

s>;-
B?
ii- -fill
|ijj
r. I : M
| 111
I: - A
>: Aijsipyi
ylMllpp
ii : rJjHjltA
'••UiU&Sgggj
[jjjtegfp pjt
njifc: llal! HH'i




Jjntchelder ■


MEMOIR
SCOTS’ CHURCH, \
INCLUDING SKETCHES OF THE
j'iISTORY OF j^ESBYTERIARJSM.
NEW SOUTH WALES AND VICTORIA.
The Rev. F. R. M. WILSON.
MELBOURNE:
ROBERT MACKAY, PRESBYTERIAN BOOK DEPOT,
15 Collins Stkeet West.
1 8 7 0.


isos
MELBOURNE :
J. AND A. M'KINLEY, PRINTERS,
QUEEN STREET.


PREFACE.
I shall have a greater respect henceforth for the man
who has written a book, —if he has had to write about
living men and recent events, and has told everything
that needs to be told, and yet has managed to hurt no
one’s feelings. I cannot expect to have done this.
But I must say that I have done what I could. And
if I have not succeeded, few will be more sorry than I.
The work of gathering and selecting the materials
(most of which were furnished by Mr. Hetherington’s
executors) and arranging and condensing them,
has taken far more time and labor than I had
expected, and more than many people will suppose.
But it has been indeed a labor of love. I trust that it
may help to honor the memoiy of my revered friend,
who, with eminent disinterestedness and humility,
sought not honor from man. Ido trust also, what I
know he himself would have chiefly desired, and what
I have sought to keep prominently before me, that it
may honor the Master.
In now committing this volume to the public, I
desire to record my sincere thanks to many kind
friends (some of whom are named in the following
pages) for the assistance which, from love of Mr.
Hetherington’s memory, they have given to his
biographer.
Camperdovm, 17th October, 1876,




CONTENTS.
CHAPTER I.
EARLY LIFE.
Birth and Family,—An Annandale man, —Training,—R, M.
M'Cheyne, Early character, University studies, —
Relaxation, —Theology -
CHAPTER 11.
CANDIDATE FOR MINISTERIAL WORK.
Miss Carr, —License, —Eskdalemuir, —Veto, —Interview with
Duke of Buccleuch, —Gig upset,—Unsuccessful
CHAPTER 111.
MISSION WORK AT PORTOBELLO.
Agreement,—How he fulfilled it, —Journal of operations,—
Success, self-vigilance,—Views of prayer,—Gift of prayer
CHAPTER IV.
LEAVING SCOTLAND.
Dr. Lang,—Motives for Emigration,—Correspondence with
Miss Carr, —Colonial Committee, —Marriage, ordination
and farewell, —Dundee, —M'Cheyne -
CHAPTER V.
ON BOARD THE JOHN BARRY.
"Work on board, —St. Jago,—lllness and death of Mrs. Hether-
ington,—Sympathy of emigrants,—Mr. Hetherington’s
illness, —Fruits of affliction, —Quarantine, —Appointment
to Singleton


CHAPTER VI.
AT SINGLETON, NEW SOUTH WALES.
The District, —the Work, —Society,—Government stipend,—
School, —Apology for secular pursuits,—Dissuades minister
from emigrating,—Cruel treatment of convicts, —Roughing
it, —Parson versus Presbyterianism,—Joined by sister and
brother, —Station, Bonshaw, —Miss Shannon, —Marriage,—
Denbie, —Mechanical skill, —Gardening ...
CHAPTER VIL
THE PRESBYTERIAN CHURCH IN NEW SOUTH WALES.
Dr. Lang,—Presbytery of New South Vales, —Declaratory
Act of Assembly in Scotland, —Dr. Lang brings out Minis-
ters, —State-Aid, —Nineteen more Ministers, —Dr. Lang
sets up a Synod,—His difficulties with State, —Proposal
for Union,—Dr. Lang in Britain, —United Church, —
Training of Native Ministry,—Dr. Lang again,—Dr.
Lang deposed,—Resolutions of Synod on spiritual
independence,—Disruption struggles,—Division of Synod,
—Proposal of Scots’ Church, Melbourne, —Mr. Hethering-
ton’s ecclesiastical views - - - - -
CHAPTER VIII.
SCOTS’ CHURCH, MELBOURNE.
Rev. J. Clow, —Rev. J. Forbes, —First steps to build Church,
—Temporary Church, —Call to Rev. J. Forbes, —Formation
of Scots’ Church, —School, —Permanent Church, —Manse, —
Original subscription list, —Stipend,—Mr. Forbes’ demis-
sion, —Mr. Hetherington’s settlement, —Financial affairs of
Scots’ Church, —New Manse, —Stipend raised, —Church
completed,—Debt liquidated,—Testimonial to Mr. Hether-
ington,—Colleague, Rev. P. S. Menzies, —Opinions as to
Mr. Menzies’ preaching,—“The Atonement,” —The Col-
leagues,—The New Scots’ Church, —Mr. Menzies’illness and
death, —Mr. Hetherington’s address on the occasion,—Mr.
Hetherington’s visitation of sick, —Sermons, —Overwork, —
“ Sorting the library,”—Mr. Hetherington at his work, —


Marriage Fees, —Trusteeships,—On Council of University,
—Charities, —An amusing mistake, —Mrs. Hetherington's
work
CHAPTER IX.
THE PRESBYTERY OF MELBOURNE.
Formation of Presbyter^,—Connection with Synod,—Mr.
Forbes’ resolutions, —Mr. Forbes’ demission, —Mr. Hether-
ington called and inducted, —His co-Presbyters,—His
position towards the Church of Scotland, —Session of Scots’
Church, Difficulties with co-Presbyters, Gets out
Ministers from Ireland, —Testimonial to Mr. Hetherington,
—His work in Presbytery and Synod,—Unitarian Episode,
—List of the Ministers till 1854.
CHAPTER X
UNION NEGOTIATIONS.
Mr. Hetherington’s part in them, —Sources of information - 121
§ 1. The other Churches Previous to Negotiation.
1. The U. P. Church of Victoria : —Origin,—Rev. A. M.
Ramsay,—Other Ministers, — Synod formed, —Basis of
Synod,—Additional Ministers, —Overture on Union.—Pro-
posal to Free Church. 2. The Free Church of Victoria :
Formation,—Acts, —Anti-State-aid, —Additional Ministers,
—Resolution to accept Government sites, —Union proposals
postponed.—Relative number of the three bodies - - 122
§ 2. Commencement of Negotiations.
Mr. Hetherington moves separation of Presbytery of Mel-
bourne from Synod,—Mr. Hetherington moves
for Union
with other Churches, —Committees appointed, -
-The Free
Synod and the U. P. Proposal
- 130
§ 3. Negotiations on the First Basis.
1. Presbytery of Melbourne and Free Synod:—Committees,
—Proposed designation of United Church, —Proposed Basis
of Union,—Misunderstanding,—Free Synod’s conditions of
Union. —Rev. W. Hamilton, —Presbytery of Melbourne
formed into Synod of Victoria, —Articles of Union, —Diffi-
culties as to “Exclusive Jurisdiction” and source of


ministerial supply,—Limitation of correspondence with
“Faithful” Churches, —Negotiations complete,—Com-
mittee to prepare memorial for counsel. 2. U. P. Synod
and Free Synod:—Committee meetings,—Proposal of Free
Synod,—U. P. Synod agrees generally. 3. U. P. Synod
and Synod of Victoria: —Basis suggested by Synod of
Victoria, —Author’s Remarks - -
§ 4. Embarrassments.
1. Free Synod and Synod of Victoria:—Memorial for
counsel by Dr. Mackay,—Mr. Hetherington’s annotations,
—Dr. Mackay’s remarks, —Opinion of counsel, —Cor-
respondence about the annotations, —Author’s remarks, —
Union to be consummated when negotiations with U. P.
Synod completed,—Report of Dr. Mackay’s speech, and his
explanation, —Mr. Love dissents from passage relative to
“Faithful Churches.” 2. Free Synod and U. P. Synod:—
Free Synod resolves to accept State-Aid, Ministerial
accession to U. P. Synod,—Resolutions of U. P. Synod,—
Committee meetings, —U. P. proposal to omit second
article, and insert saving clause, —Free Synod’s committee
proposes an excepting clause, —Further proposal of U. P.
Synod,—And of the other committees, —Free Synod with-
draw from negotiations with U. P. Synod,—Decision of
Synod of Victoria on this, —Committee to arrange for
Public consummation of Union ....
§ 5. Divisioyts.
Union Bill Delayed,—Doubts in Free Synod as to Union, —
Rev. A. Paul’s pamphlet dealt with, Proposal of
majority,—Reply by minority,—The expulsion,—U. P.
divisions .......
§ G. The Second Basis.
Synod of Victoria renew negotiations with U. P. Synod,—
Committee discharged,— Synod of Victoria proposes
modification of articles, First general conference on
Union, —Mr. Hetherington’s letter to Free Synod,—Dis-
cussion on it in Free Synod,—Free Church committee’s
reply,—Discussion in Synod of Victoria, —New articles
proposed,—Concurrence of congregations sought,—Second
general conference on Union, —U. P. Synod of Victoria.


divides, — Mr. Love’s emendation of article, Third
general conference on Union, —Question of State-aid, —
Ministers who remained outside of the Union, —Letter by
Mr. Hetherington, to the Church of Scotland, on the Union
§ 7. Consummation of the Union.
Synods met, — First Moderator, — Basis of Union read, —
List of ministers and elders, —Public meeting,—Author’s
remarks - - - - - -
CHAPTER XI.
IN TIIE UNITED CHURCH.
In the United Synod,—“General Assembly,”—Mr. Love’s
resignation,— Mr. Hetherington’s tact and patience, —On
committees, —State-Aid, —Mr. Hetherington’s persistence,
—And promptness,—His view of the benefit of State-aid,
—His labors in connection with it, —Loan building fund,
—Rules and forms, —Clerk of Assembly,—Discipline,—
Moderator of Assembly,—The Lethbridge case, —Church
property,—Law,—Finance,—The West Melbourne case,—
The Scotch College case, —Picture in “Punch,” —Various
Church labors, —His presence missed ...
CHAPTER XII.
THE END.
Old age, —Father’s death, Mrs. Hetherington’s sudden
death, —Her Christian worth, —Mr. Hetherington failing,
—Proposed retirement, —House provided,—Sons at Fiji,—
Startling news, —“Must go to Fiji,”—Prevented,—Severe
illness, —Solemn questions,—Their fruits, —At Beeehworth
and Stanley,—The New House, —Increasing debility,—
Last sermons, —“Chilled to the very heart,” —“Too -weak
for that now, ” —Last illness and death
CHAPTER XIII.
“immortelles.”
Funeral, —Rev. D. S. McEachran, —Dr. Macdonald, —Rev. R.
Hunter, —Rev. J. Ballantyne,—Minute of Assembly


SERMONS.
Preface to Sermons
SERMON I.
Sermon as Moderator of the General Assembly. I Cor.,
iii. 7, —“So then neither is he that planteth anything,
neither he that watereth; but God that giveth the increase”
SERMON 11.
Communion Sermon, with “Fencing of the Table.” John
xix. 30, —“It is finished” -
SERMON 111.
Funeral Sermon. Revel, xiv. 13: —“And I heard a voice
from heaven saying unto me, Write, Blessed are the dead
which die in the Lord from henceforth. Yea, saith the
Spirit, for they rest from their labors, and their works do
follow them” .......


Ulcmoxr 0! Pdljtringinit.
CHAPTER I.
EARLY LIFE.
No man has done more for Presbyterianism in
Victoria than the Rev. Irving Hetherington; and it
has been felt that it would be neither wise nor
grateful to let him pass away without recording some
memorial of him, for the information of those who
come after and reap what he has sowed.
Irving Hetherington was born at Whaite, in the
parish of Ruthwell, Dumfriesshire, Scotland, on the
23rd day of July, 1809. His father,Richard Hetherton,
a well-to-do farmer, and his mother, Louisa Carruthers,
a very superior woman, were the parents of a large
family, nearly all of whom survive:—
John, who became a surgeon in the royal navy, and inherited
from his grandfather—Colonel Carruthers—the Denbie estate,
where he now lives. Thomas, at Searigg, a farm on the Denbie
estate. Irving, so named from the Irvings of Bonshaw, a
connection of the family. Louisa, now Mrs. Miller in Liverpool,
England. Mary, now Mrs. Keys at Mussellbrook, N.S.W.
William, at Sydney, and owner of Bonshaw station, &c., N.S.W.
Isabella, who died. Dickson, unmarried, and living with her


brother Thomas. Jessie, now Mrs. Maunsey, in Sydney.
Richard, who died in New South Wales. Walter, in Liverpool,
England.
The name Hetherington was first taken by the eldest
son John, when at college; and his example was
followed by the rest. The father, however, continued
to sign himself Richard Hetherton to the last.
With many men it matters not where they were
bom and nurtured; but it was not so with Irving
Hetherington. He was a thorough Annandale man;
and his love for his native place never cooled. Kind
and courteous as he was to all, he showed extra
kindness to a dalesman. And, sooth to say, many a
pound he lent and gave—and lending was often just
another form of giving—for the sake of Annandale. To
those who are not acquainted with the Annandale folk,
it will be well to say that they are a sturdy, indepen-
dent race, shrewd and energetic, usually well-informed,
thrifty and trustworthy; in short, Scotchmen,
with an extra dash of energy and determination.
Irving Hetherington possessed in an eminent degree
the determination of his race. Under difficulties which
would dishearten most people, he would persevere
through sheer persistence; and when remonstrated
with, would say with good-humoured doggedness,
“ Never heed ! Never heed ! I winna be beat.”
The style in which he was brought up was severe,
and what would be now thought harsh. Everything
like fondness or exhibition of sentiment was made
ridiculous; and any feeling that was merely personal


must be locked up in one’s own heart, or expressed
with a cynical bluntness that should disarm criticism..
Religion itself put on an aspect of theological sturdiness
.and severity. It must be said, however, that the
minister of Ruthwell—'Dr. Duncan, well known as the
founder of Savings’ Banks —did all he could to
.associate the gospel with what was useful and pleasant.
Still, the prevalent tone of religion and of family
life was stern. Under this stern influence the finer
feelings of the sensitive lad were repressed, until the
indulgence of affectionate expression became impossible.
The affection which was thus denied an outlet at the
nearest channels was pent up into greater depth and
volume, and made his friendship all the more valuable
that it was not demonstrative.
He began his education at the parish school, whence
he was soon removed to the Clarencefield Academy.
As a sample of the severity with which the young were
trained in his youthful days, Mr. Hetherington once
gave the following incident: —When ten years of age
he began Latin; and for his first lesson he had to
decline the noun penna, but without having been
taught how to pronounce it. In repeating his lesson to
the master, when he came to the Genitive plural, he
was unfortunate enough to put the accent on the last
syllable pennarum. The titter which this called forth
from his companions was visited on the shoulders of
the unlucky lad, and he got a severe flogging, the
injustice of which he remembered even in his old age.
When he was twelve years old he was placed under the


tuition of Mr. Alexander Ferguson, the esteemed master
of the Lockerbie Academy.
In the memoir of Robert Murray McCheyne, it is
said that “ most of his summer vacations used to be
spent in Dumfriesshire ; and his friends in the parish of
Ruth well and its vicinity retain a vivid remembrance
of his youthful days.” Irving Hetherington was one
of these friends, and though he was four years the
senior of Robert McCheyne, they were great friends,
and were much in each other’s company while little
boys.
Irving was remarkable as a boy for his conscien-
tiousness, and his gravity of demeanor. He once told
the writer, with a laugh, that among his school-fellows-
he was nick-named “ Auld Sobersides,” and “ The
Missioner.” He early set his heart on being a missionary,
and his parents devoted him in his childhood to the
ministry. No particulars as to his early piety have
been obtained, nor was Mr. Hetherington known at any
time to refer to either the date or the details of his-
conversion. It is stated by a near relative, that he
must have been influenced by the love of God from his-
early childhood, through the teaching of his mother.
When he was sixteen years old, he went to the
Edinburgh University, and commenced his curriculum
under Pillans and Dunbar, the professors of Latin and
Greek. Whether he was clever or not, he was certainly"
industrious, illustrating Fowell Buxton’s saying as to
the value of “ ordinary abilities with extraordinary
application.” While at Edinburgh he applied himself


very closely to study; with too little regard, indeed, to
his health or to regularity of hours. And this was
•characteristic of him through life. His power of
sustained work was remarkable ; and he always gave
unremitting attention to whatever he undertook, with-
out due consideration for his own comfort, or even his
health. He was not originally strong, and his system
was weakened by the intensity of his application.
It is not to be imagined, however, that he never
unbent his mind. He enjoyed fun most heartily, and
took part in all kinds of innocent amusement. It
.appears from one of his father’s letters long after, that
when a young man, Irving used to play the fiddle. But
he does not seem to have* excelled as a violinist, or to
have cultivated a taste for modem music. On one
occasion he wrote :—“ I will confess I have no furious
love for music. With me it is indeed a matter of
association rather than of taste. My mother sang some
■old Scotch melodies, such as, ‘ Auld Robin Gray,’ ‘ Auld
Lang Syne,’ ‘ I’m wearin’ awa, Jean,’ ‘ John Anderson,
my jo,’ ‘ The flowers of the forest,’ etc., and these have
a hold on my heart which it will be cold ere it be freed
from. I love them dearly, every note of them. But as
to the compositions which are called music—the cloud
of din, the chaos of jingling with which we are ordi-
narily treated; why, Ido think that it would be no loss
at all though it were, every scrap of it, put into the
fire. I have no head for a hurricane of music.”
He seems to have spent nine winters at college, during
four of which he attended the theological classes. Of


all his professors he spoke with the highest respect
and gratitude of Dr. Chalmers, who was at that time
Professor of Divinity in the Edinburgh University.
There is no doubt that Mr. Hetherington owed much
of the decidedly evangelical cast of his theology, under
God, to the teaching and the fervid appeals of that
great man.


CHAPTER 11.
CANDIDATE FOR MINISTERIAL WORK.
After his college course was finished, Irving returned
to his father’s farm, at Itoberthill, near Lockerbie, and
applied to the Presbytery of Lochmaben to be taken
on trials for license. He then gave himself with his
wonted diligence to the preparation of the prescribed
discourses. An unforeseen event, however, distracted
his attention from those studies. In. the course of
social visiting among the neighbours, he called at the
farm of Halldykes, and met with a young lady who
was spending the winter there —Miss Jessie Dalton
Carr, from Workington, in Cumberland, and niece of
the good folk at Halldykes. He had previously heard
a good deal about Miss Carr—her amiability, her
devoted affection to her sister, whom she had nursed
in her last illness, and above all, her earnest
piety.
He became attached to her; chiefly from a convic-
tion of her piety, as he afterwards frankly told her.
His visits to Halldykes were frequent, as a matter of
course. But, owing to his natural diffidence, he
allowed Jessie Carr to return to Workington without
telling the state of his affections toward her. As the
time drew near when he must appear before the
Presbytery, he found that his anxiety about her


interest in him monopolised his thoughts and hindered
his studies. Strive as he would, he could not fix his
.attention. Discourses on difficult texts were to be
■delivered to the Presbytery within a few weeks; but
when he tried to busy himself with the completion of
these, imagination proved a sad truant. The question
kept coming up, and would not be set aside —What
possible chance have I of obtaining a higher place in
her consideration than that of a mere acquaintance ?
With this question unsettled, the weary sermons, which
were so urgent to be finished, could not be touched.
He felt at last that he could not delay the solution of
the question a day longer without actually endangering
bis license. He therefore took courage, and went over
to Workington to learn his fate. After the usual
maiden reserve and reference to her mother and step-
father had been overcome, he obtained her consent to
an engagement; and returned to Scotland a happy
man, with spirit to work and to face even a more
formidable Presbytery than that of Lochmaben.
He passed with credit, and was licensed on the 3rd
■day of August, 1835. Engagements to preach were
obtained for him by the ministers of the Presbytery,
and he had occasional opportunities to preach as a
candidate ; which he did with much acceptance.
It was desired that he should try for the vacancy at
Eskdalemuir, and in defaidt of opportunity to preach
there, it was arranged that he should officiate in the
neighboring parish of Westerkirk —the Eskdale folk
being warned of the arrangement. The result was that


lie won the good-will of the people. But the great point
was to win the good-will of the patron, the Duke o£
Buccleuch. To attain this end Major Crichton, of
Dalton, who was considered to have great influence
with the Duke, was called upon, and his assistance
secured. The Major’s advice was to gather as many
certificates and testimonials as possible, avoiding
■certificates from Whigs and those obnoxious to his
Grace. Through application and influence a large
number of testimonials was obtained, of which Mr.
Hetherington characteristically remarked, in a letter
to Miss Carr, —“ I can never verify them. Their
accounts of me are indeed most extravagant —accounts
which humble more than they gratify. However, they
may manage our point, and that is all we want.” The
Major enclosed these to the Duke, with a letter from
himself. In support of these, and independent of the
Major, the Hon. William Keith Douglas, late M.P., was
written to ; and also the Marchioness of Queensberry,
the Duke’s aunt; in the hope that their friendship for
Mr. Hetherington’s grandfather, lately deceased, would
incline them to use their influence with his Grace to
obtain the vacant charge.
It turned out after all that the Duke had chosen
another man, and, on the recommendation of Pringle,
of Westbank, had given the presentation to a Mr.
Cunningham. When the presentation was reported to
the Presbytery, the people exercised their veto against
the presentee —for the Veto Act was then in force. The
Presbytery, however, determined to resist the operation


of the Veto Act. The history of this Act is briefly as
follows: —
In 1832 and 1833 the subject of the settlement of ministers
was brought up to the General Assembly by overtures from the
inferior courts. Dr. Chalmers moved, in May 1833, the sub-
stance of what afterwards became the Veto Act. Against this
motion Dr. Cook moved that it be declared that it is competent
for heads of families in full communion to bring objections of
any kind against the presentee ; the Presbytery being the judge
of these objections, subject, of course, to appeal. Dr. Cook’s
motion was carried by 140 votes against 137 for Dr. Chalmers’
motion, and a committee was appointed to frame regulations for
the guidance of the Presbyteries in this matter. In 1834 the
subject was again brought up by overture, and Lord MoncriefF
moved : —“ That the General Assembly, having maturely con-
sidered the overtures, do declare that it is a fundamental law of
the Church, that no pastor shall be intruded on any congrega-
tion contrary to the will of the people ; and that, in order to
carry this principle into full effect, the Presbyteries of this
Church shall be instructed, that if, at the moderating in a call
to a vacant pastoral charge, the major part of the male heads of
families, members of the vacant congregation, and in full com-
munion with the Church, shall disapprove of the person in
whose favor the call is proposed to be moderated in, such dis-
approval shall be deemed sufficient ground for the Presbytery
rejecting such person, and that he shall be rejected accordingly,
and due notice thereof forthwith given to all concerned ; but
that if the major part of the heads of families shall not disap-
prove of such person to be their pastor, the Presbytery shall
proceed with the settlement according to the rules of the Church
and further declare that no person shall be held to be entitled
to disapprove as aforesaid, who shall refuse, if required,
solemnly to declare, in presence of the Presbytery, that he ia
actuated by no factious or malicious motive, but solely by a


conscientious regard to the spiritual interest of himself or the
congregation.” This motion was carried by 184 votes against
139 for Dr. Cook’s motion. New regulations were framed in
accordance with thi3 Veto Act, by a Committee of which Lord
Moncrieff was convener. And both the Veto Act and the-
Regulations were sent down to Presbyteries for their approval
in terms of the Barrier Act, both having interim authority.
In 1835, the Presbyteries having by a majority approved the
Veto Act, it was passed into a standing law of the Church by
178 votes against 124. The Regulations were amended and
again sent down to Presbyteries with interim authority. And
they were year by year re-enacted ad interim with various
alterations, and re-transmitted to Presbyteries until the year of
the Disruption.
This slight sketch of events will explain the
importance which would be attached to such a case
as that of Eskdalemuir, and how the slightest flaw
would be taken advantage of by a party in the
Church, to prevent the case coming before the
General Assembly.
The Presbytery set aside the veto. The Eskdale
people thereupon appealed the case to the Synod, and
appointed a Mr. Baird as their agent to prosecute
the appeal. At the meeting of Synod, when Mr.
Baird presented his mandate, empowering him to
represent the people before the Synod, it was found to
bear date December 183 G, instead of December 1835.
This blunder decided the case. The mandate was held
to be invalid; therefore Mr. Baird had no standing, and
could not be heard. Therefore the petition he presented
was unsupported, and the appeal was considered to be


fallen from. Therefore the patron’s presentee got the
parish.
When Mr. Hetherington got word of this decision —
through a letter from Major Crichton—he was at the
wedding feast of his sister Louisa, where he was bride-
groomsman. Instead of being depressed by it, he
entered into the fun and frolic of a border Avedding all
the more heartily that his mind was relieved
meanwhile from the heavy responsibility of the care of
souls. This contest created a great stir in the country
side, and dreAV out expressions of sympathy from
many ; and none Avere more pleasing to Mr. Hethering-
ton than those of the Avarm-hearted shepherds of the
Muir.
After this defeat Mr. Hetherington thought of going
over to Ireland, being urged to this step by a friend,
who promised to use his influence for him in that
country. His father, however, was averse to this,
.and resolved they should first call on the Duke to learri
what were his intentions. So off they set for Bowhill
in Selkirkshire, where they learned that the Duke was
staying at that time. On their arrival they found
that his Grace was at a fox-hunt, but would be home
in the evening. It Avas late when he returned; but
he gave them an interview, and received them kindly.
Then the father introduced his son:—“This is the
preacher respecting whom I lately took the liberty of
addressing your Grace. He is very desirous of minis-
terial employment, and at present has some slight
prospect of a situation in Ireland; but before leaving


the country it has been thought right we should wait
upon your Grace, with a view to ascertain what hopgs
he might indulge of such employment here.” The
Duke answered, “I really feel much difficulty in replying
to such an application. lam glad, however, that I have
an ’opportunity of doing so personally rather than
by writing. It is a principle of mine never to give
any explicit promise as to anything of the kind. I
have experienced how painful and distressing it is to
be fettered by pledges, and therefore I have determined
to continue free from them. You are not to think
your case hard,” said he, turning to the young preacher,
“I have given the same answer to eight or ten
applications of the same sort within the week; and I
have even sent away the friends of the young man who
will be presented to Melrose in the same manner. But
you are known to me, Mr. Hetherington, both by
name and character. I have received your testimonials,,
and I have never read any more satisfactory. I have
also had several letters in your favour. Your name is
on my list, and I will not lose sight of you.” He then
asked to what part of Ireland Mr. Hetherington
thought of going, and expressed his approbation of the
design. “It will keep you occupied, and you will still
be within my reach there.” Then to ,the father,.
“ When a vacancy occurs, I will be none the worse to
be reminded of your son.” They then took their
departure. While driving home, the young man told
his father that there was a prospect of a vacancy at
Terregles by the removal of the present minister. On


hearing this the old man resolved to drive over at once
to KinmoUnt House, the residence of the Marquis of
of Queensberry, Lord-Lieutenant of the county, who
had the presentation to that living. And Sabbath
though the next day was, they must push on so as not
to lose a day. But by the time they came to Lockerbie
House, it had got very dark; so much so that before
they suspected danger they had driven on to a heap of
broken stones on the roadside, and upset the gig.
The old man was hurled from it with dreadful violence,
and, being a heavy man, was much hurt. His head was
sadly cut, and two or three ribs broken. This accident
stopped the visit to the Marquis for a while.
These details may give the reader some notion of
what young ministers needed to do in the olden days
of patronage. And Mr. Hetherington certainly seems,
from his letters, to have left no stone unturned to secure
friends and get a hearing in vacancies. The indomit-
able persistence of his nature was stimulated to the
greater exertion by his attachment to Miss Carr. Still,
with all his efforts, and although his preaching was
highly approved, and his character esteemed, and his
manner liked by the people,—the patrons’ lists were
full, and influence stronger than that of his friends
carried the day: he could not obtain a presentation :
nor could he even get an assistantship. After a year
spent in hunting after patrons and waiting on aged and
infirm ministers, his spirits gave way, and he became
painfully depressed (ail his days he was subject to
occasional attacks of nervous depression).


Candidate for Ministerial Work. 15
Here the wise counsels, and gentle affection, and true
piety of Miss Carr w r ere of eminent service to him—
soothing his feelings, moderating his impatience, and
leading him to resign to God’s kind governance the
results of all human exertion.


CHAPTER 111.
MISSION WORK AT PORTOBELLO.
At length, on the 20th of September, 183 G, Mr. Hether-
ington was offered a humble post as missionary at
Portobello, Joppa and Easter-Duddingston; and gladly
he accepted the offer, as an opening for missionary
work, for he was sick-tired of busy idleness. The
agreement into which he entered with the committee
was for six months, at the rate of £5O a year. He was
required to visit four hours and a half daily during
four days in the week, to preach one sermon each Sab-
bath evening, and to keep a journal. Of this journal
there has been found among Mr. Hetherington’s papers
the rough draft of the first three weeks’ work. In these
three weeks we find that he preached six sermons,
double the required number, —which he did in order to
afford regular service in Pipe-street, the most destitute
district of his charge. He also in the same time made
170 visits. That these visits were not mere perfunctory
calls is shewn by the journal, which will doubtless be
interesting to the reader. It is headed, “ Journal of
operations as Home Missionary at Portobello”:
October 3rd, 1830. Deeply impressed with a sense of the
greatness of the work in which lam now to be employed, and
of my own utter insufficiency for the successful prosecution of
it, I would at the same time approach it with a heart resolved
to give itself wholly to it; and my encouragement I would draw


-from theheavenly assurance that, in my poor endeavors, I shall
have the co-operation of that most merciful and mighty of
Beings, to whom I am the greatest of debtors, who never sends
any to this warfare on their own charges, but who has promised
to be with all who engage in it. “ Not by might, nor by power,
but by my Spirit,” is his own declaration ; and never let this
by me be forgotten ; but, while I ever look to this testimony as
my check and guard against every thought of self-dependence,
let it be my check and guard against despair ; and while I con-
fess at all times that in myself there is n» sufficiency for these
things, let it be always uppermost in my heart that it is not by
so weak an instrument that the prevailing iniquity is to be
assailed, but by the might and the power of the Lord of hosts.
In a spirit of much self-renunciation, in a spirit of much reli-
ance on divine aid, I devote myself to this undertaking ; and
let the prayera of all who are interested in it be united with
mine, that on my wanderings among this people, among whom
it is my privilege to labor, the blessing of Him who alone gives
the increase may be plenteously outpoured, that this wilderness
may blossom and bring forth abundantly to His praise, and that
many—very many souls may be led to enquire after and to lay
hold on the things which belong to their peace.
Preparatory to my visitations, I attended a meeting of the
committee at Captain Barclay’s, when it was suggested by Dr.
Thomson, and agreed to by the members present, that it should
be my endeavor in the first place to make myself known to the
various families among whom I was to be engaged, and to gather
them as soon as possible into convenient stations for preaching ;
—that, in order to this, I was to call upon them and acquaint
them with my errand, and invite them to meet me for this
object. .Regarding this suggestion as tantamount to the charge
of the committee, and having, through Captain Barclay’s kind
assistance, procured a room in Pipe street as a place of meeting,
I have visited to-day, in that street, Mrs, W , etc.; (the names
of six persons are given.) In my interviews with these indivi-


duals I sought—after acquainting them with the purpose of my
visit, and that I should be very often back to see them, and
telling them when I would expect to meet them for worship-
—to awaken in their minds a sense of guilt and ruin in the sight
of the just and holy God, the necessity of our seeking his pardon
through the blood of the atonement, and that right speedily, life
being so uncertain, etc. ; and then, as fully and distinctly as I
could, I pointed out to them the sufficiency of Christ as a
Saviour, the plenteousness of his redemption, the freeness
wherewithhis benefits lire offered—exhorting them to appropriate
these offers' to their own souls; and prayed with them. The
answers I received and the remarks made were generally very
discreet, but very vague and general.
October 4th. Visited—(the names of twenty one persons are
given.) On this day, as yesterday, I strove to convince those I
visited, of their real condition as sinners, and to prevail on them
to embrace for themselves the Christian sacrifice. As before, I
saw nothing remarkable about these families save their extreme
poverty and destitution ; their observations on the importance-
of having an interest in Jesus being very commonplace and
very general. Scarcely any one in habits of church-going. One
told me he had not been in a place of worship for the last two
years. Spoke very strongly with them on the madness and
danger of such a course, and entreated them to consider
whither it must lead them.
October sth. Visited—(sixteen persons) ; and then went to-
Wilson Park, where I visited—(nine persons). In respect to
such as I visited to-day in Pipe-street and the neighbouring
lanes, 1 have just to repeat yesterday’s report: Their attention
was directed to the same great subjects ; their answers and
remarks were equally pointless and unsatisfactory. In respect
to the families in Wilson Park, however, I have more favour-
able accounts to give. Their circumstances are of a much more
comfortable description ; their intelligence on religious topics
very superior; their seriousness more suitable. Still I have


not yet met among them one to whom I can with any confidence
refer as decidedly Christian. But at the same time I must have*
it always understood that, in making such a statement, I speak
merely of my own observation : many there may be, notwith-
standing appearances, among those visited, whose real character
diffidence and reserve may have concealed, but who are, in
truth, of the number of the Lord’s people.
October 6th. Visited in Wilson Park—(nine persons). Of
these, two are in very bad health, with whom I spent great part
of my time. One, an old disciple, sinking under great age and
many infirmities into her grave. I had much pleasure in con-
versing with her. She declares herself to be waiting and long-
ing for the Lord’s coming, and to be full of gratitude and love to-
ller Redeemer. The other is less decided. To her, I went over
the whole scheme of our salvation very carefully, showing our
state in reference to it, the love of the Father, Son and Spirit,
in the accomplishment of it, the freeness with which the
privileges comprehended in it are offered to our acceptance ;
and urged her solemnly, by her need of these, to seek them
without delay. As she would make no observations on what
I said, but listened attentively in silence to all, I stated I could
not judge what were her own sentiments, nor what her degree
of information in respect to such subjects. Her bashfulness is
indeed excessive ; and I fear I shall have to pay her many a
visit ere I know what I should say to her. Another person of
these is a Roman Catholic. At first she declined my visit on
the plea of being much engaged. I returned afterwards ; and
have, I think, gained her confidence, by the kindness of my
address to her. I spoke with her on points of our common
belief, our need of the Saviour, the fulness and the freeness of
his grace; and prayed with her. She seemed gratified and
thankful when I promised to return to see her.
October 7th. On the west side of the town visited—(nineteen
persons.) Of these, one drove me twice away ; her husband
who is a sad drunkard, being asleep, and not to be disturbed.


Another is a Homan Catholic, and in most deplorable ignorance.
She seemed, in fact, to have but two points of religious opinion
apart from the divine authority of her religion,—the oldest,
therefore the only true system of belief and practice ; —and
these were, the existence of one God, and our unfaithfulness to
His laws. At least, I could find in her no further knowledge,
it not being my part to search into all the rubbish the priest
might have put into her mind. When I speak of her ignorance,
therefore, it is of the Saviour Christ. She seemed not to have
heard of him, or, at least, to have ranked him merely with the
army of intercessors. As to his being the only Mediator—as to
his being the divine Mediator, 'she appeared to have no con-
ception. I durst not push her too hard, lest I should have
been forbidden to come back. I therefore, professing to take it
for granted that she knew the truth, went over the whole
scheme of redemption, pointing out the completeness of Christ’s
work, the freeness of his grace, and our business in reference to
him ; and, after praying with her, promised to return soon to
see her again.
Another gave me a long account of her misfortunes, the in-
jurious treatment she had met with at the hands of professing
Christians, etc. She pretended to much regard for the Saviour ;
hut never, almost, did I meet with a more ill-ordered mind.
These enemies of hers, she insisted, must be punished; that was
quite plain to her ; and no little satisfaction did such an assur-
ance afford her. Astonished at such inconsistency, I talked long
with her upon it; cautioned her most solemnly against the in-
dulgence of a temper so insulting to him in whom she pretended
to trust, and for whom she pretended to have so much love ;
bade her beware lest she should be deceiving her own soul, etc.
But, in fact, the poor woman seems crazed with sorrows. She
promised to attend the meetings ; and, after praying with her,
I pointed out some passages of scripture for her to consider till
I return—which I promised to do soon—and left her.
On the Bth visited Mrs. B and Mrs. 0 .


9th.—Preached from John iii. 16 :—“ Godsoloved the world,”
etc., to a very crowded meeting ; my audience, generally, very*
quiet, and some apparently much impressed. That evening, after
service, visited Mrs. B , who was very ill. Spoke to her very
solemnly on the state of her soul as guilty and ruined in God’s
sight, and pointed to the only salvation ; assured her of God’s
willingness to pardon, Christ’s willingness to save; and en-
couraged her by all the motives I could think of, to commit
herself to the divine mercy. Still silent; no answer. After
praying with her, that grace might be given her, to enable her
to embrace the offered Saviour, left her.
10th.—Visited her again on Monday, and found her rather
better in health, but still as backward to speak with me. Read
several passages from John, 3rd and 14th chapters, and ex-
plained and urged the necessity of the new birth as a prepara-
tion for heaven, and shewed the readiness of Christ to do-
everything for her. She seemed very desirous of instruction,
and considerably impressed ; and very thankful for my coming
to see her.
On the 11th, visited at Easter Duddingstone—(fifteen persons
named.) In respect to these individuals I have only to remark
that, except in some few instances, neglect of ordinances was
confessed. I can apply fully to them the description given of
Wilson Park—great civility in their reception of me, great
attention to all I had to say, very discreet answers to my ques-
tions ; hut still much vagueness, much indifference and inexpe-
rience in religious things. If from this I must except any, I
would mention JeanF . She does seem to be considerably
affected about her soul’s welfare. Most of the others are cal-
lousness itself.
On the 12th confined at home till evening, when I visited
Mrs. B ; who seems in no degree changed.
On the 13th visited at Easter Duddingstone—(eight persons
named), and in Wilson Park—(six persons.) As on Tuesday,
I spoke very strongly with those families at Easter Dudding-


stone who confessed with absenting themselves from church,
on the evil of such a practice, its dishonor to God, its detriment
to their own souls ; shewed up the folly of those objections
they pled—such as want of clothes, etc.; and insisted on their
at least meeting me on the following Sabbath, at the School-
house. This they promised to do ; and, after much conversa-
tion on the work of the Saviour, and on duty and privileges in
connection with it, I prayed severally with them, etc. At one
of the houses in Wilson’s Park found a little child rather un-
well. Took occasion, in a very simple and very affectionate
manner, to speak to him and his mother and sisters, of what the
Saviour has done and is doing for sinners, and what he will
do, if we take him to be our Saviour.
On the 14th visited at Joppa Pans (eleven persons named),
and at Wilson’s Park, Mrs. B and Mrs. M . These
families are just akin to those in Pipe street —very poor, very
indifferent to all I had to say to them, but sensible, apparently,
that I was influenced only by kindness towards them ; and ex-
pressed their wish that I would return to them.
On the 16th visited Mrs. B . Found her in a more hope-
ful state. When I talked to her of the Saviour, by the uplift-
ing of her hand she showed she valued such views of his gracious
character and all sufficient work ; and when I pointed out the
mercy she had so long experienced herself, she seemed sensible
of it, and appeared to feel the force of my exhortation, should
she recover, to very greatly alter her conduct in respect to
him.
On the 16th, preached to crowded meetings at E. Dudding-
stone, and at Pipe-street, on-Luke xiv. 22—“ Yet there is
room.”
On the 17th, visited B. M .
On the 18th, visited—(eleven persons named), and at Joppa
Mrs. L . Except in respect to the last—who seems a very-
sincere Christian, this day met with none rightly affected,
apparently, towards spiritual things. Went over the usual


-topics ; and, though kindly received and requested to return,
had very little satisfaction in any of them.
On the 19th, visited—(ten names mentioned.)
On the 20th, visited—(three, persons named), and in Porto-
bello (six persons named.)
In one of his letters he says : —“ These visits are, I
must confess it, very burdensome.” No wonder ! But,
whether burdensome or not, they doubtless contributed
very largely to the success of his more public ministra-
tions. Of the Sabbath meetings he was soon able to
say:—“ Such looks of anxiety and eagerness and
•concern I have never elsewhere witnessed. O what a
blessed thing it would be, to be the means of turning
so much as one of them to Christ! ” And in
November he wrote “ There is indeed a movement,
a progress here : Prayer meetings are rising, and there
are many symptoms of improvement. I mean to
•establish a prayer meeting on Friday night. May the
God of prayer be with us.”
While thus laboring with characteristic intensity of
.application for the good of others, he was not
unmindful of his own spiritual wants: —“ Occupied as
I am with religious matters all day long, pray for me
that I may not forget my own personal concern in
them ; and that, while labouring to build up others, I
may not be careless of the interests of my own soul.
This is, I do believe, the danger of all who are
similarly employed. I see more and more how apt one
is to talk about the love of God, for example, till he
sees little lovely in it; or of the excellency of God, till


he sees little that is adorable about it. I would be-
wretched, were I not assured that Divine power can
rule the heart, and that that power is ruled by prayer.”
This last expression he would, doubtless, have
modified had he considered it more carefully. But the
meaning is apparent. Mr. Hetherington, however,,
always held very decided and exalted views with
regard to the value of prayer. And these views he
carried out into practice. It was known to members
of his family that he often spent much time in prayer
and his voice would be heard in earnest entreaty far
on in the night, when he thought that all were asleep.
And the compiler of these memoirs, whom, in such
matters, Mr. Hetherington honored with his confidence-
as much as he did any person now alive, has often
been made aware, incidentally, how frequent and
fervent was his communion with God, and how
confidently he trusted in the efficacy of prayer. Being
struck with Mr. Hetherington’s gifts in prayer, he once
took the liberty of asking him how he had attained
suchvarietyin prayer. Heanswered that,while hewasat
Portobello, he carefully studied beforehand the subjects
of his public prayers, and chose each time a separate
theme on which to frame his thoughts. On one
occasion it would be the greatness of God, on another
Has love, on another His holiness, and so on. By
these means, and by being much in secret prayer, he
attained to a variety and fervency of truly devotional
utterance which the writer, at least, has seldom seen
equalled, and never surpassed.


CHAPTER IY.
LEAVING SCOTLAND.
In December, 1836, Dr. Lang, of Sydney, was in
Scotland, seeking to secure as many as twenty preachers
for New South Wales. He published an address, which
was widely circulated. Of this address Mr. Hetherington
wrote: —“ Nothing did I ever read more affecting. 0,
yes ! I will go at all costs; that is, if, on enquiry, I get
all he states generally verified, and explained to my
satisfaction.” The answers he got to his enquiries
produced considerable hesitation. He was “at one time
much disposed to venture forth; at another much
inclined, on account of the unfavorable reports that
reached him respecting Dr. Lang, to abandon the
enterprise altogether.” At length he wrote to Dr. Lang,
offering to go with him, and in writing to Miss Carr
informing her of this step, he says:—“ As far as I know
my own heart, it is in faithfulness to the Master of
Missions that I would enter on it. Oh ! when I think
of all that Jesus did for me, and the strictness of that
charge which lies on me as on all who have worn the
badge of His service, to go forth as his ambassadors to
sinners, I feel very anxious to spend myself in this
work of His; but still I do feel a reluctance to set out.
Not so much—in no degree so much—for my own sake,
because of the pain I must suffer, as for the sake of


those I love, because of the pain I must thereby inflict
•on their hearts.”
After meeting with her step-father, the Rev. Coll
Turner, in Edinburgh, another, idea began to trouble
him, which he had not thought of at first. He began
to fear that Miss Carr’s friends would object to her
going to New South Wales. He wrote, expressing his
■conviction that he must go at all costs, and his willing-
ness to release her from her engagement, however much
he might suffer from it, if she felt she could not go. Of
the correspondence on this subject the compiler of
these memoirs feels compelled to give several extracts.
Although it is with extreme reluctance that he publishes
.such expressions of attachment, yet in no other way
could the true character of the correspondents be shown,
.and full justice be done to those qualities of Mr Hether-
ington which, during life, were hidden under a cold
■exterior. On the 21st December he writes
When I had time to reflect on the difficulties of the enter-
prise and the sacrifices I should have to make for Christ’s sake,
in giving up so much that is dearer to me than I can tell, it
.never did come into my mind that I should have to give up her
who is dearest to me of all. When I thought of the pain, the
agony of separation from father and mother, and brothers and
sisters, I felt assured that she should be with me to soothe that
agony. And when I did think of the counsel and the energy
and the perseverance requisite in such an undertaking, I did
comfort myself by the hope that my Master would place one
with me who should supply, through His grace, all that was
.awanting of these to me. In this, however, I leave you free to
jnake your own choice. I am not so selfish, be assured, as to


wish you should endure one pang on my account. God knows
I would not. And I can face the pain of separation, and the
dreariness of the life that would be before me, with greater
resolution than mar your peace. Let the matter be fully and
■carefully considered. Ask Mr. Turner and your mother what
you should do. And, if the conclusion be that I shall go alone,
I will not deny you have done wisely ; and I shall try to think
■of what has passed as but a warmer friendship, and shall, to
the last of my life, importune the throne of the Highest for
that happiness for you to which I had thought to be instru-
mental. I commend you, dearest, to the direction of the
Spirit of Wisdom and of Grace. Let not one consideration for
me control your own judgment and your own sense of duty.
And do not keep me long in suspense.
The answer was not long in coming; that is, con-
sidering the state of the postal service in those days.
It is dated 30th December:—
Never did I sit down to write to you with such feelings of
inability to express all I wish to say, or with such feelings of
indecision as to what I ought to say. Indeed, Irving, you could
not have applied to one more unlikely to give an impartial
opinion than myself ; for my own happiness is too closely con-
nected with all your movements to admit of any advice I may
give being entirely void of self. Therefore, dearest Irving,
feeling as 1 do, undecided and unwilling to influence you in any
way, I would leave the matter entirely to yourself ; begging
you to pay attention to the advice of those friends who, from
their piety and experience, are qualified to direct you aright.
And in commending you to the guidance and direction of Him
who alone knows what is most for His own glory and our good, I
do feel confident that all must be well; and whatever the issue
of your application may be, would wish not only to acquiesce,
hut to rejoice in His will. Your first reasons for making this


application are unanswerable. For certainly our time ought to-
be entirely devoted to God’s service ; and as we know not how
long or how short a time we have to live, our anxiety ought to
be to find out in what way we can best serve Him. It matters-
not in what part of the world our lives are spent; if we rest in
Christ, he will be with us. And surely we cannot refuse to-
leave, for a short time, our earthly friends, for His sake who
left a heavenly throne, suffered and died, for us. If your
motives for leaving your native land proceed purely from love
to Christ, unmixed by any worldly considerations—if it be
God’s will—you must go. But if, dearest Irving, you are
impatient because you are not yet fixed in any permanent
situation, and on this account are anxious to be fixed, even in a
foreign land, then I think much may be said to your remaining
yet a little longer in your own country. For why are you
doubtful and uneasy? You are yet young. You have not
been long a preacher. You have many friends. And in God’s
good time these friends will exert themselves in your behalf.
Cast all your care upon your Heavenly Father, who careth for
His children. Look to Him for direction in all things, and
He will guide you. Yes, dearest Irving, He will guide you.
To endeavour to describe to you how much I was startled,
and agitated on reading your letter last night—which, on.
account of the badness of the roads, did not reach me till then—
would be useless. Yet, miserable as I have sometimes felt,
agitated and nervous as I now feel, never for a moment have 1
thought of remaining behind. Where you wish to take me,
there I wish to go.
The latter paragraph of this letter was evidently-
written a day after the former.
Mr. Hetherington wrote again:—
“Myowndearest Jessie—Howdeeply affectedl was byyourletter
I am unable to express to you, nor can I tell you how highly I.


admired your Christian devotedness in offering to sacrifice so
much for the Saviour’s cause, or how gratefully and tenderly I
felt the assurance you gave of your readiness to leave all and
follow me in seeking God’s work. Ido trust, dearest, that even
in this life such resolutions shall not go without their reward,
and that, in pursuing this course, you will find it to be the
course of happiness as well as of duty. I have seen Dr. Lang,
and I may say that everything is almost settled; that is, that I
go with him. . . . Neither Tom nor Willie will
accompany me ; nevertheless, I will go, and a cloud of
witnesses will attend on me. 0, yes! It is a good work, and
woe be to me if I shrink from it. That is—for I must never
forget that—if the committee accept of me. I may be rejected of
them. Should they, however, sustain me as qualified for the
duties of the charge aspired after, I shall go at all costs.”
While these letters were passing to and fro, Mr,
Hetherington’s offer to Dr. Lang came to the knowledge
of the Assembly’s Colonial Committee. On the advice
of Professor Welsh, he went to Paisley in February,
1837, and preached before Dr. Burns and Mr.
M'Naughton, who accompanied him to the Colonial
Committee in Glasgow, and testified their satisfaction.
There were at that time two sub-committees of the
Colonial Committee, one at Edinburgh, and the other
at Glasgow, the latter under the convenership of Dr.
Duncan McFarlane. By this sub-committee Mr.
Hetherington’s certificates were examined, and he was
very fully questioned. They were highly satisfied;
and he was very solemnly appointed, and charged to
do the work of an evangelist in the colony. He was
desired by the committee to sail for New South Wales
in the month of March, in a ship from Dundee


chartered by Government to take out a hundred
families of Presbyterian mechanics. It was proposed
that he should be their chaplain on the voyage, and
receive £l5O for his services, and an appointment by
Lord Glenelg—His Majesty’s Colonial Secretary—to a
church in New South Wales on his arrival there. He
accepted this appointment, though it left him very
little time to make his arrangements. This haste
however, was a relief to his feelings ; as he said in one
of his letters:—“ There is little leisure to brood over
the painfulness of parting with friends. Many a sad
thought about them will rise up ; and I have only one
way of keeping such intruders down, and that is just
by praying very perseveringly that every purchased
and promised blessing may be given them. Were it
not for this relief, I would give way altogether.”
Having such short time to make arrangements, he
hastened to Workington as soon as he could ; and it
was arranged that Miss Carr should be married to him
at once, and should accompany him to New South Wales,
They were married in the parish church at Workington
early on the 24th February; and, after breakfast, they
set off, with a few of Mr. Hetherington’s friends, for
Lockerbie. On the 25th February, Mr. Hetherington
was ordained by the Presbytery of Lochmaben in the
parish church of Dryfesdale. The newly married couple
then bade farewell to their friends at Lockerbie on the
27th, and started for Dundee to meet the ship.
When they arrived at Dundee, on the 2nd of March,
the ship had not arrived. It had started from


Deptford on the Thames, a fortnight before; hut was
detained by contrary winds. They therefore went to
Portobello, and remained there until the ship was an-
nounced as ready to sail. While they were at Dundee,
just before sailing, they went on Sabbath to St. Peter’s
Church. Mr. McCheyne preached from a text which
Mr. and Mrs. Hetherington felt to be very appropriate
to them. It seemed as if God had directed them there,,
to hear the Saviour’s last command: “Go ye into all
the world and preach the gospel to every creature.”


CHAPTER V.
ON BOARD THE JOHN BARRY.
■On Friday, the 24th March, the John Barry set sail
from Dundee for Port Jackson; with Mr. Robson,
captain, Mr. Thomson, surgeon and superintendent of
the immigrants, Rev. Irving Hetherington, chaplain,
and nearly four hundred souls on board, of whom more
than one hundred were children under ten years of age.
After five or six days of discomfort and confusion, the
passengers began to settle down to the circumstances
of a life on board ship. A day school was instituted,
and a Sabbath school was held on Sunday afternoons,
and also in the evenings. Mr. Hetherington preached
on the Sabbath mornings; and held a prayer meeting
on Wednesday evenings, which was well attended, and
was conducted with much fervor and devotion, with
the help of some excellent men among the emigrants.
After sermon on Sabbath, Mr. and Mrs. Hetherington
distributed tracts, bibles, and testaments, with which
they had been furnished before leaving Scotland
Nothing occurred to break the usual course of events
on ship board, until the 18th April, when they called
at St. Jago, in the Cape de Yerde Islands. From this
place they sent letters home. Mrs. Hetherington wrote
on the 20th to her sister:—
Yesterday was the Sabbath, and often did I think of the
services in which you would be engaged. I prayed for you all;


1 knew that my loved friends were remembering me. The
difference of situations made me sad, for with us it was a corn-
fused and unchristian-like Sabbath. Irving’s first work was
do exert his authority in order to prevent boats from boarding
■with fruit for sale ;in which he was successful. Then we had
the Consul and three Portuguese gentlemen to breakfast, who
remained until the evening ; and you may be sure their pre-
sence did not increase the quiet of the Holy Sabbath. Our
sailors were employed in getting water into the ship ; and many
of the emigrants, who had been on shore the preceding day,
were suffering from the effects of intemperance. The noise of
the sailors prevented our having divine service in the morning ;
therefore Irving and I spent most of the time in our little cabin.
In the afternoon the people were collected on the quarter-deck,
and worship was performed. Our Catholic strangers were very
Attentive; and the Consul, who is a Protestant, expressed him-
self highly pleased. In the evening we had a prayer meeting
between decks, which was numerously attended. 0 that God
may give efficacy to His own word, and that the seed sown may
hereafter appear, for His own glory !
After this break in the voyage they again settled
down to the monotony which colonists who have come
from home so well remember. On the 4th of May, the
captain having told them that they would very
probably soon fall in with a homeward-bound ship,
3lr. and Mrs. Hetherington occupied themselves in
writing to their friends, to let them know of their
welfare; having nothing really to say but that they
were well, that the heat was great, that they fared
well and enjoyed the good things which were so
plenteously provided, etc. The letter which Mrs.
Hetherington began to her mother on that day had


to be finished by Mr. Hetherington nearly a month,
after. He writes: —
On the first of June I sit down to complete my Jessie's*
letter. But, alas! my beloved mother, how shall Idoso ?
In what terms shall I communicate the event which, heart-
rending as it is to me, must be no les3 bitter to you ; whereby
lam now so sorely chastened 1 May God strengthen me for
this task ! May the God of all consolations support you, as He
only can, under the intimation, which cannot be withheld, of
our common, our unspeakable bereavement! Our darling is no-
more. And, excepting God be with me now, lam alone in the
world, and the world i 3 to me a desert. You will observe from
my dear woman’s letter, that she had begun to write to you on
the 4th of May, and that she was at that time in good health.
And so she was ; looking rather thin and delicate indeed, but
she did not complain of indisposition, and was in excellent
spirits, and spent the afternoon and evening in the most cheerful
manner with the gentlemen who, she tells you, were to dine
with us. Next morning, however—Friday—she complained of
sore throat, and took breakfast in bed ; and having wrapped
her well up, I, believing that it was but a cold caught in walking
on the poop with our visitors, expected she would be soon well
again.
In the course of the day, however, happening to examine-
her pulse, I was greatly alarmed at finding it very high and
rapid, and called in the surgeon, who gave her some medicine,
and ordered us to use gargles for her throat, and to repeat
them at very short intervals. This was done all that night.
And next day, as the fever was increased in severity, the-
surgeon bled her; still enjoining the assiduous use of the
gargles and washes. On Sabbath she was so much better that
I went out and preached to the people ; one of the girls, to
whom she was much attached, being with her in my absence.
From this time she was never for a moment left by


some of them, except when I dismissed them. And Jit
is a satisfaction—a great satisfaction—to me, as it will
be to you also, my dear mother, to know that they
watched over her, and waited on her during her illness, with
most devoted tenderness. One family especially—a Mrs.
D , sister to the wife of the minister of Tannadice, and her
two daughters—they were to her as though she had been their
own sister. May God reward them ! Indeed, she had endeared
herself to every one. The sailors ceased to cry when hauling
up the sails, lest they should disturb her; and sentries were
placed by the emigrants along the decks, to keep the children
quiet; while the captain, by a particular position of some sails,
caused a current of fresh air to pass through the cabin, so that
it was comparatively cool; and the surgeon, a very able, kind-
hearted man, who was most attentive during the day, rose often
twice and three times during the night to see her. But what
availed all this ? From the beginning of her illness there had
been a considerable redness on her skin; but that had been
pronounced the prickly heat, and was rather thought a favorable
symptom. On Monday, however, the disease assumed a more
alarming character. The fever became so fearfully intense that
her mind began to be occasionally affected by it, and then it was
pronounced a decided case of malignant scarlet fever. From
that day to the close of the disease she had only short intervals
of consciousness. On Tuesday I was acquainted by Mr. Thomson
that he had lost all hope of her recovery ; and, though there
was no abatement of his exertions, she sank more and more
until she fell asleep from mere exhaustion, five minutes after
midnight, between Thursday the 11th and Friday the 12th.
Only seven days ill! Alas, how dreadful the blow ! How
very sudden ! That there was little or no suffering after Sab-
bath the surgeon assured me (and she herself constantly said
she had no pain; and, when asked how she was, she said “ Only
very weak”) ; and this he accounted for by the oppression pro-
duced by the fever on the brain.


And now, my beloved mother, having got over the account of
her disease—many tears it has cost me to write it; how shall
it he read by you I —you will expect me to give you other
information regarding my lamented darling’s illness, no less
interesting—how she looked, and what she said ; and, were I now
with you, it is possible that I could describe every look, and
repeat the few words she spoke. I say few, for, her throat
being affected, it caused her much pain to speak, though she
had little pain when not speaking. Were I with you, I could
do this ; but I feel I cannot on paper. I write now in Sydney,
for, during our whole voyage, we met no opportunity to Eng-
land ; yet is my Jessie’s every look and every tone as distinctly
engraved on my memory—as fully remembered, as they were
two months ago. 0 yes ! I never can forget. And in particular
will you be anxious to know what was her experience in the
prospect of eternity. It was of the serenity of heaven. Let me
die the death of the righteous, and let my last end be like hers.
O, it was the most perfect peace ! On the surgeon apprising
me on Tuesday of her extreme danger, I thought it right to
communicate this to her. She was quite collected at the time ;
and was looking at me in the affectionate manner that was so
usual to her, and which will, I think, never cease to haunt my
dreams. I said to her that Mr. Thomson did not give us reason
to expect her recovery. “It is the Lord’s will, and we must
submit, Irving,” she quietly answered. “And have you no
fear then, of death, Jessie?” “No, dear.” “And how is it
that you are not afraid to die ?” “ I have long taken Christ for
my portion, and set my hopes on Him.” I could but weep.
Afterwards I asked her what word of God it was that then gave
her most comfort. “ Come unto me, all ye that labour and are
heavy laden, and I will give you rest,” she replied, with much
eagerness ; and, after I had made some remarks on this, she
bade me repeat some of those scriptures in which salvation by
grace is offered to sinners. This I continued to do, when I
thought she was in a state of consciousness ; and prayed with


her day and night. Her spirit ascended as I was commending
her to the God of grace. As assured do I feel of her blessed-
ness, yea, as confident that she is now with the God for whom
she gave up so much, as I could be were an angel to bring to
me tidings of her mingling with the choir above. I have studied
her long; I have watched her from the first day of our
acquaintance ; and 1 now do say that never, except in one
instance—and that so trivial as would perhaps make my
sensitiveness appear excessive, if mentioned—have I witnessed
in her any departure from the very spirit, the pure and holy
spirit of the heirs of glory. To her, death was indeed unspeak-
able gain. But what a loss have I sustained !
On the day of the funeral the emigrants met and
drew up a letter expressive of their deep sympathy
with him—commending him to Him who can be a stay
and comfort in time of trouble, assuring him of their
fullest support in all his endeavors to do good on board
the ship, etc. One of the emigrants, who is still alive
and in Melbourne, when she was called upon for infor-
mation about the voyage, said:—“ Mrs Hetherington
was a rale pleasant leddy, and sair did the minister feel
the loss o’ her. He used to hing ower the ship’s side at
the place where she was buried in the sea, and look at
the water sae sad-like. We were sorry to see him. He
used to be sae attentive to her, when she was alive.
He was very ill after she deed.” In fact the surgeon
at one time thought he was dying; his nervous system
completely gave way.
Mr Hetherington once told the writer that the death
of his wife threw him into a brain fever; and he
described with awe how, in the delirium of the fever.


he had risen from his berth and gone on deck, and was
on the very point of casting himself into the sea, when
he heard a voice, as though from heaven, restraining
him. What the words were the writer now forgets,
but he thinks they were some passage of Scripture.
The words came to Mr Hetherington’s recollection with
such vivid force as to become audible. He was startled,
and reminded of his duty to God; and even in the
delirium he at once obeyed. When he came to himself,
and remembered the circumstances, though he did not
think it was actually a voice from heaven, he did think
it was virtually such, and he thanked God most
fervently, to the very end of his life, for this merciful
interposition of Providence.
The death of his wife had a powerful effect upon the
development of Mr. Hetherington’s Christian character
and ministerial gifts. It certainly contributed very
largely to fit him, more than ever, for the work of
comforting the sick and the bereaved. This, indeed,
was his special field. He seemed almost intuitively to
know what each sufferer needed. His chief powers of
Scripture explanation, and illustrative anecdote, and
wise counsel, and faithful warning, and gentle comfort,
seemed to be reserved for the chamber of the mourner,
the invalid, and the dying. No one could be more
tender in sympathy with the sorrowing, more rich in
consolation, more fervent in prayer. At no other time
.did he shew so fully the depth and intensity of his
spiritual feelings. And no doubt these gifts were fos-
tered by his own grievous affliction. The consolation


he knew so well how to offer to others had been his
own refuge in the hour of deep distress.
On the 13th July the ship “ John Barry” arrived at
Port Jackson, and lay in quarantine in Spring Cove
for about six weeks; a number of passengers besides
Mrs. Hetherington having died of scarlet fever on
board. When the ship was quarantined, Mr. Hethering-
ton forwarded his letters from Lord Glenelg and other
documents to the Governor and to the Presbytery of
New South Wales. And when at length the passengers
were allowed to land in Sydney, he presented himself
before the Presbytery, by whom, with the sanction of
the Governor, he was appointed to Singleton on the
-Gth of September.


CHAPTER YI.
AT SINGLETON, NEW SOUTH WALES.
Singleton is a pretty little town on the right bank of
the Hunter, 123 miles from Sydney, and is situated in
the electorate of Patrick’s Plains, one of the richest
pastoral and agricultural localities in New South
Wales. The district apportioned to Mr. Hetherington
included Patrick’s Plains, Jerry’s Plains, and Muswell-
brook, and was about fifty miles long and thirty miles
broad. He took charge of this district on the 11th
September, 1837, and in a letter to his friends at
Workington, written in 1838 —of which the following
portion of a draft was found among his papers—he
gave a full account of his position and work : —“ln
addition to the Sabbath services I give an occasional
sermon at the houses of the settlers for the sake of'
their servants ; and I do assure you that if I wanted
an attentive auditory I should almost prefer a convict
one. The poor wetches seem to swallow every word ;
and every appeal seems to be strongly felt. I lament
my district is so extensive, and my weekly rides so-
long, that I cannot get this other part of my duty
so fully cared for as I devoutly wish I could. I trust,,
however, that ere many years pass I shall be relieved
of my more distant connections, and be thus enabled
to concentrate my efforts on one sphere. Meanwhile-


I must do my best to manage what is committed to-
me. The families in connection with me. are the
most respectable in the district, and are very wealthy ;
and I can number not a few carriages and phaetons
and gigs at my stations every Sabbath. I have>-
therefore, beyond what is enjoyed in most of our
Scottish parishes, the advantage of good society—a
literary society I may term them; for having much
leisure all read a great deal. And perhaps you would,
infer, as another advantage, a good revenue for the-
support of the tabernacle. But of this I cannot boast,,
for truly my stipend is not oppressive. Through a
law passed some time ago, I have from Government
an allowance of £IOO a year to aid my people’s contri-
butions. That allowance has, however, been all I have
received. This is not the land for a voluntary church,,
for, as far as my own experience goes, it does not seem
to form one of the maxims of Australians to give
anything to their ministers. But, notwithstanding, I
am content. For me the £IOO is abundance; I am
thankful for it. The law by reason of which this
salary is enjoyed is this:—When a hundred people
above fourteen years of age, male or female, bond
or free, agree to attend the ministrations of a
clergyman at any one station where he officiates,,
there is given one hundred pounds; where two
hundred adults attend, there is issued £150; and
when three hundred adults, £2OO. Now, my district
yields me but the lowest rate at present; though it is
not impossible that in a few years it may yield the


second. Yet, as I said, were that all my income, it
would suffice. And most enlightened and praiseworthy
was the enactment of the legislature, whereby the
ministers of our church were admitted to such a boon.
Thelaw noticed applies to the three denominations alike:
there is here no established church, properly speaking.
There is, however, one palpable flaw in this Act; it is
not permitted in it to combine two districts in making
up the aggregate of our people, when suing for the
salary. Suppose—as is nearly correct—l have two
stations twenty miles apart, where ninety-nine
.adults do agree severally to convene for worship, and
that I do, by dint of hard riding, regularly every Sab-
bath preach to both congregations; nevertheless, were
I to fail in makiDg one of the ninety-nine one more,
that is, a hundred, I should be held to have no people
.at all, though in reality a hundred and ninety-eight.
That is very hard. And as hard almost as this —which,
if not my own case, is very near it:—suppose at one
meeting I have a hundred ; and that by riding after
sermon, I preach, twenty miles off, to a hundred and
ninety-nine people more; yet, in the eye of the Govern-
ment I have not a bit higher claim than the man who,
coming round the corner of his house, preaches to his
bare hundred, and does no more. But notwithstanding,
I thank the Government for so much. Through this
aid the ordinance of the ministry will still be kept in
the country; and it is not a vain hope that, when this
ordinance has been for a time possessed, men will learn
to appreciate it, and of their superfluity to give unto


-those who spend themselves in seeking their good.
For myself I do not complain of its smallness: in fact, I
•could dispense with it altogether; I have income enough
without it. When I proposed the erection of a church,
I stated generally to those whose aid I sought, that I
•should combine with it a school for the education of
their children. Many of those to whom application
was made, lived, however, many miles from our town-
ship ; and their families could not, therefore, take
advantage of the school as day scholars. It was on
this account proposed, that, in building a parsonage,
.accommodation should be made in it for boarders, who
might there be educated. This plan was agreed to,
and very liberally supported; about £4OO were sub-
scribed ; and this being added to the Government
contribution—which is always equal to the amount of
private donations—will be £800; with which it is
considered we will be able, not only to build our church
and complete it, but also to build and finish a dwelling
for me of two stories, containing twelve apartments, be-
sides kitchen, &c., of size enough for the twenty or thirty
children who, lam told, will be sent to me. The
building has been begun and is advancing rapidly,
insomuch that it is promised that I shall have it ready
by the end of June. But not to lose any time, I have
already engaged a tutor; and in my present residence,
a cottage which I rent, am meanwhile as busy as cir-
cumstances will permit. I have four boarders with me
already, and have just got notice of the coming of four
more in a few days ; and I have about 20 day scholars.


Whence my income is at present £250; to which adding-
£loo of Government salary, £350; from which, when
I have paid £GO to the tutor and all bills, I reckon on
having still on hand—as a fund for the days when I
have become unfit for missionary effort, and turn
myself back to Britain—better than £IOO. This is the-
first year. But when the seminary is complete and in
full operation, it will yield a more plentiful return; for
then my income will not be less than £GOO ; of which
the one-half will be put aside, I am persuaded, for
the end mentioned, and which must be kept in
view.
I feel that I am waxing very worldly; and I fear that
when I let you fartherinto my plans, you will pronounce
me utterly given over to money-hunting. Let me first-
state these plans, and then defend them. For money
deposited in the bank seven per cent, is given; but
there is a better investment still. By purchasing sheep
or cattle, about twenty-five per cent, in ordinary years-
can be obtained; for many years past, much more ; but
even that would accumulate very fast. I leave you to-
guess my purpose, and to judge if I have cause to-
lament the lowness of my circumstances, or to reflect
on myself for having led my best friend so far on her
way to a land where she would have suffered poverty.
And now then to defend myself from the suspicion that
may and must have arisen in your minds, that I am
sinking into covetousness. For this I hold I have but
to remind you of the labors referred to [in a previous
portion of the letter, which is awanting.] Ido not feel


-them much at present, it is true; but what constitution
-\yould not sink under them, if long pursued ? And say
who, when I am no longer able to sit on horseback,
will be my host ? In India, ministers are sent home
with a pension; but here—where a pension is as much
required —but for the savings of economy and industry
in the period of service, no resources would be
possessed ; for no pension awaits us. Like the ant,
therefore, I will provide for the wintry season ; if ever
I see such, it will be well for me then; and if not, my
memory will be to my friends none the less grateful,
that of such things, in the midst of my ministry, I have
•been not unmindful.
But how have I been wearying you, I fear I should
.say, by these egotistical representations ! You will
forgive me, my dear friend, when I tell you how it is I
have been so tedious about my own affairs. I have
•almost fancied myself again in William street, and I
have written as though we were still sitting over the
•drawing-room fire, and you were still inviting me to
say everything to you that at all interested myself.
Very delightful to me were those evenings! When I
think of happiness tasted by me from earthly sources,
I think of them. You were then a patient listener, and
hence I have taken for granted that you are a diligent
and patient reader. And besides, it is a mournful but
much valued gratification to me to write to you; and I
•could keep writing to you without ceasing: While I
write, distance seems, as it were, withdrawn; and my
heart, which I thought sorrow had chilled entirely, is


again warmed by renewals of my dearest associations.
But I must not indulge too far at your expense.
I would thank you for your affectionate letter, though
it was a hitter sight to me. And very gladly would
I now say to you —accept of Dr. Lang’s invitation,
and join us here, as you mention in your letter he
had urged; but I dare not advise that you should
accept it, though it would he new life to me to see you
and your dear family in this land of my pilgrimage.
If you were here just now, I would yield Jerry’s
Plains to you, where you would have the Government
salary of £100; but that, I fear, would be the whole
of your income; for the number of resident proprietors
is small, and neither would they give liberally, nor
would they build a house for you—as is being done
at Patrick’s Plains—where you might have a school,
so as to add materially to the Government allowance.
Were it the case, indeed, that here we lacked laborers
for the vineyard, I should certainly say—Come. For
on £IOO a year you could at least subsist; and
souls are perishing, for whose sake you are bound
to reduce yourself to a bare subsistence, if need
were. But neither can I say this. In truth, many
allege that there are more ministers here than,
humanly speaking, can be supported, or rather, will
be supported. And if I chose to limit myself to-
Patrick’s Plains at present, where I have not eight
families, —which I would do for you—l have only to
signify as much to two or three ministers, to secure
them to it. Now this I will not do at present for any


but you. There are at this time in the colony
nineteen Presbyterian ministers holding ordination,,
and three licentiates unordained—a full force, con-
sidering the amount of the Presbyterian population.
Wherefore I do dissuade you from coming; and the
more, that you have such a field of usefulness in actual
possession. 0, my dear friend! Be thankful for a
church-going people. Be thankful that you live-
where the Sabbath is in some degree honored, and
where men profess—at least, profess—some respect for
spiritual things ; and that you have the satisfaction of
speaking to some who not only understand, but have a
taste for such realities. What a relief it would be to-
me if I could meet with a man or woman in my
district who (The rest is wanting).
The nine years of Mr. Hetherington’s residence at
Patrick’s Plains were spent in hard work, and rough
work in various ways. He once mentioned to the
writer a few facts in connection with the convict
element in his district. He was appealed to some-
times by the convict servants, to use his influence to
protect them from unkindness and tyranny. For'
although tyrannical treatment was certainly excep-
tional in his district, there were stations on which
cases of it did occur. He mentioned one case
specially. The man was an unusually civil and
industrious servant, a very superior man. For some
trivial fault he was sent off to the police quarters,,
where, of course, he would get a flogging. And the
floggings of convicts in those days were severe.


Mr. Hetherington pled for the poor fellow most
compassionately, but in vain. The man was marched
off to the whipping-post, and the lash unsparingly
laid upon his back; and Mr. Hetherington heard the
blows, and, at length, the cries of tortured nature,
that haunted his memory long after. The poor fellow
never forgot Mr. Hetherington’s kindness and
sympathy.
The long rides which Mr. Hetherington had to take
in all weathers, conjoined with the mental work
required in the preparation of a young minister’s dis-
courses, and, at first, the care of the school, which he
superintended for several years, were trying enough.
At that time he -wrote out his sermons in long hand;
and carefully were they prepared. Much of his study-
ing, however, he was compelled to do on horseback ;
.and when a thought struck him, he would dismount
and note it down, and then remount and pursue his
journey. At one time a drought of long continuance
had so bared the pastures as to weaken the horses, and
make them useless. He had, therefore, to perform his
journeys on foot, and generally during the night, so as
to avoid the heat of the day. One Saturday night he
had to walk thirty miles; and, after climbing a hill,
and while resting on a log at the summit, the idea of
ministers in Scotland complaining of being Mondayish
after two services, and without other fatigue, struck
him as so ludicrous that he could not help bursting out
into a loud “ guffaw ” of laughter, whichsounded strange
in the darkness and loneliness of the bush. On one


occasion, long after he had left New South Wales, and
when he was travelling with the writer in a wild part
of the bush in Heytesbury, in Victoria, it was suggested,
as the night came on, and the roads were bad and some-
what dangerous, that we had better camp out for the
night. “ Did you ever camp out for the night ?” asked
Mr Hetherington. “ No,” was the answer. “ I have,”
quoth he decidedly; “ press on.” Still, trying as his
work sometimes was—and he never spared himself —it
was useful work, and to him it was congenial work.
After his removal to Melbourne, he often said—while
staying now and then for a week or so with a minister
in the country, and assisting in his labors—“ The bush
is the place after all.”
While minister at Patrick’s Plains, Mr. Hetherington
was brought unpleasantly into contact with the Church
of England clergyman; whose lofty assumption of
priestly dignity as a direct successor to the Apostles,
and his supercilious treatment of the dissentingpreacher,
and his public assertion of extreme high-church views,
stirred up Mr. Hetherington to deliver a series of lec-
tures on Presbyterianism, and otherwise to defend his
position as a minister of the Gospel. The remembrance
of this passage in his life, and the research involved in
getting up the lectures, gave that definiteness to his
views, and that firmness to his expression of them,
from which we reap the benefit in the Presbyterian
Catechism, drawn up by him not long before his death.
And it was very much owing to this that he persisted
in devoting a chapter in the Catechism to the Apostolical


Succession. When it was suggested that the devotion
of a whole chapter, in so small a book, to such a subject,
was making too much of it, he replied—“ My dear sir,
you know nothing about it Your experience is no
rule. Your neighbor is an unusually liberal man for
an Episcopalian clergyman—a man among a thousand.
But when I was in New South Wales, I had a very
different experience. This dogma of Apostolical Suc-
cession was thrust into my face in a way which com-
pelled me to assert my ministry. And I would have
been very thankful for a small manual, like this
Catechism, to distribute among my people. We’ll just
let it be.”
About the beginning of the year 1889, Mr. Hether-
ington was joined by his brother William and his sister
Mary, from Scotland. His sister kept house for him
for two years, and was then married to a Mr. Keys,
who had come out in the same ship. His brother
William, after getting a little colonial experience, was
employed in the management of a station in which
Mr. Hetherington had an interest.
In the year 1840, Mr. Hetherington joined two-
gentlemen, Messrs. White and Robertson, in taking up
a station, which he, as the principal partner, named
Bonshaw —after an estate in Annandale, belonging to
the Irvings of Bonshaw, a connection of the family;
and the first stock which was put upon the ran was a
mob of fifty heifers, which Mr. Hetherington bought at
£lO a head. The investment did not turn out to be so
remunerative as he had anticipated. In fact, instead of


gaining twenty-five per cent, per annum, he lost by it;
and eventually sold out to Mr. Keys. It was a very
common thing in those days for ministers who had,
a little money, to invest it in stock ; and it was
nearly as common a thing for them to lose it aIL It is
not improbable that the result was, after all, the best
for them, and the best for their ministerial usefulness.
At the end of 1840, or the beginning of 1841, Mr.
Hetherington went over to Woolongong to baptize a
child of his friend, the Rev. John Tait, and was intro-
duced by Mr. and Mrs. Tait to an excellent family at
Mount Keira, near Woolongong. In this family Mr.
Hetherington found his second wife, Margaret McAllis-
ter, the eldest daughter of Charles McAllister Shannon,
formerly of Levenstrath, Argyleshire, Scotland. “ Cap-
tain Shannon and his wife were both children of God,
and trained their family in strict religious principles.
They have long been enjoying the blessedness that God
has prepared for them that love Him; and—thanks to
the good seed early and carefully sown, to their prayers,
and above all to the grace of God—they have had' the
joy of meeting many of their children before the
throne of God and the Lamb.”
Mr. Hetherington and Miss Shannon were married
in 1842, and for nearly two years they lived in the
large building—partly manse and partly school, of
which mention has already been made. Three
children were bom to them at Patrick’s Plains, one of
whom died in Melbourne. About the year 1844 they
removed to a house which Mr. Hetherington built on


a piece of ground purchased by him on the bank of the-
Hunter, a mile and a half from Singleton, and which
he called Denbie, after an estate belonging to his
mother’s family in Dumfriesshire. On this house and
ground he spent many an hour’s work. Even after
coming home from a long journey, he would set to
work at gardening or carpentry with an energy that
seemed never to tire. Few people would suppose that
Mr. Hetherington was possessed of considerable
mechanical ingenuity. But after he had given up the
school, and had some leisure , time on hand, he
employed himself in planning and carrying out several
contrivances for saving labor. He constructed, among
other things, a small tramway from the river up to the
house, along which the water required for domestic
purposes was conveyed; the bucket tipping over
when it got down to the water side, and being easily
and rapidly brought up when filled. He afterwards
set up a water-wheel to water the garden; and people-
far and near came to see the machinery, which was
simple and effective. The garden was a hobby of his.
The writer has seen a manuscript book on gardening
which was compiled by Mr. Hetherington while at
Denbie. It was a large book, written in small
characters, filled with extracts from all quarters on
all gardening subjects, and with an index at the end
for reference. It was a perfect magazine of horticul-
tural knowledge. This book was afterwards sent to-
his sons at Fiji, when they began their plantation on
the Dreketi.


Mr. Hetherington always looked back to his stay at
Patrick’s Plains with pleasure; and he said more than
once that if he had known, before deciding to leave,
that the people had such an esteem and affectionate
regard for him, he would never have parted from them.
On leaving for Melbourne he was presented with a
few theological works, hearing the following inscrip-
tion : —“ Presented to the Rev. Irving Hetherington by
the inhabitants of Singleton and Patrick’s Plains (on
his translation from Singleton to Melbourne), as a
mark of their esteem and affection for his talents as a
preacher and kindness as a friend, during the period of
nine years he laboured among them; hoping that in
after years it may be the means of recalling to his
remembrance the many warm friends and ardent
.admirers he left in the district. April 20th, 1847.”


CHAPTER VII.
THE PRESBYTERIAN CHURCH IN NEW SOUTH WALES.
During his stay in New South Wales Mr. Hetherington
took less part in church business than he did after he
came to Victoria. As a bush minister he was away
from the centre of affairs, and as a young man he had
his experience yet to gain. Besides, he had, especially
at first, no heart to mingle in ecclesiastical polemics ;
and the polemical unfortunately characterised far too
largely the mode of conducting Presbyterian Church
business in the early days of New South Wales. His
name appears in the records very sparingly; and
chiefly in connection with heathen missions and
devotional exercises and the exercise of discipline.
Still, he did take a share in the difficult and painful
duties which were demanded by the early history
of Presbyterianism in New South Wales.
It will be proper to give a short sketch of this-
history from the beginning. The first Presbyterian
minister that landed in Australia was the Rev.
John Dunmore Lang, A.M., afterwards D.D. He was-
ordained in Scotland by the Presbytery of Irvine on
the 30th September, 1822, and came out to the colony
under the auspices of Sir Thomas Brisbane, Governor
of New South Wales. He began his labors in Sydney>-
June, 1823 ; and in connection with his ministry the


first Presbyterian church in Australia—the Scots
Church —was built in Jamieson-street, Sydney, in
1825. For eight years Dr. Lang was the only Pres-
byterian minister on the continent. But, in 1831, he
was the means of bringing out five ministers, who
along with him formed, in 1832, the Presbytery of
New South Wales.
A difference soon arose in the Presbytery; and the
Rev. J. McGarvie, afterwards D.D., appealed to the
General Assembly of the Church of Scotland. In
consequence mainly of this appeal, a Declaratory Act
of Assembly was passed on the 24th May, 1833,
regulating the connection of colonial churches with
the General Assembly; and appointing its first
Colonial Committee to correspond with colonial
churches, and give them advice and aid in all matters
in which they they might choose to consult the
Church of Scotland. (The italics are ours, and their
significance will appear further on.)
The General Assembly of the Church of Scotland did, and
hereby do, enact and declare, that it is proper and expedient
for ordained ministers of the Church of Scotland connected with
fixed congregations in any of the British Colonies, to form them-
selves, where circumstances permit, into Presbyteries or
Synods, adhering to the standards of this Church , and maintaining
her form of worship and Government.
That no minister should be received as a member of any such
Presbytery or Synod, when first formed, who has not been
ordained by a Presbytery of this Church ; that no minister of this
Church should be afterwards received as a member who does
not come specially recommended from the Presbytery by whic h


he was ordained, or in which he has last resided ; and that no
probationer of this Church should receive ordination from any
such Presbytery, except on his producing extract of license,
with a testimonial of his good character, from the Presbytery
or Presbyteries within whose bounds he has resided down to
the time of his leaving Scotland.
That it is not expedient for such Presbyteries, in the present
state of education in the colonies, to exercise the power of
licensing Probationers ; but that licentiates of the Church of
Scotland, who shall be ordained by any such Presbytery to
particular charges in the manner above described, shall remain
in full communion with the Church of Scotland, and retain
all the rights and privileges which belong to licentiates or
ministers of this church; and that members of congregations,
under the charge of ministers so ordained, shall, on coming to
Scotland, be admitted to Church privileges, on the production
of satisfactory certificates of their religious and moral character,
from the minister and session of the congregation to which they
have severally belonged.
And the Assembly earnestly recommend to all ministers and
probationers of this Church, who remove to those colonies in
which such Presbyteries are constituted, to put themselves under
the inspection of the Presbytery of the bounds in which they
may reside ; and, in the event of their returning to thi3 country,
to produce testimonials from such Presbytery or Presbyteries,
of their character and conduct during their absence.
The General Assembly further named a standing committee
to correspond with such Churches in the colonies, for the pur-
pose of giving advice on any question with regard to which they
may choose to consult the Church of Scotland, and affording them
such aid as it may be in the power of the committee to give in
all matters affecting their rights and interests.
During the next five years Dr. Lang visited Scotland
several times, to bring out additional ministers. He


.spent much of his time and strength and even of his
own money in this important work. Australian Presby-
terianism owes much to Dr. Lang; and it would have
owed much more, and have been more willing to
acknowledge it, had it not been for the faults which
marred a life otherwise fitted to be pre-eminently
useful. His indefatigable energy, his acknowledged
ability, his long colonial experience, and the fact that
he was the founder of Presbyterianism in Australia,
and the means of bringing out so many Presbyterian
•emigrants and ministers, gave him an influence which,
with judicious and humble management, would have
raised the Presbyterian Church of New South Wales
to the highest place of usefulness and respect, instead
of wasting its strength, as it was wasted, in unnecessary
•disputes and divisions. The justice of these remarks
will be seen in the sequel.
On the 29th July, 1836, an Act was passed by Sir
Richard Bourke, Governor of New South Wales, with
the advice of the Legislative Council, authorising the
issue, from the revenue of the colony, of sums to be
•applied in aid of the building of churches and the
maintenance of ministers of religion- As soon as this
Church Act had passed, Lord Glenelg, the British
Secretary of State for the Colonies, wrote to the General
Assembly’s Colonial Committee, informing them of it,
and offering a free passage and outfit to such ministers
as should be recommended by the Committee. Dr.
Lang obtained from the Governor leave of absence for
fifteen months, and went home for the fourth time to


bring out additional ministers. There were at that-
time only five Presbyterian ministers in Australia,
including Dr. Lang. The Church of England people-
were bestirring themselves so vigorously to reap the
benefits of Sir Richard Bourke’s Church Act, that-
within two years they introduced one bishop and
twenty-three clergymen. Dr. Lang determined on his-
part to do what he could for Presbyterianism, by
bringing out twenty additional ministers, besides-
emigrants. With this aim he visited Scotland, Ire-
land, and Germany; holding meetings, and publishing-
addresses ; and through his untiring energy he was-
instrumental in bringing out, within twoyears, nineteen
ministers and candidates for the ministry. These
ministers, while most of them influenced by Dr. Lang,,
were directed by the Colonial Committee of the Church
of Scotland, and recommended by them to Lord.
Glenelg, by whom they were appointed to the colony.
Four of them preceded Dr. Lang to Australia, and
landed in Sydney.—Rev. James Allan in the first half
of 1837, Rev. Irving Hetherington in July of the same
year, Revs. William Hamilton and John Tait in Sep-
tember ; all of whom were settled in charges before Dr..
Lang returned.
On the 3rd December, 1837, the ship Portland arrived,
with Dr. Lang and eight ordained ministers, along with
two probationers and two schoolmasters, who were
afterwards ordained. He was anxious to introduce-
these persons at once into the Presbytery, that they
might have a seat and a vote in that court. But'


according to the laws of the Church of Scotland, they
could not be members of the Presbytery until they
were settled over congregations. (See Declaratory
Act given above.) Dr. Lang found also, on land-
ing, that, while he was away from the colony,,
the Presbytery had got an Act passed by the Legisla-
ture, 9th September, 1837, “to regulate the temporal
affairs of Presbyterian Churches in connection with
the Church of Scotland in New South Wales;” and
that this Act recognised the Presbytery of New South
Wales as having jurisdiction over the Presbyterian
Church property in connection with the Church of
Scotland. The Presbytery being thus clothed with a-
power and influence which he could not hope to over-
come, he therefore, on the 11th December, gathered
together the brethren who had come out with him only
eight days before, and proposed to them that they
should organise a Presbyterian body separate from the
Presbytery. The majority of them fell in with this
proposal, and styled themselves “ The Synod of New
South Wales.” Three of them, however, refused to
join the schismatic movement, and applied to be re-
ceived by the Presbytery. These three were the Revs-
George Macfie, John Gregor, and James Forbes. A
Gaelic minister who came from Scotland soon after,
and two missionaries to the aborigines, who came from-
Germany, joined the Synod.
In February, 1838, the Synod, on applying to the
Government for salaries to their ministers, were in-
formed that they must apply through the moderator of


the Presbytery. After much correspondence with the
Government, however, they prevailed on the Legisla-
tive Council to grant them the usual salaries for one
year, until the question be referred to the British
Government. The Presbytery memorialized the Go-
venor against the recognition of the Synod. The
memorial was sent to Britain, to the Secretary of State
for the Colonies, who referred it to the Church of Scot-
land. The Colonial Committee of that Church gave
its judgment that the so-called Synod of New South
Wales had no connection with the Church of Scotland;
and the Commission of Assembly supported this
decision. And so the Synod got no salaries.
Before the news of this decision had reached Aus-
tralia, a proposal for union had been made by the
Presbytery in October, 1838, on the motion of the Rev.
W. Hamilton; and was agreed to by the Synod. But
•on learning the decision of the Church of Scotland, the
• Synod were indignant, and authorised Dr. Lang to go
to England as their representative, and appeal to the
•Secretary of State for the Colonies against the assump-
tion, by the Church of Scotland, of authority over the
.Synod of New South Wales. He was also instructed
to represent to the General Assembly their continued
.attachment to the Church of Scotland. Dr. Lang ac-
cordingly went home in 1839, and tried hard to prevail
upon the British Government to disallow the Presby-
terian Church Act, before it should have been in force
two years, after which term it became the permanent
law of the colony.


His mission was unsuccessful on all points. The
Government in England referred him to the Church of
Scotland. And a Special Committee was appointed by
the Commission of Assembly, with reference to the
unhappy divisions of the Presbyterian Church of New
South Wales, and especially to confer with Dr. Lang in
regard to his duty in this matter, in the hope of heal-
ing the division. After much correspondence, Dr. Lang
appeared at length before the Committee, and pledged
himself to adhere to the agreement made with the
Presbytery of New South Wales as to union ; and, in
consequence of this pledge, no action was taken with
regard to his conduct by the Church of Scotland ; it
being left to the Colonial Church to take such steps as
they might see fit.
A letter -was sent by the Commission of Assembly to
the Presbytery of New South Wales, counselling union,
and urging the faithful exercise of discipline over its
ministers, the neglect of which had been charged against
them by Dr. Lang. A Pastoral Address was also sent
to the Presbyterians of New South Wales, strongly
counselling union, and remonstrating with the ministers
of the so-called Synod for their schismatical conduct in
separating from their brethren. The Presbytery had
carried out the discipline recommended by the parent
Church, even before the letter had arrived; and Mr
Hetherington specially exerted himself, and did good
service in the difficult and painful duty of discipline
against several of the ministers, who were removed
from the ministry during 1839. The Union was agreed


upon; and a Bill to amend the Act regulating the
temporal affairs of Presbyterian Churches was passed
in September, 1840, legalizing the union.
On the sth October, 1840, “ The Synod of Australia
in connection with the Church of Scotland” was
constituted; the Rev. John Tait, Moderator. The
Moderator and the Rev. Irving Hetherington were
appointed to answer the letter from the Church of
Scotland. Dr. Lang returned from Scotland in 1841,
and, on the 11th March, gave in his adhesion to the
United Synod, which then numbered eighteen ministers.
They all signed a Bond of Union, pledging themselves
to pass over and bury in oblivion all matters which had
been previously subjects of mutual complaint, and
engaging to treat each other in conformity with the
laws of Christ and the Scottish Church, submitting
themselves to the judgments of the majority.
After Dr. Lang had joined, Dr. McGarvie absented
himself from the meetings of the Presbytery of Sydney
for two months, and declined to give any reason for
his absence. Dr. Lang then moved that he be
suspended until the meeting of Synod, for contumacy
and rebellion. The motion was carried, but an appeal
was taken to the Synod. Dr. McGarvie attended the
Presbytery meetings thereafter. On which account,
at the annual meeting of the Synod in October, it was
not deemed for edification that anything further should
be done in the matter.
At this meeting of Synod Dr. Lang introduced the
subject of the training of a native ministry in connec-


-tion with the Australian College. After conference by
& special committee with the trustees and shareholders
of the College, it was agreed to sanction a curriculum
similar to that required by the Church of Scotland;
and a committee was appointed to carry this into
effect; Dr. Lang, convener. Dr. Lang never convened
the committee; but, of his own accord, set off in
November to visit Port Phillip and Van Diemen’s
Land, to advocate the cause of the Australian College.
The person whom he employed to fill his pulpit during
his absence was one whom the Synod had, a short
time previously, refused to receive into its ministry.
A memorial from certain members of the Scots Church,
■complaining of this and other matters, was sent to the
Presbytery, and referred to the Commission of Synod.
The Commission met in January, 1842, and admonished
Dr. Lang to pay more regard to the resolutions of the
Church Courts in future. He thereupon fiercely
attacked the Synod from the pulpit of the Scots Church,
and denounced them in most violent terms, both there
.and in the newspapers. He called a meeting of the
■congregation, which was held on the 22nd February,
when he proposed separation from the Synod. A
letter of resignation was written on Ist March —
addressed to the Moderator of the Presbytery of
Sydney—giving as his reason for resigning, that he
had been led to the conviction that the Synod s
reception of State aid, on the principle on which it
was given in New South Wales, is wrong; and 1
informing the Presbytery that the majority of the


of Faith, and to the other standards and formularies of the-
Church of Scotland, the Synod think it incumbent on them
at the present time to proclaim their attachment to the great
truth so prominently and frequently held forth in those
standards, that the Lord Jesus Christ is the only King and
Head of the Church, which he hath purchased with his blood,
and that his revealed will and authority form the only infallible
rule of duty to his followers.
2nd. That as “ the Lord Jesus, as King and Head of his
Church, hath therein appointed a government in the hands of
Church officers, distinct from the civil magistrate,” it belongs to-
such officers to judge and dispose of all spiritual questions and
matters, and, when assembled in synods and councils,.
“ ministerially to determine controversies of faith and cases of
conscience, to set down rules and directions for the belter-
ordering of the public worship of God and government of his-
church, to receive complaints in cases of mal-administration,
and authoritatively to determine the same Christ’s servants-
being bound in all things to obey the commands of him in whose
name they act.
3rd. That “ the civil magistrate ought to assist, maintain r
and fortify the jurisdiction of the Church” in spiritual things,
but “ neither to preach, minister the sacraments, nor execute
the censures of the Church, nor prescribe any rule how it should
be done whence it followsthat, if in any instance the magistrate-
exact, as the terms of his support to the Church, any conditions
inconsistent with her allegiance to her only King and Head, or
incompatible with the proper discharge of the duties he has
assigned to her, it becomes the Church to decline the magistrate’s
countenance rather than submit to such unlawful conditions.
4tli. That the Synod feel called upon to declare their attach'
ment to another principle set forth in the standards of the
Church of Scotland, and asserted under great diversity of
circumstances at various periods, “ that no (pastor) should be
intruded upon any congregation, either by the Prince or by any


inferior person, without lawful election and the assent of the
people over whom the pastor is placed, as the practice of the
apostolical kirk and good order crave.”
sth. That as the above principles are so clearly declared in the
formularies to which the members of this Synod have solemnly
recorded their adherence; as they were not only avowed, but
acted on, by the Established Church of Scotland at the time
when this Synod was formed and assumed its present desig-
nation ; as they were not only principles of the Church, but
principles generally believed to be recognised by the State in
the ancient statutes of the kingdom of Scotland, and in the
treaty of union with England : The Synod do now declare their
unaltered attachment to the aforesaid principles, and their
determination, through God’s grace, ever to maintain them, and
to administer the government of this colonial Church in
accordance with them.
6th. That this Synod express their gratitude to God, that in
the gracious arrangements of His Providence, they enjoy that
spiritual liberty which is essential to the right administration of
the affairs of a Christian Church ; no attempt having been made
to interfere with their treatment of spiritual matters, and there
being no statutes in force here, under color of which any such
interference can be apprehended.
7th. That the arrangement of the colonial government which
requires the adherence of the people as a title to endowment in
favor of a particular minister, is an effectual guarantee against
intrusion; and this Synod are determined to uphold the right
of the Christian people to choose their pastors, and, in all
cases where a congregation has been already formed, to
require the assent, either formal or tacit, of a majority of the
communicants therein, previous to the formation of the pastoral
relation.
Bth. That as the ecclesiastical equality of all ministers of
Christ’s gospel, who are pastors of congregations, is a funda-
mental principle of Presbyterian polity, it necessarily follows


congregation of the Scots Church, with its elders and.
trustees, agree with him, and are determined to-
maintain their right to the church and all the propertjr
connected with it, against all claimants whatsoever.
The Presbytery appointed a committee to confer with
him ; but he refused to meet the committee. He was
then summoned to appear before the Presbytery in
April. Dr. Lang did not appear; and the case was
referred to the Commission. By the Commission of’
Synod, on the 7th April, Dr. Lang was suspended from
the ministry, and the Presbytery of Sydney were
instructed to proceed against him by libel in usual
form, and refer the final decision to the annual meeting-
of Synod in October. In October Dr. Lang appeared
in the presence of the Synod, but declined to go to the
bar, alleging that the Synod had no jurisdiction over
him. The libel was read, accusing him of slander,,
schism, and contumacy. Evidence was adduced; and,
after two days’ consideration of the case, the Synod
decided that the charges were proven. On the third,
day it was moved that Dr. Lang’s resignation be
accepted. Mr. Hetherington moved as an amendment
that the Synod proceed to depose Dr. Lang. The
amendment was carried by a large majority ; and the
sentence of deposition was pronounced by the
Moderator, the Rev. William Hamilton. Official
intimation of this sentence was sent to the Church of
Scotland; by whom he was declared to be no longer a-
minister of that Church, until he be reponed in due
form. It is gratifying to be able to append to this sad


history the statement that Dr. Lang was afterwards
recognised by the Church of Scotland, and that he is
now an honored minister of the Synod of New South
Wales, which was formed, in 1865, by the union of the
representatives of the Established, Free, and U. P.
Churches of Scotland.
The year 1843, which was so eventful in Scotland,
was fortunately uneventful in the histoiy of the Synod
of Australia; and Mr. Hetherington did not attend any
of its meetings that year. (The news of the disruption
in Scotland did not reach Australia till after the meeting
of the Synod in October.) This breathing space, how-
ever, was not destined to be a long one.
At the annual meeting of Synod in October, 1844, it
was reported that a letter had been received by the
Moderator of Synod from the Colonial Committee of
the Free Church of Scotland, dated 28th June, 1843.
An overture also was sent up from the Rev. W. Hamilton
of Goulboum, with regard to a circular addressed to
each minister of the Synod by the Colonial Committee
of the Established Church of Scotland. Another over-
ture was sent up from the Rev. J. Forbes, of Melbourne,
with regard to the spiritual independence of the church,
both as to the rights of the people in choosing their
pastors, and as to the supreme and independent jurisdic-
tion of the Synod. On the motion of Mr. Forbes, the
Synod unanimously resolved and declared as follows :
Ist. That, as, at the formation of this Synod, the various
members did, by their subscriptions to the Bond of Union then
signed, declare their adherence to the doctrines of the Confession


that the jurisdiction of Church Courts lawfully extends over
those only who are members of them, or who are represented in
them ; and that, in like manner, individual ministers, or bodies
of ministers, can be morally responsible only for the actings of
those courts of which they are members, or in which they are
represented ; whence it follows that the members of the Synod
are subject to none other jurisdiction than that of the Synod
itself, and are not morally responsible for the actings of any body
holding, or professing to hold, the same standards, over whose
proceedings they can exert no influence.
9th. That the nature of the relation between the Presbyterian
Church in New South Wales and the Church of Scotland, formed
a prominent subject of consideration in the discussions, con-
ferences, negotiations, and correspondence which preceded the
formation of this Synod ; —the independence of the colonial
Church from all transmarine jurisdiction being made an indis-
pensable preliminary to the union then effected between the
various Presbyterian ministers in the colony. And the Synod
have to express their satisfaction that the entire subject has
been fully investigated, and that the Established Church of Scot,
land definitively declared—more especially in the “ Report of
the Committee appointed in 1839, by the Commission of the
General Assembly, with reference to the Presbyterian Church
of New South Wales,” and unanimously agreed to and approved
of, and adopted by the said Commission on the 12th December,
1839, and subsequently by the General Assembly of 1840, —that
this Synod is the supreme legislative and judicial court for the
colonial Presbyterian Church, and enjoys in fact, what it is
entitled to of right, the power of regulating the affairs of this
branch of Christ’s Church, in accordance with their views of his
will, under the guidance of His Spirit;—the Synod, never-
theless, considering themselves bound by the most solemn
engagements to adhere to the doctrines of the Confession of
Faith, and the other standards and formularies of the Church
of Scotland, and to administer discipline agreeably to the laws


of that Church, in so far as they are applicable in the circum-
stances of this colony.
To these resolutions —which were adopted by the
Synod without one dissentient voice, and were never
rescinded —the attention of the reader is directed, and
especially to the last of them, as throwing light upon
several points in the after history of Mr. Hetherington
and of the colonial Churches. These resolutions
expressed the unanimous sentiment of the Synod,
and the sentiment which ruled Mr. Hetherington’s
conduct in reference to the Church of Scotland, not
only during his stay in New South Wales hut after-
wards in Victoria. Even while most anxious to retain
connection with the historic Church of Scotland,
he held that the colonial Church was thoroughly
independent of its jurisdiction. His desire, and that
of others in the Synod, was to set up an Australian
Church, unentangled by home controversies.
With reference to the communications from the
home Churches, which were next laid before the Synod,
the Rev. W. Hamilton moved a number of resolutions
to the effect that the Synod holds a neutral position,
and desires to maintain communion and friendly
correspondence with both Churches; and lest the
designation “In connection with the Church of
Scotland” should be misunderstood, this designation
shall be changed. Dr. McGarvie moved as an amend-
ment that it is not necessary to change the designation
of the Synod, or to abandon their connection with the
Established Church of Scotland. The Rev. J. Tait


moved, as a second amendment, a series of resolutions
to the effect that the Synod sympathises with the
stand taken by the Free Church, and on this account
resolves that the designation of the Synod be changed,
and that supplies of ministers be sought from the Free
Church. The second amendment was carried against
the first; and the motion was carried against the
amendment by nine votes to six, four members
declining to vote between the last alternatives. Mr.
Hetherington was one of those who voted for the
motion. A committee was appointed to take steps
to procure the passing of an amended Temporalities
Act, in which the change in the designation of the
Synod should be legalized. It was agreed, on an
overture from the Presbytery of Melbourne, that there
should be two independent Synods, to be called
respectively the General Synod of the Presbyterian
Church in New South Wales, and the General Synod
of the Presbyterian Church in Australia Felix. It
was decided that the Temporalities Bill, when drawn
up, and before being submitted to the Legislature,
shall be sent to the five Presbyteries for approval.
The result of this decision was that two of the
Presbyteries rejected the bill, one held no meeting,
and so, in the absence of approval by a majority of
the Presbyteries, the movement was delayed for a
year.
At the next general meeting in October, 1845, Hr.
Hetherington was chosen Moderator. The same three-
fold division of opinion was manifested in regard to


the question of the Synod’s connection with the
Established Church of Scotland. Three motions were
.again proposed. But this year the Free Church party
•earned their resolutions, not only against the Estab-
lished Church connection, but also against the neutral
position; eight voting for the Free Church, six for
the neutral position, and eight declining to vote —
some from sympathy with the Established Church,
and others for various reasons. A new Temporalities
Bill was directed to be framed, and to be submitted to
a meeting of Synod in May, 1846. At the meeting in
May the matter was postponed to the annual meeting
in October.
At the meeting of Synod in October, 1846, an extract
minute of the Acting Colonial Committee of the Church
•of Scotland was read, together with a deliverance
of the General Assembly, of date 2nd June, 1845,
.relative to the resolutions passed by the Synod of Aus-
tralia in October, 1844, — i. e., the second series of
resolutions passed at that meeting. The deliverance
stated explicitly, that these resolutions necessarily
imply, on the part of the Synod, a total repudiation of
its statutory connection with the Established Church
of Scotland, and that such ministers and elders of the
.Synod as adhere to these resolutions are no longer
ministers and elders in connection with the Church of
Scotland; and instructed the Colonial Committee to
take all competent steps to vindicate the rights of
those who still adhere to the Church of Scotland. This
.certainly brought matters to a point. It was shown


also, that the Free Church scouted the idea of the
Colonial Church taking up a neutral position, and
holding friendly relations with both of the home
Churches : the Synod’s resolutions of 1844 were
received in the Free Church Assembly with shouts of
derision. This fact shows how strong the church feel'
ing was at that time in Scotland. When the very
same principle was propounded after the union of the
Churches in Victoria, the Free Church heartily approved
what they had previously scorned and rejected. Not
that we condemn them for this. In times of conflict,
neutrality, however theoretically advisable, is often
practically impossible; and where high principles are at
stake, neutrality is either culpable indifference or
contemptible cowardice. The Free Church Assembly,
glowing with the consciousness of having suffered for
conscience’ sake, and with zeal for the principles of
spiritual independence, were impatient of neutrality.
But to return to our Synod. There is not the
slightest doubt that those who took up a neutral
position in the Synod of 1844, did so from no-
indifference to principle, but from a desire to keep the
colony unembarrassed by home divisions. The event,
however, shewed that this was impossible; and the
question before the Synod of 1846 was simplified. Three-
motions were tabled, as in the two previous years; but
that which proposed a middle course was very scantily
supported ; and it was eventually carried by a large
majority—“ That it is not necessary to proceedfurther
in the consideration of the change of designation, and.


the committee appointed thereanent are hereby released
from their duties in that matter.” This decision was-
come to on the 9th October, 1846. Six ministers pro-
tested against the decision, and withdrew from the
Synod; leaving sixteen ministers in connection with
the Church of Scotland, of whom Mr. Hetherington
was one. Four ministers withdrew on Free Church
grounds ; of whom three, the Revs. J. Tait, W. Mcln-
tyre and Colin Stewart, formed the Synod of Eastern
Australia; and one, the Rev. J. Forbes, founded the Free
Presbyterian Church of Australia Felix. The Revs.
W. Hamilton and T. Mowbray withdrew because they
believed the Church in the colony ought to be separate
and independent of the home churches. Mr. Hamilton
wentto Port Phillip, and ministered there,in the Western
District, unconnected with any denomination until the
Union of 1859, when he joined the Presbyterian Church
of Victoria. Mr. Mowbray continued to be minister of
the same congregation in Sydney, until a rupture of a
blood-vessel in thelungs drovehim to the milder climate
of Moreton Bay, where he afterwards became the
founder of the Presbyterian Church of Queensland.
In consequence of Mr Forbes’ protest, the Presbytery
of Melbourne in connection with the Synod of Australia
declared, on the 17th November, that he is no longer a
member of the Presbytery, or a minister of the Scots'
Church, Melbourne. The pulpit of the Scots’ Church
being thus vacant, some of the leading members of the
congregation wrote to the Rev. Thomas Mowbray, in
Sydney,—having known him previously, while he was


in Port Phillip, as minister at Merri Creek, for two
years and a half, —and asked him to recommend to them
as a pastor, one of the ministers who had remained in
the Synod of Australia. He recommended the Rev.
Irving Hetherington; and in a letter of date 25th
December, IS4G, thus wrote to Mr Hetherington:—
My chief object in writing you to-day so hurriedly is to ask
what you would think of a removal to Melbourne. My friends
there put still some confidence in me, and have written on the
subject of supplying the vacancy. I have replied to-day, that
there is only one man on this side fit for so important a charge—
yourself. Now I wish to know how you stand interested in the
matter, before proceeding farther ; and I beg that you will take
it into earnest consideration. You know the importance of the
• charge. It is inferior to none in the colony. In emoluments it
is the first in Australia. There is Government salary of £2OO,
and the people were wont to add £150; a manse, small, but
■ comfortable ; a very handsome and capacious church ; a large
and respectable congregation ; an excellent school-house : so far
as worldly things are concerned, I consider there is no room for
hesitation. I would be sorry that you should leave this side of
the colony. At the same time, it presents so much that is
.attractive to any one, both as a minister and as a family man,
that I would not consider myself acting a friendly part did I
.not advise you to say that you were willing to accept of it. If
you will say so, and will put some trust in my prudence, I will
immediately put myself in communication with the leading men,
who are all among my own personal friends. Let me entreat
you to write immediately on receipt of this, and let me know
your views on the subject.
With kindest regards, believe me, in great haste.”—Yours
sincerely, T. Mowbkay.
Rev. I. Hetherington, Singleton.


The Rev. W. Hamilton also, on being applied to by
some of the leading men of the Scots’ Church —when
he arrived in Melbourne, early in 1847 —to recommend
a minister to them, strongly x-ecommended Mr.
Hetherington; and distributed copies of a sermon of
Mr. Hetherington’s, which he had preached when
Moderator of Synod, and which had been published.
The result was that a numerously signed call was sent
to Mr. Hetherington. He accepted it, and was loosed
from his charge in the month of March, 1847, and left
Sydney in May—nearly ten years after his landing
there.
There was no man whom the Free Church party in
184 G condemned so strongly as Mr. Hetherington.
They had counted upon him as one of their party,
.and they bitterly blamed his desertion. Indeed, it
broke off several friendships with him. Undoubtedly,
as far as the questions of non-intrusion and spiritual
independence were concerned, Mr. Hetherington was
one with the Free Church. But he considered that
the resolutions of the Synod of Australia in October)
1844 —to which attention has been already drawn—
fully declared the principles in question; and that the
connection of the Synod with the Church of Scotland,
defined in the Declaratory Act, 24th May, 1833, was one
which preserved the independence of the colonial
Church. While it allowed of the giving and receiving
of advice, it did not allow of the exercise of authority.
This explains several things in Mr. Hetherington’s
subsequent history, besides his action in 1846; and


was, no doubt, one link in the chain of events which
brought about the union of the Churches in Victoria.
In concluding this chapter, the compiler of these-
memoirs thinks it right to say that most of the-
documents from which the foregoing facts have been
drawn were furnished by the Kev. W. Hamilton, of
Mortlake ; and that the draft of the chapter was read
over to him, with the view of ascertaining if it gave a
fair account of the events described. He gave a
general approval; and suggested several points which
were inserted in this chapter, and one point which
is here subjoined:—“ It was probably the most
important result of all the painful, and not very
creditable, contendings of the Presbyterian ministers-
in New South Wales, from 1837 till October, 1839,
that the independence of the colonial Church courts
was declared and so definitely exhibited as in the
minute of the Colonial Committee of the Church of
Scotland of 29th June, 1839 (appended to minutes of
Synod of Australia of 1844), and in the Pastoral
Address of the Commission of" Assembly of the-
Church of Scotland.”


CHAPTER VIII.
THE SCOTS’ CHURCH, MELBOURNE.
The history of the Scots’ Church, Melbourne, com-
mences with the year 1837, the same year in which
Mr. Hetherington came to Australia. In the ship, the
North Briton, which brought from Scotland the Revs.
W. Hamilton and J. Tait for Sydney, and the Rev. J
Lillie for Hobart Town, there came also the Rev.
James Clow, who had served fifteen years as a
chaplain in the East India Company’s service at
Bombay, and had retired with a pension. He left
Scotland with the intention of settling at Adelaide.
But when the ship had arrived at Hobart Town, and
while he was waiting for an opportunity of proceeding
to his destination in some small coasting vessel, Mr.
Clow heard a good deal which tended to change his
mind and direct him to Port Phillip as a more
promising settlement. John Batman had visited it in
May, 1835, and brought back a glowing report of the
country. John Pascoe Fawkner had gone over and
settled on the banks of the Yarra Yarra, on the 31st
August, 1835, and a number of enterprising settlers
had followed, and taken up land in all directions. In
October, 1836, Captain Lonsdale had arrived as Police
Magistrate, with thirty soldiers, an officer of the
customs, two surveyors, a constable, and a few convict


laborers ; and on taking the census—exclusive of the
blacks—found the population of Port Phillip to be
274. In April, 1837, Governor Bourke had visited the
new settlement, fixed the site of a town and named it
Melbourne; and on the Ist June, the first sale of land
had been held at the new township. There was great
excitement in Van Diemen’s Land on the subject of
Port Phillip; and Mr. Clow resolved that, before
finally determining where he would settle, he would
first visit Port Phillip, and see it for himself. Leaving
his family, therefore, in Hobart Town, he went over to
Melbourne. His mind was soon made up to settle
there; and as the second sale of land took place while
he was at Melbourne, he bought some town lots, and
returned to Hobart Town for his family. He then
prepared a wooden house in Hobart Town, to take
with him, and made all other necessary provision for
settlement; and set sail for Port Phillip, with his
family and all their goods, in a small schooner. After
a rough and somewhat dangerous passage, they landed
at Melbourne on the 25th December, 1837.
Mr. Clow began at once to officiate as a minister,
preaching on Sabbaths in a school-house which then
stood on the ground now occupied by St. James’
Church. The services thus conducted by Mr. Clow
were the first regular public services of religion held in
Port Phillip. A Mr. Keed, from Tasmania, in an
interesting autobiographical tract which he has
published, claims to have held the first religious
service in Port Phillip; and we are informed, in the


life of the Rev. D. J. Draper, that the Rev. Joseph
Orton, chairman of the Van Diemen’s Land District of
the Wesleyan Methodist Society, visited Port Phillip
in April, 1836, with John Batman, and held public
worship on Batman’s Hill, Sunday, 24th April—being
the first minister of the gospel who preached in the
settlement. These, however, were isolated services.
Mr. Clow was the first to conduct public worship
regularly in Port Phillip.
Meanwhile the Rev. James Forbes having arrived
at Sydney with Dr. Lang (as we have seen in a
previous chapter), and having been appointed by the
Presbytery of New South Wales to Port Phillip, came
over to Melbourne in January, 1838. As Mr. Forbes
was thus the legally appointed preacher, Mr. Clow, as
a loyal Presbyterian, gave place to him, and assisted
him to organise the first congregation in Port Phillip.
On the 3rd February, 1838, a meeting of the members
and friends of the Church of Scotland was held at
Melbourne, the Rev. James Clow in the chair; when
it was resolved that a church be built, and that in
order to secure Government aid to this building, £3OO
at least be raised by subscription, payable in instal-
ments at three, six, and nine months. A committee
was appointed to expedite subscriptions, to obtain from
Government a site for a church, school, and minister’s
dwelling, and to prepare a constitution of the proposed
congregation with the view of securing the property
to the purposes of a Presbyterian Church. The Rev.
J. Clow was appointed treasurer; and the Rev. J.


Forbes and Mr. Skene Craig, secretaries. At the close
•of the meeting £139 19s. was subscribed. At a
meeting of the subscribers, held on the 3rd May at
the residence of the Rev. J. Clow, the committee
reported that £3G3 had been already subscribed; which
-they rightly considered a gratifying instance of
liberality. They reported further that they had
-petitioned the Government of New South Wales to
grant a site on the rising ground in Collins-street.'
They reported also that Mr. Forbes had received the
following letter from Captain Lonsdale :
Melbourne, 21st April, 1838.
Sir, —The Bishop of Australia having determined that a
clergyman of the Episcopalian Church shall be appointed to this
town at an early date, and that, upon his arrival, the building in
which divine service is performed will be required exclusively
for the Church of England, I think it right to acquaint you at
once with his Lordship’s determination, to enable you to make
arrangements for your congregation.—l have the honor to be,
Sir, your obedient servant, W. Lonsdale, P.M.
Rev. Jas. Forbes, Melbourne.
With regard to this letter the committee remarked:
“ How far the Bishop’s determination is consistent with
the pledge made to the original subscribers to that
building, when the building was given over to Govern-
ment, your committee do not possess sufficient infor-
mation to enable them to judge; at all events it is for
those gentlemen, not for your committee, to decide.
Waiving all discussion as to our original right to the
use of this building, the committee would proceed to


submit to the meeting the propriety of 'providing .
immediately for the Presbyterians a temporary place
•of worship.”
What this pledge may have been, of which the com-
mittee speak, is not now apparent. We may, however,
interject this comment —that when Scotchmen waive
all discussion as to their supposed rights, it may be
very safely concluded that they have not much hope
•of substantiating them. The committee reported yet
further that two gentlemen had offered sites for a tem-
porary church, —Mr. Lilley and Mr. Fisher. The
meeting accepted Mr. Fisher’s offer; inasmuch as his
allotment in Collins-street, opposite St. James’ Church,
and adjoining the residence of Mr. James Smith, was
the more convenient of the two, and inasmuch as Mr.
Fisher not only offered the site rent free for fifteen
months, but also agreed to buy the building at the
contract price, when it should be no longer required by
the congregation.
A weatherboard building was accordingly erected,
29 feet long, 15 feet wide, and 10 feet high, shingled
and floored, and with two windows and a door in front,
at a cost of £BB. It is interesting to remark that
tenders were called for by “notices posted up in
the town”; —Mr. Fawkner’s paper having been only
announced in January of that year, and the first nine
numbers being in manuscript. Pulpit and seats were
put up at a further cost of £2O 195.; and service
was begun in this temporary building in July, 1838.
At the request of the Rev. J. Forbes a meeting of


the heads of families and adult members of the congre-
gation was held in the temporary church, Collins-street,
on the 22nd June—the Rev. J. Clow in the chair, to
consider the propriety of calling Mr. Forbes as their
minister. A call was got up and signed by those-
present, and was afterwards sent round to those absent'
for their signatures.
On the Ist August, 1838, at a public meeting of
subscribers, a constitution of the proposed church was
adopted, regulating the spiritual affairs of the congre-
gation “ according to the directories and usages of the
National Church of Scotland” ; yet, in the true spirit
of Presbyterianism, declaring that “ this church shall
ever be ready to impart all spiritual privileges and
advantages to every class of Christians whose tenets
and manner of life substantially accord with those
required in members of the Church of Scotland.” The
Rev. Jas. Forbes, who had already been called by the
Presbyterians of Melbourne to be their pastor, was-
declared to be the first minister of the Scots’ Church.
He was the first minister of the gospel settled in
Australia Felix. It was agreed that the temporal
affairs of the church be managed by a Board of five-
trustees, elected according to the provisions of the
Act 8 William IV., No. 7. The first trustees so
elected were James Clow, Skene Craig, Peter Snodgrass,
William Ryrie, and Thomas Napier. Mr. Forbes was
appointed convener and secretary of the board.
A Sabbath school was held in the temporary church,
and after some correspondence with the Government


in Sydney, a day school was opened in the same
building in November, 1838. Within six months
there were eighty children in attendance. The building
was then found too small, both for the school and for
the congregation; and it was resolved at a meeting
of the subscribers on the 22nd May, 1839, to build a
school-house on the site granted by Government, and
to hold worship in it till the permanent church could
be erected. The school-house, which was completed
in September, cost £524, of which one-half was
contributed by Government, and the other by public
subscription.
In another year or eighteen months the congregation
had increased beyond the accommodation afforded by
the school-house, and it became at length necessary to
build the church. After much consideration plans
were adopted, tenders were accepted, and the founda-
tion stone was laid on the 22nd January, 1841. The
erection of the spire, gallery, and vestry shown in the
plan was postponed ; and the main building only was
put up, without fittings, at a cost of £2,485. The
manse, i.e., the original manse—a brick building—was
put up by Mr. Forbes at an expense of £2lO, for
which he was re-imbursed gradually as the money
could be spared.
As to the minister’s stipend, a letter of date 31st
May, 1839, from the Colonial Secretary’s Office,
announced that Mr. Forbes would receive £l5O per
annum from the Government; to commence from the
time when it could be shown that£3oo had been actually


raised by subscription for the building of the church—
which was about October, 1838. The original subscrip-
tion list, which was thereupon sent to the Government,
showed an amount promised of £662 75., from 174 sub-
scribers, The paid-up subscriptions amounted to
£464 19s. from 93 subscribers. This list is an interesting
document, containing many names which have become
well known since then. It shows also the pecuniary
state of the colony at that time —the only sums above
£lO being £2l from the family of John Batman, £2O
from the Rev. J. Clow, £l2 from J. H. Patterson,
£lolos. from Strachan and Co.,and £lO 10s. from James
Jackson. In August, 1839, the congregation awoke to
the consciousness that the minister had as yet received
no stipend whatever, though he had ministered to them
for eighteen months ; and that the stipend promised by
Government would be insufficient, even when it should
be paid. It was thereupon agreed to collect voluntary
contributions for the minister’s stipend from members
of the congregation. These contributions rose in
course of time to more than £IOO a year. When the
church came to be seated, seat rents took the place of
the voluntary contributions, and £l5O was granted out
of the seat rents for the minister’s stipend. The
Government aid meanwhile rose to £2OO, as the con-
gregation increased in numbers; so that the stipend
reached £350, which was considered very good in those
days. The marriage fees were divided between the
Presbytery and the congregation.
From the year 1841, when the church was built,


there is nothing notable in the history of the congre-
gation except its steady progress, till the Disruption in
1846.
In July of that year Mr. Forbes wrote to the
trustees, informing them that he intended to demit
his charge as a minister of the Synod of Australia,
and suggesting an arrangement as to debt, etc. In
reply, they expressed their desire that the matter be
postponed until after the meeting of the Synod in
October. Mr. Forbes, having at that meeting separated
from the Synod, returned to Melbourne, and, on the
4th November, held a meeting of the members of the
congregation in the Scots’ Church; when there was-
submitted to the meeting a declaration of sympathy
with Mr. Forbes’ views, and also a resolution to unite
with him in the formation of a Free Presbyterian
Church in Australia Felix. No formal resolution,
however, was arrived at. On the 6th November he
intimated to the trustees that he had renounced all
connection with the Synod ; and requested payment
of arrears, and that he be released from all responsi-
bility connected with the debt. The trustees promised
to pay the arrears, hut declined to release him from
the responsibility of the debt. An adjourned meeting
of the congregation was held on the 17th November;
and at length Mr. Forbes and those members of the
church who sympathised with him retired from the
Scots’ Church, and established a Free Church congre-
gation, which met for public worship in the Mechanics’
Hall on the 22nd November, 1846.


When Mr. Forbes left, there was a debt of £4lO on
the church, and £BO owing to Mr. Forbes for improve-
ments on the manse. His arrears of stipend, amount-
ing to £26, were paid at once; but the debt on the
manse was not paid him till long after.
A meeting of the now diminished congregation was
held on the 9th December; when a committee was
appointed to look out for an eligible minister. At a
subsequent meeting, on the 2oth January, 1847, this
committee reported the name of the Rev. Irving
Hetherington, of Singleton, and read letters in his
favor from the Revs. J. Lillie, T. Mowbray, and W.
Hamilton. It was unanimously agreed that Mr.
Hetherington be invited to become their pastor; and
it was resolved “ that the thanks of the meeting be
conveyed, through the committee, to the Rev. J.
Lillie, of Hobart Town, the Rev. T. Mowbray, of
Sydney, and the Rev. W. Hamilton, late of Goulbum,
for the warm interest they have shown in the welfare
of the congregation, as evinced by the respective
letters read to the meeting.” The Presbytery of
Melbourne moderated in a call on the 16th February ;
when Mr. Ballingall moved, and Dr. Wilkie seconded,
that a call be given to the Rev. Irving Hetherington
of Singleton. No other name being proposed, Mr.
Hetherington was declared duly elected. A call,
numerously signed, was sent to the Presbytery of
Maitland, who, on its acceptance by Mr. Hetherington,
loosed him from the charge of Singleton. It was not,
however, till the 28th May that he reached Melbourne.


The Presbytery met, and inducted him into the charge
of the Scots’ Church, Melbourne, on Sabbath, the 13th
June, 1847.
Mr. Hetherington soon found that both labour and
time would be needed to resuscitate the congregation.
At a meeting of the trustees in October, 1847, it
.appeared that, while in Mr. Forbes’ time the seat rents
not only furnished £l5O a year towards the minister’s
.stipend, but also left a balance sufficient to defray the
■expenses of repairs on the church, these seat rents had
.since fallen to £IOO a year. This fact shows what a
blow had been given to the congregation by the
exodus of the Free Church party and by the vacancy.
In November, 1849, two years after, Dr. Wilkie on
behalf of Mr. Hetherington informed the trustees that
their minister had been compelled to contract debt to
ithe amount of £l3O, partly from the expense of
bringing his family from the Hunter at a cost of £3O,
.and partly from the expense of establishing his family
in Melbourne, and maintaining them there since their
.arrival. He stated also that Mr. Hetherington would
•consider £l5O, with Government allowance, sufficient
.for his support. The trustees thereupon recommended
.the session to pay out of the marriage fees and
.collections in their hands the sum expended by Mr.
Hetherington in removing from the Hunter, and also
whatsoever was needed to make up his congrega-
tional stipend to £l5O per annum, counting
from the beginning of his ministry in the Scots’
•Church. Notwithstanding this recommendation, the


congregation were generally in arrears to their
minister.
The attendance upon ordinances, however, was
steadily increasing. And at length it was thought
proper to enlarge and complete the church. At the
end of the year 1849, the erection of peAvs and gallery
and vestry was commenced; and, in order to raise
money, it was resolved, subject to the sanction of the-
Synod, to lease the allotments behind the church along
Little Collins-street. A good deal of expense was also
necessitated by the Corporation lowering the level of
Collins-street and Russell-street, opposite the church
ground, where there was originally a somewhat steep
hill. The financial affairs of the congregation -were far
from being in a flourishing state at this time, or indeed
down to the year 1851—the year of the gold discovery
in Australia. At the end of 1850 Mr. Hetherington
began to act as secretary to the Board of Trustees, and
continued this work down to the end of 1859.
At the beginning of the year 1851, it was considered
necessary to build a new manse; and tenders were
accepted to the amount of £1188; but before the
building had been begun, the gold-fields had opened,,
and everything became unsettled. The manse was
eventually built in 1852, at a cost of more than £ISOO.
In July, 1852, a grant of £SO was given to Mr. Hether-
ington in addition to his stipend, “ in consideration of
the severity of the times.” And in September of the
same year, Mr. Hetherington having stated that there
were several cases of distress in the congregation, he-


was authorised to relieve them out of the Church funds..
At the same time it was resolved that his stipend be
£7OO, that is, £SOO from the congregational funds, and
£2OO from Government—to be counted from July of
that year. The flood of gold had at length reached the-
congregational reservoir. In 1859, the stipend was
raised to £800; and the marriage fees were given to-
the minister besides.
In 1857, it was resolved that the church he completed;
and after much trouble, the spire was built and the
whole church renovated in 1859, at a cost of £3300.
The debt arising from this was for many years an
incubus upon the congregation. A committee of the
congregation was appointed at the end of 1859, to
assist the trustees in the management of the secular
affairs of the Church. The debt was at last cleared off
in 1867, by the personal exertions of Mr. Hetherington.
A Government grant of £7OO was obtained by him
from the General Assembly’s Committee on State-Aid;
and with this grant as an argument for exertion, Mr.
Hetherington went round the chief men of the con "re-
O O
gation with a subscription list, and collected another
£7OO from them, and paid off the whole of the debt by
June, 1867. In July, the congregation presented him
with a very handsome library suite of furniture—
stirred up in part, no doubt, by gratitude for relief
from the debt.
At a meeting of the conjrescation of the Scots’ Church,
Melbourne, on the 23rd July, 18G7 —thirty years after
Mr. Hetherington had come to Australia, and fully


•twenty years after he had been inducted into the charge
•of the Scots’ Church, it was resolved that an effort be
made to get a colleague for Mr. Hetherington. The
following is the minute on the subject: —
The members and adherents of this church, having taken into
.consideration the long-continued and faithful services of their
worthy and beloved pastor, the Rev. Irving Hetherington, and
the propriety of relieving him from part of his ministerial and
.pastoral duties, resolved that the Scots’ Church shall be consti-
tuted a collegiate charge ; that steps be forthwith taken to
-obtain a suitable colleague for Mr. Hetherington ; that the
board of management be authorised to guarantee a salary of at
least £OOO per annum from the funds of the church to such
•colleague, &c.
A committee was appointed to make the necessary
.arrangements. This committee accordingly corres-
ponded with several eminent divines in Scotland,
requesting them to act as commissioners, to secure for
the Scots’ Church, Melbourne, a clergyman of the
Established Church of Scotland, who shall be at once
.a thorough scholar and a popular preacher. These
gentlemen agreed to act; and having expressed an
opinion that £GOO was not sufficient, the congregation
resolved to guarantee £BOO a year to each colleague, and
that the senior pastor retain the manse.
After a good deal of correspondence and much
trouble, the committee in Scotland announced that the
Rev. P. S. Menzies was willing to go to Melbourne;
and they recommended him very highly. He arrived
in the colony on the 20th June, 1808, and was inducted


into the collegiate charge of the Scots’ Church, Collins-
.street, on the 20th August following. Before he came,
there had appeared in the Melbourne papers notices of
him, which at once drew a large attendance to hear
him. The church was crowded, and the interest excited
by his fresh and earnest preaching was kept up Sabbath
.after Sabbath, till it was evident that a new and larger
church was needed to accommodate the larger congre-
gation.
The style and tone of his preaching were altogether
new to the Presbyterians of Melbourne, and many who
did not appreciate the ordinary preaching of the gospel
were attracted by the originality and boldness of his
thoughts, and by the sympathy he showed with
modem thought. On the other hand, it must not be
•concealed that many, while interested by his
were often pained by his daring statements, and sad-
dened by his manifest lack of sympathy with ordinary
evangelical views, and his occasional bitter denunci-
ations of their favorite expressions. These remarks
have reference chiefly to the commencement of his
ministry in Melbourne.
Mr. Hetherington, sympathising as he did so deeply
with evangelical views, was much exercised in mind
by the preaching of his young friend. It was a
•subject of anxious thought with him, and many
prayers; and he felt called upon to preach the
doctrine of the atonement of Christ for sinners with
•even more earnestness and fulness and frequency than
•ever.


One day when Mr. Hetherington and Mr. Menzies
were dining together at the house of one of the people,
a gentleman from a neighbouring colony was present—
a man of piety and of singular dignity and impres-
siveness of manner. The conversation turned upon
theology, and Mr. Menzies made some rather brusque
remarks reflecting upon the doctrine of the vicarious-
atonement. The gentleman, speaking with quiet
earnestness and almost judicial dignity, said—“ If you
take away from me the doctrine of the atonement for
sins by the death of Christ, you leave me nothing
peculiar to Christianity within the boards of the Bible
which I care to retain.” Mr. Menzies was much
struck with the remark, and with the manner in which
it was uttered. And Mr. Hetherington noticed that
he never again heard from Mr. Menzies the same tone
of observation with regard to that doctrine.
Mr. Hetherington always felt that Mr. Menzies was-
a sincere Christian and a truly pious man ; and looked
upon the imperfection of his theological views as being'
the fault of his school and not of himself. Latterly he
was much rejoiced by the increasing fulness of the
gospel truth which Mr. Menzies preached. The
friendly relations between them were never disturbed
by any cause. While Mr. Menzies was drawing such
large congregations, the contrast between the church
in the morning and in the evening was very marked ;
yet Mr. Hetherington never showed the slightest
inclination to depreciate Mr. Menzies, or to grudge his
popularity. He shewed in this, and indeed in all his


■conduct towards Mr. Menzies, a self-abnegation and
kindly nobility of spirit which were eminently
characteristic of the man. And Mr. Menzies’ conduct
towards Mr. Hetherington, while thoroughly inde-
pendent and manly, shewed a reverent regard for Mr.
Hetherington’s age and character, and at the same
time the amiability of his own disposition.
Very soon after Mr. Menzies had been settled in the
Scots’ Church, the building of a new church was
proposed at a meeting of the congregation in February,
18G9 ; and subscriptions were got, amounting to nearly
£lBOO. Nothing further was done, however, till the
end of 1871, when, through the energy of Mr. Menzies,
the matter was again taken in hand; and in January,
1872, it was reported that additional subscriptions, of
about £lO,OOO, were promised. In the month of May,
plans, were submitted. Tenders were thereafter
accepted for £20,000, and the work was begun in
January, 1873. The old church, which was associated
with so many hallowed memories, and with so much of
the history of Presbyterianism in Victoria, was taken
down; and on the same site was raised the present Scots’
■Church—one of the chief ornaments of the City of
Melbourne, and by far the finest piece of architecture
in the colony. The foundation-stone was laid by the
Rev. Irving Hetherington, on the Ist April, 1873.
The congregation worshipped in the Temperance Hall,
and in the Athenaeum, till the 29th November, 1874,
when the new church was opened for divine service by
Mr. Hetherington.


Meanwhile, in the summer of 1872-73, Mr. Menzies’
health began to decline; and in the month of May,
1873, he was compelled to give up preaching. Arrange-
ments were made to bring out a preacher from Scotland,
to supply Mr. Menzies’ place for a twelvemonth, at a
salary of £BOO. It was agreed at the same time that
the stipends of Mr. Hetherington and Mr. Menzies be
£5OO a year each, Mr. Hetherington retaining the
manse.
Mr. Menzies died on the 23rd February, 1874; and
Mr. Hetherington, preaching in the Scots’ Church, on
the Bth March, from Revelations xiv. 13: “ Blessed are
the dead which die in the Lord,” etc., concluded his
sermon (which is given at the end of this volume), with
the following application to the Rev. P. S. Menzies:—
Dear Brethren, —These are to us appropriate and seasonable
counsels. We mourn now for the dead ; you for your pastor, I
for my colleague in the ministry of this congregation. We feel
that the loss we have sustained is an unspeakable loss. We
testify that he whom we mourn deserved and possessed our
highest esteem, our warmest love. We unite in our expressions-
of deepest sorrow in the sense of our common and great bereave-
ment. At such a time, how soothing are these words, brethren !
How gracious, how precious, is the message which they bring,
as they call away our thoughts from the sad affliction which has-
befallen us, to the cheering assurances which they contain !
It is now five years and eight months since Mr. Menzies com-
menced his ministry with us. On coming, we had been led, by
the testimonies of those who had commended him to us, to-
expect much from him ; and we all know how fully these expec-
tations were verified, and much more than verified ; by what
singular eloquence and power his teaching was characterised ;-


how vast and varied were the resources he possessed for it, and.
with what rare ability and earnestness these were employ’ed.
As a preacher he was acknowledged to have no superior in this-
land. We were conscious that we were eminently privileged in
our possession of him. He was to us a burning and a shining
light, and we rejoiced in his light. Ah! how especially conscious-
of our privilege are we now !
In speaking to you of our loss, brethren, I know not that it is
incumbent on me to dilate on the excellences by which Mr.
Menzies was distinguished. These were all known to you. His
name itself recalls them ; and knowing this, I may well abstain
from descanting on those excellences which you all as highly
appreciate, but which I could only poorly and painfully
describe.
You knew his diligence in preparing for the pulpit; you could
understand how laborious his preparations were. You knew his •
faithfulness in the pulpit, in the delivery of his gospel message
how faithfully he proclaimed its full and free salvation, how
faithfully he pressed its offers and invitations, how faithfully he-
inculcated its duties, how faithfully he vindicated its authority,.
how faithfully he exposed the fallacies by which it is assailed,,
and in which men hide themselves from Christ; how faithfully,
and affectionately, and earnestly, and unceasingly' he entreated,,
and warned, and counselled, and instructed, and comforted
us all.
And you knew his diligence and faithfulness, as health and
strength allowed, in his pastoral labors ; how, in his visitations
of the sick, in his prayers from house to house, in his instructions
in the Bible class, in his addresses at the prayer-meetings, he
gave proof of the warmth of his love, of the tenderness of his
sympathy for you, of the strength of his solicitude for your
spiritual welfare, of the ardor of his zeal to make you partakers
in the full riches of Christ.
. And you knew the consistency of his life ; how conspicuously
it bore witness in every trait and feature of it, to the sincerity


.and simplicity of the faith he professed. Speaking for myself,
I never knew a more faultless character, a more beautiful
example of what the pure-minded, humble, earnest Christian
: should be, one so free from all self-assertion, from all self-
pretension, so patient, so gentle, so generous, so real, so
true.
And so also did you know his zeal and forwardness in every
good cause in which he could legitimately engage; how ready he
was, according to his strength, to promote it, to co-operate
in it.
And so also did you know his meekness and candour and
faithfulness, in the relation in which you had associated him in
the ministry of the congregation; how complete was the harmony
which, from first to last, was therein maintained. Through all
the years in which we were so closely identified, never once was
there a jar or an approach to jar, never a cloud or the shadow
of a cloud between us ; never once was there a failure in the
affectionate reverence with which every fair wish was consulted.
“ Dear Saint! ” may I not say, “ very pleasant hast thou been
unto me.” He was very dear to me. I valued his ministry very
highly; and very exalted were my hopes from him.
You know how well, and wisely, and worthily every way, he
occupied his place in the Church and in the world ; how wide-
spread was the influence he commanded, how lovingly and
zealously and efficiently he served hi 3 generation by the will of
God, until he fell asleep.
And knowing this so well, brethren, nothing that I could say
could add, I am persuaded, to the impression which you have of
the greatness of the blessing which we, which the Church at large,
possessed in him while he remained, or of the greatness of the
loss which we, which the Church at large, have incurred in his
removal from us. We mourn for him, and we may well mourn.
But we may not repine : there is no bitterness in our sorrow.
We may not complain : The Lord is righteous. We may not
grudge his removal : nay, rather, in the assurance of what his


removal has been to himself, we should seek and pray that we
may rejoice in it.
He had reached a little over thirty-four years of age. Ten
years of hi 3 life had been spent by him in the ministry of
the gospel. After an unusually brilliant career at the Univer-
sity of Glasgow, he was called, when barely licensed, to be the
minister of a large congregation at Paisley, whence, after two
years, he was translated to Glasgow, and whence again he was
brought to us. A brief ministry ! But a ministry of abundant
labors. We cannot doubt that it was greatly blessed. Not a
few, I know, have testified here that it was blessed to them.
How many more, here and elsewhere, could so testify, the great
day will declare. His last service with us was, I believe, in
the month of May last; when his health, long delicate, unfitted
him for further duty. We all know how fondly and anxiously
we watched the changes that followed, what hopes and fears
succeeded, until at length these hopes were closed suddenly in
death. His last words respecting himself were, “I am dying,
—and I am so happy.” These words are precious to us, as
uttered by him. We can be at no loss to understand what
were the visions on which his mind then rested, or whose
presence it was that inspired the happiness he expressed. Say,
what a commentary on these words does his life afford !
And now, brethren, in the view of all this, let us seek that
it he sanctified. He whom we mourn, being dead, yet
speaketh. He speaks to us from the grave, to which he has
been carried. He speaks to us from the rest to which, as we
believe, he has been translated. He bids us rejoice in the
reality of that rest. He charges us to cleave to Him in whom
that rest is found. He exhorts us to live ever above the world;
to strive ever for the heavenly crown. O ! brethren, how
solemnly does the appeal come home to us this day! The
voice which so often pled with us, prayed with us, prayed for
us, shall no more be heard. Dear brethren, let us recall tlu
utterances of the past, how he agonized for our salvation, how


lie labored that he might present us faultless unto God. And
shall they not be cherished ? shall they not be obeyed ?
■“ Remember those who have had the rule over you, who have
spoken to you the word of God, whose faith follow, considering
ihe end of their conversation, Jesus Christ, the same yesterday,
to-day, and for ever.” “Be not slothful,” but the “followers
•of them who, through faith and patience, inherit the promises.’’
“Be ye steadfast, unmovable, always abounding in the work
of the Lord, forasmuch as ye know that your labor shall not be
in vain in the Lord.” “Be diligent, that ye may be found of
him in peace, without spot, and blameless.” Amen, may God
so grant; and to His name be everlasting praise. Amen.
Throughout the whole of his ministry in the Scots’
Church Mr. Hetherington gave assiduous attention to
■every part of his ministerial work, but especially dur-
ing the first six or seven years of his stay in Melbourne,
when he was at the height of his vigour, and before
denominational work had come upon him so heavily
as it afterwards did. His journal, though imperfect,
shews unmistakeably his eminent diligence in all his
work. The Presbytery, the board of trustees, the
session, the choir, the Sabbath school, the bible class, the
prayer meeting, the study, the pulpit, the homes of his
people, baptisms, marriages, the sick bed, the house of
mourning, all found him diligent up to the measure of his
abilities and often beyond his strength. After spending
the greater portion of the week in visiting and in meet-
ings of various kinds, he would borrow largely from the
night in his preparation for the pulpit—a loan which
his physical strength had to pay for, both then and in
after years. His journal shews, what was probably


unknown outside of his family circle, that he was not
only constantly overworked, but that he very frequently
suffered from the overwork. He made no complaint;
but as long as there was work to be done, and he could
struggle through it, it must be done. Sometimes,
indeed, he was absolutely compelled to cease. On one
occasion, in March, 1856, he was taken very seriously
unwell, and was ordered to rest from all work for six
months. By the month of June he had sufficiently
recovered to make his appearance at the Presbytery,
and at the Board of Trustees. To the latter he stated
“ that it was the opinion of his medical attendant, that,
in order to the full restoration of his health, a visit
should be paid by him to New South Wales.” The
trustees concurred in that opinion; and agreed that the
Rev. A. D. Kininmont should be requested accordingly
to continue his services in the Scots’ Church, and that
the allowance for these services, as also for those already
performed by Mr. Kininmont, in terms of his arrange-
ment with the kirk session, should be defrayed out
of the Trust funds. The records of the Presbytery of
Melbourne and of the board of trustees of the Scots’
Church shew that he had returned by the month of
August, and took his usual share in their business.
In his journal Mr. Hetherington makes frequent
mention of the illness of his young child, Charles. In
one place he says of this illness, which was followed
eventually by the death of the child : —“ Dr. Howitt
and Dr. Wilkie met, and after consultation announced
that poor little Charley is in imminent danger. God’s


will be done. But it is the most painful intelligence
I have got for years.” When the child began to sink r
and was evidently dying, the agony of feeling which
Mr. Hetherington endured grew insupportable, and his
only refuge was in frequent and protracted prayer.
Another bereavement, a few years later, which he felt
very much, was the loss of a daughter, Elizabeth-
These trials, working through grace upon a tempera-
ment so sensitive and thorough as his, fitted him still
more than ever to he the sympathizing comforter of
the suffering and the bereaved. And much work of
this kind fell to him ; to his own spiritual benefit, no
doubt, as well as the benefit of those he visited; as he
himself used to say, that he got more good than he
gave. He was a frequent visitor at the Melbourne
Hospital. Being the recognised representative of the
Church of Scotland in Melbourne, he was generally
sent for to visit Presbyterian patients. The secretary
of the Hospital, Mr. Williams, remarked of him:—
Whenever he was asked, he was at once oh the spot,
at any hour, early in the morning or late at night. He
made no display of this, however. He manifested an
unobtrusive and retiring disposition; avoiding notice
in his work. I saw him glide in and glide out, and
knew what his mission was; hut he did not invite
approach. I am sorry I did not know him. He seemed
to be a true follower of his Master.”
Very early in his ministry, Mr. Hetherington began
to keep a sermon book, in which he entered in short-
hand the texts of his sermons in the order in which


they were written, with the dates and places of their
delivery. Besides unfinished sermons and others which
he rejected from his list, the numbers came at last to
more than four hundred; —all carefully -written out in
shorthand, and arranged in a drawer in the order of
the list, with corresponding numbers, so that he could
lay his hand upon any one at a minute’s notice. Many
of them were re-written again and again, in whole or
part; for he never could preach an old sermon without
alteration. He himself had a very humble estimate of
his sermons ; and was very unwilling to allow any
to be published. They were, of course, unequal,
as was to he expected in so busy a ministry. And
they were somewhat heavy in their style; to which
the increasing difficulty of reading the small shorthand,
in which they were written, no doubt contributed.
But in the estimate of many pious people, his preach-
ing was eminently useful—being careful in exposition,
sound and judicious in the statement of doctrine,
remarkably full and varied in its application to Chris-
tian experience, affectionate yet urgent in exhortation,
and characterised by an impressiveness which was the
result of his own personal character and piety.
In Mr. Hetherington’s journal, a sentence occurs
which will be amusingly suggestive to Mr. Hethering-
ton’s friends:—“Busy sorting the library.” It certainly
needed “sorting” often enough. But it was indeed
thoroughly sorted at intervals. Mr. Hetherington
lacked early training in business habits; but he was
nowise wanting in love of order. Many people calling


on Mr. Hetherington, and being shewn into his library,
imagined from the very general confusion of loose
papers and books, and from the frequent necessity of
searching after some missing document, that what they
saw on the library table was only a sample of the dis-
order which reigned' through all his papers. Some
who were not well acquainted with Mr. Hetherington
supposed, and in fact said, that the Church documents
in his hands must be in a state of inextricable confusion.
There could not be a greater mistake. The writer of
these memoirs was at one time under the same impres-
sion ; but having often stayed in the manse for days
together, and often assisted Mr. Hetherington in draw-
ing up Church documents, he was surprised to see how
neatly the papers —which had been “ sorted ” —were
docketed, folded, tied up, and arranged in their
proper places. But the fact is that Mr. Hetherington
had as much work on his hands as would have fully
employed another besides himself; and his sense of
neatness was too fastidious to allow him to file any
documents, unless they were arranged with a care and
method that required leisure.
To shew how the disorder accumulated, the reader is
invited to seat himself, in imagination, in the easy chair
in the corner of the library—a chair, by the bye, which
Mr. Hetherington never occupied himself —and witness
a sample of the ordinary work which took up Mr.
Hetherington’s days, and often great part of his nights.
Early in the morning Mr. Hetherington is seated at
the table—it may be, studying. The various books


required in the course of examination into a passage of
scripture are lying on the table. He has been engaged
an hour or two; and he is noting down in shorthand
the results of his examination—when the front-door
bell is rung, and the servant informs him that a gentle-
man wishes to see him, “the Rev. Mr. A.” “ Tell him to-
walk in.” After a few words of friendly greeting, and
enquiry as to how things are progressing in Mr. A.’s
district, if the visitor does not come to the point, he is
brought to it by the question: “ Well, Mr. A., what can
Ido for you to-day ?” It is perhaps some question of
trustees, or of state-aid, or land, about which his con-
gregation has applied to the Government; and there is-
a hitch somewhere. The Rev. Mr. A. seeks to engage
Mr. Hetherington’s interest in the matter by shewing
the hardship which the delay inflicts on his congrega-
tion and himself. A few questions are asked as to dates,
etc., and the Government letters on the subject are
sought for in a drawer; where we see bundles of docu-
ments neatly tied up with tape, and closely packed in
order of date. A bundle is taken out, and we see that
every paper has been folded into exactly the same size;
a piece of block tin, cut to the requisite shape for the
purpose of folding them is lying in another drawer
along with other implements needed in the study. The
letters are all neatly docketed; and the document
wanted is soon found. “ Now, Mr. A.,” says Mr. Hether-
ington briskly, “will you go with me to the Treasury,”
or Land Office, as the case may be, “ and we will see
about it ?” The letter is taken with them, but the


bundle from which it has been withdrawn is left on the
table, among the books and papers with which he had
been previously occupied. When Mr. Hetherington
comes back, having finished the work for which he
went out, and having likely called on some sick person,
by whose door he had to pass, and, it may be, having
met some one in the street who has taken him off on
some other business; he returns to find that, in his
absence, a young man has called with a parcel of papers,
and a gentleman has left word that he will call at such
a time about some business which he did not state, but
the servant thinks it must be about a marriage. Mr.
Hetherington lays down the Government letter which
he has brought back, and opens the parcel of papers.
The contents are being examined, when the bell rings
again, and Mr. B. is announced. Mr. B. is evidently
an esteemed friend. “ Oh, how are you, Mr. B. ? lam
delighted to see you. A sight of you is perfectly
refreshing. And how are all the good folks at C.?”
After some genial conversation, they adjourn to the
dining-room; and some member of the family appears.
“ The gentleman who was to call again ” is now an-
nounced, and is shewn into the library, where Mr.
Hetherington sees him. His errand does prove to be
about a marriage. The necessary information is taken
down, the day and hour of the ceremony is arranged,
and the man takes his departure. The postman
calls with the letters, which are opened and read.
One of them needs immediate'attention; and leaving
everything else, Mr. Hetherington puts on his hat,


and, with a word of apology to his friend, rushes
off into the town. When he returns, he is accompanied
by a man who comes to pay his rent for some
property of which Mr. Hetherington is a trustee.
Papers are sought out, which are laid on the table, and
add to the litter. The matter is found to be correct.
The money is paid in cheques and cash, and a receipt
is given. Mr. Hetherington is going to put the money
into the bank at once, along with some other sums which
are lying in a certain drawer—when the young man who
brought the parcel of papers calls for an answer, which
is needed immediately. * Mr. Hetherington looks for the
documents in a hurry; and turns over the books and
papers lying on the table, till they are in a mass of
confusion. “ Where can those papers have gone to ?
Ah! here is one of them; where can the other be ?”
He opens the study door and calls for one of the family,
who quickly attends at the impatient summons and
helps in the search; and the paper is found inside one
of the books. An answer is -written in haste. Before
it is well completed, a cab is driven up to the gate; and
Mr. Hetherington is wanted to see Mr. D., who is dying.
By the time he has returned from the visit, some other
matter requires his attention, and so on. This is no
exaggeration, as those who have lived in his house can
testify. Then, some day when the calls on his time
are comparatively few, he has a “ redding up.” The
accumulated papers are separated ; unnecessary papers
are put carefully into the waste basket; the books
.returned to their accustomed shelves; documents and


letters neatly folded, docketed and put away in the ap-
propriate drawers; and order reigns, for a time at least.
From Mr. Hetherington’s journal it is apparent that
a good deal of his time was taken up by baptisms and
marriages. It is well known that Mr. Hetherington
was called on to solemnize a great number of marriages;,
and it may be supposed that the fees from these mar-
riages would add very considerably to his income. The
reader, however, is reminded that these fees were at
first divided between the Presbytery and the congrega-
tion; afterwards the congregation got them all; and it
was not till October, 1859, that Mr. Hetherington
benefited by them directly. At one time so many
were the marriages celebrated by him, that, instead of
his stipend being any burden on the congregation, the
marriage fees by themselves paid the stipend, and left
a balance to meet other congregational expenses.
Another thing which is noticed in the journal is the
extent to which Mr. Hetherington’s time and energies
were taxed by merely secular work, which others laid
upon him, and which his kindliness of disposition would
not allow him to decline. In common with other
ministers in Melbourne, but more frequently, perhaps,
than the rest, he was called upon to secure situations
for persons out of employment. He was also occa-
sionally appointed a trustee of property left by will;.
and in every such case he was the working trustee.
Thousands of pounds would pass through his hands,,
for the proper security and administration of which he
was responsible.


The writer makes bold to take this opportunity of
saying that it is a mistake to appoint ministers as
trustees of property. Those who appoint them have
doubtless the idea that their minister is the most likely
person to take a kindly interest in their orphans and
widows after they are gone, and to see that the trust is
administered faithfully; and the minister may feel that
he cannot well refuse to act. But while this may be
the case, it ought to be remembered that ministers —
though they may be willing to act without hope of
reward, and may desire to act faithfully—are not gen-
erally fitted by business habits to manage property; it is
not in their line, and the responsibility should not be
laid upon them. And besides, it is not in the interest of
the minister’s usefulness to involve him in such cares:
“ It is not reason that we should leave the word of God,
and serve tables.”
Another secular position to which Mr. Hetherington
was appointed, which involved, however, more honour
than labour, may be here mentioned. The following
letter will speak for itself:—
Melbourne, 14th March, 1853.
My dear Sir, —The Local Governor has desired me to say it
will afford him much gratification, if you will consent to be one
of the Council of the University, about to be established in
this city, under the provisions of the Act of Council recently
passed.—l remain, dear Sir, yours faithfully,
W. Lonsdale.
Rev. Irving Hetherington, etc., etc.
The Melbourne University was founded on the 10th


-July, 1854; and Mr. Hetherington acted as a member
-of the Council till his death, twenty-one years after.
He was also connected with several of the benevo-
lent and religious associations in Melbourne, until
■ecclesiastical work so grew upon his hands, that his
energies became engrossed by the interests of his con-
gregation and the Presbyterian Church.
A memoir of Mr. Hetherington’s ministry in the
Scots’ Church would be incomplete, without some
mention of the private charity which it entailed upon
him. His central position in the city, his long residence
there, the national character of his church, and his well-
known benevolence, drew many to his door who knew
not where else to go. Many a poor fellow newly out
from Scotland, having no friends in the colony, or not
being able to find them—penniless, homeless, hopeless,
—came as a last resource to the manse. Many a tale
of sorrow he heard; many a story of sin now bitterly
repented. Many a half-crown he gave away; and
many a pound he lent. These loans, it must be said,
were generally speaking gratefully repaid; but too
•often they were neglected, even when in after years
the debtors to his bounty were driving past him on the
street in their vehicles. What his gifts were to those
whose poverty he witnessed in their own homes—
where he so assiduously visited, —no one can tell. But
the number of beggars that came to his door was per-
fectly astonishing. It was impossible for him, busied
ns he was, to investigate every case; yet it was impos-
sible for him, constituted as he was, to deny them.


When the servant, then, came to the library door, and'
said, “ a poor man sir!” he asked, “what kind of a man
is he ?” If she said, “an old man,” or “ a blind man,”
or “ a cripple,”—his hand was in his pocket as a matter'
of course. If she said, “He seems a strong young fellow,”
he would answer brusquely, “ Tell him there’s nothing
for him.” “He says he has had nothing to eat to-day,
sir!” “ Give him something, then.” If there was any-
thing special in the case, or the beggar persistent, Mr.
Hetherington would go to the door; and often his pity
would be imposed upon, as he himself was more than
half aware.
These demands upon his time were made by night
as well as by day. The study light, which so generally
burned far on into the night, often attracted the notice
of some poor fellow who, from want of means to pay
for a night’s lodgings, was wandering along the street;,
and Mr. Hetherington would be disturbed in his
studies by a timid ring at the bell. This peculiar ring
at night came at length to be associated in his experi-
ence with a request for means to get supper and a bed;
and a sixpence was the invariable donation in such
cases—threepence for supper, and threepence for bed.
A medical man of his acquaintance was passing by the
manse one night, and, seeing the light in the study,
thought that, as Mr. Hetherington was evidently still
up, he would tell him about some business connected
with one of the benevolent institutions of the city, in
which Mr. Hetherington had asked his help; but
unwilling to disturb the family, he rang the bell gently.


■The front door was opened a few inches, and a hand
was protruded, which dropped a sixpence into the
palm of the astonished doctor. A hearty laugh soon
.caused the door to be opened more widely; and Mr.
Hetherington saw to his own amusement who it was
upon whom he had bestowed his unnecessary alms.
As a provision for the beggars of the week, Mr.
Hetherington invariably secured from the collectors on
Sabbath the threepenny pieces which form so charac-
teristic an element in church collections, substituting
larger money of his own. He always had a supply of
this small silver, and seldom sent any beggar away
without a threepence.
Any poor woman who came to the door was received
into the hall, and saw Mrs. Hetherington, who was
connected with most, if not all, of the Melbourne insti-
tions for the benefit of females, whether sick, or poor,
or penitent. She was also a leading member of the
Ladies’ Benevolent Society, and visited with other
ladies the homes of the Melbourne poor; and her kind-
ness and judicious treatment, her advice and aid, com-
forted hundreds of distressed families.


CHAPTER IX.
THE PRESBYTERY OF MELBOURNE.
In a previous chapter it has been shewn that the
Rev. James Forbes was the first minister settled in
Port Phillip, and that he came to Melbourne early in
1838. The next Presbyterian minister that arrived
was the Rev. Andrew Love, who landed in Sydney in
April, 1840, and was appointed to Geelong. These
two ministers were considered members of the Presby-
tery of Sydney (!), in connection with the Synod of
Australia. But on the arrival of three more ministers
in 1842—Thomas Mowbray, who was settled at Camp-
bellfield, on the MerriCreek; Alexander Laurie,who was
settled at Portland; and Peter Gunn, who was settled
at Melbourne as Gaelic minister- -the Synod of Aus-
tralia authorised them, along with an elder from each
session, to form a Presbytery in Australia Felix, to be
called the Presbytery of Melbourne.
They met on the 7th June, 1842, and it is interesting
to notice that, true to the genius of Presbyterianism,
their first business, after making the necessary Presby-
terial arrangements, was the consideration of Public
Education, and that they sought to raise the status of
teachers, both financially and religiously. They also
gave themselves energetically to the work of supplying
ordinances in the interior, and, by missionary tours at


various times, opened the way for the settlement of
ministers throughout the colony.
The Presbytery kept up their connection with the
Synod of Australia chiefly through their annual certi-
ficate as to the work of the ministers and the business
of the Presb} r tery; and upon this certificate depended
their salaries from the Government of New South
Wales. In course of time there came to be a separate
Treasury at Melbourne, and an Administration of
Government distinct, in some degree, from the Sydney
Executive. And as the distance of Port Phillip from
Sydney, and the expenditure of time and money neces-
sitated in travelling to and from the Synod, made the
representation of the Presbytery of Melbourne merely
nominal, a desire arose for separation from the Synod
of Australia. The Presbytery of Melbourne sent up
an overture to this effect in September, 1844. The
overture was adopted ; but the legalising of the sepa-
ration was not carried out. Again in September, 1845,.
an overture from the session of the Scots’ Church, Mel-
bourne, for the same object, and for a change in the
designation of the Synod, was transmitted to the Synod
Mr. Gunn dissenting from its transmission.
In September, 184 G, the Presbytery adopted a series
of resolutions, proposed by Mr. Forbes, in view of the
deliverance of the General Assembly of the Church of
Scotland in May, 1845 (mentioned in a preceding chap-
ter). These resolutions declared that the deliverance
was inconsistent with the principles of entire inde-
pendence on which the Synod was formed in 1840 \


they expressed a desire that the Colonial Church
should be an Australian institution in name, in aspect,
and in spirit; and they expressed an adherence to the
resolutions of 1844. Another series of resolutions,
proposed by Mr. Forbes, expressing sympathy with
the Free Church of Scotland and renouncing the
Established Church, was negatived.
On the 17th November, a protest by Mr. Forbes
against the decision of the Synod on the 9th October,
and a letter of resignation were laid upon the table of
the Presbytery. Mr. Forbes was then, as a matter of
course, declared no longer minister of the Scots’ Church,
or a member of the Presbytery.
On the 16th February, 1847, the Presbytery mode-
rated in a call from the congregation of the Scots’
Church, Melbourne, which turned out in favor of the
Rev. Irving Hetherington, of Singleton. The call was
sent accordingly, and Mr. Hetherington was inducted
on the 13th June, —Mr. Love presiding on the occasion.
When Mr. Hetherington joined the Presbytery, his
co-presbyters were the Revs. A. Love of Geelong, P.
Gunn of Campbellfield, and A. Laurie of Portland.
The first business in which he was called to take part
was the consideration of certain documents presented
by the Rev. John Gow, who, being originally a licen-
tiate of the Presbytery of Glasgow, in Scotland, and
having come out to Port Phillip as a settler, took up a
small run on the Wardy-Yallock, about twenty miles
west of Geelong, where a hill is still named after hint
—Gow’s Hill. A call was given to him by residents


in the district of Wardy Yallock, in which the people
of Colac joined. His certificate of license was found
•correct, the call was sustained, and he was ordained as
minister of Wardy Yallock and Colac. Soon after
this, in 1848, Mr. Laurie was libelled for improper
■conduct, and deposed.
On the 3rd January, 1849, Mr. Hetherington being
appointed Moderator of the Presbytery, it was pro-
posed that he should write to the Church of Scotland
•in reference to the great want of ministers in the bush.
Mr. Hetherington declined to prepare any document,
or give effect to anything in which it would be neces-
sary for him to make a declaration of subjection to the
Church of Scotland, and held that he was independent
of the jurisdiction of the home Church. Mr. Gunn was
therefore directed to write in name of the Presbytery;
which consisted that day of Mr. Hetherington (in the
■chair), Messrs. Love and Gunn, ministers, and Mr. J. G.
M'Millan, elder.
On the 2nd July, 1851, Mr. Hetherington submitted
to the Presbytery a letter of resignation from three
■elders of the Scots’ Church. These elders were asked
to come and confer with the Presbytery about their
resignation. They did so, and explained the circum-
stances in which they resigned. Mr. Hetherington
was heard in reply, and thereafter the resignations
were accepted. Mr. Hetherington was authorised to
take measures for the appointment of elders for the
Scots’ Church—Mr. Gunn to act with him as assessor
on the occasion. On the 7th October, Mr. Hetherington


reported that he had re-constituted the session; but
one of the elders who had resigned objected to the
mode in which it had been re-constituted. The matter
was considered at several meetings, but no conclusion
was arrived at till the sth November. At this meet-
ing Mr. Love drew the attention of the Presbytery to
what he called the unpresbyterial, unseemly, and con-
temptuous language of Mr. Hetherington at the last
two meetings, and moved that he be called upon to
express regret. This motion was seconded by Mr.
Gow, the only other member present besides the mode-
rator. Mr. Hetherington expressed regret that any
language used by him had been offensive to the Pres-
bytery, but vindicated his language as occasioned by
the unpresbyterial, unseemly, and contemptuous treat-
ment to which he himself had been subjected. The
elder, to whose re-admission into the session of the
Scots’ Church objection had been taken, resigned his
office, and so the affair ended.
Mr. Hetherington found himself unable to work
along with his co-presbyters ; who were all of the old
school, and strongly attached to the Church of Scot-
land. At length, a misunderstanding having arisen
between the Free Synod in the colony and the Mis-
sion Board of the Presbyterian Church in Ireland, —
owing to a letter from the former body in March, 1850,
to which the latter replied in July, 1851, —Mr. Hether-
ington wrote to the Irish Church, inviting them to
send ministers to the Presbytery of Melbourne. They
sent three ministers in the year 1852. During the


same year two ministers came from Scotland. A com-
mittee for receiving ministers was then appointed by
the Presbytery, with two conveners, Messrs. Love and
Hetherington. Mr. Hetherington received the Irish
brethren most cordially; and with their assistance, the
aspect of the Presbytery was much altered. With the-
exception of one from Scotland, all the ministers
received by the Presbytery in 1853 were from the Irish
Church. The one from Scotland was no credit to it,
and soon left the colony. The benefit of the presence
of the Irish ministers in the Presbytery was felt
especially in the Union negotiations, whose history
is given in the next chapter. And it Avas chiefly
from them that the following testimonial Avas given
to Mr. Hetherington, on the eA r e of the Union in
1859:
To the Rev. Irving Hetherington.
Dear Friend and Brother, —As the Synod of Victoria is now
to be dissolved, and to unite with the other Presbyterian
Synods in this colony, We, the Ministers and Elders of that
Synod, feel that we should not let this occasion pass without
expressing the lively recollection which we shall ever entertain
of your friendship to ourselves as brethren, your labours in
our Presbyterial and Synodical business, and your usefulness to
the Church of Christ at large.
The young minister will not soon forget how readily you
reached forth to him the friendly hand, and guided and assisted
him when arriving, often without friends or counsellors, in this
the land of his adoption; while all must acknowledge the benefits
derived, whether in personal difficulties or in the business of
the Church, from your superior wisdom and experience. In
Presbytery and Synod you have ever taken an active part; and


if business of more than ordinary difficulty and trouble had to
be discharged, on you this devolved. Neither mental nor
physical toil was shunned by you, so that you might accomplish
whatever would tend to the advantage of your brethren, the
extension of our Zion, or the general promotion of the cause of
Christ. And in the consummation of the Union of the various
Presbyterian Synods, so long desired and now so much rejoiced
over, you have for many long and weary years laboured zealously
.and perseveringly. Though often discouraged, you yielded not,
until by the blessing of God this desirable and beneficial result
has, mainly through your instrumentality, been accomplished.
Through it all we have deeply sympathised with you ; and now
with you heartily merge into the General Assembly of the Presby-
terian Church of Victoria; which delights to number you among
its founders and fathers.
In our new circumstances we hope still to enjoy your counsel
and co-operation; and, no doubt, will find you the friend you
were ever wont; yet we cannot dissolve the court where you
have so long stood a pillar, without thus expressing our feelings
■of respect for your character and worth, and gratitude for your
labours. And as a tangible evidence of the same, we beg your
acceptance of the accompanying salver, with a tea and coffee
service. Our earnest prayer is that you may be long spared to
the Church and to your family, and that you and your beloved
partner may for many years enjoy this memento in the use
for which it was designed.
Signed on behalf of the Synod of Victoria,
Hugh Blair, 1
James Megaw, > Ministers.
George M. Reed, )
Walter Thompson, Elder.
Melbourne, April 7th, 1859.
The language of this testimonial is not exaggerated.
Even during the Union negotiations, which chiefly fell


on him, Mr. Hetherington took more than his full share
of Presbytery and Synod work—in the settlement of
ministers, in the visiting of new districts, in the advis-
ing of congregations, in the regular visiting of the
gaol in Melbourne, in the exercise of discipline, in the
establishment of a Widows’ fund, in securing sites and
aid from Government, etc. Besides all this, Mr.
Hetherington was Moderator of Synod in 1855
and 1858, clerk of Synod in 1854 and 1856, and clerk
of Presbytery in 1854, 1857 and 1858. He took a
lively interest in all the Church’s affairs; and where he
saw that anything needed to be done, he never said,
“ What is that to me ?” or devolved the work on others;
but if he could do anything, he did it at once, at any
cost to his own comfort and convenience.
One characteristic episode may be here mentioned.
In April, 1858, while South Melbourne Church was
vacant, one of the trustees had leased the church and
manse to a Unitarian minister. No sooner had the
church been opened for the purpose of Unitarian wor-
ship, than Mr. Hetherington heard of it, and reported
the matter to the Presbytery. That reverend court
resolved to communicate with the trustees. Mr. Hether-
ington, finding that the business was left incomplete,,
took measures on his own responsibility to recover pos-
session of the church and manse for the Presbytery. He
preached in the church the next Sabbath, and gave a
sermon on the subject of the Divinity of Christ, from
John viii. 58: “Verily, verily I say unto you, before
Abraham was, I am.” This sermon was published by


request. It is remarkable for its clear statement, its.
close logic, and its trenchant style. Mr. Hetherington
also arranged for the continuance of sermons by
members of the Presbytery, whom he got to co-operate
with him. The Presbytery, when they met in June,
approved of what he had done, and required the
trustees to remove the Unitarian minister from the
manse as speedily as possible.
The following list of the ministers of the Synod of
Victoria, at the beginning of the negotiations for
Union, was drawn up by Mr. Hetherington in 1854,
and was found among his papers :
1. Irving Hetherington, arrived July 13, 1837, appointed,
to Singleton, September 6, 1837 ; translated to Melbourne,
June 13, 1847.
2. Andrew Love, arrived April 9, 1840 ; appointed to Gee-
long, April 16, 1840.
3. Peter Gunn, arrived February 25, 1842 ; appointed to
Melbourne, April 21, 1842 ; translated to Bulleen, December 5,
1843 ; translated to Campbellfield, September 8, 1845.
4. John Gow, ordained to Wardy-Yallock and Colac, No-
vember 3, 1847.
5. John Reid, arrived March 10, 1852; appointed to Mel-
bourne, July 7, 1852; translated to Doutta-Galla, April 12,
1853.
6. James Low, arrived March 20, 1852 ; appointed to the
Mount-Alexander goldfield, July 7, 1852 ; admitted member of
Presbytery as minister of Castlemaine, May 11, 1853.
7. Thomas Heron, arrived July, 1852 ; appointed to the
Ovens goldfield, July 28, 1852; translated to Melbourne,
May 11, 1853 ; deposed, July 20, 1854.
8. Thomas Craig, arrived September, 1852 ; appointed to
Belfast, October 20, 1852.


9. David Boyd, arrived December, 1852 ; ordained to
Heidelberg, June 2, 1853.
10. Sam Corrie, arrived January 20, 1853 ; appointed to
South Melbourne, April 6, 1853.
11. Peter McLaggan, arrived April, 1853; appointed to
Oolac, May 11, 1853 ; demitted his charge and left the colony,
March 29, 1854.
12. Thomas McAnlis, arrived 1853; appointed to Tarraville,
January 4, 1854.
13. Andrew Graham, arrived 1853 ; appointed to Kalkalo,
January 4, 1854.
14. John Martin, arrived 1853 ; appointed to Ballarat gold-
field, January 4, 1854.
APPENDIX.
James Forbes, arrived December 3, 1837 ; appointed to
Melbourne, January, 1838 ; demitted his charge, November
17, 1846.
Alexander Laurie, arrived February 8, 1842 ; appointed to
Portland, same date ; deposed, July 0, 1848;
To which may be added—
James Clow, arrived November, 1837 ; admitted an honorary
member of the Presbytery of Melbourne, January 4, 1854.
Thomas Mowbray, settled at Campbellfield, June 7, 1842;
translated to Sydney, December 20, 1844.


CHAPTER X.
NEGOTIATIONS FOR UNION.
’To Mr. Hetherington belongs the honor of being the
first to propose a general union of Presbyterianism in
the colony. A previous proposal for union had been made
by others, but on a narrower basis. The United Pres-
byterian Synod had made overtures to the Free Pres-
byterian Synod, as the only body which they thought
presented no insuperable obstacle in the way of union
with them. If these overtures had been at once fol-
lowed up by negotiation, and had led to a successful
issue, a synod would have been formed far out-num-
bering the Presbytery of Melbourne, and a general
union would have been much more difficult of attain-
ment. It is very likely that this consideration helped
to rouse Mr. Hetherington to energetic action.
But the honor of proposing the union is comparatively
& small thing. It is due to Mr. Hetherington to say that
he was also the chief agent in working it out; and that
was no small thing. The difficulties in the way were
almost insuperable. Few men could have overcome
them ; and it is not too much to saj r that without the
untiring diligence, and courtesy, and self-denial, and
indomitable persistence of Mr. Hetherington, the union
would not have been accomplished. A thorough study
of the negotiations leaves no doubt on this point.
In collecting materials for this chapter the writer has


been indebted to several persons to whom he applied
for information—especially Dr. Cairns, Rev. R. Hamil-
ton, the Hon. R. Ramsay, and Mr. James Bennie, who
kindly gave him the perusal of papers in their posses-
sion, and otherwise helped him. Mr. Hetherington’s
papers also, and the original records of the Synod of
Victoria and of the Free Synod were in his hands. The
original documents have been consulted in every case of
moment,and where the phraseology has been condensed
great care has been taken to avoid altering the sense.
As the intimate friend of Mr. Hetherington, the writer
has sought to bring out what is to the honor of his
memory —and no one will blame him for this, —but he
has not knowingly either perverted or hidden the truth,
and he trusts he has written nothing which ought to
wound the feelings of any.
In order to lay before the reader a full and clear
account of the negotiations for union, it will be well
to give a brief sketch of—
§ 1. The other churches previous to negotiation.
And First, the United Presbyterian Church of Vic-
toria.
This Church originated in a public meeting held in
the Independent Chapel in Collins-street. in March,
1845, which was called “for the purpose of organising
and establishing a Presbyterian Church in the colony
on the basis of the standards of the Church of Scotland,
but entirely free and unconnected with the State.”
At this meeting a committee was appointed to carry
out the proposed object.


After corresponding and waiting for nearly two years,,
they were at length cheered by the arrival on 4th
January, 1847, of the Rev. Andrew Mitchell Ramsay,
from the Relief Church, Scotland. Another meeting
was then called in the Independent Chapel, when Mr.
Ramsay was invited to form “ a Presbyterian congre-
gation unconnected with the State.” It may be well to
remind the reader that the United Presbyterian Church
of Scotland was not formed until May in that year.
Mr. Ramsay collected a congregation in a school-
room in Little Collins-street (Campbell & Macgregor’s-
school), whence they removed to the Temperance Hall,
and afterwards to the Protestant Hall, Stephen-street.
On the 24th September, 1850, the foundation stone
was laid of the first United Presbyterian Church, and
the building was opened for public worship on the
30th March, 1851. This building is now the Assembly
Hall of the Presbyterian Church of Victoria. .
The first minister who joined Mr. Ramsay was the
Rev. Thomas Elliott Richardson. He arrived on the
24th October, 1848, and proceeded to Portland, where
in about eighteen months a church was built, and Mr.
Richardson officiated in it till 20th May, 1852, when he
resigned to become editor of the Portland Guardian.
The third minister was the Rev. Lachlan McGilvray,.
who settled in June, 1849, at Warrnambool, where a
church was built and opened 30tli March, 1851.
The fourth minister was the Rev. William Jarrett r
who was originally an Independent minister, and who
was conducting a private school in Melbourne, when.


Mr. Richardson and Mr. Ramsay, having conferred with
him and found his views agree with theirs, expressed a
wish that he would undertake the formation of a second
-church in Melbourne; to which he gladly acceded. A
•congregation was gathered in St. Patrick’s Hall, and, in
August, 1850, was formed into a church, —with a semi-
independent constitution. A building was then erected
in Lonsdale-street, to which they removed 9th May,
1851.
These four ministers met on the 18th January, 1850,
.and agreed to form themselves into a Synod, to be
•called the Synod of the United Presbyterian Church of
Victoria; and on the 22nd January they met as a
•Synod, and adopted a constitution which for brevity
will challenge comparison with that of any church in
modern times. This constitution consisted of:—1. A
;Summary of Doctrine “ submitted as a general state-
ment of the general principles of faith and practice
most surely believed amongst us, and thought to be
sufficiently definite to exclude fatal error, and suffici-
ently general to permit that variation of sentiment on
minor points, which seems to be incident to our present
imperfect state.” This summary of doctrine contained
eleven short articles. 2. A Summary of Ordinances
and Church Polity, “ to embrace all that is essential to
the maintenance of that order which the Lord Jesus
Christ has established in his Church.” 3. The Funda-
mental Principles of the Church, ten in number, the
most notable of which are a repudiation of all connec-
tion with the State and all State endowments of


religion, and a repudiation of all standards of doctrine
discipline, or government, except the New Testament.
This constitution being adopted, it was agreed that
correspondence be opened with the various evangelical
churches in the Australian colonies, and in Europe and
America, with a view to obtain and diffuse intelligence,
and to cultivate Christian sympathy and intercourse.
The Synod was evidently characterised by liberal views
and wide sympathies.
This Church was afterwards joined by the following
ministers, whose names are given in the order of settle-
ment
Mr. Alexander McNicol, arrived February 12,1850; ordained
June 18, 1850 ; settled at Bacchus Marsh.
Mr. David Chapman, arrived January 25, 1851 ; ordained
May 14, 1851; settled at Broadmeadows.
Mr. David Hunter Ballantyne, arrived March, 1850; ordained
May 14, 1851; settled at Albury.
Rev. Andrew Ross, arrived January 18, 1851; inducted at
Portland, September 14, 1851.
Rev. Robert Hamilton, received September 24, 1851; settled
at Collingwood.
Rev. William Baird Miller, received September 24, 1851.
Mr. Robert Buchanan Scott, arrived February, 1851 ;
ordained. July IC, 1851.
The writer is bound to state that in the induction of
these ministers, -with one or two exceptions, the same
questions which are put to ministers at induction in
the United Presbyterian Church in Scotland were put-
by the presiding minister of the United Presbyterian.
Synod of Victoria.


In April, 1851, the Synod appointed two Presby-
teries—Melbourne and Portland. The Presbytery of
Portland at its first meeting on the Ist December, 1851,
agreed to overture the Synod “to take immediate steps
for ascertaining how far union with other Presbyterian
denominations is practicable, and where practicable, to
use all diligence in seeking to bring to a satisfactory
issue a matter so deeply involving Presbyterian inte-
rests.” On the 28th January, 1852, the Synod took
up this overture, with the following result: —
The Synod agree as to the desirableness of a Union with
the other divisions of the Presbyterian Church in the colony,
where this can be effected without any compromise of principle,
or curtailment of the liberty at present enjoyed ; —that with
that section of the Presbyterian interest denominated the Free
Church the Synod can discern no substantial hindrance to an
incorporated union, and are prepared to entertain the subject of
union with that denomination, as calculated to promote in an
eminent degree the interests of our common Christianity ; and,
with the view of effecting such a desirable object, the Synod
remit to the Melbourne Presbytery to correspond with their
brethren of the Portland Presbytery as to the necessary steps
to be taken in effecting the desired union.
After some further correspondence between the two
Presbyteries, the Presbytery of Melbourne appointed
Messrs. Ramsay and Hamilton a committee to draw up
a letter which might be sent to the Free Church. When
the Synod met at Portland, 24th January, 1853, Mr.
Hamilton produced the draft of a letter which he had
prepared. It was ordered to be sent to the Free Church,
and was accordingly written and signed Andrew Ross,


Moderator of U. P. Synod, and dated Portland, 25th
January, 1853. From some cause or other this letter
was not considered by the Free Synod till January,
1854.
We come now to the Free Church of Victoria.
This Church originated in 184 G, by the secession of
the Rev. James Forbes from the Synod of Australia,
with a portion of the Scots’ Church congregation. They
met in the Mechanics’ Hall on the 22nd November,
184 G, and continued their meetings there until John
Knox’s Church was built. The Rev. Thomas Hastie,who
came over from Tasmania at the beginning of 1847,
and settled at Buninyong, and the Rev. John Ziegler
Huie, who arrived from Scotland about the same time,
united with Mr. Forbes and Mr. Henrie Bell, an elder,
to form the Free Presbyterian Synod of Australia Felix,
on 9th June, 1847.
As long as Mr. Forbes was a member of the Synod,
a great deal of attention was given to the formal state-
ment of the principles, rules, standing orders, &c., of the
Synod. These have been collected and printed, and
the reader is referred to them for further details. There
is one of these “Acts,” however, which must be noticed
here. It was passed 4th December, 1850, in answer
to the question—whether it would be proper for the
congregations of this Church to apply for or accept
sites for churches and ministers’ dwellings from the
Colonial Government. It declared:—
That as, in the legislation and government of New South
Wales, Judaism and Christianity, Popery and Protestantism


are practically treated as equally deserving of support from the-
public funds and grants of land, the Synod feel
called upon to protest against the principle involved in such
procedure, and to seek the abolition of the-
system In order to render this protest effectual
and consistent, the Synod consider it indispensable that the con-
gregations of this Church should, as in time past, abstain front
applying to the Colonial Government for either money or land
for church purposes.
This was not, however, to preclude grants for schools.
This decision, following up the previous practice of the-
Synod, explains how the U. P. Synod proposed union
with the practically voluntary Free Presbyterian Synod
of “Victoria,” as it was now called, rather than with
the State-aided Presbytery of Melbourne.
A dissent from this decision was tabled by the Rev.
J. H. McLachlan, who had arrived from Scotland 9th
February, 1849, and joined the Free Synod. Mr. Huie-
had returned to Scotland before this meeting. The
Rev. John Tait, of Paramatta, was present as a visitor
from the Synod of Eastern Australia, and took part in
this decision. An invitation was thereafter given to
him by the Synod to come over to Victoria and join
them, which he did in March, 1851. He was inducted
as minister at Geelong, 16th April, 1851.
Theßev. John Hume arrived May 20th, 1851, and was inducted
at Kilmore the Bth October.
The Rev. James Forbes died 14th August, 1851; and by his-
death the Synod lost an able leader and administrator.
The Rev. William Miller, who arrived 11th September, was-
elected minister of John Knox’s Church, and inducted on the-
lGth December, 1851.


Mr. D. M. Sinclair, a licentiate of the Synod of Eastern Aus-
tralia, arrived from Sydney in December, 1851, was ordained
11th February, 1852, and was appointed to form a Gaelic con-
gregation in Melbourne, in the Protestant Hall. He resigned
4th January, 1854.
The Rev. Allan McVean arrived in February, 1853, and was
received as a member of the Synod.
Mr. Donald McDonald arrived in February, 1853, was or-
dained Bth August, and settled at Bulleen.
The Rev. John Barnet arrived in July, 1853, and was
appointed to Bellarine.
In September, 1853, there arrived a strong re-inforcement of
ministers, the Revs. Adam Cairns, D.D., Archibald Simpson,
William Henderson, and Alexander Adam. Dr. Cairns was
appointed to Melbourne, to form a new congregation there, Mr.
Henderson to Williamstown, Mr. Adam to Burnbank, and Mr.
Simpson to Sandridge and Emerald Hill.
The arrival of Dr. Cairns was of itself an important
accession. Fitted both by natural gifts, and by experi-
ence gained in the Church of Scotland, and afterwards
in the Free Church of Scotland, in whose discussions he
took a warm interest and a prominent part, he at once
took the leadership of the Free Church in the colony.
At the meeting of Synod on the 27th September,lBs3,
when these four ministers were received, the question
of accepting sites from Government was re-opened by"
Dr. Cairns. The old members of the Synod made a
gallant fight for their previous decision ; but the new
members were too many for them. It was carried by
8 to 4
“ That without touching the protest of the Synod against the


indiscriminate endowment of all religions by the State, it be
resolved that, in regard to sites for ecclesiastical buildings, the
congregations of this Church be left at liberty to act on their
own convictions : all applications to Government for sites to
pass through the Moderator of Synod.”
At this meeting the letter from the U. P. Synod rela-
tive to union was received, and its consideration post-
poned to next meeting.
On the 4th January, 1854, another welcome addition
was made to the Synod. The Revs. Mclntosh Mackay,
D.D., George Divorty, and William S. Login having
arrived, were cordially received. The name of Dr.
Mackay was a power to the Church, especially among
the Highlanders in the colony.
At this date the Presbytery of Melbourne numbered
fourteen ministers, the U. P. Synod eleven, and the
Free Synod sixteen.
§ 2. Commencement of Negotiations.
Before laying the proposal for union upon the table of
the Presbytery of Melbourne, Mr Hetherington sought
to prepare the way for the Presbytery’s independent
action, by getting it separated from the Synod of
Australia. He had been corresponding with the
Moderator of the Synod on the subject, and in July,
1853, he “directed the attention of the Presbytery to the
disadvantages of their remaining with the Synod of
Australia, and urged the propriety of seeking separa-
tion. He submitted to the Presbytery the corre-
spondence which he had had on the subject with
the Moderator of Synod.” He was instructed to


further prosecute the matter. In pursuance of this
instruction he prepared a draft of a Bill to submit to
the Legislative Council of Victoria. The Presbytery
adopted the draft, and instructed him as Moderator of
the Presbytery to make a formal application to the
Synod of Australia for the separation of the Presbytery
from the Synod’s jurisdiction.
Mr. Hetherington then, on the Gth October, 1853,
gave notice of motion to the following effect: —
1. That the Presbytery, deploring the existing divisions in
ithe Presbyterian community of the colony, and recognising the
benefits w hich the restoration of union in that community would
confer, and their own obligations to seek it by all competent
means, do resolve to take measures to promote so desirable an
object.
2. That with this view a committee be appointed by the
Presbytery, to ascertain by correspondence and conference with
the other Presbyterian bodies in the colony, how far they, on
their part, are disposed for union, and on what terms they
would agree to it; the said committee to report to the Presby-
tery at its next meeting.
3. That this committee be composed of the Revs. A. Love,
P. Gunn, J. Reid, T. Heron, and I. Hetherington convener.
Atthenextmeeting of the Presbytery on 4th January,
1854, “ Mr. Hetherington dwelt at length on the desir-
ableness of the proposed union, and in proof of its
practicability read a letter from the Attorney-General,
to whom, on behalf of the Presbytery, he had appealed
for counsel on the several legal points involved; and
also referred to interviews which he had had with


ministers of the other Presbyterian bodies.” The
resolutions were unanimously adopted.
The committee met immediately on the rising of the
Presbytery, and “ instructed the convener to announce
their appointment to the Free Church of Victoria,
and to the United Presbyterian Church of Victoria,
through their respective moderators, to apprise these
Churches of the desire of the Presbytery of Melbourne
to seek the union of the different Presbyterian Churches
of the colony, and to invite them on their part severally
to appoint committees to confer with them on the
subject.” Mr. Hetherington wrote as instructed, and
sent the letter to the moderator of the Free Synod at
once.
The Free Church Synod were sitting in John
Knox’s church that same day. At their evening meet-
ing, the letter from the Presbytery of Melbourne was
received and read. After full deliberation it was re-
solved that Dr. Cairns, Dr. Mackay, Revs. J. Tait, and
W. Miller, and Messrs. Dickson and Drummond, be
appointed a committee to confer with the parties named,
and report to the next meeting of Synod.
At the morning meeting of the Free Synod, the
letter from the U. P. Synod, mentioned in last section,
had been considered, and it had been unanimously
resolved:—
That the Moderator be instructed to convey to the Synod of
the United Presbyterian Church an expression of their high
satisfaction with this communication, and the great importance
which they attach to the union of the different sections of the


Presbyterian Church in the colony ; and to request information,
especially with reference to their standards and their course of
education for the ministry ; and to forward to them a copy of
the Acts of this Synod.
Mr. Hetherington’s letter to the U. P. Synod was
sent 12th January, and was acknowledged by Rev. R-
Hamilton, Clerk of Synod, who promised to “take the
first opportunity of bringing the subject under the
consideration of the brethren.”
§ 3. —Negotiations on the First Basis.
The committees of the Presbytery of Melbourne and
the Free Synod met on the 16th January, 1854. “The
occasion of the meeting” was stated by the Rev. Mr.
Hetherington. The first question considered was the
designation which should be adopted in the event of a
union. Mr. Hetherington proposed that the Supreme
Court of the United Church should be designated “The
Synod of the Presbyterian Church of Victoria adhering
to the standards of the Church of Scotland,” and urged
that this was necessary, on legal grounds, to secure the
property of the Presbytery of Melbourne. It was
agreed to conferwith the Attorney-General on this point.
They met again on the 14th of February, and it was
reported that the Attorney-General had given it as his
opinion, that in order to secure the property of the
Church in its new form it was not necessary that the
designation should contain any reference to the Church
of Scotland. The conference were unanimously of
opinion that “ The Synod of Victoria ” will be a suit-
able designation. The second question taken up was


the Basis of Union. The committees concurred in
thinking that the Westminster Standards, viz., the
Confession of Faith, the Larger and Shorter Catechisms,
the Presbyterial Form of Church Government, and the
Directory for Public Worship, together with the Second
Book of Discipline, will form a proper basis. The
conference expressed their willingness to admit an
explanatory declaration, substantially the same with
that contained in the 2nd clause of the sth article of
the Fundamental Act of the Free Presbyterian Church
of Victoria, and the 2nd and 3rd resolutions on the
spiritual independence of the Church, passed by the
Synod of Australia in 1844 (see chapter 7).
Mr Hetherington reported the next day to the Pres-
bytery of Melbourne that it had been mutually agreed
that a union of the two Churches might be effected on
the following terms :
1. That in their union they do form themselves into a Synod,
to be designated “The Synod of Victoria.”
2. That the standards adopted and maintained by the said
Synod be the standards of the Church of Scotland, viz.: The
Confession of Faith, The Larger and Shorter Catechisms, The
Directory for Public Worship, The Form of Presbyterial Church
Government agreed on by the Assembly of Divines at Westmin-
ster in 1643, and the Second Book of Discipline, together with
a Fundamental Act declaratory of the magistrate’s duty in rela-
tion to the Church, the Synod’s independence, and the right of
every congregation to have an effective voice in the election of
its own minister.
The reader will see a difference in phraseology be-
tween the decision of the joint committees and the


report as given by Mr. Hetherington to the Presby-
tery of Melbourne. This difference gave rise to a cor-
respondence between Dr. Cairns and Mr. Hetherington.
Mr. Hetherington laid this correspondence before the
Presbytery on sth April, and moved—That as the use
of the expression “Church of Scotland” in the second
clause has been misunderstood, it he erased from the
report, and that the standards be enumerated without
it. Of course the standards of the Church of Scotland
are identical with those of the Free Church and of
the United Presbyterian Church of Scotland. The
objection was to the mention of the Church of Scotland
at all, in the Articles.
The Free Synod met on the sth April, and when
Dr. Cairns’s report was received and approved, the
committee were instructed, at the suggestion of Dr.
Mackay, to continue the negotiations, “ and specially,
in all that they do in the matter, to have regard to the
following conditions”: —
First, —That no union can be entered on till the Presbytery
of Melbourne is a free and independent judicatory, separate
from the jurisdiction of, and connection with, any other Church
or ecclesiastical body whatsoever ; and, second—That after the
Presbytery of Melbourne is thus separate and independent, the
two judicatories, as two courts on an equal footing, shall unite
together into one general Synod, on a bond or basis of union
distinctly setting forth the great principles laid down in the Fun-
damental Act of this Synod.
In pursuance of these instructions, when the com-
mittees met, on the same day, certain alterations were


proposed on the Synod of Victoria Bill then before the
Legislative Council, and were agreed to by the Presby-
tery of Melbourne.
At the meeting of the Presbytery’s committee that
day, the Rev. W. Hamilton, of Kilnoorat, who is men-
tioned in a preceding chapter as occupying an isolated
ecclesiastical position, was present, and was invited to
express his opinion on the basis of union. He agreed
to the articles, on condition that it be declared “ that
the United Church desires to maintain communion and
friendly intercourse with all ecclesiastical bodies
throughout the world, who adhere to the above recited
standards.” This proposal was “kept in retentis until
the constitution of the Synod should come under con-
sideration.”
. On the 19th April, 1854, the Presbytery of Melbourne
was constituted into the Synod of Victoria, with the
avowed object of forming a rallying point for the diffe-
rent Presbyterian Churches of the colony.
The Synod considering that this colony now contains a large
and rapidly increasing Presbyterian population, comprehending
Presbyterians from various countries and churches both of Europe
and America, and that it is accordingly desirable for the best
interests of religion in the colony, and of this Church in parti-
cular, that the Synod be placed on a broad comprehensive basis,
not avowing an exclusive preference for any particular church,
and as free as possible from everything likely to prevent Pres-
byterians in general from uniting in one large and influential
body, ready to hold friendly intercourse with every other religi-
ous communion which professes a general adherence to the same
standards; they resolved and agreed to record on the present ocea-


sion their firm determination to maintain a separate, distinct and
independent position, and especially to assert their uncontrolled
and perfect freedom in the management of all their spiritual
and ecclesiastical concerns agreeably to . the standards above
described.
In pursuance of the instructions of the Free Synod,
given on sth April, a series of articles was drawn up
by the committee of the Free Church, as a basis of
union with the Synod of Victoria. These articles were
prepared by the Rev. J. Tait, clerk of the Free Synod.
They are given here in the form in which they were
subsequently adopted by the two Churches :
We, the undersigned ministers and elders of the Synod of Vic-
toria, and of the Synod of the Free Presbyterian Church of
Victoria, constituting the supreme judicatories of our respective
Churches, and being, as such, free and independent, and under
no external jurisdiction or control whatever, having resolved,
after long and prayerful deliberation, and repeated friendly con-
ferences, held on the motion and at the instigation of the former
Synod, to unite together in one Synod and one Church, being
satisfied that there is no longer any impediment or hindrance to
the same, and that we hold the same standards and formularies,
namely, the Westminster Confession of Faith, the Larger and
Shorter Catechism, the Form of Presbyterial Church Govern-
ment, the Directory for Public Worship, and the Second Book
of Discipline, do now, in the name of the Great Head of the
Church, and with solemn prayer for His guidance and blessing,
join and unite together in one Synod, to be called “ The Presby-
terian Church of Victoria,” having superintendence and juris-
diction over all the presbyteries and kirk-sessions and congre-
gations that homologate and agree to this union, in the same
way and with the same powers and authorities as the aforesaid
Synods ; and resolve and determine that the following be the


fundamental principles and articles of this union, and be sub-
scribed by each of the members of the new Synod, namely :
I. That the Westminster Confession of Faith, the Larger and
Shorter Catechisms, the Form of Presbyterial Church Govern-
ment, the Directory for Public Worship, and the Second Book of
Discipline, be the Standards and Formularies of this Church.
11. That according to the views and principles laid down in
the said Confession on the duty of the civil magistrate in regard
to religion, he is bound and required to use his official power
and influence for the maintenance, protection, and support of
the truth, and the restraining and putting down error and
ungodliness; but that this is to be done only in accordance with
the requirements of the Word of God, and within the sphere to
which mere civil authority is by that Word restricted ; and that
in subscribing to the said Confession, the ministers and elders
of this Church are not to be understood as encouraging or
countenancing persecuting and intolerant principles, or as pro-
fessing any views inconsistent with liberty of conscience and the
right of private judgment.
111. That according to the views and principles laid down in the
said Confession in regard to the Sole Headship of Christ over His
Church and the authority with which he has invested her rulers,
they have an independent and exclusive jurisdiction in the
government of the Church in all spiritual things ; that it
belongs to them alone to admit or exclude members and office-
bearers, and to license and ordain ministers, to induct and settle
them over congregations, and to suspend or depose them; that
with these and the like functions it is equally presumptuous and
unwarrantable in the magistrate to interfere, and faithless and
sinful in the Church to permit or submit to such interference ;
and that from any of the decisions of her judicatories in refe-
rence to such spiritual matters, there can be no appeal to any
civil authority whatever.
IY. That according to the views and principles laid down in the
ConfessionofFaithand in the Second Book of Discipline in regard


to the Headship of Christ over the members of the Church
individually, they have rights and privileges secured to them
which may not be interfered with, and that the rulers are to
exercise their authority so as to have respect to these, and take
care that no elder or minister be intruded on any congregation
contrary to their will; and in particular, that it shall be a fun-
damental rule of this Church, that the election of ministers,
ruling elders, and deacons belongs to the members of each
separate congregation in full communion, the judicatories of the
Church superintending and regulating the same.
V. That this Synod, while holding itself at liberty to maintain
communion and correspondence with all other faithful Presby-
terian Churches throughout the world, has yet of right, and is
determined to maintain, a separate and independent character and
position, and to preserve unimpaired a supreme and independent
jurisdiction overitssubordinate judicatories andcongregationsand
people, irrespective of any other Church or body whatsoever ;
and that all privileges, whether ecclesiastical or temporal, held
by any of the ministers, office-bearers, or other members in
virtue of their office and membership respectively, are and shall
be possessed and enjoyed free from the interference or control of
any ecclesiastical body foreign to itself.
VI. That the foregoing principles be summed up in the sub-
joined Formula, and be signed by every licentiate before
receiving license, and by every minister previous to his recep-
tion into the Synod, or induction into any of its congregations.
FORMULA.
I do hereby declare that I do sincerely own and believe the
whole doctrine contained in the Confession of Faith, approved
by the General Assembly of the Church of Scotland in the year
1647, to be the truths of God ; and I do likewise own the purity
of worship presently authorised and practised in the Presbyterian
Church of Victoria, and also the Presbyterian government and
discipline thereof ; which doctrine, discipline and church govern-
ment, I am persuaded, are founded on the Word of God, and


agreeable thereto. I likewise sincerely and heartily hold the
principles respecting the supremacy of Christ over His Church,
and her subjection to Him as her only Head, and the freedom
from secular control in the management of the affairs of Christ’s
House belonging to her in virtue of His institution ; which are
set forth in the Articles of Union agreed on and subscribed by
the ministers and elders constituting the Synod on ....
I approve of all the other declarations and provisions of the
said articles ; and I promise that through the grace of God I
shall firmly and constantly adhere to the same, and to the utmost
of my power shall in my station assert, maintain, and defend the
said doctrine, worship, discipline, and government of this Church,
together with its exclusive and final spiritual jurisdiction, and
its independence from all external control and interference.
And I promise that I shall follow no divisive courses from the
principles and constitution of this Church, renouncing all doc-
trines, tenets and opinions whatsoever contrary to or inconsis-
tent with the same.
These articles were submitted to the Synod of Vic-
toria on 4th July, 1854, and were considered seriatim.
After various alterations limiting the exclusive juris-
diction of the office-bearers of the Church, defined in
the third article, to spiritual things, etc., the Rev. I.
Hetherington was instructed to return them as amended,
to the Rev. Dr. Cairns, to be submitted to the Free
Church.
The next day Dr. Cairns gave in these Articles of
Union to the Free Synod, by whom they were then
amended and approved; but the alterations by the
Synod of Victoria were sent back to the committee.
The proposal to limit the exclusive jurisdiction of the
Church courts to spiritual things sounded ominous to


Free Churchmen, who had suffered from the meddlings
of law courts with Church matters; and it raised a
question in the Free Synod as to the legal conse-
quences which might ensue from the Union, in respect
of the temporalities of the Church. On this point
different views were entertained by the members of the
Synod. At the suggestion of Dr. Mackay, it was re-
solved that the advice of the ablest counsel in the
colony shall be taken on the point, and a deed drawn
up which shall secure the Free Church property from
all legal consequences which may affect the property of
the Synod of Victoria. The Free Synod also in-
structed their committee on Union “to fix definitely
with the other committee from what source the United
Church should receive a supply of ministers to meet
their immediate wants.”
The day following, the Synod of Victoria’s committee
came- to the Free Synod for conference upon the
Articles, etc. No decision was arrived at with regard
to the Articles; and the members of the Synod of Vic-
toria were resolute in objecting “to any recorded
arrangement to the effect that ministerial supply should
only be taken from the Free Church to meet our
immediate wants.”
The committees met frequently and discussed the
question of the exclusive jurisdiction of the Church,
but without result.
At length, on the 19th September, at a conference of
the two Synods, the Free Synod saw their way to
accept the alterations of the Synod of Victoria on this


point. But while accepting these alterations, they in
their turn proposed an alteration on the fifth Article,
to the effect that the United Church hold itself “at
liberty to maintain communion and correspondence
with all other faithful Presbyterian Churches.” This
limitation of the correspondence to faithful Churches
was intended by the Free Synod to be read in the light
of the third Article, which declares it faithless and sin-
ful in the Church to permit or submit to the interfe-
rence of the civil magistrate with the functions of the
Church, and was understood by them to exclude the
Established Church of Scotland. It was not so under-
stood by the Synod of Victoria; who at once accepted
the alteration.
The misapprehension arising from the ambiguity of
this phrase, “ faithful churches,” produced a harvest of
troubles in the subsequent history of the negotiations.
Various other alterations of less importance were
made upon the Articles; and the negotiations were held
to he complete. The ministers were ordered to invite the
congregations to declare their concurrence in the
measure; and it was resolved that steps be taken
to consummate the Union at a date not later than three
months from that time.
Dr. Mackay and Messrs. Hetherington and Clow
were appointed a committee to prepare a memorial for
counsel in regard to the effects of the contemplated
union upon the properties of the two churches.
While these negotiations were being thus promptly
brought to a satisfactory conclusion, the negotiations


with the United Presbyterian Church of Victoria were
progressing, but at a much slower pace.
The U. P. Synod had held a meeting on the third
day of January, 1854—the same day on which the
Free Synod had begun its session—and it was reported
that the letter of January, 1853, had been forwarded
and acknowledged, but that no formal answer had as
yet been received. (It was considered by the Free
Synod next day.) A committee was appointed, how-
ever, to confer with any which the Free Synod may
appoint:—Revs. Messrs. Ramsay, Jarrett, Hamilton,
and Dalrymple, and Dr. McArthur, elder; Mr. Ramsay,
convener.
On 4th April, the Free Synod appointed a com-
mittee on union with the U. P. Synod:—the Revs. Dr.
Cairns, Dr. Mackay, A. Simpson, G. Divorty, and W.
Miller; Dr. Cairns, convener.
The first meeting of these committees was held on
the 27th May, and was merely preliminary: Dr. Mackay
and Mr. Ramsay were asked to prepare subjects for
conference. At the next meeting, 21st June, a paper
was read, giving a summary of the principal points
requiring consideration. It may be condensed thus—
1. The two Churches agree in doctrine, discipline, and
Church government. 2. Neither of them receives money
from the State. 3. While differing theoretically as to
State-aid, both of them testify against the indiscrimi-
nate mode in which it is at present given, and are
pledged to seek its abolition. 4. They ought to unite
if possible. 5. The question of civil establishments of


religion should be matter of forbearance in the United
Church. These points were talked over, and the meet-
ing adjourned to the 24th July. On that day several
members were absent, so the meeting was postponed
to the 31st. At the meeting on the 31st, the
articles proposed on 26th June were adopted; and,
in view of the contemplated union between the
Free Synod and the Synod of Victoria, it was
proposed that those ministers now receiving State
aid should keep it during their lives or during their
ministry, but that no congregations of the United
Church should receive pecuniary assistance from the
State for building purposes. This meeting was after-
wards declared by the Free Synod, in September, not
to be a regular meeting of their committee, not having
been duly convened; and therefore its conclusions were
of no official authority. On 22nd August, the commit-
tees of the three Churches being present, a proposal was
made that congregations in the United Church seeking
State-aid should do so under special rules to be enacted
for the purpose by the United Church. No conclusion
however was arrived at. On the 11th September the
conveners of the three committees met by themselves
in Mr. Hetherington’s house. Dr. Cairns read a memo-
randum drawn up by himself, which the Free Church
committee afterwards adopted. The substance of this
memorandum is:—Of the three Churches seeking
union, one objects to Government aid altogether, the
second to indiscriminate endowment, and the third sees
nothing wrong in receiving State-aid in present


circumstances: therefore these points must be left open;
every congregation acting as it chooses in the matter,
only under the rules of the Church, and every one being
at full liberty to hold and disseminate his opinions on
this subject; andan arrangement should be entered into,
by which no one shall be called to do anything which
would offend his conscience, or interfere with his prac-
tice in this matter.
When the Free Synod met in September, and Dr-
Cairns gave in the report of the committee, it was
resolved:—
That this Synod is prepared to unite with the Synod of the
United Presbyterian Church of Victoria on the terms of the
Articles agreed to by the Synod of Victoria, it being understood
that the question as to the United Synod giving its sanction or
not to the reception of State-aid by the new congregations which,
may be formed under its superintendence, shall be an open one,
and decided as to their wisdom may seem fit.
Dr. Cairns resigned his convenership of the commit-
tee, and Mr. D. Macdonald was put in his place.
In answer to this proposal of the Free Synod, the
U. P. Synod, at its meeting on Ist November, 1854,
agreed that, as far as members of the Synod have had
an opportunity of examining the articles referred to,
they are disposed to adopt them, provided there be
inserted in the Ordination Formula, after the words
“ Confession of Faith,” the following clause:—“ Except
in so far as the said Confession teaches, or is supposed
to teach, persecuting and intolerant principles.” But
they recommend that the whole document receive still


more careful revision. They further resolved, that in
regard to union with the Free Church, “ they see no
necessity for imposing any restriction on the action of
the United Church, in dealing with any application for
State-aid from any new congregation that may be
formed under its superintendence, being confident that
the wisdom of the United Synod, under the guidance
and blessing of the great Head of the Church, will at
any time afford sufficient protection against those evils
which, in their several capacities, they have all along
seriously protested against.” In short, they considered
that the United Church would be, by a large majority,
practically voluntary, and that the decisions as to new
congregations receiving State-aid would be such as
eventually to extinguish State-aid altogether in the
United Church.
N egotiations between the United Presbyterian Church
and the Synod of Victoria began with a conference of
their two committees on union, 22nd August, 1854;
when it was proposed—l, That the congregations at
present constituting the Synod of Victoria shall not
be required to renounce their claims for Government
aid ; and 2, That no application for such aid shall be
made on behalf of any new congregation formed under
the United Synod. To this proposal the Synod of
Victoria answered on the 19th September, “That the
only sound basis on which a union with the United
Presbyterian Church can be effected, is—that the exist-
ing interests of the ministers and congregations be pro-
tected, and that it be left open to congregations here-


after to be formed, to apply for Government assistance
or not as they may decide for themselves, subject to
such arrangements as may be made by the judicatories
of the Church.”
In these negotiations, there is manifest a very natural
desire, on the part of each Church, to give to the pro-
posed United Church as large a tincture as possible of
their own distinctive principles;—Mr. Hetherington
and the Synod of Victoria seeking to retain some sort of
connection with the Church of Scotland, —Dr. Cairns
and the Free Synod trying to preserve intact their
Free Church testimony, and commit the United Church
to it also, —and Mr. Ramsay and the U. P. Synod
anxious to avoid all complicity with State-aid, and to
extinguish it altogether. And if these brethren did
sometimes push their distinctive ideas too far, and were
even unnecessarily wary of each other’s proposals, it is
only what was to be expected. There was no prece-
dent to guide them in such negotiations ; as it was the
first attempt to re-unite Presbyterianism in any land.
Moreover, some of the ministers had taken a prominent
part in home controversies, and retained a considerable
infusion of that denominationalism which such contro-
versy is apt to produce. The opinion of the home
Churches, too, had to be considered: colonial ministers
could not throw themselves wholly out of sympathy
with their brethren of the parent Churches; their own
feelings and even policy forbade them.
On the whole, it was well that union was not ac-
complished in 1854. The churches were really not


prepared for it. They needed further education, in the
Providence of .God, before their union could be com-
plete or lasting. Proof of this is found in the sequel.
§ 4.— Embart'assments.
We have seen that Dr. Mackay, J. Clow, and I.
Hetherington were appointed a special committee to
prepare a memorial for counsel as to the effects of the
contemplated union upon the properties of the two
Churches. The question to be submitted was—whether
the Synod of Victoria Act, April, 1854, “ protects the
property of the congregations, and affords a security
against civil consequences affecting the status of the
ministers of the united body; and what the adequate-
remedies would be, if it be not sufficient for that pur-
pose.”
At the first and only meeting of this committee, it
was agreed that Dr. Mackay, who raised the question
in the Free Synod, should prepare the memorial. He
therefore drew up a statement, in which he set forth
the position of the two Churches, and the grievances to
which they, and especially the Free Church, would be
subjected, if they should unite under the Synod of Vic-
toria Act, and then find that the Act did not disconnect
the Synod of Victoria from the Established Church of
Scotland.
The memorial was handed to Messrs. Clow and
Hetherington for their approval. They were not satis-
fied with it as representing the position of the Synod
of Victoria, and agreed that, without altering the
memorial, Mr. Hetherington should draw up annota-


lions on it. In these annotations Mr. Hetherington
argued, for the guidance of counsel, the connection
•existing between the Synod of Victoria and the Estab-
lished Church of Scotland. He represented it as
•“consisting in, I—Affinity, she being their ecclesiastical
parent; 2—Conformity, they maintaining her doctrines
and form of procedure; 3—Correspondence, she having
the privilege, in virtue of such affinity and conformity,
•of issuing counsel and admonition to them, and they
the privilege of asking counsel and admonition of her.”
This was a very fair representation, not only of the
ecclesiastical connection between the Synod of Victoria
and the Established Church of Scotland, but also of
that between the Free Presbyterian Synod of Victoria
.and the Free Church of Scotland ; as the Free Synod
afterwards exemplified in 1857 and 1858. But Mr.
Hetherington went on to argue that the union cannot
alter this connection, —that the same relation will con-
tinue between the same parties after the union, i.e.
between the Church of Scotland and those who formerly
belonged to that Church. This position also has been
exemplified since the union in 1859, by the former
members of the Free Synod. But at the time when
these annotations were written, and in the case of the
Established Church of Scotland, this doctrine was
startling to Free Churchmen.
The memorial was returned to Dr. Mackay, with these
annotations; and he, in his turn, wrote remarks upon
them, and laid all three papers before the Free Synod
■on the Ist November, 1854. The Synod resolved that


these papers be submitted to counsel, as previously
agreed upon; but instructed their committee on union
to confer with the Synod of Victoria’s committee,
about the statements made in the annotations, in regard
to their relation to the Established Church of Scotland.
The papers were submitted to two of the leading
lawyers of Melbourne ; and the answer, given in 1855,
was—that the Synod of Victoria Act does not sever
connection with the Established Church of Scotland ;
and that a new Act is necessary to effect that separa-
tion, and to make it safe in the eye of the law for the
Free Presbyterian Synod to unite with the Synod of
Victoria.
Meanwhile a long correspondence was held about the
annotations. The Free Church Committee were sur-
prised to find that, notwithstanding the language of
the 3rd and sth Articles, the writer of the annotations
and, as they supposed, the Synod which he represented,
still thought they could retain a connection and corre-
spondence with the Established Church of Scotland, in
the United Church. They, on their part, imagined that
the restriction of the United Church to correspondence
with “ faithful churches ” would of course shut out the
Established Church of Scotland—which had submitted
to the interference of the civil magistrate with the func-
tions of the Church, and was therefore “ faithless.” The
Synod of Victoria, however, apparently did not see it.
And here rose up the difficulty, which nearly wrecked
the negotiations altogether. The Free Synod, especially
those members of it who had taken part in the Disrupt


tion, felt that consistency required them to hold aloof
from all possible connection or correspondence with the
Established Church of Scotland. The Synod of Victoria,,
on the other hand, would not consent to renounce all
connection and correspondence with their parent Church;
although they were willing to make distinct provision
that,in any correspondence between the United Church
and other Churches, no minister shall be called on to
perform any act which he conscientiously considers
inconsistent with any solemn engagement he had pre-
viously entered into. The Free Church committee did
not feel that such provision would cover the case; and
a lengthy statement was drawn up by Rev. J. Tait, at
the request of the committee, containing an analysis of
the annotations, and a full discussion of the whole
subject. This statement was forwarded to the com-
mittee of the Synod of Victoria. Mr. Hetherington, on
behalf of the committee, declined the discussion, as
having reference, not to a matter of principle, but to a
matter of detail in administration, which should be left
to the deliberative wisdom of the United Church, and
as “being based on .an elaborate analysis of certain
annotations, of which the committee, as such, have no
knowledge, and for which they are not responsible.”
Through this door the two Synods escaped from
the embarrassment. The committees mutually agreed
to defer the application of the Articles of Union to par-
ticular cases, until the cases have actually arisen ; and
the whole of the documents connected with the embar-
rassment —memorial, annotations, statements, &c. —were


set aside as of no official authority. The Free Synod
ratified this agreement in November, 1855. As to the
Synod of Victoria, the documents had never come before
them in any way whatever, and in their records no
notice is taken of this episode in the negotiations.
This discussion had one good effect; it clarified the
views of both Churches, in some degree, as to the posi-
tion which the United Church would need to take up
towards other Presbyterian Churches.
It is only due to Mr. Hetherington to say that he did
not wish that the connection, which he so fully defined
in the annotations, should exist between the Church
•of Scotland and the United Church as a whole. And
the majority of the Synod of Victoria, coming as they
did from the Presbyterian Church of Ireland, had no
desire to be specially connected with the Church of Scot-
land. They agreed with Mr. Hetherington that, in the
United Church,theChurch of Scotland oughttobesimply
on the same footing with other Churches. In these whole
negotiations, Mr. Hetherington and the majority of the
Synod of Victoria stood midway between the strong
Free Church sympathies of some of the leaders in the
other Synod, and the Established Church sympathies
of several members of the Synod of Victoria; and he
often found it very difficult to steer between these
adverse currents. Indeed, but for his patient and judi-
cious management, under God, the negotiations would
have been broken off again and again.
On the 6th November, 1855, the two Synods met in
conference. There was read a draft of a Bill to amend


the Act regulating the temporal affairs of the Church,
and a committee was appointed to take steps to have
the Bill passed through the Legislative Council. Mr.
Clow, as senior minister present, was called upon to
•offer up thanks to God for the successful issue to which
the negotiations for union had now come. The final
arrangements for consummating the union were post-
poned until the negotiations with the United Presby-
terian Church should be concluded.
The next day, at a meeting of the Synod of Victoria,
attention was called to a paragraph in the Geelong
Advertiser , containing the following statement as made
by Dr. Mackay, at the meeting of the Free Church
Synod:—“There seemedto be a popularprejudiceagainst
union with the Established Church on the plea of our
going backwards; but of a truth instead of their going
back to the Established Church, the ministers of the Esta-
blished Church were coming over to them.” Dr. Lillie,
of Hobart Town, being present, stated that he had been
in communication with Dr. Mackay, and was authorised
by him to state that, in employing the language attri-
buted to him at the meeting of the Free Church Synod
on Tuesday, he did not mean to identify the Synod of
Victoria with the Established Church of Scotland, or to
affirm that the former was coming over to the Free
Church of Victoria, but simply that principles, held by
the Free Church, are held in common by the Free
Church of Victoria and by the Synod of Victoria, and
that those who come from the Established Church of
Scotland, and join on such a basis, come over to what


he considers essentially Free Church ground. The
Synod of Victoria accepted the explanation, but
expressed regret that occasion had been given to render
any explanation necessary.
At the next meeting of the Synod of Victoria, on the
20th December, Mr. Love dissented from that part of
the last minutes in which it is recorded that the Articles
had been finally agreed upon. Had he been present,
he would have moved that the clause in the fifth
Article,relative to correspondence withfaithfulchurches,
should be expunged. After discussion, it was resolved
to submit to the Free Synod, at the conference about
to be held, that the passage should be altered as a con-
cession to Mr. Love; at the same time, not pressing it as
an ultimate condition. At the conference, Mr. Love ex-
pressed his views, but contented himself with having
recorded his objection on the minutes of his own Synod.
During the same year in which this embarrassment
occurred between the Synod of Victoria and the Free
Synod, a difficulty arose also between the Free Synod
and the Synod of the United Presbyterian Church.
It is necessary to mention here a resolution of the
Free Synod, 2nd November, 1854. It was moved by
Dr. Cairns that while the Free Presbyterian Synod
protests against the present indiscriminate endowment
of religion by the State, it is not necessary to the vali-
dity of this protest that State assistance be refused,
and that it is inexpedient to prohibit the receiving of
State-aid. Eight voted for the motion, and seven
against it. On the sth April, 1855, the subject came


up again by overture, praying that the resolution he
rescinded. Four voted for rescinding, and eleven
against it.
This decision was a discouragement to the United
Presbyterians in the way of seeking union with the
other Churches; and would doubtless have hindered
their continuing the negotiations any further, were it
not that certain political action at this time gave them
reason to expect State-aid to be very soon discontinued
altogether in Victoria. Their chief aim, therefore, was
to get the 2nd Article of the Basis withdrawn ; con-
taining, as it did, a thorough-going statement of Estab-
lishment principles.
It is well to state also that an important addition
was made to the U. P. Synod in the beginning of 1855.
The Revs. James and John Ballantyne and A. D.
Kininmont arrived on the 12th February, and the
Rev. H. Darling about a month after. The latter,
however, did not stay long in the colony at that time.
This Synod met on the 26th April, 1855. After much
discussion, the following resolutions were adopted,as con-
taining a general statement of the principles on which a
union of the three Synods might be accomplished:—
1. That, inasmuch as the three Presbyterian denominations are-
one in doctrine, discipline and government, and inasmuch as the
Confession of Faith is the received and acknowledged compen-
dium of their doctrinal belief and worship, said Confession of
Faith be the doctrinal basis of the proposed union, except in so
far as said Confession teaches, or is supposed to teach, persecut-
ing and intolerant principles.
2. That, in the exercise of charitable and prudent regard to


the interests and arrangements entered into prior to the union,
those ministers and churches at present in the receipt of
•Government aid, shall not be required to forego the same,
without their own consent.
3. That, in the matter of churches originated after the Union
shall have been consummated, should any propose to apply
for Government assistance, it shall be competent for the United
Synod to decide as to whether or not they shall receive it.
4. That the right to expound and discuss, on all suitable occa-
sions, the principle of Government interference and aid in the
cause of religion, be reserved to all parties; but that the minis-
ters of the united body shall agree to avoid all unnecessary
severity in such discussions, and shall conduct them in the
spirit of liberality, forbearance and Christian love.
Copies of these resolutions were sent to the other
Synods; but neither of them met till November.
Meanwhile the three committees held frequent con-
ferences. At the first of these, on 27 th June, Mr. Ram-
say having stated what the U. P. Synod had done, as
above, Dr. Cairns read and commented on the first and
second Articles of Union agreed to by the Synod of
Victoria and the Free Synod ; when it appeared that
the brethren of the U. P. Synod had objections to the
second Article, as setting forth views on the duty of
the civil magistrate, with which they could not agree.
They proposed, therefore, that the second Article should
be omitted, and the first be modified thus :—That the
Westminster Confession, etc., he the standards of this
Church; but that, in subscribing the said Confession,
the ministers and elders of this Church are not to be
understood as professing any views inconsistent with


liberty of conscience and the right of private judgment,
or in any way countenancing persecuting and into-
lerant principles. This modification of the Basis was
remitted to the three committees for their separate
consideration.
They met again on 31st July; and the excepting
clause was variously modified. They met also next
day, but separated without coming to any decision.
At length, in November, the Free Church committee
proposed the following as the excepting clause, believ-
ing from private conferences that it would meet the
views of the U. P. Synod:—
But that any minister or elder who disapproves of those por-
tions of the said standards which treat of the powers and duties
of the civil magistrate in reference to religion, viz., the 3rd sec-
tion of the 23rd chapter of the Confession of Faith, and the 7th
clause in the answer to the 191st question in the Larger Cate-
chism, shall be held as subscribing these standards subject to the
exclusion of said portions.
The Synod of Victoria, on 6th November, agreed to
entertain this modification. The U. P. Synod, on 6th
November, considered that the proposal does not meet
the exigency of the case, inasmuch as it limits the
right of exception to the ministers and elders of one sec-
tion of Presbyterians, instead of making it a general
and permanent principle of the union ; and they pro-
posed “ the following proposition as containing the
deliberate mind of the Synod on the subject of sub-
scription to the standards :
That the Westminster Confession, etc., be the standards of


this Church, but that those ministers and elders who do not
.approve of the statements contained in the 23rd chapter of the
said Confession, and in the answers to the 109th and 191st ques-
tions of the Larger Catechism, or in other portions of the said
standards which relate to the duty and province of the civil
magistrate in matters of religion, shall be held as subscribing
these standards subject to the exclusion of these portions :
And further, that this right of taking exception to such portions
be expressly stated in the ordination formula.
This proposal was laid before a conference of the
three Synods. The Synod of Victoria accepted it. The
Free Presbyterian Synod were unanimously of opinion
that they could not agree to these terms; but with a
view of making another effort for the accomplishment
of the great object which they have still so much at
heart, they appoint a committee to ascertain if the
U. P. Synod cannot be brought back to the terms on
which they originally proposed to go into union.
This committee, along with that of the Synod of
Victoria, agreed to propose the following modification
of the excepting clause :
But that in subscribing the said standards, in so far as they
relate to the duty and power of the civil magistrate in matters
of religion, the officebearers of this Church are not to be under-
stood as countenancing persecuting or intolerant principles, or
as professing any views contrary to liberty of personal conscience
and the right of private judgment.
This proposal was submitted to the committee of the
U. P. Church; who said they were prepared to accept
it, provided the same excepting clause he inserted


in the ordination formula attached to the Articles
of Union, and in the questions put to ministers at
ordination.
In the Synod of "Victoria, on 20th December, Mr.
Hetherington spoke in support of this modification;
but the Synod, being unwilling to take separate action
in the matter, suspended consideration of it till they
should meet in conference with the Synod of the Free
Church.
Meanwhile in the Free Synod, on 18th December,
it was moved by Dr. Cairns, and seconded by Mr. A.
McVean:—
That the Synod, having heard the report of their committee
on union with the U. P. Synod, and having duly considered the
.same, resolve that whereas the Basis of Union having been
framed with a view to guard the testimony of this Church on
certain controverted points, the 2nd Article of said Basis more
especially asserts the obligation of the civil magistrate to coun-
tenance and cherish the truth of God : And whereas, the said
Article having been solemnly affirmed at a previous meeting of
Synod as a necessary part of Divine truth, to expunge it from
the Basis as now proposed would be a practical abnegation of
the doctrine therein contained, and a virtually setting up of
voluntary standards : therefore the Synod retain the 2nd
Article in its integrity, as setting forth the magistrate’s duty in
regard to religion, and quoad ultra approve the committee’s
diligence.
It was proposed as an amendment by Dr. Mackay,
And seconded by Mr. Tait, that the report of the com-
mittee be approved, and the proposal it contains com-
municated to the committee of the U. P. Synod on


Union. It was proposed as a second amendment by
Mr. Miller and seconded by Mr. Paul:—
That the Synod, having heard the report of the committee on
Union with the United Presbyterian Synod, resolve that, whereas
the basis of union was framed with a view to guard the testimony
of this Church on certain controverted points, the second article
of said basis more especially asserts the obligation of the civil
magistrate to countenance and cherish the truth of God, and
whereas the said article has been solemnly affirmed at a previous
meeting of Synod as a necessary part of divine truth ; therefore
the Synod retain the second article in its integrity, and approve-
the great diligence of the committee, and the care exercised by
them in a very difficult and delicate negotiation, but find upon
considering the whole circumstances of the case, that the two
Churches are not prepared for an incorporated union at present,
but that they should continue to cultivate friendly relations.
Dr. Cairns and Mr. McVean withdrew their motion
in favor of the second amendment. Two voted for the
first amendment, and seven for the second. And so the
negotiations for union with the United Presbyterian
Church were closed.
This decision was announced to the Synod of Victoria,
at a conference of the two Synods, on the evening of
the 20th December. Much regret and disappointment
were expressed by members of the Synod of Victoria at
the course which had been pursued by the Free Church.
The Synod of Victoria retired from the conference,
and met apart to consider what they should do. After
careful deliberation, they agreed to express and record
their approval of the modifications of the Articles pro-
posed, and their satisfaction that these were likely to


prove acceptable to the U. P. Church. At the same
time they deeply regretted that, the Free Church hav-
ing rejected these modifications at their previous meet-
ing, they were compelled to forego the hope they had
indulged of the union of the three Churches at this
juncture. In these circumstances they resolved that,
inasmuch as they were bound by the pledge given at
their recent meeting in Geelong to unite with the Free
Church, they should proceed with that measure; still
looking forward, however, with unabated anxiety to
the renewal thereafter of negotiations with the U. P.
Church, persuaded that union with that body also is-
essentially necessary to the real prosperity of the
Presbyterian cause in the colony.
The conference resumed, and this resolution was
communicated to the Free Synod. A committee was
appointed to make the final arrangements for the
public consumniation of the union.
The Free Synod then met by itself that same even-
ing at 10 o’clock. Sederunt, Rev. D. Macdonald, mode-
rator; Revs. Dr. Mackay, Dr. Cairns, Messrs. Miller,.
Paul, McVean, Divorty, Henderson and Tait, ministers,
and Messrs. Ogilvie and Rennie, elders. “It was unani-
mously resolved that the Synod do record their devout
thankfulness to Almighty God that the negotiations
for union had come to such a promising issue,
earnestly recommend each of the brethren to make the
contemplated union the subject of increasing prayer,
that it may be guided to a right consummation, and
that the Divine blessing may richly attend it, and, in


terms of the resolution of conference, authorize the
Moderator to convene the Synod at such time and
place as may be agreed on by the joint committee,
with a view to carry the union into effect.”
§ s.— Divisions.
No doubt the prayer was offered; and it was
answered, but not as was expected. Evidently the
time for “ a right consummation ” had not yet arrived.
At the beginning of 1856, Mr. Hetherington was laid
aside by severe illness for about three months. Dr.
Mackay was ill too; and owing to these members of the
committee being laid aside, the Bill had not been pre-
pared and submitted to the Legislative Council, before
the Council was dissolved, and the New Constitution
of the colony came into force. This delay allowed
difficulties to rise up, which led to very painful results
in the Free Synod. At the meeting of that Synod, on
the Ist day of April, 1856, it was proposed by Mr.
McVean, and seconded by Mr. Paul, that all the docu-
ments bearing on the subject of union, and more espe-
cially such as have reference to the question of com-
munion with other Churches, should be made accessible
to all the members of the Church. And it was moved
that such documents be laid on the table of the Synod
for the information of the office-bearers of this Church.
“ The previous question ” was moved by Mr. Hastie,
and carried.
At the meeting of the Synod, on the 4th November,
Mr. Miller stated that he and other members had doubts
as to going forward with the union, and requested a


conference with the brethren on the matter. The con-
ference was held. Thereafter, a petition from John
Knox’s Church, asking for information about the con-
templated union, was heard: and the moderator—Mr.
Henderson—with Dr. Cairns and Mr. Tait, were ap-
pointed to give them the information required.
In January, 1857, the Synod had their attention
drawn to a pamphlet, written by Mr. Paul, entitled, “A
Coalition of Interests not the Unity of the Faith.” A
majority of . the Synod found the conduct of Mr. Paul
deserving of severe reprehension, on several grounds,
into which it is not necessary to enter here. The Mo-
derator reprehended him, and required him to express
sorrow, and retract “ the groundless and offensive
charges he has made.” Mr. Paul declined to do this ;
but, after meeting with a committee appointed to deal
with him, he made a declaration with which the Synod
were satisfied.
On the 7th April, 1857, the Synod again met in
conference, to consider what was to be done in view of
the doubts which have arisen in the minds of some of
the brethren, as to uniting with the Synod of Victoria-
Dr. Cairns submitted the following document to the
Synod, and they approved and adopted it:—
1. That this Synod did solemnly, and deliberately, and
unanimously resolve to go into union with the Synod of Victoria,
on the terms laid down in the Articles of Union; that, having
solemnly and deliberately come to this decision, they entered
into a covenant or agreement with the other Synod to consum-
mate the union on these terms ; that they are still impressed
with the conviction of the importance and safety of union on


this basis, and, both on this account and on account of
their solemn engagement, they are determined to go forward
with it.
2. That, there being a minority now opposed to going forward
with this union, and threatening to resist it, the brethren, still
adhering to their convictions of the necessity and importance
of this union, and feeling their obligation to adhere to their
covenant, are shut up by the very nature of our Presbyterian
constitution to require of the minority that, while retaining
their own sentiments and views, and recording their dissent so
far as they see necessary, they do not actively resist and oppose
the carrying out this deliverance and this covenant, or they can
no longer be permitted to remain within the body ; and if they
conceive that they are shut up by their convictions of duty still to-
resist and oppose, there is no other course possible in the cir-
cumstances, without utterly setting at nought the fundamental
principles of Presbytery, than that they retire at once in peace
and form a Church according to their own views, or that the
painful necessity will bo laid on this Synod to assert the authority
of the Synod and exercise discipline on those persisting in this
divisive and rebellious course.
The following reply was given the same day by the
members of Synod opposed to the Union:—
The undersigned members of the Free Presbyterian Synod of
Victoria, having under consideration a proposal for a pacific
arrangement between them and the members of the said Synod
who are resolved to promote union with the Synod of Victoria,
resolve and propose as follows :
1. That, adhering as they do to all the provisions of the
Fundamental Act of this Synod, they do not concur with, but
on the contrary repudiate, the general views of Presbyterian
Church Government which this proposal submitted to them
assumes.
2. That, being desirous, nevertheless, equally with the brethren


opposed to them, of a pacific arrangement; they concur in the
proposal made in the close of the paper, to the effect that the
minority withdraw peaceably from the majority of the Synod.
3. It being provided, that all questions with regard to the
property of the several congregations shall be equitably deter-
mined by a joint committee, composed of members derived in
equal proportions from the majority and minority respectively.
(Signed) Arthur Paul
William Miller
Andrew Maxwell
A. McVean
John McDougall
Wm. M. Bell
Joseph Thomson
Roderick McLeod.
On the Bth April Dr. Cairns moved the adoption of
a long deliverance which contained specific charges
against the Revs. W. Miller, A. Paul, A. McVean, and
A. Maxwell (the Rev. J. McDougall withdrew from
the position he had taken up,) of divisive and
rebellious courses, in publicly opposing and condemning
the Synod, and taking active steps for dividing and
disrupting the Church, and declared that they are no
longer ministers or members of the Free Presbyterian
Church of Victoria. The motion was adopted. Mr.
Miller then read a protest against the proceedings of
the Synod, subscribed by Revs. W. Miller, A. Paul,
A. McVean, A. Maxwell, ministers, and Messrs.
W. M. Bell, J. Thomson, and R. McLeod, .elders ; and
having laid the document on the table, he retired, and
was followed by the other protesters. The elders who


had signed the protest were declared to be no longer
elders or members of the Church. An answer to the
protest was drawn up by the Rev. J. Tait and adopted
by the Synod.
During this unfortunate year the United Presbyterian
Synod also was divided. Into the history of this
division, which originated in 185 G, it would serve no
good purpose to enter. It is sufficient to say that it
resulted in the setting up of three United (!) Presby-
terian denominations. The Rev. A. D. Kininmont
withdrew on the 28th April; and the Rev. D. Chap-
man on the 24th September; and on the 14th October,
185 G, they formed themselves into a Presbytery in
connection with the United Presbyterian Church of
Scotland. On the 29th September, 1857, the Revs.
W. Jarrett, James Ballantyne, John Ballantyne, and
J. Cooper, with Messrs. James Bennie and John Wat-
son, elders, having withdrawn from the U. P. Synod
of Victoria, formed the United Presbyterian Synod
of Australia, “on the Basis of Doctrine and Church
Polity which is held and maintained by the Church
known in Scotland as the United Presbyterian
Church.”
In consequence of an opinion expressed by the home
Synod as to the insufficiency of the Basis of 1850, the
U. P. Synod of Victoria passed a Deed of Declaration
on the 28th October, 1857, by which “ the Synod, to
remove all existing doubts, and to prevent any future
misconception on the subject, hereby enacts and de-
clares, that the standards of the United Presbyterian


Church in Scotland are the standards of this Church,”
&c., &c.
§ 6. The Second Basis.
It became more and more evident to Mr. Hether-
ington and the Synod of Victoria, that the
United Presbyterians were necessary to a thorough
union,—not only with a view to the incorporation
of all the sections of Presbyterianism in the
colony, but also for the securing of harmony between
the members of the Synod of Victoria and the Free
Synod. The United Presbyterians would strengthen
the union of the two bodies, cement-wise, by the inter-
position of another element: they would maintain the
balance of power. So that, when the Free Synod, 27th
May, 1857, directed those of their number who were
members of the joint committee, to urge on the pre-
paration of the Bill (by which the legal connection
between the Synod of Victoria and the Established
Church of Scotland should be dissolved, and the proper-
ties of the two Synods secured to the united Church
under the name of the Presbyterian Church of
Victoria) the Synod of Victoria, on the 22nd July,
resolved that it was imperatively necessary, not only to
take action for union with the Free Synod, but especi-
ally to renew negotiations with the UP. Church. A
committee was appointed for this purpose; Revs. A
Love, T. Craig, P. Gunn, and I. Hetherington; Mr.
Love, convener. Mr. Love wrote to the Rev. A. M.
Ramsay, who replied that he was desirous of resuming
negotiations; but, after four months’ waiting, nothing


•came of it. He wrote also to “ Mr. Kininmont’s
section,” but received no reply. At the meeting of
Synod in December, Mr. Love reported to this effect,
and also drew attention to several matters of a dis-
couraging nature ; and the committee was discharged.
On the sth November, Messrs. I. Hetherington and
P. Gunn waited upon the Free Synod with a draft of
a Bill which had been prepared by “ certain ministers
of the Synod of Victoria.” This draft was referred to
the joint committee, to modify the original Bill as they
shall see necessary, and have it passed through the
Legislature with as little delay as possible. The draft
was adopted by the Synod of Victoria on the 3rd
December.
On the 6th January, 1858, Mr. Hetherington, as
moderator of the Synod of Victoria, called a meeting of
the Synod to confer about the Articles of Union. He
stated that the draft of the Bill, adopted by the Synod
at last meeting, contained the Articles of Union previ-
ously agreed on. It was imperative, before presenting
the Bill, that it be in the form in which it would be
acceptable to all whom the Union was to comprehend.
He had sought to learn the views of the U.P. brethren;
and they had agreed that they would be satisfied with
a modification of the first and second Articles, substan-
tially the same with that agreed upon in 1855 ;
That the Westminster Confession of Faith, &c., be the
standards and formularies of this Church; but inasmuch as there
exists a difference of opinion in regard to the doctrine taught in
these standards relative to the power and duty of the civil


magistrate in matters of religion, the office-bearers of this
Church, in subscribing these standards, are not to be understood
as countenancing any persecuting or intolerant principles, or as
holding any views inconsistent with the liberty of personal con-
science or the rights of private judgment.
The Synod of Victoria consented to this modification.
Mr. Hetherington next laid on the table a memorial
from the congregation of the Scots’ Church, Melbourne,
objecting to several of the clauses in the Articles of
Union, and urging that they be expunged. The Synod
concurred generally in these objections; and it was
resolved to apply to the Free Church brethren to make
the necessary alterations.
These resolutions were communicated to the Free
Synod the same day, and they decided that—
They are prepared, according to their solemn and repeated
pledges, to go into union with the Synod of Victoria on the basis
of the Articles which have been already fixed and settled: But
such is their deep conviction of the importance of union, that
they are still prepared to consider any change which the Synod
of Victoria finds necessary to secure the full consent of all its
congregations, if such changes shall not be inconsistent with the
tenor of the Articles.
A conference of members of the three Synods
was held the same day. (Henceforth the conferences
were held in this unauthoritative form, as conferences
•of members). At this meeting the TJ. P. brethren
•agreed to the modification of the first and second
Articles, proposed by the Synod of Victoria, provided
a corresponding alteration be made in the formula and


ordination questions. Mr. Hetherington stated and
explained the alterations required by the Synod of
Victoria. The Free Church brethren desired that the
changes required by the Synod of Victoria be specified,
and laid before the Free Synod.
The Synod of Victoria met next day, and agreed to
record their satisfaction with the result of the confe-
rence, so far as related to the U.P. brethren; with whom
the terms of union may be said to be finally adjusted.
The Synod also recorded their satisfaction with the
cordial spirit shewn by the Free Church brethren; and
they appointed a committee to treat with the Free
Church on the matter, and directed the Moderator to
write to the Moderator of the Free Synod, indicating
the passages objected to, and asking for a committee to
be appointed to arrange the matter. The letter was
written that evening:—
Melbourne, 7th Jan., 1858.
Rev. and Dear Sir, —At a meeting of the Synod of Victoria,
held this day in thß Scots’ church, Melbourne, I was instructed
to communicate to you that it has been, ascertained, on refe-
rence to certain of their congregations, that it is requisite to have
some alterations made in the structure of the Articles of Union,
agreed on by our two Synods, to secure the adherence of these
congregations to the measure. The clauses to which exceptions
are taken are the following, viz., in the third Article—“ And
that with this and the like functions it is equally presumptuous
and unwarrantable in the magistrate to interfere, and faithless
and sinful in the Church to permit or submit to such interfe-
rence.” In the fourth Article—“ And in particular that it shall
be a fundamental rule of this Church, that the election of minis-
ters, ruling elders and deacons belongs to the members of each.


separate congregation in full communion, the judicatories of the
Church superintending and regulating the same And in the
fifth Article—“ While holding itself at liberty to maintain com-
munion and correspondence with all other faithful Presbyterian
Churches throughout the world.” The Synod recognise the
binding obligation of the engagement into which they have
entered with your body, yet they are most anxious at the same
time to obviate the objections to the union which are taken by
many of their most influential and valued members. With this
view, in the hope that this communication will be received by
you in a favorable spirit, the Synod have appointed the follow-
ing persons a committee to co-operate with you in effecting the
desired alterations, viz., Rev. Peter Gunn, Andrew Love, Irving
Hetherington, and Mr. Budge, elder —Mr. Hetherington con-
vener ; and have directed me to request that you on your part
will be pleased to appoint a similar committee to transact with
them in the matter.—l am, Rev. and Dear Sir, yours faith-
fully,
I. Hetherington, Moderator.
The Rev. A. Simpson, Moderator of the Free Synod of Vic-
toria.
The Free Synod had adjourned on the 7th January,
and so this letter was not considered by them till 7th
April, when it was moved by the Rev. W. Henderson
that a committee be appointed to confer with the com-
mittee of the Synod of Victoria, witli a view to have
the present difficulty removed. Dr. Cairns strongly
resisted the modification of the Articles, and moved as
an amendment that the following resolutions be adopted
by the Synod, and transmitted to the Synod of Vic-
toria :
1. That this Synod considers itself bound by solemn obliga-
tion, undertaken deliberately and prayerfully in the sight of the


•whole Church, to abide by the engagement entered into with the
Synod of Victoria in November, 1855, to unite with that Synod
-on the Basis of Union then unanimously adopted.
2. That in consequenco of that covenant the Articles of Union
have been accepted by our several congregations, though not
without much difficulty and many painful sacrifices, and the
alterations now desired would be regarded by many as a breach
of faith, and would lead inevitably to new and bitter trials.
3. That copies of the said Basis of Union were sent to the
Parent Church in Scotland, and, after considerable delay, an
opinion had been obtained from the leading ministers of that
Church, approving of the same as warranting union : and the
changes now sought would not only injure our relations with
that Church, but would subject this Church to the reproach of
trifling with serious matters and provoking further division,
instead of seeking to heal that which had already occurred.
4. That while endeavoring to persuade the brethren separated
from the Synod that there was no sufficient cause for their
opposition, and that, on the ground of the Articles to which both
Synods were pledged, they should return to their former place,
any proposal to alter that Basis would, if entertained, extinguish
all hope of a reconciliation.
5. That under any view of the case and the interests involved
in it, the present is a most unsuitable time for broaching a
subject so extremely delicate and hazardous, seeing that a
-deputation from this Synod has been sent to Scotland, for the
very purpose of obviating difficulties and inducing our friends
there to take a large and generous view of this colonial question,
and that any alteration of the Basis might frustrate the object
•of their mission.
6. That the request for change is neither wise nor expedient
in present circumstances. The union would have been con-
summated long ago, but for circumstances over which neither
Synod had any control. The delay has been occasioned by the
impossibility of procuring a civil statute recognising the United


Church and protecting the property of the several parties. No
blame is attributable to this Synod for this unforeseen necessity;
and it does not seem unreasonable to expect that the Synod of
Victoria should exercise forbearance, until God in his providence
had removed the impediment which had hitherto obstructed the
common movement.
7. That for the reasons foregoing the Synod would entreat
the Synod of Victoria to abide by the agreement come to in
November, 1855, and to sympathise with this Synod in its sore-
trial, and to use all means competent to them to facilitate the
completion of the union with the least possible delay.
Mr. Henderson’s motion was carried by nine to
seven, and accordingly a committee was appointed;
Mr. Macdonald, convener. Mr. Macdonald wrote to
Mr. Hetherington on 12th April, 1858, from Emerald
Hill.—
The Rev. I. Hetherington.
My dear Sir, —At a recent meeting of the Free Synod of
Victoria, a communication from you, dated Melbourne, 7th
January, 1858, was submitted by the moderator ; the said com-
munication referring to certain modifications asked by the
Synod of Victoria to be made in the Articles of Union, in defe-
rence to the opinion of many influential and valued members of
the congregations of your Synod. The Free Synod appointed
the following a committee in this matter. ... I write this
letter in the name of the said committee.
The committee instruct me to assure you that our Synod
regards union to be a greater necessity than ever, and that it
considers itself bound by the most solemn obligations to abide
by its engagements with the Synod of Victoria, as well as to-
seek the consummation of that engagement by all lawful means.
At the same time I have to state that, at a recent meeting of
Synod, a strong unwillingness was expressed by many members


to go back on the articles of union, mainly because it was felt
that to do so would be again to introduce painful discussions
into some of our congregations, and might be to cause painful
separations. The committee hope that in these circumstances
the brethren in the Synod of Victoria who are moving
for the proposed alterations, will rest satisfied with the follow-
ing explanation, an explanation which the committee feel
assured the Free Synod will not hesitate to ratify at any
time, viz. :
1. That the Free Synod regard the Articles as abstract truths,
and not as pointing at Scottish Churches. They contain truths
which any orthodox Presbyterian Church might adopt for her-
self for a basis, were she framing her constitution for the first
time, according to the Word of God.
2. That the language in which the Articles are couched is
not held by our Synod as intended to refer specially to the
present state of the Scottish Establishment. We rather regard
it as language in which you and we can equally and heartily join,
whatever our opinion of the present state of the Scottish Estab-
lishment may be, because it is language rendered venerable to
us all by the Presbyterian association of centuries.
3. That the Free Synod quite understand that ministers and
probationers of sufficient education and good standing, prepared
to sign the standards, are to be admitted into the proposed
“Presbyterian Church of Victoria,’’whateverdenomination they
may have belonged to previously, it being understood that,
after admission into the proposed united Church, they are to be
ministers of that Church only, and amenable to her jurisdiction
alone.
The committee fain hope that this explanation will remove
any objections to the Articles as they stand, and that the union
will be consummated on these Articles with the least possible
delay.
D. Macdonald, Convener of Committee.
On the Gth May, the Synod of Victoria considered


this letter. Mr. Hetherington was still moderator.
Mr. Clow moved that the Union Committee represent
to the Union Committee of the Free Church in reply
that “although they would have preferred the alter-
ations in the Articles which had been submitted to the
Free Church, not merely or chiefly because of the
offensive application of which they are susceptible to
any existing Church, but rather because they are re-
garded as endangering the harmony of the future
Church ; yet, owing to the sense which they entertain
of the extreme desirableness of union, they are willing
to accept the explanations which have been given by
the Committee of the Free Church, provided these
either are embodied in a separate Article of Union or
are appended to the present Articles.” Mr. Love moved
that the consideration of the letter be postponed to
another meeting, and absent members be requested to
attend. The motion was withdrawn, and the amend-
ment adopted.
On the 2nd June, when the Synod of Victoria met,
it was moved by Mr. Love that as there appears to be
no hope of inducing the Free Church to grant the con-
cessions sought by this Synod, no further steps be
taken in the matter at present, and the Moderator be
instructed to communicate to the Moderator of the Free
Synod accordingly. The motion was not seconded.
The committee was re-appointed, with instructions to
prosecute negotiations with the Free Church.
On the 2nd December, Mr. Hetherington reported to
the Synod of Victoria that no meetings of the com-


mittee had been held, but, from private interviews
with some of the Free Church committee and others,
he had hopes that the Union would soon be satis-
factorily arranged. The committee was re-appointed
with the addition of Mr. Clow, and instructed to seek
such alterations of the Basis as will render it generally
acceptable.
The committee met soon thereafter, and proposed
to the Free Church committee that the old Articles
of Union be abandoned, and the following be substi-
tuted as a new Basis of Union. It is here given in
the form in which it was finally adopted:—
We, the undersigned Ministers and Elders of “ the Synod of
Victoria,” “the Free Church Synod of Victoria,” “the United
Presbyterian Synod of Victoria,” and “the United Presbyterian
Synod of Australia,” having resolved, after long and prayerful
deliberation, to unite together in one Synod and in one Church,
do now, in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ, and with solemn
prayer for His guidance and blessing, unite in one Synod, to be
called “the Presbyterian Church of Victoria,” and resolve and
determine that the following be the fundamental principles and
Articles of the Union, and be subscribed by each of the
members of the new Synod :
Ist. That the Westminster Confession of Faith, the Larger
and Shorter Catechisms, the Form of Presbyterial Church
Government, the Directory for Public Worship, and the Second
Book of Discipline, be the Standards and Formularies of this
Church.
2nd. That inasmuch as there is a difference of opinion in re-
gard to the doctrines contained in these standards, relative to
the power and duty of the civil magistrate in matters of religion,
the office-bearers of this Church, in subscribing these standards


and formularies, are not to be held as countenancing any perse-
cuting or intolerant principles, or as professing any views, in
reference to the power and duty of the civil magistrate, incon-
sistent with the liberty of personal conscience or the right of
private judgment.
3rd. That this Synod asserts for itself a separate and inde-
pendent character and position as a Church; possesses supreme
jurisdiction over its subordinate judicatories, congregations, and
people ; and will receive all ministers and preachers from other
Presbyterian Churches, applying for admission, on an equal foot-
ing, who shall thereupon become subject to its authority alone.
Formula. —l do hereby declare that I do sincerely approve
and accept the standards and formularies enumerated in the
foregoing articles as the confession of my faith, with the decla-
rations and provisions contained in the second article ; and I
promise that, through the grace of God, I shall firmly and con-
stantly adhere to the same, that I shall follow no divisive coun-
sels, but in my station, and to the utmost of my power, shall
assert, maintain, and defend the doctrines, worship, discipline,
and government of this Church, as therein defined, renouncing
all doctrines, tenets, and opinions whatsoever contrary to or
inconsistent with the same.
The two committees reported to their respective Synods
on the Bth December. The Synod of Victoria adopted
the report. The Free Synod agreed to bring the pro-
posed change before their congregations, and recom-
mend it; and resolved that a special meeting of the
Synod be held, on a day to be afterwards named, to
come to a final decision on this matter.
A conference of ministers of the various Presbyterian
Churches interested in the union was held the same
evening in Chalmers’ Church, Melbourne. All who were
present expressed their acceptance of the new articles;


and a committee was appointed by the conference, to
bring the bill before the Legislature without delay, and
to summon the next meeting in the month of February,
-Mr. Hetherington, convener.
The next day, the 9th December, the Synod of Vic-
toria met, and instructed the members to bring the new
Articles of Union before their congregations at as early
a date as possible, with the view of securing their con-
currence.
On the 2nd February, 1859, another conference of
the various Synods was held in the Scots’ Church, Mel-
bourne. It was reported that the various congregations
in connection with the several Synods had concurred
in the new Basis, with the exception of St. Andrew’s,
Carlton, and a few congregations in the United
Presbyterian Church of Victoria.
On the Cth of April, the U. P. Synod of Victoria met,
and the Rev. A. McNicol moved :
That as this Synod has again and again declared in favor of
a general Presbyterian union, and as the proposed basis is sub-
stantially what was suggested by ourselves in 1855, and finding
that a large majority of our congregations are of opinion that
the time has arrived for its consummation ; we now resolve to
unite with the other Synods and form the Presbyterian Church
of Victoria, and proceed to wind up the business of this Synod ;
it being distinctly understood that in the United Church our
ministers will continue as heretofore to be supported by the
free-will offerings of the people, and that we will be at liberty
individually to raise our voice against all State endowments of
religion, as we have formerly done, both at home and in this
colony.


The Rev. A. M. Ramsay moved as an amendment a
series of resolutions to the effect that, while those
with whom it is proposed to enter into union are in
the receipt of State aid, this Synod cannot honor-
ably and consistently enter into union with them. A
further difficulty was also stated, arising from the his-
tory of the divisions in the old U. P. Synod, which we
need not further specify. The vote was taken. Eight
voted for the motion, and five for the amendment.
The majority agreed to meet next day for the consum-
mation of the union, which was expected to take place
then.
On the same day—the Gth April—the Synod of
Victoria met. Mr. Love suggested that, in the 2nd
article of the basis of union, the meaning might be
made more definite by inserting after the words—
“ professing any views ” the words—“ in reference to
the magistrate’s authority.” The Synod approved of
the suggestion, and agreed to submit it to the confe-
rence this evening. The formula for subscription by
the office-bearers of the United Church—which is
appended to the articles of union—was proposed to
the Synod and approved; and it was agreed to submit
it to the conference.
In the evening of the Gth April, the conference of
the members of the four Synods purposing to unite
was held in the Scots’ Church. Mr. Hetherington, the
convener of the committee, reported that, after much
opposition, the property Bill had been carried success-
fully through both Houses of the Legislature; and sub-


mitted a plan of arrangements for the consummation
of the union. With slight modifications the plan was-
adopted. The thanks of the conference were given to
Messrs. I. Hetherington and D. Macdonald for their
distinguished services in connection with the passing
of the Bill. The Rev. W. Hamilton, of Mortlake, being
present, was invited to state his views; and having
done so, it was agreed that he should be received into
the new Synod immediately after the consummation
of the union. The Rev. John Ballantyne, on behalf
of the United Presbyterian Synod of Australia, raised
the question as to the new Synod not receiving in its
corporate capacity, or through its official head—the
Moderator —any State aid for religious purposes. It
was agreed that, in order to protect the United Pres-
byterian brethren from any compromise of their prin-
ciples, a small committee should manage the State aid
on behalf of those wishing to receive it.
The formula proposed by the Synod of Victoria was-
adopted, as was also the alteration proposed by them
upon the second article of union. And the negotia-
tions were successfully concluded, with thankful hearts
to the Great Disposer of all, for their having been thus
enabled to agree upon a basis in which the distinctive
principles of each Church were fully conserved.
The following were the Presbyterian ministers who-
remained outside the Union:—the Revs. W. Miller,
A. Me Yean, A Maxwell, A. Paul, and A. Mclntyre,
styling themselves the Free Presbyterian Synod of
Victoria; the Revs. A. M. Ramsay, R. Hamilton, and


.Jas. Henderson, styling themselves the United Pres-
byterian Synod of Victoria; the ‘Revs. D. Chapman,
R. B. Scott and R. T. Walker, who afterwards joined
the United Presbyterian Synod of Victoria. Both of
these Synods eventually united with the General
Assembly of the Presbyterian Church of Victoria; the
Free Synod, with the exception of two ministers, in
1867; and the United Presbyterian Synod in 1870,
:after the passing of the Act of Legislature abolishing
State Aid to Religion.
The following draft of a letter, found among Mr.
Hetherington’s papers, addressed to the Rev. the
Convener of the Colonial Committee of the Church of
Scotland, will doubtless be interesting to the reader as
an explanation, by Mr. Hetherington himself, of the
main facts and motives of the Union negotiations:—
Melbourne, 10th February, 1861.
Revd. and Dear Sir, —We beg to acknowledge the receipt of your
letter of 20th February last, in which you request us to furnish
you with full information respecting the recent union of the
Presbyterian Churches in this colony, to enable you to submit
a statement on the subject to the General Assembly of the
Church of Scotland.
In compliance with this request, we have great pleasure in
presenting to you the following account of that event, which
we trust will be found sufficiently explicit to answer the purpose
which you have in view.
Prior to the union there were in the colony six Presbyterian
Synods, comprising in all sixty-three ministers (this should be
sixty-six) : —The Synod of Victoria, to which we personally
belonged, and which represented the Church of Scotland, having
nineteen ministers ; the Free Presbyterian Synod of Victoria,


having twenty-five ministers (this should be twenty-seven) ; a
Synod describing itself by the same name, and claiming to be
the real Free Presbyterian Synod of Victoria, having five
ministers ; the Synod of the United Presbyterian Church of
Victoria, having seven ministers; the Synod of the United
Presbyterian Church of Australia, having four ministers ; and
the Synod of the United Presbyterian Church of Scotland
in Victoria (?), having two ministers ; and one minister from
the United Presbyterian Church of Scotland who had not
attached himself to any Synod. (From this list Mr. Hether-
ington unaccountably omits mention of Mr. Hamilton, who
came from the Church of Scotland, but maintained a separate
and independent position until the Union). The Synod of
Victoria consisted of five ministers licensed and ordained by the
Church of Scotland, one licensed by the Church of Scotland and
ordained in the colony, eleven licensed and ordained by the
Presbyterian Church in Ireland, and two licensed by that Church
and ordained in the colony.
The negotiations for union were commenced in October, 1853,
by an overture to the other bodies from the Synod of "Victoria.
From various causes these negotiations were protracted until
April, 1859, when they terminated in the union of four Synods,
comprehending fifty-two ministers (this should be fifty-five),
and their congregations, who then formed themselves into a
Church, bearing the name of The Presbyterian Church of Vic-
toria. Eleven ministers on that occasion refused to enter into the
union ; five constituting the Synod which claimed to be the
real Free Presbyterian Church of Victoria, three belonging to
the Synod of the United Presbyterian Church of Victoria, and
who retained the designation, two constituting the Synod of the
Presbyterian Church of Scotland in Victoria (!), and the United
Presbyterian minister who had remained unattached.
In explanation of the terms on which the union was effected,
we beg to transmit to you the accompanying documents—the
Articles of Union adopted by the Synods in their union in the


Presbyterian Church of Victoria, and the Act of Parliament, pre-
viously obtained, by which the properties of the several Synods
were vested in that Church. These two documents exhibit the
constitution of the Church : The Articles of Union—which in
their final form were proposed by the Synod of Victoria, and
accepted by the other Synods—specify the standards in which
its principles are embodied, and assert its independence as a
Church; while the Act of Parliament secures, on the one hand, the
property of the Church to its ministers and congregations main-
taining its standards, and guards, on the other, the faithful
adherence to these standards on the part of its ministers and
congregations.
The assertion of independence contained in the third article
was a necessary condition ; —the union of the Synods involving
a severance by them of the relations with the home Churches
which they had previously held. In respect to the distinctive
principles of these home Churches it was found, after five years
of negotiation, that no adjustment of them could be made.
In constructing our scheme, we had therefore to exclude any
reference to these distinctions, and to go back to the fundamen-
tal principles on which, as representing the home Churches, we
were severally agreed. These principles are set forth in the stan-
dards enunciated in the first article. In that article these
standards are adopted in their integrity. In the second article
there is—not a repudiation of any part of them, or of any
doctrine taught—but a disavowal of an offensive interpretation
of which, in the opinion of some, a particular doctrine indicated
is susceptible.
Our grand object in seeking union was the spiritual welfare
of our adopted country, and in particular the progress and
prosperity of the Church to which we belonged. The manifold
divisions in our Presbyterian community which we have des-
cribed, were operating, as was painfully evident to us, most
disastrously on the interests, not of Presbyterianism merely,
but of vital religion itself, —bringing grievous scandal and


reproach on “the worthy name by which we are called,”
diverting the attention of our people from the the things which
really affected them to questions of organization in which they
were remotely, if at all, concerned, creating dissension, foment-
ing personal jealousies and animosities, repelling from our
communion many persons whose adherence was especially to be
desired, embarrassing, weakening and obstructing the efforts of
individual ministers, and rendering impracticable enterprises of
a missionary and educational character which were loudly
demanded, but for which the combination of all was imperatively
required. As a remedy for these evils, and as a means of
elevating our Church to a position in which her mission in this
land might be effectually accomplished, union was sought by us,
and sought as a measure of primary and most sacred obligation.
Our grand care in seeking union was that the testimony which
■we were individually bound to maintain should be preserved
unimpaired, that in entering into it there should be no com-
promise of principle made, that the Confession of Faith and
form of Church polity adopted in it should be the same as those
to which we were already pledged, so far as that polity was
applicable to the altered circumstances in which we are here
placed. Our solicitude on this head was proved by the length-
ened negotiations in which the terms of union were debated and
discussed. In finally agreeing, as we did, to accept as our basis
the historical standards of the Church of Scotland, unencumbered
by any addition, and accompanied only by the negative clause
contained in the second article, it was believed that every
interest was secured, that all was retained which it was possible
to retain.
The members of the several Synods, in entering into the
union, counted on possessing in it the sympathy and support of
the various sections of the home Church which were respectively
represented by them. We individually most earnestly desire
to be assured of the approbation of the Church of Scotland.
Cherishing the most profound veneration and the most ardent


love toward that Church as the Church of our fathers and of
• our affections, with whose commission we were honored, and
by whom we were sent to the work which we have sought here
to fulfil, we are anxious that our motives and procedure in this
movement should be favourably appreciated by her, that it
should bo acknowledged by her that, in the course which we have
pursued, we have faithfully acquitted ourselves of the obliga-
tion which her commission imposed,—to seek supremely the
glory of her adored Head, and the good of His people in this
land.
Above all we are desirous that our infant church should
i-eceive from the Church of Scotland a measure of the assistance
which she urgently requires. We are necessarily dependent,
and must for long continue to be dependent on the home
• churches for our supply of ministers. An appeal on this head
has been made by some of our number, we are aware, to the
other churches. We would beseech the Church of Scotland to
bear her part in furnishing the much needed help. The last
• census returns shewed that the majority of Presbyterians in the
colony had declared themselves to be of the Established Church
•of Scotland. At this time we require over twenty additional
ministers to occupy our vacant stations. Will the Church of
.Scotland, in consideration of the fact that the majority at these
stations are her own people, send us ministers to occupy some
•of them 1 To keep pace with the progress of the country, it is
furthermore computed that thereafter, and for a considerable
time to come, at least ten additional ministers will be needed
• every year. Will the Church of Scotland, in consideration that
Presbytery was planted by her in this land, and that the great
majority of its adherents turn to her with unabated loyalty as
their Parent Church, include our Church in her mission schemes,
.and join the other churches in sending to us a succession of
ministers to aid us in imparting to her expatriated people the
•ordinances of divine grace I —We remain, Revd. and Dear Sir,
Your Brethren in the Lord, Irving Hetherington, etc.


§ 7. —Consummation of the Union.
On the 7th April, 1859, the four Synods met separately
for the last time, and drewup their concluding minutes ;
in which they formally expressed their satisfaction with
the Basis of Union, their gratitude to God by whom
they had been guided to so happy a result, and their
resolution to proceed now to the Consummation of the
Union.
At twelve o’clock, according to previous arrange-
ment, the Synods met in the Scots’ Church, Melbourne,,
and took their seats in the front pews, which had been
prepared for the observance of the Lord’s Supper.
The rest of the building was filled by the public. The
four Moderators sat in chairs in front of the pulpit,
and it had been arranged that they should all take
part in the opening services in order of seniority. The
Rev. W. Fraser, Moderator of the Synod of the Free
Presbyterian Church of Victoria, gave out to be sung
Psalm cii. IG-19; and after the singing, offered up
prayer. The Rev. J. Cooper, Moderator of the
Synod of the United Presbyterian Church of Aus-
tralia, read from the Word of God, Ephesians iv.,
and John xvii. The Clerks of the Synods—the
Rev. J. Tait, of the Free Synod, the Rev. J. Ballan-
tyne, of the U. P. Synod of Australia, the Rev. H. S.
Seaborn, of the U. P. Synod of Victoria, and the
Rev. J. Megaw, of the Synod of Victoria —read
their last minutes. The Rev. D. H. Ballantyne,
Moderator of the United Presbyterian Synod of Vic-
toria, gave out to be sung Psalm cxxxiii.; and the


V’, __
;/ «■
Rev. G. M. Reed, Moderator of the Synod^of.yictoria;
offered up prayer.
The meeting then proceeded to the election of a
Moderator. It was moved by the Rev. J. Storie that
the Rev. James Clow be the first Moderator of the
Synod. The Rev. J. Nish seconded the motion, which
was carried unanimously. It was generally felt that
this honor was due to him as the oldest minister, as
the first that held regular public worship in the colony,
and as one upon whom all sections of the Church
could heartily agree. Mr. Hetherington, indeed, had
resolved to propose Mr. Love, being anxious to secure
the adhesion of those whose sympathies with the
Established Church of Scotland might still embarrass
the cause of union. But the Free Church brethren had
arranged that Mr. Storie should propose Mr. Clow. Mr.
Storie, therefore, rose so promptly, and nominated so
suitable a person, and the proposal of another name
would have been so ungracious in the circumstances,
that Mr. Love’s friends sat still.
The Rev. J. Clow, having been robed in gown and
bands, entered the meeting, and all rose till he took
the chair. He then constituted the Synod by prayer;
after which he delivered a short and appropriate
address, especially pointing out in a gentle, winning
way, the necessity for watchfulness and prayer that
the spirit of union might characterise all the proceed-
ings of the Synod.
The Rev. W. Hamilton, of Mortlake, was then
received according to previous arrangement.


The Moderator asked all the members of Synod to
stand, in token of their concurrence, while he read the
Articles of Union and the Formula. Thereafter they
took their seats to partake of the Lord’s Supper. Dr.
■Cairns presided, and the following elders, D. Ogilvy,
J. Bennie, W. Robertson, and D. Kennedy, belonging
respectively to the four quondam Synods, carried
round the bread and wine. At the conclusion of this
service, the members of the Synod who were present
signed the formula in the order of their ordination, as
follows:
ministers :
JRev. James Clow
99
William Fraser
99
Adam Cairns
■99
William Jarrett
■9 9
Hugh Sanderson Seaborne.
99
Irving Hetherington
■99
John Tait
99
Wiliam Hamilton
■9 9
W. T. Craig
99
Peter Gunn
99
Thomas Hastie
99
John Storie
99
John Gow
■9 9
James Ballantyne
99
George Mackie
■9 9
J. H. McLachlan
99
Charles Moir
99
Alexander MeXicol
99
John Ballantyne
99
David Hunter Ballantyne
Rev. David Boyd
~ Archibald Simpson
~ John S. Moir
„ D. Macdonald
„ Hugh Blair
„ A. Duff
~ G. Divorty
~ James Nish
~ Samuel Kelly
„ James Megaw
„ Geo. McCulloch Reed.
~ William J. Taggart
~ Robert Hogg
„ Evan Macdonald
~ Alexander Proudfoot
~ John Clark
„ Robert Sutherland
„ Francis R. M. Wilson
„ William Mackintosh
~ John Meek


ELDERS:
Mr. William Robertson
~ Robert Rattray
~ J. S. Ogilvy
~ James Davidson
~ Neil McCallum
~ William Hurst
~ Alexander Hardie
„ J. G. McMillan
„ Donald Kennedy
Mr. J. Watson
~ James Bennie
~ John Brown
~ Alex. Patterson
„ Dugald McPhail
~ Charles Ferguson
~ Henry Budge
„ Walter Thomson
The following ministers, members of the Synod, were
absent—making fifty-five ministers in all:
Rev. A. Adam Kev. W. Login
„ S. Corrie
„ J. Cooper
~ J. Don
~ A. Graham
~ J. Grant
„ W. Henderson
~ S. Kelso
„ A. Love
~ J. Low
~ D. McCalman
~ A. McDonald
~ J. K. McMillan
~ J. Parker
A. public meeting was held the same day, at 7 p.m..
in the old Exhibition Building; the Rev. James Clow
in the chair. This building was chosen as the largest
in Melbourne, and it was completely filled. The organ
behind the platform was used to accompany the sing-
ing ; and a numerous choir, composed of precentors and
singers from several congregations in the city and
suburbs, occupied the space between the organ and the-
platform. The ministers and elders sat on the plat-
form, round the chair. The devotional exercises, with
which the meeting was opened, were conducted by the-


Rev. Irving Hetherington. The Hundredth Psalm was
sung with vast power and effect by the whole meeting.
The 13th chapter of I. Corinthians was read, and prayer
was offered up ; then was sung with great spirit that
glorious triumphal antiphon, Psalm xxiv., 7-10 —“ Ye
gates lift up your heads on high,” &c.
The Rev. J. Clow, in explaining the object of the
meeting, characterised it as one of the happiest and
most important that could be conceived, and expressed
his own most sincere gratification, and his belief that
the Church, now united, is admirably fitted to pro-
mote the highest and most permanent interests of
the colony. He called upon Dr. Cairns to address the
meeting.
Dr. Cairns then gave a statement, or a bird’s-eye
view, of the leading principles of Presbyterianism, and
concluded with a few remarks on the accusation which
is sometimes brought against Presbyterians—that they
are prone to dissension :
I ask our critics or our censors to consider these things :
First—All our affairs are transacted in open court; and hence
any little disagreement is apt to receive an undue degree of
notoriety. Second—We come here from Churches in Scotland
which are not only separate, but in some respects, antagonistic,
and the adherents of these Churches very naturally wish to per-
petuate in Australia the sectional peculiarities to which they
were attached at home. And this is a great evil. Third—We
have to set up the Church of Christ, in a state of society loose
and chaotic beyond example. A work has fallen to our lot
which would tax the patience and the skill of the most sagacious
minds ; and of all the graces needed by the minister of Christ


here, the most important, perhaps, is the grace of counsel
.and understanding. We owe much to our parent Churches, but
they have never realised the magnitude of this prominent neces-
sity. We need for the ministry men of mature experience; and
sometimes we get mere novices. We need men of patience and
foresight; and they present us with men of hasty temper, whose
native atmosphere is opposition. We need men of tried ability
.and established influence; we are now and then visited by those
who, having lost all hope of success in Scotland, have magnani-
mously resolved to try their fortunes in this new land of pro-
mise. Besides, in a small community, one or two perverse
spirits can work a whole world of mischief. We are like passen-
gers in a wherry, one scamp has us at his mercy ; he can dictate
his own terms, for if we do not comply on the instant with his
humour, however ridiculous, he can capsize our boat. These
are some of the evils incidental to our present circumstances.
They are patent enough ; but it is obvious that time will cure
them. This evening our Church numbers nearly sixty ordained
ministers, and when we are multiplied six-fold, as we will be in the
• course ofa few years, the eccentricities oftwo or three wrong heads
will not greatly annoy us. But let us not forget that it is “not by
might nor by power, but by my Spirit, saith the Lord.” Our
•Church may be perfect in doctrine, and scriptural in her polity,
fashioned in every particular according to the pattern shewn us
in the mount, but all will be naught and vain, if not quickened
and energised by the Holy Ghost, if not made the channel
through which flows the river of the waters of life. And the
blessing will come if we earnestly seek it. A praying people are
■ ever strong ; a prayerful Church is ever safe. Let us, ministers
and people together, make this the subject of our united suppli-
cations. Let us wrestle and we shall prevail. Let us plead the
promise, and it will descend as a plentiful rain. This Church
will be a golden candlestick, and it will never be removed out
of its place. He who has the key of David will set before us an
■open door which no man can shut. Faithful to him, he will be


true to us. He will give us power over the nations. He wiU
give us the morning star. Our little Zion will grow into a city
set upon a hill—a city whose walls are salvation and whose gates
are praise. And here he will make the horn of David to bud ;
he will ordain a lamp for his anointed ; he will clothe his-
enemies with shame; and upon his head shall his crown flourish.
And now “ let the beauty of the Lord our God be upon us;
establish thou the work of our hands upon us, yea, the work of
our hands establish thou it.”
The meeting was thereafter addressed byD. Ogilvy,.
Esq., in support of the proposition,—“That the Presby-
terian system is founded on Scripture, and is admirably
fitted to preserve the spiritual liberties of a Christian
people, and to promote the cause of Christ amongst all
classes and nations by the Rev. W. Jarrett, on the
subject of “The Union, as it affects the prosperity of
the Church itself;” by the Hon. Dr. Wilkie on the
same subject; by the Rev. James Ballantyne, on
“ The influence of Christian Union on the world with-
out;” and by the Rev. A. McNicol, on “Personal piety,,
the true basis of Christian Union.” The intervals
between the speeches were filled with the hearty sing-
ing of psalms and paraphrases —by the whole meeting,,
as it ought always to be in religious assemblages;—and
the meeting was dismissed with the benediction.
The foregoing is an outline of the events which took
place on that memorable day; but to give an idea of
the feelings which animated these events is impossible.
If the reader has ever climbed a high mountain, he will
remember something of his sensations, —of the exertions
which were necessary, of the resting here and there, of


the disappointments he experienced when he gained
an eminence, to find that he had not yet attained the
summit, that he had to descend from the eminence
which he had struggled so hard to attain, in order to
scale another height, and yet another, until at last,
unexpectedly, the crown of the hill was gained, and
the vast landscape was spread out before him. The
mingled feelings of victory, of elevation, of far-reaching
view, of sublimity, intoxicated the mind, and made it
impossible to explain the sensations experienced. This
day of the consummation of union was an occasion of
moral elevation, from which we looked back on the
difficulties of the past with triumph, forward to the
future with wide-extended hopes, down upon our own
exertions and our own motives with humilitj 7 , and
upward to our Gracious Guide with thankful adoration.
In these feelings Mr. Hetherington eminently shared.
He once told the writer that, when the union was
attained, he felt his mission in this world was accom-
plished. It was a work worthy of a life; and, when it
was done, he could depart when and how his Master
chose.


CHAPTER XI.
IN THE UNITED CHUKCH.
Although Mr. Hetherington felt, —not boastingly,
but in all humility and reverence, —that the consum-
mation of the Union was the accomplishment of his
mission in this world, God had still much work for
him to do, especially in the building up and con-
solidating of that Church which he was so instrumental
in uniting. For sixteen years he was spared to take
a leading part in its history,—directing its business,
moulding its forms, preserving its properties, strength-
ening its discipline, and in many ways leaving the
impress of his wisdom and energy and Christian
character upon its proceedings.
It is not the aim of this chapter to relate the history
of the United Church during those sixteen years. The
more humble task is undertaken of indicating the
chief departments in which Mr. Hetherington con-
tributed to the establishment and growth of the
Presbyterian Church of Victoria.
In the business of the first meeting of the United
Synod in April, 1859, Mr. Hetherington took by far
the most prominent part. Indeed, his name is the
only one mentioned in the minutes as proposing any
resolution. It was he who proposed Mr. Tait for the
clerkship; a proposal which was heartily adopted by
the court. Mr. Tait, as the clerk of the Synod of the


Free Presbyterian Church of Victoria, from the begin-
ning of the Union negotiations to their consummation,
had shewn great ability and diligence in drawing up
the minutes and synodical documents, and in arranging
and expediting the business of the Synod and of its
conferences. He was specially skilful in the suggestion
of intermediate resolutions, by which unnecessary
division might be averted ; and his tact in management
without appearing to manage, was remarkable. His
death, in 1860, was felt by the Assembly to leave a
blank which no other man could fill so well.
It was Mr. Hetherington also who proposed that the
Supreme Court of the Church take the name of the
General Assembly. And it was characteristic of Mr.
Hetherington’s whole ecclesiastical career that he
should make this proposal. The General Assembly of
the Presbyterian Church of Victoria by the very name
took its place on the same level with the Supreme
Courts of the home Churches. It was an unmistakeable
declaration of independence.
At this same meeting, Mr. Hetherington, having
received a letter asking him to announce to the
Assembly Mr. Love’s intention of leaving his charge
with as little delay as possible, laid the letter before
the Assembly, and moved that a committee be
appointed to confer with Mr. Love, to induce him to
withdraw it. There was nothing that Mr. Hethering-
ton was more anxious to avert than the formation of
a Church in the colony, outside of the United Church,
and in connection with the Church of Scotland. This


anxiety led to several misunderstandings with the
Free Church of Victoria in the negotiations for Union,,
as we have seen in the preceding chapter; for the
means which Mr. Hetherington took to conciliate those
who sympathized with the Established Church stirred
up the suspicions of those who sympathized with the
Free Church ; and vice versa. This same anxiety now
led him to use all available means for inducing Mr.
Love to withdraw his resignation. Mr. Hetherington
recognised Mr. Love’s influence as the most able and
thorough representative of the Church of Scotland in
the colony; and knew that his resignation at this
juncture would probably stir up thoughts and feelings
in various quarters prejudicial to the cause of the
Union. Mr. Hetherington knew that there were many
influential men in the colony who, on the slightest
ground for dissatisfaction, would be ready to com-
municate with the Church of Scotland, and get out
ministers to form a Church in connection with it. He
knew also that the Colonial Committee of the Church
of Scotland looked doubtfully on the Union ; and that
a communication of this sort from influential members
in Victoria would likely be listened to. And if they
should form such a Church, it would attract most of
the old colonists; who nearly all came out to Australia
before the Disruption, and whose sympathies were, for
the most part, strong in favour of the “auld kirk” of
their fathers. Such an untoward event would detract
materially from the beneficial results which were
looked for from the Union, —as they are so ably


•summed up in Mr. Hetherington’s letter to the Colonial
Committee, given in last chapter. All these consider-
ations, doubtless, had their share in leading Mr.
Hetherington to propose a step which some members
of the Assembly thought rather below the dignity of
the court. However, it was felt that Mr. Hetherington
knew best how to manage the interests of his former
Synod. His motion was therefore acceded to, and he
was appointed convener of the committee ; which
was happily successful in its work.
This matter has been dwelt upon, not from its
intrinsic importance, but as a specimen of the tact
which Mr. Hetherington exercised in all cases seriously
affecting the interests of the Church. While ready
•enough to uphold the true dignity of ecclesiastical rule,
when that was necessary, he never allowed any consi-
deration of mere dignity to thwart the higher object
■of unity. Would that this spirit had always been
shewn by Church rulers ! If it had, we would not in
this nineteenth century be so sorely troubled in seeking
to re-unite the Church of Christ, which has been
divided by no cause so frequently as by false dignity.
In looking back over Mr. Hetherington’s ecclesiastical
■career, we find many instances in which he stooped to
conquer,—in which he met resentment with gentleness,
wounded pride with humility and kindliness, and even
rudeness with patience; but not one instance in which
.a regard to the dignity of the Church, or of himself,
hindered his doing all that could rightly be dond, to
or to heal the disaffection even of one brother.


The Assembly were so conscious of this, that when any
case arose requiring patient and wise conference with
a recalcitrant minister or congregation, Mr. Hethering-
ton was invariably appointed to the work; and it was
never found that the real dignity of the court, or of its-
commissioner, suffered in his hands.
At the first meeting of the General Assembly, Air.
Hetherington was placed upon all the nine committees-
appointed by the court, except the Committee on
Finance, which was at first composed wholly of elders;
and he was placed upon that committee also in
November of the same year. He was, moreover,
made convener of three of these committees. Of the
Committee on Missions to the Heathen he only retained
the convenership until he had reported to the Assembly
six months after. But of the Committee on State-aid
Mr. Hetherington was convener till his death. It
ought to be said that, though this committee was
appointed in the Assembly, it was, properly speaking,
not a committee of the Assembly, but of the State-aid
recipients of the Church. After a year or so, this
committee lapsed; and the business of distribution was
arranged at the yearly meeting of the recipients—still
called a committee —and earned out by Mr. Hethering-
ton as their agent with the Government.
Had Mr. Hetherington done nothing more for the
Church than what he did in connection with State-
aid, he would have earned the Church’s deepest grati-
tude. That he faithfully and conscientiously adminis-
tered the money granted by Government, and that he


forwarded the applications for sites, was by no means
all that he did in this department of his work. He
took a deep and active interest in it as a labor of love,
sparing neither time nor trouble in the work. He
was determined to secure to the Church, as far
as possible, all to which it was entitled, whether of
land or of money. At one crisis in the history of the
State-aid, his persistence—even against the remon-
strances of many of the brethren—was the means, as
he used to say, of thousands of pounds being secured
to them which would otherwise have been lost to the
Church. The crisis arose out of a difficulty with the
Government as to the amount to be apportioned to the
United Church. The grant, as we have seen in a pre-
ceding chapter, was given on the basis of the census.
At the first census which was taken after the Union,
the Presbyterian Church of Victoria was credited with
a ridiculously small number of adherents, many Presby-
terians having declared their adherence to the various
Synods from the union of which the Assembly was
formed. As there were denominations in the colony
retaining the names of two of the old Synods, the
Government credited to these denominations all
who declared their adherence to those Synods. Mr.
Hetherington remonstrated, and argued the case at
great length, and corresponded on the subject with the
Government until many of the recipients, wearying to
get their wonted dole, urged him to give way. He
was not to be moved; and he pressed his case until a
more equitable basis of distribution was agreed to.


Another episode in the history of the State-aid may
he here mentioned, as very characteristic of Mr.
Hetherington’s promptness and energy in the interests
■of the Church. A Church had been built at Wickliffe
as the common property of the Presbyterians and Epis-
copalians. A debt lay on the Church which it was
desired should be wiped off. It was agreed at length
that whichever denomination paid off the debt should
have the church. The Episcopalians did not see their
way to raise the money. A liberal Presbyterian belong-
ing to the united congregation offered a certain sum
towards the liquidation of the debt; but was not suffi-
ciently supported. Mr. Hetherington got word of this;
and, at the yearly meeting of the State-aid recipients,
asked that £3OO be granted to Wickliffe, which was
agreed, and the property was secured to the Presby-
terian Church.
Mr. Hetherington often spoke with enthusiasm of
the immense benefit conferred upon the Church by the
Government aid, in erecting churches and manses in
many places where the people would never have had
courage to think of building, had it not been for State
aid. He sought always to use it, not as a substitute
for congregational liberality, but as a stimulus to exer-
tion ; and he constantly urged upon the recipients the
necessity of employing it with this aim. “ Have you a
manse?” he would say to a minister; or, “Do you
need it enlarged ?” or, “ Have you debt on your
church ?” or, “ Does your church need any improve-
ment? Make an application for a share in the


grant. Then you can go to your people and say, ' I
can get so-and-so from State aid, on condition that
so much is raised in the district,’ and stir them up to
liberality.”
One of the most trying duties attached to this office
was the explaining to the various applicants the
Government regulations, according to which the grants
were given. Even after explanation, the unaccountable
mistakes that were often made, necessitating the re-
turn of the schedules for correction, would have been
laughable had they not been so annoying. And many
who did not obtain what they had expected, could not
be convinced that it was not Mr. Hetherington’s fault.
To have answered all the letters which were written
to him on the subject would have taken more time
than he could spare: so he made it a rule to do what
was asked as far as he could, and let the event be his
answer.
No one could understand —unless he had helped in it
—theimmense labour involved in this State-aid business,
not to speak of the responsibility of handling about seven
thousand pounds a year, —to cover which Mr.Hethering-
ton had a commission of one and a half per cent, on
the whole grant. There was first the management of
the Stipend Grant; —the calculations by which Mr.
Hetherington sought to distribute to each minister
•every farthing to which he was entitled, from the day
of his induction to the day of his demission; the
writing out and posting the cheques to about eighty-
five recipients, with a statement of dividend, and


schedule to be signed; and keeping an account of
each; then the getting in the schedules, which often
necessitated a number of letters before they could all
be sent in to the Treasury,—and before they were all
there in full tale, not a penny could be given to any
of the claimants : next, the management of the Building
Grant; the filling-up of the schedules with a number
of items required by Government, such as the amount
of paid-in subscriptions and the amount of previous
grants; the sending out these schedules, and often,
re-sending them, to about forty applicants a year, with
instructions as to signatures of trustees and as to the
certification by a Government official regarding the-
cost and quality of the building; the repeated requests,
as the year came near an end, either to forward the
schedule duly signed, or to say whether the application
was fallen from; and the substitution, during the last
week or so of the year, of new applicants, which Mr,
Hetherington would hunt up himself, in room of those
who had failed to comply with the Government
conditions ; the frequent visits to the Treasury, to see
if such and such a grant was yet payable, and, by
importunity, to release the schedule from whatever
department it had become embayed in ; and the for-
warding the cheque to the minister of the congre-
gation : and lastly the applications for sites, with
the frequent visits to the Land Office which they
involved. All this business made a serious addition
to Mr. Hetherington’s ordinary work as minister oF
Scots’ Church. And the thoroughness and fidelity


with which it was done deserved a very grateful
acknowledgement on the part of those interested.
When the abolition of State-aid had been determined
on by the Legislature of the colony, a Loan Building
Fund was formed by the Church from those Building
Grants which were received thereafter—from 1869 to
1875. Mr. Hetherington was appointed convener of
the Committee on the Loan Building Fund at its
formation, and retained the office till his death in the
last year of State-aid in Victoria.
At the meeting of Assembly in November, 1859,
the Committee on Rules and Forms of Procedure, of
which the Rev. James Ballantyne was convener, and
of which Mr. Hetherington was an active member,
gave in their report. A few rules relative to Assembly
business were adopted; the rest of the draft was sent
down to Presbyteries; and the committee were in-
structed to continue their work. In this work Mr.
Hetherington took a laborious part till its completion
in 1862. In 1867 he moved for the drawing up of a
second edition, which, under his convenership, was
completed in 1868. He told the writer of these
memoirs that, from their first rough draft to their last
corrected copy for the press, he must have written out
those rules and forms, with his own hand, more than
a score of times.
In May, 1860, Mr. Hetherington was appointed
Clerk of Assembly and Convener of tlie Business
Committee, in room of Mr. Tait, who had died in
March of that year. The convenership of the Business


Committee he retained for six years. The clerkship
he retained till his death. The form of minute which
had been adopted by Mr. Tait was closely followed
by Mr. Hetherington, so as to keep a uniform style
•of record throughout. In the phraseology of the
minutes he was exact, even to fastidiousness, recording
the business with a clearness and conciseness which
leave nothing to be desired.
At the same meeting the Assembly considered their
first case of discipline. It was a most painful scene.
The erring man appeared, and confessed his guilt,
and deplored his sin in language expressive of
the deepest contrition, and cast himself on the
mercy of the court. It is right to say that he had
been dealt with by his Presbytery before, and had
been suspended from the ministry for a time, and had
fallen again. Mr. Hetherington moved that the con-
fession now made by the Rev. J. G. be accepted, and
that, in terms of it, he be deposed from the office of
the holy ministry. An amendment was proposed that
he be suspended sine die. The motion was carried by
23 votes to 13. After prayer and a solemn address by
the Moderator—the Rev. Dr. Cairns, —the sentence of
deposition was pronounced. Every head was bowed ;
.and several members of the court could not restrain
■their feelings of grief from audible expression. What-
ever may have been the effect of that day’s proceedings
upon the deposed man, they certainly had their in-
fluence, as a potent means of grace, upon the Assembly.
'Compassion for the sinner mingled with indignation


against the sin; and humility in view of human
weakness —their own weakness, illustrated in the fall
of a brother—was joined with zeal for the purity of
Christ’s Church. It was with these sentiments that
Mr. Hetherington took the leading part in this painful
work. And it is noticeable in the history of the
United Church that, in the exercise of discipline, Mr.
Hetherington almost always tookaleading part,and that
he conjoined firmness with tenderness in an eminent
degree. While he had no sympathy with the indul-
gent view of sin so characteristic of worldly men, he
was as far removed from that pharisaic harshness
which is so often conjoined with secret sin. In this
most important sphere of the Church’s work, which
is so generally neglected, and which is carried out
with firmness and publicity by the Presbyterian
Churches alone, the wisdom and character of a Church
and its rulers are tried more deeply than in any other
province of ecclesiastical duty. And it speaks very
highly for Mr. Hetherington that, while taking the
lead in this work as one of the fathers of the Church,
he was able so judiciously to temper judgment with
mercy. No man would denounce the crime more
unsparingly, or clear the Church of the offence more
firmly; but when the sentence was passed, no man
shewed more genuine kindness to the culprit. Many
instances might be quoted, if it were wise to do so, in
which Mr. Hetherington was the help—often the only
help—of the man whom he had been a means of remov-
ing from the ministry.


As far back as 18C0, Mr. Hetherington was spoken
•of as Moderator, and sounded as to his willingness to
. accept the office; but he preferred to keep the position
•of clerk. He used to say laughingly, “ Wait till the
•Church numbers a hundred ministers, and then I may
take the chair.” At last he consented to his nomina-
tion in 18G9. After his year of office, he was glad to
get back again to his desk in front of the chair, and
said in his diffident way,—“ lam conscious I made a
wretched Moderator.” The real ground for this state-
ment being that, in many of the questions which came
before the court that year, he took a more than usually
• deep interest, and frequently had to leave the chair to
take part in the business of the Assembly. It is impos-
sible to do this and fill the chair with comfort.
In August, 18C2, a pro re nata meeting of Assembly
was held for the purpose of considering what action
should be taken by the Assembly in a suit at law>
instituted to dispossess the congregation at Lethbridge
of their property. Mr. Hetherington had already taken
steps to secure the property, and urged the Assembly to
support the congregation in their efforts byall competent
means. The Assembly strongly commendedhisdiligence,
but held that they are precluded from action as an
Assembly. They expressed their conviction that the
congregation has a right to the property, and their
sympathy with them in their efforts to defend it, and
recommended the members of the Church to aid them
by pecuniary contributions. The congregation, however,
•eventually lost the case.


This is mentioned as a sample of the tenacity with
which Mr. Hetherington, on behalf of the Church,
held to its property. In after years, when the State-
.aid Abolition Act was passed, the Government sites
were made over absolutely to the churches ; and
.applications were made to the General Assembly for
leave to sell sites and portions of sites. Mr. Hethering-
ton strongly opposed the giving permission to part
with any site belonging to the denomination. He
looked upon it as very short-sighted policy to part with
an inch of church property, so long as there is any
probability of making use of it, at however distant a
•date. Like a gardener with whom the writer is
.acquainted, who looks upon the uprooting of a fruit-
tree as an unpardonable act of imbecility:—“ What!
Take out a healthy tree! I always see room to put
another tree in, but never a reason to take one out.”
The selling of a site or a part of a site, in order to
Taise money to build a church, Mr. Hetherington
denounced as, in most cases, foolish and even wrong, —
as a robbing of posterity. He could always find spots
where another site would be desirable, hut never a
site which might be sold.
Mr. Hetherington took a prominent part in all legal
•questions affecting the Church; and when a Law
Committee was appointed, in 18G7, he was made
Convener. In May, 18G9, on the motion of Mr.
Hetherington, Mr. J. C. Stewart was appointed Law
Agent of the Church, and Convener of the Law Com-
mittee.


In the Committee on Finance, of which Mr. James-
Bennie was for a long time convener, Mr. Hetherington
took a lively interest. He thoroughly sympathised
with the stand so often taken by the committee in
reference to a more business-like mode of managing
the Church Funds; especially sympathising with their
views as to the inviolability of the several funds. He
held that the Assembly were trustees of the funds
which were contributed by the members of the
Church for specified objects; and that to use one
fund to meet the obligations of another, was an
incompetent act. When sometimes proposals of this
kind were pressed on the Assembly, he would say pri-
vately:—“The Assembly will never realise the limits of
its powers, until it is taken into the Supreme Court;
and it will have to come to that yet. Only an action
at law, carrying heavy costs, will bring them to reason.
Not that I would do it. But I believe it would do
our Assembly good.- It would teach some of our
enthusiastic friends that they cannot do according to-
their own will and pleasure with Church Funds.”
In December, 18G5, Mr. Hetherington appeared
before the Assembly as an appellant against a decision
of the Presbytery of Melbourne, sustaining a call to-
the Rev. A. Robertson from a congregation in West'
Melbourne. The appeal was taken on the ground that
the prescribed preliminaries, as regards the previous
formation of a congregation and the moderation in a
call, had not been observed. The Assembly sustained
the appeal, and found that the Presbytery had acted.


irregularly in the case; but agreed, notwithstanding
the irregularity, to sustain the induction of Mr. Robert-
son. Mr. Hetherington’s action in this matter subjected
him to misconstruction. And he knew it would do so.
But few men were less moved by such considerations
from pursuing what he believed to be the right course.
It was very characteristic of Mr. Hetherington that,
when he had arrived at the opinion that such a course
ought to be pursued,—when his conscience got
interested in the question,—he was not to be turned
from his path by either fear or favour, nor even by
argument. He would carry it through to the end,,
at all hazards, and would give way only when he
must.
This was very fully illustrated in 1870 and 1871,
when the controversy took place with regard to the
sites of the Scotch College and Chalmers’ Church. At a
pro re nata meeting of the Assembly, in July, 1870, a
Reference was received from the Education Committee
relative to a claim preferred by the Board of Manage-
ment of Chalmers’ Church, Melbourne, to a portion of
the land granted by Government as a site for the Scotch
College, Melbourne. After a good deal of discussion,,
the Assembly found that, while the land in question
belongs legally to the Scotch College, yet it has been
in undisturbed occupancy by the congregation of Chal-
mers’ Church for the past twelve years, and as there is
evidence to show that an agreement had been made to
exchange a part of the Scotch College site for a part of
the Chalmers’Church site, the congregation of Chalmers’


Church have a claim to the possession of the allotment
in question.
At the regular meeting of Assembly in November,
an overture from the Rev. I. Hetherington was read,
relative to the rescinding of this finding of the pro re
nata meeeting, as both legally and morally wrong; and,
in connection with the overture, Mr. Hetherington
presented a petition from seventy members and adhe-
rents of the Church against the claim of the Chalmers’
Church congregation. On the motion of Dr. Cairns,
the overture was dismissed, and the decision of the
pro re nata meeting confirmed, by a majority of GO
to 6. When the Assembly came to consider how this
decision was to be legalised, it was found that an Act
of Parliament would be needed to authorise the change
of allotments ; and a committee was appointed to pre-
pare a Bill at once, and get it passed through the
Legislature. The Bill was introduced, but was opposed
by Mr. Hetherington and a number of others; and the
expense which this opposition would entail led the
committee to decide,that they would let the Bill lapse
for that session, and refer the whole matter to the next
meeting of the General Assembly.
In November, 1871, the General Assembly agreed
by a majority to abandon the Bill, but at the same
time, to express their strong disapproval of the manner
in which the objectors to it have prosecuted their
opposition. The Assembly put on record the following
as their reasons for abandoning the Bill:
1. Because the further prosecution of the Bill, in the face of


-the strong opposition which has been raised to it, would involve
the Assembly in expenses which would be altogether dispropor-
tionate to the ends intended to be served by it.
2. Because the strong feeling which has been evoked in
reference to the whole subject, and which a further prosecution
of this Bill would only intensify, tends to disturb the peace and
harmony of this Church, and is highly prejudicial to its interests
and injurious to the cause of religion.
The feeling which was called out on both sides was
certainly very strong, and was actually intensified by
the smallness of the question. The narrower the lists,
the more desperate the fight. It was much to the
credit of the Assembly that the expression of such
strong feeling was restrained as it was. The news-
papers made the most of it, of course, but that was not
much after all. A very good thing appeared in the
Melbourne Punch. On the morning after it had been
published, Mr. Hetherington, at the Elizabeth-street
railway station, met Dr. Macdonald, who had a copy in
his hand. “Here, Macdonald! I see you have a copy of
to-day’s Punch. Let me see it. I hear they have me
in it.” Dr. Macdonald gave it up, evidently not with-
out some misgivings as to how Mr. Hetherington might
take the matter. The paper was soon spread out, and
the picture found. It represented Dr. Cairns and Mr.
Hetherington passing each other on the street, each
with his chin in the air, and each with a corpulent
umbrella under his arm. A bundle of tracts was stick-
ing out of Mr. Hetherington’s pocket, inscribed—“ Let
dogs delight.” The title given underneath was—“ How
these Christians hate one another ! ” It was certainly


a clever caricature, and Mr. Hetherington’s figure was
especially ludicrous. He looked a,t it for a little, and
broke out into a hearty laugh ; took another look, and
exclaimed—“ 0 dear me! what a shocking bad hat
they have put on me ; —Ho ! ho! ho! —And the Sairey
Gamp umbrella!—and the legs ! —O, it is excruciating!”'
And he laughed till his sides ached, rolling about from
one side of the platform to the other. “Oh ! I must
send this home. I must get a copy and send it to Scot-
land. It is excruciating!” And he went away incon-
tinently, and got a copy, and posted it.
In conclusion, there may be mentioned, among the
many departments in which Mr. Hetherington contri-
buted to the welfare of the Church—the Ladies’College,
of the committee of which he was convener for a while;
—the Infirm Ministers’ Fund, of the committee of which
he was a joint-convener from 1872 till his death, and on
behalf of which he employed himself actively in col-
lecting subscriptions in 1872, in order to bring the .fund
into operation with special reference to the case of the
Rev. W. Fraser, of Bulla; —the Home Mission, in
which he took a deep interest, considering it, if properly
worked, one of the most important schemes of the
Church, and for which he collected contributions in
1874, on account of the falling off of the Church
collections the previous year;—and the Catechism on
the Government and Discipline of the Presbyterian
Church, begun in 1873 by himself in connection with
a committee of the General Assembly, and finished
in 1874.


This brief summary must suffice at present. The time
lias not yet come for writing even a sketch of the
history of the United Church. But when that history
shall be writen, Mr. Hetherington’s name will occupy in
it a most honorable position, second to none that have
as yet labored for the upbuilding of the Presbyterian
■Church of Victoria.
Like the fall of a large tree in a plantation, whose
■ extent of shade and length of branch were never pro-
perly estimated until it has fallen, and we see the
huge blank which it has left; such has been his removal
from the Church. His usefulness was never fully ap-
preciated during his life ; and it is only when we try
to fill his place, and when occasions arise in which his
firmness and prudence would be eminently helpful to
,us, that we realise what a loss we have sustained.


CHAPTER XII.
THE END.
Mr. Hetherington had entered upon his seventh-
decade, and age was beginning to tell upon him. People
indeed used to think him older than he really was—
he was so worn with overwork; but he himself said
that, though he supposed it must be true that he was
now an old man, he felt still as young as ever he did.
“ I now realise how it is that men can postpone prepara-
tion for eternity, even when they have attained to old
age—even when they have one foot in the grave : we-
never feel old. However it may be with the body, the
mind never grows old. At least, I don’t feel one bit
older than when I was a boy. lam not so active as I
once was, and a smaller amount of work fatigues me
now. Sometimes, when I have been in the town, and
have made a few calls, I am so tired when I return
that I can scarcely lift my foot to come up the steps
but my spirit is still as young as ever. The most
notable symptom of declining vigor that I experience
is the loss of recuperative power. When lam attacked
by illness, I find that I do not recover so readily as I
was wont when a younger man. But you may note it
as a fact that a man never feels old.”
“ It is a merciful provision of Providence, this gradual
taking down of the tabernacle piece by piece—taking;


out a pin here, and loosening a cord there—giving
warning to secure, now if ever, eternal habitations.”
“ 0, what a blessed hope. is set before us through
Christ! Life and immortality brought to light through
the gospel! We know not what we shall be; but when
He appeareth, we shall be like Him ; for we shall see
Him as He is.”
“I am conscious that I have been an unworthy
servant, and that my ministry has been in many
respects a failure; and though I have been most
mercifully preserved from many grievous sins, yet I
have much to answer for—opportunities unimproved,
time misspent, souls unwarned. 0, I have much to
answer for ! But the blood of Jesus Christ cleanseth
from all sin.”
Sitting at the fireside at night, when all the house-
hold had gone to rest, and before he retired to his
study to finish the day’s work, he would utter such
thoughts as these in a tone of most touching humility
and reverence, expressing thus, almost meditatively,
the thoughts which rested his spirit after the worry of
the day. In his later years he seemed to lose in some
degree his unwillingness to give utterance to his
spiritual feelings; and these feelings were evidently
deepened and softened by the various trials which. God
sent him.
One of these trials was the death of his father. So
long as his father lived, he would now and then express
a wish that he could see Scotland once more. And
Dr. Cairns’ visit to the old man in Annandale, in 1865,


was appreciated as a personal kindness to himself,
which he would not soon forget. But after the death
-of his father, at a very advanced age, he had no more
wish to return to Scotland. Though he spoke always
with great affection of his brother “Tom,” the chief
attraction to the home of his boyhood was dissolved
by his father’s death.
Another trial, far sharper than this, and over-
whelming in its suddenness, was the loss of his wife in
1870. On the evening of the 20th December, Mrs.
Hetherington and her daughters set off at a quarter
past seven for Chalmers’ church, to witness the
induction of the Rev. A. Cameron as colleague to Dr.
■Cairns. The Rev. Dr. Macdonald, of Emerald Hill,
walked with them part of the way, and observed that
Mrs. Hetherington seemed to suffer a good deal from
breathlessness. Near the gate of the church she
stopped short, feeling unwell, and leaned against a
fence. She asked her daughter Lizzie to stay with
her, and told the rest to go on to the church, and she
would either follow immediately, or return home.
Not feeling any better, she tried to walk home ; but
soon found herself unable to do so, and had to sit down
on the kerbstone. A car was sent for, and she was
taken home as quickly as possible. Her husband and
her son John were both in the house, and carried her
in. She was moaning, as if in pain, and her hands
were icy cold. They took her into the dining-room,
and were laying her on the sofa, when she said to her
son—“l am going, my boy,” and breathed her last.


She died within twenty minutes of the time when she
felt ill. The doctor, who had been sent for, came only
to find her dead.
Nothing can exceed the solemnity of the impression pro-
duced amongst the congregation assembled at Chalmers’ Church,
•on the intelligence becoming known that such a distressing event
had taken place during the proceedings of the Presbytery in
connection with the induction. The uncertainty of life was felt
to have received a more than usually affecting illustration, and
the deepest sympathy was expressed for the bereaved family.
The funeral which took place on Friday, the 23rd, was very
largely attended, both by members of the Scots’ Church and of
the Presbytery of Melbourne, and by representatives of the
•entire religious community. The service in the church was
•conducted by the Rev. Dr. Cairns, and at the grave by the Rev.
P. S. Menzies. The latter gentleman also made suitable allu-
.sion to the loss sustained by Mr. Hetherington’s family and the
Church, on the Sabbath following, preaching from the text, “Be
still, and know that lam God.” Psalm xlvi. 10. Dr. Macdonald,
who officiated in the Scots’ Church in the evening, preached an
impressive discourse from the passage, “ Prepare to meet thy
■God, O Israel.” Amos iv. 12 ; and dwelt forcibly on the lessons
which so sudden a death was designed to teach.
Of Mrs. Hetherington’s firm and unwavering confidence in
her Saviour’s love, no one who knew her will entertain a
moment’s doubt. She had the ornament of a meek and quiet
spirit, which is in the sight of God of great price ; and her affec-
tionateness as a wife and mother, her interest in public and
•congregational charities, her ready hospitalities to the numerous
strangers who had occasion to visit the Scots’ manse, and her
•quiet and unpretending yet fervent piety, will give her name an
honored place in the remembrance of very many in the colony
■of Victoria, who take an interest in the cause of saving truth
And the Church’s well-being.


The foregoing sentences are taken from an obituary
notice in the Christian Review of January, 1871. We
may add that, on the occasion of the funeral, quite a
number of poor women were assembled in the street
opposite the manse, looking on and weeping for the
loss of one who had often been their help and adviser
and comforter. Many afterwards came to tell the family
what she had done for them. One woman who had
been rescued by her from a life of degradation, and
had been provided with a good situation in the bush,
was on her way to tell Mrs. Hetherington how she had
got on, and to thank her for it, when she heard that
her kind friend was .gone.
Mrs. Hetherington’s character was, as is remarked in
the obituary notice, quiet and unpretending; and her
good deeds were known to few. Equable and pleasant
in disposition, she was by nature a peacemaker. And
while sympathising and kind to the poor and the dis-
tressed, she was also attentive to her duty as a Chris-
tian woman in the higher ranks of society. In her
own home “ all who really knew Mrs. Hetherington
could testify to her entire self-abnegation and loving
devotion as a wife and mother. Her children, of whom
seven survived her—three sons and four daughters—
owed most of the brightness of their lives to her; and
the real help and stay and comforter in all times of
trouble that she was to her husband, he and that God
who was her strength only knew. Mr. Hetherington’s
love and appreciation of her were shown by his agony
of grief when she died, his deep depression after-


wards, and the tender reverence Avith which he ahvays
spoke of her, —often saying that her faith was stronger
and far greater than his OAvn. Hoav he changed and
aged after her death was matter of public comment.
In fact, his health declined from that date.
Although he Avorked as resolutely as ever, and some
people might be led to suppose that he was well enough,
he was constantly ailing. He took every available
opportunity of rushing off into the bush for a rest.
But he found it impossible to remain long enough to
gather any lasting improvement. Notwithstanding
the relief afforded by the co-pastorate, he always found
work enough to take up all his time and overtask his
strength. Then the illness and death of Mr. Menzies
were very trying to him : not only trying to his feel-
ings, but exhausting to his energies also, by the
additional responsibility and work which they cast
upon him, notwithstanding the kind help of his
brethren of the ministry.
It may be here mentioned that after the death of
Mr. Menzies, the congregation resolved to take steps-
to secure a fitting successor, and to relieve Mr.
Hetherington of the whole burden of the Scots’ Church;
giving him the position of senior minister, with a
salary of £SOO, but without responsibility as to
ministerial duties. After a good deal of correspondence,
the Rev. Charles Strong, of Anderston Church, Glasgow,
was called, and accepted the call to the Scots’ Church,
Melbourne. It was further resolved that the manse
be given up to the working pastor; and that a house


be purchased for Mr. Hetherington during his life, and
for his daughters after him. The Board of Manage-
ment contributed to this object £ISOO out of the congre-
gational funds, and additional contributions were given
by friends, until altogether £I9OO was raised. With
this sum a comfortable house in Hotham-street, East
Melbourne, was purchased and improved, and duly
vested in trustees.
Another distressing event took place in the same
year in which Mr. Menzies died ; and though it happily
turned out better than was expected, it was for a while
.a severe trial to the old man. Some years previously
his eldest son had gone over to Fiji, and taken up land
■on the Dreketi river, in the Island of Vanua Levu.
The father paid for the land, and started his son with
a small capital. A cotton plantation was formed ;
labour was paid for; and, after a year or so, the third
son joined his elder brother in the management. Un-
fortunately the demand for cotton fell, and the planters
had to turn their attention to some other source of
income. They kept the plantation, and attended to it
sufficiently to prevent it running wild, in case cotton
should rise; and they planted part of it with coffee
and with sugar-cane ; and meanwhile, until these
young plants should have grown old enough to give
some return, they took to the “ beche de mer ” fishery.
Certain ungainly animals called “ sea-slug,” “ sea-
cucumber,” or “ trepang,” (Holothuria edulis) are
• collected into a boat from the bottom of the sea by
■divers. When taken to land they are put into boiling


water for about two minutes, then opened with a knife-
and cleaned, boiled and cured and dried in the sun;
after which they are packed ready for sale. They find
a market in China, where they are esteemed a great
delicacy. The business, however, is not a very
remunerative one. The brothers were engaged in
this work; the elder being usually on the plantation,
to watch the property, and attend to the few labourers
that were still employed on the plantation; the younger
brother being generally on the coast near the mouth
of the river, where they had rented a piece of ground,
and erected a boiler, drying shed, etc. There was a
boat at each place; the larger boat at the coast, and
the other—a dingy—at the plantation. By the by,,
this larger boat was sent, with a number of other things,
as a present to “ the boys” from their father, when
they began the fishery ; and was named by him the
Margaret, to remind them of their departed mother.
On'the morning of Tuesday, the 2nd June, 1874, as
Mr. Hetherington and his family in Melbourne were
finishing breakfast, a friend who was staying in the
house noticed a paragraph in the Argus, which he
pointed out to Mr. Hetherington:—
We have Fiji files to 13th May. The Times complains that tfie
mail arrangements are very unsatisfactory. At this season of
the year it takes the schooner which carries the letters from
Kandavu to Levuka as long to perform the journey as the mail
steamer occupies in the trip from Sydney to Kandavu. For
Australian letters despatched to any part of Fiji except Kandavu
—the mail steamer’s port of call—the quickest route is by any
vessel leaving Sydney or Melbourne direct for Levuka. Some-


thing mysterious seems to have occurred on a Vanua Levu
plantation owned by the Messrs. Hetherington, formerly of
Melbourne.
The Times says:—“A boat belonging to Mr. Hetherington
of Dreketi river, with a number of foreign labourers in it, has
been picked up between Levuka and Vanua Levu. At the time
it wa3 observed it was upon the reef, and some of the men were
busily engaged, trying to push her off. They said that they
were coming to Levuka to see the consul, and that the white
man (to whom they alluded is only surmised) had killed or
beaten two of their number. They can only speak indifferently,
and whether they meant killed or beaten is not known. It is a
curious fact that their women and children are with them, and
also that some of the men are suffering from wounds supposed
to have been caused by large knives. The people are now in
Levuka in safe keeping, and the war schooner Renard will be at
once despatched to Dreketi to make enquiries. ”
Mr. Hetherington read this silently, and handed it,
without a word, to the eldest daughter, and she to the
rest. The news came upon them like a paralysis. The
question arose in every mind—“ What about the boys?”
—a question that stirred up possibilities to which no
one chose to give utterance. The daughters quickly
retired. Mr. Hetherington, on going into the library
with his friend, shut the door and, walking uneasily
through the room, said —“My poor boys! I fear we
shall never see them more. Before those wretched
savages could have secured the boat they must have
previously disposed of one of the boys, if not both. I
am convinced they would not give up the boat with-
out a struggle. I must go and see Mr. . He has
been on the islands, and may possibly suggest what is


likely to have happened.” Mr. was met in the
street, and suggested all the most favorable solutions
of the problem that he could think of; but, dropping
behind with Mr. Hetherington’s friend, he said privately
—“ I have little doubt the young men are murdered.
How otherwise could the laborers have got the boat ?
And how could they have got their women and children
on board that were living on the plantation ? They
may have stolen the boat from the fishing ground;
but then, you see, they must have gone up the
river, and brought away their women and children.
How could they have managed that ? What I don’t
like about the business is the presence of the
women in the boat. Poor old man! lam very
sorry for him.”
Mr. Hetherington then went and consulted several
friends, who made various conjectures. One of these
conjectures laid hold of Mr. Hetherington’s mind as
being the most likely alternative to the death of his
sons. It was suggested that the story of the laborers
might be true in the main—that a quarrel had taken
place, that the injured men had been wounded by one
of the brothers, and that the whole of the laborers had
risen and laid hold on the boat with the intention of
going to Levuka to complain of ill-usage. In that case
it was likely that one or both of the young men might
be taken by the captain of the Renard to Levuka, to
stand a trial, the upshot of which, in such a land as
Fiji, no one could foretell. This idea grew in Mr.
Hetherington’s mind, until he felt that thus it must be,


and he decided that it was his duty to go to Fiji, and
give what assistance he could to his sons: his presence
would be needful in any case.
The California mail is to start next day, and no time
must be lost if he is to go. He went therefore to the
office to take out his passage to Kandavu. The agent
very kindly tried to dissuade Mr. Hetherington from
undertaking such a voyage,—“ Although it is not to
my interest, Mr. Hetherington, to keep you from going,
I must say that at your time of life it will be attended
with considerable risk. May I ask, are you a
good sailor ?” “I am a wretched sailor,” he replied,
“could not be worse. I suffer dreadfully on ship-board.”
" Then, Mr. Hetherington, would you allow me to say
that you ought to try to get some other person to go
for you. The first-class cabins are all taken. We
might, possibly, get some one to give up his cabin to
you, but we cannot count on that; and though our
second cabins are comfortable enough as second cabins
go, I would not like to send a venerable clergyman like
you in one of them, if you will allow me to say so;
especially when you are such a poor sailor. Besides,,
when you get to Kandavu you will be eighty or ninety
miles from Levuka, and you will have to spend at least
one night in the boat under no better cover than a tar-
paulin ; and if you have to go further than Levuka,.
no one knows when you would get a chance of a boat,,
or what kind of accommodation you would have to put
up with. However, I will keep you the cabin that you
select till ten o’clock to-morrow, and you can pay for


it then if you are still determined to go. I can’t do
fairer for you than that.”
This arrangement was agreed to. It was afterwards
ascertained that one of the passengers, J. L. Currie, Esq.,
kindly announced that he would give up to Mr.
Hetherington one of the berths which his son was to
have occupied, and he would take his son into his own
cabin.
Mr. Hetherington next went to the office where
he had insured his life; and paid twenty pounds
additional premium to cover the risk of the voyage.
He then went about, securing letters of introduction
to the British consul and to the chief men of Levuka,
and purchasing several things which he was told would
be of service to him. On his return to the manse, he
was persuaded by the family to consult a medical man
as to his ability to stand the voyage. A cab was got,
and he drove off with his friend to Dr. Robertson’s.
The doctor, after fully questioning him on his state of
health, at length said that in his opinion the proposed
voyage involved serious risk, not only to Mr. Hether-
ington’s health, but even to his life.
After such an opinion the whole question was fully
argued pro and con. The objection which weighed
most with Mr. Hetherington was the position in which
his death, —were it to result from the voyage,—would
place his daughters.
The arrangements mentioned in a former part of
this chapter had not yet been made. The only
provision for them as yet was the insurance on his life,


and his interest in the Widows and Orphans’ Fund of
the Church. This consideration tried his feelings very
deeply. But then, when he pictured in his mind the
possibilities at Fiji, he felt that he must go. He would
at least make all preparation for going, and decide-
to-morrow morning. The evening was spent very
busily by the family, as may be supposed, and the
fervency of the petitions that night at the family altar
may be also imagined. In the morning Mr. Hethering-
ton announced that, having been up all night putting
church documents and his own private affairs, etc., in
order, he had found that he could not go without leav-
ing some matter's incomplete, to the completion of which
no one but himself had the key. This was the last
scruple that turned the scale : and Mr. Hetherington
remained at home.
Some days after, a letter from Fiji informed him, to-
the immense relief of the family and friends, that the
young men were safe and well. The labourers had
stolen the boat, but had managed to do it so cunningly
as to get off without coming into collision with its
owners. The boat was recovered, but it was considered
unwise to force the laborers to fulfil their contract. The
brothers therefore abandoned the fishery. The elder
took to the practice of his profession as a lawyer in
Levuka, and the younger returned to Australia.
In November, 1874, Mr. Hetherington was more than
ordinarily busy as Clerk of Assembly. During the
meetings of the Assembly, and indeed before it met, he
suffered much from indigestion. Still he persevered at-


his work until the minutes were published. Then the
communion in the Scots’ Church occupied his atten-
tion. No sooner was this over than he became dan-
gerously ill. “ For ten days,” to use his own words,
he was “ hanging between life and death.”
In those solemn circumstances, in the prospect of
eternity, —he afterwards told several of his friends, —
he brought before his mind the whole subject of
personal religion, and studied it anew from the
foundation as though he had never studied it before,
studying it now in the immediate prospect of eternity.
He thought upon the nature and character of that God
before whom he was soon to stand, and upon his own
relation to God by nature as one conscious of sins
against God: He thought what must be the demands
of justice on account of his sins against such a Being :
He considered anxiously how hemight escape from these
demands: And he came again to the assured belief
that only through the atoning blood of the divine Re-
deemer is there ground of hope for a sinner. He studied
carefully the plan of salvation as revealed in scripture ;
—the substitution of Christ for the sinner, and the im-
putation of Christ’s righteousness to those who believe
in Him. With all his heart he committed himself to
the Lord Jesus Christ, whose blood cleanseth from
all sin; and in this faith waited for His salvation.
It was God’s will that he should recover for a while,
and exhibit the fruits of this solemn act of faith. He
recovered sufficiently to go about his work once more;
though the disease was by no means eradicated, but


troubled him constantly, in greater or less measure,
from that time onwards. The fruit of this earnest con-
templation of spiritual realities, this anxious enquiry
into the foundation of his hopes, and this whole-souled
dedication of himself to the Redeemer, was manifest in
the whole tone of his after life, to those who came into
close contact with him.
The writer was much struck by this the first time
that he met him after his illness. Mr. Hetherington,
after spending a month or so at Queenscliff, and at
other places with various friends, came up to Camper-
down, partly for a change, and partly to baptize a
child which was named after him—“lrving Hethering-
ton.” This name, by-the-by, appears on the register
of not a few families in the colony. He arrived at the
manse, as usual, somewhat unexpectedly, on the even-
ing of the loth March, and from the time of his arrival
the tone of his conversation, and his deportment alto-
gether, impressed his friends with the idea that his
day’s journey in the coach must have been spent wholly
in prayer and religious meditation. Spiritual things
were the theme of his conversation; and any approach
to levity was rebuked by its incongruity with the
gentle holiness of his demeanour.
After spending about ten days, chiefly at Keilambete,
near Terang, the residence of a gentleman and lady,
whose generous and warm-hearted disposition he much
esteemed, he returned to Melbourne. According to
arrangements made during this visit, the writer went
down to Melbourne at the end of April, and on the 27th


of that month accompanied Mr. Hetherington to Beech-
worth as a deputation from the General Assembly.
Mr. Hetherington was very ill all the time of this visit
to Beechworth. A short trip to Stanley, to which
“ village among the mountains” he was taken by a
friend who lives there, enlivened him wonderfully, and
he was able to eat more heartily than he had done for
some time; but he suffered for this afterwards. He
was wretchedly ill all night. On his return to Mel-
bourne he had to attend during most of the next week,
ill as he was, upon the Commission of Assembly, as its
clerk; and the duties of this office he painfully per-
formed to their completion.
About this time the house in Hotham-street was
finished; and Mr. Hetherington took a great interest
in having everything about it complete; labouring
hard with his own hands, —poor old man ! —when he
thought anything was not as it ought to be. He had
no expectation that he would long occupy it himself ;
but he wished to leave it in such a state that it could
let well, and thus bring in some support for his
daughters after he was gone. With feelings which will
be readily understood, he shrank from leaving the
manse, where so much of his life had been spent;
where he had enjoyed so many comforts, entertained
so many friends, endured such painful bereavements,
gone through so many labours; which, in short, was
associated with the busiest and most useful part of his
■life. He put off the “ flitting ”as long as he could, and
only removed to Hotham-street in time to allow the


manse to be put in repair before the new minister
should come.
His health meanwhile was a source of growing anxiety
to his friends. It was evident that his strength was
much reduced. His circulation was so weak that he
was obliged to resort to artificial heat at nights to save
him from being tortured by cramps. And his illness con-
tinued, notwithstanding all the means which were used
to overcome it. But he continued to fulfil all the
duties of his ministry faithfully and diligently to the
■end. On Sabbath, the 13th June, he presided at the
celebration of the Lord’s Supper in the Scots’ Church,
Melbourne. This proved to be the last occasion on
which he preached from that pulpit. The text he
preached from was, “ It is finished.”
The next Sabbath he exchanged pulpits with the
Rev. P. Mercer, who was supplying Broadmeadows.
It was the communion service there that day; and
again he preached from the text, “It is finished.” In
the evening he preached in the same place from Ephes.
vi. 11, “Put on the whole armor of God:” and this
was his last sermon. He had arranged with the Rev.
T. M. Fraser, of Geelong, to exchange pulpits for the
Sabbath following; and intended to leave for Geelong
on the Saturday by the afternoon train. But it was
otherwise ordered.
On the evening of the Friday he sat up writing till
late at night, as he very generally did. His eldest
daughter overheard him moaning, as if in pain ; and,
on going to him, found him suffering from cramps,


•especially in his hand. He went to bed ; and heat was
.applied to his feet and hands ; and gradually he
recovered On the Saturday morning he was called to
.attend a funeral. It was a miserable day, with a cold
biting wind ; and he was taken to the cemetery in an
•open buggy. On the way he complained of the cold,
saying that he was “ chilled to the very heart.” He
was then put into a mourning coach, and went on; but
when they arrived at the cemetery, he could not speak.
He was taken to the nearest inn, and hot whiskey and
water was administered to him in the hope of reviving
him; but without effect. Mr. Russell, one of the board
•of management of the Scots’ Church, who was present,
then sent him home, telling the driver to keep an eye
•on him. When he got back to Hotham-street, he could
neither stand nor sit, and had to be assisted into the
house. He said only, “lam so cold.” Dr. Robertson
was sent for, and did what he could; but the vital
•energies had sunk too low to be revived. He scarcely
spoke, even in answer to questions; and when he began
a sentence, he was unable to complete it. On the
Saturday night he said to a friend, “ I am weak both
in mind and body.”
His last illness was a very striking illustration of a
truth which he once impressed upon the mind of an
invalid relative by the following anecdote: —I was
■once visiting an old woman, a great sufferer but a true
•Christian. When I asked her how she felt to-day, she
answered cheerfully, “I’m just restin’, haudin’ (holding)
•on to Jesus.” On repeating my visit, I found her worse.


“ Well! ” said I, “ are you still haudin’ on to Jesus ?”
“ Na,” she replied, “ I’m ower wake for that noo” (too
weak for that now :) “ It’s Jesus haudin’ on to me.”
On the occasion of his illness in the previous Decem-
ber, he had been enabled to exercise an intelligent and
hearty faith in his Saviour. He was too weak for
that now. But his Saviour, whom he served and
trusted, assuredly held on to him, even when, during
his last eight days on earth, his higher life was veiled
by utter debility.
On the Sabbath morning, on hearing it strike four,
he became uneasy, and wished to get up and dress,
evidently thinking it was the hour for his going to
Geelong. At the beginning of the week he suffered
from headache and earache. His legs also began to
swell, and caused him great pain. On Wednesday
night the pain left him; and from that time he gradu-
ally sank. He was evidently conscious to the last, as
he showed by attempting to fold his hands when
prayer was offered up ; and would generally say “yes”
or “ no” when asked a question; but he was too weak
to engage in conversation, or to express connected
thought. On Friday, at four o’clock in the morning,
he sat up without help (which he had not done for
some days), and when his daughter asked him “ What
do you want, father ?” he said, “ Get pen and ink.”
“ What for ?” “ I want you —to record —no rebel-
lion in me.” He then lay down and sank into a half-
conscious state, in which he remained until he died,,
early on Monday, the sth July, 1875.


CHAPTER XIII.
IMMORTELLES.
On the Bth July, at two o’clock in the afternoon, the-
friends of Mr. Hetherington were met to offer their
tribute of respect to his memory. Religious services
were conducted in the house by a friend of the family.
The rest of the funeral arrangements were carried out
according to the directions of the managers of the
Scots’ Church. The body was enclosed in a leaden
coffin and conveyed to the Scots’ Church, and there
placed in front of the pulpit, which was all draped in
black. The building was crowded to the door, and
many stood upon the steps of the church and in the
street. While the procession of mourners was enter-
ing the church, and while they were leaving, the organ
played softly “ the Dead March in Saul.” The funeral
services were conducted in the church by the Rev. R.
T. Walker, Moderator of the General Assembly, who
gave out the hymns to be sung at intervals through
the service; the Rev. J. Nish, who read a selection of
very appropriate passages from the Holy Scriptures ;
the Rev. D. S. McEachran, who delivered a funeral
address; and the Rev. Dr. Cairns, who offered up'
prayer. The hymns sung were deeply impressive :
“ For ever with the Lord,” and “ Jesus, my Redeemer,
lives,” especially thrilled the heart with mingled feel-


mgs of grief and triumph. When the service was
concluded,the coffin was again borne to the hearse, and
the funeral procession was formed. It was a very long
one, and was attended by representatives of all classes
—by office-bearers and members of the Scots’ Church,
by the leading ministers of the various Protestant
denominations, and by several of the council of the
University. When the hearse arrived at the cemetery,
the coffin was attended to the grave by the relatives
and personal friends as pall-bearers. The Rev. Dr.
Macdonald offered up prayer, and the mortal remains
of Irving Hetherington were left in the grave until
the coming of Jesus his Redeemer shall raise him up
to be “for ever with the Lord.”
From among the many public notices which have
since appeared, the following immortelles have been
selected for preservation in these memoirs: The Rev.
D. S. McEachran, in giving the address in the church
on the day of the funeral, said with much feeling:—
There were few persons who knew him but would acknowledge
that he was a true man of God. He had a remarkable power of
inspiring confidence in others, due to his simplicity of character,
the straightforwardness of his disposition, the affectionateness
of his heart, and the general soundness of his judgment. He
was a true friend to others, and therefore had true friends
himself. In sickness, sorrow, or affliction, he was always a
comforter. In the church courts his influence was great, not
alone on account of his great knowledge of church polity, but
also because he never expressed his opinion on any subject
without having given it his serious consideration. While a
Presbyterian by conviction—his last earthly work was the


preparation of a Presbyterian catechism—he was always ready
to hold out the right hand of fellowship to all who loved Christ.
In the funeral sermon preached in the Scots’ Church,
on the Sabbath following, Dr. Macdonald said :
Mr. Hetherington was pre-eminently the poor man’s minister.
No minister of our church has ever had anything like such a
circle of wealthy friends as he had, and he did what it is very
difficult for a Presbyterian minister to do, he commanded the
affections and respect of the upper classes, yet he did not spend
his spare time in the drawing-rooms of the rich—perhaps not so
much as he should, because a Christian minister must cultivate
all classes, and seek to evangelise the high as well as the low.
Mr. Hetherington also shrank perhaps too much from all
revelation of his own inner life. He did not wear his heart on
his sleeve. It was only on rare occasions that you found that
his soul was much with God, and especially when he engaged in
prayer you heard breathings of spirit and wrestlings which
brought you into the inner sanctuary, and into the very
presence-chamber of Jehovah. As a preacher he had many
excellencies, including, of course, the chief that he himself
believed. He preached in a way that lam afraid is going out
of fashion now —logically, doctrinally, evangelically. His
sermons were full of marrow, founded on the first of all gospel
doctrines—atonement by blood, Christ crucified; and no man
mourned more than he over the loose preaching which is
becoming popular now-a-days, which does not convince of sin,
and in which sound doctrine and godly experience are dropping
■out of sight.
Mr. Hetherington had many of the qualities of a great
.administrator, and he devoted his high gifts to the service of
the church of which he was an ornament. I can testify how
thoroughly he went into the negotiations for union, how readily
he surrendered to the united body the advantages hitherto


enjoyed by the members of the Synod of Victoria, and yet how
resolutely and successfully he withstood any attempt to give the
union church a leaning towards or against any one of tho Home
churches. It was mainly through his efforts that an Act of the
colonial Parliament was obtained, legalising the union, and he
had the happiness of seeing that great aim of his life consum-
mated in his own church. From the first he took charge in the
Presbyterian Church of Victoria of all questions referring to-
sites and State-aid; and, after the death of Mr. Tait—whom
we lost too soon—Mr. Hetherington became Clerk of Assembly ;
and, in fact, died in harness, labouring for his beloved church
to the last.
I feel it a privilege to have known such a man. I knew hint
long and intimately. I have consulted with him, worked with
him, contended with him. I have seen him pleased and angry,
successful and defeated, in joy and sorrow, and I declare before-
God, that to the best of my knowledge and belief, he was a
thoroughly honest man and a true Christian. He was a faithful
servant of God, and I have the sad but very sincere pleasure of
laying this immortelle on his tomb.
The Rev. R. Hunter, of St. Andrew’s Church, Kil-
more, in the course of a sermon preached after Mr.
Hetherington’s death, was reported in the Advertiser
to have spoken of him in the following terms ;
The death of Irving Hetherington was looked upon by the
whole Presbyterian church as a great loss, for he was no-
ordinary man. He was a prince in our Israel, and one of the
Master’s choicest servants; his endowments were marked by a
richness and fulness, which have left a stamp upon this young
community. His ministry in the city of Melbourne extended
over a period of 28 years ; and rarely indeed has a ministry
been exercised in so important a sphere, for so long a time, with
such unwearied diligence in the discharge of duty, and unspotted.


■excellence of personal character. We have three brief sketches
of character in the Bible which were in a great measure
combined in him, “a man in whom the Spirit of God is,” “a
man greatly beloved,” “ the disciple whom Jesus loved.”
“Grace formed him in the Christian hero’s mould.
Meek in his own concerns—in’s Master’s bold;
Passions, to reason chained, prudence did lead ;
Zeal warmed his breast, and reason cool’d his head. ”
His character was very simple and straightforward ; there was
the utter absence of display, and a hatred of shams ; anything
approaching to a sham awakened all the scorn and contempt of
his manly nature. He was humble yet dignified ; as has been
said of another, “though he was very humble, yet he knew
how to be a man and no worm, as well as when to be a worm
and no man ; he knew when to lay his honor in the dust, and
when to let no dust be upon his honor.” Mr. Hetherington was
emphatically a man of God, and this, I doubt not, was the secret
of his great influence ; his Christian character was a power ; he
had nothing about him of sanctimoniousness, but no one could
know him without his giving the impression that he was walking
with God, that he was living a life of faith and prayer. As a
preacher he was thoroughly evangelical. No one could speak
more affectionately from the heart to the heart; he gave the
impression that he deeply felt the value of the souls of his
hearers, and the grave responsibility of his high office. His
preaching was marked by a vigor and freshness of thought, with
a full grasp of his subject. He was one who fully and faithfully
preached the whole counsel of God, and he had no sympathy
with a style of preaching which has, alas ! become but too
common, diluting certain cardinal truths so that they can hardly
be recognised ; his one theme was “ Christ and him crucified.”
As a son of consolation he was conspicuous. He experienced, in
early life, a huge sorrow, which, doubtless, fitted him fully to
sympathise with and speak words of comfort to those passing
through a season of trial and suffering; and who that ever


heard him can forget the touching and earnest supplications he-
offered up to the God of all comfort, as he stood by an open
grave ready to receive “the dust of kindred dear.”
Mr. Hetherington was most firmly attached to his own church,
and ever zealous for the maintenance and the propagation of
her great principles ; still he was a lover of all good men,
and his sympathies were intense with all that was spiritual and
genuine in other churches of Christ. He possessed gifts which
fitted him for an ecclesiastical leader; he had an unbounded
capacity for work, and possessed great sagacity, matured by
experience ; he was a wise counsellor and no trimmer, always
unfaltering in his maintenance of what he believed to be right
and true ; hence, in the conduct of the church’s affairs he occu-
pied a foremost place, and his name will ever remain associated
with the early history of our church.
Of his deathbed we know nothing, but no doubt there was a
quiet resting upon that Saviour whose Gospel he so faithfully
preached ; whose blood cleanseth from all sin ; and when his
quiet eyelids closed upon this world he had another morn than
ours ;he entered upon his eternal Sabbath. We can no longer
go to him in perplexity ; we can no more lean upon his firmness,
nor benefit by his insight; but let us take comfort that, though
the servant dies, the Master lives, and reigns the same yester-
day, to-day, and for evermore. And now we say over his grave,
“ Blessed are the dead who die in the Lord from henceforth;
yea, saith the Spirit, that they may rest from their labors, and
their works do follow them.”
In the obituary notice which appeared in the
Christian Review, the editor, the Rev. James Ballan-
tyne, said: —
The intellectual endowments of Mr. Hetherington were of no
mean order. In discrimination, he was clear and far-seeing ;
in the views which he took of any question or subject, he was


comprehensive and concentrative ; in the conclusion to which he
came, he was logical in judgment, and consequently sound and
reliable.
One or two qualities of Christian character were especially
prominent in him. He was truly “a meek man.” One may
go far before finding a man who had less assumption about him.
He never put himself forward. He never sought precedence.
He hated with a right good will everything like pretence or
fussiness. Like his Master, he did not strive nor cry, nor was
his voice heard in the streets ; but quietly and earnestly he was
ever working, falling in with the plans and operations of others,
pursuing the even tenor of his Christian way, contented to help
forward in any capacity and any measure, things true and
honest and just and lovely and of good report among men. A
very profound reverence constituted a marked feature of his
moral character. He reverenced all that was really good. This
probably was one reason why he was comparatively reticent on
matters of individual experience. Religion, in his estimation,
was a very sacred thing—a solemn work chiefly between a man
and his God. And hence it troubled him to see anyone parading
his goodness. At the same time, as occasion seemed to demand,
he would give utterance to some beautiful and quiet thought,
illustrative of God’s gracious dealings with him, or of his child-
like trust in the leadings of his hand. His benevolence calls for
special notice. There was a deep well of sympathy in his heart,
and from it there ever outflowed the most kindly and tender
feelings towards the needy, the friendless, or the suffering. And
this did not evaporate in the utterance of a few studied and
sentimental phrases ; his hand was ever as ready as his heart
was open. His consistency and steadfastness were noticeable
in an age and a colony in which the variable and shifting play
such prominent parts. He was not, like many, carried away
by the mere impulses of the moment. He knew the transitory
character of mere tides of feeling and opinion, and had the
somewhat rare faculty of possessing his soul in patience till the


waters subsided again, and things came back to their accus-
tomed level.
As a public man his career is well known. In the pulpit he
was grave and earnest, ever mindful of “ that awful place ” in
which he stood, and the weighty message which he was com-
missioned to deliver. The style of his preaching was plain, and
without any attemptat ornamentation or display. If his sermons
were not brilliant, neither were they vapid or commonplace. He
endeavoured to set forth, in all simplicity, the way of life through
faith in the dying Saviour ; and while he gave prominence to
this cardinal truth, he did not forget “ words in season ” to the
devout, to the weak in the faith, to the tried, and to the
tempted ; nor did he shun to declare “ the whole counsel of
God.” In the discharge of pastoral duty he was diligent,
conscientious, and faithful; and in the chamber of sickness ho
was especially valued, for the tenderness of his spirit and the
soothing power of his words. In the councils of the church he
proved himself to be a man of wisdom and prudence. His
knowledge of ecclesiastical law was extensive and accurate, and
his qualities as an administrator were of no ordinary kind. The
services which he rendered to the Presbyterian Church in this
colony were at once numerous and of the most important and
valuable character. All its interests lay near his heart. He
threw “ bis whole man ” into the work. He cheerfully made
sacrifices ;he grudged no labour ;ho never wearied. He wore
himself out —mind and body—in the furtherance of its prosperity.
At the pro re rata meeting of the General Assembly,
called for the purpose of making the arrangements
rendered necessary by the death of the Rev. Irving
Hetherington, the clerk of the Assembly, a committee
•was appointed to prepare a minute relative to the
death of the Assembly Clerk; and they were
empowered to insert it in the Records of the


General Assembly, and to send copies of it to the
members of the bereaved family, and to the session
of the Scots’ Church, Melbourne. The following are
the terms of the minute:—
The Assembly, in recording the death of their late Clerk, feel
constrained to express their high sense of the unwearied dili-
gence and unbending conscientiousness with which he fulfilled
the duties of his office. He was eminently a brother beloved.
Occupying for many years a position of great influence, he was
singularly courteous and unassuming. Deeply interested in all
that concerned the general welfare of the Church, he grudged
no pains in discharging the duties laid upon him, which, though
frequently onerous, were at all times cheerfully undertaken.
He was an earnest and faithful preacher, and specially assiduous
in his kindly and sympathetic attention to the sick and needy.
Notably unpretentious in his benevolence, he could never listen
unmoved to any tale of woe. Possessing an intimate knowledge
of the laws of the Church, and warmly attached to her polity,
he rendered eminent service by the part which he took in the
business, alike of the Presbytery and the General Assembly.
The union of the various sections of Presbyterianism in the
colony, so happily effected in 1859, was largely promoted
through his instrumentality, and such was his catholicity of
spirit that he was held in high esteem by brethren of all Evan-
gelical denominations. His memory is fondly revered by all
his fellow-workers in the ministry and eldership. Would that
their warmly cherished remembrance of his worth may stimulate
them to increased diligence in the service which he performed
■so devotedly, and loved so well! The Assembly have further
to record their heartfelt sympathy with his bereaved family,
and would prayerfully commend them to the care of Him, who
js the Father of the fatherless, and the shield of the orphaned.


SERMONS-
Of the following sermons the first was delivered before
the General Assembly of the Presbyterian Church of
Victoria, on the Bth November, 1870, at the conclusion
of Mr. Hetherington’s moderatorship; and was pre-
pared by him for the press at the request of the
Assembly; but, from some oversight, it was never'
printed.
The second was the last sermon which Mr. Hether-
ington preached in the Scots’ Church, Melbourne. It
was delivered in connection with the celebration of the
Lord’s Supper, on the 13th June, 1875 ; and is a fair
specimen of his ordinary preaching, both in matter
and in style; although neither it, nor the third
sermon here given, has the advantage of having
been revised by him for publication. There is
appended to it the address, given on the same
occasion, preliminary to the Lord’s Supper, according
to the old Scotch custom, and which is usually
called “ fencing the table.”
The third sermon was preached on the Bth March,
1874, on the occasion of the death of the Rev. P. S.
Menzies, and was followed by the “ application,” etc. r
given in Chapter VIII.


SERMON I.
I. Cor. iii. 7. —“So then neither is he that planteth anything,,
neither he that watereth, but God that giveth the increase. ”
These are words of remonstance and rebuke. We-
learn from the context, that at the time when this-
epistle was written, party disputes and dissensions had
broken out in the Church of Corinth; that its mem-
bers were contending with one another in regard to
the comparative merits of their religious teachers
that, assuming the names of those of their teachers
whom they individually preferred, they were
severally claiming the pre-eminence for them. We
remark that the Apostle is addressing himself in this
passage to the correction of this abuse. He shews
the converts of Corinth, in the beginning of the chapter,
that the disorder into which they had fallen argued
in them a low state of spiritual life, —that their envy-
ing and strife and divisions shewed they were yet
carnal, yet governed to an extent by the mere ordinary
principles of the world. And here he urges, as decisive
of the inadmissability and consequent impropriety of
the disputes in which they were involved, that the
distinctions on which these disputes proceeded were
unauthorised ; in fact, that the position of their
teachers justified no such competition on their behalf;
that so far from their being entitled to any special


dignity and power in the Church, they were but
instruments in its work ; that they were utterly
powerless of themselves to confer any the minutest
spiritual benefit on those who adhered to them ; that
the benefits experienced in connection with them
were wholly of God; that their glorying in them and
their rivalry for them were therefore utterly incompe-
tent and vain.
Such, it is observed, was the occasion, and such was
the design of these words. They appealed to a truth
which which must have been well known to the
converts of Corinth; which must have been taught
them as an essential truth, even the universal preva-
lence of divine grace in the Christian dispensation.
They had lost sight of that truth in this particular, or
they had failed to trace it to its natural conclusions.
They needed to be reminded of it and to be admonished
of their error: They had laid themselves open to
reproof, and they were thus reproved. How many are
there, brethren, to whom the truth so enforced by the
Apostle is a familiar truth, who yet require, like these
converts of Corinth, to have it again and again urged
on their consideration !
The expressions “ planting ” and “ watering ”in the
sentence before us are figurative. They are here
employed to represent, as they do most fitly represent,
the several operations of the Christian ministry in the
conversion and sanctification of sinners. The former
term refers to the operations which are of an initiatory
character, the latter to those by which the subsequent


progress of a work of grace is promoted, both as regards
communities and individuals. In the case to which
our attention is called these expressions describe the
services which had been performed at Corinth. That
church had been planted by Paul, and watered by
Apollos. The former had established Christianity there,
as is told in the 18th chapter of the Acts ; the latter
had succeeded him in his labours, as is related in the
19th chapter of the Acts, and had extended and
confirmed the cause which the other had begun. Paul
in these words recognises the agency of both in the
production of the results effected, and Paul here most
emphatically disclaims, for both, any and every pre-
tension to merit or honor because of them.
These words would remind the converts of Corinth
that, in the efficiency of the gospel ministry God is
everything; man is nothing. Man has a part in that
ministry to bear; but as regards the efficiency of it,
that is wholly of God, dependent and altogether
dependent on the forth-putting of divine power. Had
it pleased God, man might have been passed over in
it. The offices assigned in it to him might have been
committed to members of the angel host—they might
have been honored as the messengers of Heaven to
mankind. Or the objects proposed in it might have
been accomplished by the direct and immediate action
of the Holy Spirit. A continuous inspiration might
have been maintained, the charges of guilt might
have been brought home to the conscience, the over-
tures of mercy might have been pressed on the heart,


•every gracious feeling might have been breathed into
the soul, every gracious purpose might have been
prompted in it, any degree of heavenly elevation
might have been bestowed upon it, independently of
.all means. God could have executed thus irrespectively
his plans for our race, just as, through the revolving
year, God could have covered by his resistless fiat the
waste wilderness with the ripened grain. It has not
:ro pleased God. He ordinarily employs means for the
accomplishment of his designs, and here he does so in
uniting sinners to himself, and in preparing them for
his presence. The ministry has been instituted by
him, —not the ministry of angels, but of the fellows
.and associates of those to whom his call is sent. Yet
is the effect not less divine. The means employed in
■order to it contribute nothing to it. The Lord himself
determines what the effect shall be, and by the exertion
of his own sovereign will he creates that effect, he
brings it to pass, from first to last, in all its measure
and in all its degrees.
The converts of Corinth, we say, would of them-
selves have recognised the conclusion here indicated by
the Apostle, had they recognised, as they should have
recognised, the condition of the human nature on which
the Christian ministry operates, and the effect on that
condition which it is the end and design of the Christian
ministry to produce. That condition is a condition of
absolute depravity. Fallen man is spiritually dead,
insensible to spiritual realities, destitute of part or
interest in spiritual blessings, incapable of the acts and


■exercises of spiritual life. Fallen man is alienated from
God, engrossed with earthly objects, governed by
■earthly influences, seeking his happiness in earthly
good, living without God in the world. Fallen man is
an enemy to God, shrinking with instinctive aversion
from his presence, refusing with instinctive repug-
nance obedience to his will, proclaiming his enmity by
ja, persistent and perverse opposition to him. Fallen
man is corrupt in heart and life, possessed and actuated
by an innate bias to evil, an innate tendency and dispo-
sition to sin, ever and again manifested by him in
actual transgression And the end and design of the
Christian ministry is the recovery of fallen man from
his condition of sin and misery, and his restoration to
the holiness and happiness in which and for which he
was created. It is designed to quicken the spiritually
dead, to renew in them the powers and susceptibilities
of spiritual life, to enable them to know and love and
serve God as the renewed only can. It is designed to
recall the alienated from their alienation from God, to
engage them in closest union and communion with
God, to walk by faith, to walk with God. It is de-
signed to dispel and destroy in them the native enmity
of the heart to God, to inspire them with a confiding
trust in the holy God, an adoring love of the holy God,
.a grateful sense of his goodness, a ready obedience to
his commands, a willing submission to his appointments,
a supreme devotion to his cause. It is designed to
cleanse and purify the corrupt heart from the love and
power of sin, to create and maintain in it an abiding


dread and hatred of sin, an abiding reverence and love
for what is holy, just, and good;—in a word, to train
the whole man in the practice of all the virtues, for the
glory, honor, and blessedness of the redeemed. And to
produce these effects, the gospel ministry is provided
with testimonies, warnings, and invitations of the
gospel. It has to embody them in arguments and
appeals, and with its arguments and appeals to per-
suade men to realise these effects in themselves. It has
to call on the spiritually dead to awake to life. It has
to call on the alienated to return to God. It has to call
on the rebellious to surrender themselves to the love
and service of the holy God. It has to call on the sin-
ful and corrupt to mortify their evil appetites and
passions, and to emulate in their spirit and conduct the
holiness of heaven. It has to deal with sinners, to
break through in them the lethargy and the fascina-
tions of sin, and to convert them to God. It has to-
deal with believers, to impart to them new life and to
incite them to still higher and holier manifestations.
It has to plant, it has to water, and this the increase.
In comparing the condition of human nature with the
effects of the Christian ministry upon it, it is manifest
that these effects are not attributable to the ministry
itself, that they are what no mere argument or appeal
could have produced—that there is nothing in the
planting or in the watering performed that could
account for them —that they are competent only for
God. Where the converts of Corinth had another hope
.—where they counted, as they did, on the efficiency of*


the gospel ministry in itself, they had lost sight of these
truths; they had lost sight of what human nature is,
or they had lost sight of what Christianity is—they
had taken up with low, partial, and superficial views,
of the one or of the other, or of both. Had the con-
verts of Corinth, we say, considered these truths, as
they should have considered them, they would have
confessed, as they should have confessed, that their
hope,was vain, that the effects they witnessed and in
which they rejoiced were not of man, that they were
of God, that the efficiency of such a ministry, so glori-
ously effectual with them, was wholly and solely of
God.
Again,theconverts of Corinth, we say, would of them-
selves have recognised the conclusion here indicated
by the apostle had they recognised, as they should have
recognised, the force of the testimonies on the subject
which they had received from their religious instruc-
tors. These testimonies, we are to understand, had
ever been in accordance with the universal and unvary-
ing testimonies of the Holy Spirit. Paul, in reproving
their error in this instance, implies that their error had
proceeded, not from erroneous teaching, hut from their
misapprehension of the truth taught. And on that
head how ample and how explicit are the testimonies
of the Spirit, and how amply and explicitly, we are to
understand, had these testimonies been delivered to
them. They may have been read to them, we would
say, from Moses and the prophets in such promises as
these, as in Deut. 30: —“ The Lord thy God will circum-


•cise thy heart and the heart of thy seed to love the
Lord thy God with all thy heart and all thy soul.”
And Psalm 110, —“ Thy people shall be willing in the
■day of thy power.” Or Jeremiah 31, —“After those days,
saith the Lord, I will put my law in their inward
parts, and write it in their hearts, and I will be their
God and they shall be my people.” Or they may have
had it communicated among the sayings of the Saviour
which were rehearsed to them, as is recorded in John
vi.—“ No man can come to me except the Father who
hath sent me draw him.” “It is written in the prophets,
They shall be all taught of God. Every man, there-
fore, that hath heard and hath learned of the Father
comethto me.” Or, in John xvi.—“ And when He, the
Spirit, is come, He will reprove the world of sin, and
of righteousness, and of judgment.” Or they may
have had it delivered to them by Paul, whose doctrine
was ever the same as that which he embodied in his
Epistles, where it is fully declared, “ You hath He
quickened, who were dead in trespasses and sins.”
“ We are His workmanship, created in Christ Jesus
unto good works, which God hath before ordained that
we should walk in them.” “In meekness instructing
those that oppose themselves, if God peradventure
will give them repentance to the acknowledging of
the truth.” “By grace are ye- saved through faith,
and that not of yourselves, it is the gift of God.”
“ Being confident of this very thing, that He who
hath begun a good work in you will perform it until
the day of Jesus Christ.” “ May the God of peace


make you perfect in every good work to do His will,
working in you that which is well pleasing in His
sight through Jesus Christ.” These passages, and
countless other passages in the Word, represent that
the conversion and sanctification of sinners, which the
Gospel ministry is designed to subserve, is the Lord’s
own work. It is so affirmed; no participation in that
work, as regards its results, is acknowledged. It is
asserted that by His own power it is accomplished.
The converts of Corinth must have had these repre-
sentations, or representations to this effect, made to
them; and, referring to these representations, had they
attended to them as they should have attended,
had they reverenced them as they should have rever-
enced, they would of themselves, and in terms as
peremptory, have ascribed the efficiency of the Gospel
ministry wholly and solely to God.
And, again, the converts of Corinth would of them-
selves have recognised the conclusion here indicated
by the apostle had they recognised, as they should
have recognised, the force of the evidence, in respect to
it, presented to them by their own observation and
experience. The most patent fact presented in respect
to the gospel ministry is the uncertainty of its results,
the utter inability of man to ensure or determine what
the results shall be. Where the truth is faithfully pro-
claimed, none can tell where it shall and where it shall
not prosper; none can say who shall and who shall not
believe its report. To some it is “ a savour of life
unto lifeto others it is “ a savour of death unto


death.” Some are awakened by it to the reality and
horrors of sin, to the reality and preciousness of sal-
vation, to the necessity of an instant flight from
wrath, an instant flight to Christ, an instant surrender
to him. With others it is unheeded; it is as though
unheard ; they remain under it unmoved and thought-
less, or they are lulled by it into a deeper security, or
are hardened by it into a more unyielding resistance,-
or sunk by it into a more hopeless despair. So various
are its effects with sinners. And as various are its
effects with believers. The same exposition of the
truth is to one most profitable; to another it is
most unedifying. One commends; another complains.
One is impressed, melted, hallowed, is drawn by it to
the Lord Jesus, is shown in Him new glories, is borne
away in blissful anticipation; another is untouched,,
unrefreshed, unstrengthened, uncomforted. The people
of God look back to their conversion, and acknowledge
that the motives which proved irresistible with them
then had been for long resisted. They look along the
course by which they have been advancing, and they
acknowledge how futile and fluctuating has been their
advance. They testify that, though rich in spiritual
privileges, their spiritual growth and progress has been
in no wise answerable to the advantages enjoyed. And
so neither is there aught decisive in the appointments
of the Christian ministry. The most talented, the
most learned, the most eloquent, the most earnest and
affectionate of ministers are often seen to spend their
strength for nought, where the comparatively feeble


are achieving triumphs. It is thus found; it is thus
confessed. The issue is ever thus uncertain; what no
one can control; in respect to which no one can pro-
nounce. And the inference from this uncertainty,
when duly considered, points, and points demonstra-
tively, to the truth expressed in the text. It shows
that the issue is with God; that in order to the effect
sought, a power is required which man does not wield,
which He who ordained the Christian ministry has
reserved to Himself, and which He, and He alone, does
andean exercise. Were it otherwise, could the effect'
•of the Christian ministry be assumed in any instance, or
in any degree, there were room for an opposite conclu-
sion. It might be held that the effect was of man,
that it. depended on conditions which man could
specify and man fulfil; that what was required in any
case was hut the due observance of these conditions.
As it is, it is manifest, most manifest, that all such con-
clusions are vain. When God has a work in any
instance to accomplish, God ordains means and instru-
ments for its accomplishment. And in ordaining means
and instruments, God ordinarily adapts them to the
effect designed. He provides a ministry suited in gifts
and graces for that effect. And yet even then, by the
failures which attend the efforts of the most gifted and
the most successful, he still discovers that the power is
not transferred; that it is his own hand; that they
who are born under it are “ born not of blood, nor of
the will of the flesh, nor of the will of man, but of
Godthat to the last and uttermost it is by the grace


of God that they are what they are. The converts at
Corinth, we say, had had their own proofs and tokens
of this truth presented to them, and considering these
proofs and tokens, had they considered them as they
should have considered them, they should have seem
they must needs have seen, that in the Gospel ministry,
in whose efficiency with them they rejoiced, the
efficiency was wholly and solely of God.
And how account we of this truth, brethren ? How
ought they who fulfil the Gospel ministry, and they for
whom it is fulfilled, to regard the testimony which the
apostle has here given in respect to it ? flow ought
they severally to bear their part in it ?
We say of the former—of those who fulfil the Gospel
ministry—that it behoves them to bear their part in
that ministry reverently, most reverently. How
solemn is the thought which these words suggest!
They show that they by whom the service of the
ministry is performed, co-operate in it with God, in
offices in which the whole efficiency is retained and
exerted by God; that the objects sought are objects
which he especially values, for which infinite sacrifices
have been made by him, and for the attainment of
which a direct and immediate and continuous inter-
position is required from him. There is a levity, it is
known, chargeable on the ministry of the Gospel.
There is such a thing as an affectation of quaintness
and eccentricity indulged at times in the pulpit, it is
known, with a design to provoke a smile. How is
such rebuked ? Oh, how monstrous is the inconsistency,


how enormous is the folly, how audacious is the pro-
fanity of the man who, standing there as the “ mouth
of God,” dares to mingle his own frivolities with the
message which he delivers! What gravity, what fear,,
what guarded seriousness, what depths of awe, on the
contrary, ought he ever to maintain!
We say of them again, that it behoves them to bear
their part in it humbly, most humbly. How self-denied
is the tone which these words express! How lowly is
the confession, how emptied of all pretension is the
acknowledgment which they dictate! They show
that where good is effected by the preacher, not one
atom of it is due to himself, not one atom of it can he
claim as his own, that in it he is nothing, that it is all
wrought of God. There is a proud self-sufficiency in
the ministry of the Gospel at times, it is known, a
boastful expectation of success from the imagined
superiority of the services performed. There is a proud
self-seeking and ostentation in the pulpit at times, it
is known, an eagerness for the applause of men, an
anxious craving for their admiration, an ambitious and
studious display to secure it, and that for its own sake.
How are such rebuked! Oh, how miserable is the
intrusion which is there committed on the province
and prerogatives of God • How hateful is the presump-
tion, how preposterous the arrogance of the’ man who
in a co-operation by which he is infinitely honoured, in
which he is admitted as instrumental, and but instru-
mental, in the work of God, where the work is God’s
own work, would yet in it be all, or yet in it be any-


thing! What dependence, what self-annihilation, what
an exclusion of all personal ends and aims, on the
contrary, ought he ever to exercise !
We say of them again, that it behoves them to bear
their part in it faithfully, most faithfully. How im-
perative are these words, how absolute are they in
requiring that the message of the Christian ministry
be the message, and none other than the message, of
God! They show that the message of the ministry to
be effectual must be accepted and applied by God,
must express the mind and will of God, must present
as its arguments and appeals, the arguments and
appeals which God has prescribed, and which God may
present as his demonstration of the truth to the hearts
and consciences addressed. There is unfaithfulness, it
is known, in the Christian ministry. There are whose
message is not the message of God, whose teaching is
in many essential respects opposed to it, who in their
testimonies to sinners do not urge sinners, as God would
have them urged, to return to God —do not warn them
of their guilt and ruin—do not charge them to flee to
Christ —do not insist with them on their instant and
entire self-surrender to Christ, their instant and entire
self-consecration to Christ; but prophesy to them
smooth things, say to them “ Peace, peaceencourage
them to look to other saviours, to rest on other founda-
tions, to follow other masters, to hope in God though
they live in alienation from Him and in opposition to
Him; and, in their testimonies to believers, do not
urge believers, as God would have them urged, to live


to God—do not warn them of their dangers—do not'
denounce to them their sins—do not call and urge them
to reach after the realisation in themselves of the whole
life of God—do not charge them to abound in the
whole work of God—do not incite them to go on unto
perfection; but in their teaching lead them to lay aside
their fears, to indulge an unquestioning security, to-
make light of their inconsistencies, to spare themselves,
to live beneath and far beneath their privileges,,
beneath and far beneath their obligations; to
believe that they are in the vineyard, yet require from
them little fruit for God, little fruit for man, little fruit
for heaven —to be contented with their Christian creed
and their Christian profession—questioning little and
questioning seldom if they have more than a name to
live. Ah, how much of this is there! And how is it
all rebuked! How in such a ministry is the message
of God perverted and betrayed ! How utterly false is-
such a ministry to its declared design—how false as an
instrument of the Holy Spirit—how false to God—how
false to man! How is the authority of God in ordain-
ing it dishonoured —how is the purpose of God in
sending it frustrated—how are the evils it was meant
to remedy aggravated—how are sinners hardened, how
are believers beguiled! An unfaithful ministry! Oh,
how tremendous the thought! Oh, what need has
the Gospel ministry for holy fear, for reverent, prayerful
inquiry, for studious jealous care in receiving their
message, in adapting their message, in delivering their
message, so to receive and adapt and deliver it that


they may stand acquitted of this heaviest condemna-
tion, that they may be approved, that it may be owned,
that it may he blessed.
We say of them again, that it behoves them to bear
their part in it diligently, most diligently. How rous-
ing are these words ! What a call to exertion do they
contain! They show that the work to which they,
the ministers of the Gospel, are appointed, their plant-
ing, their watering, is a work which requires diligence,
and that, as appointed to it by God, they are to practise
in it the diligence required, to the utmost of their power
to do the work given them to do, doing it as unto God,
and doing it with their might. They show that, in the
work so given, they are workers together with God,
that their work is accepted by God as that on which
his work proceeds, and that, as workers together with
God, they are devoutly, and studiously, and earnestly to
adapt their work to God’s work, to the utmost of their
power to promote the ends which it is his design to
promote. They show that the effects sought are effects
whose transcendent importance is attested by God, and
that, as so attested, they are to the utmost of their power
to do what they are permitted to do, and are called to
do, in order to these effects. They show that these
effects are ever uncertain, that it is never known in
any instance what God’s purpose in that instance may
he, how great or gracious, and therefore that they are
to omit no opening, no opportunity, they are to improve
every opening, every opportunity, to the utmost of their
power to concur with God in it. There is a slackness,


an apathy, a carelessness, it is known, in the Christian
ministry in this work, in some from a mean apprecia-
tion of the work itself, in others from a desponding
sense of their declared insufficiency for it. How are
both rebuked! How egregious is the mistake of the
man who thinks lightly of a Avork in comparison Avith
Avhich every other Avork is manifestly nugatory and
vain; a Avork Avhich directly affects the destinies of
immortal souls, Avhich if prospered issues in their
translation from sin and hell to God and eternal bliss; a
Avork to Avhich he is called by God, in Avhich God
condescends to be associated with him, in Avhich God
bears the primary and pre-eminent part; whose objects
are proposed, Avhose appointments are prescribed, Avhose
success is measured out by God! How especially
mistaken is the man Avho, in the vieAV of the fact that
the success of the Avork is so measured out by God,
Avho, because God has reserved to himself the part of
efficiency in it, because he ordains and provides Avhat
that efficiency shall be, applies himself coldly and
feebly to it! Hoav is he condemned ! What burning
zeal; Avhat untiring assiduity in planting, ever planting,
in Avatering, ever Avatering; Avhat instancy, in season,
out of season; Avhat a taxing and tasking of every
faculty to meet its obligations, ought he on the contrary
to display!
We say of them again that it behoves them to bear
their part in it prayerfully, most prayerfully. How
impressive are these words! What a call to the mercy-
seat do they contain ! They show that in the work of


the ministry,the effect of the work is ever to be referred
to God; that without His blessing on the work, the
work were nought; and that in prosecuting the work,.
His blessing on it, as necessary and essential to it, is
ever to he sought. There is a want in this respect, it
is known, chargeable on the ministry of the Gospel.
There are who restrain prayer, special prayer for a
blessing on their work. They recognise the truth
declared that the effect of the work is of God. They
confess their dependence on God in the work for the
minutest attainment of its real design, hut they rest in
this confession. They do the work and they leave the
work, leaving it to God to give effect to it as may
please Him, without further care to ensure that the
effect shall be given. How are they also rebuked!
How untrue are they in this to God, how untrue to
their relations with him, how untrue to their privilege
as invited to carry their every care to Him, how untrue
to the work to which they are called, how untrue to
God’s purpose in calling them to it! We read how
Paul interpreted the service required of him. We are
told how faithfully, how diligently the work was-
performed by him. We see here how absolute he
was in looking to God for the effect of it. But we read
elsewhere how he followed it further, how he followed
it to God; “ for this cause,” he Avrote to the Colossians,.
“ we do not cease to pray for you, and to desire that ye
may he filled with the knowledge of His rvill in all
wisdom and spiritual understanding, that ye may Avalk
worthy of the Lord unto all pleasing, being fruitful in


•every good work and increasing in the knowledge of
God, strengthened with all might according to His
glorious power unto all patience and long-suffering
with joyfulness.” And so wrote he to the Ephesians,
.and so to the Philippians. The God who had appointed
him to that service, and who alone could give the
increase, was to him the prayer-hearing God, and in
the light of that assurance he addressed himself to it,
he occupied himself in it, committing himself and his
work still to Him, and invoking, as he eminently might,
.and as he pre-eminently needed, his blessing on it.
How does he fail who here fails! who, with direct
.access to God, with a work given him by God—and
such a work i—taught that its success lies wholly with
God, invited to make his requests known to God,
commanded to make his requests known, yet fails to
press his advantage here with God, who is silent here,
where he should plead, and especially plead, is silent to
God! Oh, what unbelief is in that silence! Oh, how
is God disowned in it! Oh, how are souls wronged by
it! How is the measureless wealth of blessing, which
his prayers might have drawn down on the work, then
sacrificed! Oh, how aimless, how powerless, how
profitless, in comparison, must his work be! How
devoutly on the contrary ought the rule of the apostles
in it ever to be followed:—“We will give ourselves
continually to prayer and to the ministry of the Word;”
not less continually to prayer than to the ministry of
the Word! Avhat patient watching throughout unto
prayer should there be therein exercised!


We say of them again that it behoves them to bear
their part in it hopefully, most hopefully. How
encouraging are these words! How ample, how
boundless, is the promise which they afford ! They
show that in the work of the ministry the efficiency is
claimed by God, is undertaken by God, that it is by
his omnipotence that the ends sought in it are to be
secured ; and that in the prosecution of the work this
His undertaking is ever to be recognised, in the view
of his omnipotence it is ever to be seen and acknow-
ledged that there is nothing in it that is hard, that its
uttermost purposes are all practicable, and wholly
practicable, that there is no weakness, no wickedness,
no unbelief, no obduracy, no degradation, no darkness,
no despair to be overcome that cannot be overcome.
There is doubt and distrust, it is known, ofttimes in the
Christian ministry. There is a tendency in those who'
are engaged in the work to take a desponding view of its
success. They realise strongly the difficulties by which
it is opposed ; and they realise feebly the power by
which it is enforced, and they grow weary and faint
in their minds : or they look back on their own labours
and they see few if any results, and they look for as
few in the time to come. How are they rebuked!
How uncalled for are their fears' how unjust and dis-
honoring to God! how much of unbelief is therein ex-
pressed ! In the review of their own labours, were
they right in their estimate of them, there were room
with them to question their own faithfulness, and dili-
gence, and prayerfulness in them. . And yet neither


were they justified, in that case, in setting bounds to
God. But they may not have been right. Elijah so
judged of his labours in his day, and Elijah erred.
When he supposed himself to stand alone—the only
defender of the truth—there were seven thousand in
Israel to whom the truth was precious. In like man-
ner, who knows what good may have been done ? The
ministry of the Gospel, where duly exercised, where
reverently, humbly, faithfully, diligently, prayerfully
fulfilled, has warrant, and full warrant, to count on
the Divine support. God’s commission, and God’s call,
are God’s pledge. And having that warrant, how
complete is the warrant! What resources are waiting
on it! what resources are waiting for it! what services
may it not undertake ! on what triumphs may it not
reckon ! with what authority, what confidence, may it
ever, should it ever, be pursued!
Once again, we say of them that it behoves them to
hear their part in it joyfully, most joyfully. How
cheering and assuring are these words! They show that
the work in which they, the ministers of the Gospel, are
engaged is a work for God, which is especially accepted
by God, in which God takes an especial part; and they
invite them to believe that, in that work, they—the
ministers of the Gospel—do personally enjoy, and shall
enjoy, an especial acceptance with God; that they shall
receive from Him an especial recompense of reward.
They shew further, that in that work, the work is
theirs and the effect is God’s; and that where they are
accepted and rewarded in the work—as they are


accepted and rewarded—they are accepted and re-
warded, not according to the effects realised, hut
.according to the work bestowed, not according to the
increase given, but according to their faithfulness and
•diligence in planting and in watering for it. They
point to these assurances as to be thence also inferred.
They remind them of the many gracious testimonies
in the Word which declare that the eye, and the heart,
and the hand of the Loitl are, and shall be, especially
with his faithful ministers. And they bid them bear
these assurances with them,and therewith lighten,and
cheer,and sustain themselves in the labours which they
have to perform. There are at times, it is known, low
views, on this head, in those who fulfil the Christian
ministry. They lose sight at times of their relations
with God in this work, and from that cause are often
neither so sensible of their privilege in the work, nor
so diligent in the work, as they ought to be. How are
they also rebuked ! How necessary is it that they do
duly recognise the dignity of their position as workers
together with God ; that in fulfilling their mission they
may fulfil it with the authority and the decision which,
as workers together with God, they are entitled, and
ought to exercise ! How necessary is it that they do
duly recognise the character of the increase which
they are to promote; that it is God’s increase—increase
of God’s giving, and increase for God; that it is for
souls they are to seek, for the conversion of sinners, for
the perfection of believers, they are to strive; that it
is to this blessed work, to these blessed ends they are


called to contribute, —at these to aim ! How necessary
is it also that they do duly recognise the grounds on
which the rewards of the Christian ministry are dis-
pensed ; that they are not responsible for success, that
they are responsible only, as they are responsible,
for work; that,whether successful or unsuccessful, their
reward remains, their reward is sure; that eveiy ser-
vice rendered, every word of warning, and counsel, and
•consolation, every prayer offered, however it may fail
of its desired effect, fails not in this—it is accepted and
registered by him as a service to himself, and shall he
acknowledged on the great day ' The faithful minister
has these assurances; has full warrant for them, impart-
ing authority • and earnestness, and comfort, to his
ministry. It is in the recognition of his relations with
God that these assurances arc realised, and how
implicitly, how abidingly, how thankfully, how joy-
fully, are his relations with God to be recognised ! The
joy of the Lord is his strength.
We must stop here. We .have glanced at these sug-
gestions, as presented to us in this passage, in relation
to those who fulfil the Gospel ministry. We have seen
how reverently, how humbly, how faithfully, how
diligently, how prayerfully, how hopefully, how joy-
fully, that ministry shonld be performed by them.
This passage is a testimony for us, brethren, who share
the work which Paul and Apollos shared. It bids us
so account of it as they accounted, so exercise ourselves
in it as they were exercised. Planters and waterers
in the Lord’s vineyard, it admonishes us of our position,


and of our responsibilities and privileges as pertaining
to it. It was the watchword of Paul; it has been th.fr
watchword of all who have been blessed in his work.
According as it is realised, so the ministry is what it
should be, <f mighty through God to the pulling down
of strongholds, and bringing into captivity every
thought to the obedience of Christ.” Brethren, let this-
realisation be ours, —so planting, so watering. And O,
may He who gives the increase,give it to us abundantly.
We should have noticed further hero, how the
ministry so described should be received by those for
whom it is fulfilled. We should have shown how they
ought to account of themselves, as being, while tinder
that ministry, under the operation of the Holy Spirit.
We should have called them to observe how exalted
their views of the ministry should be, as so associated
with God in its work; how simple and absolute should
be their dependence, for its benefits, on Divine grace ' r
how sensible they should be of the sinfulness of every
abuse of their privilege; how firm their attachment
should bo to the ministry given to them; how much
they should hold him,by whom it is rendered,in honour
for his work’s sake; how prayerful they should be for
him, and for his ministry for themselves and for others;,
how careful they should be every way to profit by it
to the full, and that their profiting should appear..
These are suggestions which might be presented in
adverting to this further application of the text; under
other circumstances we would have pressed them
strongly. We can but commend them to consideration.


Brethren, may they he thoughtfully, earnestly con-
sidered; may the lessons thus taught us be wisely
learnt, may the Lord enable us ever rightly to bear
our part in relation to an agency, an ordinance of
which we are thus told, which comes to us with such
exalted claims, which, ordained of God to plant, and
ordained of God to water, has from God its increase.


“It is finished.”— John xix. 30.
:Sucn, according to this evangelist, were the last words
which were uttered by our blessed Lord upon the cross.
It is related that thereupon he bowed his head and
gave up the ghost. We take these words, therefore,
with which our blessed Lord marked His departure, as
mainly, if not simply, His announcement of the event.
They tell us, as we understand them, that the agonies
•of the cross were finished, and that the ends and objects
for which these agonies were borne were accomplished.
The scene to which this passage calls our attention
is one to which our thoughts arc specially directed this
day. We are engaged this day in celebrating the death
of our blessed Lord. We are honoured to partake in
the service whichHe Himself appointed in remembrance
of it. Let us draw near, then, in faith, Christian
brethren. Let us place ourselves in faith by the
beloved disciple, whose testimony is here recorded.
Let us stand with Him near to the cross, and listen
with Him to the voice by which these words were
spoken. Oh, my brethren, can we imagine how these
words were heard, how they were recorded ? Can we
•conceive at all what they conveyed ?
"It is finished.” How late in His history, we ask
jyou to notice, was it ere the holy sufferer coukl say
what was then said ! At how early a period had the


sufferings, which were there terminated, been begun!
How long had He known sorrow ere He could thus
announce their close!
Behold Him descending from His throne of light to
earth, emptying Himself of His glory and becoming
man! He who could say, “ I and my Father are one,”
identified with the creatures of His hand, and
assuming their infirmities, taking to Himself a true
body and a reasonable soul! Oh, dust may easily
return to dust, but what was it for the infinite God to
sojourn in this cold world! -what, to tabernacle in clay!
And behold what, as man, He became, how He made
Himself of no reputation, how He sprang as “ a root
out of a dry ground.” How poor and portionless, how
mean and abject was the position which He took in
the world, —born in a stable, cradled in a manger,,
hurried in feeble infancy, a fugitive by night, from the
sword of the persecutor; His youth to manhood spent
in the companionship of the rude and untaught, a
partner in their privations and their toils ! Had He
assumed to Himself earth’s highest distinctions, its
throne of widest domain, its richest, choicest possessions,
His humiliation even then had been unspeakable.
How destitute of all earthly advantages was the
condition in which He was revealed!
And behold Him from " his shewing unto Israel ”
through the ministry which He thence onward fulfilled,
what woes He had therein to endure. How He was
tried, how He suffered from the attacks of the wicked
one [ Consider Him in the wilderness, whither He


was led to be tempted of the devil; how, worn with
wanderings for forty days and forty nights, consumed
with hunger and thirst, He was assailed, His holy soul
oppressed, outraged, and harassed by the foul presence,
by the impious suggestions, by the blasphemous solici-
tations of the rebel and malignant spirit. How he
was tried, how He suffered from the “ contradiction of
sinners ” of mankind —sinners whom He had come to
save ! Consider Him for three years ever occupied in
their service, going about continually doing them good,
by miracles of healing such as man never wrought, by
gracious disclosures, counsels, warnings, and invitations
such as man never spake—claiming their gratitude,
their trust, their submission, their love. And yet how
was He requited ! By perverse cavils and objections,
by insulting imputations, by actual violence. They
denounced Him as a madman, as a wine-bibber, as in
league with devils, as having a devil. They led Him
to the brow of a hill that they might cast Him down
headlong. They took up stones to stone Him, they
drove him from their coasts, they held council after
council to put Him to death ; while one of His disciples
who had received the highest marks of his favor, who
had been in continual attendance on His person, who
had witnessed all His mighty works, undertook to
betray Him into their hands. How He was tried,
how He suffered from the direct inflictions of His
Heavenly Father! Consider Him in the garden,
whither He had retired to meet His enemies. How
deep was the consciousness of these inflictions as then


felt! In what agonies was that consciousness then
confessed ! Contemplate Him, our Immanuel, while
His disciples slept for sorrow, a stonccast withdrawn
from them. See His holy head bowed to the dust;
hear Him cry, “0 my Father! if it be possible, let this
cup pass from me, nevertheless not as I will, but as
Thou wilt.” See Him rising, and see Him again bowed
to the earth, and hear that cry repeated, “ O my
Father! if this cup may not pass from me except I
drink it, Thy will he done.” Sec an angel strengthen
Him, but only for further suffering. See him a third
time bowed to the earth, and as he prays, as before,
great drops of blood fall to the ground. The cup of
Divine wrath, which man’s sins had filled to over-
flowing, is at His lips, and He drinks deep of it. It is
His Father’s wrath He bears. His Father is hiding
o
His face from Him. His Father is here dealing with
Him as an avenger. And, overwhelmed by the dread
exaction, He proclaims in these tokens the measureless
<lepths of His anguish. Say, what a sea of terror was
that which then rolled over Him !
The Saviour had been thus tried, He had thus
suffered. Heaven, earth, and hell had been thus against
Him. Each had borne its part in the trials and suffer-
ings to which He was subjected—trials and sufferings
unequalled, unapproached, save by what succeeded.
In what remained, Heaven, earth, and hell combined
their fiercest assaults. How inconceivable was the
anguish which followed! He had arisen from the
earth. He had returned to His disciples, to find them


unconscious of His suffering, and fast asleep. He had
spoken to them words of gracious consideration. As
He speaks, the tread of armed men is heard advancing.
He goes forth to meet them. Judas betrays the Son of
Man with a kiss. On the signal they lay hold of Him,
they bind Him, they lead Him away, and deliver Him
up to the council. The council falsely accuse Him
they adjure Him to dcclaroHimself; they condemn Him
for blasphemy; they spit on Him, they buffetHiin, they
blindfold Him, they smite Him with the palms of their
hands. They say, “ Prophesy who is it that smote
Thee ?” They drag Him before the tribunal of Pilate \
They accuse Him of sedition. Pilate sends Him to
Herod. Herod and his men of war set Him at nought;
they mock Him; they array Him in a gorgeous robe,,
and they send Him again to Pilate. Then He is finally
condemned, and now their worst cruelties burst forth.
They strip Him of His garments ; they put on Him a
purple robe; they plait a crown of thorns and force it
on His bleeding brows ; they put a reed for a royal
sceptre into His hand. They bow the knee, and say
to Him, “ Hail, King of the Jews ! ” The multitude,,
with loud outcries, demand his execution—“ Away
with Him, away with Him ' crucify Him, crucify Him !
His blood be on us, and on our children." He is
scourged ;He is made to carry His cross. Worn out
with suffering, He sinks beneath its weight, and
another is compelled to bear it. And now they reach
Golgotha. They lay the cross on the earth, He is-
stretched upon it, His hands and His feet are nailed


to it, the cross is raised and forced into the ground.
O man ! man ! it was thus thy Saviour died.
He hung there in agony. One hour and another
passed away, and still it was not finished. The slow
moments, lingering, dragged along, and yet it was not
over. Deeper and deeper did His .soul sink in the
waters of affliction; darker and darker grew the cloud
that shrouded His spirit: more heavy and still more
heavy the woe that lay upon His heart, and yet He
endured. He speaks once, he prays for His tormentors.
Again,He seeks a home for Hisweeping mother. Again,
He promises paradise to His contrite fellow-sufferer;
and yet He says not “ it is finished,” but still there He
hangs, draining in silence and loneliness His cup of
anguish that His Father had given Him; while the sun
in the firmament hides his face, and the shades of night
at noonday overspread the land, and nature lies sunk
and prostrate. Again the sufferer speaks, and Oh,
that loud and awful cry, “ My God, my God, why hast
thou forsaken me ?” Who may understand that cry!
who may fathom that ocean fathomless ! And again
He speaks, and now it is to the witnesses of His agony;
and He tells them of His burning thirst; —it might have
moved the most remorseless:—they give Him vinegar
to drink. And again he speaks, and now hearken! it
is at length that word so long delayed. He speaks it
now, “It is finished.” The weary strife is done. The
moment of his release is come, and he bows his head,
and he breathes out his soul: and the man of sorrows
hangs without a sorrow!


We thus read these words, brethren! They bear to-
us this meaning. They point to the past, and in ite
disclosures they tell us what was there “ finished.”
How feebly can we conceive of these disclosures,,
brethren! We trace them, and we retrace them, but-
who may estimate them aright, who may look down
into their depths! Oh, Christian brethren! ye are-
here to do honour to your suffering Lord; ponder well,
what the sufferings of your Saviour implied.
"It is finished.” Consider 1. What were the-
consequences involved in the event here announced,,
its bearing on the condition of the human race.
Consider how transcendent in importance these con-
sequences were. As agent of the divine mercy, as-
angel of the covenant of grace to the lost and ruined,
as the Mediator between God and man, the Lord Jesus,,
the eternal Son, had undertaken to offer in his own
person full and perfect satisfaction to the divine justice
and holiness and truth for the sins of a guilty worlds
He had come forth on this errand. He had stood in
this character between the living and the dead. And
he had thus accomplished it. That errand, that under-
taking, was there achieved. The end and object sought-
in it was secured. In the sufferings which from his
first appearing in the world he had undergone, and
which were completed on the cross, there was furnished
to the jealousy of the Godhead,ground of most righteous-
acquittal and acceptance for all of the children of men
who in any age should be brought to avail themselves
of it—of the salvation which was thence proclaimed


It is a precious truth, an ever-adorable truth—oh, how
precious! oh, how adorable! —that a scheme of
deliverance so ample and comprehensive was devised
and adopted. It is a precious truth that for the fulfil-
ment of that scheme the Saviour came; and now a
most precious truth that every condition proposed in
that scheme was performed, that, as had been engaged
in the counsels of eternity, He on whom our help was
laid thus “ finished ” transgression, and made an end
of sin, and brought in an everlasting salvation for us.
“It is finished.” Consider 2. What was the love
implied in the event here announced—the love to our
race which was therein manifested and revealed by our
blessed Lord. Consider what compassionate love was
displayed by our Lord in His consenting, as Ho did at
the first, to the undertaking in which these sufferings
were involved ; what dauntless love was displayed in
engaging in the undertaking, when the fulness of the
time was come ; what steadfast love was displayed in
persevering as He did in that undertaking unto the
end. Say, what but infinite love, brethren —infinite
love—could have done what was clone ! Consider His
all-sufficient, His limitless, sovereign power, and say
what was the forbearance, what the self-denial which
these sufferings revealed ! Say, why did he not com-
mand the stone of the wilderness to be made bread
when he required it ? Why was He, who fed the ten
thousand, ever a-hungered ? Why was Ho who made
all worlds, ever weary ? why was He, to whom the
earth and the fulness thereof belongs, not at once


enthroned amid all its magnificence ? How was it
that His tormentors, when they reviledand blasphemed
and withstood Him, were not swept away ? Why
especially, as He hung in agony without the walls of
Jerusalem, where, perhaps in the very spot where He
suffered, in one night the hundred and eighty-five
thousand men of the Assyrian host were destroyed,—
why were not the same consuming judgments not
launched against His murderers ? O, why was not the
world in which such indignities had been offered to
Him, such atrocities done—why was it not over-
whelmed in one shattering destruction, and scattered
in fragments through the fields of space ? What but
His own infinite love, His own eminent love for
sinners, whose eternal welfare depended on His suffer-
ing on their behalf all that He did suffer, —what but
this would have restrained him from relieving himself
of His troubles, and of those who troubled him ! And
what a proof of His love was it that He never did ;
that, on the contrary, when He had to suffer hunger,
He suffered it; and privation of other kinds, He bore
it; and persecution, He meekly and unresistingly
endured it! Think of this, brethren! And now con-
template Him as here discovered —the ransom for
man’s guilt fully paid, not one sorrow that was
demanded towards it omitted, all duly borne. Say
what must that love have been which had carried
Him through all He had endured! what that love
which had detained Him on that cross so long; which
had held Him there till all was finished —nothing


hurried, to the very close ; nothing abridged, nothing
imperfect; the last pang which justice demanded sus-
tained—sustained in the very fulness of its force, in
the very fulness of its poignancy ! He spoke not this
word till that last pang had ceased to vibrate through
His heart. Herein, indeed, was love ! What manner
of love ! 0, the love of Christ to sinners ! And O, the
love to Christ which sinners should return !
“It is finished.” Consider 3. What is the encou-
ragement presented, in the event here announced, to
awakened and anxious souls. Consider how full of
encouragement these words were, and are, to them.
They know that they are sinners. They feel the
bitterness and the burden of their sins. They see that
for their sins they are necessarily and righteously
condemned. They are taught that Jesus, in suffering,
suffered for their sins—in atonement for them. But
still they have doubts and fears. Their faith in their
ruin as sinners is more present and pressing with
them than is their faith in His atonement. It is
altogether more vividly, more forcibly realised. They
are haunted by the dread lest in their guilt there
should be aggravations for which that atonement did
not and could not provide, and lest practically they
should be left to save themselves, or perish. These
words encourage them to cast off their fears. They
tell them that by these they wrong the Lord and
themselves ; that He was there to make atonement for
them ; that He know perfectly, as God, what atonement
was required, what ransom was demanded; and that


to the uttermost it was fulfilled—His atonement an
absolute atonement, " The blood of Christ cleanseth
from all sin. The cessation of His suffering, when He
ceased to suffer, showed that the end for which He
suffered had been accomplished. He who had suffered
so long had not ceased to suffer \mtil all had been
infallibly secured. This is the testimony of the
“ faithful and true witness.” And “ 0 laboring and
heavy laden !” it says, “ be persuaded by it, and turn
unto the Lord and live. There is forgiveness for thee
with God. There is admission and welcome for thee
with God. There is every blessing for thee with God.
Salvation is proper and peculiar to Him. In His work
there is no room, there is no need, for thy poor efforts ;
weary not thyself in vain. Dishonor Him not by
questioning it. Say not, as thou hast said, and
persisted in saying, “My sins are monstrous, so
monstrous that I may not come to God till I have
made some better satisfaction for them.” He answers,
“ Satisfaction for them is finished, and by Me.’’ Say
not, “ I have made myself vile, so vile in the sight of
God that I may not hope for pardon from Him, I may
not look for His favor until I have cleansed myself to
some better degree from my sins, and shown some
better grounds of acceptance with Him.” He answers,
“ The grounds of thy acceptance are finished, and by
Me.” Say not, “My heart is faithless, so faithless and
inconstant, so prone to sin, that I may not engage
myself to God’s service; I may not propose it; it
were but hypocrisy to pretend to it, till I have taught


myself in some better degree to love and honor the
Lord.” He still answers, “It is finished; the grace
necessary, the grace that alone can sanctify is finished,
.and finished by Me.” 0, believe this, and turn unto
the Lord, and live. Beseech Him for His salvation ;
beseech Him, by the cup of wrath which He drank, to
grant it to thee ; beseech Him by the blood which He
shed in the garden, and on the cross ; beseech Him by
His love, His mercy, His truth and sworn faithfulness ;
beseech it of the Father in Him: and verily thou shalt
be heard, and verily thou shalt be saved.
"It is finished.” Consider 4. What is the comfort
presented in the event here announced to the humble
believer. Consider how cheering to the humble
believer it is to know what is here affirmed, that
■Christ’s work for him was “ finished.” He knows that
his own works for God are all unfinished, that there
defects in them all, in all he does; that there is
much of sin and vanity in the highest of his duties, in
the purest of them ; all imperfect. What a relief it is
to him, what an answer for him to the anxieties and
fears which the consciousness awakens, that the Lord
has “ finished” his work for him! Comfort thyself in
this thought, believer! Say, “I am complete in Him.”
:Say, “ Though I cannot perfectly obey or fulfil any
command of the law, yet is the righteousness of the
law fulfilled in those who believe: Christ’s complete
obedience is imputed, is accredited to them, and makes
them complete and without fault before God.” Oh,
blessed be God for the perfect righteousness of Christ.


And how cheering is it to the humble believer to
know that Christ’s work in him shall in like manner
be finished. As Christ’s work for him, so Christ’s work
in him shall be finished. He that hath begun a good
work in the soul shall finish it. Of this the apostle
was confident. The Lord Jesus is not only the author
but also the finisher of faith in his people. If he begin
he will finish. “The gifts and calling of God are
without repentance.” In his suffering work there was
no desertion by him of his undertaking, nothing that
savored of desertion: in his sanctifying work there
will be none. Nay, but his persistence in the former
is the pledge of his persistence in the latter. Comfort
thyself with this thought, believer! It is with thee
day of small things, a time of darkness and infirmity:
But look up, he who never desisted till he had
presented a perfect sacrifice for thee to God, will not
desist until he has presented thee also perfect and
complete before God. Abide in him: he will abide in
thee. Eye hath not seen nor ear heard, neither hath
it entered into the heart to conceive what he has in
reserve for thee. His work of suffering was finished
on the cross: his work of most gracious communication
shall never be finished. Through life he will be with
thee. In death he will bo with thee. And when
present things are passed away, thou shalt be with
him, where all life’s sorrows are finished, and where
the joys of eternity are begun, to be finished no more,,
finished no more for ever. Amen.


After Sermon.—On John xix. 30.
Brethren, the tabic of the Lord is again prepared.
Again, in obedience to His charge, “ do this in remem-
brance of Me,” the holy ordinance is to be administered.
The cry has again gone forth, “ Behold the bridegroom
coineth ! The master of the feast is at hand, coine ye-
forth to meet Him.” 'Say, brethren, how solemn is the
call, and how humbly, how reverently, how thankfully,,
how hopefully is it to be obeyed !
In engaging in this service we have to ask ourselves-
of our warrant to make so near an approach; and, for
that purpose, again to ask what are our views of the
death of Christ which is therein commemorated, with
what feeling it is regarded. We have seen what that
death is to His true people, how their hopes centre
upon it, with what utter gratitude it is contemplated
by them. Were it thus with us, how fitly should we
take part in the celebration; with what exalted
expectations might we address ourselves to it. St.
Paul tells (in Phil. iii. 18,) of many in his time who,
though professing to be the Lord’s people, were yet
known to him as the enemies of the cross of Christ.
“ For many walk,” he says, “ of whom I have told you
often, and now tell you even weeping, that they are
the enemies of the cross of Christ, whose end is destruc-
tion.” Dear brethren! That was an unspeakably
mournful, an unspeakably fearful disclosure. The
Apostle wept in the view of it. Received as Christians,,


•claiming to take their place with them, acknowledged
.as of them, and yet “ enemies of the cross of Christ!”
We are to assume that there are such still among those
who profess to be the Lord’s people. How anxiously
should we ask if, by any possibility, we should be
classed among them ! And who are they who should
be so classed ?
1. He is manifestly an enemy of the cross of Christ
who denies the dread truth on which the doctrine of
the cross proceeds ; who disputes the completeness of
man’s ruin, the absolute misery of the human race as
guilty and lost; who questions their helpless exposure
to eternal doom ; who holds that the sinner is not
wholly depraved; who contends that, as he is, and by
the exertion of his inherent powers, he could redeem
the past, and recover his position with God. Such a
cne charges the doctrine of the cross with folly. He
•deems the sacrifice of the cross an expedient that
exceeded the necessity of the case. He accounts that
the blood of the cross was shed in vain.
2. He is manifestly an enemy of tlie cross of Christ
who lays claim to any merit or worth of his own; who
trusts that on personal grounds he could be forgiven ;
that his own righteousness could he in any degree
.accessory to his acceptance with God. Such a one
impeaches the necessity or the sufficiency of the mighty
sacrifice which was offered on the cross for sin; and
thus detracts, as far as in him lies, from the honor of
the love, and mercy, and grace which that sacrifice
revealed.


3. He is manifestly an enemy of the cross of Christ
who, looking to the sacrifice of Christ to commend him
to the Father, yet looks to his own holy deeds as what
does engage, and must engage, the interest of Christ
for him. Such a one limits the mercies of Christ. He
disputes the truth of his testimonies, that he “ came
not to call the righteous, but sinners to repentance,”
“to seek and to save the lost.” He indirectly denies
his own inability for any good, and asserts for himself
•a share, and that practically a leading share, in the
glory of his own salvation.
4. He is manifestly an enemy of the cross of Christ
'who emboldens himself, through his reliance on the
isacrifice of Christ, in the practice of any sin. Such a
■one sets himself in direct opposition to the spirit and
intention of the interposition in which the sufferings
•of the cross were undergone. It was there especially
ishewn that sin is hateful to God, that he cannot leave
it unpunished,—shewn so emphatically that, had the
npostacy of the human race been followed by their
instant destruction, it had been no such evidence of
the fact. What a traitor to the cross is the man who
works his evil deeds beneath its protection, who sins
where its shadow falls, who takes encouragement
thence to sin without fear! A traitor! Yes. The
openly dissolute and profane are manifestly enemies to
the cross: But so also, and more especially, is the
inconsistent professor who allows himself in his
inconsistency, and comforts himself in his admissions
by the thought of what the Saviour has borne.


There are such, outwardly allied with God’s people,,
who yet in such wise prove that they are strangers
and aliens from him, denying the necessity of the
cross of Christ, or but partially acknowledging its
glories, or practically defeating its design,—the secure,,
the self-sufficient, the unhumbled, the unholy. There
arc such now, as there were such then. The apostle
denounces them as the enemies of the cross, and
declares that their end is destruction.
Dear brethren! In seeking to approach the Lord’s
table, let us sec how, in this respect, it is with us.
Were we conscious that our views of the cross are such
as those to which the apostle referred, how manifestly
were we debarred! If we are conscious, on the
contrary, that our views of the cross of Christ are
wholly different from theirs; that we glory in the
cross, that we have no confidence in the flesh, that our
rejoicing is in Christ Jesus, and in him alone, that we
have fled to him as lost, as perishing; that wo have
committed ourselves to him as the only, all-sufficient
Saviour, the Saviour from the power of sin as well as-
from its penalty; if we can say that our ruling desire
is to walk worthy of Him, that we do account sin a
burden from which we long to be delivered, that we
watch and pray that we may not be tempted to the
commission of it, that we comfort not ourselves when
betrayed into it, by the thought that it is light and
venial, but that we mourn it, and confess and deplore
it as what, but for Christ, must involve us in eternal
despair, that we set ourselves with renewed care to


the work given us, placing ourselves ever anew under
the Saviour’s direction, as in the Saviour’s keeping.
If this he our determination, brethren, if we do rejoice
in the fulness of the Saviour’s undertaking for us, if
we do answer to his love, if our grand ambition is to
honour Him who has loved us and given Himself for
us: Oh, let us be assured of a welcome from Him.
Brethren! He, in whose cross we glory, awaits us at
his table. And now arise ye, and seek unto Him.
•Oh, He shall receive you. Oh, He shall bless you,
.and for ever. Amen.


And I heard a voice from Heaven saying unto me ; Write ::
Blessed are the dead which die in the Lord from henceforth. Yea,
saith the Spirit; that they may rest from their labors, and their
works do follow them.—Revelations xiv., 13.
Such was the announcement which issued from the
veiled glory ; such was the testimony which the
Apostle was thus specially charged to deliver. In
these vvords did the Holy Spirit proclaim, and instruct
the Apostle to proclaim, how the death of God’s people
is regarded on high, and with what feelings their death
should be regarded below.
It was a precious announcement, a precious testi-
mony. It spoke thus on a subject on which, above all
subjects, light is required by man, and on which full
light was thus given. In a world where death reigns,,
where the ravages of death are widely mourned, where
all have to apprehend their approach, how comforting
are the disclosures which these words of the Spirit
revealed ! What terrors do they disarm ' To what
blessings do they guide! How thankfully are they to
be accepted ! How profoundly are they to be con-
sidered ! How earnestly are they to be applied !
The announcement here made by the Spirit in
respect to the death of God’s people, it is perceived,,
was twofold. It shewed who they are—the blessed,
dead —to whom the Spirit referred; it shewed what is.
the blessedness which they—the blessed dead —enjoy.


I. And, first, of the blessed dead. They are de-
scribed as having this distinction, they are “ in the •
Lord.” “ Blessed are the dead who die in the Lord.”
The expression “ in the Lord ” is a familiar expression.
As employed in the Word, it is employed to denote
the peculiar relation which subsists between the-
Lord Jesus as the Saviour, and the Lord’s people as-
the saved; the union of Christians with Christ, by
virtue of their faith in Him and His love to them —a
union real, close, and identifying, sustained on His part
by a warm protecting love, and held by the drawings
of His grace ; sustained on their part by a trustful,.
affectionate, depending love, and held by a clinging
reliance on His all-sufficiency. As thus united to the
Lord, His people are declared to be in Him—in Him.
as members are in the body, whose head He is ; in Him
as branches are in the vine, whose stem He is; in.
Him, as living stones are in the temple, whose corner
stone He is. And as being in Him—“ in the Lord ”
as being united to Him—to the lord, all blessings are
declared to be theirs. “ There is no more condemnation
to them that are in Christ Jesus.” “Of whom are we
in Christ Jesus, who of God is made unto us wisdom,,
and righteousness, and sanctification, and redemption.”
Whether in time, at death, or through eternity, it is as •
“in the Lord,” as “united to Him,” the Mediator of
the new covenant, that the privileges which the Lord
has purchased in terms of the covenant for men, are
shared by them. This is abundantly declared. And
very beautiful is the order of the dispensation. And


very glorious is the view of the extent and security of
the Christian’s portion which it presents —united to
the Lord, and, therefore, interested in His full salvation.
The expression to “ die in the Lord,” denotes accord-
ingly, to die in union with the Lord. It denotes that
at the period of death the union which faith creates
had existed, and that after death it still continues to
exist; that then the soul was resting in the Lord, and
that thereafter the soul continues still to rest in Him.
It is declared that the union of the soul to the Lord is
indissoluble, that it is unaffected by death. “He is able
to keep what is committed to Him against that day.”
“ Neither death nor life, . . shall be able to separate
us from the love of God, which is.in Christ Jesus our
Lord.” While the Christian lives, he lives in the Lord,
“ the life which he lives in the flesh he lives by the
faith of the Son of God.” Wheii the Christian dies he
dies in the Lord—“ into Thine hand I commend my
spirit.” " Thou hast redeemedme, 0 Lord God of truth 1”
The soul is still united to the Lord —“ absent from the
body, present with the Lord.” The body is still
acknowledged by Him—" them that sleep in Jesus will
God bring with Him.”
This union with the Lord may have been established
in early life, or it may have been established in life’s
latest stage. The thief on the cross and Paul the aged
were alike “ in the Lord,” and dying they died alike
u in the Lord the one when his Christian course was
but begun, the other when his course was fully run >
yet in this respect, in their being " in the Lord, ” there


was, and is, no difference. The babe in Christ and the
father in Israel do enter together into His rest. 0,
brethren, how momentous is this distinction! How
unspeakably does it concern us to ask—“ Is it thus
with us ? Live we in the Lord ? AVere death now to
come to us, where should it find us ? Should we die
in the Lord ?”
11. And second, of the blessedness which they, the
blessed dead enjoy. The blessedness of those who
have died in the Lord is described by the Spirit as
twofold: “They rest from their labours;” and “their
works do follow them.”
1. “They rest from their labours.” And in what
sense was that said ? It meant not the rest of
unconsciousness. We read this where the Saviour
said to the thief on the cross, “ To-day shalt thou be
with me in paradise.” AVe read the same where Paul
expressed his “desire to depart and to be with Christ,”
which he testified was “far better.” It meant not the
rest of inaction. AVe read this in Rev. xxii, 13,
where it is said of the heavenly Jerusalem that “there
shall be no more curse, but the throne of God and of
the Lamb shall be in the midst of it, and his servants
shall serve Him.” And we read the same in Rev. vii.
10, where it is said of the redeemed, “ therefore are
they before the throne of God, and serve Him day and
night in his temple.” It meant what it expressed,
“ They rest from their labours,” from what were their
lahouvB.
They rest from earthly toil and drudgery, from the


weary toil and moil of mind and body which in life-
they had to undergo. It is an eternal sabbath, and
man’s week-day work is done.
They rest from earthly temptation, from the weary
contention they have had to maintain with the enemies'
of their souls, from the resistance, watchful and
resolute, which they had to oppose to their open or
insidious assaults.
They rest from earthly imperfections, from the strain
and the effort required of them in the fulfilment of
duty, id the endurance of trial, with powers unequal
and insufficient, from the sadness of their frequent
failures, from the anxious endeavour to realise a
holiness which could never be satisfactorily attained.
They rest from earthly suffering, from the griefs and
woes, the pain and anguish with which in life they
were afliicted. These, with them, are past. Their last
pang has been borne: Never, never through eternity,
shall it be repeated.
From all this they are delivered. “ They rest.”
There is a service which the blessed have to perform,
a service that is unceasing, a service suited to the
circumstances in which they are placed, a service that-
is directed by the same rule as that by which the
services of earth are directed, fulfilled in compliance
with the divine will: But in that service there is no
" labour;” there is no exaction; there is no restraint.
The heart is there right with God, and every office is
delightful, and every exercise is itself a reward.
In heaven, it is taught, there is for them no unbe-


lieving thought to distress, for faith is there passed,
into vision. In heaven there is no startling fear to-
disturb, for hope is there turned into fruition. In
heaven there are no remains of indwelling corruption
to draw forth the sigh of penitence and regret, for the-
body of sin as well as of death is there wholly abo-
lished. In heaven no tempter beguiles, for the presence-
of the Lord filleth all in all, and in His presence evil
cannot stand. In heaven no cloud of affliction ever
descends to darken the brightness of their joy, for
there there is no more death, neither any more sorrow,,
nor any more pain ; such is their state there, all har-
mony without, all harmony within; their warfare over,,
their armour resigned, their Sabbath rest begun —a.
rest unbroken, a rest for ever ! O say, are they not-
blessed ? O say, who would not seek his portion witli
them ?
And 2. “Their works do follow them.” And in
what sense, again, was that said ? What works were-
they which follow them ? and how do they follow
them ? Their works, we say, were their own works ;
the works proper to them as “in the Lord,” as
disciples of Christ; their works of faith, their
labours of love, their patience of hope. As the dis-
ciples of Christ they were engaged to the per-
formance of these works, when they were brought
into covenant with the Lord, into t union with Him;
and ever since, they were exercised, amid many
confessed imperfections and failures, and according to
the grace given to them, in the performance of them.


They are designated “ their works.” They are acknow-
ledged by God as “ their works.” For these works they
are indebted to God; they are ftaught that they are
indebted; that, where moved and finstigated to them,
they are moved and instigated by God; His grace
separated them from the world; His grace taught
them to know themselves; His grace shewed them
His love in Christ; His grace enabled them to
see what they have seen, to enjoy what they
have enjoyed, of the mind of God; His grace
gave them their assurance of their interest in Christ;
His grace made them love Him for having first
loved them; His grace made them have their con-
versation in heaven ; His grace, in every point where-
in they differ, had made them to differ. And yet they
have credit with God for all that is distinctive of
them ; for every service rendered, for every exercise of
faith and patience fulfilled, as though by their own
strength and their own counsel it had been performed.
Such is their privilege ; such is the grace of God.
Their works—the sanctities of their earthly life—fol-
low them within the veil.
You notice that it is said of these works of theirs
that they “do follow them.” It is not said that they
precede them. We ask you to notice that distinction.
The Lord Jesus goeth before them, and none else.
That is His place; and theirs, —“ they follow the
Lamb whithersoever He goeth ;” they follow Him into
the presence of the Father; they follow Him to
heaven; He it is who gains admission for them to the


blessedness which is there dispensed. But while they
follow Him, and follow Him closely, their own works,
you notice, “do follow them." They follow them in a
two-fold sense : the remembrance of their works fol-
lows them on God’s part; the relish for their works,
and the influence of their works, follow them on their
own part.
The remembrance of their works follows them on
God’s part. Their works are remembered by God as
the proof of their faith in Him; as the evidence that
they arc of the company of the redeemed; that they
are the children of God; that they are fit to take
their place and part in the choirs around the throne.
Their works are so remembered by God in His recep-
tion of them into heaven. They shall be so remem-
bered on the Great Day. On that day they shall be
adduced by the Judge as attesting the reality of their
interest in Himself. Not one of them, we are taught,
shall be forgotten; not one of them shall be omitted.
There, all that grace has wrought in them, all that
grace has wrought for them, all that grace has wrought
by them, all that it has enabled them to do and to
bear in the Saviour’s cause, shall be rehearsed as justi-
fying the decree in their favour which shall then be
pronounced : —“ Come, ye blessed.”
• And their works are remembered by God in the
blessedness which they thenceforth receive from Him,
in the manifestations of His love which they then and
thenceforth enjoy. Each work of theirs, we are
taught, has its appropriate reward on high; every


.service is requited. The cup of cold water given in
the name of a disciple is acknowledged, and fitly
acknowledged; the recompence promised and earned
is measured forth. In the scale of blessedness
there is room for each of the redeemed, and to
■each is assigned the place which is specially and
relatively his due, —“ God is not unrighteous to forget
your work and labour of love which ye have shewed
towards His name.” It is not there forgotten. 0,
eye hath not seen, ear hath not heard, we may not
•conceive of the glories of the blessed, the order
which obtains among those over whom the Lord there
reigns. But we are to infer that in the apportionment
•of these glories —in the apportionment of the offices
there conferred—the virtues and services of earth are
honoured and recognised. We are to infer particu-
larly that there the services and virtues of earth form
the subject of most gracious communings with the
Lord. We are to infer that in regard to these services
and virtues His most gladdening commendations are
given. We can imagine this. It might be directly
by Christ Himself—the Lord’s people there “ see Him
as He is.” ’Or it might be through angel ministries, as
imaged forth in the delegation of the angel Gabriel to
Daniel, the “ man greatly beloved.” In either case we
can imagine the review to which they are led by their
Lord,and the gracious references wherewith the review
is made—the kind, the tender appeals. We can imagine
how graciously, how lovingly he will refer their poor
endeavours, of which at the time they had thought so


little, —the charities they had offered, the sacrifices to
which for conscience’ sake they had submitted, the
testimony which they had borne to His truth, the
words of couusel and admonition, the words of cheer
.and comfort, the words of warning and rebuke which
they had uttered; and liow in this a provision is made
for their blessedness, which can never, never fail.
And, again, we said that their relish for their works
follows them, that the influence of their works fol-
lows them. In this sense their works follow them.
And in this sense their works, as following them, bless
them, as constituting, in the habit which they have
formed, in the taste which they have created, their
meetness and capacity for the services and joys to
which they are there exalted. It is as being holy, we
arc taught, that they are blessed. By the exercises of
earth they have been prepared for the engage-
ments of heaven. The fellowship they have had
with their Lord here below was that which quali-
fied them for fellowship with Him on high. And the
more intimate their communion here has been, the
greater their attainments in' faith and godliness here,
the purer, the more perfect their holiness here has
been: the larger shall be the measure of their blessed-
ness there; the nearer shall be their position, amid the
rejoicing throng, to His throne.
These consequences are revealed as involved in their
earthly services. And they are precious consequences;
are they not, brethren ? They are expressly affirmed
in countless revelations. And say, as we dwell in


thought upon them, as we survey them, and see how
they bear on the condition of those who “ in Christ”
are brought within the compass of all the beatitudes,,
say, breathe we not in our souls an echo to the
testimonies which the Spirit thus sent down from
heaven, that "Blessed,” yea, inexpressibly blessed
"are the dead who die in the Lord,” who "rest from
their labours,” and whose “ works do” thus “ follow
them!”
We have seen, brethren, what are the truths which
are contained in these words. We have seen that
there is a blessedness possessed by the dead in Christ,,
which is proper to themselves. We have seen how
that blessedness is realised. And wc have seen how
surpassing all comparison that blessedness must of'
necessity be. We speak of these things feebly,
brethren. But we speak of them truly: we speak as
the Spirit spake. And now we ask you to apply this
most sure doctrine.
We ask you, 1. To judge thence how, in the view of
these things, we should account of ourselves. We
have seen how it is that sinners are admitted to share
the glory of eternity: We have seen that all their
interest therein turns on their union, in time, to the
Lord; that this is the ground, the reason, the warrant
of it; and that none other is. Wo are to question
ourselves on this head. We are to ask—how should
we ask ?—" Are we in Christ ?” Paul speaks in
Romans xvi., 7, of some who were in Christ, before
him. He speaks in Galatians i., 22, of the churches of


Judea which were in Christ. Say, brethren, do we
answer that it is so with us; our affections centering
on Christ, our homage paid to Christ, our services
rendered to Christ, our communion with Christ; a
wakeful, humble, thankful, confiding service and
communion as theirs was ? 0, if it he thus with us as-
with them, then surely we too may indulge the good
hope which such words encourage: We too may look
down into the gloom of the dark valley without
dismay; for with us too shall he realised what the
Lord has undertaken for His people, and with such
blessedness we shall he blessed. 0, these are precious
assurances. And, Christian brethren, if such Christians
we are, let us rejoice in them.
We ask you, 2. To judge thence how, failing this,
we are here rebuked. If we may not take to our-
selves these consolations, if we must confess that we
have hitherto resisted the calls of the Lord Jesus
Christ, that we are not in covenant with Him, not
resting in Him in the relation on which these cheering
words proceed; we ask you to consider how inesti-
mable are the advantages of which we do thus hazard
the loss for ever ! How inconceivably precious is the
inheritance which is thus offered to us, but which,
living thus, we may never enjoy. Brethren, we read
here, “ Blessed are the dead who die in the Lord.” We
ask you what would have been the testimony in regard
to those who die out of the Lord, alien from Him, in
their state of nature, in their state of sin ? We ask
you, if such had been the subject of this revelation, in.


what terms the voice then heard would have dis-
coursed of it ? Can we tell what the language would
have been ? 0, yes; “ wretched !” it would have pro-
claimed, “ miserable, and that for ever!”—a misery
which may not be remitted, a misery ever deepening,
for therein, too, their works do ever follow them.—o,
brethren! each clamourous still for its full measure of
punishment, its full recompense of reward. We pray
that there may be none among us who have been so
reckless. We trust that there are hut few among us
who have thus withstood the Lord; but if there were
among us one—but one—-O, we would beseech Him—
how should we beseech him!—to be warned and
admonished; and now, while yet he may — noiv, while
■yet he may —to flee to Christ, to give himself to
Christ.
We ask you, 3. To judge thence how in the view of
these things we should regard the removal of those
whom we had classed, while here, as “ in Christ,”
whom we had accounted believers in Christ. We ask
you how, in mourning for them, we should mourn ?
We are not forbidden to mourn for the dead, brethren.
It is right that in our bereavement we should do jus-
tice to the affection and worth of those of whom we
have been bereaved. It is right that we should grate-
fully and suitably acknowledge our obligations to
them, that we should confess how life has been im-
poverished for us by the stroke. Tears are holy—
“ Jesus wept.” We are not to rebuke the mourner;
we arc to “ weep with them that weep.” But while


-we mourn, for the dead, brethren, we are to see that in
mourning we exceed not the measure which truth and
reason prescribe. When we have a good hope in
regard to the departed, let us seek, in meditating that
hope, to moderate the sorrow with which they are
lamented. We say of them that they have “ entered
into their rest.” Ah, how inconsistent were we in
excessive repinings over an event which has been pro-
ductive to them of such effects! Let the thoughts
here suggested be duly weighed. Would we recall the
departed to traverse again the way they took —to
endure again the labours they had here to endure ?
Would we have them to exchange perfection for imper-
fection, light for darkness, life for death ? Let these
testimonies teach us that our loss is their unspeak-
able and everlasting gain. Let us not complain that
it is so. Let us learn thence humbly and submissively
to resign ourselves to the will of the Lord, and to say
under His rod, “ Blessed be His name !” Amen.


MELBOURNE :
J. AXD A. M*KISLBV, FBIXXESS,
QUEBJT BTKEBT.


PRESBYTERIAN SABBATH SCHOOL DEPOT,
15 COLLINS STREET .WEST.
(NEAR ELIZABETH STREET.)
ROBERT MACKAT,
IMPORTER OF
Magazines and Newspapers
BY EVERY MAIL STEAMER.
Encyclopedias, Dictionaries, and Gazetteers.
Photographic and Scrag) Albums in Great Variety.
grafting Jgaimals. §,rftsfs’ Colours.
MANIFOLD LETTER WRITERS.
ACCOUNT BOOKS AND STATIONERY
OF EVERY DESCRIPTION.
Paper Fasteners, Elastic Bands, Fancy and Plain Writing Papers, Envelopes, Ink,
Pencils, and Copy and Exercise Books.
ILLUSTRATED FAMILY BIBLES.
Agent for the National Bible Society of Scotland.
Pew and Pocket Bibles. Psalm and Hymn Books. Picture Books for Children.
Standard Works for the Family library.
REWARD BOOKS and SCHOOL BOOKS at LOWEST PRICES.
DISCOUNT ALLOWED TO TEACHERS.
CENTRAL AGENCY FOR COUTTS’ GUARANTEED ACETIC ACID.


FAMILY BIBLE DEPOT,
Agency for the National Bible Society of Scotland.
Family Bibles, in superior bindings, with and without the
Psalms in metre. Prices of 4to editions, from 10a. to £7 7s.
The following are a few of the editions usually kept in stock : —
The Self-Explanatory Family Bible, with Marginal
Readings and Original and Selected Parallel References, printed at
length. Strongly bound, med. 4to, coloured sbeep, 10s. ; cape
morocco, gilt edges, 12s. Gd. ; morocco flexible, 20s.
The Holy Bible, crown 4to, small pica type, with Maps and
Steel Engravings. Morocco flexible, 305,; with superior Coloured
Plates, Register, &c., 30s.
The Practical Devotional Family Bible, with the Con-
densed Commentaries of Henry and Scott. Cape morocco extra,
305.; full-morocco, Maps, &c. t 375. 6d. ; aud in superior morocco
bindings, with Plates, &c,, 60s. and upwards.
The Illustrated Household Commentary, containing
a Scripture Atlas, 30 large Cartoons of Remarkable Events and
about 500 Engravings, beautifully printed on toned paper. Morocco
flexible, 555. ; or morocco super, extra, o3s.
Cassell’s Family Bible, new edition, numerous Engravings, 21s.
Morocco 30s.
Barnes’ Notes on the New Testament, illustrated and
annotated edition, with (57 Plates illustrating Scripture Scenes &c.
6 double vols., cloth, 345. (Id.
Earnes' Notes on the Books of Job, The Tsalms, Daniel, and Isaiah,
with Plates. 7 vols., 31s. 6d.
Scott’s Commentary on the Scriptures, with additional
Notes by the Rev. Wm. Symington, D.D. 15 vols., cloth, 80s.
The Imperial Family Bible, new edition, with many thousand
Critical, Explanatory, and Practical Notes, illustrated by the finest
series of Steel Engravings ever published, comprising 74 Plates.
One handsome volume, morocco extra, £7 7s.
Brown’s Family Bible, with Plates, Family Register, &c., 40s. ;
morocco extra, 455.
The Comprehensive Family Bible, with numerous Critical
aud Explanatory Notes and Practical Reflections, 74 Historical and
Landscape Illustrations, Maps, &c. One handsome volume, morocco
super, extra, £O.
Cooke’s Brown’s Self-Interpreting Bible, new edition,
having several thousand additional Notes, explaining difficult
texts, by the late Rev. Dr. Cooke and Dr. J. L. Porter, illustrated
with a series of very fine Engravings on Steel. Morocco extra,
£4 4s.
ROBERT MAC KAY, IMPORTER.


Family Worship, a series of Prayers, with Remarks on Passages
of sacred Scriptures for every Morning and Evening throughout the Year,
by above 200 ministers, with ">OO selected Hymns, illustrated by fine Steel
Engravings. New and improved edition, royal 4to, cloth 275. 6d.
Service Book for the Bush ; being Prayers for Social and
Public "Worship, by Ministers of the Presbyterian Church of Victoria,
edited by the Rev. JL J. Campbell, Geelong; 6s.
The Book of Family Devotion, by the Rev. D. Dewar, D.D.,
LL.D., half-jnomceo, 27*. Gd.
Daily Prayers and Daily Readings for Christian
Homes, by Rev. Dr. Tweedie, ss. Gd.
Morrison’s Family Devotions, with Short Notes on the
Portions of Scripture. New edition, half-morocco extra, 18s.
Family Prayers, by the Rev, J. R. Macduff, D.D. Large type
edition, cloth extra, 3s. fid.
Fletcher’s Family Devotions, with numerous Plates, cloth,
gilt, 30s.
Prayers for Social end Family Worship, prepared by a
Special Committee, and authorised by the Geucral Assembly of' the ChuTch
of Scotland. New edition, cloth, ls.'ftd.
Family Prayers, by C. J. Vaughan, D.D., 3s. Gd.
Aids to Devotion, (Family Prayers), by authority from the
General Assembly, with Introductory and Occasional Prayers, cloth, *2s.
The Cottage Prayer-book and Aids to Devotion, by
the Eev. Dr. Clarke, Is. fid.
The Family Prayer-Book, for Every Day in the Year, with
Prayers and Thanksgivings for Special Occasions, by Contributors of various
Denominations. 4to, cloth extra, 7s. fid.
Morning by Morning, (or Daily Headings for the Family acid
the Closet), and EVENING BY EVENING (or Bendings at Eventide),
by the Hov. C. 11. Spurgeon. 3s. Gd. each.
Family Prayers, being a complete Course for Six Weeks, with
additional Prayers suited ior Special Occasions, by the llev. E. Bickersteth.
Sew edition, 3s Gd.
The Mother’s Family Prayer-book, or Helps to Family
Worship, designed chiefly for use in the absence of fathers. Cloth extra,
3s. 6d.
The Daily prayer-book, for the use of Families, by various
Contributors. Edited by John StoughtOD, D-D. Cloth extra, 6s. fid.
Prayers in the Congregation, by Henry Ward Beecher, D.D.
Cloth, 3s. Gd.
The Altar Of the Household, beirp Services adapted for
Family Worship for Every Hay in tlic Year. Cloth gilt, 235.


PRESBYTERIAN SABBATH SCHOOL DEPOT.
Agency for the National Bible Society of Scotland.
Agent for Drummond’s Stirling Publications & Tracts.
POCKET, PEW, PULPIT AND FAMILY BIBLES.
In Great Variety, and at the Lowest Prices.
SPECIAL ADVANTAGES TO SABBATH SCHOOLS.
SUPPLIES FDR CHURCHES & DISTRIBUTION BY LOCAL BIBLE SOCIETIES.
Scheme of Bible Lessons for 1877, with Notes for Teachers, adopted by the
Sabbath ochooi Committee of the Presbyterian Church of Victoria.
Hymns and Spiritual Songs, with music, edited by Rev. James Gall, 2d.
Harmonised Edition. Cloth, Is.
Hymns for Evangelistic Meetings and Sunday Schools, 400 hymns, with tunes, 4d.
„ „ Harmonised Edition, 2s.
Sankey’s Hymns and Solos, enlarged edition, Is.; school edition, Gd.
The Tenny Hymn Book, Curwen’B Sunday School Hymn Book, Wilson’s Songs of Zion
Is. per dozen
Bateman's Hymns, 13. Gd. and 2s. per dozen.
„ „ harmonised edition, cloth, Is.
„ Sacred Melodies, containing 200 hymns, with the music, 2s. per dozen
„ „ „ with words only, Is. per dozen
Harmonised edition, cloth, Is.
The Gems of Song, containing 20G hymns, 2s. per dozen
Harmonised edition, 3 83 melodies, cloth Is.
Phillips' American Sacred Songster, paper cover, 2s per dozen; cloth, with music, 2s. Sd.
each; cloth extra, 4s.
Phillips' Song Ministry, music for pianoforte, Is. 6<L
Illuminated Reward Cards, in great variety, Gd. and Is. per packet
Attendance tickets, in sheets and packets
Roll Books, Class Registers, &c.,for Superintendents and Teachers
The Fitst Catechism for Infant Classes, Is. per dozen
The Second Catechism for Junior Classes, 2s. per dozen
Short> r Catechisms, with and without proofs, Gd. and lid. per dozen
Willson’s Mather’s Catechism. Gd. per dozen
Leitch’s Analysis of the Shorter Catechism. 2s. per dozen
Inglis's Shorter Catechism Popularly Explained, 2s. per dozen
The Confession of Faith, with Larger and Shorter Catechism, &c., cloth, Is. 6d; leather,
The Children's Paper
Band of Hope Review
The Cottager and Artizan
The Children’s Messenger
British Workman
Children's Friend
Infant’s Magazine
The Adviser, &c., &c.
REGULARLY RECEIVED.
The Scottish Sabbath School Teacher's Magazine
The Sunday School Teacher's Magazine
The Union Magazine for Sunday School Teachers, Sco.
TER MAIL STEAMERS.
Handbooks for Sunday-ScMool Teachers always In stock.
A Large Stack of Bibles with Psalms, 'iestamcnts, and Psalm Books in
every style of binding, and sold at the lowest prices.
ROBERT MACKAY, IMPORTER.
