





USemoft of
THE MOST REVEREND
ROGER BEDE VAUGHAN, 0.5.8.,
ARCHBISHOP OF SYDNEY.


.
■


Memoir of
THE MOST REVEREND
ROGER BEDE VAUGHAN, 0.5.8.,
ARCHBISHOP OF SYDNEY.
BY THE
RIGHT REVEREND J. C. HEDLEY, D.D.
LONDON:
PRINTED AT THE CHISWICK PRESS
1884.




Memoir of
THE MOST REVEREND
ROGER BEDE VAUGHAN, 0.5.8.,
ARCHBISHOP OF SYDNEY.
OGER WILLIAM VAUGHAN, who took in holy
religion the name of Bede, was born on January 9,
1834, at Courtfield, near Ross, Herefordshire. His
father was Colonel John Francis Vaughan, of Court-
field, and his mother, Elizabeth Louisa Vaughan,
daughter of Mr. John Rolls, of the Hendac, Monmouthshire
His childhood was passed at Courtfield under the care of an
affectionate but conscientious father, and of a mother whose
saintly life and example have been a precious inheritance to all
her children. Roger was the second son, the present bishop
(Herbert Vaughan) of Salford being the eldest; and these two
were sufficiently near one another in age to be brought up in
very intimate companionship. At the age of six he was sent
with his brother Herbert to a boarding-school at Monmouth,
where the late Rev. Dr. Burgess (afterwards bishop of Clifton),
assisted by the Rev. Thomas Abbot (now rector of St. Mary's,
Monmouth), had under his care a few boys, the sons of the
Catholic gentry of the neighbouring counties. Here he remained
about two years and a-half or three years. His kind masters
found him good, gentle, truthful, and pious. He did not show
any extraordinary talent or strong love for study; and his
physical health soon began to be so delicate as almost to put a
stop to all attempts at study. He was taken home because it


was thought that he was suffering from disease of the heart. He
spent the next four or five years at Courtfield, only allowed to
study when he felt inclined. Confinement and stooping over a
book were pronounced to be injurious to him, and he was
encouraged to be in the open air and to spend his time in cheer-
ful amusement. But his education, in the highest sense of the
word, went on all the time.
His soul was formed to piety 1 under the influence of his holy
mother. He and his elder brother used to be fond of playing at
saying Mass, and at anything that was ecclesiastical. Not being
strong, his recreations were chiefly of a quiet kind. He was fond
of drawing, of painting, and of music; and he used to amuse
himself and his brothers and sisters with acting, and similar per-
formances. He enjoyed quietly fishing in the Wye, which flows
through some of the finest scenery in England, past the Court-
field demesne. Hunting and shooting and sports requiring
physical strength he had no turn for. Indeed he used to dread
firing a gun, and to shrink from inflicting death or pain upon
animals. He was exceedingly affectionate and sensitive, bright,
inventive, full of humour and fun, and clever at all he took up.
His first sign of a vocation of a more marked kind was given
in 1848, when his parents were spending the winter in the island
of Jersey. The Jesuits had been brutally expelled by the revolu-
tion from different countries in Europe. This fired his generous
and sympathetic disposition, and he then told his mother he was
determined to become a Jesuit himself. But he was still too
delicate to leave home. In 1851, however, when he was about
seventeen, he was thought to be sufficiently strong to be sent
to the Benedictine college of St. Gregory, at Downside, near
Bath, which his elder brother had just left to continue his eccle-
siastical studies in Rome.
At Downside his health improved, and he advanced with great
rapidity in learning, making up by his excellent abilities for the
disadvantages under which his delicacy had laid him for so many
years. After the death of his mother, to whom he was passio-
nately attached, the thought of becoming a priest, which had
left him before he went to college, returned to him with great
force. The love of home seemed to have been extinguished in
him and its charm to have departed and he made up his mind
1 The substance, and to some extent the very words, of these first two
pages have been taken from the biography of Archbishop Vaughan, which
appeared in the “Tablet” on August 25, 1883.


to become a child of St. Benedict at Downside, where he had been
greatly edified by the holy and devoted lives of that religious
community. He received the habit on September 12, 1853, from
Prior Peter Wilson, in company with John Wulstan Richards
(now incumbent of St. Josephus, Swansea, and canon of Newport),
George Clement Clark, now of St. John's, Bath, and one other
postulant. He took the solemn vows of religion at the hands of
the late Prior Norbert Sweeney on October 5, 1854.
It was whilst at Downside that he had two singular presenti-
ments. The one was a certain knowledge of his mother's death
before the news of it had reached the college, and this at a time
when he could have had no grounds for supposing her to be ill.
The other was a kind of foresight into the future. It seemed to
him, as he used to describe it, that he saw himself grown up and
sent to Australia to do a great work, and then suddenly disappear
in a blue mist. This feeling so impressed his mind that he
actually took down the map of Australia to examine it, and when
he saw marked on the map the range of the Blue Mountains,
he concluded that this was the blue mist in which he was to dis-
appear. And often afterwards, and still more when he had been
nominated by the Holy See for Sydney, he used to tell his friends
that they were to expect his sudden disappearance some day
among the Blue Mountains. There is something curious and
remarkable, to say the least of it, in the way in which this latter
presentiment was fulfilled. And it is curious also to note that
the cell he occupied at Downside as a young religious was the
identical one which had previously been the cell of two other
great English Benedictines who also distinguished themselves
in New South Wales, Archbishop Bede Polding, and Bishop
Ullathorne.
In the year 1855, after he had been in the religious habit about
two years, he was sent, for the purpose of study, to Rome, to
the monastery of St. Paul fuori le mura. It was this far-seeing
decision of his superiors which has given its colour and character
to his whole life. The Cassinese Benedictines, among whom he
was sent, had learned men and learned traditions. Rome herself
always contains in her ecclesiastical society men whom merely to
know is an education; and she teaches and elevates the youthful
heart by her very stones.
Roger Bede Vaughan resided in Italy from 1855 to August,
1859. These four years were spent chiefly at San Callisto and
San Paolo ; but the young Benedictine did not omit to visit the


great arch-monastery of Monte Cassino and the cradle of western
monachism, Subiaco. His life at Rome was that of a religious
man and of a hard student. With all his brilliant qualities the
late archbishop had a real love of seclusion. This was partly
self-denial and the wish to escape dangerous occasions of vanity;
but it was also, in great measure, his natural temperament. He
could not tolerate frivolous people and commonplace talk. He
could unbend and be genial and jocose, as his friends well knew.
But he knew no mean between that and serious work. To give
an idea of how he worked in Rome, the following extracts from
his letters may be quoted. The first is from a letter dated “ San
Paolo fuori le mura, March 15, 1858.” —“ Lady was
kind enough to call on me here, about a fortnight ago. I showed
them every civility I could; the church, relics, &c. &c. It is
so long a walk to Rome and back from St. Paul's, that, as I can
never get there without sacrificing some of my choir-duties, I
make the journey as seldom as possible. In fact I never go
in unless I have some necessity. I purposely avoid making
acquaintances, for if once in a town one begins visiting, serious
study is at an end.”
The second is from a letter written at San Callisto in the same
year, but a few months later, September 23 : —“ With regard
to my health, lam quite well. And so much so, that instead
of taking the customary villeggiatura, have been remaining in
Rome to study, as I wish to work up my Greek a little during
the vacation. I can read German now with little difficulty. I
have picked it up during my recreation hours, as I require very
little exercise, and find my only pleasures amongst my books.
spread the report of my sickness ; indeed he told me the
other day that he did his best to get me removed. In the
middle of summer, perhaps, I did look a little pale, and was, as
everyone else, a little pulled down by the heat; but I have been
strong enough to perform all my duties without difficulty through
the whole summer. One of my reasons for learning German is
because I have a great love for philosophy, and they tell me I
have a turn for it, and ought to make it my study; and there are
so many works, literary and philosophical, in that language which
are not translated, that I thought my play-time would not be
thrown away in gaining a knowledge of it. As Ido not know
what I may be put to in the future, whether Downside, Belmont,
or mission, I have not turned my mind to any one branch of
science in particular, but have been trying to do my best in all.


If, however, it should ever enter the minds of superiors to think
me capable of instructing in days to come, I should apply myself
in particular to that branch of knowledge which might be des-
tined for me —as, to be really proficient in all, requires many
years of intense labour. However, as I have no reason at present
to think that such will be the case, I shall try to do my best,
and make myself as useful as my poor abilities will admit.” 1
We have here, in his own words, the indication rather than
the description of his life at San Callisto and San Paolo. He
worked hard at theology, history, philosophy, and literature.
He had regular terms and times of study, though it would not
appear that he joined any class. His teacher, during a great
part of his stay, was the learned Don Angelo Zelli-Jacobuzzi,
now abbot of St. Paul’s, whom the writer has lately heard to
speak of him with great admiration and affection. Among the
community of San Paolo he was naturally an object of con-
siderable interest to English-speaking visitors, and the more so
in virtue of his handsome, winning face, and his tall and com-
manding figure. Some of our readers will remember how he
was the guide of the Prince of Wales when His Royal Highness
visited the basilica of St. Paul. The writer has heard him
describe how, before he would begin his functions as “ cicerone,”
he insisted to the Duke of Newcastle that he should be “ properly
introduced.” He used to relate how, in pointing out the
mosaics of the Popes which run round the clerestory of the
great church, he casually but very distinctly requested the Prince
to observe that they “ began with St. Peter, and ended with
Pius the Ninth.”
It was one of his pleasant memories to recall how kind to him,
in the days of his Roman life, had been Pio Nono himself. The
1 There is a very simple and charming letter, dated San Paolo, December
15, 1858, addressed to Prior Sweeney, giving details of his Roman life, from
which we cannot resist the temptation to make an extract: —
“ There could not be a better place (if a man has a conscience and is a
monk) to love God and gain knowledge. I must always feel most grateful to
you for this amongst your other numerous kindnesses to me, in having sent
me to a place where I am likely, or at least have an opportunity, to prepare
myself to be of some service to our dear congregation .... I miss our way
at Downside in some things very much; after being accustomed to an active
life, this kind of diluted retreat is a little trying at first. But I have plenty
to do, and find my time too short. They have no ceremonies, expositions,
high Compline, as we have at Downside! I have seen no altar look so well
since I have been at Rome as ours does on a grand day, after Brother Wil-
frid’s talents and good taste have been bestowed upon it.”


Holy Father, in the times before he was a prisoner in the
Vatican, was never happier than when attending a function on a
great festival, or receiving the clergy or the religious at his light
collation after the solemnities were over. Roger Bede Vaughan
was always noticed by the kindly Pontiff on great days at St.
Paul's, and received from him many a good word, and sometimes
a little gift to mark his fatherly affection. And it was under-
stood that it was owing to the express and direct wish of the
Pope that the young student was allowed to remain in Rome so
long as he did.
It was in Rome that the young religious received the holy
order of the Priesthood. He had received the tonsure and
minor orders from the late Bishop Morris at Downside on June
2, 1855. He was advanced to the Subdiaconate in Rome on
April 3, 1858, and to the Diaconate on Ember Saturday, March
19, 1859. Three weeks later, namely, on April 9of the same
year, he was ordained Priest by Cardinal Patrizi, the Vicar of
His Holiness, in the Lateran basilica. He celebrated his first
Mass on April 15.
He returned to Downside in August of the same year, 1859.
During the two years which he now spent in the monastery of
his profession, his chief work was the care of the mission which
is attached to St. Gregory's. He had his duties in the choir,
and he also taught in the college; but it was in the care of souls
that he now began to develop two of the principal talents which
God had given him, his power of governing, and his gift of
speech. He was not without consciousness of what he could do
as a speaker; and during these two years he took particular pains
in studying how to impress and move the minds and hearts of
the poor. He might have become a great missioner had not
Almighty God destined him for a yet more important work.
The Benedictine cathedral monastery of St. Michael, near
Hereford, was opened with much solemnity on September 4,
1861. But already for two years a small community had been
on the spot, and the work of the house, as a noviciate and place
of studies, had been begun on the 21st of November, a venerable
and “ memorable '' day. It was in the autumn of 1861 that Roger
Bede Vaughan was appointed by the President-General of the
English Benedictines as professor of metaphysics and moral philo-
sophy at St. Michael's. It was a post of considerable importance,
and it offered to the peculiar gifts and talents of Father Bede an
opportunity which he was not likely to let slip. St. Michael's


was the “ House of Studies " of the congregation. Here a priest
and professor had under his charge or within the reach of his
influence the whole of the young men who were in time to form
the congregation itself. Bede Vaughan even from the earliest
period of his religious life had seen the importance of St.
Michael's, and had humbly aspired to be a member of its com-
munity. Writing from Rome to a friend on March 15, 1858
(the year before St. Michael's was occupied), he said, “If you
should write to me I should be most thankful to hear something
about Belmont, for I take a special interest in it. . . . I know
not if it would be bold to ask if there be any chance of my being
sent there on my return." Again, a month later, he writes
(April 15) : “ Belmont is my hope." And on June 8 of the
same year he says: “ I am particularly interested to know if
those who are to go to Belmont are determined, as I may come
under something." And on the following August 24 he speaks
thus humbly of himself: “Even the weakest can help. It may
be want of capacity, but it will never be want of will or sacrifice
that will make me entirely useless." He was sent there in time
for the solemn dedication of the church on September 4, 1861;
and many will still recall how his tall figure marched at the head
of the great procession carrying the cross.
He entered on his duties as professor of philosophy with all
the energy of his strong and serious nature. He had not the
gifts of a pedagogue or tutor. But he had the art of making
young men think for themselves. He was not a man to confine
his philosophy to his class-room. He treated it as an earnest
business which was never far out of place in the studious
monastic life. At the outset he was unfortunately weighted
by a false philosophy. He had taken up the charlatanry and
false glitter of a certain phase of Ontologism ; and he spent
months of labour in elaborating its formularies for his class.
He lived long enough to become a thoroughgoing Thomist;
and the mere fact that at St. Michael's he was trying to make a
poor cause attractive, gave a kind of fervour to his lessons, and
added a sort of apostolate to his intercourse with the young men,
which made them both work and think, whilst his own good
sense prevented them from taking any real harm. During these
days he was very strict in his monastic life, as far as the
weakness of his heart would allow. He wanted to have nothing
to say to the world, and it is to be feared that he sometimes
managed to affront troublesome friends and admirers from the


outer world who wanted to take up his time. The fervour of
the man was characteristically seen on one occasion when, in the
course of a retreat given by the present Archbishop of Trinidad,
then the Rev. Father Gonin, of Woodchester, he became so
impressed with the thought of monastic poverty, that he took all
his superfluous books—he had no other superfluities—and piled
them in a heap outside his cell.
He had only been one year at St. Michael's when he was
elected Cathedral Prior of the diocesan chapter of Newport and
Menevia, and, as such, superior of that house. He was a good
deal surprised at his election. He had no false humility, and he
made no protests; but his friends knew well the intense serious-
ness with which he accepted the charge. No doubt he felt that,
with God's help, he could do something for the house and for his
order; for he was one of those exceptional men who combine
great powers with a calm recognition of their powers. It was
not that he was vain. There was, no doubt, considerable tempta-
tion to vanity in many of the circumstances of his life. But it is
the feeling of those who knew him best, that however much at
times the phantom of vanity fluttered before his imagination, it
never gained any hold upon his intellect, much less upon his will.
But he was on many accounts surprised at his election; and when
he accepted the duties placed upon him, he did so under the
simple and genuine idea that it was the will of God. In a letter
which is not dated, but which must have been written about the
middle of July, 1862, whilst the general chapter was sitting at
Ampleforth, he thus writes: u I will submit. I will sacrifice
myself with God's help entirely and without reserve to the one
great end for which Belmont has been established; and I hope to
make example a more powerful means than words in teaching
others to follow out the spirit of their state."
He was Prior of St. Michael's for ten years and a half, viz.,
from July, 1862, to February, 1873. There are naturally very
few incidents to relate of those years of monastic seclusion and
labour. His life in the monastery was only varied by an occasional
vacation—and this was by no means an annual thing—by a
journey to some struggling mission in South Wales, or some
distant Benedictine church to preach a sermon, and by one visit
to Rome of considerable duration. One of the notable points in
that “ example " which he promised to give consists in his
steadiness to the ordinary life of the house. Superiors are often
with good reason expected to appear beyond their enclosures;


but Bede Vaughan let it be seen and felt that going out was
distasteful to him. He could not, on account of his heart, attend
the earliest morning offices of the choir; but he made a rule to
himself, from which he most rarely deviated, to appear in his
stall every morning without fail at the hour which prudence
allowed; and from this practice, and from punctual attendance at
all the day offices, no amount of literary or other occupation ever
made him excuse himself. During his priorship he took up
different branches of teaching at various times, chiefly sacred
Scripture or preaching; but he watched and presided over the
whole of the scholastic work, keeping both professors and students
steadily to their duty the whole year round. His intuitive power
of taking the right side of an administrative question, a gift which
is only found in a few men, together with his natural firmness of
character, gave the house over which he presided a deep peace-
fulness and an air of settled calm such as well became a home of
studious Benedictines. But his great power, after all, was his
power of speech. He used every occasion afforded him by the
constitutions, by custom, or by circumstances, for speaking to his
community or to particular members of it. It was not precisely
that he was a finished speaker. He was eloquent, after a fashion,
and had a great number of words at his command, though he could
not always marshal the right one. He poured out sentences with
ease, and the result was generally effective; but in his earlier
days he was often diffuse and sometimes tedious. The secret of his
effectiveness was his earnestness and seriousness. He once said
to the writer, “ I became a religious because I was aware that I
was bound to love God with my whole heart; and I thought I
could not do it if I remained in the world.” Roger Bede Vaughan
was one whose special characteristic was the primitive virtue of
loving God above every other thing. Love of God is common to
all who are in grace; but it is not all who carry it about with
them in the features of their mental and emotional life. He
showed it, to those who knew him long, as he moved in his way
through his career, he had a considerable tenderness of heart; he
had no slight tincture of cynicism, and great powers of sarcasm.
Though he was affectionate, he was also inclined to bitterness.
These were two opposite rocks. By grace and denial, his aflfection-
ateness was predominantly given to his Maker and his Last End,
and his bitterness disappeared in the largeness of view by which
he learned to look at all things, both great and small, in the light
of God alone. That this was his predominating and permanent


spirit, in spite of an occasional brusqueness, hardness of manner
to others, and cynicism of expression to strangers, is not to be
doubted for a moment. Almost all that was objectionable in his
speech and deportment disappeared during the ten years of his
episcopate in Sydney; and had he lived till he was sixty or
seventy, instead of dying as he did at fifty, we should have had as
fine an example of a perfectly ripe and mature servant of God,
great bishop, and Christian gentleman as this generation has seen.
Once or twice the real tenderness and piety of his nature broke
out on the surface. Once, in a discourse in chapter, on an
evening which followed a day (and many days) spent in poring
over the early saints and fathers of the desert, for certain
chapters in his Life of St. Thomas, he was speaking, as he so often
did, of the sweetness of giving one's heart wholly and completely
to God, and he broke down in a passion of sobs and tears. To
weep in the pulpit is not a rare thing with preachers ; but, except
this once, there cannot be recalled any occasion in which Bede
Vaughan gave way. There was another time, when he had just
come away from the death-bed of a brother monk and a very dear
friend; the same overpowering thought filled his heart, and he
could not speak. And some will remember how, at the end of a
certain retreat which he had been preaching to the community of
St. Michael's, he asked for their prayers for himself, and betrayed
unmistakable emotion when he begged them to ask God that the
“ remainder of his short life might be spent within the English
Congregation." He referred to certain chances of his being
called to the episcopate. It was perhaps his “ retreats" which
best enabled others to understand his character. Most of the
Benedictine convents of men or of women throughout England
have heard him at one time or another; and we believe that the
chief and uniform impression, wherever he preached, was of a
man who had seriously and fervently given his own heart to God,
and who seemed to think he could do nothing better for any
immortal soul than to persuade it to do the same.
During his residence at St. Michael's Prior Vaughan wrote and
published in 1865, a pamphlet which he entitled, “ What does it
profit a Man ? University Education and the Memorialists. By
the Son of a Catholic Country Squire." In this brochure, which
is somewhat diffuse, but written with great freshness and spirit,
he strongly maintains the position that to send Catholic youths
to Oxford and Cambridge is sure to result in the loss of the
English Catholic tradition. He also contributed several articles


to the “ Dublin Review," the principal being one of sixty pages, on
“ English Catholic University Education," which appeared in
October, 1867. The aim of the article, which comments largely
on the Universities “ Report" of 1867, is to demonstrate that
“ Oxford is poison to Catholic life;" but a considerable portion of
it is taken up with the question of a Catholic university, which
the writer considers both necessary and practicable. The paper
is full of matter and of argument, and will bear attentive reading
even now, seventeen years after it was written. But the great
literary work of Father Bede Vaughan was his “ Life of St.
Thomas of Aquin," in two volumes, of which the first was pub-
lished in 1871 and the second in the following year. Of this work
we will only say that whatever it has done for St. Thomas and
for the public, it most emphatically, in the widest sense, educated
its writer. Its plan and scope, as most of our readers know, are
very wide. The prior spent something like five years over it.
He read every sort of book on St. Thomas, and on every person
and subject connected with him. He wrote and re-wrote his
chapters. He gave himself no recreation except what was
absolutely necessary to keep him in working order; and the
example of hard, persevering, and successful work which he thus
gave to his staff and to the community is one of the excellent
results of his priorship. And thus, after ten years of prayer,
cloistral life, hard study, and experience of the human heart, Roger
Bede Vaughan was an educated, trustworthy, and mature man,
fitted to take any post or any dignity in the Church of God.
It was at one time extremely probable that Prior Vaughan
would have been named an assistant to the late Bishop Brown of
Newport and Menevia. It was well known that the bishop was
most anxious to secure him, and in December, 1872, it is under-
stood that Propaganda had given its approval and consent. But
the pressing importunity of the late Archbishop Polding, of
Sydney, induced the Holy See to alter its mind, and Father
Vaughan received a telegram on February 5, 1873, from Rome,
announcing to him that he was appointed coadjutor with right
of succession to the metropolitan see of Sydney. Having resigned
the office of cathedral prior, he was consecrated on March 19
following, at Liverpool, in the church of St. Vincent, by His
Eminence Cardinal Manning. The present bishop of Liverpool
was consecrated with him. Soon after his consecration he
visited Ireland, and was present at Cardinal Cullen's examination
in the memorable O'Keefe trial. In the month of July he


assisted by invitation at the fourth provincial synod of West-
minster, held at St. Edmund’s College, and preached the opening
sermon. It was immediately published, under the title of
“ Ecclesia Christi.”
In September of the same year he set out for Rome, intending
to travel to his new home by way of Egypt and the Red Sea.
He was accompanied to Rome by the Rev. Fathers Margison and
Guy, of the English Benedictines. They stopped at one or
two places en route ; and the following passage from a letter to
Colonel Vaughan, his father, will give some idea of the serious
thoughts which occupied him on this journey. The letter is
dated “ Como, September 19, 1873.”
“ We were fagged out by our Alpine travel, and spent most of
yesterday resting, on the lake, in a boat. Though lam with
two pleasant companions, my thoughts were often and often far
away from Como and its rich and beautiful banks. The post,
which I have now left, practically (I suppose) for ever, and all
those I know so well and love so tenderly, and the future with
its uncertainty and inevitable difficulties, filled my mind and
imagination ; and will do again and again. But I think we all
love enterprise; and difficulties and sacrifices are quite the wrong-
sort of things to try to stop our paths by! Pride ! Herbert
would say. I don’t quite know myself what name to call it by ;
but anyhow it seems to help me along, and I will not quarrel
with it just at present.” • ...
It has been said that he wished to live and die in his
congregation. Four years before his elevation to the episcopacy
he wrote thus, apropos of becoming coadjutor to Bishop
Brown: —
“ I simply wish to do the work which is put before me ; and
the more I think of it, the more I feel that I should do more
good to religion working in the congregation than in any other
position.” (January 8, 1869.)
In a letter dated February 6, 1873 (the day after he received
the definite news of his appointment), he writes thus :
“ I need not say how great a wrench it will be to me to leave
home and friends .... I hope God will give me grace to do some
work for Him, and will accept the trial of parting as an earnest
of my readiness to serve Him anywhere.
And on October 1: —
“ l hope God will give me strength to do His will and work;
for indeed the field is vast, and the ploughing in places difficult/’


He arrived at Sydney on the 16th of December, accompanied
by the Very Rev. William Anselm Gillett, of the English Bene-
dictine congregation, and his own brother, Mr. Reginald Vaughan.
The former was to remain with him during the whole ten years
of his Sydney life, to accompany him to England again, and to
mourn his sudden death. His reception was very magnificent.
It will be interesting to let him partly describe it in his own
words:—
« X had a grand reception. Six steamers, loaded with enthusi-
astic Catholics, came out to sea to meet me, and accompanied me
to land. There I met the dear old archbishop and a crowd of
over 20,000 people, of all classses and denominations, who had
been expecting my arrival all day. We drove through the town
to the cathedral, and the ‘ Te Deum ’ being sung, two addresses
were read to me, one from the clergy by the Vicar-General, the
other from the laity by Judge Fawcett. I replied in such a way
as seems to have conciliated all. Everyone, Protestants and all,
has been most kind. . . . The weather is beautiful but very
hot, Christmas day was roasting. But fortunately the heat is
not oppressive, and I am in capital form.” (To his Father ;
dated Dec. 29, 1873.)
The story of his life at Sydney belongs rather to Church
history than to a biographical sketch like this. It may be said,
briefly, that besides his general administration in spirituals and
temporals, his achievements were chiefly two, —first and greatest,
the establishment on a firm and, it may be hoped, lasting basis,
of independent Catholic elementary education; and, secondly,
the rebuilding of the Cathedral Church of St. Mary in Sydney.
The importance of the former work cannot be over-estimated. That
a Catholic community, refusing all Government help, and casting
off all State fetters, should successfully educate by their own
sacrifices the whole of their poor children, is a magnificent
example. The Catholic population of the diocese of Sydney is
set down at about 93,600. The Catholic children actually at
school in January, 1883, were calculated at 15,200, of whom
12,500 were attending Catholic schools, and the remaining
2,700 other schools.
One of the secrets of Archbishop Vaughan’s success is
revealed in the fact that no less than 10,916 of these children
are taught by religious men and women. But the greater part
is due simply to his people’s enthusiasm and his own influence.
The building of St. Mary’s cathedral has been a work of


immense labour. Already more than £IOO,OOO have been spent
upon a portion of it; and of this sum nearly every pound was
the fruit of letters written all over the Continent by the hand of
the archbishop himself, or contributed at meetings presided over
by his own vigorous and genial presence.
The visitation of a diocese like that of Sydney is, it need not
be said, no easy task. The immense distances, the rough roads,
and the thinness of the population combine to make it a hard
trial to a bishop’s health and endurance. During the ten years
of Archbishop Vaughan’s administration he made two complete
and exhaustive visitations of every part of his vast mission, the
first in June, July, and August, 1874, and the second in the
summer (winter) of the present year (1883) before he set sail for
England. But in addition to these long and arduous journeys,
he frequently during each year went among the distant priests
to cheer them and help them. As two-thirds of his flock were
concentrated in the city of Sydney itself, he was doing his
duty best by devoting his energies mainly to the town and
neighbourhood.
The details of a bishop’s life in his diocese consist for the
most part in that daily attention to the business which each
day brings, and in that unceasing devotion to dry matters of
spiritual oversight, of building, and of finance, which are of little
interest to anyone, unless trouble occurs. As regards adminis-
tration, it is betraying no secret to say that Archbishop Vaughan
left the financial affairs of the diocese of Sydney in a very much
more satisfactory state than he found them. By a combination
of decision and patient perseverance he extinguished debt, set
accounts in order, and made property pay; and he has left his
successor in the position of a man who will have no trouble in
using to the utmost, for the advancement of the Church, the
munificent liberality of the past and present Catholic flock of New
South Wales.
But in the episcopal career of Archbishop Vaughan there was
much more than routine work or the round of daily duties. The
world, social and political, of New South Wales, was just the
sphere in which his striking character and abilities were calculated
to produce their greatest effect. Vigorous in their youth, busy,
successful, and rich; not highly cultivated, yet ready to attend
to a cultivated man; not definitely religious, yet with much
religiousness in their disposition, the population of the city
soon awoke to a perception of the fact that Archbishop Vaughan


was an uncommon man, and must be watched and listened to.
In his very first speech in the cathedral of Sydney, on the day
he landed, the archbishop had foreshadowed his education policy.
At the beginning of the year (1874) he made his audience
remark, at Lyndhurst, that “ Protestantism was decaying ; '' and
the Anglican community began to stir themselves. On May 5
of the same year, just before he was appointed rector of the
university college of St. John, he told the Fellows that he con-
sidered that institution the “ stronghold of the Catholic position,''
and the “ main fortress of the Catholic Christianity,” and he
gave them an eloquent exposition of the character of the Christian
gentleman. In August, 1875, he pronounced his well-known
“ O'Connell '' oration, on the evening of the O'Connell centenary
commemoration. It is not too much to say that this great
effort made him talked about and famous over the whole
Australian continent. It appeared next morning in the “ Sydney
Morning Herald " —the “ Times'' of Australasia—in sixteen
columns of print; and after that day, whether in Sydney or in
the bush, whether in his own diocese, or on a visit to the districts
of his brother bishops, there was always a crowd to meet him,
and he was the man the people wanted to see. 1
It was in his Advent Conferences, delivered in the same year
(1875), that the archbishop first came into collision with the
Anglicans of Sydney. On November 9 of that year the Anglican
Bishop Barker had said, in the course of a speech in laying the
foundation stone of a Protestant hall, that the claims of the
Catholic Church were founded upon “ frauds and forgeries.'' It
was to rebut this gross and public slander that Archbishop
Vaughan first delivered and then wrote out and published four
Conferences on the “ Church of Christ.'' He said that he re-
1 The following extracts from letters never intended to be seen by any
but the most intimate friends will be now interesting:—
September 4, 1874. “It is quite marvellous —the reception I get every-
where I go. They tell me such a thing was never heard of before. The
Governor is nothing to it; for Protestants and Jews join in the demon-
stration, and far more enthusiasm is shown in my regard than in his. The
Protestant bishop is simply nowhere.’’
April 12, 1878. “ Last November I made a visitation tour through the
Armidale diocese, of which I have now the administration. I travelled 1,500
miles, preached fifty-seven sermons, and confirmed innumerable children.
The Protestant bishop fled the town (of Grafton), and all his congregation
abandoned his church and came to me . . . . It is the same every-
where, for somehow I have managed to get the ear of the country, and secure
their attention.’*


garded Bishop Barker’s onslaught as a challenge to the Catholic
body which it became his duty to accept. “Itis a notorious
fact,” he said, “that for the last twenty years our accuser has
seldom allowed a chance to slip of publicly reviling the Catholic
Church Are we to be for ever silent ? ” The conferences
are eloquent, popular, and full of telling references and quotations.
The third, in which the speaker retorts upon the Anglicans
themselves, and after describing their institution, asks if this can
be the “ Church of Christ,” is extremely effective, and the
enormous audience, of nearly 6,000 persons, who heard it, must
have thoroughly enjoyed its stirring invective, delivered as it
must have been with all the startling intonation which the arch-
bishop’s friends remember so well. But it must not be supposed
that he rushed into controversy from choice, or was glad to
be able to say painful things. It was just the other way. He
used to say that the days of controversy were over, and that we
must begin over again in the apostolic rule of preaching the faith,
and letting the seed fall where it will. But his controversy in
this case was not unsuccessful, for Bishop Barker did not venture
to answer these conferences.
The address on the dangers of modern liberalism and secret
societies, which he delivered in October, 1876, and published
under the title of “ Hidden Springs,” had the effect of arousing
the hostility of the Sydney Freemasons. Their Grand Chaplain
retorted, in a letter to the public press, that Catholic bishops
took an oath “to persecute heretics.” The archbishop, in a
dignified letter to the “ Morning Herald,” challenged him to
prove it. But no proof was forthcoming; the Grand Master
wrote and disowned the Chaplain; and the Freemasons were
none the better for the incident.
In March, 1877, the Venerable Archbishop Polding died;
a man of blameless life, winning character, and unwearied zeal,
and one who, if we had details of his long life and labours,
would perhaps prove to be the greatest “ missionary ” of modern
times. Archbishop Vaughan pronounced a loving and eloquent
sermon over his remains in St. Mary’s Cathedral. Having now
become Archbishop of Sydney, he applied to Rome for the
“ pallium.”
He received it by post, and was solemnly invested with it on
January 13, 1878, by the late bishop of Bathurst, acting as Com-
missary of the Holy See, in the presence of the suffragans of the
provinces. It is worthy of a passing note that Archbishop


Folding had received the “ pallium ” three different times, having
twice lost his “ pallium ”by fire. But this was the first time that
an investiture had taken place in Australia itself.
From the date of his accession to the metropolitan dignity
till his departure for Europe—lB77 to 1883—Archbishop Vaughan
laboured indefatigably. The education campaign was long
and arduous. His “ Pastorals and Speeches on Education ”
have been published in a separate form. 1 The volume opens
with the joint pastoral of the archbishop and bishops of the
province (1879), urging Catholics to use only Catholic schools
and to agitate for a change in the law. Then follow five
pastorals of the archbishop’s own, all issued during August,
September, and October of the same year, and filled with
exhortations, arguments, and figures. During the same time,
and up to Christmas, he spoke at least eight times on the same
vital subject. At the beginning of 1880 we have four more
addresses. The last address in the volume was in reply to an
attack made upon him by Sir Henry Parkes, then Premier. The
prime minister had called him an “ audacious prelate,” and said
various things about his intolerance and seditious teaching. Arch-
bishop Vaughan’s reply was received with very great satisfac-
tion by the public of New South Wales, and Sir H. Parkes was
obliged to make some kind of apology.
We have not spoken of his “ Arguments for Christianity,” a
series of six very able Lenten Lectures (1879), and of the Lenten
Lectures of 1882, “ Christ’s Divinity; ” besides more than
twenty addresses on various occasions which have been printed;
these being exclusive of his speeches on Education proper. One
of these addresses, a very interesting one, was delivered on
February 22, 1877, when he was presented by the Catholic
Young Men of Sydney with a magnificent crosier of colonial
gold.
Archbishop Vaughan’s private life was, in one respect at least,
very remarkable. He never made any friends \ and he truly said,
at the moment of his sailing for Europe, that he left his adopted
home with a heart as unattached to persons as when he had arrived
there ten years before. It was not that his flock were not fond
of him, or that his clergy kept at a distance. He might have
had intimacies by the score, and as much society as he could have
received. And his real love and esteem for his devoted priests
and for those good, generous, and self-sacrificing laymen who
1 E. F. Flanagan, Sydney, 1880.


seem to belong by excellence to the rising Church of Australia,
was deep and well-known. But, as has been before remarked, he
was a solitary man. When he first landed he lived for a few
weeks in the presbytery at the pro-Cathedral with Archbishop
Polding. He afterwards went to “ Everleigh House,” a residence
which had been taken and furnished for him. But he remained
here only a very short time. He had noticed what might be made
out of the beautiful college of St. John, one of the colleges of
Sydney university, built partly by government aid and partly by
Catholic subscription, for the higher education of Catholic youths.
Here he settled, and here he lived to the end. At first he was the
rector; after his accession, Dr. Gillett received that office. His
rooms were simple and even monastic. In his sitting-room an un-
carpeted floor, a crucifix, a skull, and no other ornament what-
ever. In his bedroom, nothing but the Mater Dolorosa, and his
large rosary. As a son of St. Benedict his robes, even as arch-
bishop, were black, not purple; and it is known that it was his
intention, on his return, to wear the habit itself. He could not
rise very early in the morning, on account of the weakness
of heart of which he was afterwards to die. Many a time,
especially after one of his long and arduous discourses in the
cathedral, the beatings of his heart made his bed and his room
actually vibrate for hours after he had retired to rest. He
always felt that his life hung upon a thread; especially as he lay
in bed at night did this physical feeling, that his life was wearing
itself out, fill his imagination; and those who knew him are sure
that he never slept without earnestly and fervently resigning
himself into the hands of Christ, in the consciousness of the
possibility of sudden death. He said mass daily in his private
chapel, attended by Father Gillett. In the morning he tran-
sacted business at the cathedral; at two he dined, generally
alone with his secretary, sometimes with a priest or two, rarely
with anyone else. In the afternoon he would perhaps drive out,
and, if necessary, pay visits of ceremony; or, if a priest were
sick, he would visit him and remain by his side. Much of his
writing for the press, and of his Roman correspondence, was
done in the evening by the help of a type-writer. His letters
to his friends in England were very infrequent, especially after
the death of his father.
Archbishop Vaughan had intended to visit Europe sooner than
he actually did; but as his visit implied a year’s absence, and as
he wished to havo the instructions of the Holy See on many im-


portant matters, he waited from year to year to complete his ar-
rangements. After opening his new cathedral on September 8,
1882, he made a general visitation of the diocese after the
following Christmas. On April 17, at a meeting in the cathedral,
he had the happiness of declaring that the building, which had
cost £102,763 6s. Id., was out of debt. Two days before, when
speaking at Balmain, he had made a statement which is so inte-
resting that it may here be printed in full.
“ When I came to the colony in 1873, the number of chapels
and churches in the archdiocese was 53, of which 29 were in the
city and suburbs, and the remaining 24 in the country districts.
Now, in 1883, the number of chapels and churches is 120; of
these 39 are in the city and suburbs, and 81 in the country
districts. In 1873 the number of schools was 34, of which 23
were in the city and suburbs and 11 in the country districts.
Now, that is, in 1883, we have 102 schools, 62 in the city and
suburbs, and 40 in the country districts. The difference between
34 and 102 during ten years is a very remarkable increase. Ac-
cording to returns that I have carefully prepared, we have at this
moment 15,200 Catholic children at school. Of these 12,500 are
in Catholic schools, 2,700 in other schools. Now you know what I
have said about schools being ( holy places/ You know how I
believe in the teaching of men and women who have dedicated
their whole beings to God. Well, I have said already that the
number of Catholic schools in the archdiocese is 102. Of these
22 are taught at present by lay teachers, of the rest 11 are taught
by religious orders of men, educating 2,370 pupils, and 69 by
religious orders of women, educating 8,546 pupils. The lay
teachers have 1,564, making a total, as I said just now, of 12,500
children. Now, take schools taught by religious orders. We
have under their care 55 primary schools, of which 24 are mixed,
13 high schools, 9 boarding and high schools combined, or board-
ing schools only, 1 orphanage, 1 industrial school, and 1 provi-
dence or home, making in all 80 establishments. A modern
prophet 1 foretold some time ago, that the change my pastoral
letters effected would be ‘ death to the calling of the clergy.
Let us look at figures. Of the 80 establishments just mentioned
68 have been started since I troubled the peace of Sleepy Hollow
—and of these 45 have been started since January, 1880, and
27 since the beginning of the present year. lam going home
to get more priests and Brothers —perhaps a few Premonstraten-
1 Sir Henry Parkes.


sians—otherwise their work will grow too big for their hands.
Now look at things from another point of view. Take our great
central schools, which I have always said form the great heart
of the archdiocese. I have put this heart in the right place —in
the Brothers' and Sisters’ hands. At St. Mary’s we have 757
children, at St. Benedict’s 895, at St. Patrick’s 673, and at the
Sacred Heart 767 ; these, with St Hilda’s and St. John’s, with St.
Vincent’s and St. Bridget’s and the Home, make up 4,889 chil-
dren in Sydney under the Christian and Catholic influence of
men and women of heroic Christian life, teaching the rising gene-
ration, not for pay, but for God’s love and sake.”
A few days before he sailed he blessed in the cathedral an
altar to the Sacred Heart of Jesus. Speaking to the people
around him he explained what was the spirit of devotion to the
Sacred Heart, and urged them to give themselves wholly to our
Lord; and then, saying that deeds were better than words, he
informed them that from that day forward he gave up and conse-
crated to the maintenance of the schools of the parish the whole
of his income from the cathedral.
It was on the 17th of April that he bade farewell to his clergy
and people. After the business connected with the building
fund had been gone through, two addresses were presented to
him, one from the clergy, which was read by Dr. Sheridan,
0.5.8., the vicar-general, and the others from the laity, read by
the Hon. Sir Patrick Jennings, K.C.M.G. A purse of £7OO
accompanied the addresses. The archbishop read a carefully
written reply to each ; and the words which he addressed to the
clergy are so full of interest from a biographical point of view
that they are given here. It will be observed how full they are
of the feeling of the nearness of death and judgment.
“ My dear Very Rev. and Rev. Fathers, —What words can I
make use of in reply to your address and presentation which will,
without seeming to be ungracious towards you, convey to you my
real sentiments on an occasion like the present, so especially
trying to myself, when I have to receive the verdict of the clergy
upon me, and to listen to words in which, on the one hand, I
can scarcely allow myself to take pleasure, and yet which, on the
other hand, I cannot hear read without being deeply moved with
a sense of affectionate gratitude and love. For whilst my ears are
taking in the kind and flattering expressions which succeed each
other so rapidly in my favour, whilst you all stand before me, and
your spokesman tells me, in your name, that I have done faith-


fully and well, my reason seems to be stimulated into an unwonted
activity, and I bear a voice within me asking me by what stan-
dard lam being measured by my brethren of the clergy. Dear
Rev. Fathers, you are so charitable as not to fix the standard too
high, and I thank you for your charity. But if it be allowable
for you to lower the standard in accommodation to my weakness,
it is not allowable for me to follow your kind example. When
I look upon the lives of really great, first-class Church leaders in
the past, of fearless exponents of the truth—and great workers
in their generation—such as St. Basil, St. Gregory, St. Jerome,
and St. Chrysostom —I am deeply impressed by your kind con-
sideration in my regard, and by the mediocrity of my perfor-
mances in every line of duty since I have been amongst you in
this colony; and far from being elated or dazzled by your most
generous expressions, I am struck —I was almost going to say
wounded—by a sense of depression at the thought of what really
might have been done by one who could more successfully have
approached towards the standard which I have proposed, with so
little success, for my own imitation. But there is something
which pierces far sharper and deeper into the chamber of my
inmost spirit than all this, and that is the anticipation of a judg-
ment which will be pronounced upon me by a very different tri-
bunal. Yes, dear Rev. Fathers, I know what you say; I thank
you for what you say; but what will my Judge say when I have
to give an account of my stewardship before His court ? Such
thoughts as these inflict themselves upon me in spite of myself
whilst my ears are taking in your favourable words. And yet,
though I am sobered, and I may say saddened and depressed by
the pictures which such an occasion as this seems to thrust up before
my imagination, I do at the very same time—so complicated is our
subtle human nature—thank you with unfeigned love, for your
extreme goodness towards me, and for your patience; for your
genuine loyalty towards me, tested so often, exhibited so fre-
quently, in many trying ways, during the last ten years ; for your
jealousy of my reputation and good name, which you have treated
as if they had been your own; for your pride in any little suc-
cesses I may have been permitted to achieve, and, above all, for
your brave and consistent support of me, when I have been
forced, by a sense of duty, to say and do unpopular things, and to
contristate those whom I should naturally have felt such a delight
in giving every pleasure to. Through good report and evil
report, in fair and foul weather equally, you have stood at my


side whilst preaching the doctrines of the old glorious religion.
The Catholic Church is not of to-day or of yesterday ; and her
principles of action are as old as her charmed life. Those who
run may read the simple Gospel teachings of her spokesmen.
Her leading maxims I have developed and insisted on. Her fun-
damental doctrines have been the subject-matter of my pastorals
and speeches, and I have never dared to go one step beyond
the catechism and the Apostles* creed; and you, dear Rev.
Fathers, have, every one of you, been on my side, because I have
ever identified myself with her heavenly policy, and with her
enlightened interpretation of the Gospel of Jesus Christ. I take
your address as summarizing, with great exactness, your attitude
towards myself during the course of the last ten eventful years.
I thank the Holy Spirit, the Comforter, for thus having bound
us into one in the charity of Christ. Had it not been for this
identity of spirit, this bond of union, this mutual and unclouded
confidence, we should not be assembled in this great fane to-
night; we should still be worshipping mournfully in a miserable
barn. Had it not been for your co-operation, your self-sacrifice,
your appreciation of the Church’s ordinary magisterium regarding
education, the education question would not have been, as it is
now, practically solved. The Church was showing signs of
losing her elasticity. Her little ones—who especially belong to
Christ—were in danger of being reared in an atmosphere de-
prived, scientifically, of every germ of Catholic faith. Your
Catholic instincts, the instincts of men coming from aland which,
amidst the wreck of all things dearest in life, has ever cherished
the faith of St. Patrick—and will cherish it to the end—the un-
broken tradition of your faith—dear Rev. Fathers—has drawn
you, perhaps almost in spite of yourselves, to my side, and has
kept you there; or, to sum up all I mean to say in a single sen-
tence, you have saved the Roman Catholic religion in this arch-
diocese of Sydney. What sane man would prefer a little miser-
able human popularity to the achievement of such a result as
that ? At times I have scarcely been able to resist a smile—
though, I can assure you, not an ill-natured smile—at the sur-
prise which men of the world have expressed, from time to time,
at my courage, as they called it, in going straight against the
tide of popular feeling ; and they have spoken kindly of my pluck.
I said to myself all the while, dear Rev. Fathers, ‘ They little
know what a big coward I am.* Had Ito be judged at the last
day by the public opinion of this great colony, it would be a very


different affair indeed. But when our fate has to be settled
once for alb we shall find ourselves in a truly democratic position,
all standing on an equality before a very different court. My
anxiety is to stand well there—before the tribunal of our com-
mon Master ; and, if I seem to men of the world to show courage
in breasting public opinion, it is because I know that public
opinion will not judge me at the last day, can neither reward me
with heaven for flattering it, nor consign me to hell for all eter-
nity for speaking out the truth ; whereas, my Master can, and
will, reward me everlastingly if lam true to Him; and can, and
will most assuredly, punish me everlastingly if I die out of His
favour. Besides that, His judgments are always right, and
justice and truth are the foundation of His throne; expressions
which cannot, except ironically, be made use of regarding the
dicta of public opinion, even in New South Wales. Yet, do not
let it be imagined that, in saying this, I think lightly of my fellow-
man, or of his opinions, or of the opinions of the masses; on the
contrary, I hold their opinions in great respect. ‘ Voxpopuli vox
Dei ’ is not without its meaning, even in the nineteenth century.
I look upon it as a misfortune when public opinion has to be op-
posed, especially by ecclesiastics; but when it runs counter to some
great Church principle —to some principle of the Gospel—to
some principle known to be portion of her Divine message —
to that Depositum which she is gifted with inerrancy to teach to
the people, in such a case our duty is very clear; and if we shirk
that duty —if we deny Christ before men, He, our Master, will
deny us before His Father who is in Heaven. And public
opinion, exercising that strange versatility which is especial to it,
would scream with astonishment as well as delight at having
caught us tripping in a place she would least have expected it
possible. It is seldom one has an opportunity of touching thus
publicly on fundamental principles of Catholic thought and action.
I am glad to have been provided with this opportunity of doing
so. We follow, in all storms, the steady electric light of a Church
which we hold to be divinely gifted with inerrancy in moral and
dogmatic teaching; and we are always ready in all fogs and mists,
with all charity to all men, to abide by the result. Those who con-
scientiously oppose us now will be for us in their children. And
though for many ages there will be strife, before the world col-
lapses there will be not only one Shepherd, but, with God's
grace, one only fold. Anyhow, let us do our work in our day.
The spiritual empire, of which we are soldiers, by its very history,


stirs up the fires of charity and zeal in our hearts. Ours is one
of the very few causes in the world worth living for, and dying
for, too ; and whatever be our exertions, they look very insig-
nificant and mean when compared with the heroic labours and
sacrifices of those who have gone before us. Dear Rev. Fathers,
I once again, and again and again thank you for your kindness
and charity towards me. I thank you also for your handsome
donation. I scarcely could have too large an income, when all
the calls that come upon me are considered. You could not have
given me a more acceptable present than money, for nothing
gives me more genuine pleasure than giving it away. May God
bless you all —you dear beloved men —and keep you, and sup-
port you in your heroic solitary loving life. Pray for me till I
come back. Love me and care for me in your quiet silent
thoughts. If we are not friends, who ever in this world will be
friends ? I will not forget you, whether in the busy city or the
solitary trying bush, at the tomb of our great exemplars—St.
Peter and St. Paul; and when kneeling at the feet of the suc-
cessor of the Fisherman, and when humbly kissing the cross upon
his instep, I will assure him that I would not exchange you,
dearly beloved brothers in love and in sacrifice, for any other
body of Catholic clergy in the English-speaking world."
One further citation must be made. It contains the words
which, on this same occasion, he addressed spontaneously, and
from the sudden impulse of his heart, to the crowds who filled the
cathedral. Read in the light of the events that were to follow
soon, it has the mournful and pathetic interest of a final leave-
taking.
« I hardly like to go away without saying one or two very short
words to the people here at large. I can hardly allow myself to
pass away absolutely in silence, inasmuch as I feel an attraction
simply to say with all love and all affection —good-bye. It is a
painful, a sad thing to say, but we have to say good-bye from time to
time, and at last we have got to say good-bye altogether, so it is
well for us to practise ourselves in saying it, and I think you are
giving me a pretty good trial of it on this occasion. I need not
say how strange my feelings are on leaving the colony. I do
not feel any kind of elation or any great joy, like a schoolboy
who is going home. When I came out here I came out for good.
I was forty years of age, and by forty years you have made all
your friends, I suppose ; and, when you have made them and left
them, you are a different man from one who has been living all


his life in the same place. How that lam leaving here for home
again, I feel as if I were going back to a dreamland, and when I
look back to so many friends who have been taken away, and so
many changes which have taken place, and to the general con-
dition of things so arranged, as if I did not belong to them, I
rather feel as if I were leaving home in leaving you. I feel the
impression of a kind of sadness rather than any particularly
bright joy in the anticipation of getting on board ship and sail-
ing 16,000 miles to the old country from which I came. Of
course I shall be very pleased to see my own people, and they
will be very pleased to see me; but all the time I should have
‘ Good-bye , in my mind. I shall go and see them, and come
away —come back to you —(great applause)—come back to you
who have made my life so happy in this colony, and who have
given me an opportunity to do that which I love most —to do
good to the people, to preach the high things of God, to feel that
I am sailing and labouring in His favour, and that you recognize
the work I am doing and join and assist me in carrying it out.
All this happiness and pleasure you have given me, and when I
come back I hope for another ten years to take up my labour
and carry it out, if possible, with more energy and more earnest-
ness than I have done during the last ten years. I wish you
then—as I shall not address you again, I suppose, until I return
to the colony —I wish you, your wives and families, your children
and homes, all the peace of Christ and God; I wish you all the
prosperity that God thinks good for you in this world; I wish
you all peace amongst yourselves; I wish you especially when
the time comes the vision of the kingdom of glory for which we
live; and I wish you all a most affectionate and a most loving
farewell.”
And then he gave them his blessing.
The Archbishop, with Dr. Gillett, sailed on April 19th, 1883,
in the City of New York, for San Francisco, en route for
Europe. The “ Itinerarium ” was recited in the crowded
cathedral, and his grace said his last “ good-bye.” The vessel
passed through the Heads at half-past four, amid the shouting of
the crowd and- the music of the bands. It was exactly four
months from that day that he died in England.
He travelled slowly across the Horth-American continent, visit-
ing Salt Lake City, Chicago, Washington and Boston, and
entering Canada. The Sunday before he left Hew York he said
mass for the last time. The last part of the voyage from Hew


York to Liverpool was rough and stormy, and the archbishop had
little rest. He landed at Liverpool on Thursday, August 16th,
and his first act on setting foot once more on the shore of his
native country was to drive out to Woolton and pay a visit to
the Right Rev. Abbot Burchall, then president-general of the
English Benedictines, formerly his own superior during nearly
the whole of his religious life. In the priory at Woolton he met
several former confreres, who chanced to be there that afternoon.
It was the last time he was to meet his brethren on earth. On
returning to Liverpool he rested that night at the Adelphi
Hotel; but before he retired he wrote a touching and character-
istic letter to his aunt, Mrs. Weld-Blundell, of Ince Blundell,
informing her of his landing and of his intention to visit
her. He said he was coming “ for a long rest. 77 His berth
on board ship, he said, had been “as narrow and as hard as
the coffin for which he would one day be measured, and it was
no wonder if he had not rested in it quite so soundly and quietly
as he would rest in that. 77 This was a jest: a “grim, under-
takers jest, 77 as he called it; but those who know how the
physical discomfort of his heart made his imagination work, see
in the words one more indication that he was continually expect-
ing death.
He arrived at Ince Blundell on the Friday about mid-day,
and his brother, the bishop of Salford, came in the course of the
afternoon. At dinner the archbishop was in good spirits, and
apparently in his usual health; but he frequently said how tired
he was; he described himself as wearied out with his ten years 7
work; he said he had lost his vivacity and become an old man;
that he wanted to see no one, but to hide himself and be quiet;
and he spoke again of the weariness which the unnatural pulsation
of his heart occasioned him. He was present at Benediction of
the Blessed Sacrament; and at about half-past ten he went
slowly and lingeringly up to his bedroom. He said he would
take a long rest next morning, and say the last mass, as he had
been without sleep for four or five nights. In the morning the
servant who called him had no answer; and at ten o 7 clock Mr.
Charles Weld Blundell got into his room through the window,
to open the locked door, and he and the bishop of Salford then
found him in bed, cold and stiff in death, and without any sign
of pain or struggle. He had evidently died in the early part of
the night, and his heart that had beat so fast for years was still
for ever.


The funeral took place at Ince Blundell Hall on Thursday,
August 23rd, and his remains were laid temporarily in the vault
under the sanctuary of the church, until they can be translated to
his beloved church of Sydney. A large number of the English
Benedictines and of the clergy attended the requiem and dirge ;
and there were also present the bishops of Liverpool, Salford,
Leeds, Newport, and Northampton, and the president-general of
the Benedictines. All the archbishop's brothers were present
but one. The mass was sung by three of his brothers, the Very
Rev. Joseph Jerome Vaughan, 0.5.8., prior of Fort Augustus,
being celebrant, the Rev. Bernard Vaughan, S.J., deacon, and
the Rev. John Vaughan, subdeacon. A touching discourse,
full of personal detail, was pronounced by the Rev. Father John
Morris, S.J.
On the 18th of September a solemn “Month's Mind” was
celebrated at Courtfield, the scene of his childhood and of his
earliest impressions of love and duty. The Requiem mass was
sung by the Right Rev. William Vaughan, bishop of Plymouth,
the archbishop's uncle, the deacon and subdeacon of the mass
being the two brothers, as at Ince Blundell. The bishop of
Newport was present in the sanctuary, as were the bishop of
Clifton, and the president-general. Nearly all the monks from
St. Michael's cathedral monastery attended, to sing the solemn
Gregorian “ requiem” to which the deceased prelate had so
often listened from his stall in St. Michael's. A large number
of the people occupied the body of the church, many of whom
had come from Hereford to show their affectionate remembrance
of the prior of Belmont. After the mass of the dead, the sermon
was preached by the bishop of Newport and Menevia, who had
lived at St. Michael's with Prior Bede Vaughan from the day he
was made prior till his consecration —eleven years. The text was
from Genesis xii. 1 : “Go forth out of thy country and from thy
kindred, and out of thy father's house, and come into the land
which I will show thee .... and thou shalt be blessed.” It
is believed that the words which have been written in this brief
notice are the best commentary on this text, and its complete
justification.


CHISWICK PRESS C. WHITTINGHAM AND CO., TOOKS COURT,
CHANCERY LANE.




