

Cathedral Church of St. Andrew,
SpDnes, /iDay 20tb, 1910.
Solemn
/Iftemonal Sendee
®n tbe beatb of
Ibie fSDoOt Gracious r!Dajcotv>
Iking lEbwarb m.
wbo passed awap at 11,45 p.m..
On f rtSap, /IDap atb, 1910,
Authorised for Ust in the Diocese by the Archbishop of Sydney




©rDer of /IDemorial Service
Co be useD on ffriDag, /Rag 20tb,
Being tbe Date of tbe Hogal funeral in BngianD
of our late beloveD Sovereign XorD
Iking BsDwarD un.
The Procession will move up the Nave in Silence.
When all have taken their appointed places , these opening
sentences will he sung:
TAM the resurrection and the life, saith the Lord: he
that believeth in Me, though he were dead, yet shall
he live; and whosoever liveth and believeth in Me shall
never die. — St. John xi. 25,26.
T KNOW that my Redeemer liveth, and that he shall
stand at the latter day upon the earth. And though
after my skin worms destroy this body, yet in my flesh
shall I see God: whom I shall see for myself, and mine
eyes shall behold, and not another. — Joh xix. 25, 26, 27.
brought nothing into this world, and it is certain
we can carry nothing out. The Lord gave, and the
Lord hath taken away; blessed be the name of the Lord.
1 Timothy vi. 7. Joh i. 21.
3


Domine, refugium.
Psalm xc.
I OBJ), Thou hast been our refuge: from one generation
4 to another.
Before the mountains were brought forth, or ever the
earth and the world were made ; Thou art God from ever-
lasting, and world without end.
Thou turnest man to destruction : again Thou sayest,
Come again, ye children of men.
For a thousand years in Thy sight are but as yester-
day : seeing that is past as a watch in the night.
As soon as Thou scatterest them, they are even as a
sleep: and fade away suddenly like the grass.
In the morning it is green, and groweth up ; but in
the evening it is cut down, dried up, and withered.
For we consume away in Thy displeasure; and are
afraid at Thy wrathful indignation.
Thou hast set our misdeeds before Thee: and our
secret sins in the light of Thy countenance.
For when Thou art angiy all our days are gone : we
bring our years to an end, as it were a tale that is told.
The days of our age are threescore years and ten ; and
though men be so strong, that they come to fourscore
years ; yet is their strength then but labour and sorrow ;
so soon passeth it away, and we are gone.
But who regardeth the power of Thy wrath : for even
thereafter as a man feareth, so is Thy displeasure.
So teach us to number our days ; that we may apply
our hearts unto wisdom.
Turn Thee again, O Lord, at the last: and be
gracious unto Thy servants.
O satisfy us with Thy mercy, and that soon : so shall
we rejoice and be glad all the days of our life.
Comfort us again now after the time that Thou hast
plagued us : and for the years wherein we have suffered
adversity.
Show Thy servants Thy work : and their children Thy
glory.
4


And the glorious Majesty of the Lord oar God be upon
us : prosper Thou the work of our hands upon us, O pros-
per Thou our handy-work.
G-lory be to the Father, and to the Son : and to the
Holy Ghost;
As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall be:
world without end. Amen.
Then shall follow the Lesson taken out of the fifteenth
Chapter of the former Epistle of Saint Paul 'to the
Corinthians.
Then an Anthem shall he sung :
THE PACE OF HEATH.
r jpHE face of death is toward the Sun of Life;
His shadow darkens earth ; his truer name Is onward ;
No discordance in the roll
And march of that Eternal Harmony
Whereto the worlds beat time,
Though faintly heard
Until the great Hereafter.
Mourn in hope, mourn in hope.
Words hi) Lord Tennyson. Music composed by Joseph Massey.
Then the Choir shall sing :—
T HEARD a voice from heaven, saying unto me, Write,
Prom henceforth blessed are the dead which die in the
Lord ; even so saith the Spirit: for they rest from their
labours.
Then the Priest shall say:- —
Lord, have mercy upon us.
Answer
Christ, have mercy upon us
Lord, have mercy upon us.
{Cy UR Father, &c. r


Special Collects.
GOI), Who as at this time didst teach the hearts of Thy
faithful people, by the sending to them the light of
Thy Holy Spirit; Grant us by the same Spirit to have a
right judgment in all things, and evermore to rejoice in
His holy comfort; through the merits of 0 hrist Jesus our
Saviour, Who liveth and reigneth with Thee, in the unity
of the same Spirit, One God, world without end. Amen.
GRANT, O Lord, that as we are baptized into the
death of Thy blessed Son our Saviour Jesus Christ,
so by continual mortifying our corrupt affections we may
be buried with Him ; and that through the grave and
gate of death, we may pass to our joyful resurrection ; foi
His merits, Who died and was buried, and rose again for
us, Thy Son Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.
A LMIGHTY God, Who through Thine only-begotten
Son Jesns Christ hast overcome death, and opened
unto us the gate of everlasting life; We humbly beseech
Thee, that, as by Tby special grace preventing us Thou
dost put into our minds good desires, so by Tby continual
help we may bring the same to good effect, through Jesus
Christ our Lord, Who liveth and reigneth with Thee and
the Holy Ghost, ever one God, world without end. Amen.
O Almighty God, Who has knit together Thine elect in
one Communion and fellowship, in the mystical
body of Thy Son Christ our Lord; Grant u s grace so to
follow Thy blessed Saints in all virtuous and godly living,
that we may come to those unspeakable joys, which Thou
hast prepared for them that unfeignedly love Thee;
through Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.
6


Then shall he sung the Hymn following :—
Whom have I in heaven but Thee ? and there is none upon
earth that I desire in comparison of Thee/’
IST BARER, my God, to Thee,
Nearer to Thee;
E’en though it be a Cross
That raiseth me;
Still all my song shall he,
Nearer, my God, to Thee,
Nearer to Thee.
Though, like the wanderer,
The sun gone down,
Darkness comes over me,
My rest a stone ;
Yet in my dreams I’d he
Nearer, my God, to Thee,
Nearer to Thee.
There let my way appear
Steps unto Heav’n,
All that Thou sendest me
In mercy given,
Angels to beckon me
Nearer, my God, to Thee,
Neai’er to Thee.
Then, with my waking thoughts
Bright with Thy praise,
Out of my stony griefs
Beth-el I’ll raise ;
So by my woes to be
Nearer, my God, to Thee,
Nearer to Thee.
Till in my Father’s house
Perfectly blest,
After my journeyings
Safe and at rest,
Ail my delight shall be
Ever, my God, with Thee,
Ever with Thee. Amen.
Übc Sermon:
The Lord Archbishop op Sydney,
7


Then shall be sung : —■
OW the labourer’s task is o’er;
’’ Now the battle day is past;
Now upon the farther shore
Lands the voyager at last.
Father, in Thy gracious keeping
Leave me now Thy servant sleeping’.
There the tears of earth are dried;
There its hidden things are clear ;
There the work of life is tried
By a juster Judge than here.
Father, &c.
There the sinful souls, that turn
To the Cross their dying eyes,
All the love of Christ shall learn
At His feet in Paradise.
Father, &c.
There no more the powers of hell
Can prevail to mar their peace ;
Christ the Lord shall guard them well,
He Who died for their release.
Father, &c.
“ Barth to earth, and dust to dust,”
Calmly now the words we say,
Leaving Mm to sleep in trust
Till the Resurrection Day.
Father, &c. . . . . Amen.
Concluding praters.
A LMIGrHTY God, with Whom do live the spirits of
them that depart hence in the Lord, and with Whom
the souls of the faithful, after they are delivered from the
burden of the flesh, are in joy and felicity ; We give Thee
hearty thanks, for that it hath pleased Thee to deliver Thy
servant, Edward, our late King and Governor, out of the
miseries of this sinful world ; beseeching Thee, that it may
please Thee, of Thy gracious goodness, shortly to accom-
plish the number of Thine elect, and to hasten Thy king-
dom ; that we, with all those that are departed in the
true faith of Thy holy Name, may have our perfect con-
summation and bliss, both in body and soul, in Thy eternal
and everlasting glory; through. Jesus Christ our Lord.
Amen.


( \ MERCIFUL God, the Father of our Lord Jesus
Christ, Who is the resurrection and the life; in
Whom whosoever believeth shall live, though he die; and
whosoever liveth, and believeth in Him, shall not die
eternally ; Who also hath taught us, by His holy Apostle
St. Paul, not to be sorry, as men without hope, for them
that sleep in Him ; We meekly beseech Thee, O Father,
to raise ns from the death of sin unto the life of righteous-
ness ; that, when we shall depart this life, we may rest in
Him, as our hope is Thy servant doth; and that, at
the general Resurrection in the last day, we may be found
acceptable in Thy sight; and receive that blessing, which
Thy well-beloved Son shall then pronounce to all that love
and fear Thee, saying, Come, ye blessed children of My
Father, receive the kingdom prepared for you from the
beginning of the world; Grant this, we beseech Thee, O
Merciful father, through Jesus Christ, our Mediator and
Redeemer. Amen.
Hfee benediction.
IXbC jflDHtXlb shall then be played—all standing.
Then shall the Procession return to the South-West
Door in the reverse order to that in which it entered
the Cathedral.
N
Woluntars * Aaixbe Jancbre * Cfooplti.
9


®rber of procession.
Choir.
ay Readers.
Theological Students.
If ay Members of the Standing Committee.
Clergy.
Rural, Deans.
Verger.
Day Members of the Cathedrae Chapter.
Registrar of the Diocese.
Chanceeeor of the Diocese.
The Precentor.
Canons of the Cathedrae.
Archdeacon of South Sydney,
Archdeacon of Cumberland.
Archdeacon of Camden and Vicar-Generae.
Verger.
Staff-Bearer.
The Archbishop of Sydney.
Chaplains.




