

Memories of Days long gane by.
BY THE WIFE OF AN
AUSTRALIAN PIONEER.


[?]


MEMORIES OF DAYS LONG GONE BY.
WE were married, my husband and I, on Tuesday the 25th April,
1848, in Edinburgh—my birthplace and home till then—by the
Rev. John Sym, Old Greyfriars. The year previous I had gone
with my eldest brother, John Macleod, a naval surgeon, just returned from
one of his cruises, to visit Ben Ehydding, Yorkshire, where my second
brother was the medical man. There I met Mr. David C. McConnel, just
returned after several years pioneering in Australia. In the beginning of
the following year we were married; at the same time, as my parents
strongly objected to my going out to that far-away land, my husband made
arrangements for having his property out there managed in his absence.
His brother was his partner, and he remained in the Colony; also there was
& good manager, an Englishman and married. My husband arranging to
enter into pastoral pursuits in England, to qualify himself for this life we
went to live in Nottinghamshire, where he arranged to learn farming with
an excellent instructor for six months. My husband’s uncle, Mr. Thomas
Houldsworth, was at the time member for North Nottingham, and he asked
his interest to secure for him one of the Duke of Portland’s farms, which
shortly after was promised to him. All went smoothly and happily for some
months, when one day a letter arrived from the far-away brother saying that
it was absolutely necessary that my husband should go out to look after bis
property, giving powerful reasons. Here was a dilemma. Go he must, but
what of me, his wife ? Honourably he left me free to go or to stay; but
there were my parents to deal with. He wrote fully to them, assuring them
that it rested with me entirely how to choose. It was an anxious time.
My parents, relatives and friends put their veto on my going with all their
strength. I earnestly sought guidance in prayer. Surely I was helped.
My subsequent life, I think, proves that my Father had chosen this way for
His child. I was led to decide in favour of going; the cup was a bitter one,
but it had its own drop of sweetness. I wrote to my dear parents telling


them I could do nothing else, that they must let me go, commending me to
the care of Him who would be as near to me on the wide waters and in that
far-distant land as if I were by their side. A painful, reluctant consent was
given, and soon we were to leave our happy little home and friends.
My nationality was frequently in evidence while in Nottinghamshire. Our
landlady had been for many years housekeeper to the Duke of Norfolk. He
presented her on leaving with the large house she was living in, which had a
beautiful well-stocked garden. My kind landlady said to me, “ I know that
Scotch ladies are great jam and jelly-makers, and if you would like to make
some you are welcome to as much fruit as you like.” So I thought I would
begin with some red currant jelly. I had my own maid, Sarah, and we
started. As the jelly was boiling I said, “ Sarah, go and bring me a dozen
little pigs,” that is what delf is called in Scotland by the common folk, and
so we called jelly-pots “ pigs ”to our servants. Sarah said, “ Yes, ma’am.”
She went to Mrs. Lithgon and said “ The missus wants a dozen little pigs.”
“Nonsense,” was the reply, “ your mistress cannot bear the sight of pork;
you have made a mistake, go again and ask.” She came and said, “ Please,
ma’am, did you say you wanted a dozen little pigs ? ” “ Yes, Sarah,” I said,
why don’t you go for them ?” She went back to Mrs. Lithgon and said,
“Yes, it is pigs; the missus wants a dozen.” “Well,” Mrs. Lithgon said
“if it is pigs it’s not a dozen; go again and ask her,” She came quite
nervously and said, “ Please ma’am do you want twelve little pigs ? ”
The situation dawned upon me, and in a fit of laughter I nearly lost the
jelly and burnt myself.
Another curious mistake of a different kind occurred when I wanted to get
a little box-ottoman made. There was no upholsterer in Worksop, our
nearest village, but as we had a little Albert phaeton we started in it one
afternoon to find one. Passing Mr. Eddison’s farm we stopped to ask him.
“Oh yes,” he said, “ There is one in such a village,” and in directing us
said we would come to the undertakers, and it was very near there. We
came to the village, but could see no undertaker. We enquired of several
people, they all said there was no undertaker in the village. We said we
were told there was an upholsterer near an undertaker ! Then the man said,
“Oh I know, it is the farm of the ’Undred Acres.” There we found our
man. We had many pleasant drives through Sherwood Forest, sometimes


beyond, to Farnfield, the property of my husband’s uncle, Mr. William
Houldsworth. His wife was a delightful old lady, quite eighty, without
wrinkles and very active. We sometimes met William and Mary Howitt
there; they used to read and recite poetry to the old couple.
The next move was to bid farewell to beloved Scotland and beloved
people, which even now I dare not dwell upon. Then we went to London
to make preparations for our departure, December 31st, 1848. It was a
dreary time of year in which to leave one’s native land, but it would bring
us to the new country at the right season —winter. Gravesend is about the
most dismal port one could start from, and how the wind howled that first
night! The ship “ Chasely” was not Al, but considered quite good enough
to go to the Antipodes! She had been chartered, along with two others,
by Dr. Lang, whose church was in Sydney, New South Wales. He was a
very clever man, who had also much zeal for the advancement of Australia,
his adopted country. These three ships, of which the “ Chasely ” was the
second, were chartered by him to convey a well-chosen, superior lot of
emigrants, intended to people the towns that were being formed about
twenty years before in the newly-opened district of Moreton Bay, 500 miles
north of Sydney. My husband being an enthusiast in the promotion and
well-being of Moreton Bay, where nine years before he formed and made
his home, took cabins in the “Chasely” for ourselves and maid. Our
fellow-passengers in the “ cuddy,” as the saloon used to be called in those
days, were Dr. Hobbs, ship’s doctor, and his mother, Mr. Bowden, a sugar
planter, and his wife and child. These were all; but we found a good
number of nice people among the emigrants, who had availed themselves of
Dr. Lang’s arrangement with the British Government that on payment of
£2OO they should have land-privileges on arrival in Brisbane. I would like
to put on record, before leaving this part of my narrative, that the evening
before sailing Dr. Lang came on board, met with his emigrants, and
addressed them in a faithful, fatherly manner, reminding them of their
responsibilities in making their home in a new land, and bidding them be
true to their religious principles. They were all of one faith, and he
trusted that brotherly-kindness vrould bind them together as fellow
passengers. A hymn was sung; he then earnestly prayed for the safety
of the ship and all on hoard. Before parting he shook hands with each,


wishing them God-speed and a happy New Year, My husband had made
our cabin most comfortable ; it was large, being in the stern. Our book-
shelf was well filled; two swinging candle lamps gave a fair light. We
had a large double sofa that shut up into a single one for the day, a tray on
each of our chests of drawers that prevented things from slipping off, a
table on the folding washstand, and comfortable chairs; a carpet made the
cabin feel warm and comfortable. It was very cold. I think there was
snow 01 sleet that night; the wind blew hard. Next morning we set sail
on a voyage which occupied 128 days. The weather continued boisterous,
and we crossed the Bay of Biscay in “half a gale,” when we had the
misfortune to lose all our poultry and our sheep, save one, which was
reserved for a sumptuous repast when we arrived in Moreton Bay!!
We had not many excitements on the voyage, and those we had were of
an uncomfortable kind. The first was that we nearly ran into Madeira
during a thick fog. We were near a great rock that loomed black and
frowning upon us, but the ship “ put about ” all right. The next adventure
was getting so close to Pernambuco, South American coast, that we saw the
lights of the town quite distinctly; a strong current that our Captain
knew nothing of was responsible for this. Our Captain was young, and
evidently inexperienced. A merciful Providence thus twice preserved us.
A sick lady, who was in a hammock on the poop, said to the Captain only
the day before, “I smell land.” He laughed, and said she was nearly a
hundred miles from land; but she held to it and she was right. It was in
the evening she made the remark, and it was after midnight when we were
awaked by the noise of “ shifting sails,” and as the ship retraced her way
we saw the Pernambuco lights from our stern window.
We had a disagreeable experience of rats abounding day and night. My
husband knew my antipathy to these rodents, and brought two terriers
with us one from Skye, the other English. One we always had in our
cabin, the other was invariably out on loan ! When at meals I always sat
with my heels under me, the only protection I could have at these times.
At 10 p.m., Mrs. Hobbs, the doctor’s mother, used to have supper in the
Cuddy, which was usually bread and cheese and porter. I sometimes sat
and chatted with her while she was having it. One night a large rat came
on the table, and went straight for the cheese, when there was quite a


tussle, but tbe old lady came off victorious. I did not go any more. These
rats became so numerous that a certain quantity of water had to be put out
for them to drink ; it was found they were gnawing the ship, so thirsty were
they, in seeking for water.
Losing our fresh provisions as we did was a real hardship; the result was
that our daily fare suffered much— salt beef and pork, on which latter was
an adornment of bristles not at all appetising. We were very badly off for
vegetables, milk, and butter, the art of preserving these things being at a
very rudimentary stage. Then the bread was always heavy and dark, so we
had to fall back upon “ ships’ biscuits,” Had these been good and fresh
we could have managed better, but they were old and musty. We had
“ lain in ” a few “ comforts ” for the voyage and that helped us wonderfully.
Another hardship was that we were (each person) restricted to three pints of
fresh water daily for all purposes ; but we had a salt water bath, which it
would have been hard to do without. In spite of all these drawbacks we
had pleasant times. Among the emigrants were some very nice people,
well-connected, well-read. A good many were young couples, several of the
husbands were clergymen’s sons. Their wives were very pleasant people,
one played the harp. We all did needlework, and often we sat together in
my cabin, where we spent happy hours. We were all young married women,
full of wonderment about the far-away land that was to be our home. I
think my husband was the only one on board who had been in Australia,
and he was in great request. From the first the poop was made free to any
of the emigrants who might wish to go there, and so we had often a very
pleasant company in spite of the mixed element of which it was composed.
There were a good many children, youths and maidens. We instituted
classes for these, week-days and Sundays. The singing was often very
beautiful. Long, long years after I was in a baker’s shop in Brisbane.
The woman serving looked hard at me, and then she said, “ Are you Mrs.
McConnel ? ” I said, “ Yes.” “ And did you come out in the ‘ Ohasely ’? ”
“Yes.” Then she said, “I was one of the little girls you used to teach,
and I have never forgotten it.” There was a minister on board whom Dr.
Lang had asked to conduct the Sunday services, etc, I think he was a
Congregationalist, and I daresay a good man, but his exposition of Scripture
was so very lame, to say the least of it, that a deputation was appointed to


ask him to read the Scriptures without explanation, which request he
complied with. In later years he had a small church not far from Ipswich.
On one occasion, at the time of the Races, he determined to preach a sermon
in Ipswich on “ Death and the Pale Horse.” Taking his horse to be shod,
Campbell the smith said to him: “And so I hear you are going to preach
Sabbath next on ‘ Death and the Pale Horse.’ ” “ Yes,” he said. “ Well,
tak’ ma advice an’ stick to the Gospels; dinna ye meddle wi’ the Revelations.”
Ido not know whether he took the advice or not. But this is a digression.
Well, we went on our way with all its happenings, good and bad, the
ship and her passengers arriving safe in Moreton Bay, Ist May, 1849.
What a dreary waste of water the bay looked! It is formed by three
islands—Stradbroke, the most southerly; Moreton, separated from it by a
dangerous channel about a mile wide ; in the north, Bribi Island. These
three islands form the bay, which is about twenty miles wide, excepting at
the north and south. The three islands form a breakwater nearly seventy
miles long, Stradbroke, the largest, being thirty. Between Moreton and
Bribi Islands is a wide entrance into the bay called the North Passage ; its
deep water channel is four miles wide, through which vessels of the largest
size can pass at any time. There are many little islands in this great inland
sea, but they lie mostly to the south. It was through this deep wide channel
that we entered. On the mainland, to the north, we could see three
remarkably-shaped mountains close to each other ; the natives have a legend
connected with them. They are called by the colonists the Glass-house
Mountains. These were the only features of interest that we saw in all the
land, lying quite low, and covered with low-growthed vegetation. We cast
anchor and looked anxiously for some recognition of our arrival. A
pilot-station was placed on Moreton Island, and as soon as we were sighted
out at sea we were signalled. It seemed really to me as if we had come to
the end of the known world, and no other had dawned upon us. At last, in
the far distance, a boat appeared. We became very excited. As it drew
near we saw it was the Customs boat, with two gentlemen and four of a crew,
all fine athletic-looking fellows. The gentlemen, Customs and Health
officers, Mr. Thornton and Dr, Ballow, boarded our ship, and when they saw
my husband they shouted “ Hallo, Mr. MeConnel, who ever thought of
seeing you here ? ” He replied, “ Not only me, but my wife! ” Then I


received the heartiest of welcomes. As we could show a “clean bill of
health ’’ and there was no Customs trouble, their work was soon over, and
we went to dinner. The “fatted sheep” had been killed, and we fared
sumptuously, the captain being congratulated on such excellent provisioning
of the ship—l 23 days out, and still live stock ! Our visitors little knew the
facts, and we did not enlighten them.
My husband, self and maid were invited to leave the ship in the Customs
boat, which we did, and took our two terriers with us. In the meantime we
could hear peals of laughter “forward.” The men were treating the new
chums to all sorts of ridiculous tales; amongst others, that crowds of
sweethearts were waiting for the young women to make them their wives,
and such like. Well, we were all ready to go, and nothing loath to leave
that crazy little barque that a watchful Providence had safely guided through
dangers seen and unseen, till with thankful hearts we found ourselves arrived
at our desired haven.
As our boat moved away we were greeted with hearty ringing cheers
from our fellow-passengers and the ship’s officers. There had been no
quarreling throughout the whole voyage, quite the reverse. We were some
flours going up the river to Brisbane. What a dismal waterway it was !
Neither sign of house nor hall, nor man, black or white. Mangroves the
only vegetation visible. But there was much lively amusing conversation.
I was informed that no “ calling cards ” were ever used in Brisbane, but it
was well to have a piece of chalk in my pocket so that I might write my
name on the door if people were out! But I was not caught, my husband
having enlighted me a good deal. Coming up the river all seemed brighter.
There was a part cleared by German missionaries, where the grass was
green and tempting. Impulsively I said, “ Will you stop a few minutes
and let me have a run ? ” The crew were much amused, but of course
stopped. Taking the terriers with me we all had a good run, and I returned
glowing with pleasure, my first run for nearly five months ! Soon were we
near Brisbane. The first building by the river was the Custom House, and
close by lay Mr. Thornton’s cottage, from which there was a jetty. In the
cottage we could see two ladies using a glass to see who were in the boat.
An immigrant vessel landing in the Bay was an object of great excitement
in those days. I was told afterwards the remark was, “ There are bonnets


in the boat, who can they be ? ” The landing took place and we were
introduced to Mr. Thornton’s wife and step-daughter. After me came my
“traps” just such things as ladies in England travel with. Miss
Buttenshaw looked at them in amazement, and turning, said to me, “ What
will you do with all these things ? ” I said, “ I will require them when I
travel.” “ Travel ? ” she said, “ where will you travel to ? ” My reflections
were not happy ones, and my heart sank. Then a reporter for the
“ Courier ” called for information. He soon left, when my companion said,
“ That man was once a convict.” Truly, I thought, my lot was cast in a
strange place. I was gaining experience !
Houses had not the luxury of spare rooms then, so my husband went to
secure accomodation for us in the one hotel of which Brisbane could boast,
“ Bowe’s Inn.” Meanwhile Hr. Ballow brought his young wife to see me ;
she was dark, pretty, and very pleasant. I think the doctor was her senior
by a good many years; he was rather a good-looking jolly Scotsman from
Edinburgh, “ mine own romantic town.” It was a great pleasure to him to
get my descriptions of familiar places, a good deal altered since he left.
My husband having secured rooms, we bade adieu to our friends and went
to our new quarters. How shall I describe them ? There were no ladies to
travel, so it was useless to provide rooms not wanted. A private sitting-room
was not to be thought of. We were shown into a long bare dining-room,
with a long table and many chairs. Several men were there, but left when
we entered. The verandah was the great rendez-vous. When we were told
our rooms were ready I went in, and was going to shut the door when I
found if I wished to do so I must put a chair against it, as there was neither
handle, lock, nor bolt! Then I looked for a blind to the window, but it was
innocent of such a luxury, and I could not spare the one towel to make
the room private. Other things were equally unpleasant ; leave we must;
but where to go we knew not. A knock at our door anti we were told
there were visitors. A Mr. and Mrs. Pickering with their niece, a Miss de
Styak, a nice young girl lately arrived from England, who ultimately
became the second wife of Mr. Robert Douglas, Kangaroo Point, to whom
she had a family of sons and daughters. I have alluded to my brother-in-
law, Mr. John McConnel, being in the Colony. He had been in business in
Manchester. Through a careless or dishonest partner the business had


to be wound up, when he and the younger brother of the family, Frederic,
sailed for Australia. Ido not remember whether they came together or
separately, I think the latter. John was the second eldest of seven brothers;
my husband was the second youngest, and there were several sisters between.
Soon after he arrived he bought a cattle station, “ Crow’s Nest,” for cash,
and my husband helped him in settling, etc. The “blacks” were very
troublesome. He did not like being there, so he sold the station, on terms.
Ultimately my husband took him into partnership, when he received a small
share in Cressbrook. He had two rooms in town. The inn was often rowdy,
and he was a quiet man. When he heard that his brother David was
married and meant to bring out his wife to Moreton Bay, he at once went
to Sydney to look out for us.
In those days letters took long in travelling, and often a year elapsed
before one could get a reply; now such a thing is almost incredible. A
sailing vessel might be a slow tub, taking six months to make a voyage;
again, it might be a fast ship, making the voyage in little more than half
the time; so that although my brother-in-law had been written to and told
that we were sailing direct for Moreton Bay, it was long after our arrival
that he received that letter. Then he hurried back and gave me a true
brother’s welcome; but “hurrying back” meant waiting for the next
sailing vessel. Meanwhile we took possession of his two rooms, sorry
apartments they were, but they were private. The cottage belonged to
Mr. Swan, editor and late owner of the “Courier.” A quiet, respectable
couple he and his wife were. It was in George Street, near to where it
crossed Queen Street, which was the principal thoroughfare. At the far
end of it, by the river, was, later on, built Government House, when
“Moreton Bay” became Queensland. There was no indication then of
the fine street it has become. The cottage was “weather-board,” with a
narrow verandah. A French-light window opened from the verandah into
the sitting-room. Another door, at the opposite end, led into the bedroom.
They were sorry apartments, innocent of what could be called furniture.
The sitting-room had as its only contents a table, some chairs, and two
large packing-cases of skins of birds, etc., preserved with arsenic—plentifully,
one would say, from the strong odour. There was no fireplace. The other
room had ship’s furniture, that which my brother-in-law had in his cabin


on his voyage out. The table appointments were indescribable, everything
seemed to have suffered from wear and bad usage—cups without handles,
steel forks with missing prongs, no apology for the absence of cruets or any
substitute, no glass, only pannikins, and oh! if they had been a bit
brighter! I had become accustomed to bad cooking on board ship; here
it was no better, but, at least, the food was fresh, which was a decided
improvement. It was all very rough, and I had not learned to take into
consideration how hard it was for it to be otherwise—five hundred miles
away from Sydney, irregular sailing vessel communication, a township with
no “ general store ” —one does not get easily accustomed to such things.
But this did not last long. In the evening of the day we moved into the
rooms I went with Hannah, my maid, to arrange the bedroom. As the sun
set I heard a rustling noise, and, looking about, saw a swarm of large,
black-looking insects trying to fly and hitting me on the face; they came
from behind the chest of drawers. I called to my husband in terror; he
said they were “flying cockroaches ! ” Their odour was worse than that of
the bird-skins in the sitting-room. We had no protection from them that
night. Oh, the horror of it! But next day we made net curtains.
Somehow, everything was unpleasant; but my dear husband made the
best of it all for me.
There had not been a general rain for some months, now it began to fall
in torrents. No one had a conveyance of any sort, not even Captain
Wickham, the Government Resident. His house, “ Newstead,” at Breakfast
Creek, was some miles down the river. He rode into town, but everyone
else came and went by river. There were no roads made, only surveyed and
labelled, and in such weather a conveyance would have been of little use.
My husband had gone to the ship to see about getting our belongings on
shore. His absence made it more dark and cheerless, and I was glad to
find a fireplace in our bed-room. Hannah made me a nice bright wood
fire. I was sitting by it, not in the happiest of moods, when an amusing
incident happened. The rain had stopped, and the sun was shining.
Presently a knock was heard at the door of our sitting-room. Hannah went
to see who it was. In a little while she returned, and said, “ Please, m’am,
there are two persons wishing to see you.” I said, “Are they men or
women ? ” “ Well, m’am, they ought to be gentlemen, but law’s me, you


should see how they are dressed ! Why, they have no waistcoats on.” I
asked, “What are their names?” She replied, “I asked them for their
cards. They said they did not carry cards.” “ Well,” I said, “ did you not
get their names ? ” “I am coming to that. What do you think they said ?
* Our names are Mr. Bigge and Mr, Little.’ ” It was a strange coincidence,
those were really their names. Mr. Bigge had “Mt. Brisbane,” the nearest
station to Oressbrook, and Mr. Little was a solicitor. I said,, “It is all
right, I know the names, I will go to them.” She said pleadingly, “ Please
don’t go. Master is not at home, and they are larky gentlemen.” Later
when I told them this story they were greatly amused, and have never
forgotten it. Only two and a half years ago, when I was visiting this same
Mr. Bigge and his wife in their beautiful home in Devonshire, he recalled
the incident to me, and tells it still to the amusement of his visitors.
When the rain cleared the people came to call for me. Captain and
Mrs. Wickham, Dr. and Mrs. Ballow, Mr. Duncan, Collector of Customs,
with his wife and daughter; they were all most cordial in their expressions
of welcome. Mrs. Wickham was a daughter of Hannibal McArthur, of
Sydney, who I think was the first to introduce sheep into the Moreton Bay
district, or perhaps into Australia. Mrs. Wickham was young and very
charming ; later she proved a good friend to me.
Before long our brother arrived from Sydney; he was glad to have a
sister in that new and far-away land, and nothing could exceed the
heartinessof his welcome. Well, we had to vacate his “ apartments.” We
found a small wooden five-roomed cottage on Kangaroo Point, on the
south side of the river. I think I see it now. It was on the roadside, a
little up the hill, not far from the river, though we could not see it. The
walls were weatherboards and unlined—the shingled roof was very leaky.
There was a 4 ft. wide verandah along the front, enclosed by a wooden
paling. Opening on the verandah were a window, a door—a window, a
door—belonging to two separate rooms (all the windows had small old-
fashioned sashes), then there was a door between the two rooms ; one was
the sitting-room, the other the kitchen. Behind the former was one bed-
room, the only door being by the sitting-room. There was another small
room at the hack of the kitchen, close to which was a narrow stair leading
to a room above, appropriated by the “ married couple Hannah had the


little room by the stair; then there was a back door leading into a yard j
and that was my first residence in Moreton Bay! We had to put most of
our imported furniture in a shed; but the piano, a beautiful Collard, one
of our wedding gifts, we had to find room for. This was difficult, and
could only be done by closing the door opening on to the verandah, and
placing the piano against it, so that the only entrance into our sitting-
room was through the kitchen. Visitors, all, had to enter that way.
One afternoon while I was in my room visitors called. My room was
certainly not more than 10 ft. or 12 ft. square, and the door opened upon
the bed. I disliked opening it, so I got out by the window and came in
by the back door and through the kitchen to receive my visitors, making no
explanation. The roof of the sitting-room was so leaky, that when a
shower came I had to place sundry utensils about to catch the rain drops,
and so save my pretty things. And yet, how happy we were in that
rough little place!
My husband bought land at Toogoolawah, now Bulimba— a few miles
down the river and on the south side—and at once set about clearing and
building. I went with him and a surveyor when he went down to inspect
the land ; it was too rough for me to go all the way, so they seated me on a
log to await their return; it was then I made my first acquaintance with a
snake and a laughing jackass. Meditating while I sat I heard a most derisive
laugh repeated again and again. I thought it was a black-fellow. The sound
seemed to come from the trees, and looking up I saw a rather unshapely
small brown bird with a big, wide throat; he was the culprit. As I looked
he went on again. I was much amused. Then after a little, at a short
distance, I saw a large black snake lying in a heap of withered leaves, it was
in it s winter sleep, but something had disturbed it and it raised it’s head,
showing a beautiful scarlet throat. I seemed hypnotised by it, and could not
take my eyes away from looking at it. Soon it laid down its head again. I
did not feel any fear. Of course in its torpid condition it would not have
attacked me.
The work of clearing and building began, and it became an unfailing object
of interest to us. Our only way of going to the spot was by river, so my
husband purchased a boat. Many trips we took, spending the days watching
the progress of our new home. The house was built of white freestone.


brought up in punts from a quarry some miles down the river.
We found kind friends on Kangaroo Point; the Key. Thomas Mowbray,
from near Glasgow, while his wife and her sister, Miss Anderson, were from
Colinton, near Edinburgh. He was in delicate health, and had to give up
his church (Presbyterian) in Sydney, having ruptured a blood-vessel, and
was sent to Moreton Bay, which was considered good for chest complaints.
He lived for many years, and took boys to educate with his own. He was
greatly esteemed by all. They had a nice roomy brick cottage, with a fine
view across the river from their verandah. I did value their friendship.
Then Major and Mrs. Barney, with their young son and daughter, came to
live on the Point. The Major had sold out from the Army some years
before—came to New South Wales, where he took up country “Barney
Downs,” and began squatting. But he knew nothing of pastoral
pursuits, and soon lost all his money, and came to Moreton Bay almost
penniless. Ho obtained the billet of Post-Master for Brisbane, at a small
salary, for which office he was not much better fitted than he was for
squatting. About this time another interesting man came to Brisbane, the
Eev. Mr. Creyke (Episcopal); he was very delicate, and had left England on
Account of his health, a young widower with one son, who had remained at
home to be educated. While spending an evening at the Major’s he became
so ill that he could not be moved. During his illness he discovered the
straitened circumstances of the Barney family, requested to board with
them, and also helped the Major in the Post Office. A close friendship was
formed between them, which death only ended. Later on Mr. Creyke grew
much better, married, and sent for his son.
Then an Inn was opened in the Point, a butcher’s shop by “Paddy
Mayne,” and a small store by a family named Davidson. So the little
place kept growing.
While we were waiting for our new home to be ready we paid a visit to
Cressbrook, my husband’s station about 90 miles up the Brisbane Biver. It
was a sheep and cattle station found and taken up by him in 1841-42. The
journey was a formidable one for a lady to take in those days, especially for
me as I could not ride. We had brought out an Albert phaeton which we
had used during the few months that we lived in Nottinghamshire, and we
travelled in that, it was seated for four. My husband and I sat in front, and


Hannah with the smallest amount of luggage we could possibly do with
behind. The groom led spare horses, one carrying a pack, which consisted
of saddle-bags filled with clothing. As there were neither made roads nor
bridges we had some rough experiences. To save the springs of the phaeton
they were bound up with “green hide,” i.e., the untanned hide of a bullock
cut up in strips, not elegant in appearance, but answering the purpose well.
The day on which we started on our journey was very beautiful. As
Kangaroo Point is on the south side of the river there were only a few gullies
to cross. To me they seemed bad enough, though I did not say so, and the
road was as rough as any far-away bush road of to day, 1906. There was
no getting along; although the distance to Ipswich was only 25 miles it
took two days to cover it, and we had to stop when there was a stopping
place. Halfway there was a small township called Woogaroo, now the site
of an enormous lunatic asylum. The place is beautifully situated on the
Brisbane River. A pretty cottage in this early township was the home of
Dr. Simpson, the first Commissioner of Crown Lands for the Moreton Bay
district. He was a man past middle-life and a widower, a doctor of
medicine, had travelled much, principally in Europe. We greatly enjoyed
his accounts of his travels, some of which were absorbingly interesting.
His was my first experience of “bush” hospitality; it was delightful, his
welcome so hearty. We were made most comfortable, his arrangements
were simple, and with an air of refinement. In the morning he showed us
among other things a large flock of fine turkeys, and told us he always had
one for his Sunday dinner. No doubt he had willing friends to share
it, who would not mind the ride from Brisbane Ipswich to spend the day c
with so genial a host.
From there it was an easy journey to Ipswich Limestone as it was
then called. Being the head of navigation it was a busy little town.
Goods came up from Brisbane by river, the streets were lined with drays
and long teams of bullocks that had brought from the interior wool, tallow,
hides, etc., and were reloaded with necessaries for the stations—flour, tea
and sugar besides all that constitutes a bush store. The inn we stayed at
was a rough little place and very rowdy. We started early next day on
our way, and a rough way it was over miles of black soil. We followed
the bullock-drivers track; it was a feat of dexterity to keep clear of the
or


ruts made by the great wheels of the heavily-laden drays. What impossible-
looking gullies we crossed with their steep and often slippery banks ! lam
afraid I used to shut my eyes, abandoning myself to my fate. What a sigh
of relief I gave when each difficulty was overcome! Then we came to
Wattle-tree (Mimosa) country, poor soil, but so pretty, for the trees were in
bloom, and the air fragrant with the sweet scent. Now we had rough driving
of another kind, for we had to keep zig-zagging to avoid fallen trees.
Fortunately there was little fencing in these days, so we had a wide space
to choose from. After this we had a few, a very few, miles of pretty
country and better roads, but soon there was a sad change, when we
reached what was called in irony “Bullock’s Delight.” It was a terrible
piece of country. Of course we all got out and walked, but even that was
difficult on the hilly, broken country devastated by floods, with deep, dry
water-courses everywhere. I think there were quite two miles of this.
Then we came to the top of the “Big Hill” which we had been climbing
all through the “ Bullock’s Delight.” It was easy going down the hill.
Then we came to the “Flats,” pretty country and easily got over; but it
had been a long, weary day, and it was quite late when we arrixed at
Wivenhoe Inn. Many drays were camped all about, while their drivers
were carousing inside.
The man and his wife who kept the Wivenhoe seemed quite respectable.
We had a private room, if one could call such a room private, the partition
of which, separating it from the public room, was of woodern boards six
feet high! It was the same in our bedroom. The landlady brought in our
supper—a fine ham, new laid eggs, good bread and delicious fresh butter.
We thoroughly enjoyed our evening meal. We were very tired, and glad
to return to rest. Through the space between the partition and the
shingled roof every sound was heard, and, as the night wore on, the talk of
the bullock-drivers became unbearable. My husband went to the landlord
to ask if he could not quiet them. It was no use; their money was as good
as other people’s, they said, so we had to endure it. It was an unhappy
experience.
We were off early next morning, a long journey was before us, nowhere
that we could stay the night till we reached Cressbrook; there was still
descent to be made which was steep and rough. Gradually the road


improved, and in about an hour we were at the bottom of the hill. The
country now became very pleasing. There was a sheep-station called
Wivenhoe, belonging to a Mr. Uhr. He was there, but just about to leave
with his wife and little daughter. Mr. Uhr’s brother had been murdered
by the natives, and, as they continued troublesome, the family decided to
move to town. They had rough quarters, but not so rough as where we
stopped for lunch, at the house of Major and Mrs. North, fine old gentlefolk
from Ireland. The Major had lost a good deal of money by becoming
security for a large amount to a member of his family. He honourably
paid his debt and came to Australia to retrieve his fortune. This I was
told by Mrs. North. Poor lady, in telling me she added, “But he was
Scotch!” I said, “Oh, Mrs. North, lam Scotch.” “Well,” she said,
“you are not from Edinburgh.” I said, “It is my birthplace where I
lived till I was married! ” She heaved a great sigh and said, “ Well, there
are good and bad everywhere.” Their cottage was bark, with an earthen
floor very uneven. The dear old lady gave me a hearty welcome. We
were expected, and she had a pair of boiled fowls for lunch. I have never
forgotten the scene —the little old gentleman moving about the poor hut;
she went to a box and took out a snow-white damask tablecloth, spread it
on the rickety pine table that the holes in the floor made so unsteady, and
laid out on it some beautiful old silver. I was amased, but more so when I
saw her take a great pot off the fire, carry it ouside and drain the water
from the boiled fowls. I quickly got up to help her; she laughed and said,
“ You could’nt. I do everything for my husband and myself. I’m sorry
there is no tea (the invariable bush beverage), we can’t afford it. I make
hop beer. If times are good we will soon be out of our difficulties.” The
Major was thought inhospitable, but the truth was he would not allow his
wife to wait upon the men who passed by.
After dinner we hurried away; we had to reach Oressbrook, if possible,
before dark. I thought the “ bush ” a dreary place. About eight miles
from the head station my husband stopped and bade me “welcome to
Oressbrook; ” it was the boundary between that and the next station, Mount
Brisbane, but neither white man nor black did I see, nor hoof of stock, and
it seemed to me all a myth, and I said so. My husband only laughed. As
we neared the station the country became very pretty, and from the nature


of the soil the road grew much better. The crossing of Cressbrook Greek
was beautiful. The Moreton Bay myrtle was in flower and very abundant,
red and in form like a bottle-brush among very light feathery foliage; but
the banks were steep and the crossing difficult. Two and a half miles
further on we came to a chain of lagoons; here we were met by the
“ Super,” Alpin Cameron, a big burly Scotchman, who with the men gave
us a great cheer and a hearty welcome, and insisted on drawing our carriage
to the house themselves. It cheered me to see a pretty neat cottage and a.
well-stocked garden with a grape-vine-walk down the middle of it. Just in front
of the house was a Bunya tree planted by my husband in 1843. It is now a
giant, called “ Grandfather’s Tree.” All had been done in and around the house
to make it a home for gentlefolk. I felt rested, glad and thankful, for after
the experience of the last two days I did not know what to expect. We had
a suite of rooms, sitting, sleeping and dressing rooms, that had been built
for Mr. Henry Mort, who was superintendent for some years, and had
brought up his bride. The house was quiet and comfortable, though
terribly bare. We took our meals in the common dining-room. Our first
rqeal was in the evening. The Super presided. I sat beside my husband.
What a tea equipage it was! A tin tea-pot that I think held at least eight
quarts, it took two hands to lift it, there was a piece of metal opposite the
handle to take hold of. The large cups and saucers had amusing pictures
on them, fiddlers, bagpipes, players and dancers. There was an apology
made for the sugar, which was as near being black as could be; the lumps
were black. When the Super learnt I was going up he rode to the various
stations around —none of them nearer than 12 miles—to try and get light
sugar; but no, all had the same. Master and men shared alike. There
was a huge “ fat lamp ” in the middle of the long table, not pleasant, but it
gave a fairly good light. I cannot recollect the others that were at the
table, but I know that I often sat down with 14 men, most of them travellers
arriving at sundown, which there is never later than 7 o’clock. Cressbrook was
on the main road. We often had very pleasant people, but all men.
It was the time of sheep washing and shearing; when the shearers had
finished at one station they went on to the next. The first transaction was
to make an agreement with the master about payment. I think it was
usually so much a score, the masters of the neighbouring stations arranging


the amount beforehand. That settled, then came the choosing of shears
the winding up was a glass of grog to each man served by the Super, then
good night and away to their “huts,” as their quarters were called.
Such was the order in the early days; but all that is changed now. I
was much interested in the process of sheep-washing and also in the
shed. Some men shore beautifully and rapidly, while others were clumsy,
slow and always calling out “ tar,” when a boy would go with a tar-pot and
a brush to doctor the cut sheep.
During that time I witnessed the most sudden and severe storm that I
think I have ever experienced, at least it was the first I had seen.
Everybody was at the wool-shed ; I was alone in the house. Suddenly the
sky became overcast, then black; it was almost dark when the rain,
accompanied by hail, came down in torrents. One could not hear oneself
or anyone else speak. The roofs were not ceiled, and through the dry
shingle the storm poured down, so that there was not a dry spot or thing in
the house. I was terrified. My husband and brother-in-law ran as fast
as they could (the wool-shed was some distance off), and the water in
places was already up to their knees, incredible as it may seem. They
were much concerned for me, and it was indeed a sorry plight, I and
everything dripping. I could not help feeling alarmed. Big wood fires
were soon blazing, and Hannah with “ the Couple ” in the kitchen set to
work to make things better. Of course I took my share, and was glad
to be busy. Many sheep were killed. It was all very solemnising away in
the lonely bush.
It made me glad to see the Lord's Day was kept reverently—a complete
cessation from labour. My dear husband had service at 12 o’clock. He
used the Church of England service, and read very good sermons. John
Coleman, the storekeeper, was his clerk. He was a well-educated man, son
of a clergyman, but had been wild in his youth, and like many another such
came to Australia. He was first a shepherd; my husband saw he was too
good for that, and made him his storekeeper. He never left Oressbrook.
He married a good wife, and had a fine family, who are still with us in the
third generation. He and his wife lie side-by-side in the little Oressbrook
burying-ground.
I remember I was a good deal troubled by the extreme bareness and


shabbiness of our sitting-room. A very old sofa, six old cane chairs, and
a square cedar table, nothing more. One afternoon while my husband had
gone to town to see how our house at ToojSboloowah was progressing, my
brother-in-law came to me and said, “ Would you like to see the stores ? ”
Yes, of course I would; there were bags of flour and sugar, chests of tea,
saddles, bridles, hobbles, men’s clothing and such like, and tobacco, of
course. But up in the corner of a shelf I espied a roll of unbleached
thin grey linen. I said, “ What do you do with that ? ” “ Oh,” he said,
“ came U P by mistake, and we have put it aside.” I asked, “ Will you
give it to me ? ” He was much amused, but said “ Certainly.” So it was
brought into the house. I had a consultation with Hannah about making
covers for our sofa and chairs. Then I thought what I should do to
brighten them. I remembered that my husband had about three dozen
crimson silk pocket-handkerchiefs. I went to his chest, took out one
dozen ! Then I got the carpenter to make seats of wood for the chairs,
a good-sized box for an ottoman, and two little candle-boxes for stools,'
all nicely stuffed, that Hannah and I set to to dress. We cut up the
handkerchiefs in strips and bound the covers. We worked hard to have
it all ready against my husband’s return. The room was metamorphosed.
My husband stared; he was very pleased, but when he said “ Where did
you get all that pretty crimson binding?” I said “Out of your chest;
it took a dozen of your handkerchiefs!” I feared he might be vexed;
but no, he laughed, and said they were put to a good use. So I had
quite a pretty room to sit in; the door opening on to the verandah, over-
looking a pretty garden, and the beautiful hills beyond. The Bunya tree
was growing quite stately by the path.
But it was all very solitary in its vastness, terribly so. The thought
came to me, surely for some purpose I had come to this far-distant life ?
At the age of eighteen I found the preciousness of my Saviour and
learnt something of the power of the Holy Ghost, and I thought there was
an open door for me ; not at that time exactly in Cressbrook, but in the
new land to which I had come. In those days women did not “ come out,”
as in the present time. Soon we were to return to Brisbane. I think it
was just- before I left that I distributed some booklets, and Eev. Dr.—since
Bishop—Ryle’s famous Xmas tracts, and by God’s help I tried to live the


life I could not speak of.
Our return journey was uneventful. When we reached Wivenhoe,
Mr. Uhr’s station, we found he and his wife were leaving directly, riding on
horseback. They had a little daughter, and finding it difficult to manage
for her to travel, asked us if we could take her to Brisbane. We were very
glad to help, so room was made for her beside Hannah. She was a wild
little thing, not easy to manage, which I daresay, from my ignorance of
bush life, was more my fault than hers. She was with us in our cottage
at Kangaroo point. Everything was a marvel to her. Our kitchen clock
had large green weights ; she looked at them and said, “ Why do you have
Emu eggs in your clock ? ” We paid an early visit to Toogoolawah. The
outbuildings, which were of brick, were getting on apace.
It was our intention to move in as soon as they were ready, but some
months had to pass. I think it was in the beginning of December that we
entered our new home. There was much to do. The wing built was long
and about thirty feet deep, with a good verandah. First there were the
kitchen and scullery, one behind the other; next, a very large room,
ultimately to be divided; this we took for ourselves, making a dividing
partition of strong unbleached calico, the inner division being our bedroom,
while we set ourselves to make the front part as nice a living-room as
possible; beyond was the store. The servant’s room was overhead. Ido
not remember where the laundry was, possibly between our rooms and the
store. No servants could be procured nearer than Sydney, although very
soon after this immigrant ships came direct to Moreton Bay. There were
no servants in the class of immigrants sent out by Dr. Lang. The man and
wife that came to us seemed respectable and capable. The woman was cook
and laundress, the man was indoor servant and also helped his wife, while
Hannah was housemaid and generally useful; so we felt settling. As the
hot weather increased the mosquitoes became intolerable. I took refuge in
our large bed, safely tucked inside the net curtains with my work, books and
writing materials. Being new country, with a swamp in draining close by,
the pest could not be worse; they were in myriads and very irritating,
especially to new comers.
Quite early in 1850 an immigrant ship arrived ; from it we had an excellent
gardener, James Johnston, from Edinburgh. He had a nice young wife


and one child, a baby. And so the interesting work of gardening was
begun, which ended in several acres of ornamental grounds in front and at
the sides of the house ; there was also a large kitchen garden, very fruitful.
A good deal of labour was employed. My husband wished to have and
encouraged settlement of respectable families near to him. He must have
bought a good deal of land, and portions of this he sold to his work people.
I know they had it on easy terms, making regular payment from their
wages, then from time to time they were “ let off,’’ so as to begin clearing
and making their homes. I think our gardener was the first to begin; he
was delighted with the new country and wished to bring his father and
mother out, and to have a house ready for them. To do this he worked hard
all his spare hours, and often had an “ off time ”as well. When the building
began money was needed as well as time. Good as his wages were, they
could not meet that.
Just about this time my first baby was born, and Mrs. Johnston was my
nurse. There were no special nurses to be had in those early days. I had
a good doctor and all went well with me. At the end of the month I was to
pay her for her services, but she said, “ I would like to leave it in the
master’s hands till Jeames has a paddock fenced in, when I want to buy twa
coos.” But “Jeames ” needed money to help buy timber, so one morning
he came to his master and said, “ Has ma wife ony money lyin’ wi’ you,
sir ? ” “ Yes,” was the reply, “ I have the money she earned when nursing
Mrs. McConnel. He said, “ Weel, sir, I’ll hae tae tak’ it, for I ma,nn pay
an account for timber the day; ” so he got it. Soon after the paddock was
fenced the gudewife came to my husband and said, “ A wad like tae lift the
siller noo tae buy the twa coos.” She was told, “ Your husband got that a
month ago.” She said, “Did Jeames lift the siller a’ was keepin’
for the twa coos?” “Yes,” my husband replied, “he needed it.” She
said, “ Weel, I wadna hae thocht it o’ him.” Then after a pause she said,
“ Has Jeames any money awin’ tae him ? ” “ Yes,” my husband said, “he
has. She replied, “ Weel, I’ll lift it, an’ ye can tell ’im that when he comes
lor t! The matter was soon all put right; they were a very happy couple.
Soon the old parents arrived and with a widowed daughter, also a brother
and his wife, the brother becoming later school teacher in Ipswich—a post
he held for many years. Our gardener rose to own a sugar mill built on his


own land, and ultimately became a Member of Parliament. He was a very
intelligent man—read much—a grand type of my own countrymen. In
after years a sad accident befel him, he lost an arm by machinery in the
mill. We were all so very sorry for him. I wrote to bim my sympathy;
he replied, and to show how unspoiled by prosperity he was, he addressed
me, “ Dear and honoured Mistress.” All his family have done well. His
widow still lives. Only last year one of my children met James Johnston’s
eldest son, the same age as my eldest son, whose cradle was in the kitchen
while his mother nursed me. He was exhibiting dairy cattle, and took first
prize for a fine bull; he was introduced to my daughter, and said he was
proud to meet and shake hands with one of the family. My husband not
only rejoiced in, but helped on, the success of this honest, intelligent
working man.
Another Scotch family that came to us from the next immigrant ship was
Thomas Cairns, Janet his wife, and a large family. Cairns, managed the
farm, his wife took charge of my poultry yard, which was a large one; one
daughter was married and went into the bush with her husband; one
younger one came into our service when another baby came ; she assisted
in the nursery, for the nurse, Mrs. Shenton, was an elderly woman and found
the stairs and carrying heavy. It would be difficult to tell the value of
these people good to the third generation. Some of them are with us now —
not in service—but owning many milch cows, selling the milk to the
Condensed Milk Factory, Cressbrook. About this time my husband began
to have a large dairy, and had a milking herd of Devons—beautiful creatures.
A couple from Cornwall, also hired from an immigrant ship, had charge of
it, and a nice young couple they were, George Waldock and his comely wife,
Mercy Meek, The variety of work was most interesting, and there was yet
another branch of industry added. Among Dr. Lang’s immigrants was a
first-class cabinet-maker, Towell by name. My husband engaged him to
come to Toogooloowah to make the furniture for the house, and well he did
it; all except the beds, which we brought from England. He used cedar
and stained pine, and it was all very much admired by our visitors. Now
the population increased considerably. Immigrants wanted land, and a
good deal was bought in the neighbourhood, besides that which my husband
sold to his people. It was a busy time—clearing, draining, ploughing,


planting, and everything growing like mushrooms in the virgin soil.
Thus began the thriving district now called Bulimba, my good husband
the centre of all. We began to have a considerable population around us,
among which were a number of children, and we cast about to devise means
for education and Sabbath observance. All the young people and their
elders that came from the old country knew their three E’s and were very
intelligent. I wish I could recollect what was done for day-teaching. There
was no teacher to be had in Brisbane, although there were one or two
schools, such as they were. I think the elder must have taught the
younger; but my husband and I had each a good large Sunday class, he of
boys and lof girls, and all except the little ones read to us; they were very
regular in attendance, prepared their lessons well, and were quiet and
attentive.
We had also frequently services on Sunday afternoons. There were, I
think, two ministers in Brisbane —one Church of England, the other
Independent. My husband asked them if they could come on Sunday
afternoons to hold service, and they both willingly complied. To come they
had a ride of between four and five miles on the north side to the ferry. So
we made an arrangement, as there was not time to give notice, that we would
always be on the look-out about three o’clock, and when we saw one arrive
on the other side, he was ferried across, and the farm-bell was rung loud
and long. In a wonderfully short space of time a goodly congregation had
assembled. The crossing of the river was wide, and then there was a walk
of about one-third of a mile to the house. When the tide suited, we went
to town for morning service—usually two boats full—but it was a long pull,
the river had many bends, and it was often very hot. And then, of course,
only a few of the people could be accommodated. The road to South Brisbane
was a good deal nearer, but it was blocked by Norman’s Creek, which was
wide. On the north side the way was very rough, no road. My enterprising
husband bought a strip of land running from our ferry to North Brisbane,
fenced it on both sides, and made a road; he also built stables, a little
coach-house and a man’s hut. There we put our conveyance, two horses and
a man in charge, who also had charge of the ferry boat. This arrangement
added greatly to our comfort and convenience.
South Brisbane was at that time a busy place, so much business being


done with Ipswich and the bush. The Eev. Mr. Mowbray, who lived in
Kangaroo Point, used to have services there when his health allowed him ;
it was but a short distance to ride from his house. He proposed ,to my
husband that a Presbyterian church might be built there. There were a
good many Presbyterians, and all well-to-do. Bo a meeting was called ; all
were very glad to hear of the proposal; a committee was formed, and the
work was begun and carried on enthusiastically. A wooden church was
erected, seated for about 200. Before it was enclosed the natives or “ blacks ”
as they were called, were much attracted by it. When they saw people going
in and singing, etc., they said, “ Goorrai! budgery eorobery! ” and when the
sermon began one or two of the men gesticulated like the minister, upsetting
him a good deal. It was very hot and the door was open. The disturbance
was prevented from happening again. We had no regular minister, but set
about getting one. Meanwhile, Rev. Mr. Mowbray held a service as often
as he could.
In 1852 my youngest brother, Rev. Walter Macleod, unexpectedly arrived
from Scotland, a Licentiate of the Free Church. He was very delicate. To
show how difficult correspondence was with the Old Country, letters written
to us telling of my brother’s immediate starting for Sydney did not arrive
till some time after his own arrival there. He had come by a quick sailing
ship while the letters must have come in an old tub taking six months on
its way. He had, of course, no letter of welcome from us, but kind friends
received him in Sydney. My first intimation of his arrival was from him-
self, to say that the voyage had done him so much good that he was taking
the duties of the Rev. Mr. Salmon in Sydney, for a month while the latter
went away for a much needed holiday, that nearly half the time was over,
and that he would come to Brisbane by the first opportunity. These
opportunities were few and far between, so that our communication with
Sydney was by no means to be relied upon.
My joy was unbounded, for not one “ kent ” face had I seen since I came
to that far off land. In these days when a steamer was coming up the
river a bell was rung to announce the event a long way below our reach.
On the day when this bell heralded my brother’s arrival, we hastened
down with our little son; and he and I stood by the boat-shed while
the boat was rowed out mid-stream with my husband to meet the


steamer. An indescribable feeling of awkward shyness came over me.
My impulse was to hide. I could scarcely bear my joy. The steamer
stopped. I watched my brother leave it and enter the boat. As it neared
the bank I came out of the darkness, and the supreme moment arrived
when we were locked in each other’s arms. Our happiness is not
expressible. He was three years younger than I—always delicate and
needing tender care; he was very dear to me ; he had a beautiful
countenance, an amiable disposition, and early showed signs of a pious
nature. Healthful occupation in the country would have been the best
for him, but his heart was set on studying for the Scotch Presbyterian
Church, and my parents did not restrain him. During the eight years of
his University career his health was wonderfully good. It is here that I
will record a remarkable event—the interposition of Providence in saving
the life of our little son, Harry, the first-born.
We had grown a great many pineapples, and I formed the wish to send a
hundredweight of pineapple jam to my relatives in England and Scotland.
This caused a busy time, for first the apples were reduced to pulp, placed in
large earthenware jars and sprinkled with sugar. The work was done in
my beautiful large store-room, which was in the house and just behind the
dining-room, opening from a passage which led from the kitchen to the
dining-room. We had had a very busy day, and, pretty tired when I went
to bed, I suppose it was about one or two o’clock in the morning that I
awoke and found myself standing on the floor of our room, some way from
the bed. I rubbed my eyes and wondered how I came there. I did not
return to bed, but was impelled to walk towards the door, which I opened
and crossed the little passage that separated the nursery from our room. I
entered it; the moon shone brightly. I passed Harry’s cot, with its net
curtains drawn and tucked in. I then passed the nurse’s bed. All seemed
still and peaceful. I went on to the window, from which there was a view
of the river. I watched the moonbeams playing on the water and then
turned in again. Eepassing Harry’s cot I thought the moonbeams were too
strong on it, and I went to draw the dimity curtain, when I thought the
child looked strange. I instantly threw back the curtain and found he was
in a fit, with his face dark purple, foam all round his mouth, his eyes glazed,
he rigid and cold. I took him in my arms, waked the nurse, and called my


husband. The nurse went at once for hot water.
Here I must make a digression. My kind friend and neighbour,
Mrs. Wickham, wrote for my benefit a list of rules useful for a° young
mother; one was : Never to be without hot water. This I adhered to most
faithfully, so that our darling child was soon in a hot bath, when he became
less rigid. We tried to give him castor oil, the only thing we had for an
emetic, but his teeth were clenched and we could not open them. Soon
there was no need of an emetic for he brought up a great quantity of
pineapple pulp. After this he quickly recovered, and the life of our child
was saved ! Who but the Gracious God, the ever-watchful eye of our Father
m Christ our Lord, gave this deliverance ? To this day it is all very
wonderful to me. Can I ever doubt the loving care of the unseen God ?
Never! Unobserved, the child had been running backwards and forwards
taking each time a handful ot the delicious stuff. He was under two years
of age but was very precocious, walking at ten months and speaking early.
How glad and thankful I was that I kept the rules given to me by my dear
friend, who not very long after this died rather suddenly in Sydney, away
from the husband that loved her so dearly. She left three children, two sons
and one daughter.
I had begun to feel contented and happy in my far-away home. This
far-away-ness caused the one heartache in my otherwise happy life. I had
one of the best and kindest of husbands, two children (boys) and my
beloved brother, a part of my old home. My home was beautiful, and there
was much in which I could take a real interest. Our people were very
dependent upon us, and it was in our power to help them. It was a
delightful gratification to my husband to see his workpeople prospering.
And they did prosper. To-day a good many of them, or their children, are
filling important jiositions. But a sad change came. It was when
recovering after the birth of my second child, that one day rising from the
sofa to ring the bell, I felt a tightness in the hollow under my knee, as if one
of the muscles was stiff. On examining the place, I found a little colourless
substance about the size of a small bean, and quite painless; still, it
tightened the muscle. I became uneasy, and when my doctor, Dr. Canon,
called next day I shewed it to him. He said it was nothing to be alarmed
about, and that the nurse had better rub it twenty minutes each day. This


was done for a week without any effect whatever, except to make the part
tender. Then a liniment was prescribed, the application of which broke the
skin, while the muscle tightened more, so that I limped. Then my doctor
became concerned, said it was the effect of climate, that Toogooloowah lay
too low, and recommended my husband to take me to Cressbrook, which he
did without a day’s delay.
It was a hard journey, with my baby and his little brother. The journey
was accomplished; each day my knee grew worse so that I had to use a
crutch. There was no doctor within 60 miles and only a weekly post.
Dr. Cannon was written to to say I was daily becoming worse; then he sent
up red precipitate ointment to he applied; still I became steadily worse.
One night I awoke with such a sinking at my heart that I thought it was
death. I awoke my husband, told him how I felt; he examined the sick
part and found it a gangrene wound!! He jumped out of bed, roused
the household, and in a very few hours we had started on our return to
Brisbane. Can I ever forget that journey of four days ? It rained nearly
all the time. The country was a swamp. I could not get out of the trap,
so going down steep places the phaeton was held back by ropes. There
were, besides my husband who drove, my dear brother, the Super, groom,
and one or two of the station-men. There were no mackintoshes or cloaks
for the men; they all rode soaked to the skin; but they cared for my
brother. Passing a string under the fold of a double blanket (blue I think),
they fastened it around his neck so that one half covered the front while the
other covered the back. It had a droll appearance, but was successful in its
object. We made Mt. Brisbane the first night, the station of Messrs. F. &F.
Bigge, who showed us no little kindness; next night we reached Wivenhoe
Hotel, and the next Ipswich. At Coal Creek, near to Ipswich, came the
hardest part of our journey. I had to get out of the trap, the tender little
ones with me. The nurses and one of the men cared for them. Then the
trap had to be carefully handled ; down it went to the bottom of the steep
muddy shining bank, and I followed, sliding down the bank. Oh, it was
terrible ! I was one mass of wet mud when I reached the bottom. In this
condition I got into the trap, and somehow got safely to the other side. The
children were taken on horseback. It was a sorely anxious time for my
poor husband. I wonder he did not turn grey there and then. Before


nightfall we reached the Hotel—a sorry spectacle, but with thankful hearts.
My little baby was none the worse, and Harry, brave little lad, took it all as
a matter of course, and got some childish fun out of it.
We had to stay in Limestone for a day or two; while there we heard of a
clever German doctor who had quite recently come to practice. My husband
asked him to come and see my knee. He was a tall gaunt-looking man
above thirty years of age, with a benevolent countenance and a kindly, almost
tender, manner; he looked clever. He could not speak English well, but he
seemed to know what was wrong, and said he could cure me. He was silent
on the treatment I had undergone, though one could see he did not approve.
How I wish he had spoken out his thoughts then! Jt was my fate to pass
through a long period of suffering. We did not then suspect my doctor’s
utter ignorance of the case, so decided to return to our home, where I had
every comfort. I steadily grew worse. After some weeks I was unable to
sleep, and had continual fainting fits.
One day there was a regatta in the bay. My dear husband was very fond
of boating. I was feeling better, and I persuaded him to go, my brother
remaining with me. Towards evening I became very ill, fainting continually.
My brother was anxious, and sent one of our men, who could use the oar
well, for his master, to get him to bring the doctor, who also was in the
bay. My husband met the man as he was coming home. While he hastened
to me, he sent the man for the doctor. Every restoration was tried, but
still I continued fainting. The doctor was long in coming, so my husband
sent again and again. At last he came, quite tipsy. When he entered my
room, the smell of drink made me quite sick. He looked at me, felt my
pulse, and then took my husband aside to tell him I was dying, that I should
not live till morning. He left some foolish prescription, and took his
departure. Day was breaking, a beautiful morning. My brother suggested
carrying me downstairs to the drawing-room, which was done. I was laid
on a couch by the open French lights ; it was haymaking-time. The farm
servants, Germans, began work and while they worked they sang. The
fresh early morning, the scent of the hay, with the rhythmic merry singing
seemed to work as a charm on me. There gradually came longer intervals
between the faintings, so my husband and brother after consultation decided
that the former should ride off at once to Ipswich, some thirty miles, and


fetch Dr. Sachse to see me. We parted with the probability of not meeting
again on earth. I commended him to the loving care of our Father in
Heaven, and he started off.
On arriving at Ipswich he lost no time in seeing the doctor, begging of
him to return with him. But the doctor had a most important and anxious
case on hand and could not leave. He said, “ Bring Mrs. McConnel to me.”
My poor husband was at his wit’s end, when it occurred to him to engage a
river steamer to go to Toogooloowah for me, which he was enabled to do.
Then he set about to look for a place in the town to take me to. Ipswich
had little to offer, but with the help of the Kev. Mr. Wallace, Church
of England clergyman, he found a cottage of four very small rooms,
furnished ; then he returned home, rejoiced to find me no worse but rather
better. Next morning the steamer arrived; it was anxiously looked for,
good old Cairns, the grieve, running to the house crying, “ I see the reek”
(smoke). I was carried on board in my bed, a widowed sister of James
Johnston with me as nurse, Harry, and a maid with him. My darling baby
I had to leave behind with his nurse, who was a good tender woman. My
brother also came, my husband and he lodging at a hotel close by. I bore
the journey well, and my bed was put in the largest of the four little rooms.
Dr. Sachse came as soon as possible. After examination he took my
husband aside and said, “ I cannot undertake this case. Your wife probably
will die; I, the German doctor, will be blamed. I have a reputation to
make.” At last he yielded to earnest pleading. On the following day he
took charge of my almost hopeless case, I need not go into particulars.
The leg was much worse than he had anticipated, and he proposed
amputation. My dear husband tenderly broke this painful alternative to me.
I said, “ No, I would rather die.” Dr. Sachse then said, “ Well, we will do
our best.”
For many weeks he poured liquid caustic down my leg, where the fistula
was. I did not feel it any more than if it had been water. He said, “my
poor patient, I can give you no hope while the limb keeps so dead.” He
persevered; twice a day he applied the caustic and bandages, my good
nurse touching me with a mother’s care. I had a Chinese lounge put on
wheels, and was kept out in the open air all day long, scarcely had any
food, only bread dipped in champagne and herb tea made by the doctor.


So the time wore on till one clay, while having the caustic poured down my
leg, I said to him, “ I feel as if a little red hot cinder was rolling down
my leg.” He threw down what was in his hand, gave a skip across the
floor and excitedly cried, “now I can give you hope. Life is coming to the
limb ! ” From that day there was steady though slow improvement. Now
I had a great longing to see my baby, and he came up with his nurse. He
looked so bonnie ! It was good for me to have him. His brother, too,
was passionately fond and proud of him, but teething went hard with him.
I do not think my good doctor understood the treatment of infants. My
beautiful boy died in our hands, seven months old. The effect of this was
feared on me, so I tried not to fret, sought to be resigned to the Father’s
Will, who had given us the precious loan and then took him to Himself.
The little forlorn brother wept and fretted much. His father brought him
up a little toy from Brisbane ; he looked at it, burst into tears, and returning
it to his father said, “ Papa give it to God, and ask Him to give it to Alick.”
I feel constrained to record this loving faith of a little child.
Time wore on and the day came when I was allowed to use crutches.
Still my foot scarce touched the floor. Gradually it improved, when one
day I said, “ Doctor, if I had a high-heeled shoe I think I could walk.”
His reply was, “You shall never have a high-heeled shoe; you are young,
and you shall compel your leg to get straight.” My good, clever doctor!
He was right; in about a year and a half after I walked as well as I had
ever done, and my heart was full of gratitude for all the dear Lord had
done for me, bringing me safely through that long time of sore sickness and
trial, I trust a better woman, with a heart alive to the sufferings of others.
As my illness originated from climatic causes my dear husband determined
to take me back to the old country as soon as he could arrange to do so.
What the doing of this meant to him I did not then realise, for I longed
with a great longing to be with parents, brothers and sisters again. Not
even by letter could I have their sympathy. Letters took months in
transit, and, being conveyed by sailing-ships, were always uncertain. The
heat tried my brother, too, very much; so it was decided that he should
return with us. My brother-in-law had left for a trip home some months
before.
Thus was closed the first five years of my life in Australia. Not a


murmur came from the lips of my husband, although all the labour of those
years had, as it were, gone for nothing. Our beautiful home was to be sold,
as also all it contained. We did not know that we should ever return;
there was no one to care for it, nor to he responsible for it in our absence.
I, with my brother and my little Harry, had to return to Cressbrook till all
was arranged. This time going up to the country did me good; it was
closing spring time, not too warm, and I took up a young girl, Mary
Duncan, daughter of the Collector of Customs, for company. She was
plain, but had a warm, affectionate heart; she was devoted to Harry. So
was the child to her; he was scarce three and a half years, but he gave
evidence of thoughtful consideration for the feelings of his friend. One
day she had dressed her hair in a very unbecoming way, but she did not
think so. She came in to our early dinner, Harry sat opposite to her; she
said, “Harry, do you like my hair done this way?” He looked at her,
then cast his eyes down on his plate, but did not answer. Again she asked
him. Again he did not answer; and so it was for the third time. At last
w 7
she said, “You might answer, Harry, and say how you like it.” With a
little cough he replied, “ Little boys should be seen and not heard ! ” He
'did not like it and he would not say so, thinking it might disappoint her.
We were all astonished, for it was “ ’cute ” for so young a child; he was
very talkative, and of course he had heard his father or me use the words
to him.
After all was settled we went almost immediately to Sydney, where we
embarked. There a few kind friends to say good-bye. Our friends,
Mr. and Mrs. Wilson of Pilton, with their son, Willie, just one year older
than our boy, and I think a baby girl, had arranged to return to England
in the same ship, which was exceedingly pleasant. Our passages were
taken in an old Indiaman, the “ Windsor.” I think it was about the end
of January, 1854, that we sailed. As we were getting our baggage on
board Mr. Wilson witnessed some disturbance going on in a boat that had
put out to the ship. He watched and saw the officers of the ship struggling
with a young lady they were trying to bring on board. She fought and bit,
and it was seen that she was a lunatic. She was taken on board and put
into her cabin with an attendant. Mr. Wilson went at once to the agents
and told what he had seen, and said that unless the lady was removed he


would not sail in the ship, nor would his friend, Mr. McConnel. There was
a gieat fuss made; the agents averred that she was “peculiar,” and that
she disliked being put on board, and they refused to remove her. Con-
sequently Mr. Wilson and my husband ordered their baggage to be taken
off the ship. When the agents saw that they were in earnest they said
they would have the objectionable passenger removed, which they did with
much difficulty, as the relatives refused to take her back, and she had to be
kept on the verandah of their house, of course under care. All this caused
a delay of two days, during which time a young man, a passenger,
developed measles! He, too, had to be removed, for there were a good
many children on board. As our route was via Cape Horn we were going
at once into cold weather, which might have proved serious. So out of
apparent evil came good. Our voyage was fairly comfortable, but we
experienced very rough weather rounding the Horn. We saw one iceberg ;
it was very large and beautiful in shape and colour, clear sea-green crusted
with snow.
There was one very great storm; the waves seemed mountains high. We
were shut down, but once for a few moments my husband took me to the
top of the companion-ladder to witness the “Majesty of the Sea ” ; lying
in the trough between the waves, sharp and peaked like mountains, it
seemed impossible we could ever rise, but our brave little ship did, then
down again ; it was an awe inspiring sight. One felt the mighty power of
God at the same time the protecting arm of the Father around us, and
we were safe. There is a great difference in the form of the waves
rounding the Cape of Good Hope and those of Cape Horn; the former
are great rounded billows, while the others are very high and sharp. We
had been having weekly concerts which the storm interrupted, but as it
became calmer they were resumed, but we were forbidden to open our
ports. My friend, Mrs. Wilson, with her husband, had the next cabin to
ours. She had dressed for dinner, and had a little time to spare, so she
took her guitar and practised what she had to play at the concert later
on; her husband was with her. She said, “ William, just open the port
for a minute or two, it feels so stuffy.” He demurred, but at last gave way.
No sooner was it done than a sea broke into the cabin almost suffocating
Mrs. Wilson who, gasping for breath and entirely drenched, rushed into


the “Cuddy,” Mr. Wilson endeavouring to close the port, but not before
everything in the cabin and on themselves was dripping. What a business
it was ! Beds and bed-clothes all wet, and with salt water that even the
sun, if there had been any, could not have quickly dried. There was no
fire, and everything was stowed away “ Forward,” and all of us passengers
set to, giving all we could spare, and more, to help make them comfortable ;
but it was a sorry business with a ludicrous side to it. One moment did
all the mischief, and after this Mrs. Wilson endured the stuffiness, the
sticky wet with all its discomfort, with the utmost patience—the port
remained shut till the sea was quiet. I think that was the only exciting
scene during all the voyage, but it was a comfortless one, and glad we
were to land. Harry had his fourth birthday at sea, and Willie Wilson his
fifth, he was born on the same day of the month, 18th April, only the
year before. I remember we got the address of a hotel to go to, a private
one, in Manchester Square. The change was great. When dinner was
announced, we found the dining-room lit with many wax candles, and
three or four menservants waiting, napkin in hand, to do our bidding ! We
were quite dazzled, but tried to take it quietly. Next day we got ourselves
in better order, but not comfortable! No telegram announced arrival of
ships. My husband’s friends were chiefly in Manchester, mine nearly all
in Edinburgh. In due course we were amongst them, having a warm
welcome. They all thought much of Harry, and did not feel inclined to
realise that he was an Australian. Certainly he was not the least shy, and
was able to give an account of himself. I was not very strong, and was
glad to have rooms of my own in Edinburgh, near my dear parents. My
brother went almost directly home to them, wonderfully well, and I having
nearly lost my lameness. On the 11th of August our third son was born,
David Rose. My dear old grandfather was still alive when we arrived,
living at Portobello on the shores of the Firth of Forth, just three miles
from Edinburgh, and I drove almost daily to see him. He died the night
David was born, so we named him Rose, making a link in the events of time.
I must make a little digression here, as I have omitted to tell of a serious
accident that might have ended my life. When it was quite decided
that we should return to the “ Old Country,” Mr. and Mrs. Hendry Mort
invited us to visit them at their station, Franklyn Yale, which we were very


happy to do. I suppose Franklyn Yale is full twenty miles northward from
Ipswich, and we arranged to go there before going to Cressbrook, where my
husband had much to arrange in prospect of his absence for some years.
We arrived safely, though we travelled over rough roadless country, my
husband and self, nurse and Harry, with a groom leading a pack-horse, and
another horse to change half-way. After a most pleasant visit we were
arranging to start for Cressbrook when my husband discovered that he had
left his keys at Toogoolawah, or Bulimba as it began to be called. There
was nothing for it but that he should go for them, arranging with Mr. Mort
that he should drive us to Ipswich where he would meet us. Well, he
started off at once, and next morning we left for Ipswich in the same order
that we came; full half-way we halted for lunch and to change the horse.
As the worst of the way was before us the strongest was kept for it, “Quilp,”
a fine animal but touchy about the head, once harnessed he would not
allow himself to be touched. As I was lame I did not get out of the trap,
and ate my lunch while the change was taking place. The groom had put
the harness on, or nearly so, when he noticed that he had forgotten to
remove the halter, so he proceeded to unbuckle the headgear, when Quilp
threw up his head, the blinkers fell off and he bolted ! He galloped right
into the bush among fallen trees and other debris. It was awful ! Straight
in the line he was going I saw a huge gum tree. I felt he must dash me
against it. I committed my soul to God, then became insensible. Ido not
know how far we had gone, quite half-a-mile I think. As consciousness
returned, I found myself lying on the ground, Mr. Mort kneeling beside me
beseeching me to open my eyes, while the groom, a German, kept exclaiming
over and over again, “ Ach, mein Gott! ” I did open my eyes. Then I was
asked to try to stand. Poor Mr. Mort thought there must have been bones
broken, but no, not one, only dreadfully shaken. There had been a portmanteau
placed upright between Mr. Mort and me, this saved me, for when the trap
capsized in trying to get over a great log, Quilp set to work to get free-
kicking the portmanteau, not me, and galloping off out of sight. Mercifully,
wonderfully was I preserved, but we were in an awkward position, there was
no time to lose. Mr. Mort pencilled a few lines to the doctor and sent the
groom off galloping for bare life; there was a solitary bark hut not far off,
with difficulty I was got there, nurse and Harry following. (How thankful


I was that they were not in the trap). The hut-keeper, I forget whether
man or woman, did all that could be done. I was laid on the stretcher-hed,
and thus we awaited what would happen. Meanwhile the groom was not
long in getting to Ipswich.
The doctor in haste made all arrangements possible. We were to have
gone to the vicarage. Kind Mr. Wallace when he heard of the accident
helped the doctor. Nobody had a carriage of any sort in those days, so a
dray was made as comfortable as possible with mattress, pillow and blankets.
It was now dark, but the doctor and Mr. Wallace took each a lantern and
rode before the dray. They had left before my husband arrived from
Bulimba. He went to the stables of the hotel, while giving his horse to the
groom he was accosted with, “Have you heard the news, sir?’’ “No,
what news ? ” “ There has been a dreadful accident and Mrs. McConnel is
nearly killed about ten miles from here, and the doctor and the parson have
gone to the place.’’ My poor husband ! He again mounted his horse and
rode to meet us. Meanwhile I had been got safely into the dray, nurse and
Harry at my feet. Our progress was very slow; there was no moon and the
way was very rough. My kind friends rode in front to lead, and Dr. Sachse
with a cheerful voice sang lively German songs. Thus we were wending
our way when my anxious husband met us. Oh ! how thankful he was to
learn that I was not hurt, and we praised our great Deliverer for His
goodness during such imminent danger. It was early morning when we
arrived. I was glad to rest, but poor Mr. Mort had not slept at all, nor did
he for several nights. He was greatly shaken and people unreasonably said
the accident was all his fault and that I must be much worse than they all
said. At his request two days later I dressed and took a little walk with
him to convince the unbelieving. There was a good deal to be done before
we could start on our journey to Cressbrook ; the trap was brought in and
repaired, with much mending of harness, and new pieces added. “ Quilp ”
was found quietly grazing with part of the harness hanging about him. I
do not know how long we waited, but ere long we started with the same
trap, the same horses; nothing else could be done, and I was wonderfully
strengthened during our two long days’ journey. This was the worst
accident I ever had; and how wonderfully I was preserved ! The whole
scene is as vivid to me now as it was then, more than fifty years ago.


Now I will return to wnere I made tilts digression. Tlie following seven
years were spent in England, Scotland and on the Continent. .Four children
were born during that time, two sons and two daughters. My husband
went once to Australia. While he was away my baby boy died, our fourth
child, ten months old, which was a great grief to me. He was a beautiful
child. At that time we were living on Tooting Common, six miles from
London. A year and a half before we had decided to travel for a year—that
was towards the close of 1856. We were a goodly party : my husband and
my three children, two nurses, and a nephew of my husband’s, son of his
eldest brother, Henry McConnel, of Cressbrook, Derbyshire, after which the
Australian property was named by my husband. We spent a delightful year
abroad. There were no railways in Italy then; at least very few, so we
travelled a great deal by vetturino. At Nice we engaged a courier, a Swiss,
honest, handy and intelligent. We saw the closing of the first Exposition
in Paris, travelled slowly via Arles and Avignon, the Riviera, staying six
weeks at Nice ; then through Florence, Pisa, Rome and Naples. While in
the latter place I was summoned home by the sad news that my eldest dear
brother, John, was dying and desired much to see me. There were no
means by which to make haste in these days, but my good kind husband at
once made arrangements so that I was able to leave the following day.
A separate passport had to be got, money changed, arrangements made
for the courier to go with me, my husband taking the care of the
children and everything else upon himself, and so I left my dear ones to take
my sad homeward journey by steamer to Marseilles. It was the end of
January; I was the only traveller northward bound. It was very dreary and
I could not sleep, nor did I undress. There were railways in France and I
was soon in Paris, where a brother-in-law and his wife were. I learned from
them that my dear brother had passed away, but I went on. At Boulogne
I had four hours to wait for the steamer. I dared not go to sleep, but a hot
bath and change of linen quite set me up. I left the courier in London and
took the night express for Edinburgh. I felt dazed. Naples to Marseilles,
Lyons, Paris, Boulogne, Dover and London. I was as it were in a dream.
The train arrived fifteen minutes before its time. I was expected at my
home, but it was early morning, and being before my time I was not met.
Hastily getting into a cab, I knocked my head. I said, “ You had a small


cab.” With a grunt the cabman replied, “Ma’ cab is as big as ither folk’s
cabs, it’s yersel 'at’s sae big, m’em ! ” I was in my native Edinburgh at
once; no where else could that have been said to me.
I will pass over the sad week I spent with my beloved sorrowing ones.
My brothers William and Walter were there, I was told the glad news that
the dying one had had sweet consolations on his deathbed as his saintly
young brother poured into his soul the story of a Saviour's love. His last
words were, “lam all stained, nothing in me —but washed and made clean
in the Blood of the Lamb,” and he thanked God for such a brother, while
my mother in her anguish felt joy of heart for such blessedness. My dear
brother was laid to rest next day in the Dean Cemetery. My brother’s ship
was in the Black Sea during the Crimean War. There was a terrific storm
that lasted some days, when the ship was ankle-deep in water; it was then
he contracted Bright’s disease, of which he died. My dear father and mother
were glad to have me for a few days, when again I turned my face
southward —this time to Rome, where my dear ones had just arrived after
an exciting land journey from Naples—it was known that banditti infested
that road. I got a book in London, “ Doctor Antonio,” which I was
reading with much interest when, to my surprise, it was taken from me by
Roman officials. It had been put on the Index !
We felt thankful to our gracious Father and Protector for His care over us
all when we were absent one from the smother.
We must have gone directly south to Naples from Nice, travelling
northward later as the weather got warmer. We were six weeks in Rome,
spending Easter there. It was in the days of Pio Nono, and the “ spectacles ”
were grand. The illumination of St. Peter’s on the night of Easter Sunday
and the fireworks of the following evening are never to be forgotten. There
are no such “ spectacles ” now. We spent six weeks in seeing much that was
interesting in ancient Rome—all too short was the time, but I have returned
three times since then. Florence was very delightful, with its exquisite
pictures and statuary; I loved Venice. From there we returned to. Milan,
our starting place for the Lakes. We parted with our good courier there.
Our long drives were much enlivened by the two nurses, one Scotch, the
other French. The latter could not learn English, and nurse disdained a
“ foreign language.” I usually sat with my husband and Harry on the


banquette, a hooded seat in front, “ Giovanni ’’ driving from a seat m front
of us, while the inside was given up to the nurses and children, our nephew
and courier being seated on what we would call “ the rumble ” behind.
When it was raining I had to go inside. On one such day Jeannette was
seated next to me, her charge being asleep in the bassinette. Nurse had
baby on her knee when Jeannette held out her arms asking to nurse her
for a little. A Scotch voice said, “ No, yeil no get her.” I said, “Don’t
be disagreeable, give her baby.” “ Aweel ye’ll see what’ll happen.”
Jeannette was delighted, and kept dancing baby up and down before the
window singing “ Mademoiselle baby, Mademoiselle baby,” when a rut on
the road caused the carriage to jolt, and by some unlucky accident baby’s
tongue got caught between her teeth (for she had all her front ones). Of
course baby cried. Now was the time for nurse to be irate. “ Gie me the
bairn ! didna’ I tell ye, mistress, that she couldna’ keep a bairn ? ” while
poor Jeannette said, “Ah, Madame, je suis fachee, je suis tres fachee! ”
Then nurse said,“ Did ye ever hear the like o’ that ? To daud (hurt) the bairn’s
mouth a’ then ca’t fashous ! ” (troublesome). I said, “ Nurse, she is saying
she is sorry, very sorry,” but she answered, “ Oo aye, mem, ye aye tak’ the
foreigner’s pairt! ’’ Explanation was needless. I had my own amusement out
of those two. It is no use at this time of day to describe the exquisite beauty
of the Italian Lakes. Como with its Isola Bella I liked the best, and we were
loath to leave. We then crossed by the Spliigen Pass and by the Via Mala
into Switzerland. What a change it was! Truly a new country. How grand,
beautiful and varied in scene is God’s lovely earth ! Every place seemed
more delightful than the last. Switzerland delighted us, and we lingered in
it as long as we could. We travelled quickly through Germany and got back
to England after one year’s delightful travel. My health was much improved
and David, who was so delicate when we started, had grown strong and well.
He was an interesting child, his observation was wonderful, he began to speak
in French, evidently finding it much easier than his native tongue.
We decided to live near London, and my husband took a house on
Tooting Common —Woodlands—We had about 2J acres of ground, so we
had a garden with some trees and a little field. We kept one horse and a
milch cow. We enlarged the house by building a large night-nursery,
and this gave us a fine room off the breakfast-parlour which we found very


useful for gentlemen visitors; it was a pretty and comfortable home.
We adorned it with the treasures we gathered in our travels. On
February 2nd a son was born, named William Macleod, he who died
during his father’s absence in Australia, so our nursery had three little
ones, while we sent Harry to a preparatory school quite near, kept by a very
nice lady, Miss Durst, He came home on Saturday till Monday morning.
So far I have got without ever alluding to the Australian natives. We
took a little orphan boy home with us. Our Cressbrook super found him for
us at Durundur, a station near the coast belonging to Cressbrook. The
boy promised well; about seven years old, an average specimen, well-made,
not good-looking, he had, like all the Australian natives, nice hair, smooth
and not coarse. He could not speak any English. Until he went on
board ship he wore only a little shirt, but as the weather became cooler
he was glad of more clothing, and he very readily adapted himself to the
change of circumstances. He did not give us much trouble—and became
quite a favourite on board. When we arrived in England he was a seven
days’ wonder ; particularly in Yorkshire where we went for some little time.
Arriving at a country inn to change horses he was taken down from the
box. The onlookers cried out it was a young devil! When we reached
Ben Ehydding some oldish ladies thought him a very naughty little boy.
He knew nothing at that time of the Sabbath, and went bird-nesting, but
day by day he tamed down, and was very good-natured, and began to speak
a little English. We treated him in every way as we would were he a
white boy; we did not trouble him with lessons then; we were unsettled,
always moving from place to place. When it was arranged that we
with our little ones should go abroad for a year, my kind sister and her
husband, Mr. Reid, of Drem, East Lothian, offered to keep him in our
absence ; with them he had a happy, healthful year. He grew intelligent,
and was quite contented. When we returned home and took our house on
Tooting Common, we sent for our boy and put him to school. He made
good progress, also at Sunday School, so that after a year the Rector wished
to have him baptised. We decided to call him Alpin, after the Super
that brought him to us, and Durundur, his native place, but he wished
to add Edward, which was his schoolmaster’s name, so he was named
Alpin Edward Durundur. He dearly loved all “ spectacles ”; a circus


was his delight; he was never inside a theatre. We were not far
from the Crystal Palace; he had a boy’s ticket, and it was his delight
to spend Saturdays and holidays there. We often sent the nurses and
children. He loved the Church of England service, never omitted a
response, and would go three times to Church on Sunday, if there
were three services. I do not mean to suppose it was only devotion that
prompted him, but more love of “ spectacle yet he was a well-behaved
boy, honest and truthful. Somehow Ido not think it occurred to him to
tell a lie ; he used no bad words, was obedient and tractable ; he began to
improve in looks, and was well-grown; his chief extravagance was an
occasional sixpence for hair oil! He was very proud of his shiny, wavy
black hair. After three years we went to live in Edinburgh; there again
he made excellent progress at school, also in games. He was now getting
on to be sixteen years of age, and we wished him to learn a trade.
Just at this time my husband found it necessary to return to Queensland,
and as the length of his stay was indefinite I much desired to go with him,
but on account of the summer heat having had a disastrous effect on my
health, it was thought better that I should stay in Europe. My husband
set about arranging for me and the children (of whom there were four) to
remain behind, but I went of my own accord to consult my good Dr. George
Keith on the subject. He said I was in perfect health, and that he did not
see any reason why I should not go, with this proviso, that if my health
began to suffer I should not delay but return home at once. I was most
thankful for this, and when I told my husband he was filled with gladness.
In making our plans we thought what would be the best to do with Alpin ;
he was sixteen years of age, and just beginning to need more watchful care.
He fancied being a carpenter, and we thought he could learn that trade as
well in Queensland as at home, so he went out with us; he had so long
enjoyed a civilised state that we thought he would not care to return to his
old life, but the old scenes and his tribe who lionised him, were too much
for him, and he said one day, “lam tired of this sort of thing,” and became
restless. So we thought it best to send him back to the Old Country, and my
husband made good arrangements with a very nice kind captain to take him
home in his ship. We did not tell Alpin till he was on board. I had packed
his box, putting in little things I knew he would like. My husband took


him to Brisbane the evening before the ship sailed, went on board with him,
told him that he was going back to the friends who had been so kind to him,
and that he would come back in two or three years, gave him half-a-sovereign
and said good-bye, leaving him with the captain. But the same night he
swam ashore, bought a tomahawk, and went into the far-away bush. He
never came back, which was a grief to me. I have written at length about
our black boy to shew what can be done with the Aborigines, and to prove
that they are not by any means so low down in the scale of the human race
as they are generally supposed to be. In truth we ought not to have taken
him back to the scenes and people of his old savage life. We did it for the
best, wishing to keep him under our own eyes.
This will be a good time to make my remarks on the natives generally.
They were divided into many tribes, each with its chief, chosen on account
of his bravery. The men of one tribe chose their wives from the women of
another tribe, and often only secured them by hard fighting. Ido not know
the number of the tribes (I do not think there were very many), that lived
on the land that my husband took up and called Cressbrook, but he
set himself at once to make friends with them, and they soon got to like
and trust him. He never failed to do what he promised. I know that one
or two of the men were treacherous, that they speared cattle, once an
imported bull from England, but of course they had no idea of the value of
the animal. When the tribe behaved badly my husband would not allow
them to come up to the head station, nor give them presents, —a shirt, or
red pocket-handkerchief, tobacco or a pipe ; when they did no work they got
no rations, but little was expected of them, for they loved wandering to the
Bunya Mountains, when the nuts were ripe, or to a Corroboree, or a fight;
but that was all quite natural. My little Harry as a baby was very fond of
one woman, “ Long Kitty ” ; she was very affectionate and liked to have
charge of him, so I made her go to the river and bathe; I gave her a comb
and a loose red gown, and she would come up very smart, with her hair
parted —‘ likit missus ’ —and ask for the baby. She would look proudly over
the country and say, stretching out her arms, “ All this ‘ yarmen (land)
belonging to me.” It did seem hard to have it all taken from them, but it
had to be. They cultivated nothing ; they were of no use on it.
Another interesting native woman was another “Kitty,” the wife of


“ Pi Sg ie Nerang,” who was not worthy of her. Kitty was very pretty, she
came from Durundur, and grew very fond of me and the children ; she was
affectionate. Once on my return from England I had brought a piece of
red serge to make the native women winter dresses—a loose gown with
short sleeves, coming down about half-way from the knee to the ankle
Kitty was very proud of hers, and begged me to allow her to go to Durundur
to show it to her sister. It was the rule that when the tribe started on
their expeditions they left their good clothes behind, generally wearing the
opossum-rugs made by themselves. I gave her leave. By-and-bye she
returned minus the red serge gown; I said, “ Kitty, where gown ? ” She
said, “ Missus, baal you be woola (don’t be angry), my sister bin say, ‘give
it me gown, kind missis give you ‘nother,’ and I ben give it her.’ ” I
pretended to be very angry. She said, “ Poor sister baal (not) got it gown.”
It was quite true what she said, so after a little I gave her another. I think
the natives are much maligned. A generation or two of wise, kind
treatment would make a great change in them, but there were many
hindrances, and the tribes would need to be broken up.
Polly was another fine “ gin ” ; she was very cruelly used by her husband,
she had her teeth knocked out; but she was a gentle creature ; she had a
little daughter named “ Clara,” (they very often came to the white people to
give them names for their children). Kitty had a little daughter named
“ T °P s y>” who was full of mischief. I tried to separate, in a measure,
these children from the tribes. I arranged a room for them where their
clothes were kept, and where they had a tepid bath every morning, for
although I had provided warm beds I could not wean them from going off to
the camp at night to sleep by the camp-fire. They learned to read a little
and to sew, to repeat and sing simple verses and hymns, but when the tribe
went on their nomadic excursions nothing would induce them to leave the
little girls behind, so on their return all was to do over again. They are
certainly very fond of their children. A young friend I had staying with me
asked to have the charge of Topsy and Clara while she was with me. I
was very pleased. She cared for them well-perhaps gave them too much
liberty, for one day when she was out riding they entered her room,
ransacked her drawers, dressing themselves up in her clothes and putting
on what trinkets they could find; while admiring themselves in the


looking-glass they heard footsteps and scuttled under the bed ! Of course
the poor little culprits were soon found, but beyond a severe reprimand and
a promise extracted that they would not do so again, nothing more was
said about it, and certainly they kept their word. One Sunday Miss Smith
was telling them of the love of God—that He loved them and wished them
to be His very own children. At once Topsy said, “Ah! Miss Shmit,
suppose God love me like that, what for he make me black ? ”
At last after long years of ill-usage the natives, such as are left, are being
thoroughly well cared for, humanely and wisely treated, not by forcing them
to cultivated habits, but by giving them a certain amount of liberty, teaching
them to be a law-abiding people, above all seeking to win them for the
Master. Away in the North, not far from Thursday Island, where the natives
are comparatively numerous, there is splendid and successful work being
done by the Moravian missionaries under the control of the Presbyterian
Church of Australia.
It was in 1862 we again sailed for Australia in a sailing vessel bound for
Sydney. No steamer crossed the ocean till years after. I had an excellent
nurse for the baby and we had quite a comfortable voyage. Captain Williams
was not only a good sailor but a godly man. He had prayers in the cabin
every morning, and there were rarely any of the passengers missing. We
had plenty of amusement. He entirely discountenanced gambling and
drinking. I think it was about a year before this that the Moreton Bay
district and all to the north of it was formed into a new colony called
Queensland, with Brisbane for its capital. Sir George Bowen was our first
Governor. Lady Bowen was a Greek, beautiful and pleasant; she had
several pretty children. On our return we found a great change for the
better in things generally, still all was in a very crude state. There were
more people and more stir. There was not yet anything approaching to a
good hotel. There was a fair Boarding House on Kangaroo point,
“ Mary Cain’s ” it was called —that was the name of the landlady. There
were some nice people, Mr. and Mrs. E. I. C. Brown and their little daughter
about six, just arrived from England. Mr. Brown was a solicitor and
became partner with Robert Little, who afterwards became Crown Solicitor.
Of course we had our own Parliament, and about this time my husband
was asked to become member of the Legislative Council, but he respectfully


declined the honour. There was no easy way of getting to town in these
days, no made roads, no bridges over rivers and gullies, so he would have
to live in town while the House was sitting. He did not wish to be so long
away from Cressbrook, especially as he had been an absentee for nearly
eight years ; and, again, it would not have suited my health, and he would
not live alone in town, also he was troubled with deafness in one ear. In
declining he said he would leave the honour to one of his sons. There are
four all well up in manhood and all in Queensland, but not one of them has
entered either of the Houses of Parliament, though my eldest daughter’s
husband, Mr. H. P. Somerset, has taken upon his shoulders the duties of a
member.
We were anxious to get to our journey’s end. We called at Government
House—built by Dr. Hobbs for himself and family; being the best that
could be had, it was rented for the vice-regal party till Government House
should be built—saw our friends and made preparations for our journey.
There were my husband and myself, three children, a governess, Miss
Sargent, and nurse. We had brought out a good dog-cart, and we had the
phaeton which carried us all, the luggage following close behind in a
waggon. The weather was fine, but the roads were so bad that getting on
was slow work. I rather think we went by river as far as Ipswich, our
conveyances being driven there. As soon as all was ready we started,
making Wivenhoe the first night. The inn was not comfortable, but it
was clean and quiet. We made an early start next morning, as we had
much the biggest half of our journey before us—and no inn; first we had
to go over the ‘ Big Hill,’ which was a great toil for the horses, though
we got out and walked a good way ; even with fresh horses we could not
make headway. We had several miles of heavy black soil to cross, which
took the strength out of the grass-fed horses. When we reached Sandy
Creek —where Esk now stands—we found that we could not make the
remaining fifteen miles to Cressbrook till long after dark, so there was
nothing to do but to camp. My brother-in-law and his wife were at
Cressboook, and learning that we could not reach home that night sent
us food, blankets, etc. The two elder children with the governess slept in the
dog-cart, the seats being removed, while nurse, baby and I were in the
phaeton, the men camping on the ground and seeing to the fire. The


bush sounds in the night were very eerie, and Miss Sargent felt at least
timid! The notes of numerous birds, the screaming cockatoos, the howl of
the dingo, and the buzz and chirrup of many insects were disquieting;
the hoises came round munching their food, and the men moved about
stirring up a great blaze now and then; there was no sleep for the elder
folks, though the children slept soundly.
We were all glad when day broke, and all was bustle to get away. The
morning was beautiful, the air fresh and keen, so after thanksgiving for the
safety of night we started. The road was fairly good, and we went along at a
good pace, soon arriving at Cressbrook. My brother- in-law with his little son
Arthur, with Mrs. Bunting, Amy’s mother, occupied the. “ Cottage,” (it
could only take the governess and the two elder children), while my
husband and I with nurse and baby had rooms at the “House.” Mr. Butler
was then superintendent and lived there with one or two others. We had
our meals at the “ Cottage ”; at best the arrangement was not comfortable.
There was a schoolroom to provide ; Arthur was to join his cousins, so the
dining-room of the old house was given for that, and we enclosed a piece of
the verandah with curtains, put the dining-table and chairs in it, and as soon
as possible got our own servants, when we no longer needed to go over to the
Cottage for meals. I cannot remember what we did with the men folk, but
they were all right for the time being. Service was held every Sunday
forenoon on the Cottage verandah, though we seldom had a minister. We
had Sunday School in the afternoon, and we gave the children books to take
home for the “grown ups” as well as themselves, and we taught them to
sing hymns.
Station changes were pending. We had another station—Durundur, about
thirty miles off—and by agreement it was arranged that by giving a year’s
notice on either side the partnership should be dissolved, and my brother-in-
law have Durundur if he wished it, but Cressbrook was to be my husband’s ;
and this was done. Then we set about building a large addition to the old
house, making it our home, and when my brother-in-law went to Durundur
we made the cottage “Bachelor’s ” quarters. Building brought more people
on the station, splitters, sawyers, carpenters, builders and bricklayers. The
house was of wood, the chimneys brick. Some of the men brought their
wives and families, which gave me a fuller life. I went amongst them, saw


to their huts—the chief one a school for the children. We improvised a
schoolroom, got a respectable female teacher. We provided her rooms,
food and firewood, with £lO a year, the children paying 6d. and 4d. weekly.
This was a few years before the State schools were begun. The children
learnt very well, the little girls learning to sew very neatly and make
their samplers. This drew us all together wonderfully. Then we began
to have a small library for the men. We fitted up a room in a wing
at the back of the Cottage, we called it the Reading Room; we made it
fairly comfortable, and put in a good cedar table with a drawer and chairs.
There were pens, ink and paper, with a blotter. A good kerosine lamp was
lit at sundown, and in winter a fire. Certain rules were pasted on the door.
lam glad to say this privilege was valued, and made good use of. After
Sunday school each week we gave the children numbers of “ Good Words,
“ Sunday Magazine,” and “ Sunday at Home,” for their parents, always
receiving the old number before giving the new, which was passed on to
another family. The children got plenty of books, and we took a good deal
of pains in teaching them to sing. After school they joined their parents
in a walk by the river. We too went out, and it was pleasant to hear the
young voices singing the hymns they had learnt at school as they all sat
and rested.
Then changes took place. Sandy Creek, fifteen miles off on the way to
Ipswich and Brisbane, was made a township. Most of our people bought
land there. The conditions of sale were that the purchasers must reside on
their allotments and improve the land. The men had not money enough to
do that, they could not give up their work, so as soon as possible they moved
their wives and families down and joined them from Saturday till early
Monday morning; but there were neither church nor schools, and that was
a sad state of things. Our silver wedding took place about this time, and
my dear husband bought, cleared and fenced land in Esk for a church and
manse —or parsonage as it might be —and this was to be in memory of our
silver wedding. Then we set about building the church and manse. Our
kind friend Mr. Alex Raff sent a handsome cheque to help on the work.
Then the State schools were established ; as there was a sufficient number
of children to warrant a school at Esk, we at once applied and got one.
Soon the school was built and a teacher placed in it. So far the children


were all right. Cressbrook also had enough children to enable us to apply
for a “provisional school.” The conditions were that a school-house and
house for the teacher should be provided by the applicants, also that the
teacher should be provided with food, firewood, etc. All this was done, and
as the teacher we had was a fairly good one, we made application for her ,
her certificates were accepted and she continued for some years. Cressbrook
being on the road from Ipswich to the Upper Brisbane River district, sundown
brought many travellers—some very pleasant; then we always had a friend
staying with us, and we used to exchange visits with our neighbours. We
usually drove or rode in the evening. I did not find the bush at all dull.
I found plenty to do - taking an interest in the people, visiting the school,
holding a weekly Mother’s Meeting.
Then we had for three years eight South Sea Islanders in whom I took a
deep interest, as also did my husband; he allowed them to choose the site
for their cottage and fenced in ground for a garden ; they bathed much in
the river, which was quite near. They were very docile; those that came
from Mari were mostly Christians. One seemed to have oversight of the
■ rest, he always said grace before eating, the others bending their heads.
They were very anxious to learn to read. In town I got copies of one or
two of the Gospels in Mari language, also English testaments in good type,
also copy-books and slates, and then began our lessons. In winter we had
school at night, in summer at 5 a.m. on the verandah; their copies and
sums were set the night before, my dear husband helping me. They
arranged that in turn one should weekly stay away to prepare breakfast;
work began in the heat at 6.30. It was a pleasant time, they teaching
me Mari and I them English. They learned to repeat a good deal of
Scripture in their own language, also the Lord’s Prayer. They loved
singing songs and hymns. They had by agreement .£6 a year, were clothed
and fed, and their passage paid to and from the islands. Hawkers used
to come up with all sorts of ware, and tried to make a deal with them. My
husband explained to them how much better it would be if they saved
their money to take home, so he got them each a Savings Bank Book, and
they soon understood. They did not smoke. At busy times, such as that
of sheep washing and shearing, or of extra work among the cattle, my
husband always gave each 10/-; this they could spend as they liked.


I used generally to get them what they wanted when I went to Brisbane.
I think that here I will quote from an old diary, closing 1876 and
entering on 1877; it is a peep into the bush life of those days. The Esk
Church was built, the Manse was being built. Meanwhile the minister,
Rev. Mr. Watt, and his wife lived with us, and he was driven to Esk every
Sunday for service, the governess and two children going with him to help
the singing.
QUOTATION.
Text on Watchword for 1877, Hebrews 18, 8-—“ Jesus Christ, the same
yesterday, to-day and for ever.”
January Ist. “ Yesterday, Sunday, was a most pleasant day, and I hope
one that we will all remember with profit. The weather was delicious,
bright, with a hot sun, but so tempered by fresh, cool breeze that the
heat was not felt. We had Mr. and Mrs. Butler and their three dear
children, our nephew, Arthur, from Durundur, Fred Heussler, Mrs. Watt,
Messrs. Macphail, Carr, Somerset and Mackay. Tom drove Mr. Watt to
Esk to preach; he was back in time for service at 8 p.m. He gave a most
faithful sermon. At 11 p.m. we met again; scarce one on the station
was absent from our watch to bring in the New Year. There were hymn-
singing, short prayers and reading till five minutes to twelve, when we all
engaged in silent prayer till Mr. Watt said we had crossed the bridge and
entered 1877. Then he wished us a happy New Year, adding a tew words
of counsel. Then all sang “ Hold the Fort, for lam coming,” after which
a general greeting took place. Never was a more glorious night for giving
birth to a New Year—a full moon and a cloudless sky. There was a little
fun for half an hour. Eric had brought some mistletoe and hung it in a
convenient place—a very good place—but soon all was quiet, and we were
astir early this morning to prepare for the annual great station picnic—
games on the plain, horse and foot-racing without any evil adjuncts, and now
nearly all are dancing in the schoolroom. Not a man has gone to Sandfly
Creek (where there is a public house), all at home. Thus ended a happy day.”
My bush home-life was very pleasant; at this time it was also very full.
January 2nd. “A busy day tidying up. Manse at Esk completed.
Mr. and Mrs. Watt with their baby left towards end of the year; are much
pleased with their new home in the Esk Manse. Mr. Watt, gets more and


more delicate, I fear he will not enjoy it long. He was very consumptive
when he left Scotland; he lost ground instead of gaining on the voyage,
and not all the care and feeding-up he had at Cressbrook did him any good;
he is a scholarly man, clever, and an earnest faithful preacher.”
It was in 1876 that our dear eldest son Harry was married to Mary
Elizabeth, eldest daughter of Mr. William Kent of Jondarian, the Downs.
She was lovingly welcomed into our family and so was Harry into hers.
It was in all respects a most happy event. They went to Witton for a short
honeymoon, and then went to England, taking Willie Kent with them.
Harry elected to call his wife Madge, and Madge she is to this day; the
reason was because there were so many Marys in our family. David, our
second son, was studying at the Edinburgh University, Harry had been at
Emanuel College, Cambridge. There was a good deal of coming and going
between the dear old country and the new.
I think it was in 1873 that my husband bought a property six miles up
the river from Brisbane, called by its former owner Witton Manor, and we
retained the name. It was a pleasant house, and though we went often to
Cressbrook, Witton became our headquarters. There was a good deal of
'immigration from England, Scotland and Ireland, and a number of the
immigrants took up land all around us. It was interesting to go amongst
them. How hard they worked ! A home was to be made, and money was
scarce. Trees had to be felled and slabs prepared for the but. The wife
bravely helped her husband with the cross-cut saw, and when the roots of
the trees were laid bare to be burnt out, she helped to keep the fire going.
Meanwhile the families lived in tents lent by Governnent, so clearing was
going on as well as building and fencing. The little ones played about
while the older ones cared for them as they attended to other domestic
duties. They soon learned to be very useful. The climate was favourable
to outdoor life. There were frequent accidents and sickness among the
children, sometimes necessitating them to be taken to town. This was
difficult. A springless cart over rough roads was bad for the patient; and
when arrived in town there was waiting for the doctor ; he saw the patient,
prescribed and got his fee, 10s.; then there was the journey back, and only a
tent for home. When the case was serious the poor little sufferer succumbed.
I witnessed some sad cases. I went to the Bowen Hospital, as our General


Hospital was called, to see if there was any room for little ones—no, men’s
and women’s wards all crowded. I thought it was time to have a sick
children s hospital, and resolved with God’s help to have one for Brisbane.
In all Australia there was only one, and that was in Melbourne, the capital
of Victoria. I wondered how I should set out about attaining this object,
then I bethought me that the young people and children might give material
help. So I invited a large number of ladies with their children to afternoon
tea in the Witton grounds, and told them of the suffering little ones, and
what they could do to help get a hospital for them; the response was
wonderful, they were filled with enthusiasm. The ladies, too, heartily
promised their help. I felt so encouraged that before we parted it was
arranged that not only the young people present, but all in the Colony that
we could reach, personally or by letter, should be solicited to help—by their
work and by collecting cards.
In six months from that time the Annual Agricultural, Pastoral and
Industrial Exhibition would take place, and we proposed to ask for a space
in which to exhibit our collection of work, which also would be for sale.
Meanwhile we were all to work hard to gain our desired object. All did
work with a will, the enthusiasm never flagged. Through the influence
of Sir Arthur Kennedy, a court was granted to us in the Exhibition
Building, and there we displayed our wares. They came from far and
near; there was a large and most interesting collection from the children
from the State schools as well as from families. The boys did some
excellent wood-carving as well as other handicraft. There was a great
variety of girls’ work. All, old and young, contributed, and the result was
far beyond our expectations. Then the Exhibition of Producers gave
us their exhibits, such as sugar, flour, etc. Our Queensland poet,
Mr. Brunton Stevens, wrote some beautiful verses, entitled “For My Sake,”
from S. Matthew xxv., which was printed in leaflets and sold well; it is
always placed in the first page of the Annual Report. From the time of
the Hospital’s opening on 11th March, 1878, till to-day it has prospered.
It is now one of the largest in Australia, and is continually being enlarged,
and always free from debt. God has surely blessed the labour of our hands.
My children are acquainted with the subsequent years of my life, and
my pen is not needed to recall them here. These reminiscences are of the
“ old times,” and they are at an end.


INCIDENTS RELATING TO PLACE-NAMES ON CRESSBROOK.
I must devote a chapter to an account of certain incidents that occurred
at Cressbrook long years ago, which no one can tell of but myself, and I
wish them to be remembered by my children and grandchildren, to whom
alone they will be interesting.
BRUMMY’S WATEEHOLE.
In 1850, my husband and I with our baby son, who was born in April of
that year, went on a visit of some months to Cressbrook. I had no bath there
for him, and to my surprise one of the men brought me a pretty bath-
tub, oval, painted blue outside, and white inside. Later he brought me, I
f.binV it was, a little table and chair for the little son and a footstool for me.
I thanked him much for his kind thought; he had made all himself; he
was clever at handicraft. I think he was the station blacksmith. He came
from Birmingham and the men dubbed him “Brummy.” The hawkers
travelling from station to station with their wares slyly bought kegs of rum,
and poor Brummy at such times got very drunk ; wishing to avoid the snare
he built himself a bark hut close to a deep waterhole; it was beautiful clear
water, and no drought ever reduced its quantity. Moreover, it was a very
pretty spot, about a mile from the head station. It became known as
“ Brummy’s Waterhole,” as it is to this day, but my children did not know
why it was so called. Now I have made a record of it, and they will
remember Brummy and his kind thought for their mother and her baby.
The others to record are very different, but all give the origin of names
given to various pretty parts of Cressbrook Bun.
MAGGIE’S DELIGHT.
Once on our return voyage from England we took charge of a young girl
returning from school, the daughter of a friend, Mr. George Raff. She
came to pay us a visit. About three miles from the house there was a
beautiful spot by clear running water, there we picnicked one day. Our
young friend was simply enchanted with the beauty of the place, and in
memory of her visit we named it “ Maggie’s Delight,” and so it is still
called.
MRS. BARNEYS ROCKS.
Once a very dear old friend came on a visit; she was delicate and very
frail—the widow of Captain Barney—she had ridden much in her youth,


and said to my husband that she would dearly like to have one more ride.
My husband selected a quiet easy horse. Mrs. Barney put on my riding-skirt
and away they went. They went some little distance across the river,
ascended by a bridle-track a rocky hill from which there was a fine view, and
then they turned homewards, the dear old lady much gratified by what she
had accomplished, but very tired. In remembrance of this we called the
place “ Mrs. Barney’s Bocks,” and it has never lost its name.
DAYSPRING.
Again, my earliest friend in the Colony—Madge Buttenshaw —came to
visit us with her husband, Mr. W. H. Day. We had a long picnic-ride one
day, a very stiff one, right among the hills. At the top of one was a fresh
gurgling stream of water, surrounded by beautiful native plants and wild
fruits. Our visitor admired it much, and we there and then called it
“ Dayspring,” and that is its name now.
THE TWA JEANIES.
During the Christmas holidays we usually had a number of young people
staying with us. One year we had two young girls, Scotch, among others,
both called Jeanie. On one of our riding-excursions we halted to picnic by
two conical hills, very similar to each other; it was a very happy day, and
to commemorate it we named the hills after our two young friends, “ The twa
Jeanies,” and they have never lost their name.
BESSIE’S NOOK.
Another time when we had visitors from Brisbane with us, we asked the
Mt. Brisbane party to join us in a picnic down the river, half way between
their station and ours. There were Mr. and Mrs. Francis Bigge and
Mr. and Mrs, William Bowman. We were a merry party. First we bathed,
the gentlemen riding a mile lower down to do the same. After lunch we
played at “ Aunt Sally,” then we had songs and a good deal of chaffing.
Mrs. Bigge was the life of the party, and we called the place after her
“ Bessie’s Nook,’’ It is a pretty spot by the river and still bears the name.
THE K.C.B. TREE.
Another time the three stations, Kilcoy, Cressbrook and Mt. Brisbane all
gathered by a large tree, at a point where these three stations touched each
other. We were a merry luncheon-party, and before leaving gave the place


the appropriate name of “ The K.C.B. Tree,” so it is now, although it no
longer forms a boundary.
MISS McLEISH’S WATEEHOLE.
One more still remains to be accounted for. We had a governess—
Miss McLeish—she was fond of riding alone. She had one favourite ride—
about four miles. I suppose one day she went exploring and lost herself.
We found her by a waterhole in which wild ducks were swimming. She
got a good deal teased on her return, and ever since the waterhole is called
by her name.
OUE SHIPWEECK.
I will finish this chapter with an account of a shipwreck which befell
myself and three youngest children on a voyage to England. Until 1871
only sailing vessels came to Australia. There may have been an occasional
auxiliary screw steamer; but in 1870 the enterprising shipping firm of
Devitt & Moore decided to build a fleet of steamers for Passenger and Cargo
traffic, to sail at first bi-monthly between London and Melbourne. The
first of the fleet was named the “ Queen of the Thames,” and arrived in
Melbourne the end of 1870, to sail end of February, She was a fine
steamer, replete with every comfort. Many took their passages in her, from
the North of Queensland, all the Colonies, New Zealand and Tasmania,
till not a berth was to spare.
It had been the intention of my husband that we should go home shortly,
but although he was himself not ready he thought it too good an
opportunity for me and the children to lose, so he took our passages in
her, intending to follow a few months later himself. He and our son
Harry came to Melbourne and saw us off. On our way south we had to
transship at Sydney; while there Mr. Joseph Moore, of the firm, came to my
husband, and introducing himself, asked if he were Mr. McConnel, of
Cressbrook, and whether his wife was a sister of Dr. Macleod, of Ben
Ehydding, Yorkshire. He replied, “Yes.” Then he added, “Dr. Macleod
is my particular friend, and hearing Mrs. McConnel was to be one of our
passengers, I concluded she was my friend’s sister, so I ask you to put your
wife and children under my care, and I promise, as far as one can promise,
to see Mrs. McConnel and her children safely landed in London.” This
was a great comfort to my husband as well as to me.


Well, I bade a sad good-bye to my dear ones. The anchor was heaved,
and we were off. Mr. Moore’s wife was with him, and most kind she was to
me. All went well till on the evening of the 18th the Captain, who was
looking out for the Cape Aghullas light-house—on seeing which he would
alter his course for Cape Town—saw a light and thought it was the light-
house, and was going to give his orders when Mr. Boyden (or Goyden),
Eegistrar General for South Australia went to him and respectfully said,
“ Captain, allow me to tell you that light is a Hottentot’s fire. I know the
coast well.” Captain was annoyed at being interfered with, told Mr. Goyden
to mind his own business, and did alter his course. That evening we had
our weekly concert. A white squall rose, and all the ports were shut. I had
a bad headache, and having to retire asked if I might have my port opened.
Captain said, “ Not yet. I will come and open it before Igo on deck.” I had
■a large cabin. The two little boys, 6 and 7, slept in the top bunk, Mary
slept in the under one, while I slept athwart ships. About midnight the
Captain knocked, came in and opened the port, and said good-night. I
suppose it was about an hour later that I was waked by a great shock to the
ship, and found myself standing on the floor. There was another and
another shock, and I knew that the ship had struck. I had the same
experience, though in a much smaller way, on the Brisbane river when the little
steamer struck on the sandbanks, so I knew our ship had not struck a rock.
Presently Mr. Moore came saying it was a bad business, would I and the
children get dressed and go to the Captain’s cabin where I would find
Mrs. Moore, which we did as hastily as we could. It was a quiet night,
but very dark. Captain said we must be eight miles at least from the shore.
There was no panic. Eev. Mr. Wilson and his wife went among the
passengers, reading the Holy Word and praying and cheering, while
Mr. Moore held a service in the Captain’s cabin, which was crowded. The
boats were lowered and provisioned with biscuits and water, while we waited
for the break of day. When it came we found there were but four lines of
breakers between us and the shore, and an inhospitable shore it was. Not
a house nor tree nor shrub to be seen, only miles upon miles of glittering
sand strewed with broken shells and pieces of coral, telling of the force of
the breakers.
A boat was manned and several gentlemen were pulled ashore. With a


marine glass they scanned the horizon in search of help. After a time they
thought they saw something moving in the far distance; as the objects got
nearer, though still a long way off, they proved to be a man on horseback,
but not coining our way. The man must be attracted. All united their
voices in a great shout often repeated, and threw their hats up in the air.
The rider was arrested, and turned his horse towards them. No doubt he
also saw the stranded ship. As he came galloping up he proved to be a
Dutch boy who knew nothing of English. Mr. Stuart, of Sydney, took his
card and wrote, “ Ship stranded, three hundred passengers on board, send
help.” He gave this to the boy, pointed to the ship and waved his hand
for him to make speed, and he galloped off. Then came the work of getting
all on shore. The boats were good and the men were strong. As the boat
rose on a great wave all who could throw themselves one by one into the
boat were caught by a sailor. Old and infirm people, as well as little
children, were carefully and tenderly taken by the sailors. No one saw the
captain; he had completely lost his head. All the passengers were landed
safely, and we gave God thanks. There were horses and cattle on board,
and these were cast into the sea to swim for their lives; not one reached
the shore—the sharks caught them. The ship’s back was broken and she
became a complete wreck.
The boy hastened with his message, gave it to his father who could net
read it, but luckily his aged mother who lived with him could. He at once
rode into Bredasdorp where Mr. Danvers, an English agent, was stationed,,
he roused the country so that by the afternoon our longing eyes saw troops
of all kinds of conveyances coming to our rescue, chiefly the “African cart ” •
all were drawn either by mules, donkeys or bullocks; it was a motley crowd,
but how thankful we were. Mr. Danvers came with them; he was at once
introduced to Mr. Moore. He was told that coast was very unhealthy, that
the aged, the sick, and the children must be removed first, and he managed
it all. Mr. Moore was anxious to communicate with London. Mr. Danvers
said the fortnightly mail steamer left Cape Town on Monday, that if he
started at once he could overtake her ; there were 200 miles to travel, only
about 20 miles from Gape Town would he find a railway. Bo arrangements
were hastily made for his journey; he was to be accompanied by Mrs. Moore
and her maid.


Before he left he put me under Mr. Danvers’ care as his particular friend,
asking him to make the most comfortable arrangements for me and my
children. Mr. Moore had a good deal of specie on board that he took
with him. He arrived just as the steamer was about to leave; he sent a
letter to his father, in which he said, “ Tell Dr. Macleod his sister and her
children are safe.” Thus he proved a good friend indeed. Mr. Danvers
arranged for me and the children to go to a farm, “ Nach Yacht, and some
friends that I begged might go with me, the Eev. and good Mr. Wilson, his
wife, and a boy they had under their care, and Mrs. Cleveland, who was
hastening home to see an aged and infirm father. Bredasdorp was terribly
crowded. We received much kindness from the Dutch, and I will here add
that our rescue from the barren and unhealthy shore was due to a most
providential instance. There were no trees nor coal mines, nor fuel of any
kind; it was usual to burn Orgols (dried manure), but on the inhospitable
coast of Struys Bay there were many shipwrecks; the drift-wood was
gathered and stacked by an old couple living in a lonely hut on the beach,
a good few miles from Bredasdorp and Nach Yacht. It was the custom to
get a load of this drift-wood twice a year, when a messenger was sent on
horseback to say when the cart would be sent. It was on one of these
errands the boy was when he was hailed by us. Surely God’s gracious
hand was in this, for very many found a watery grave there.
We had a romantic journey to Cape Town; everywhere we met with
kindness. When [we reached our journey’s end accommodation had been
secured for us by Mr. Moore. We were lodged in a beautiful old Dutch
house, kept by Mrs. Darke; all the passengers were sent home in the
fortnightly Cape steamer. It was a great crush. Mr. Moore preferred to
wait for one of his company’s sailing vessels that was to call at Cape Town
on its way to London, and he asked me to do the same, a kind offer which
I gladly accepted. We sailed on the 12th of April, arriving in London on
the Bth June. All the expenses of the passengers from the time of
shipwreck till their arrival in London were met by the firm. The Captain
underwent a public trial, was dismissed, and never again had command of
a ship,
Our relatives rejoiced to welcome us, and thus happily ended one of the
most exciting episodes in my rather eventful life.


W* fafauC C. Th.
#6 a.
STORIES OF AUSTRALIAN BUSH LIFE, 1844.
Experiences of the late Frederic Mcconinel.
When I was staying at our station at Cresshro9k ( in
one of our neighbours, asked me to go with him to his station,
about 12 miles away. On arriving, we found it in a great state of com-
£inSir^ld S E e i£sgle t s!affl?ilS d rtffl !< !a ftt
I had a brace of pistols. We looked about &. espied smoke on the top of
a hill half a mile off, which indicated that the blacks were there.
Two of us had watches, so we agreed to divides he to remain, I to
gallop round to the back of the hill & attack them at the same moment.
" i was accompanied by Graham, to whom I gave one of my pistols* also
by a couple of fierce kangaroo dogs. _ ,
When we got to the back of the hill, we found it exceedingly steep,
& to our dismay heard a gun miss fire, followed by a shot from Ivory,
who had fired before the time. m *
There was a yell from the blacks, who suddenly appeared. We sent
the dogs forward as if they were going in after kangaroo* they rushed
in among the blacks & by terrifying them made them look round before
attacking Ivory. They fortunately saw Graham & myself smuggling up
the hill, and, fearing there were more of us, fled in every direction.
The nan hit by Ivory managed to escape down the hill. ' . „
We got in the middle of them, & I had my pistol within a yard of a
man’s back, I could not make up ray mind to fire at him, but followed
h i in
The blacks all disappeared, leaving behind them their tools, spears
bags & axe, also a sheep roasting whole. . „ w*
We took everything we wanted, & returned to Graham s station. We
found the murdered shepherd, & buried him next morning, poor fellow.
I had to ride home alone past the very spot. The blacks shouted and
coo-ee’d to me, but I passed them at a trot, carrying home the spoil.
The axe, which is now in my possession, has an English blade, but
the handle is made & ftted by the blacks. I have also boomerangs and
clubs, beautifully made.
2.
On another occasion I was coming up country, having been down to
Sidney to buy stores &, engage men, shepherds &c. Wepassed a station
one afternoon, the owner no.t being at home, & went on some
further to another station, where we stayed all night. Early next mor-
ning, about 5.30, a man from tBe station we had passed came to say
they had been attacked by blacks, who had speared a man through the
leg, &. had taken a small flock of sheep. Our host was not at-home, so
I started for the station with five of my men, & another visitor. We
found on arrival that all the white men had retired to another hut,
two miles off, & that the station was sacked by the blacks- doors open
stores scattered about- spirit barrells broken open- about 20 spears
perpendicularly stuck into the ground. We first tried to track the
sheep, but failed, , . ,
We then went to the hut in which the white men were _hiding. When
we got there, we found that our host of the previous night had retur-
ned & followed us, & arrived also. He had found a black on the.road,
& made him come with him,i-fi the threatening to shoot him if he
refused. We decided to make use of him in the morning, &. kept watch
X hV' Ituk, u *L flu. Cn*u*l, *9 a
« JUy. ’A"** "• *“ eaMU


over him all Kept making all sorts of excuses to get away ,
bUt In l the U mornfng‘we started, three men on horseback,five of my mm on
foot & the black fellow, who was put on a horse, with a white shift
over hiffito cover his blackness, & to prevent him from escaping. On
arriving at the station we found it was still further sacked. The .
black fellow was set to track the sheep. He led, us towards a "scrub”
UhicK wood) Jt came up to me | nSf i ?m «gn f? -wo S |a t <a |J|; 5
°” Se SSt® I fIS hmdred yards into the wood, which had been part-
ly burnt, & was covered more or less with young trees like evergreens.
/s our men wanted to rest & smoke, we stayed ten minutes sp °h
with a thick wood at our back. & bushes in front. When we fL ***
we heard yells, which extended all along the bushes in front of us, &
found that we were surrounded by the blacks, whom we # saw^ lumping fro m
bush to bush. Our leader put spurs to his horse, saying It s all up
with us”? another man followed suit? & I felt it was a dl ®sraceful pro
dengijjg to leave the men on foot to the mercy of the blacks. I accor-
dinglv put spurs to my horse, which was a good one, & shouted * V e §7,
gedtLS to borne back. They soon found themselves surrounded, and did
turn back, but only to get to the, back of the men. In doing so. we got
among the blacks, who dropped their spears & ran, in all directions,
For a time all the white men but one were in front of us? and he
got a spear between his arm & his side, but it missed him.l shouted?
the black put down his spear & bolted? and the white man got U P us.
We all stood in a circle? &. for a moment the, men swore at our lead-
er & were inclined to shoot him. The leader of the blacks, & chief of
the tribe, was a handsome young fellow called_Moppy. g?-® fa *her had
been killed by the whites: he had sworn to kill six white men in re-
venge, &. had already killed two. He stood there P° isl £® I
ready to throw at our leader. I had my gun ready to shoot him, if he
cave a soring. Our leader & the blacks began to talk. He told them we
lad not S come 6 to kill them, but to get the sheep? & if we got them, we
should not kill any of them. aeV . . „ _
The black fellow, our guide, came up to me &. asked for a pistol to
protect himself from his brother blacks* I gave it him, & he fired it
! ° ff We i made t of the blacks. About a hundred of them
formed into an open square. They danced a sort of war-dance, imitating
dif We r then a wafted’for the blacks to bring the sheep, which they ulti-
mately did- til but 70 of them. While wafting, our black guide came to
me, as I was sitting quietly on my horse, & said Look out I I loolced
round very sharply, &, saw two black fellows just about to spear As
I looked they disappeared, & we went back to the hut from which we had
COII We offered our black guide some milk to drink, hut he feared it was
poison, & would not drink it, & shortly after successfully effected
his escape.
Jhr-3U*f
