

Memorandum and
Articles of Association
OF THE
Racial Hygiene Association
of
New South Wales




THE COMPANIES ACT 1899
Memorandum and
Articles of Association
OF THE
Racial Hygiene Association
of
New South Wales




THE COMPANIES ACT 1899
Memorandum of Association
of the
Racial Hygiene Association of N.S.W
I. The name of the Association shall be “The Racial Hygiene
Association of New South Wales.”
2: The registered office of the Association shall be situated in Sydney
in the State of New South Wales.
3. The objects for which the Association is founded are:—
(a) Subject to Section 53 of the Companies Act 1899 to acquire
and take over the effects assets and liabilities of the present
unincorporated Association known as The Racial Hygiene
Association of New South Wales.
(b) To publish or arrange for the publication and circulation
amongst the members, the general public or otherwise of a
journal or other publication and all such books pamphlets
leaflets and other publications as the Association shall think
fit.
(c) To collect provide and circulate accurate and enlightened in-
formation as to the prevalence of venereal diseases and as to
the necessity for early treatment.
(d) To conduct throughout the State of New South Wales a
campaign for the prevention and eradication of venereal diseases
and to encourage and assist the dissemination of a sound
knowledge of the physiological laws of life in order to raise
the standard both of health and conduct.
(e) The education of the community on eugenic lines.
(f) To co-operate with existing Associations having objects similar
to those of the Association.
(g) To arrange either in conjunction with such organisations or
alone for courses of lectures to be given publicly and privately
and to supervise the preparation publication and dissemination
of suitable literature and to arrange for the broadcasting of
suitable lectures over the wirless.
(h) To arrange for the screening of educational films.
’i) To promote such legislative, social and administrative reforms
as are relevant to the objects of the Association or any of
them.


(j) In furtherance of the objects of the Association to carry on
the business of booksellers and such trading operations as may
be deemed conducive to the objects of the Association.
(k) To establish branches and branch offices in such places as the
Association shall think fit for the carrying out of the objects
of the Association.
(l) To amalgamate with any companies Institutions societies or
associations having objects altogether or in part similar to
those of the Association and which shall prohibit the distribu-
tion of their income and property amongst their members to an
extent at least as great as is imposed on this Association.
(m) To indemnify any member of the Association in respect of
any action taken or to be taken or liability incurred or to be
incurred by such member in any action which the Executive)
Committee of the Association may consider conducive to the
objects of the Association.
(n) To provide and collect from members, the general public or
otherwise, funds for the purpose of carrying on or furthering
the objects of the Association or any of them.
(o) To originate and promote improvements in the law, and to
support or oppose alterations therein, and to effect improve-
ments in administration, and, for the purpose aforesaid, to
petition the appropriate Government Department and take
such other steps and proceedings as may be deemed expedient.
(p) To encourage the settlement by arbitration of any questions
in which the Association is concerned.
(q) To borrow or raise or give security for money by the issue
of or upon bonds, debentures, bills of exchange, promissory
notes or other obligations or securities of the Association or
by mortgage or charge upon all or any of the property of
the Association.
(r) To purchase, take on lease, or in exchange, or otherwise acquire
any lands, buildings, easements or property, real or personal,
which may be requisite for the purposes of or conveniently
used in connection with any of the objects of the Association
subject as regards land to the 53rd Section of the Companies
Act 1899, and, so far as the Law or License of the Governor
if granted may from time to time allow, and to sell, demise,
mortgage, give in exchange or dispose of the same. In case
the Association shall take or hold any property which may be
subject to any trusts the Association shall only deal with the
same in such manner as allowed by Law having regard to such
trusts.
(s) To hire and employ secretaries, clerks and other employees
and subject to Clause 4 of this Memorandum to pay to them
and to other persons in return for services rendered to the


Association salaries, wages, bonuses and gratuities.
(t) Subject to Section 53 of the Companies Act 1899 to invest and
deal with the moneys of the Association not immediately re-
quired upon such securities and in such manner as may from
time to time be determined by the Executive Committee or as
provided in the Articles of Association.
(u) To pay for the insertion in any newspaper or other publication
of any matter calculated in the opinion of the Executive Com-
mittee to further any of the objects of the Association.
(v) To establish, undertake, superintend, administer and contribute
to any public charitable or benevolent fund for the medical,,
surgical or other relief, maintenance, support and assistance
of any persons suffering from venereal diseases and to con-
tribute to or otherwise assist any public charitable or benevolent
institutions or undertakings.
(w ) To do all or any of the above things as principals, agents,,
contractors, trustees or otherwise, and by or through trustees,
agents or otherwise, and either alone or in conjunction with
others.
(x) To do all such other lawful things as are necessary, or advis-
able, for the advancement generally of the interests of the
Association, or which are incidental or conducive to the attain-
ment of any of the above objects.
4. The income and property of the Association whencesoever derived
shall be applied solely towards the promotion of the objects of the Associa-
tion as set forth in the Memorandum of Association and no portion thereof
shall be paid or transferred directly or indirectly by way of dividend,
bonus or otherwise howsoever by way of nrofit to the members of the
Association.
Provided that nothing herein contained shall prevent the payment in
good faith of reasonable and proper remuneration to any officers or
servants of the Association, or to any members of the Association or other
person in return for services actually rendered to the Association, nor
prevent the payment of interest at a rate not exceeding the rate for the
time being charged by Bankers in Sydney on overdrawn accounts on money
lent, or reasonable and proper rent for premises demised or let to the
Association; but so that no member of the Executive Committee or govern-
ing body of the Association shall be appointed to any salaried office of the
Association paid by fees, and that no remuneration or other benefit in
money or money’s worth shall be given by the Association to any member
of such Committee or governing body except repayment of out-of-pocket
expenses and interest at the rate aforesaid on money lent or reasonable
and proper rent for premises demised or let to the Association: Provided
further that the provision last aforesaid shall not apply to any payment to
any railway, gas, electric lighting, water, cable or telephone company of
which a member of the Executive Committee or governing body may be
a member or any other company in which such member shall not hold


more than one-hundredth part of the capital and such member shall not
be bound to account for any share of the profits he may receive in respect
of any such payment.
5. The fourth and tenth paragraphs of this Memorandum contain
conditions in which a License is granted by the Governor with the advice
of the Executive Council of the State of New South Wales in pursuance
of Section 52 of the Companies Act, 1899.
6. The liability of the members is limited.
7. Every member of the Association undertakes to contribute towards
the assets of the Association in the event of the same being wound up
during the time that he is a member, or within one year afterwards, for
the payment of the debts and liabilities of the Association contracted be-
fore the time at which he ceases to be a member, and of the costs, charges
and expenses of winding up the same, and for the adjustment of the
rights of the contributories amongst themselves such amount as may be
required not exceeding seven shillings and sixpence.
8. If upon the winding up or dissolution of the Association there
remains after the satisfaction of its debts and liabilities any property
whatsoever, the same shall not be paid to or distributed among the
members of the Association but shall be given or transferred to some
other Institution or Institutions having similar objects to the objects of
the Association, and which shall prohibit the distribution of its or their
income or property among its or their members to an extent at least as
great as is imposed on the Association under or by virtue of Clause 4
hereof such Institution or Institutions to be determined by the members
of the Association at or before the time of dissolution or in default thereof
by the Chief Judge in Equity of the Supreme Court of New South Wales
or such other Judge of that Court as may have or acquire jurisdiction
in the matter, and if and so far as effect cannot be given to the aforesaid
provision then to some charitable object.
9. True accounts shall be kept of the sums of money received and
expended by the Association, and the matters in respect of which such
receipts and expenditure take place and of the property credits and liabili-
ties of the Association and subject to any reasonable restrictions as to the
time and manner of inspecting the same that may be imposed in accord-
ance with the regulations of the Association for the time being, such
accounts shall be open to inspection of the members. Once at least in
every year the accounts of the Association shall be examined and the
correctness of the balance-sheet ascertained by one or more properly
qualified Auditor or Auditors.
10. No addition, alteration or amendment shall be made to or in the
regulations contained in the Articles of Association for the time being in
force, unless the same shall have been previously submitted to and approved
by the Governor with the advice of the Executive Council of the said
State.


WE the several persons whose names and addresses are submitted are
desirous of being formed into a registered Association in pursuance of
this Memorandum of Association.
Names Addresses and Descriptions of Subscribers
HERBERT EDGAR McINTOSH,
27 Hunter Street, Sydney, Solicitor.
.ROBERT HENRY MODLIN,
17 O’Connell Street, Sydney, Chartered Accountant.
' '
MARION BROWN, J.P.,
331 Ernest Street, North Sydney, Domestic Dutties.
,
FLORENCE LIGGINS ELKIN, J.P.,
10 Burley Street, Lane Cove.
LESLIE REYNOLDS,
7 Hampden Road, Artarmon, Bank Clerk.
SARA JENNINGS,
8 River Road, Lane Cove, Domestic Duties.
E. W. HULLE,
52 Macleay Street, Bank Chief Inspector.
DATED this iBth day of August, One thousand nine hundred and
thirty-two.
Witness to the above signatures:—
LILLIE ELIZABETH GOODISSON,
General Secretary.
14 Martin Place, Sydney.




THE COMPANIES ACT 1899
Articles of Association
of the
Racial Hygiene Association of N.S.W
Preliminary
1. In these Articles unless there be something the subject or context
inconsistent therewith:—
“The Association” means the abovenamed The Racial Hygiene
Association of New South Wales.
“The Executive Committee” means the members for the time being
of the Executive Committee hereby constituted.
“In writing” means written, typed or printed, or partly written,
partly typed and partly printed.
Words importing the singular number only include the plural
number and vice versa.
Words importing the masculine only include the feminine and
vice versa.
Words importing persons include corporations.
2. The Association is established for the purposes expressed in the
Memorandum of Association.
3. For the purposes of registration the number of members on the
Association is to be taken to be two hundred and fifty (250).
MEMBERSHIP
4. Members shall be:—
(a) The signatories to the Memorandum of Association and these
Articles.
(b) The representative appointed by organisations, Institutions,
Societies, Associations and Unions which may affiliate by paying
a minimum annual subscription of one guinea. Such affiliated
organisations, Institutions, Societies, Associations and Unions
are entitled to appoint one representative for every 100 mem-
bers, or part thereof, with a maximum of five representatives
from any one organisations, Institution, Society, Association or
Union.


(c) Individuals over the age of sixteen on payment of a minimum
annual subscription of two shillings and six pence or not more
than ten shillings (to include subscription to the official journal
of the Association).
5. All members appointed by affiliated organisations shall be entitled
to attend the General Meetings of the Association, or any special meeting
which may be called in accordance with the Articles of Association, and
shall be entitled to vote on any business which may be submitted to such
meeting.
6. One of the members appointed by each organisation referred to in
Clause 4 Sub-Clause (b) to be selected by such organisation shall be
entitled to a seat on the Executive Committee which shall be the govern-
ing body of the Association between General Meetings.
7. (a) Individual members shall be organised into branches each of
which shall be entitled to appoint one representative to the
Executive Committee.
(b) Apart from the representatives of organisations which may
affiliate (and branches) individual members shall be elected to
the Executive Committee by the General Meeting. The
Executive Committee may co-opt three more to act as full
members of the Committee until the next General Meeting.
The qualification for office for any position shall be at least
three months’ membership.
8. The privileges of any member of the Association shall not be
transferable, and shall cease on the death of such member, and in case of
all members on retirement, exclusion, or, if the Executive Committee so
determine, on failure in any year to pay the annual subscription on or
before the 30th of June in that year or otherwise.
9. Every member shall be bound to further to the best of his ability
the objects, interest, and influence of the Association, and shall observe
all regulations and by-laws of the Association, made pursuant to the
powers in that behalf hereinafter contained.
10. Any member who shall fail in observance of any of the regula-
tions or by-laws of the Association may be excluded from the Association
by resolution of a majority of at least three-fourths of the members of the
Executive Committee present and voting at a Special Meeting of the
Executive Committee, at which not less than three members shall be
present. Such member shall have seven clear days’ notice sent to him
of the meeting of the Executive Committee and he may attend the meet-
ing and be heard in his own defence but shall not be present at the voting,
or take part in the proceedings otherwise than as aforesaid or as the
Executive Committee allows. A member excluded from the Association
by such meeting may, within seven days next after notice of his exclusion,
appeal from the decision of the Executive Committee to an Extraordinary
Meeting of the Association which shall thereupon be convened by the
Executive Committee.
in


MANAGEMENT
11. The management shall be vested in the Executive Committee and
local branches.
12. The Executive Committee shall operate throughout the State of
New South Wales, and shall assist the local Branches in all possible
ways.
13. Local branches shall operate over areas to be determined in con-
sultation with the Executive Committee. The decision of the Executive
Committee shall be final. They shall be federations of individuals and
local organisations with constitutions approved by the Executive Com-
mittee.
14. There shall be an Advisory Board of eight elected by the Execu-
tive Committee and which the Executive Committee shall have power to
enlarge when necessary. The Advisory Board shall be summoned from
time to time by the Executive Committee and shall act merely in an
advisory capacity and advise on the matters submitted to it by the Execu-
tive Committee at such meetings. The qualifications for teachers must be
approved by the Board.
15. Groups of experts shall be formed to deal with the various Sec-
tions of Hygiene such as Sex Education, Venereal Diseases and Mental
Hygiene.
EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE
16. The Executive Committee shall consist of a President four Vice-
Presidents, the Honorary Treasurer, the Honorary Solicitor, one rep-
resentative from each affiliated organisation, from each Branch and thirteen
other members and the ex-officio members mentioned in Article 18. The
members of the Executive Committee as at present constituted, namely Mr.
H. E. Mclntosh President, Mesdames G. S. Brown and S. Jennings and
Messrs. R. H. Modlin and Leslie Reynolds Vice Presidents and Mesdames
Ankers, Emily Bennett, Carpenter, Cramfield, Ruby Duncan, Elkin*
Colonel Fisher, G. Reynolds, Rutherford and Barclay-Smith, and E. W.
Hulle and Stephen Herford and Sir Benjamin Fuller and Mr. Creswell
O’Reilly Ex Officio shall continue to hold office and to act as a provisional
Committee until the first General Meeting.
17. The Executive Committee shall have power to co-opt not more
than three individual members between ordinary General Meetings as
mentioned in Article 7.
18. The members of the Executive Committee shall be elected annually
at the General Meeting and shall at the end of this year of Office be
eligible for re-election without nomination. Any casual vacancy may be
filled up by the other members of the Executive Committee. Retiring
Presidents shall be members of the Executive Committee ex officio for
one year.


19- If any member of the Executive be absent from three (3) con-
secutive meetings without satisfactory explanation that member’s seat shall
automatically become vacant, and the Executive shall have the power to
elect any qualified member to such vacant seat.
20. The Executive Committee shall engage all such officers and ser-
vants as they may consider necessary, and shall regulate their duties and
subject to Clause 4 of the Memorandum fix their salaries.
21. The Executive Committee may appoint one or more of their
number, or one or more committee or committees to exercise subject
to their directions a general control over the work of the Association,
or any part thereof, or to superintend, subject as aforesaid, one or more
branches of the work of the Association.
22. The Executive Committee may meet together for the despatch of
business, adjourn or otherwise regulate their meetings as they think fit.
Questions arising at any meeting shall be decided by a majority of votes.
In case of equality of votes the Chairman shall have a second or casting
vote. The President shall be the Chairman of all meetings of the Execu-
tive Committee or of any committee or committees at which he is present,
or failing him one of the Vice-Presidents, and in the absence of the Presi-
dent and Vice-Presidents the Executive Committee shall appoint a Chair-
man from amongst their number.
23. The Executive Committee may and the General Secretary of the
Association shall, on the requisition of at least three members of the
Executive Committee, summon a meeting of the Executive Committee.
24. The Quorum necessary for the transaction of the business of the
Executive Committee may be fixed by the Executive Committee, and unless
so fixed, shall be five.
25. Nominations for the position of “individual members” of the
Executive Committee to be elected under Clause 7 must be signed by at
least two other members and the Nominee. The definition of member shall
be as in Clause 4, retiring members to be eligible for re-election without
nomination. All nominations for the Executive Committee must be in the
hands of the Seceretary not less than seven days before the General Meet-
ing.
MEMBERSHIP AND AFFILIATION
26. Organisations, Institutions, Societies, Associations and Unions
operating through the State or throughout the metropolitan area may
affiliate direct with the Executive Committee on payment |of a minimum
annual subscription of one guinea.
27. Individuals may become members of their local Branch on pay-
ment of an annual subscription of two shillings and six pence.
28. Each Branch shall admit to its membership without further sub-
scription till the conclusion of the financial year any member transferred
to the district managed by such Branch, provided such member present to
the Secretary of the Branch evidence of membership for the current year.


2Q. The President and Secretary of the Association shall be ex officio
members of any Branch or Committee they may visit, but shall have no
power to vote.
GENERAL MEETINGS OF THE ASSOCIATION
30. The first General Meeting of the Association shall be held at such
time, not being more than three months or less than one month after the
incorporation of the Association, and at such place as the Executive Com-
mittee shall prescribe. Subsequent General Meetings of the Association
shall be held once in each year, at such time, not being more than fifteen
months after the holding of the preceding General Meeting, and at such
place as the Executive Committee shall appoint, and if no time or place
be so appointed, then in the month of July in each year, at the registered
office of the Association or at such other place as shall be from time to
time determined by the Executive Committee.
31. The abovementioned General Meetings shall be called Ordinary
Meetings, and all other General Meetings shall be called Extraordinary.
32. The Executive Committee may, whenever they think fit, and they
shall, upon a requisition made in writing by any five or more members,
convene an Extraordinary General Meeting.
33. Any requisition made by members shall express the object of
the meeting proposed to be called, and shall be left at the registered office
of the Association.
34. Upon the receipt of such requisition the Executive Committee shall
forthwith proceed to convene a General Meeting. If they do not proceed
to convene the meeting within twentyone days from the date of the
requisition, the requisitionists may themselves convene the meeting.
35. At least seven days before every meeting notice thereof specifying
the place, the day, the hour of meeting, and in case of special business the
general nature of such business, shall be given to the members in manner
hereinafter mentioned, or in such other manner, if any, as may be pres-
cribed by the Association in General Meeting, but the non-receipt of such
notice by any member shall not invalidate the proceedings at any General
Meeting.
PROCEEDINGS AT GENERAL MEETINGS
36. All business shall be deemed special that is transacted at an
Extraordinary General Meeting, and all that is transacted at an Ordin-
ary General Meeting, with the exception of the consideration of the accounts
and balance sheets, the election of officers of the Association, the election
of Auditors, and the ordinary report of the Executive Committee.
37. No business shall be transacted at any meeting unless a quorum
of not less than ten members is present at the commencement of such
business.
38. If within half an hour from the time appointed for the meeting
a quorum be not present, the meeting, if convened upon the requisition of


members, shall be dissolved. In any other case it shall stand adjourned
to the same day in the following week, at the same time and place, and if
at such adjourned meeting a quorum be not present, it shall be adjourned
sine die.
39. The President, or, in his absence, a Vice-President to be elected
by the members present, shall preside as Chairman at every General Meet-
ing of the Association.
40. If neither the President nor any Vice-President be present at the
time of holding the meeting, the members present shall choose some one
of their number to be Chairman at such meeting.
41. Every question submitted to a meeting shall be decided in the
first instance by a show of hands, and in the case of an equality of votes
the Chairman shall, both on a show of hands and at a poll, have a casting
vote in adition to the vote to which he may be entitled as a member.
42. At any General Meeting, unless a poll is demanded by at least
five persons entitled to vote, or by the Chairman, a declaration by the
Chairman that a resolution has been carried, or carried by a particular
majority, or lost, or not carried by a particular majority, and an entry
to that effect in the book of proceedings of the Association, shall be con-
clusive evidence of that fact without proof of the number or proportion
of the votes recorded in favour of or against such resolution.
43. If a poll is demanded as aforesaid, it shall be taken in such
manner, and at such time and place as the Chairman of the meeting
directs, and either at once or after an interval or adjournment, or other-
wise, and the result of the poll shall be deemed to be the resolution of
the meeting at which the poll was demanded. The demand of a poll may
be withdrawn.
44. The Chairman may, with the consent of the meeting, adjourn
any meeting from time to time and from place to place, but no business
shall be transacted at any such adjourned meeting other than that left
unfinished at the meeting from which the said adjournment took place.
VOTING AT GENERAL MEETINGS
45. Each member shall have one vote, both on a show of hands and
on a poll.
SEAL
46. The seal of the Association shall not be affixed to any instrument
except by the authority of a resolution of the Executive Committee, and
in the presence of at least two members of the Executive Committee and
the General Secretary, who shall sign every instrument to which the seal
of the Association is so affixed in their presence.


ACCOUNTS
4.7. The Executive Committee shall cause true accounts to be kept
of all sums of money received and expended by the Association and of
the matters in respect of which such receipts and expenditure take place,
and of the property, credits and liabilities of the Association.
48. Subject to any reasonable restrictions that may be imposed by the
Association in General Meeting from time to time as to the time and
manner of inspecting the same, all books of account of the Association shall
be open to the inspection of any member between the hours of three and
five on every week day except Saturday.
49. The Executive Committee shall at every Ordinary General Meet-
ing lay before the Association a statement of the income and expenditure of
the Association during the preceding year, and also a balance sheet covering
the same period, together with a report of the Executive Committee as to
the state and progress of the Association.
50. A copy of such statement, balance sheet and report shall be sent
to every member at least seven days before the General Meeting.
AUDITORS
51. The Association shall at every Ordinary General Meeting appoint
a properly qualified Auditor or Auditors to hold office for the ensuing year,
and shall fix the remuneration, if any, to be paid for their services. No
member of the Executive Committee shall be capable of acting as an
52. A casual vacancy in the office of the Auditor shall be filled up by
the Executive Committee, but while any single vacancy continues any
continuing Auditor or Auditors may act.
53. Every Auditor of the Association shall have the right of access
at all times to the books and accounts and vouchers of the Association,
and shall be entitled to require from the General Secretary and other
officers of the Association such information as may be necessary for the
purpose of the duties of the Auditors.
54. The Auditors shall sign a certificate at the foot of the balance
sheet stating whether or not all their requirements as Auditors have been
complied with, and shall make a report to the Association of the accounts
examined by them and on every balance sheet laid before the Association
in general meeting during their tenure of office and in every such report
the Auditors shall state whether, in their opinion, the balance sheet referred
to in the report is properly drawn up so as to exhibit a true and correct
view of the state of the Association’s affairs as shown by the books of the
Association, and such report shall be read before the Association at the
Annual Conference.
NOTICES
55. A notice may be served by the Association upon any member


cither personally or by sending it through the post in a prepaid letter
addressed to such member at his usual place of abode.
56. Any notice if served by post shall be deemed to have been served
at the time the letter containing the same would be delivered in the
ordinary course of post, and in proving such service it shall be sufficient
to prove that the letter containing the notice was properly addressed pre-
paid and posted.
FINANCE
57. The funds of the Association shall be applied to the objects of
the Association at such time and in such manner as the Executive Com-
mittee may decide.
58. Cheques shall be signed by the General Secretary and counter-
signed by any member of the Executive Committee appointed for that
purpose.
ALTERATION OF CONSTITUTION
59. No alteration of the Articles of Association can be made except by
way of special resolution urder the Companies Acts, and subject to the
approval of the Governor-in-Council under Clause 10 of the Memorandum.
Notice of any proposed alteration must be sent to the General Secretary at
least twenty eight days before the date of the General Meeting at which
such resolution is to be considered, and subject otherwise to the terms of
Section 72 of the Companies Act, 1899.
WINDING UP
60. The Association shall be wound up voluntarily whenever an
extraordinary resolution is passed requiring the Association to be so wound
up.
INDEMNITY
61. The President, Vice-Presidents, members of the Executive Com-
mittee, Honorary Treasurers, General Secretary, Auditors and other
officers for the time being of the Association, and the Trustees (if any)
for the time being acting in relation to any of the affairs of the Association
and every of them, and every of their heirs, executors and administrators
shall be indemnified and secured harmless out of the assets of the Associa-
tion from and against all actions, costs, charges, losses damages and expenses
which they or any of them, their or any of their executors or administra-
tors, shall or may incur or sustain by or by reason of any act done, con-
curred in or omitted in or about the execution of their duty, or supposed
duty, in their respective offices or trusts, except such (if any) as they
shall incur or sustain by or through their own negligence, and none
of them shall be answerable for the acts, receipts, neglects or defaults of
the other or others of them, or for joining in any receipt for the sake of
conformity, or for any bankers or other persons with whom any moneys
or effects belonging to the Association shall or may be lodged or deposited


for safe custody or for insufficiency or deficiency of any security upon
which any moneys belonging to the Association shall be placed out or in-
vested, or for any other loss, misfortune or damage which may happen in
the execution of their respective offices or trusts or in relation thereto,
unless the same shall happen by or through their own negligence.
17
WE, the several persons whose names and addresses are subscribed being
subscribers to the Memorandum of Association of the Racial Hygiene
Association of New South Wales hereby agree to the foregoing
Articles of Association.
Names Addresses and Descriptions of Subscribers
HERBERT EDGAR McINTOSH,
27 Hunter Street, Sydney, Solicitor.
ROBERT HENRY MODLIN,
17 O'Connell Street, Sydney, Chartered Accountant.
MARION BROWN, J.P.,
331 Ernest Street, North Sydney, Domestic Dutties.
FLORENCE LIGGINS ELKIN, J.P.,
10 Burley Street, Lane Cove.
LESLIE REYNOLDS,
7 Hampden Road, Artarmon, Bank Clerk.
SARA JENNINGS,
8 River Road, Lane Cove, Domestic Duties.
E. W. HULLE,
52 Macleay Street, Bank Chief Inspector.
DATED this ißth day of August, One thousand nine hundred and
thirty-two.
Witness to the above signatures:—
LILLIE ELIZABETH GOODISSON,
General Secretary.
14 Martin Place, Sydney.
Names


