

THE COMPANIES ACT. 1938.
AN ASSOCIATION NOT FOR PROFIT
Memorandum and
Articles of Association
Australian Legion of |
Ex-Servicemen and j
Women
Ayvysn Qivni




! uii}uaM}»aiamm«a
THE COMPANIES ACT, 1938.
AN ASSOCIATION NOT FOR PROFIT


THE COMPANIES ACT, 1938.
AN ASSOCIATION NOT FOR PROFIT
Pursuant to Section 18.
Memorandum of Association
AUSTRALIAN LEGION OF
EX-SERVICEMEN AND
WOMEN
1. The name of the Association is the “Australian Legion
of Ex-Servicemen and Women.”
2. The registered office of the Association is situate at No.
396 Bourke Street, Melbourne, in the State of Victoria.
3. The objects for which the Association is established
(a) To foster a spirit of loyalty to the King and to
cultivate an Imperial sentiment of patriotism.
(b) To preserve the records of all those servicemen
who have died in the service of Australia.
(c) To protect the interests and forward the welfare
of members.
(d) To purchase, lease, or otherwise acquire, sell,
exchange, or mortgage any real or personal pro-
perty for the use of members of the Association.


For the purposes of charity and amusement.
To construct, maintain and alter any houses
buildings or works necessary or convenient for
the purposes of the Association.
To take any gift of property whether subject to
any special trust or not, for any one or more of
the objects of the Association.
To print and publish any newspapers period-
icals books leaflets or brochures that the Associ-
ation may think desirable for the promotion of
its objects.
To sell manage lease mortgage dispose of or
otherwise deal with all or any part of the pro-
perty of the Association.
To borrow or raise money for the objects of
the Association or any of them in such manner
as the Association may think fit.
To invest any moneys of the Association not
immediately required for any of its objects in
such manner as may from time to time be
determined.
To undertake and execute any trusts or any
agency business which may seem directly or
indirectly conducive to any of the objects of the
Association.
To subscribe to any local or other charity and
to grant donations for any public purpose and
to provide a superannuation fund for the ser-
vants of the Association or otherwise to assist any
such servants their widows and/or children.
To establish and support and to aid in the
establishment and support of any other Associa-
tion formed for all or any of the objects of this
Association.


(o) To amalgamate with any companies institutions
societies or Associations having objects altogether
or in part similar to those of this Association and
which shall prohibit the distribution of its or
their income any property among its or their
members to an extent at least as great as is imposed
on this Association under or by virtue of the
fourth paragraph hereof.
(p) To purchase or otherwise acquire and undertake
all or any part of the property assets liabilities
and engagements of any one or more of the
companies institutions societies or associations
with which this Association is authorized to
amalgamate.
(q) To transfer all or any part of the properly
assets, liabilities and engagements of this Asso-
ciation to any one or more of the companies
institutions socities or associations with which
this Association is authorized to amalgamate.
(r) To do all such other lawful things as arc inci-
dental or conducive to the attainment of the
above objects.
4. The income and property of the Association whence-
soever derived shall be applied solely towards the promotion
of the objects of the Association as set forth in this Memor-
andum of Association; and no portion thereof shall be paid or
transferred directly or indirectly by way of dividend bonus or
otherwise howsoever by way of profit to the persons who at any
time are or have been members associate members or auxiliary
members of the Association or to any of them or to any person
claiming through any of them provided that nothing herein
contained shall prevent the payment in good faith of remuner-
ation to any officers or servants of the Association or to any
member associate member or auxiliary member thereof or
other person in return for any services actually rendered to the
Association nor for goods supplied in the ordinary and usual
way of business nor to prevent the payment of interest at a
rate not exceeding the current bank rate on moneys lent or
reasonable or proper rent for premises demised or let by any
member of the Association, but so that no members of the
Committee or governing body of the Association shall be


appointed to any salaried office of the Association or any
office of the Association paid by fees and that no remunera-
tion or other benefit in money or money's worth shall be given
by the Association to any member of such Committee or
governing body except payment of out of pocket expenses and
interest not exceeding the rate aforesaid on money lent or
reasonable and proper rent for premises demised or let to the
Association, provided that the provision last aforesaid shall
not apply to any payment to any gas or electric light company
of which a member of the Committee or governing body may
be a member or any other Company in which such member
shall hold a part of the capital and in any such case such
member shall not be bound to account for any share of
profits he may receive in respect of such payment.
5. No addition alteration or amendment shall be made
to or in the regulations contained in the Articles of Associa-
tion for the time being in force unless the same shall have
been previously submitted to and approved by the Attorney-
General for the time being of the State of Victoria.
6. The fourth and fifth paragraphs of this Memoran-
dum contain conditions on which a licence may be granted
by the Attorney-General of the State of Victoria to the Asso-
ciation in pursuance of Section 18 sub-section 1 of the Com-
panies Act 1938. For the purpose of preventing any evasion
of the provisions of the said paragraph the Attorney-General
may from time to time on the application of any member of
the Association and on giving notice to the Association so to
do and after affording the Association an opportunity of being
heard in opposition thereto within such time as may be specified
in such notice impose further conditions which shall be duly
observed by the Association.
7. The liability of the members associate members and
auxiliary members is limited.
8. Every member associate member and auxiliary mem-
ber of the Association undertakes to contribute to the assets
of the Association in event of the same being wound up
during the time he is a member associate member or auxiliary
member or within one year afterwards for payment of the
debts and liabilities of the Association contracted before the
time at which he ceases to be a member associate member or
auxiliary member and of the costs charges and expenses of


winding up the same and for the adjustment of the rights of
the contributories amongst themselves such amount as may
be required not exceeding one pound from each such member
associate member or auxiliary member.
9. If upon the winding up or dissolution of the Asso-
ciation there remains after satisfaction of all its debts and
liabilities any property whatsoever the same shall not be paid
to or distributed amongst the members of the Association but
shall be given or transferred to some other institution or
institutions having objects similar to the objects of the Asso-
ciation and which shall prohibit the distribution of its or
their income and property amongst its or their members to an
extent at least as great as is imposed on the Association under
or by virtue of clause four hereof such institution or institu-
tions to be determined by the members of the Association at
or before the time of dissolution or in default thereof by such
Judge of the Supreme Court of Victoria or High Court of
Australia as may have or acquire jurisdiction in the matter
and if and so far as effect cannot be given to the aforesaid
provisions then to some charitable object.
10. True accounts shall be kept of the sums of money
received and expended by the Association and the matter in
respect of which each such receipt and expenditure takes place
and of the property credits and liabilities of the Association:
and subject to any reasonable restrictions as to the time and
manner of inspecting the same that may be imposed in accord-
ance with the regulations of the Association for the time being
shall be open to the inspection of the members. Once at least
in every year the accounts of the Association shall be examined
and the correctness of the balance sheet ascertained by one or
more properly qualified Auditors.




THE COMPANIES ACT, 1938.
AN ASSOCIATION NOT FOR PROFIT,
Pursuant Section 18,
Articles of Association
AUSTRALIAN LEGION OF
EX-SERVICEMEN AND
WOMEN
DEFINITIONS.
1. In construing these Articles, unless the context or sub-
ject matter otherwise indicates or requires:
“Association” means the “Australian Legion of Ex-Service
Men and Women.”
“Federal Council” means the members for the time being of
the body known or to be known as the Federal Council of the
Australian Legion of Ex-Servicemen and Women and it is
understood that the conduct of its affairs shall be regulated as
provided in Articles 55 to 79 inclusive.
“State Council” means the members for the time being of
the Council established or appointed hereunder for the manage-
ment of the affairs of the Association.
“Sub-Branch” means any sub-branch formed in accordance
with the provisions hereof.


“State Office” means the office of the State Council.
“General Meeting” means a General Meeting of the Mem-
bers of the Association properly convened or held in accordance
with these Articles.
“Financial Year” means the year commencing on the First
day of July in any year and ending on the thirtieth day of
June next thereafter ensuing.
“Financial Member” means a member of the Association
who has paid his subscription for the calendar year or the
residue thereof or a member whose subscription has been sus-
pended or remitted by the State Council as hereinafter provided
and includes all Honorary and Life Members of the Association.
“Month” means a calendar month.
“In Writing” and “Written” shall include printing, litho-
graphing and other modes of representing or reproducing words
in visible form or partly in one or other of such forms.
Words importing the singular number shall include the
plural number and words importing the plural number shall
include the singular number.
Words importing the masculine gender shall be deemed to
include the feminine gender.
Words importing persons shall where the context permits
include corporations.
If any doubt shall arise as to the proper meaning of any of
these articles, or by-laws made hereunder, the interpretation of
the Federal Council shall be final and conclusive provided that
such interpretation is reduced in writing and recorded in its
Minute Book.
MEMBERSHIP.
2. For the purposes of registering the Association it is
declared that its membership shall be unlimited.
3. Any person, male or female, who at any time has been
(i) A Serving Member of, or attached for duty and
discipline to, any Naval, Military or Air Force,
Merchant Navy Service, or any similar Force or
Service of the Commonwealth of Australia, the
British Empire or any part thereof, or of any ally
of the Commonwealth or the Empire, for a con-
tinuous term on full time duty of not less than
six months during a period of hostilities.


(ii) serving member of any Naval, Military or Air
Force of the Commonwealth of Australia for a
continuous term on full time duty of not less
than twelve months during a time of peace,
shall be eligible, subject to the provisions of these Articles, for
membership of the Association PROVIDED that the State
Council may in its discretion admit to membership any person
who has served for a period less than that abovementioned.
MEMBERS OF OTHER ASSOCIATIONS.
4. The State Council may admit all or any of the Members
of any other Associations, Leagues, or bodies in any State or
States of the Commonwealth of Australia or Territory under
the authority of the Commonwealth, with objects and eligibility
for membership similar to those of the Association, to Member-
ship of the Association.
HONORARY OR LIFE MEMBERS.
5. Any person who has rendered such services as would, in
the opinion of the State Council, entitle him to the distinction,
or any other person upon whom the Council desires to confer
such distinction because of his knowlege and experience or bis
interest in the objects of the Association, may be admitted by
resolution of the Association in General Meeting as an Honorary
Member of the Association for his lifetime, or for a fixed period.
In the case of a member being admitted as an Honorary Member
he shall retain his status and all his rights privileges and obliga-
tions as a member, save and except that he shall no longer be
required to pay any annual subscription or levy.
6. In the case of any person other than a Member being
admitted as an Honorary Member, he shall enjoy and assume
all rights privileges and obligations of a Member, including
attending general meetings of the Association, but shall not be
entitled to vote thereat, nor to hold any office, nor sit on any
Council or Committee of the Association. He shall not be
required to pay any annual subscription or levy.
CORRESPONDING MEMBERS.
7. Any persons outside the Commonwealth of Australia
who may at any time have been in correspondence with the
Association or who may express his willingness to keep the
Association informed on matters of interest to the Association
or the members thereof may at the discretion of the State Coun-
cil be admitted by it as a corresponding member of the Associa-
tion with the rights privileges and obligations of an Honorary
Member.


APPLICATION FOR MEMBERSHIP.
8. Every person applying for admission to membership of
the Association shall if required by the State Council make
application in such form and manner and shall comply with
such conditions as the State Council shall from time to time
prescribe, and the State Council may in its absolute discretion
refuse to admit any person to membership. Each applicant for
membership shall also sign a Declaration, which shall be
endorsed on or attached to his application, that he has read, and
if admitted as a member, will be bound by the provisions of the
Memorandum and Articles of Association and the By-laws of
the Association then in force or which may thereafter from time
to time apply.
9. Every application for membership shall be accompanied
by the payment of the first annual subscription as set out here-
under.
ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTIONS.
10. Every member shall pay an Annual Subscription of ten
shillings (10/-) which shall be due and payable on the first
day of January in each and every year and also in the discretion
of the State Council an initiation fee of ten shillings (10/-)
upon admission to membership. In the case of a member apply-
ing for membership on or after the first day of July in any year
he shall pay as his second annual subscription the sum of five
shillings (5/-).
11. A member shall not be deemed to be in default so as to
cease to be a financial member of the Association unless his
annual subscription shall remain unpaid for a period of three
months after it became due provided that the payment of the
whole or any part of a member's subscription may upon the
application of such member, be suspended or remitted by the
State Council in its absolute discretion during his absence from
the Commonwealth or under any other special circumstances,
and the member shall in the case of such suspension or remis-
sion be deemed to remain a financial member.
BADGES.
12. A Badge shall be issued to every member upon accept-
ance into the Association. The form of such badge shall be as
prescribed from time to time by the Federal Council. All
badges shall be numbered and the issue thereof shall be recorded
by the Branch or Sub-Branch issuing the same in a book kept
for the purpose. The State Council may from time to time pre-
scribe the fee to be paid by a member for the badge. Every
such badge, notwithstanding the payment of the fee aforesaid.


shall remain the property of the Association, and shall be re-
turned on demand being made therefor cither by the State Coun-
cil or the Sub-Branch to which the member belongs, or on bis
resignation or expulsion from membership.
13. The State Council may issue attachments or clips each
year to all members on receipt of the annual subscription for
such year to evidence financial membership of the Association.
STATE REGISTER OF MEMBERS.
14. There shall be a register (called the State Register)
kept by the Secretary of the State Council containing the names
and addresses of all members of the Association and the Sub-
Branch to which members are allotted, and such information
as the State Council shall from time to time prescribe.
SUB-BRANCH REGISTER OF MEMBERS.
15. There shall be a register (called the Sub-Branch
Register) kept by the Secretary or each Sub-Branch containing
the names and addresses of all members of the Sub-Branch and
such other particulars as the State Council shall from time to
time prescribe.
CHANGE OF ADDRESS.
16. A member of the Association changing his registered
address shall forthwith thereafter send a notification in writing
under his hand of the change to the State Secretary.
17. A member of a Sub-Branch changing his registered
address shall forthwith thereafter send a notification in writing
under his hand of the change to the Sub-Branch Secretary and
such Sub-Branch Secretary shall forthwith thereafter notify the
State Secretary of the change.
A member shall thereupon be removed from the Register of
that Sub-Branch and the State Secretary shall, if there exists a
sub-branch in the area in which the new address is situated,
inform the Secretary of such sub-branch of such change of
address, and direct that the member’s name be entered upon the
register of such sub-branch.
18. If a member of the Association shall change his place of
abode from a State or Territory in which a Branch is estab-
lished to a State or Territory within which another Branch is
established, such transfer shall be notified by the State Secretary
to the State Council of the member’s new Branch and each State
Council shall notify the Federal Council of such transfer of
membership.


RESIGNATION OF MEMBERSHIP.
19. A member may resign his membership by sending his
resignation in writing accompanied by his badge to the Secretary
of the Sub-Branch of which he is a member, or to the State
Secretary, and upon such resignation being accepted at its dis-
cretion by the State Council or upon the expiry of one month
after the receipt of such resignation, whichever shall first happens,
he shall cease to be a member. Any person who shall by any
means cease to be a member shall nevertheless remain liable for
and shall pay to the Association all moneys which at the time of
his ceasing to be a member were due from him to the Association
whether for arrears or for the year then current.
SUSPENSION OF FORFEITURE OF MEMBERSHIP.
20. Any member may be suspended from the privileges of
membership for such period, or indefinitely, as the State Council
think fit, or may be declared to have forfeited his member-
ship by the State Council, and thereafter his name shall be re-
moved from the State and Sub-Branch Registers if:
(a) In the opinion of the State Council his membership
was obtained by improper means or without the
required qualifications.
(b) He has not paid his subscription within three
months after it became due and if after that period
he shall neglect for one month after application
made to him in writing by the State Secretary to
pay such arrears.
(c) In the opinion of the State Council his conduct is
in disobedience of these Articles or is detrimental
to the reputation and interests of the Association
or is calculated to bring the Association into dis-
repute or contempt.
(d) He is convicted or a criminal offence involving dis-
honesty or fraud, or misconduct of a serious nature.
21. The State Council shall only deal with any charge, other
than of non-payment of subscriptions, against a member under
Rule 20 hereof at a meeting convened for the purpose by not
less than seven days’ notice, and such member shall be given not
less than seven days’ notice in writing posted to him at his
registered address specifying the time and place at which he may
be heard in his defence, and at any such meeting a member shall
be given a reasonable opportunity of stating bis defence eithei
orally or in writing.


22. No member against whom a charge has been made or
who has been called on to show cause why his membership
should not be suspended or forfeited shall be entitled to com-
mence or prosecute any action or legal proceeding for defama-
tion against any member of the Association who gave evidence
(orally or in writing) or exercised any power or duty as a
member or executive officer of a sub-branch committee. State
Council or Federal Council, it being a condition of membership
of the Association that all complaints notices letters evidence
and other matter arising under or incidental to any complaint
and the hearing and determination thereof, and all proceedings
and utterances at Council and Committee Meetings held in con-
nection therewith, shall be privileged and protected accordingly,
and should any action or legal proceeding be taken as aforesaid,
this article may be pleaded as an absolute bar thereto. Provided
that this article shall not protect any person against the legal
liability (if any) for making, with express malice, a statement
false to the knowledge of such person.
23. Whenever any person shall cease to be a member of the
Association the State Council may direct his name to be removed
from the State and Sub-Branch Registers.
REINSTATEMENT OF MEMBERSHIP.
24. Any forfeiture, exclusion, suspension or resignation
may be at any time revoked or modified by the State Souncil
subject to such terms and conditions (if any) as the Council
shall think fit.
25. No person shall be reinstated on any register until he
has paid all arrears of subscriptions which would have become
due had he remained a member provided however that the State
Council may in its discretion reduce the amount payable.
MEETINGS OF STATE MEMBERS.
26. An annual general meeting of members of the Associa-
tion shall be held in the month of July in each year on such day
and at such time and place as the State Council shall determine.
These meetings shall be called Ordinary General Meetings. All
other meetings shall be called Special General Meetings.
27. The State Council may whenever it thinks fit, and shall
upon a requisition made in writing by a number equal to a
quorum under Article 33 hereof, convene a Special General
Meeting of members of the Association, which meeting shall be
convened within fourteen days of and shall be held not later
than twenty-eight days after the deposit of such requisition.


28. The State Council shall, not less than ten days before
a general meeting of the members of the Association, give to
such members a notice in accordance with these articles setting
out the day place and hour of meeting and stating the nature of
the business to be transacted thereat.
29. Any requisition for a Special General Meeting shall
specify the object for which the meeting is required and shall be
signed by the members making the same and shall be deposited
at the State Office. It may consist of several documents in like
form each signed by one or more of the requisitionists. The
meeting shall be convened for the purposes specified in the re-
quisition, and, if convened otherwise than by the State Council,
for those purposes only.
30. In case the State Council fails for 14 days to convene
a Special General Meeting in accordance with these Articles the
requisitionists may themselves convene a meeting.
31. Any member wishing to bring before an Ordinary
General Meeting any motion or business not relating to the
Ordinary Annual Business shall give notice thereof in writing to
the State Secretary not later than the fifteenth day of June in
each year, and no motion or business shall come before the meet-
ing unless notice thereof has been so given.
32. Any resolution rejected at an Ordinary General Meet-
ing or Special General Meeting cannot be again submitted for
consideration by any meeting for a period of twelve months
without consent of the State Council.
33. Two hundred financial members or three per centum
of the financial members on the State Register whichever shall be
the less personally present at any Ordinary or Special Meeting
duly convened shall constitute a quorum with power to act.
34. If at any Ordinary or Special General Meeting a quorum
shall not be present within half an hour after the time appointed
for the meeting those present shall constitute a proper meeting
for the purpose of the reception of the annual report and accounts
and the declaration by the Chairman of the result of the elec-
tions or the appointment of officers but for no other purpose,
and the meeting shall on the conclusion of such ordinary busi-
ness, if any, or on the expiration of the said period of half an
hour if there is no ordinary business, be adjourned by the Chairs
man to such future date and at such time and place as he may
appoint, but it shall not be necessary to give notice of such
adjourned meeting. If the meeting was called in pursuance of
a requisition such meeting shall not be adjourned but shall lapse.


If at such adjourned meeting there shall not be a quorum pre-
sent within half an hour after the time appointed for the meet-
ing the meeting shall lapse.
35. If at any Ordinary or Special General Meeting the
whole of the business appointed to be done at such meeting be
not completed, the meeting may be adjourned by motion, but
no business shall be transacted at any adjourned meeting other
than the business left unfinished at the meeting from which the
adjournment took place.
36. The business of an Annual General Meeting shall be to
receive and consider the Auditor’s Report and Statement of
Accounts for the preceding year, reports of the Federal and State
Councils on the past year’s activities, the declaration of the
result of elections and of appointments for the ensuing year, the
appointment of honorary members and such other business as
the State Council or any member on due notice may bring before
it.
37. The State President, or in his absence one of the State
Vice-Presidents of the Association to be chosen by the members
present, or in their absence a member of the State Council to be
chosen as aforesaid, shall be entitled to take the Chair at every
General Meeting and, if at any meeting no person entitled to
take the Chair be present within fifteen minutes after the time
appointed for holding such meeting or if all such persons pre-
sent decline to take the Chair, then the members present shall
choose One of their number to be Chairman. The Chairman
shall in addition to his deliberative vote have a casting vote in
the case of equality of votes.
38. A motion or amendment proposed and seconded at any
General Meeting shall be put by the Chairman and decided by
a majority of the members present on a show of hands, and the
declaration of the Chairman as to the majority shall be final
unless a division be forthwith demanded by any member or a
poll not less than ten per centum of the financial members
present and entitled to vote at the meeting, but no poll shall be
taken as to the appointment of a Chairman or of Scrutineers or
the adjournment of a meeting. The demand for a poll shall
not prevent the continuance of the meeting for the transaction
of any business other than that on which the poll is demanded.
39. If a poll is demanded in manner aforesaid the same
shall be taken in such manner as the Chairman directs, and the
result of the poll shall be deemed to be the resolution of the
meeting at which the poll was demanded.


40. The meeting shall appoint two or more Scrutineers
who shall count the members in division or open and examine
the voting papers as the case may be and report to the members
the result of the voting, and their report shall be conclusive as
to such result.
VOTES OF MEMBERS.
41. On a show of hands or a division every financial mem-
ber present in person and entitled to vote shall have one vote
and upon a ballot every financial member present in person or
by proxy and entitled to vote shall have one vote.
42. Votes may be given either personally or by proxy. No
person shall act as proxy who is not a financial member of the
Association.
43. The instrument appointing a proxy for a General Meet-
ing shall be deposited at the State Office at least seven days before
the date fixed for the meeting at which the proxy is to be used
and the State Secretary shall, prior to the holding of the meet-
ing, note on each proxy form whether or not the member sign-
ing the instrument is entitled to vote, and shall produce all the
proxy forms so noted at the meeting. Every such instrument
of proxy shall be in writing under the hand of the appointee,
shall be attested by a witness, and as nearly as circumstances
permit be in the form prescribed by the By-laws.
ELECTION OF STATE COUNCIL.
44. The members of the State Council shall be elected by
a ballot which shall be opened and kept opened prior to the
date of the Annual General Meeting for a period of twenty-one
days at the least. Nominations for election to the State Council
and appointment as auditors shall be lodged at the State Office
prior to the Ist June preceding the Annual General Meeting.
The procedure as to nominations and the conduct and declar-
ation of the election shall be in accordance with the By-laws.
CONSTITUTION OF STATE COUNCIL.
45. The State Council shall consist of a President, two
Vice-Presidents, Honorary Treasurer, and eight Councillors if
the number of members of the Association on the preceding Ist
day of June is less than one thousand (1000). If the number
of members exceeds one thousand then there shall be one addi-
tional Councillor for each additional thousand members with a


total of sixteen Councillors. The Secretary, if a paid officer on
full-time duty, shall not be elected but shall be appointed to
office by the State Council and once appointed shall remain in
office continuously until his term of office is determined in
accordance with the By-laws. The Secretary must be a member
of the Association.
46. The management and control of the Association and
of its funds and property shall be vested in the State Council,
which shall exercise in relation thereto all the powers rights and
objects of the Association, which are not by the Companies Act
1938 or these Articles required to be exercised by the Associa-
tion in General Meeting, subject nevertheless to the provisions
of the Memorandum of Association, these Articles and any
Statute and provided further that the power contained in Clause
3 (r) of the Memorandum of Association, so far as it relates to
amalgamation with other Associations of Servicemen or Ex-
Servicemen, shall be exerciseable only with the consent of the
Federal Council.
47. Paid officers or employees on full time duty of the Asso-
ciation shall not be eligible for election to the State Council
provided that any such members holding office at the date of
adoption of these Articles may continue to hold that office until
an election is held in accordance with these Articles. A paid
officer may be present at meetings of the State Council by per-
mission of the Chairman, and, if the Secretary is a paid officer,
he shall so be present.
MEETINGS OF STATE COUNCIL
48. The State Council:
(a) Will meet at such times and places as it shall deter-
mine and may regulate its own proceedings.
(b) May appoint Committees from its own members
with such powers as it may prescribe.
(c) May, consistently with these Articles, from time to
time make, vary or repeal by-laws for the regula-
tion and good government of the Association, its
members and affairs.
49. The office of a State Councillor may be declared vacant
by the State Council if:
(a) He sends to the Council his written resignation of
office.
(b) He be absent from three consecutive meetings of
the Council without its consent.


(c) He voluntarily or compulsorily sequestrates his
estate or enters into any deed of composition or
arrangement with bis creditors.
(d) He be declared lunatic or of unsound mind.
(e) His annual subscription be in arrears for a period
of six months from the day upon which it became
(f) He ceases to be a member of the Association.
50. Any casual vacancy occurring in the State Council shall
be filled by the remaining members of the Council provided that
not less than five members continue in office. If fewer than five
members remain in office, they shall forthwith convene a Special
General Meeting of members to fill the vacancies.
51. A meeting of the State Council may be convened at any
time by the President or by two Vice-Presidents or by any
three Councillors.
52. Two days' notice at the least of any meeting shall be
given, either personally, in writing, by telegram, or by tele-
phone. A quorum shall be seven members personally present.
In cases which, in the opinion of the President, are of
urgency or a special nature, the meeting can be convened on such
shorter reasonable notice as he shall consider the circumstances
require.
53. A State Councillor may appoint any other State Coun-
cillor as his proxy provided that the instrument appointing the
proxy shall be deposited at the State Office prior to the com-
mencement of the meeting for which it is given, and provided
that no Councillor shall hold more than one proxy at any one
time.
CONSTITUTION OF THE FEDERAL COUNCIL.
54. The State Council shall appoint from its members
delegates to the Federal Council: three delegates if 5,000 or
more financial members; two delegates if less than 5,000 but
not less than 2,000 financial members; and one delegate if less
than 2,000 financial members
POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE FEDERAL COUNCIL.
55. Each State Branch shall be reimbursed out of the funds
of the Federal Council for the cost of transport of their delegates
between their State Office and the venue of the meeting together
with their hotel accommodation as determined by the Federal
Secretary and such a daily allowance for each delegate by
way of expenses as the by-laws shall provide.


56. Each State Council shall within thirty days after its
establishment or the adoption of these Articles whichever shall
be the later, and thereafter annually in the month of November,
elect its members to the Federal Council Upon the completion
of each such election the Councillors then in office shall retire
and the newly-elected representatives shall be Councillors in
their stead.
57. Salaried or paid officers on full time duty of a State
Council, other than the Secretary, shall not be eligible for
membership of the Federal Council.
58. Any casual vacancy occurring in the Federal Council
shall be filled by the State Council which appointed the Coun-
cillor causing the vacancy
59. The continuing members of the Federal Council may
act notwithstanding any vacancies therein provided that not less
than five members continue in office representing a majority of
State Branches.
60. If at any meeting of a State Council at which the elec-
tion of Councillors ought to take place the places of the vacating
Councillors are not filled, the vacating Councillors or such of
them whose places are not filled shall continue in office in every
respect as though they had been duly elected at such meeting.
61 A State Council may appoint a member of the Associa-
tion as a substitute for such time as it thinks fit in the place and
stead of a Councillor who is unable for any reason to attend
any meeting of the Federal Council, and such appointment
shall have effect and such appointee whilst he bolds office as a
Substitute Councillor shall he entitled to notice of meetings of
the Council and to attend and vote thereat accordingly and he
shall vacate office if and when such State Council so decides and
any appointment and determination of office under this article
shall be effected by notice in writing under the hand of the
Secretary for the time being of such State Council.
62. A special meeting of a State Council duly convened for
the purpose may by resolution passed by two-thirds of the mem-
bers of such State Council present and voting thereat in person
or by proxy remove any Federal Councillor elected by such State
Council before the expiration of his term of office and may by
simple resolution appoint another duly qualified member as a
Councillor in his place and such Councillor shall hold office
during such time only as his predecessor would have held the
same had he not been removed.


63. If a member of the Federal Council cease to be a mem-
ber of this Association or his State Council his office in the
Council shall thereupon become vacant.
64 The office of a Federal Councillor may be declared
vacant by the Federal Council for the same reasons and in the
same circumstances as the office of a State Councillor may be
declared vacant by State Council under these Articles.
65. The Federal Council shall control and manage all funds
and property coming to its hands and in addition to the powers
and authorities by these presents expressly conferred on it and
subject as hereinafter provided may exercise all such powers and
do all such acts and things as arc set out in the Memorandum of
Association, and subject hereto:
(a) It shall meet at such times and places as it shall
determine and may regulate its own proceedings.
(b) It may appoint Committees from its own members
with such powers as it may prescribe.
(c) It may appoint a General Secretary and Treasurer
or a Secretary-Treasurer, and such other officers,
clerks and servants as it may think necessary and
shall determine the respective duties, salaries and
wages of such General Secretary, officers, clerks and
servants and may at any time suspend or dismiss
any of them In the event of the General Secretary
or Secretary-Treasurer being a member or officer of
a State Council, that State Office shall be the office
of the Federal Council for the time being for the
transaction of business, receipt and despatch of
correspondence and custody of records.
(d) It may bring before State Councils any matters
which it considers material to the Association or
its members and may make any recommendation in
relation thereto.
(e) It may from time to time as it thinks fit establish
State Branches with such powers and duties as it
may define with power to appoint and remove
temporary officers for such branch and to confer
any powers on such officers. Upon the member-
ship of such branch exceeding fifty, a general
meeting of the members of such branch shall be
called in accordance with these Articles for the
election of a State Council. The election of officers
shall thereupon be held in accordance with these
Articles and the powers of the Federal Council and


its officers shall lapse upon completion of the elec-
tion There shall not be more than one State
Branch in each State of the Commonwealth of
Australia or Territory under the authority of the
Commonwealth, and the Australian Capital Terri-
tory shall for the purpose of this clause be regarded
as part of the State of New South Wales.
(f) It shall cause minutes to be regularly kept and
entered into books provided for that purpose re-
cording the proceedings at these meetings and the
Federal Council and its Secretary shall, if required
at any time by a State Council or a State Secretary,
cause the minutes of any meeting to be copied and
a copy forthwith supplied to the State Council.
(g) It may from time to time by a vote of not less than
three-fourths of the total number of votes exercise-
able by all Councillors levy such a per capita con-
tribution from all State Branches as it may in its
discretion require.
(h) The power contained in Clause 3 (r) of the Mem-
orandum of Association, so far as it relates to
amalgamation with other Associations or Service-
men or Ex-Servicemen, shall be exerciseable only
with the consent of the State Council of each State
Branch affected thereby.
(i) It shall not have, nor be deemed to have, any power
or authority to commit any member of the Asso-
ciation, or any funds or property other than that
vested in it, to any liability or charge whatsoever.
66. The Federal Council may consistently with these rules
from time to time make, vary or repeal by-laws in relation to:
(a) The election of Federal Councillors.
(b) The use and custody of its Seal.
67. The Federal Council shall meet in the month of Febru-
ary in each year at such time and place as it may determine.
68. Five members of the Council present in person or by
substitute representing not less than three State Branches at any
meeting duly convened shall constitute a quorum. Questions
at any meeting shall be decided by a majority of votes and in
the case of an equality of votes the Chairman shall have
a casting vote.
69. At each ordinary meeting the Council shall elect a
President and two Vice-Presidents and a General Secretary and


such other officers as the Council shall from time to time deter-
mine. Each such officer shall hold office until his successor be
appointed.
70. A meeting of the Council may be called at any time by
the President, two Vice-Presidents, or any five members repre-
senting not less than three State Branches.
71. One calendar month's notice shall be given to all Coun-
cillors and to each State Branch of meetings of the Federal
Council.
72. A resolution in writing, a copy of which has been for-
warded to every Councillor and signed by members representing
a majority of State Branches and at least three-fourths of the
total number of votes cxerciseable by all Councillors shall be as
valid and effectual as if it had been passed at a meeting of the
Council duly called and constituted.
73. Immediately upon default by a State Council in pay-
ment of the per capita contribution levied under these Articles,
then the Councillors elected by such State Council shall cease to
bold office and such State Council shall not again be entitled to
elect Federal Councillors until the amounts demanded shall have
been paid. Default shall be deemed to have occurred if payment
is not made within three months from the posting of a notice
authorised by the Council to the Secretary of the State Council
under the hand of he Federal Secretary setting forth the amounts
required by the Council. Provided that the Council may at
any time after the giving of such notice suspend the operation
of these Articles for such further period or periods as it may in
its discretion think fit.
74. The Federal Council shall have a Common Seal which
may be affixed by the President and one Councillor or by any
two Councillors and countersigned by the Federal Secretary.
75. All members of the Association whose place of abode
is in a State or Territory where any branch is established shall
be deemed to be members of such Branch unless, having regard
to the place of abode of any such member, the Federal Council
is of the opinion that he could be more conveniently included
in the membership of some other Branch, in which case he shall
be included in the membership of such other Branch.
76. Every person who after the date of the adoption of
these Articles shall become a member of the Association shall
become a member of the Branch established in the State or Terri-
tory in which such person shall be residing at the time of his
becoming a member of the Association, unless, having regard to
the place of such residence, the Federal Council shall be of


opinion that such member could be more conveniently included
in the membership of some other Branch, in which case he shall
be included in the membership of such other Branch.
77. In addition to his rights privileges and obligations as
a member of the Association every member shall have the rights
and privileges and be subject to the obligations of a member of
the Branch in the membership of which he is for the time being
included.
78. The Federal Council may include any part of any State
or Territory in the Branch established in some other State or
Territory and may also include in or withdraw from any branch
any place not situated in any such State or Territory.
79. Members residing in any State or Territory in which for
the time being no Branch is established shall be enrolled either
by such a State Council or by the Federal Council and subject to
such conditions as the Federal Council may from time to time
by By-law prescribe.
ESTABLISHMENT OF SUB-BRANCHES.
80. The State Council may from time to time or at any
time establish in any part portion or district of the State or
Territory under the jurisdiction of such Council a Sub-Branch
for such part portion or district of the State or Territory, or
for particular classes or bodies of persons, and the Committee of
any such Sub-Branch shall exercise the powers authorities and
discretions conferred on it and be subject to the conditions
imposed on it by these Articles and the By-laws made from
time to time by the State Council of the State or Territory
within which such Sub-Branch is established.
The State Council may from time to time, and upon such
terms and conditions as it shall think fit, make contributions on
a per capita basis to all Sub-Branches.
81. All members of the Association whose usual place of
abode is in the part portion or district of any State or Territorv
in which a Sub-Branch is established shall be deemed to be
members of such Sub-Branch unless having regard to the place
of abode of any such member the State Council of such State or
Territory is of opinion that he could be more conveniently
included in the membership of some other Sub-Branch, in which
case he shall be included in the membership of such other Sub-
Branch.
82. Every person who after the date of the adoption of
these Articles shall become a member of the Association shall
become a member of the Sub-Branch in the part portion or
district in which such person shall be residing at the time of his
becoming a member of the Association unless having regard to


the place of such residence, the State Council shall be of opinion
that such member could be more conveniently included in the
membership of some other Sub-Branch, in which case he shall
be included in the membership of such other Sub-Branch.
83. Members residing in any part portion or district of a
State or Territory in which for the time being no Sub-Branch is
established shall be enrolled either by such a Sub-Branch or by
the State Council and subject to such conditions as the Council
may from time to time by By-law prescribe.
84. On the establishment of any new Sub-Branch after the
adoption of these Articles the State Council by which such
Sub-Branch is established shall prescribe the limits of the Terri-
tory of such Sub-Branch and on the establishment thereof all
members of the Association whose usual place of abode is within
the territory or such Sub-Branch shall thereupon become mem-
bers of such Sub-Branch in lieu of being members of any Sub-
Branch in which they were formerly members.
85. In addition to his rights privileges and obligations as
a member of the Association every member shall have the rights
and privileges and be subject to the obligations of a member of
the Branch and Sub-Branch in the membership of which he is
for the time being included and bound by the regulations and
By-laws affecting and regulating the same. No Committee. Sub-
committee or other person or body acting within or on behalf
of a Sub-Branch shall have any power or authority to commit
the funds of the State Branch to any liability whatsoever nor
to make any member of the Sub-Branch subject to any greater
liability than his liability as a member of the Association.
86. The State Council may from time to time include in or
withdraw from the Sub-Branch established in any part portion
or district of a State any part portion or district not
situated within the limits of the Territory of such Sub-Branch.
NOTICES.
87. All notices or demands in these Articles or in any By-
laws directed to be given may be served personally or by sending
the same through the post in a prepaid letter to a member at
his registered address, but the non-receipt of such notice shall
not invalidate the proceedings of a meeting held in pursuance
of such notice. If the membership exceeds 2,000, such notices
may be given by an advertisement appearing on each of two
successive days in two newspapers published daily and circula-
ting throughout the State to which the notice applies together
with a written notice of such meeting to the Secretary of each


sub-branch. Any notice served by post shall be deemed to have
been served at the time the notice was posted and in proving
such notice it shall be sufficient to prove that the letter contain-
ing the notice was properly addressed and posted.
88. Where a specified number of days' notice is required to
be given the day of service shall be counted in such number of
days.
DISTRICT BRANCHES.
89. A District Branch or Branches within a State may be
formed by the State Council. The boundaries of each such
District Branch shall be fixed by the State Council which shall
make by-laws for the regulation and management thereof.
90. There shall be a Council for each such District Branch
called a District Council which shall comprise two delegates
from each Sub-Branch situated within, or in the discretion of
the State Council attached to, such District Branch.
91. Each District Branch shall meet once at least in every
six months at such time and place, subject nevertheless to the
by-laws, as it shall from time to time determine.
92. The first meeting of any District Branch shall be called
by the State Council and the District Branch shall at that meet-
ing elect a President and Secretary who shall bold office until
the next Ordinary Meeting.
93. A special Meeting of the District Branch may be called
by the State Council or by the Secretaries of any two Sub-
Branches at such time and place as they shall determine.
94. The function, powers, and duties of each District
Council shall be advisory only, and it shall confer on all
matters of any kind concerning its constituent Sub-Branches or
any matters affecting the welfare of the Association.
95. A copy of all resolutions passed at every meeting of
each District Branch shall, within seven days, be transmitted to
the State Secretary and shall be placed before the State Council
at its next ensuing meeting.
SUB-BRANCH CONFERENCE.
96. There shall be a conference, called a Sub-Branch Con-
ference, which shall be convened by the State Council once at
least in each six months of each year, to be held at such time
and place as the State Council shall determine, and to which
shall be admitted two delegates from each Sub-Branch and six


delegates from the State Council. The Conference shall regu-
late its own business and shall be presided over by the President
of the Association or in his absence by a Vice-President to be
elected by the Conference. The resolutions of the Conference
shall be transmitted in writing within seven days to the State
Council.
VALIDITY OF ACTS.
97. All acts done by any meeting of a State Council,
Federal Council, District Council, Sub-Branch Committee or a
Committee of any of them shall, notwithstanding that it be
afterwards discovered that there was some irregularity in the
appointment or qualification of any member thereof, be as
valid as if such person had been duly appointed and was quali-
fied.
ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT.
98. Both the State and Federal Council shall cause true
accounts to be kept of the monies received and expended and the
accounts of the Association shall, until otherwise determined,
be closed annually at the thirtieth day of June.
99. The State Council shall cause proper accounts to be
kept with regard to:
(a) All sums of money received and expended by the
Association and the matter in respect of which the
receipt and expenditure takes place.
(b) All sales and purchases of goods by the Associa-
tion: and
(c) The assets and liabilities of the Association.
100. The State Council shall from time to time in accord-
dance with Sub-Section 3 of Section 123 of the Companies Act
1938 cause to be prepared and to be laid before the Association
in General Meeting an Income and Expenditure Account.
101. Auditors shall be appointed and the State Council
shall also comply with the provisions of Section 131 of the
Companies Act 1938.
INDEMNITY.
102. No Councillor or other officer of the Association shall
be liable for the acts, receipts, neglects or defaults of any other
Councillor or officer or for joining in any receipt or other act
for conformity or for any loss or expense happening to the
Association through the insufficiency or deficiency of title to any
property acquired by order of the Council for or on behalf of
the Association or for the insufficiency or deficiency of any
security in or upon which any of the moneys of the Association


shall be invested or for any loss or damage arising from the
bankruptcy insolvency or tortious act of any person with whom
any moneys securities or effects shall be deposited or for any loss
occasioned by any error of judgment or oversight on his part or
for any loss damage or misfortune whatever which shall happen
in the execution of the duties of his office in relation thereto
unless the same happen through his own negligence default
breach of duty or breach of trust.
MINUTES.
103. Each State Council, District Branch and Sub-Branch
Committee shall cause minutes to be regularly kept and entered
into books to be kept for that purpose, recording the proceed-
ings at their rsepective meetings.
104. The minutes of any such meeting which have been
confirmed at that or a subsequent meeting and signed by the
Chairman of that or the subsequent meeting shall be conclusive
evidence as a record of the business so recorded.
105. The minutes so kept shall be open to inspection by
any member of the Association but this shall not apply in the
case of the Federal Council provided, however, that any State
Council may require the minutes of any meeting of the Federal
Council to be copied and a copy forthwith supplied to it.
POLITICAL PARTIES.
106. Neither this Association nor a Council or Committee
thereof shall in any way pledge its support or adhere to or
actively assist any political party which may at any time exisr
anywhere in the Commonwealth of Australia.
COMMON SEAL.
107. The State Council shall have a Common Seal which
shall be affixed by the President and a State Councillor or by
any two State Councillors and countersigned by the State
Secretary.
