

MEMOIR
OF THE LATE
i
I
ev. jJ oseph J3./VL !
translated from the french.
Dilectus Deo et hominibus . . cujus memoria in henedictione est. —
Eccl. xlv. 1.
SYDNEY;
EDWARD F. FLANAGAN, 594 GEORGE STREET.
1876.
♦
. / , ji


Tljp J.XranifF


MEMOIR
OF THE LATE
REVEREND JOSEPH MONNIER, S.M.
TRANSLATED FROM THE FRENCH.
tj ■ >' J irtu
Dilectus Deo et hominibus .... cujus manoria in henedictione est. —


Sydney:
F. Cunninghams and Co., Printers.
186 Pitt Street.


NOTE BY THE TRANS
Haying, at the request of some warm admirers of the late Eev.
Father Monnier, undertaken to translate into English his life,
printed in France immediately after his death, it may be proper
for me to explain the cause of the delay in fulfilling my promise.
I had, as a matter of course, to ask the permission of the Marist
Fathers, which I ought to have known could not be formally
granted except by their Superior-General in France. This neces-
sitated delay. The permission was, however, granted in the
kindest terms, and that kindness is greatly enhanced by the
following note from his Grace the Archbishop of Nazianzus to
the Very Eev. Father Joly, which will form the best possible
Preface to the Memoir.
I have only to add that whatever profits may be derived from
the sale of this publication will be applied to the payment of
the debt incurred in establishing the Marist Brothers’ Schools.
W. A. D.
St. John’s College,
Sydney , February 24th, 1876.
Dear Yery Eev. F. Joly,—
You ask me if I approve of your
publishing a translation into English of the beautiful Notice
of the late Father Monnier’s Life, which you kindly gave me to
read in the French.
I approve of it with all my heart. Father Monnier’s Life
was an example to us all, priests and people, of self-sacrifice,
hard work, and oneness of aim in our Master’s service. I never
met a man who bore about him so unmistakably the note of a
true servant of Christ. His love of souls was written on his '


very countenance, and it was always a pleasant thing to talk to
him, for one felt instinctively that one was talking to a man of
God.
The more such lives as his become known the better ; especially
in this country, where there is so much to drag all down to
earth. Besides it will be a pleasant thing for us all to have
in our possession the touching memorial which you have had
the happy thought of publishing.
I am, Dear Eev. Father July,
Yours very faithfully in Christ,
f ROGER BEDE VAUGHAN,
Archbishop of Nazianzus.


MEMOIR
OF THE
REV. FATHER JOSEPH MONNIER.
On the 29th September last, * we received a telegraphic
despatch from Father Joly, sent from Sydney on the 25th. In
its terrible laconism it announced to us very painful news —the
death of the Eev. Father Monnier. To the communication which
was made of it to our various houses, we received from all sides
the answer that the Society of Mary had lost a true Marist, a
priest according to God’s own heart, a missionary devoured by
zeal for the salvation of souls. Is it not then our duty to gather
up, for our common edification, the principal traits of the life of
that worthy child of Mary ?
Joseph Felicien Monnier was born on the 15th day of March,
1825, at Amathay-Yesigneux, in the Canton of Ornans, in the
Diocese of Besangon. He was the sixth of a family of eight
children, and he never ceased to thank God for having given
him truly Christian parents. In the chain of the Jura moun-
tains, we still meet, God be thanked, some good patriarchal
families, where the children are brought up in the fear of God,
and the habit of piety. Joseph Monnier belonged to one of
these blessed families. It may be said that his infancy was
passed in obedience, in prayer, and in study. While still a
child his delight was already to read the Lives of the Saints, and
other good books, which he always carried with him to the fields,
when his parents employed him in w r orks adapted to his age.
The year which preceded his first communion gave still stronger
* 1874 — Translator.


evidence of his attraction for piety. Instead of partaking in the
amusements of his young comrades, his habit was to go to the
Church after dinner, and pass there the time of recreation,
awaiting the hour of the class.
lie was only ten years of age when M. Clerc, the Cure * of the
parish, believed that he ought to admit him to his first commu-
nion on the 16th March, 1835. He was confirmed by Mon-
signeur Mathieu, Archbishop of Besangon, the 31st May of the
same year. The testimonies, given by contemporaries, to the
uncommon virtues of that child, perfectly justify the worthy
priest who admitted him so young to the holy table. A school
companion of Joseph Monnier lately said of him: “I
venerate him as a saint, for I know how good he was when he
was young, When any dispute arose among the children of the
school, he always took the blame to himself. It is I ivho am cul-
pable,” said he, “itis I who ought to he punished ln this manner
he appeased all the quarrels. His two sisters, younger than he,
cannot recollect his having ever caused one of those little alterca-
tions so common in families. “He never vexed us” say they
“ except to press us to learn our catechism well.” Was not this
already a sign of the admirable zeal that this child should have
at a later period to preach the word of God ? In a word, his
brother and his sister affirm that they never knew him to disobey,
or lie, or pronounce improper words, too common in the best of
our country parishes. At Amathay-Yesigneux, they have still a
lively recollection of his piety and precocious intelligence. Some
years since, at the feast of St. Nicholas the venerated pastor still
cited him as the model of young school children. It is also
remembered that at the missions which were given by M. Girod
at Longeville and at Chantrans, two parishes in the neighbour-
hood of Amathay-Yesigneux, where Joseph Monnier had many
* “ Cure.” I have preferred not to translate this term. It has doubtless the same
etymology as our word curate, but its meaning is very dilferent. It might be rendered by
the word “ incumbent,” or “ rector,” or perhaps by the words “ parish priest,” so familiar
in Ireland, But the French cure is, historically, something more than all this. In the
worst of times, and sometimes under the worst of examples, through all the revolutions
and vicissitudes of his country’s history, the cure has never ceased to command the
respect of all parties, and to prove himself to he the father of his flock, and the model of
a Christian priest.— Translator.


relatives, he answered so well the questions that the zealous
missionary addressed to him in the church, that M. Girod said
loudly before all the assembly: “My child, God intends
to make a missionary of you.” Such was also the thought of
of the venerable M, Clerc. After he had made his first Com-
munion, Joseph was, with this view, initiated in the elements of
Latin Grammar, in which he made rapid progress. But before
going further we would not omit a little detail which brings out
the delicacy and virtue which already distinguished that child.
The Monnier family were numerous, and all were required to
labour for the common good. Joseph felt the privations that his
good parents imposed upon themselves to provide for the expense
of his studies; thus he made it his care to repay them by h,
affectionate submission. He wished always to be the last: he
found the food too good for him : by penance he often left that
which was most agreeable to his taste, requesting that it might
be given to the poor.
In the month of November, 1838, Joseph Monnier entered as
a scholar of the fifth class at the little Seminary of Consolation.
That house, an old convent of the Minims, is situated near the
source of the Doubs. Those who knew him in that period of his
studies praise his spirit of piety, his regularity, and his fidelity
in accomplishing well his duties. His temper was sweet, but
his character firm. He loved to divert himself with some choice
friends ; little inclined to play, he preferred the promenade under
the cloisters or the walks of the court. At the end of the first
year he shared the first prize for excellence, and obtained many
marks of honour. The following years there was the same
edification, the same ardour for study, and very nearly the same
success. Gifted with a happy memory, and a penetrating mind,
he made sport of difficulties. At the commencement of his
humanities his ardour seemed to relax, in presence of some
successes obtained by happy competitors, but he quickly recovered
his courage, and disputed, resolutely, the first places till the end.
In 1843, at the commencement of November, Joseph Monnier
arrived at the great Seminary of Philosophy established in


Yesoul. That house was then under the direction of M. Quevi,
of holy memory. From the commencement our young semi-
narist wasyemarked for his application, his regular conduct, and
his piety, among the seventy scholars who were entered with him
that year. M. Yernerey, his Professor of Mathematics, at present
Canon of the Metropolitan Church of Besangon, said, under the
form of friendly reproach to Monseigneur Elloy and to the Rev.
Father Poupinel, on occasion of their visit to the Seminary of
Yesoul : —“ You, Marist Fathers, do not know how to keep
your good subjects in France. You have in Father Monnier a
man capable of doing you great honour in the sciences, and you
send him to evangelize some savages ! This does not encourage
us to give you good subjects. “ Yes,” added he. “ During
thirty years that I have been at the Seminary of Philsophy, I
have found only two subjects of extraordinary merit—Father
Monnier was one of them. The other has become a Jesuit. Let
us hope that they will not, at least, send him on their Indian
missions!”
Joseph Monnier was good and affable with his co-disciples.
In recreation he had some traits of an amiable gaiety. He could
take his part in lively pleasantry, but he avoided with care the
wounding of others. When inclined he could relate, with spirit,
a story, an adventure, a voyage, or a party of pleasure. That
young man, amiable to others, was severe to himself, and some-
what scrupulous. Sometimes he communicated his interior trials
to a few intimate friends. Often they heard him cry during
recreation, “My Cod! how I should wish to know if lam in
grace with you !” or else, “ How much I fear having made bad
confessions and communions ! If I had the treasures of Croesus
1 would give them willingly to any one who would deliver me
from this inquietude !” It was easy for his friends to show him
that his fears were exaggerated, and that it would be better for
him to think oftener on the mercy of Cod. “ You are right,” he
would answer, “lam always the same. I think too much of
the justice of Cod, and too little of his bounty.” His inquietudes
of conscience far from injuring his studies seemed to favour


them ; study calmed his soul. u When I study philosophy or
mathematics,” said he, “I think no more of my troubles of
mind ; I get rid of my dark ideas.”
His bright intelligence, his serious mind, his continued labour
maintained for him the first rank among his fellow students, but,
as he was modest, and without pretention, these rejoiced at his
success; it was indeed with good heart that, at the end of every
year they applauded his triumphs. For him, he could hardly
believe that the first prizes were due to him; and it was with
embarrassment and confusion, when his name was announced,
that he advanced to receive the crowns that he had so well
merited.
Joseph Monnier entered the great Seminary of Besangon in
1845. That holy house was then directed by M. Cuenot. It
can be said of that renowned superior, that he was regularum
apprime tenax .* When we pronounce his name, we seem to hear
these words yet resounding: “ Yes! this is the rule, this is the
usage of the Seminary of Besangon or perhaps: “ This is not the
rule, this is not the usage." That man of God opposed, with
energy all innovations.
The examination to which students in philosophy are sub-
jected is said to be very severe ; but for Joseph Monnier the task
must have been an easy one. Still, as true modesty conceals its
talents and merits, he feared it greatly. Thus his joy, when he
found that he was admitted without difficulty was expressed with
simplicity. “If they had refused me,” said he, “ I know not what
I should have become. I have no management, I am without
initiation, I have neither taste, nor aptitude for the affairs of the
world. lam only a dull-headed mountaineer.”
He had soon other inquietudes. The general retreat followed
immediately after the admission examination. When he saw
himself in presence of the great truths of the faith, when he
heard the duties of the priesthood exposed with force, his timid
conscience was troubled. “ The truths preached to us,” said he,
* Extremely tenacious of the rules.


“ terrify me. If I listened only to my fears I should escape :
but my confessor wishes me to remain.” The new seminarist
found calm to his soul when the courses were commenced. He
gave himself w r holly to the study of theology; the science of
God was henceforth his favourite study. At the seminary of
Consolation he had displayed an uncommon facility for versifica-
tion ; at the seminary of Yesoul his remarkable aptitude for the
sciences was admired. Well! those who afterwards passed their
life with Father Monnier would have never suspected that he
possessed these talents. Poetry and mathematics had no attraction
for him. But theology, which raised him towards God, which
taught him the means of saving souls, made the charm and the
occupation of his whole life. A simple seminarist, he could not
comprehend how men, made for God and heaven, could occupy
themselves with sciences and terrestrial interests. “ Human
science,” said he, “is not worth a page of theology well medi-
tated, and well understood.” And all his life Father Monnier
thought and spoke in this manner.
At the great seminary of Besangon, new comers are not vested
with the soutane immediately on their admission, as is the practice
elsewhere ; they have to wait till Passion Sunday. In the interval
they examine their vocation with the assistance of their director.
Joseph Monnier, on that occasion, had again troubles and per-
plexities of conscience. All his aspirations carried him towards
the priesthood, but he dreaded to become a bad priest. “It is
necessary to be so pure,” said he, “to do the work of God, and
the duties of the priest are so grave, that I fear I shall not
become a good priest. A bad priest is a demon who has assumed
the soutane ; exteriorly you would believe him to be a man of
God ; in reality he does the work of the Devil.” If he feared his
weakness because he was humble, Joseph Monnier knew already
the value and strength of obedience ; on a precise decision of his
director that he was called to the priesthood by God, he silenced
his disquietude and determined to 'be a holy priest at whatever
cost.
On the eve of Passion Sunday, all those who are next day


to be clothed in the sacred habit meet in the great sacristy;
every seminarist carries on his arm his soutane, which the
superior of the Seminary blesses solemnly. On such occasions
the venerable M. Cuenot was accustomed to deliver an exhorta-
tion which he terminated always by these touching words “ Ah !
gentlemen, I have seen many here who, like you, were well dis-
posed. They promised to themselves, and they promised to their
directors, to bear always with respect the holy liveries of the
Lord. Ah! wretched men I they have forgotten their promises,
they have trailed the sacred habit in the mire; they have
become wolves in the sheepfold. May Grod preserve you from
such a misfortune !” After that ceremony, which made a lively
impression on him, Joseph Monnier said to an intimate confi-
dant : “ If I knew that I was one day to dishonour my soutane,
I should burn it immediately, and I would not sleep this night
at the Seminary.” Oh ! no, well beloved brother, you have not
dishonoured your priestly habit; we, who have well known you
during your whole sacerdotal career, we affirm that you have
been an ornament of the Catholic Priesthood, and the edification
of all the populations whom you have evangelised.
After what we have said, it is useless to add that to the love of
work, our young seminarist joined the love of regularity and
silence. In all these he conducted himself by views of faith.
His piety was, at the great seminary, that which has been all his
life—simple, affectionate, and well regulated. He visited
regularly the Holy Sacrament of the altar. His devotion for
Mary was filial and tender. When he terminated his visits to
oun Lord in His Tabernacle, he failed not to go and make a
prayer before the altar of the Holy Virgin ; especially at night,
after prayer, prostrate before the same altar, he would solicit
with piety the benediction of his Mother in Heaven ! After he
had felt an attraction towards the distant missions he was often
seen to pray in the Chapel of St. Francis Xavier. His subsequent
life proves that his prayers were fervent, and that the great
Apost 1 e of the Indies had obtained for him some part of his in-
defatigable zeal for the salvation of souls.


At the Seminary of Besangon the scholars of the first year
were accustomed to give, in turn, a little instruction of ten
minutes. When it came to his turn, Joseph Monnier was simple
and natural; his style was even somewhat cold. The Director
who had presided at the meeting was pleased, and said, during
the recreation which followed, “When this good M. Monnier
shall be in the pulpit he will not seek to produce an effect by
well studied phrases, but he will wish to do good, he will preach
the Truths of Salvation with conviction. What an excellent
Cure he will one day make!” It is indeed thus that Father
Monnier has always announced the word of God; but the Lord
had not called him to the parochial ministry.
At the Seminary of Besangon, every Saturday at 3 o’clock,
all the scholars, both interns and externs, had to be present at a
sermon preached by one of the directors. On Holy Saturday, of
the year 1847, in place of the accustomed director, there appeared
in the hall a priest, of a tall, thin figure, and carrying on his
breast the cross of a missionary. It was the Beverend Father
Laurent, oblate of Mary Immaculate, and Apostle of the Indian
tribes of Canada. During an hour, at least, he greatly interested
his auditory; the Bocky Mountains, the great rivers and the
lakes, the Flat Heads and the Sioux were the theme of his im-
provisation, which was rendered the more interesting b} r touching
traits and anecdotes, well told. On leaving the hall, Joseph
Monnier said to one of his friends, “Ah! there is some good to
be done here below ! How many souls to save ! I should like to
converse a little with that Good Father.” His friend replied,
“ If you wish, this night, after prayer, when all shall be quiet in
the Seminary, we will go and find Him.” This was done
accordingly.
When the stroke of the bell which gives the signal for bed
had resounded in the belfry of the seminary, our two friends opened
quietly the door of their cell, and their shoes in hand, they de-
scended stealthily, and groping their way along the stairs which
conducted them to the apartment of the Apostle of the New World.
Before knocking they listened at - the door to make sure that he


was alone, otherwise they would have quickly returned to their
cell. “ Knock, Abbe Monnier,” said his friend to him. The door
opened, and the missionary receive the young seminarists with
that frank and cordial welcome which distinguishes apostolical
men. From half-past nine till half-past eleven o’clock, the con-
versation did not slacken. The savannahs, the virgin forests, the
Indian tribes, with their manners, their customs, and their reli-
gion, were the object of that interesting and too rapid contraband
vigil. The reverend father spoke particularly of his missionary
life, of the good that he had the consolation of performing, and
of the still greater good that remained to be done. He repeated
many times these words of our Lord : Messis quidem multa , operarii
autem pauci. * At last it was agreed that our young seminarists
should take the advice of their directors, -and that if they judged
them worthy they should go and rejoin the valiant apostle. The
latter gave |them a picture and they retired full of consolation,
These two hours had flown like lightning.
The next day the Church celebrated the triumph of Jesus
Christ over death and hell. At the seminary all was cheerful-
ness; but our two friends felt a particular joy, of which their
co-disciples had no suspicion. On Monday the vacations com-
menced, every seminarist started for his own country, our two
made the journey on foot, like missionaries preluding to their
future evangelical courses. It was a Jong journey. The conver-
sation neither relaxed, nor was its theme changed. The missions
and always the missions. For them it was the question of the
day, and the question of the future, the question of their life,
and the question of their death, the question of heaven and of
its endless glory. What a delightful day they passed together 1
Th« friend of Father Monnier preserves in his heart the sweetest
recollection of it.
On their return to the Seminary the question of their Apostolic
vocation was submitted to the directors; their decision was
favourable, and they advised our two friends to present them-
* The harvest is indeed great, hut the workmen are few.


selves to the noviciate of the Society of Mary. They arrived
together at Lyons towards the end of September, A young
religious, Father Mulsant, conducted them to the venerated
sanctuary of our Lady of Fourviere, and made them visit the
places sanctified by the holy martyrs of Lyons. These pious
pilgrimages gave a new ardour to our dear Joseph Monnier; his
soul burned with the desire of working and of suffering for God.
He would have wished to depart without delay for Oeeanica, but
he had still to undergo many years of preparation before he saw
the most ardent aspirations of his apostolic heart realised.
He finished his course of theology at the scholasticat of
Belley. On the 22nd December, 1848, he was admitted to the
religious profession. At the commencement of October, 1849,
shortly after his promotion to the priesthood, Father Monnier
was made assistant to the Rev. Father Maitrepierre, superior of
the noviciate ; under the direction of that wise and beloved
master he gave, during that year, conferences to the novices.
The year following he lectured on Holy Scripture in the house
of Our Lady of Bon-Encontre. Suffice it to say that in these
three houses he was always for those who lived with him a subject
of edification by his piety, his regularity, his affability, his spirit
of mortification and of modesty.
Our Lady of Bon-Encontre is a celebrated pilgrimage situated
near the town of Agen, to which the faithful of that province
have been accustomed for ages to come to implore the protection
of Mary; and on many occasions has she made them experience
the most touching effects of her maternal bounty. It was there,
in that venerated sanctuary, under the eye of the Holy Yirgin,
that Father Monnier, while giving his lectures on the Holy
Scriptures to our scholastics, made his first essays in the holy
ministry. His health was already injured: his weakness was
attributed to the excess of his labour and his mortifications. It
was acknowledged that he reouired a more active life. His
health having improved, he saw realised, at length, the most
intimate desire of his soul: he was appointed to the ministry of
the missions. From that time —September, 1851, till the Easter,


of 1856, —he laboured for the salvation of souls in the dioceses of
Agen, of Chartres, and of Cambrai. It might be said that he
only passed through these three dioceses, but, like his Divine
Master, he passed through them doing good.
The confreres who knew Father Monnier during this period of
his life, have, in letters addressed to us, passed a great elogium
on his apostolic virtues : we will cite one which recapitulates all
the others.
“ Father Monnier passed only a short time in our house of
Valenciennes, at most a year and a half; but that short time
sufficed to make us appreciate the rare qualities and eminent
virtues of that dear confrere. He was a truly apostolical mis-
sionary, in all the strength of the term. His ardent and
enlightened zeal for the glory of God and the salvation of souls,
knew no bounds. Thus his words of fire speedily inflamed his
auditory and triumphed, nearly always, over the most hardened
sinners. It may be said of him, as of St. John the Baptist, erat
lucerna ardens et lucens * His sobriety was so great that we
might even add, as of the great Precursor, that he neither ate nor
drank. In fact the mistresses and pupils of a school near Lyons
to whom he gave a retreat, immediately before his departure for
Oceanica, gave him the name of John the Baptist. Habitually
his best repast consisted of bread and potatoes ; his stomach he
took care to say required that regimen; water barely reddened
was his drink.
“ Everything in him preached; but I am persuaded that the
austerity of his life, contributed more than his sermons to produce
that profound impression that he has left in all the parishes
which have had the happiness to hear him. Everywhere he was
looked upon as a saint, and they gave him that name, the only
one which expressed properly the confidence and the veneration
which were felt for him.”
Zeal was the distinctive character of Father Monnier, He
gave himself entirely to the service of the souls he had to
* lie -was a burning and a shining light.


evangelise. He was so absorbed by the good that they required
of him that be forgot himself. No obstacle stood in his way
when it was question of bringing back to Hod a soul which had
gone astray—neither the difficulty of roads, nor the distance of
places. He was always ready to start and to devote himself to
their conversion. During a mission, in which the concourse of
penitents was very great, he remained eighteen successive hours
in the confessional without taking a single moment of repose.
When penitents did not come in great numbers he remained in
the Church to hear them, praying with fervour before the Taber-
nacle, at the Altar of Mary, or making the Stations of the Cross.
He came—even at an advanced hour of the night —to receive
poor sinners who dared not come to confess during the day. He
did not content himself with waiting for them, and calling them
by his preaching and his prayers ; he went to their houses in the
scattered villages to seek the most timid or the most hardened,
Making himself all to all, he brought back to the Church and to
penitence a considerable number of sinners. While he was thus
in pursuit of them, he so completely forgot his own bodily wants
that, more than once, he returned to the house of the Gur6
without having taken any nourishment during the day. This
obliged his superior, the good Father Convers, to order him, in
virtue of obedience, to have always with him a little chocolate.
The better to resemble the Apostles, Father Monnier went on
foot to the parishes where he was sent, especially when the dis-
tance did not exceed a few leagues. During the mission at
Bailleau, in the diocese of Chartres, he went to preach three
times a week at Magny, a village more than five kilometres *
distant, which was at that time annexed to Bailleau. The Cure
offered him a carriage; he refused it, saying, “What would
people say if they saw a missionary in a carriage ? ”
Father Monnier was a man of mortification. What we have
already said sufficiently proves it. His habit w'as to deprive him-
self of fire in his chamber during winter, and he did the same in
* A little oVer three miles.


the north, when the cold was very rigorous. A confrere has seen
him at the altar with his hands so frozen that they had become
violet, and he would not permit himself to warm them a little
by rubbing the one against the other.
When he commenced a mission he began to fast. Did the
people resist his zeal? Were not the confessionals besieged?
His fast became more rigorous, and he had then recourse to the
instruments that holy missionaries knew so well. Before and
during his missions he solicited with zeal the co-operation of
communities and pious persons, exhorting them to pray much for
the conversion of sinners ; but when prudence permitted him he
demanded fasts also, adding, with our Lord: “There are
demons which cannot be cast out except by fasting and prayer.”
One day he said to the pious Cure of the parish he was evan-
gelising: “The mission does not succeed; if you please we will
pat ourselves on barley bread and water. It was done, and
many sinners were converted.
A man of prayer, he was often before the Holy Sacrament, to
replenish himself more and more with the spirit of Our Lord,
with His zeal and with His mercy. After His example he
greatly loved little children; and he made them his auxiliaries
for the conversion of their parents and the sinners of the parish.
Thus he collected them in the Church. He heard their Cate-
chism and gave them touching instructions. He confessed them
and made them pray much for the conversion of sinners. These
little children often became eloquent missionaries in their families.
By these various means how many souls has not Father
Monnier brought back to Grod during the years of his missionary
life in France ! When he was seen in the pulpit and at the
altar—said a priest who had followed him into many parishes—
the success of the mission was certain; his piety, his humility,
his charity, opened to him all hearts. We have received the
account of a very sudden conversion wLich happened during one
of these missions. A lady whose family affairs had brought her
for some days to a parish in which Father Monnier was giving
a mission, heard the missionary spoken of in very glowing


terms. She felt a strong desire to hear him preach, not that
she had any thought of conversion, though she greatly wanted
it, since she had lived many years without practising religion.
She went then to the church. From the commencement of the
instruction, so convincing, so penetrating, she was pleased; but
quickly she was seized with violent remorse, and her conduct
appeared to her in its deformity. As she was not disposed to
reform her life, and as remorse of conscience fatigued her, she
tried to amuse herself. In vain, the struggle became only more
desperate. She rose to go out, in order to escape from that
voice which plunged the sword more and more into her soul, but
she felt an invisible force which nailed her to her place. Seeing
that her efforts were useless, she fell again on her chair, and
concealed her face in her hands lest her altered features might
betray her emotion. Grace had conquered. Thus, w'hen the
crowd had left, she went to the confessional of the missionary
and told him with abundant tears what had happened. She
afterwards made her confession, and retired consoled and deter-
mined to lead a truly Christian life.
It was thus, that during five years, Father Monnier devoted
himself to the salvation of souls. Full of deference and modesty
towards the Curds and other priests of the parishes he gained
their esteem and affection, and thereby disposed them to co-
operate more effectually towards tire success of the mission.
Forgetful of himself, he was full of kindness towards his con-
freres, and especially those for whom the ministry of the missions
was most painful; he aided them with all his power. Thus one
day of first communion, after having preached three or four times
in a large Church, he, in order to take a young confrere out of a
difficulty, went on foot, and preached for him in a neighbouring
parish.
Giving himself, as we have said, wholly to the salvation of his
neighbour, Father Monnier was not less careful about his own
sanctification. If he troubled himself little about his body, he
had a great care for the salvation of his soul. Thus amid the
most overwhelming occupations of the holy ministry, he faithfully


performed his spiritual exercises; he abridged them, if it was
necessary, but he omitted them not, as we have been informed
by a companion of his labours, who adds, “ our evenings at the
confessional were prolonged till eleven o’clock, aye, even till
twelve, one, and two, which often happened to us, particularly
at Crespin (North.) We afterwards said our prayer together,
to which Father Monnier failed not to add a short reading, at
least a chapter of the Imitation of Christ, ‘to save the principle,’
as he said.”
While he devoted himself with that admirable zeal, and
without interruption, to the salvation of his neighbour, he heard
always the interior voice which said to him, as formerly the
Angel of Macedonia said to St. Paul: Come to Oceanica, to the
aid of souls. He ceased not to solicit the Yei’y Eev. Superior
General, humbly, but pressingly, on that subject. At length it
was announced to him that his vows were heard, that he was
called to the Apostolic life among the Islanders of the South
Seas. Three months before this he had given a mission in the
parish of Bailleau-le-Pin ; his labours had been blessed by
numerous conversions; nevertheless, he departed with regret, to
leave there so many hardened sinners. We publish the letter
by which he announced to M. L’abbe Paty the news of his
approaching departure. It will tell better than all the reflections
that we could make with what zeal that missionary heart burned.
, Valenciennes, the 27th March , 1856.
Monsieur Le Cure', —
It is more than time to fulfil the promise I made to you, and
to express my gratitude for the kindness which I have received
at your hands. I have nut forgotten the parish of Bailleau-le-
Pio nor the pastor who directs it. Since I have quitted you I
have undergone, by the order of Providence, a crowd of adven-
tures I have visited, for some weeks, my old mother, of -whom
the good sister Julie had given me so sweet a picture. I have
seen again my old blind father; I have given a mission in my
own native village. Although it contains only 400 inhabitants, I
have seen, in eight days, 600 persons at the holy table. The
exercises were given, notwithstanding the fine weather and the


labour, at nine in the morning and at two o’clock in the afternoon,
and our church, relatively larger than yours, was always full; it
was often necessary to double every bench. What a difference !
However, there are among us, as elsewhere, poor and rich.
Religion softens all; family life offers to all its ineffable delights.
I could say something on the subject to your parishioners, if I
were still with you. Religion renders man happy.
After having consoled my relations and my friends, it was
necessary to bid them farewell, a severe trial to them and to me;
never have I felt so great a sacrifice. I shall never again see
them in this world, for I am called to the foreign missions, and
this is why I owe you this short conversation.
It was not without a motive that I said to your parishioners,
that if they had all heard me I should have carried far away
those sins which still weighed on the consciences of a great
number of them. I loved them and I love them still. How
painful it was to me to leave some of them on whom I calculated
—to leave them in a state of the most inexplicable impenitence!
Ah! if I could speak to them again—to those friends whom I
should wish again to see, at least in the other world, I would
request them not to refuse me a last consolation, to recall that
which they learnt when they were young, to reflect on the fearful
crime which they commit in shutting the gate of their heart
against Jesus Christ, to think on the maledictions that they
accumulate on their head, by that indifference the cause of wflich
I have never been able to comprehend. I would add that the
Paschal time which is not terminated, is a new occasion for
them to return sincerely to religious practices; I would implore
them not to fail, and I am convinced that those parishioners so
good wdio came generously to hear me, would not be deaf to my
last words. They know perfectly that, on the point of quitting
my country to go 6000 leagues from here, to a country which
shall be for me like a country of the dead, I have no interest to
deceive them ; I wish nothing but their happiness.
I recommend myself to your good prayers—to the prayers of
all your parishioners. I recommend myself to the prayers of the
influential persons of the parish; they are rich, but death will
take from them all their goods, and will leave them only misery
and hell, in a few days, if they are not disposed to obey the
Church. That is certain, and that is why, in begging their
prayers, I promise them to pray that God may preserve to them
the practice of religion, and the imperishable fortune of Paradise.
I wish the prayer of the poor—he is hungry and is badly lodged.
In Oceanica I shall be often poorer and worse lodged than he;


but if he comes to mass; if he performs his duty; if he is
resigned, we shall have together a beautiful palace in heaven.
I desire the prayers of those who suffer; I shall suffer with
them ; but in the other world we shall hope for the promised re-
compense. I request the prayers of the children, of those who
instruct them, and of their fathers and mothers. Poor children,
how prudent should you be ! Ah ! if your parents wished it
what good Christians you might be ! I recommend myself to the
prayers of the good sister Julie, for whom I ought to write at
greater length Good sister, when you shall be before God, you
will send your guardian angel to sustain the missionary in his
long voyages, to restore his strength when it shall be worn out,
and above all, to show him the way to heaven. Monsieur le
Cur£, forget me not at the Holy Sacrifice ; I am about to say
mass, and I shall think of you and your parishioners. I shall
demand of Jesus Christ that they may all make their Easter
Communion ; I desire this year to make my Easter with them :
desiderio desideravi hoc pascha manducare vobiscum*
I have the honour to be, Monsieur le Cure,
Your very humble and very obedient servant,
J. Monnier, S.M
This letter arrived at Bailleau during Easter week. The Cure
read it to his parishioners on Low Sunday. What was his sur-
prise and his joy when on the following morning, on entering
the Church, he found fourteen men round his confessional!
That letter, which breathes so lively a. faith had achieved these
conversions commenced during the mission.
A few days after he had despatched the above letter, Father
Monnier proceeded to Lyons to prepare for his long voyage.
While he, with effusion of heart, thanked the Holy Virgin for
having granted him the favour which he had implored for nine
years, many others were afflicted at his departure for the
missions of Oceanica ; many even were far from approving the
decision adopted by his superiors. A good Cure of the Diocese
of Chartres, who had been a witness of the good operated by
Father Monnier in two parishes near his own, said with emotion
to one of our fathers : “your superiors are very culpable in not
* With desire hare I desired to eat this Passover with you.


having left Father Monnier in this diocese. By his apostolic
preaching, by the ardour of his zeal, he would have finished by
shaking off the religious indifference of our populations, and
reawakening the faith throughout this country. He will never
do in Oceanica as much good as he would have done in the
midst of us.”
The last superior that Father Monnier had in France writes to
us on his part: —“ As soon as I learnt that it was question of
his being sent to Oceanica, I did all that lay in my power to
induce our Yery Reverend Superior-General to desist from that
project. I said to hhn that Father Monnier was the St. Francis
Regis of our young society —that we required an apostle like him
to give a good impetus to our missions—to serve as a model to the
confreres who should come after him. All my efforts were use-
less. The Father-General deigned to answer me that he regretted
as I did the loss of Father Monnier to our French missions; but
that, convinced of his vocation for those of Oceanica, he could
not, in conscience, oppose himself to the call of God.”
Father Elloy, at present Mgr. the Bishop of Tipasa, Father
Joly, who has become the Procurator of the Missions at Sydney,
and Brother Andrew Rouge, were the companions of Father
Monnier in his voyage. They left London in the Portland , on
the 20th May, 1856,* and only arrived at Sydney the 21st
September. Father Monnier himself relates how they employed
these four months’ passage :
“ That which has contributed to make the voyage as agreeable
as possible is—that we have contrived to occupy ourselves
usefully, and that we delighted to be together. We had regular
hours for rising, prayer, breviary, rosary, study, reereations ;
making allowance for the state of the sea, and some exceptional
circumstances which must occur during a long voyage. Every
week we had three conferences on theology, two on rubrics, and
two spiritual conferences; penance and monition were made
regularly, as well as a monthly preparation for death. Towards
the end of the voyage we had a little retreat of three days.”
“We had not had the least disagreement with any one. We


could not leave our cabins without being saluted in a friendly
way by those whom we met. The mate of the ship was par-
ticularly attached to us; we called him mon ami. Our friendship
began in this way. One evening while we were on the coast of
the Cape of Good Hope, we had a storm; despite the winds and
waves which covered the deck, I made my little promenade on
the poop. It was the mate’s watch, and lie appeared fatigued.
I asked him if there was any danger. No, said he, God watches
over us; we have confidence in Him. Very good, said Ito him,
pressing his hand affectionately, I love to see such sentiments in
you ; you are my friend. He then asked me if my father and
my mother were still living, and if I thought I should again see
them. On my answer that we never expected to quit our dear
islanders, he appeared much astonished. Afterwards, looking
towards heaven, he added : You do well, } r our recompense is
above there.
“The captain said, one day, to his officers, and to the other
passengers, that he never had passengers who were so easily
satisfied. It is not, however, that we were spoiled on board
with regard to nourishment ; it was more than simple. At the
same time the cost of our passage was not high ; we could not
expect an abundant and delicate table. We did not suffer from
hunger, and we agreed that we could dispense with the rest.”
Leaving Sydney on the 7th October in the little schooner
Ariel , our dear travellers touched at Tonga the 20th of the same
month. Ten days later they separated ; Fathers Elloy and Joly
continued their route towards the islands of Samoa, whither they
were sent, Father Monnier and brother Andrew I’emaiaed at
Tonga. /
Tonga-Tabu, or Tonga the Sacred, is the principal island of
the Friendly Archipelago, on which reigns George Tupu. This
personage, truly famous in Oceanica, was, at first, only a village
chief. Full of ambition, energy, and perseverance, ho assumed
the attitude of Protector of Protestantism, which the Wesleyan
ministers, established at Tonga since 1826, tried to plant there.
He has propagated it by his laws, by his arms, and perhaps


more still by his preaching; it may he said, without exaggera-
tion, that he merits, more than the Wesleyan ministers, the title
of apostle and founder of his lotu (religion.)
This zeal, it must be admitted, serves his ambitious projects
very well. Skilful in wai’, still more cunning in politics, by
force or by fraud he has rendered, himself master of the Archi-
pelago. Not content with these successes he has carried his
arms to Fiji, where he governed the eastern islands by his
Lieutenant, Maafu. He wished also to conquer Samoa, Wallis,
&c., with a view of compelling all these islands to submit to his
false religion. Fear only has caused him to lay down his arms*
This Oceanican King is gifted with remarkable qualities ; but
that which is most remarkable in him is his hatred of Catholicism.
Our Holy Religion was introduced at Tonga, in i 842, with
the Rev. T. Chevron, on the solicitation of the Pagans. When
in 18-52, by the dishonourable taking of Pea , George had
conquered the Catholic and Pagan Chiefs, who, till then, had
resisted him, the neophytes, that our Fathers had withdrawn from
Paganism at the cost of such labour, had to submit to a fearful
persecution. The good Father Nivelleau died as one of the
results of that atrocious war. Our Fathers had been subjected
to a thousand vexations, their effects were pillaged or burnt.
Renouncing all indemnity, they accepted, in compensation, a
treaty that Admiral du Bouzet stipulated in the name of France
with George Tupu. According to the terms of this treaty the
Catholic religion was to be free at Tonga, and to enjoy the same
privileges as the Protestant worship. It has never been so in
reality.
A native of these islands, if he dares to resist his chief, must
possess an extraordinary energy, or the faith must be deeply
rooted in his soul. But the Catholics of Tonga know very well
that the king is the enemy of their religion, that in becoming
Catholics they annoyed him extremely, and that they are exposed
under circumstances wdiich arise from time to time, to suffer the
serious effects of his wrath. Early in the first year of his
sojourn at Tonga, Father Monnier wrote on this subject: “ The


ships of war encourage our timid flocks, in reminding them that
there is here liberty for all, but we can apply to King Greorge,
and to his Tonga aristocracy, that which has been said of the
Chinese mandarins: Proud to excess, they pardon with difficulty
whoever impedes their designs. Timid, they submit in presence
of force ; but, when the ships are gone, they elude their promise B
by every possible means.
We can then form some idea of the difficulty which the
inhabitants of Tonga have in embracing a religion which will
cause them to lose the good will of the chiefs, and infallibly
expose them to numerous outi'ages. These poor neophytes are
mixed, disseminated among their Protestant relations, a circum-
stance which exposes them to a hundred dangers of subversion.
The laws of the kingdom, especially those relative to marriage,
inspired by the Protestant spirit, are still a fearful stumbling
block. In fine, they have launched these islanders into an un-
wholesome way of progress, which can only develope their
cupidity. According to the testimony of the Tongans themselves,
Protestantism, in giving them an exterior of Christianity, a
varnish of false civilisation, has rendered them worse than they
were in their days of paganism.
Such is the people among whom Father Monnier found himself
transported. At his arrival Tonga contained about 2000
Catholics, a little more than a fourth of the whole population. He
began, without delay, to study the language of the country. At
the end of a year he spoke it with a facility and a perfection
which few have attained. His zeal was as active and devoted as
it had been in France; he lost no opportunity of instructing
his neophytes and fortifying them in good. With this
object he loved to visit them often in their villages. The
great heat of the climate rendered his walks very fatiguing •
but, as oblivious of the wants of his body as he had been
during his missions at Agen, it happened frequently that he
took no nourishment till towards the evening. His superior,
therefore, obliged him, when he set out on his journey
to supply himself with a sailor’s biscuit. After a week of


journeys and fatigues, he thought to repose and refresh his soul.
‘‘How much I liked,” wrote he, “the labour of the
Sunday once terminated, to run on Monday, from Maofaga to
Mua, at five leagues distance, in order to learn from Fathers
Chevron and, Pieplu that which it is necessary to do at Tonga to be
a good Marist and missionary. Between them neither command
nor refusal, they had only one thought, only one same end.
They loved God together. They were made for one another ;
death alone could separate them for a time.”
Some extracts from the letters that Father Monnier wrote to
us from Tonga will make known still more his apostolic disposi-
tions, the trials and the consolations which it pleased God to
deal out to the missionaries of that archipelago.
24th December, 1859.—“ Here, as in every place where error
dominates, we can only combat by patience and prayer. Here,
as elsewhere falsehood is taken for granted, while truth is only
admitted after long labour. In every respect we are destitute of
human assistance, while heresy enjoys every protection. Still
the Wesleyans have their weak side ; they scarcely imitate the
detachment of the Apostle Paul, of whom they profess to be the
zealous followers. They make merchandise of everything. They
sell their books, their physic, their services, even little pieces of
paper, on which are printed a text of the Holy Scripture. They
exact an annual rent from their disciples ; the extent of whose
piety is measured by the quantity of oil which they bring. If
Pope St. Gregory is right, we ought to follow an opposite course
and prove by our acts the disinterestedness of the Catholic Mis-
sionary. If our houses, our furniture and our clothes be poor,
have no inquietude. If our food leaves something to desire,
what matter? We the more resemble the apostles. Our ambi-
tion is to ornament our churches, to give eclat to the holy cere-
monies, in order to strengthen faith, and develop piety among
our neophytes. The luxury of our churches renders them high
spirited, and is for us a great consolation.
“ The Protestants have tried another means to humble us .
5
they have given to human science, or rather to that which is a


vain appearance of it, the importance which should have been
reserved for the study of religion. The devotees of the party,
forgetting their manual labour, learn night and day the rules of
decimal numeration ; the simplest operations of arithmetic
became for our learned interpreters of the Bible the ne plus ultra
of human knowledge. One of these Tongan preachers will con-
ceal himself while he is working a little question in division, for
fear his colleagues, seeing the operation, should become as wise
as himself. Another will impose on himself the greatest
sacrifices in order to learn the weights of a balance. These
exercises have brought about academic meetings, in which, it is
said, more reprimands and blows than prizes have been awmrded.
“ We were bound to combat this new effort of heresy, to avoid
incurring the reproach of ignorance and fanaticism ; for, in a
little world like that of Tonga, an incident may assume fearful
proportions. So it has happened that we have become school-
masters, to teach all our youth, and even married persons, the
four first rules, and the rule of three. . . . Father Chevron
has shewn his talent in geography and astronomy in such a way
as to terrify the most intrepid Wesleyans. We have had after-
wards our public examination, at which all our Catholics assisted.
The first sitting took place in the great house of Tui Tonga.
Readers, cipherers, and writers of both sexes— every one did his
best to obtain the palm. After two hours the sitting was closed,
and every one wdshed aleady to know if he deserved a prize, and
who should have the first palm. It is-necessary to tell you that
there were many faultless readings ; our disciples of Pythagoras
explained clearly the principles of the rule of three ; the young
girls of Mua displayed writing which would be appreciated in
the good boarding-schools of France.
“There were other sittings, where our children, united in
groups, recited portions of the Old Testament, the history of the
mysteries of our holy faith, and the life of our Lord Jesus Christ.
After this, placing themselves in two ranks, the boys on one
side, the girls on the other, they contested who should display
the cleverest hand and the most pliant fingers. The girls


plaited pretty baskets, the boys stitched the leaves of the sugar
cane, which is used to cover their roofs. It was curious to see
those little hands moving about with measure and speed, while
the fathers and mothers encouraged their children by voice and
gesture. There were little children of four or five years who
wished to prevail in address and agility in a work where nimble-
ness of fingers is an advantageous condition.
“ The sittings terminated, our young athletes defile in pro-
cession before the Tui Tonga and the missionaries ; every one
came in passing to deposit his cava root, in testimony of his
gratitude. We then distributed the rewards, namely, a rosary
for the prizes; crosses and medals served us for accessits
In the month of August, 1862, Father Monnier related in
another letter, the pains and consolations of the missionary ;
here are some passages :
“ Our Tongans unceasingly hear put forth against us every
description of falsehoods, and we are not present to defend our-
selves. They read in a gilt book, that we sell permission to
commit all the sins one wishes; that so long as one is a Oatholic
he may do what he pleases; that the Catholic priest is an
assassin who has made more martyrs than Nero. They find in
a gilt book, pictures in which priests and sometimes bishops,
assist gravely—cross or breviary in hand —at punishments the
most frightful, inflicted on the Protestant Saints. I have that
book and these pictures in my hand; one would say it was
issued from the press ot Satan. If these mad preachings did not
damn souls, we should not take notice of them; but these
calumnies have such frightful consequences, that they plunge us
in sorrow. That which consoles us is that Jesus Christ was also
calumniated. He suffered without complaining; would to God
that we might imitate him in that ! These invectives repeated
incessantly by these preachers, as proud as they are ignorant,
fatigue us, and excite a nervous irascibility. It is, in its way, a
kind of martyrdom.
“Instead of imaginary or future dangers, allow me to say a
word about real and present dangers which we encounter


at Tonga. Come with me on this "boat, that is to say on this
hollowed trunk ; let us cross the neighbouring bay, for on the
other side there is a dying man, groaning in his hut. There is
a strong wind blowing, the waves dash on our frail skiff, and we
play at swing-swang on the summit of the waves. If it is
Apolosio who conducts tis, we have nothing to fear; he is the
first rower of the Archipelago. No one has ever seen his boat
capsized. Provided that, at the commencement of the naviga-
tion, we have made the sign cf the cross, the shark will be much
disappointed if he has counted on us to assuage his hunger. But
if, in place of Apolosio, we have an ordinary oarsman, we shall
pass a bad quarter of an hour. The thought that if death come,
in the accomplishment of a duty, it will be also a martyrdom,
quickly dissipates our inquietudes. In these circumstances we
have often the same advantage that St. Peter had. Jesus him-
self is with us in the barque. And that which St. Peter knew
not then, eighteen centuries have taught us. Jesus never sleeps.
He watches over his priests.
“ The savage cries of the wild beasts poetise the journeys of
the indefatigable apostles who labour in the immense countries
of Asia and Africa. We have here neither lions, nor tigers, nor
bears, nor even serpents; but we share with many others the
favours of those myriads of auxiliaries that are called mosquitoes.
The first days we pass with them we would willingly call them
the insects of penance ; they have an affection of preference for
Europeans newly arrived. But soon their sting becomes less
painful, and we bless Providence for sending them to us, to sup-
plement the mortifications which we fail to perform. They
render us another service under this sleepy climate, they keep us
awake by their little song. When meditating in the morning
we should be inclined to fall asleep, we love them then, in spite
of all, and we bless them, in recollecting that they were the
privileged friends of St. Pose of Lima.
“I could cite many other little crosses which are our lot,
and are capable of satisfying the appetite of persons the most
insatiable of penance. In general the missionary in Oceanica is


tried in a way which he did not expect, and has not the trials for
which he was prepared. Let the confrere who wishes to come
among us learn the great science of humility and of resignation.
Let him not say: I shall confess my faith till death ; but let him
prepare himself well to suffer a hundred little unforseen trials,
daily annoyances, the multiplicity of which have also their
merit..
“ But there is one suffering much more severe, which is too
often our lot at Tonga. It was the interior suffering of our
Divine Master, when he saw many of his well-beloved disciples
quit him, to follow his enemies. When we have the happiness
of living in the midst of a Catholic population it is impossible to
conceive how heart-breaking this sorrow of the missionary is.
To see spiritual children, for whom he has sacrificed everything
that he loved more than a mother loves her only child, quit the
Holy Church, and throw themselves into the arms of heresy,
under the yoke of the demon ! Then his soul feels something of
the sorrow of our Lord in the Garden of Olives. It is that the
eternal loss of these cowardly deserters is too probable. The
return of our apostates is nearly impossible at Tonga.
“ This pain is the more keen that, among these deserters are
sometimes found persons whom we believed the most irreproach-
able; those of whom we had taken the greatest care are the first
to render themselves guilty of this black treason. Monseigneur
Bataillon could haveonce given you an account of defections of this
nature; here at Tonga, the Bev. Father Chevron has supported
them with heroic courage. Oh ! pray to our good Master to aid
us to support with patience such trials. Other sins appear to me,
if it is permitted to speak figuratively, simple venial sins, in
comparison with the crime of heresy, that crime which the Church,
in her just appreciation, has stigmatised by her most terrible
excommunications.
“ I have told you our troubles, ought I not to speak to you of
our consolations? If some sheep afflict us by their defection, we
have a good number of them who givens the sweetest consola-
tions. Is not the greatest consolation of the priest to send many


souls to heaven ? Our very presence at Tonga compels the
heretical ministers to administer Baptism to the infants and as
they perform it seriously enough, here is a crowd of infants who,
in reality, owe their salvation to us. I speak not of our children
who die before the age of discretion, this first harvest alone com-
pensates us for all our sacrifices. Another abundant harvest is
the death of our adult Catholics. We can say that, generally,
even the worst of them die well. Our young libertines or our
old indifferentists become quite devout when death makes its
appearance ; they demand, and receive piously, the last sacra-
ments. This is why we prefer the worst catholic to the best
Protestants.
“The consolations of which I speak you will call funeral con-
solations. Our Catholics give us others. We find among them
examples of 'virtue that we could offer to the good Catholics of
France. “ Father, said Zachary, called the Black Banana-tree,
to me one day, I could not sleep last night.” “ Why ?”—“lt is
because I disputed with my young people, who do not behave
well at Church. I thought I was bound to admonish them, and
I have spoken a little high. I am always like that; lam
always angry—it is a remnant of my paganism. Ah, well! Last
night I could not sleep for that sin of anger. I wished to come
and confess, but I was afraid to disturb you.”—“Oh! my
friend, you would not have disturbed me. Have you made an
act of contrition?”—“l have made more than a hundred.”—
“ That’s enough ; you will confess on Saturday.”
“We have also truly edifying conversions. Some men who
but lately cordially detested us, are to-day our greatest friends ;
assist every day at Mass, and evening prayer; they cannot under-
stand how a Christian can omit his Angelas or the prayer before
and after meals ; they carry continually on their neck, even in
the presence of the king, the Rosary and medal, in order that all
may see that they are Catholics. The fervour of the good, and
they are numerous, consoles us w r ell for the indifference and even
the apostacy of some unhappy ingrates.
Besides, at Tonga we are well provided with respect to


spiritual advantages. Directed by our amiable and very pious
superior, we have nearly all the resources of our best French
missions. We pass together the second Tuesday of every month.
Meeting on the previous evening we make our monthly retreat in
common ; that day of pious exercises, of practical conferences, and
of agreeable conversation makes us forget quickly our vexations,
and fortifies us for new labours. Every fortnight Father Breton
walks five leagues to come from Hihifo and visit me at Moafaga.
In the evening walking on the beach, or sitting under the cocoa
trees on the shore, we can speak of heaven at our •ease. I assure
you. that in that respect the good Father is a true Saint Scolastica,
he easily causes us to make an innocent breach in the rule for going
to bed. But thus when the moon is so beautiful, when the waves
do no more than caress the shore, when a thousand lights glance
in the firmament, when people have not met for a fortnight, we
are hungry to speak in French of all that which we love. One
would not wish to finish, the more so that the dear Father will
leave the following morning, without bidding me farewell, just
at the moment when I shall be at the altar/’
Behold Father Monnier painted by himself! His letters con-
tain many other details full of interest; but we must stop. That
which we have just read makes well-known the situation of the
missionary at Tonga. His life is consecrated to prayer, and to
the exercise of a very active zeal. He ought daily, by all the
means that the great desire of saving souls can suggest to him,
to counterbalance the baneful influences of a powerful and lying
sect. Father Monnier, by his frequent instructions, and still
more by familiar conversations, in the meetings which followed
evening prayer, unceasingly defended the truth and unmasked
the intrigues of error. His warm expression, his lively repartees,
his natural and simple comparisons, enchanted the Catholics and
fortified them in the faith. There is no doubt that more than
once he made lively impressions on the heretics. When they
could do it without compromising themselves, they loved to come
and hear him.
Humanly speaking, great conquests for Catholicism cannot be


expected in that Archipelago during the life of King George.
Our confreres, in waiting the days of mercy, maintained the
position acquired at the cost of so many sacrifices; hut we can
say that, in spite of obstacles, they make progress. In fact, the
total population of the island is continually decreasing, and yet
the Catholics number 2000.
Father Monnier had been eight years at Tonga, when he
received from Mgr. Bataillon a wholly unexpected letter. The
prelate ordered him to proceed immediately to Sydney, there to
take the direction of a school for indigenous Oceanicans. That
destination much surprised the zealous missionary ; it imposed on
him a great sacrifice in removing him from his neophytes. As a
religious, full of faith, his resolution was taken with as much
courage as promptitude. The vessel which had brought the
letter was to leave the next day ; Father Monnier was able to
conceal the preparations for his departure, and he quitted Tonga
with a heart full of regret. This was in the month of July,
1864.
In the designs of Divine Providence, all the events of this life
are ordained with a view to the sanctification of the elect. We
can then affirm that the sending of Father Monnier to Australia
was a providential effect of the mercy of God, who wished to
make him an instrument for the salvation of a great many souls.
As soon as he arrived at the post assigned to him, he occupied
himself, with his ordinary zeal, about the school for which he
had been sent. It was soon perceived, thinks to the devotedness
of Father Rondel, who had been associated with him, that Father
Monnier’s co-operation was unnecessary. He applied himself
wdth ardour to become familiar with the English language, when
an unexpected circumstance opened before him a new way, which
he was to follow, till the end of his career, too soon terminated.
About this time, June, 1865, the parish of Penrith, within which
the school was situated, became vacant by the death of its
pastor, the Rev. M. J. Brennan. The death of that good priest was
a true affliction for his people. The Archbishop of Sydney
begged Father Monnier to take charge of the parish till the


arrival of his successor. The interval was longer than had been
anticipated. The zeal that Father Monnier had displayed in the
exercise of his ministry caused the inhabitants of Penrith to
desire that he might remain permanently with them. They had
already made efforts to obtain the sanction of authority to that
effect, when they were given to understand that their desire could
not be complied with.
From Penrith Father Monnier proceeded to Campbelltcwn,
another important district of the diocese, which the ordinary
pastor was obliged to leave temporarily, on account of the bad
state of his health. During the three months of his sojourn in
this parish, he did good with his accustomed zeal. Towards the
end of that time, availing himself of the railway, he came every
Sunday evening to preach at Balmain, a suburb of Sydney. He
had become the ordinary confessor of the boarding school of the
Benedictine Ladies, and he rendered from time to time services
to the priest of Windsor.
We are at the month of June, 1866, the Church celebrates
that great solemnity that we call in France the Fete-Dieu, and
elsewhere the Feast of Corpus Christi. For some years the
Archbishop had established in his diocese the holy practice of
the forty hours. The Blessed Sacrament remains exposed even
at night, during two days. The forty hours commence at the
Cathedral on the day of the Feast of the Blessed Sacrament; after-
wards they are held successively in every church of the city and
in a great number of the other parishes of the diocese. A truly
holy institution! It is loved by the faithful, and they derive
great profit from it.
The Reverend Father Dillon, the priest of Balmain, as we have
said, already knew Father Monnier. His piety, his faith, his
indefatigable zeal, and his apostolic mind had struck him. He
wished, therefore, to have our confrere to prepare his people for
the graces of the forty hours. Father Breheret, apostolic prefect
of the islands of Fiji, who had not quitted his mission since
twenty-two years, had just arrived at Sydney to pass a few weeks.
He consented to partake the labours of his confrere. At first


they only contemplated having a simple preparatory triduum ;
but these pious exercises were so manifestly blessed from on
high, that Father Dillon caused them to be prolonged all the
following week. During this time that priest, a man of devoted-
ness and active zeal, who is not disconcerted by difficulties, took
measures to procure the grace of a retreat to the Catholics
detained in the central prison of Sydney. This house of deten-
tion, of which he was the chaplain, is situated on a small island
in the Parramatta river, called Cockatoo, a short distance from Bal-
main. The Colonial Secretary kindly granted the necessary permis-
sion, and complete liberty was granted to the prisoners to assist at
the holy exercises which were given for them morning and night.
The works were suspended to the great satisfaction of the
prisoners, who sacrificed willingly the gain of a week to enjoy at
their ease the benefit of the retreat. As there were among the
employes and free inhabitants of the island numerous Catholics,
they had also a separate retreat, with two instructions daily. The
fatigue of the two missionaries was great, but their consolation
was greater. The good Father Breheret could not recover from
his astonishment; he admired the zeal of his confrere, and the
lively faith of those whom he had evangelized. The prisoners
addressed a letter of thanks to the Colonial Secretary; but in
gratitude to God and the Holy Virgin for the grace which they
had received, they undertook to repress blasphemy among them-
selves, and as a guarantee of their good resolutions, in placing
themselves under the protection of Mary, they desired that they
might receive the holy Scapular.
At that time very singular facts took place in the distant
mountains, and in the less peopled districts of the colony. Bands
of Bushrangers , a kind of highway robbers, stopped the coaches,
especially the mail coaches —descended unexpectedly on a village
to plunder it, above all they looked out for the gold escorts on
their -way to Sydney. New Mandrins,* they multiplied their
* Louis Mandrin was a celebrated highwayman, who after a career of great atrocity was
executed at Valence in 1755. His exploits created a certain amount of interest at the
time, and have formed the subject of a tragedy, a melodrama, and several biographies.—
Translator.


misdemeanours and crimes; but they showed so much coolness,
courage, and even a certain loyalty after their fashion, that the
population took a great interest in the recital of their exploits.
The police and the constables were tired out without being able
to repress these excesses. They were the more frightened that
they counted in their ranks a large number of victims.
The Government enrolled a good number of volunteers to go
in pursuit of these formidable bushrangers. In order to animate
the courage of its constables it put a price on the head of the
most famous. The reward varied from £5OO to £ 1000. By this
means the colony got rid of that scourge which had endured about
ten years. Some were killed, others were taken, and the rest
disappeared.
One of the prisoners, who had assisted at the retreat given by
Father Monnier had two brothers among the bushrangers.
Happy, himself, at being restored to the grace of God, he reflected
with bitterness on the deplorable fate which menaced his two
brothers. Some days after the retreat he sent £l to Father
Dillon. “Your reverence,” said he to his priest, with his Irish
faith, “be good enough to say two Masses for my brothers, in
order that God may give them the grace to be taken alive.
I know that they will be hanged, they have well merited
it, but they will die at least like Christians. Beg of the Holy
Virgin to preserve them from the misfortune of being killed
behind a bush and dying like dogs.” A few days after his two
brothers were taken alive and brought prisoners to Sydney.
Father Monnier’s convert, happy at the news that his prayers
had been heard, obtained permission to visit them for a few'
hours. He informed them that he had had the happiness to be
converted in a retreat, and he added that having thought then
of the miserable fate that awaited them, he had caused two
masses to be said that they might be taken alive: “the Holy
Virgin has heard me,” said he to his brothers: “prepare
now to die like good Christiana; you have no time to lose.”
In fact their trial followed quickly; the brothers were sentenced
to capital punishment, but they died in very Christian dis-
positions.


Hardly were the Balmain retreats terminated, when Father
Monnier rushed with incomparable ardour into the career which
had just opened before him. It may be said that for two years
he gave retreats and missions without interruption. There exist
few localities in the Dioceses of Sydney, Bathurst, Maitland or
Brisbane where his apostolic voice did not make itself heard.
He gave retreats in succession to ecclesiastics, religious commu-
nities and simple lay people. He procured that benefit to nearly all
the parishes of the City of Sydney, as well as the rural parishes.
In these young colonies, where the population is much dispersed,
and where priests are not numerous, many localities are visited
by their pastor only from time to time. Our indefatigable
missionary went also to evangelise the places deprived of resident
priests. He lodged then how he could, but he found himself
always well provided for. It happened to him once in very cold
weather to be lodged during some days in a chamber which the
snow entered without obstacle. For him it was only an incident
which he liked to joke about.
With regard to nourishment, he had hardly modified the
severity that he had practiced during his missions in France.
To the observations that were often made to him on that subject,
he answered that his stomach was like himself, an original,
that meat did not agree with him, that bread and fruits suited
him much better. There might be some truth in this. So many
fatigues and mortifications had weakened his stomach and ruined
his health; but we may believe that, under a form of pleasantry,
he liked also to veil his love of mortification. It is thus that he
knew by zeal and by charity habitually to impose on himself
the necessity of fasting during his missions in the country.
He did not say mass till ten or eleven o’clock. The people came
often very considerable distances, and wished much to confess
before mass in order to communicate.
One would have said that Father Monnier, though his health
was bad, knew not what fatigue meant. Repose seemed a
burthen to him. Thus he allowed no interval between two
retreats beyond the time necessary for him to reach the new field


of his apostolic labours, when he threw himself entirely into his
work. He was always ready to catechise and instruct old and
young, and to go in search of the hesitating or the hardened.
But where his zeal was more admirable still, was at the holy
tribunal. A man of mercy—a true Samaritan, he received every
one with kindness and patience ; regardless of fatigue, he passed
there entire days and a great part of the nights dressing the
wounds of souls, pardoning their sins, and encouraging and
directing fervent souls.
Y/ho ever knows the lively faith of the Irish and their religious
respect fur the priest, can form an idea of the sentiments of vene-
ration which the Catholics evangelised by Father Monnier felt for
him. His zeal; his disinterestedness; his long prayers; his
kindness and his patience towards all who approached him,
struck them with admiration towards the man of God; in speak-
of him they employed the most laudatory titles that they give to
the saints. Why shall we not say with them, that by his labours,
his fatigues, the benedictions of his ministry, Father Monnier
was truly during these two years the Apostle of New South
Wales ?
At the commencement of September, 1868, he laboured in the
district of Wellington ; he purposed to leave soon for Dubbo, the
most distant of the little towns of the colony, when he received
information that he was called to take charge of St. Patrick’s
parish, at Sydney. That unexpected news deranged all his plans
of apostolic labour ; but—a man of obedience —he left as soon as
he had terminated the Wellington mission.
The parish of St. Patrick, at Sydney, is one of the five which
include the Catholics of the city, properly speaking. It. had been
confided to the zeal of the venerable Archdeacon McEncroe,
that constantly devoted friend of our Society. He died towards
the end of August, 1868, assisted by Father Muraire. The very
day of his burial the Vicar General proposed to the Reverend
Father Visitor of our missions to confide the charge of that parish
to our Society. The latter, after many days of examination and
prayer, accepted the proposal, reserving its ratification to the


Very Eeverend Superior General. Father Monnier was proposed
and accepted as parish priest of St. Patrick’s, and commenced
his ministry the 20th September, the feast of our Lady of the
Seven Dolours.
If, at the moment when that piiest —as humble as pious—
commenced his labours as pastor of souls at St. Patrick’s, the
Divine Master had demanded of him, as formerly of St. Peter;
Joseph, lovest thou me? he would have answered with sim-
plicity : “Ah! Lord, Thou who knowest all things, Thou alone
knowest if I love Thee as I ought to love Thee, but Thou
knowest that I, at least, love the souls that Thou hast redeemed.
The most ardent desire of my heart, the sole ambition of my life
shall be to save, by Thy Grace, the souls that Thou hast con-
fided to my care.” He believed, we doubt not, that in that solemn
circumstance, our Lord addressed him the words ; “ Fasce agnos
meos , feed my lambi . Nourish them with the substantial bread
of my doctrine, open to them abundantly the sources of Thy
grace. How often, doubtless since that day, for him so memo-
rable, has he not heard the Saviour repeat to him, from the
depths of His tabernacle: Feed my lambs, pasce agnos meos !
The meditation on that powerful sentence gave every day a new
nourishment to his zeal. He will remain yet six years on the
earth.; his only preoccupation will be to sanctify the souls
confided to him.
Immediately after he was installed at St. Patrick’s he erected
in his church the stations of the way of the Cross ; he wished to
induce his parishioners without delay, to follow that salutary
practice of devotion. It was useless to say to him: Have a little
patience till we obtain from France pictures which will be an
ornament to the church. “ Ornaments will come by and by,”
said he, “ but we want immediately to hate sin, to love
God, and to become more fervent. Common pictures with very
simple crosses will do us great service. Besides,” added he,
ingenuously, “when I cannot speak more with God during
meditation I make the way of the Cross.” This habit he
brought with him from Tonga. There, following the example of


the missionaries a good number of the neophytes perform the way
of the Cross early in the morning. Father Monnier did at St.
Patrick’s as he had done at Tonga, and some pious persons
quickly imitated him. Every Monday evening the way of the
Cross was solemnly performed in the presence of a large con-
course of the faithful. This holy devotion has been an abundant
source of graces, not only for that parish, but for many others
where the stations have been erected after the example of St.
Patrick’s. Let us add that it was in going through these holy
stations that Father Monnier prepared himself for his weekly
confession.
The Catholics of Australia have imported from Ireland the
sentiment of a filial devotion to Mary. A Marist in his thoughts,
in his affections, in all his life, the pious priest of St. Patrick’s
loved to speak often to his people of the august mother of Jesus
Christ, and of the sincere and devout homage that they ought to
render her. He knew that the recitation of the Eosary was not
practised as much as it should be, and his piety lamented it; thus
he sought from the beginning a means of bringing pious persons to
render every day to Mary that homage of their devotion. The
means was to go himself, and throw himself on his knees at the
foot of the Holy Virgin’s altar, before his Mass, and there, after
having recommended the sick, the sinners, and the other wants
of the parish, he recited the Eosary in a loud voice. At first
there were few to answer him, but the pious assistance gradually
increased. It was thus that the examples rather than the exhor-
tations of this true servant of Mary, brought his people to pray
more to the Blessed Virgin, and to celebrate piously her feasts.
But he had at heart to honor St. Joseph specially in his parish.
Devotion to that great Saint was for him a family devotion,
which he brought from his birthplace, for there exists at
Amathay-Ydsigneux, in honour of the foster-father of Jesus
Christ, a confraternity of which Father Monnier was always a
member, from his first communion, and he was fond of recalling
the circumstance that during the unhappy days of the revolu-
tion, the registers of the confraternity had been confided to his


family. He looked upon himself as the client of St. Joseph
by right of birth, and esteemed himself happy in having
received his name in baptism. He, therefore, caused a pretty
altar to be erected in his Church, surmounted by a beautiful
statue of the holy Patriarch ; and proclaimed at St. Patrick’s, as
he had done, indeed, everywhere the privileges, the power, and
the bounty of St. Joseph. Pious exercises were recited during
his month, and the faithful liked to attend them, as they did
those of the month of Mary. Father Monnier knew that the
shortest and easiest road to bring souls to Jesus was to make
them pass by Joseph and Mary; by means of those pious prac-
tises and holy devotions he wished to bind souls to that divine
master by cords that nothing could break.
The Word of God is frequently announced at St. Patrick’s, not
only during the months of March and May, and during the
retreat of every year ; but, at ordinary times, there is an instruc-
tion every Wednesday evening, and on Sunday, besides the cus-
tomary sermons at mass and vespers, there is a short discourse
given at the low masses. Naturally, Father Monnier took a
large part in the ministry of preaching; the habit that he had
acquired ; the abundant depth and fullness of his doctrine, the
ardour of his zeal, caused him to be always ready. If his in-
structions were frequent, they were always short, simple, prac-
tical, and breathing the spirit of faith. In the pulpit he was
truly a man of God. At the confessional he exhibited the same
zeal, and a great spirit of gentleness, binding the wounds of
souls with charity and prudence. How long were his sittings
every week at the holy tribunal! It is not of him that sinners
and the languishing could say, like the paralytic : Hominem non
Jvabeo. At the first signal he was ready to receive them. It was
for him as well as for his confreres, who seconded him with zeal,
a great consolation to see the faithful assist in great numbers
during the week, and return to the Church in the even-
ing to visit the Blessed Sacrament, while the holy table was more
and more frequented, particularly by men. A superior officer
f our national marine, visiting Sydney, came to hear Mass at


St. Patrick’s; his astonishment was very great, because he had
seen nearly as many men as women, not only assisting at mass,
but even receiving the Holy Communion. I have never, added
he, seen that in France. As he was, himself, a good Christian,
he received this simple answer : Our men do not forget that they
have souls to save, as well as the women; they hope to enjoy the
same Paradise.
We may mention only in passing, that the parish of St. Patrick
contributed generously to the Peter Pence, and to the work of the
Propagation of the Faith. Father Monnier could not avoid com-
municating to his people something of his filial affection for Pius
IX. and his zeal for the conversion of infidels. The last time
that he entered the pulpit, the Wednesday before his death, it
was to recommend anew to his parishioners the admirable work
of the Propagation of the Faith.
Simple and humble, this priest, according to the heart of Jesus
Christ, had a special affection for children. We know how zealous
he was for their sanctification from the first years of his priesthood ;
he loved to make use of them as auxiliaries in his mission. When
he took charge of St. Patrick’s, the Sisters of Mercy had devoted
themselves already to the education of young girls ; but Father
Monnier lequired good brothers as teachers in order to assist him
in forming the boys to piety. The Little Brothers of Mary had
promised to come; but the date of their departure being yet
distant, he ceased not to press them on the subject, and to address
his prayers to God. Every delay was a real sorrow to his heart.
It may also be said that every obstacle to the good education of
children affected him more painfully than the other trials of his
ministry. With what zeal he prepared them for their first
communion ! We cannot resist the pleasure of reproducing here
the report of a first communion which took place the Ist Novem-
ber, 1873 ; it is the last he prepared. Nothing in this recital —
which we owe to Father Heuze—will appear extraordinary in
France ; but we should not forget that in Australia it is a sort of
innovation.
‘ ‘ The Feast of All Saints has been for us a day of great


consolations, and we hope, of beautiful fruits for Heaven; 115
children were admitted to their first communion. You know
that we Frenchmen attach great importance to that act; are we
wrong in this ? The retreat was given by Father Monnier, that
is to say everything. If I should add that the good Father dis-
played a dexterity, an ingenuity, an unaccustomed flow of spirits,
you will easily understand that he ceased not to captivate his
young auditory. His retreat lasted three days, and the Father
gave every day three instructions. Daring the exercises we
remarked an amelioration in the behaviour of the children com-
pared with preceding years. May thanks for this be rendered to
the Brothers, to the Sisters, and to our lay teachers, who apply
themselves with zeal to the religious instruction of our children.
It was truly edifying to hear them address their prayers eight
times a day, with taste and collectedness to the Sacred Heart of
Jesus, to the Holy Virgin, to St. Joseph and St. Patrick ; but
above all I admired them every night at the procession of the
way of the Gross, where they prayed piously with the priest
without any supervision. I esteem it a happiness to have been
constantly with them during this retreat.
“ Father Kirk gave to these 115 angels the Grod whom they had
so much desired. After the breakfast, at which we served them
with cakes, fruits, sweetmeats, and tea, they assisted at the High
Mass, at which Father Monnier preached. The Retreat was not
finished, and it was necessary to avoid the dissipation which so
easily invades persons of that age. At two o’clock they returned
to the church; the vespers were preceded by the rosary. After
Benediction, and a short discourse, the good Father Monnier
distributed to the children the souvenirs of their first communion.
You may believe that he made 115 persons happy, without
speaking of the joy of their parents.
‘‘The great ceremony of renewing the baptismal vows had
been postponed to the following Sunday after vespers ; you judge
rightly that no one was absent. There they were all, the girls
dressed in white, the boys wearing a scarf with a rosette at the
side. The Cross and the acolytes opened the march. The first


girl carried the banner of the Sacred Heart, and her companions
advanced two and two ; the banner of the Holy Heart of Mary
finished the procession of the girls. The boys followed the
banner of St. Patrick ; they alone carried tapers. The banner of
St. Louis of Gonzaga preceded the twelve children of the choir,
the clergy and the celebrant in cope. The choir and the organ
chanted the Litany of the Blessed Virgin, all the assistants
responding. The church was much too small, which is the case
at all our processions. But what can we do ?
“You recollect well the disposition of the sanctuary of our
church. At the turning all the children took their place there in
the following order: The boys in three ranks occupied the steps
which rise to the superior platform; the girls in four ranks occu-
pied the steps of the inferior platform. All the children turned
towards the pulpit, the girls having their hands joined, the boys
holding their tapers in the right hand, with the left resting on
their breast. All were attentive and immovable like statues.
Behind them the altar was a transplendent mass of flames.
Prom the nave the view was certainly magnificent. Let me place
here a parenthesis. The journal has published a long article on
our beautiful feast; its reporter has hardly seen more than this
coup d’ceil. That which he should have seen and reported was
the retreat which had prepared these happy children; for that
beautiful day. Let us return to St. Patrick’s.
“ Father Monnier threw all his eloquence, but still more his
heart, into his short sermon. Afterwards, all these children,
with one voice, loud, accentuated, intelligible, renounced Satan,
his works, and pomps, and promised to keep the commandments
of God and His Church till death. All present fell on their
knees. A boy pronounced before the High Altar the Consecra-
tion to the Sacred Heart of Jesus. A girl went before the Altar of
the Blessed Virgin, and with a trembling voice, but so well
accentuated that all present heard every word, she read the
Consecration to the Immaculate Heart of Mary. At last, Thomas


Fay, aged nine years and a-half, before the altar of St.
Joseph, splendidly illuminated, read a consecration to that great
Saint, whom he called; Good Father, Patron of the Universal
Church. The Benediction of the Blessed Sacrament was given,
and we sent back these dear children to their families. We
shall find them again in a year, please God, and we shall add to
them a hundred new communicants, to present the whole for
confirmation.’'
As Father Heuzd predicted, First Communion and Confirma-
tion took place at St. Patrick’s, the 19th November last; but the
good Father Monnier, the friend of children was no longer there.
He had achieved the task which the Sovereign Priest had
assigned him, and he was gone to receive his recompense.
Before recounting his death, let us say something of his interior
dispositions.
His life was well occupied : it might be said that the ministry
absorbed all his moments, but his zeal for the sanctification of
others never caused him to neglect prayer, and, in particular,
meditation. When he had not sufficient time before mass for
prayer and to recite matins and lauds, his rule was to postpone
the office. He used to say : I shall not omit my breviary, that
is certain, but meditation postponed is often meditation omitted,
and this must not be.”
He facilitated as much as possible the return of sinners to God •
thus, while he remained faithful to principles, he leaned towards
mercy. Indulgent to others, he was severe with regard to him-
self ; the slightest thing troubled his conscience, which had been
always timorous and delicate. Here is an example : One day
he received a visit from a friend to whom he voluntarily confided
his troubles. His friend found him melancholy, and asked him
if he was sick, “No, replied he, but I am sad. For the first
time in my life, I have said mass with a troubled conscience. I
should have wished to reconcile myself, but Father Joly arrived
too late, and I have been obliged to content myself with an act
of contrition.” What then had happened to him? For many
days past an old woman, who did not even belong to his parish,


was in the habit of coming to ask money from him, sometimes
for one thing, sometimes for another; as he believed her wants
to be real, he always gave her something. But he was at length
informed that she made use of his alms to drink to excess. She
returned that morning ; he declared to her that he would give
her nothing more. That fury commenced to insult him, and he
turned her out of the house. Though he had done this quietly,
he reproached himself for this conduct.
A fortnight before his death, Father Monnier returning from
a visit to a sick person, found in the street, a little girl of five or
six years, who, in falling had severely injured her leg. He
engaged a cab, took the child with him, and went to seek a
woman to dress the wound. When the child had fully come to
herself, she began to cry. The Father believed that she suffered
much; but no, only in falling she had lost two halfpence that her
mother had given her to pay for a book at school Here is four,
said he, take them, and cry no more. In the evening he had
her taken to her parents, who were Protestants, and knew not
Father Monnier. The mother hastened to express her gratitude*
He was kind, affable to all, compassionate to the afflicted,
and truly charitable towards the poor. The Protestants were as
ready to render him that testimony 7 as the Catholics. “We
knew him not,” said many 7 Protestant ladies after his death,”
but we have often heard of his virtues, and, above all, of his
great charity towards the poor. You have lost a saint.”
During the six years of his parochial ministry at St. Patrick’s,
notwithstanding his multifarious occupations and his great
fatigues, at the desire of the bishops, he found time and strength
to give the holy exercises of the retreat to the clergy, the religious
communities, and the parishes of the city. His health was,
however, very delicate ; but by energy of will, and ardour of
zeal, he made up for the strength which was gradually leaving
him.
God, wishing to complete the purification of his servant,
sent him in the last weeks of his life, trials of a very
severe nature. He himself had the presentiment that they would


shorten his days. “Itis at the feet of my crucifix that I speak
to you of this grief” (wrote he, in his last letter but one), “ but
it kills me.”
On that occasion he said to a lady who visited him: “ Pray to
God that he may come and take me soon. You see that my
mission is finished ” Fifteen days after his prayer was heard.
We will allow the Reverend Father Joly to relate the last
moments of our pious confrere :
Sydney, 29th September, 1874.
My Very Reverend Father, —
Father Monnier died on Tuesday, loth September, the octave
of the Nativity of the Blessed Virgin, at one o’clock p.m. Since
the Friday preceding he complained of a sore throat, without
however attaching much importance to it; thus*he continued to
fulfil with his accustomed zeal all the duties of his charge, and
to hear the confessions, which at St. Patrick’s are always very
numerous on Friday evening. He had himself confessed that
day. On Saturday morning he again said the Holy Mass, but
he was barely able to finish the holy sacrifice, and he went to
bed soon after. The doctor was immediately called ;he declared
that Father Monnier suffered from an angina , the character of
which he could not yet determine. Otherwise his inquietude was
not great, as many persons in Sydney were suffering from sore
throat. Father Monnier appeared then to be attacked by the
malady of the season; it only appeared to be a little more serious
on account of his anemic state. Sunday was the feast of the
holy name of Mary ; our dear patient was worse; he wished
nevertheless to assist at the Holy Mass, and he sat up many
times during the day. Desirous of knowing how he was, and of
assisting the Fathers of St. Patrick’s, who were very busy that
day, I sent Brother Gennade to remain with Father Monnier and
take care of him. He carried to him a bottle of water from the
miraculous spring at Lourdes. In the afternoon he sent back
the Brother with a note,* in which he thanked me with effusion
for having thought of him, and he declared to me that he had
no need of any one.
Towards the evening, as he suffered much, and as he had not
slept the preceding night, Dr. Laure gave him a soporific ; he
slept well, and in the morning feeling himself better, he rose
* Vide Apendi — lr.


early and went himself to waken Father Henze, telling him that
he was getting well. During the whole day he was, or appeared
really in the way of being cured. Except during some intervals
I remained nearly all the time with him, or rather he remained
with mo in the room in which I wrote. When I left him at six
in the evening, in company with the physician who had come to
see him for the second time that day, there was every appearance
that he would have a more tranquil night than the preceding.
He inquired if he could go, the Monday following, to Windsor,
to give a sermon that he had promised to our late Vicar-General,
on occasion of the forty hours. On the declaration of the phy-
sician that, even in case of a perfect cure, he would advise him
not to preach so soon, and that to tranquillise his conscience he
expressly forbid him to preach. Father Monnier requested me to
write for him, and excuse him to the Hev. Father Sheehy.
In defiance of the entreaties of Father Heuze, and the
reiterated offers of the good teaching Brothers, our patient would
not allow any one to remain in his chamber, or in the neigh-
bourhood during the night. The following morning Fathers
Heuze and Kirk went many times to see him, five or six times
in all, and always found him sleeping tranquilly, at least in
appearance. The servant entering his room about half-past seven,
thought that he breathed with pain; she ran to the Church to
seek Father Heuze, who was finishing his Mass; the physician
was also immediately sent for. Father Heuze was frightened at
the change which had taken place in so short a time ; the patient
breathed in fact with difficulty, and a white froth came out of
his mouth. Father Heuze hastened to do all he could in that
painful conjuncture ; he gave him absolution, administered to
him extreme unction, without, however, obtaining certain signs
of recognition. The physician succeeded by various means in
rendering to the patient more strength and freer respiration, but
his consciousness never returned, at least so far as could be per-
ceived. When I arrived at St. Patrick’s, a little before ten
o'clock, the news of his death -was spread throughout the city by
the numerous persons who came every day to the nine o’clock
Mass. It w r as not true, but our dear confrere was really in his
agony, I found him in the state that I have described. The
approaches of the house, the passages, the chamber of the dying
•were crowded by people in tears. Two other doctors had come
to consult with Dr. Laure; but all declared that there was no
longer any hope. This w r as for all of us a very terrible blow r , to
see a confrere so beloved carried away so suddenly, without
obtaining from him a word or a sign. In order to excite his


attention, I spoke to him of everything that he loved the most,
in heaven and on earth, of Jesus, of Mary and St. Joseph, of the
Church and of Pius IX., of our Society of Mary, of you my very
reverend Father, of the Rev. Father Poupinel, of his confreres
present and of many others, the remembrance of whom was still
dear to him, of his sister, of whom he often spoke to us, and
lastly of his good parishioners, who lamented in the streets, in
the whole house, and in his chamber around his bed. It seemed
to me by a movement of his lips, and by the impressions pro-
duced on his figure that he understood what I said; but iu other
respects all his members appeared to be in a complete torpidity.
His Grace the Archbishop and his Ooadj utor, having been informed,
arrived the one after the other, and showed themselves full of
kindness. The Archbishop, notwithstanding his eighty years,
remained nearly all the time kneeling by the bedside of the
moribund, giving him absolution, reciting the prayers of the
agonising, and other prayers. Many priests came also to unite
their prayers to ours. The doctor being of opinion that Father
Monnier died of a malignant angina of a very contagious character,
repeatedly cautioned all of us not to approach, and not to remain
long near the bed of the dying; no one appeared to fear, or to pay
attention to the doctor’s warnings. If some consented to retire, it
was to give place to others who desired •to contemplate for the
last time the features of their excellent pastor. At last, at
1 o’clock all was finished. Father Monnier had given up his
soul to God, without effort, as if he had slept a most profound
sleep.
I acknowledge, my reverend Father, that I had much diffi-
culty in persuading myself that he was really dead. I had
nourished the hope, during the long hours of his agony, that he
would not be taken from us, that his patron St. Joseph, that our
Lady of Lourdes, whom we had not ceased to invoke during his
illness, but especially during that sorrowful morning, making
frequent use of the water from the miraculous spring, would not
deprive us of a confrere so necessary—would not, at least, permit
him to die in circumstances so sad, without being able to say to
us a word of adieu. We had not even the consolation of remain-
ing near his body so long as we should have wished. The good
Dr. Laure, who truly displajmd unbounded devotedness in that
sad moment, absolutely ordered that those who had remained a
long time in the chamber of the deceased should quit it forth-
with, and that new comers only should be admitted to the
favour of enshrouding him. Father Muraire was charged with


rendering that last duty to our well beloved brother, and of
clothing him with the sacred vestments.
It was with great difficulty that we could keep hack the suc-
cessive crowds who wished to see for the last time their venerated
Father. We were urged in the strongest manner to allow the
coffin to remain open, in order that they might see, at least in
the Church, the figure of the dear defunct. We were bound to
resist all these entreaties, which redoubled our tears. Those
who approached the body at the moment the coffin was closed,
acknowledged that the doctor had good reason for the order he
had given ; but, before closing it, those who were present came
in succession, knelt beside the body, kissed the hands of the
Father, and touched with them their rosaries, books and other
objects that they had with them.
Their Graces the Archbishops deigned to return to see us in
the afternoon, and approved of the measures we had taken ; they
decided that the interment should take place the following day.
The removal of the body took place about seven in the evening;
the sad procession entered the Church, preceded by the Fathers,
the brothers, and some other gentlemen, who carried lighted
tapers. The Church was crowded. When the body passed the
threshold the organ played a funeral march, but the sobbings of
all that people at the sight .of the coffin which contained the
remains of a well beloved father, were such that the sound of the
organ was no longer heard. It was amid these most touching
evidences of sorrow and affection that the body of Father
Monnier traversed the Church and was deposited on the cata-
falque that had been prepared before the sanctuary. In the
fear that the faithful might, out of piety, approach too near the
coffin and kiss it, we caused the catafalque to be made very high,
so that the bier commanded the whole church. The catafalque
was furnished with many lights, between which were large and
beautiful white flowers. The whole church was hung with
black, but the eye amid that great mourning reposed sweetly on
the altar, the whiteness of its marble tabernacle appeared then as
a hope of resurrection.
While we chanted the office of the dead it was necessary to
open a passage around the catafalque, in order to satisfy as much
as possible the pious ardour of the faithful who wished to
approach nearer, and give their Father a last testimony of
affectionate respect; that passage was kept, up till nearly the
middle of the night. Then the women were ordered out, and
men only were admitted to the watching. The next day the


church was filled anew at an early hour, and continued full
during the different masses which succeeded each other till the
solemn office began. The communions were numerous.
The solemn service took place at ten o’clock. His Grace the
Archbishop presided on the throne. His Grace the Archbishop
of Nazianzus sung the High Mass. The principal Catholics of
Sydney were present. Admiral Ribourt, who had known and
appreciated Father Monnier, M Lormier, his aide-de-camp, M.
Courtin, Acting-Consul of France, were also present. The place
and the surrounding streets were filled with a great crowd who
were unable to find room in the church, and who remained in
that position notwithstanding the rain which fell from time to
time.
Archbishop "Vaughan, after Mass, ascended the pulpit, and
made the funeral eulogium of Father Monnier. He took for text
these words of St. Paul to Timothy : Lahora sicut bonus miles
Christi Jesu .* He at first related briefly the career of the
defunct from the seminary at Besangon until his installation at
St. Patrick’s in place of Archdeacon McEncroe. He dwelt at
length on his labours in that parish, the conversions he had
obtained, the pious devotions he had introduced, the considerable
change that his zeal had wrought. He praised his zeal, his
simplicity, his humility. He spoke of the retreats and missions
that he had given in the different dioceses of the colony, and
even in Queensland. He represented him as the true soldier of
Jesus Christ, whose field of battle was chiefly before the Holy
Yirgin’s altar and in the confessional. The eloquent prelate
appealed to those who frequented St. Patrick’s Church, and
demanded of them if it was not there that, every day of the
•week, and every hour of the day, they were sure of finding
Father Monnier, that good priest, that child of Mary, that
indefatigable apostle, that true soldier of Jesus Christ—at least
unless he had gone to some other parish to preach a retreat or a
mission.
Archbishop Vaughan is an orator, and he was truly eloquent
that day. Thus he caused many tears to be shed, especially
when he appealed to his audience in the manner I have indi-
cated. But, however high his eulogium of Father Monnier, no
one thought it exaggerated. Father Monnier had really won
for himself the deep esteem and affection of all, priests and
laymen. For the Catholic public he had become the humble,
zealous, and mortified priest, devoted to the salvation of all.
* Labour as a good soldier of Christ Jesus.


Bishops, priests, and laymen of all conditions, gave him marks
of the most unlimited confidence. He had inaugurated in New
South Wales the work of retreats and missions ; thus he was
called, with good right, the apostle of the country. This is the
title people unceasingly give him in the letters addressed to us,
and in the visits of condolence that they have made to us, on
occasion of his death. All in one voice deplore that death as a
great calamity.
Thus, the manifestation of sympathy, regrets, and sorrow,
which took place at his death and funeral, has been truly
solemn and magnificent. If we had been able to retard the
interment for a day or two, bishops, priests, and many of the
faithful would have come from different parts of the country to
take part in that funeral solemnity. But, sudden as it was, I
believe that nothing has been seen in Sydney so imposing,
though simple, since the funeral of the Prince of Conde. At the
moment the body was taken out of the church, the tears and
sobbing of the people were something heart-rending.
The procession was opened by the school girls, under the con-
duct of the Sisters of Mercy. The children were dressed in white,
with black girdles. The numerous boys of the Brothers’ School
followed, four a-breast. They were followed by the various
associations of the parish: The Young Men’s Society, the Chil-
dren of Mary, dressed in blue and white, the members of the
Christian Doctrine Society, and lastly, the Guild of St. Mary and
St. Joseph. The Little Brothers of Mary, the Children of the
Choir, and a considerable number of priests preceded our Vener-
able Archbishop in his carriage. We, the confreres of the
defunct, marched immediately before the hearse drawn by four
horses; the hearse was surrounded by the gentlemen who car-
ried the corners of the pall.
After the body came Admiral Eibourt, with his aide-de-camp ;
the Acting-Consul of Prance, the greater part of the Prench
residing in Sydney, the principal Catholics of the city, and a long
succession of other persons. Contrary to the usage of the
country all walked bare headed, in imitation of Admiral Eibourt,
who gave that example. It was truly a great consolation for us
to see France represented in that sad circumstance by a high
dignitary of our national marine, and by a true Christian.
Besides, he himself declared to me, when I thanked him, that in
associating himself to our regrets, he had been happy and proud
to take his little part in that great manifestation of sorrow and
respect, in honour of a poor French missionary in a strange
colony and at the end of the world.


The procession, after leaving the church, descended Charlotte
Place as far as George-street, proceeded up that street to a long
distance as far as King-street, and thence down that street to
the Parramatta steamers’ wharf, where we embarked in order to
proceed to the cemetery of St. Charles, at Eyde. The greatest
order was observed throughout. Notwithstanding the immense
crowd who followed the procession, or who stationed themselves
along the streets in great numbers, there was not the least dis-
order or the slightest accident. Though that long passage took
place at the moment when business was in full activity, and in
the centre of commerce, all movement in the streets was spon-
taneously suspended. A body of constables assisted much in
maintaining good order in the streets, and keeping the wharf
sufficiently clear. Nearly all would have wished to accompany
us to the cemetery, but we had only three steamers. We could
only permit men to go on board, and onty as many as the steamers
could contain. The crowd was obliged to submit to circum-
stances, and return to the city.
At the landing place at Gladesville—although the rain had
come on during our journey, and our arrival was two hours later
than the time fixed —many of our parishioners of St. Charles
awaited us with a hearse ; the procession was organized anew, and
went over the three miles which separated us from our cemetery.
It was nearly four o’clock when this sad and imposing ceremony
terminated. Our dear Father Monnier reposes beside our
Fathers Mathieu and Schahl, Brothers Joseph Luzy and Victor
loela.
Besides the pain of having lost so suddenly an excellent con-
frere, the oldest among us by age and profession, who merited
all our confidence, who did so much honour to our Society by his
virtues and apostolic labours, so admired of all, we feel that we
have lost an indefatigable workman, who could multiply himself,
and whom it will be difficult to replace.
We would desire to send to the family of the defunct some of
the objects used by him, but we have been hardly able to prevent
his chamber from being stripped. Every one wished to possess
something belonging to their so much lamented pastor. We
had much difficulty in saving the poor pictures which were found
in his breviary, and two or three other little things. At least,
his sister shall have the rosary with which the hands of Father
Monnier were armed during his malady, and at the moment of
his death.


Thus, my Very Feverend Father, we, your children in Aus-
tralia, are plunged in a profound sorrow. Still, it has pleased
our Lord to soften it by great consolations. Not only has the
death of Father Monnier been an event for Sydney, and all have
shown us a touching sympathy, but we can say that he preaches
still after his death. That death has made a salutary impression
on many souls.
Deign to accept, &c.,
0. M. Joly, S.M.
On that tomb, so unexpectedly closed, we may engrave these
words of the wise man, speaking of Moses, the great servant of
God: Dilectus Deo et hominibus, cujus memoria in benedictione est. *
Applied to Joseph Monnier, they are still true; his memory has
remained in benediction wherever he has been. As soon as the
news of his death reached the parishes which he had evangelised
in France twenty years ago, the regrets expressed, and the
eulogiums that gratitude caused to gush from their hearts, prove
well that the memory of that just man had not fled.
The inhabitants of Amathay-Yesigneux, justly proud of their
holy compatriot, and full of gratitude for the good that he had
done to their souls, in giving a retreat in his native parish,
before his departure for Oceanica, had never forgotten him.
Since that time, every Sunday, in two congregations of men and
women, at Amathay-Yesigneux, they had prayed for the
missionary who, at the other side of the world, discharged in
their name the great debt of the gift of faith. Let M. Henriet
receive here the expression of our affectionate gratitude. That
venerable priest, at the first news of the death of Father
Monnier, had a service for him. “ There was nothing so sad,
and at the same time so consoling, as that funeral ceremony; all
the parish was there to testify its sorrow and to acquit a debt of
gratitude. The following Sunday they made an offering accord-
ing to the custom of the country. Within the memory of man
* Beloved of God and men, whose memory is in benediction.


no such crowd had been seen to take part in such a ceremony.”
The memoiy of Father Monnier is not effaced at Tonga.
“ Our Catholics, especially those of Maofaga,” (Father Lamaze
writes to us) “ have still a great affection for him, the.news of
his death therefore caused them very deep regret; but they felt
a real sentiment of pride when ■ they heard of the extraordinary
honours paid to their old missionary in the city of Sydney. Our
dear Tongans have equally rendered to our regretted confrere all
the honours in use in this country, and the prayers we have
offered for him have been followed with fervour.”
The parishioners of Father Monnier, and the Catholics of
Sydney, wish also to keep alive among them the remembrance
of the priest whom they so deeply regretted. A meeting was
convoked for the Sunday which followed his death. The presi-
dent of that assembly after having praised the virtues and the
works of the defunct, added, “We who have so perfectly known
Father Monnier, have no want of a memorial to keep alive in
the bottom of our hearts the memory of that holy priest; but
we ought to erect one to perpetuate in this parish his name and
the recollection of his virtues. We ought to do so in the interest
of our children whom he loved so much.”
A committee was formed immediately to receive subscriptions,
which in a few days amounted to a large sum. It is agreed that
a little monument shall be erected on the tomb of F ather
Monnier, similar to those placed on the tombs of Fathers Mathieu
and Schahl, near to whom he is interred in the cemetery of St.
Charles, at Ryde. It has been considered that the dear defunct,
humble in his life, would wish still to be so in his death. The
parishioners of St. Patrick’s, however, and the Catholics of
Sydney have not been content with so modest a testimony of
their affectionate gratitude. Some large stained windows are
to be placed in the Church of St. Patrick as a memorial, ever
present, of him whom death has removed from the affection
of his parishioners.


TAFf
ry t rtf tF)
52
APPENDIX.
t V
The following memoranda, which have been kindly furnished by
Fathers Joly and Henze, will show that the life of Father
Monnier was one of continued zeal. They relate to the year
1874, the last of his life :
February. —From the 9th till the 14th he was in the mission of Camden
preparing the children for their first communion, and for confirmation.
March. —From the first till the Bth he gave a retreat at the Church of St.
Francis, Sydney; from the 9th till the 17th a retreat at St. Patrick’s
preached by the Rev. G. Dillon, but in which Father Monnier had an
immense amount of work ; from the 22nd till the 27th he gave a retreat at
Newtown.
April. —From the 27 th April till the 3rd May he gave a retreat to the
clergy of the diocese of Maitland.
May (month of Mary). —After his return from Maitland he preachod
every evening at St. Patrick’s, On the 10th he preached at Newtown.
On the 26th he commenced the retreat of the Sisters at Bathurst, which
lasted eight days, and he gave five instructions every day.
July. —He gave a retreat of eight days to the Dominican Sisters at
Maitland, and preached twice at the Cathedral of Maitland during the
retreat.
August. —He returned to Sydney on the oth August. On the 6th his
Grace Archbishop Yaughan required his attendance at Lyndhurst as con-
fessor to the Priests of the diocese, then in retreat.
In the following month he fell sick and died, after four days’ illness.
It should be added that, in addition to the extraordinary labours above-
mentioned, he was the weekly confessor of the two communities of St.
Vincent’s Convent and St. Vincent’s Hospital.
The following is a translation of the note referred to on
page 43, which will be interesting to many, as the very last
words written by Father Monnier :
13th September, 1874.
Very dear and Rev. Father,
I am very thankful to you for the interest you take in my illness, and for
the water of Lourdes which you have sent me. lam almost ashamed to give
you so much trouble, but I admire, at the same time, the kindness which
you are showing to a poor confrere who does not deserve it.
I think I am a little better, although the doctor says that my throat is
still in a state of great inflammation. I have not slept at all last night.
Yours truly,
J. Monnier.
1 - NOV 1992 “IB
o oby


, - M , / H


