

Memoirs and Instructions of Dutch Governors, Commandeurs, &c.
MEMOIR
BY
ANTHONY MOOYAART,
COMMANDEUR OF JAFFNAPATAM,
FOR THE INFORMATION AND GUIDANCE OF HIS SUCCESSOR,
NOEL ANTHONY LEBECK,
1766.
Translated by SOPHIA PIETERS,
Dutch Translator.
With an Introduction and Notes by the Government Archivist.




Metnoirs and Instructions of Dutch Governors, Commandeurs, &c.
MEMOIR
BY
ANTHONY MOOTYAART,
COMMANDEUR OF JAFFNAPATAM,
FOR THE INFORMATION AND GUIDANCE OF HIS SUCCESSOR,
NOEL ANTHONY LEBECK,
1766.
Translated by SOPHIA PIETERS,
Dutch Translator.
With an Introduction and Notes by the Government Archivist.
COLOMBO:
H. C. COTTLE, GOVERNMENT PRINTER, CEYLON.
1910.


INTRODUCTION.
The writer of this Memoir, Anthony Mooyaart, was born in
Jaffna in 1698. His family had been settled in the Island for
several years, the founder having been his grandfather, also an
Anthony Mooyaart, who came out in the service of the Dutch
East India Company shortly after its conquest by the Dutch,
and who married and died at Matara, in the Southern Province.
Ills father, Nicolaas Mooyaart, settled in Jaffna, and the
ranch of the family from which the Commandeur was de-
s< ended remained up to British times in that part of the Island.
It is evident that Anthony Mooyaart, the younger, received
his entire education in Jaffna; because, in a book of family
events compiled by him, no mention is made of a visit to
Europe. It speaks well for the system of education under the
Dutch in Ceylon that men could have been trained for the
highest offices of the Government without the trouble and
expense of a finishing course in the Fatherland. Commandeur
Mooyaart entered the Company’s Service in 1712 as a “ zoldaat
by de pen,” on 9 guilders a month. This meant that he had to
enlist as a private soldier and to hold himself ready to take up
arms while being trained for civil duties. Every gentleman’s
son, without exception, had to comply with this rule of the
Service. From zoldaat he was rapidly promoted adsistent,
loeJchovder, onderkoopman, koopman, opperkoopman —the
several grades of the Civil Service—until, in 1762, he received
lis appointment as Commandeur of Jaffnapatam, the highest
Jiost in the Island next to that of Governor. When, in May,
1765, the Governor, Baron van Eck, died somewhat suddenly
from the effects of fatigue and fever brought on during his
campaign against the Kandyans, Mooyaart was called upon
14-09


to undertake the Government of Ceylon in conjunction with
the Political Council at Colombo during one of the most
critical periods in the annals of the Island. The treaty with
the Sinhalese King, Kirti Sri Raja Sinha, by which the entire
sea board was acquired by the Dutch, was entered into a few
years later by Governor Falck, who relieved Mooyaart of his
temporary charge.
Commandeur Mooyaart died at Jaffna in 1767, and was
buried in the Dutch Church, where his tombstone may be seen.
He had a large family, most of whom died young. Five died
of smallpox within as many weeks, during an epidemic. The
only survivors w r ere two sons, Gualterus Mooyaart and Wouter
Christoffel Mooyaart, both of whom left descendants. Those
of the former in the male line have now left the Island, and
are residing, some in Holland and some in England; the latter
left only two daughters, who married in Ceylon and have
descendants now in the Island.
R. G. ANTHONISZ,
Government Archivist.
Colombo, October 25,1910.


MEMOIR
For the guidance of the Honourable Noel Anthony
Lebeck, Commandeur elect of Jaffnapatam
and its dependencies, left by Commandeur
Anthony Mooyaart on his retirement, and
entrusted to the Political Council.
r
Sm, — It is my advancing age that has made it necessary for
me to retire from-the arduous duties involved in the govern-
ment of this Commandement, so as to spend the remainder of
my life in rest and tranquillity. I sent in my resignation to
His Excellency Mr. Iman Willem Falck, Governor and Director
of the Island of Ceylon, and obtained his sanction to my
proposal by the letter dated Colombo, December 28 last. In
this letter it is stated that I am relieved of the administration
of this Commandement, with the retention of the dignity of
the said office, so as to enable me to enjoy the rest which I
find necessary. This was approved by Their Excellencies the
Government of India at Batavia by their letter of September
3, in which they spoke very highly of me, leaving it to me
whether to resign the Commandement or to retain office, saying
that either decision would meet with their approval, &c. As
retirement was my intention, and my resignation has been
accepted, Your Honour has been appointed as my successor,
and to you I now give over this Commandement, once again
wishing that God would bestow His blessing on all your under-
takings, so that it may tend to your own prosperity, the
advantage of the Honourable Company, and the benefit of the
country and the Church.
I have to compile a Memoir, in compliance with the instruc-
tions of Their High Mightinesses our Masters, contained in
their esteemed despatches from the Netherlands to Batavia,
September 10, 1746, and to Colombo, October 31, 1747 ,* an
1 The first of these dates is that of the original despatch from
Holland to Batavia, and the second that of the extract therefrom sent
to the Governor of Ceylon from the latter place.


extract of which was- sent here. In this Memoir lam to state
the general condition of the Commandement, and especially
particulars with regard to the trade and all that is connected
therewith, and also the character of the natives, and how they
are to be dealt with. All this is really unnecessary, because
Your Honour has a sufficient knowledge of local affairs, not
only having been a Dessave but also an Administrateur here.
I will, therefore, try to avoid all prolixity. Moreover, an ex-
tensive review by me for your information would be an affront
to the experience gained by yourself by your own observation,
Your Honour having been in authority during my illness in
the year 1764, and during the time I was in Colombo to act as
Governor of Ceylon on the death of the Honourable Lubbert
Jan Baron van Eck of blessed memory. 1 You must at that
time have observed the character of the natives, the condition
of the Commandement, and the state of the trade; so that I
will only briefly state here such particulars as I think may be
useful to you, omitting whatever would be only necessary for
any one who had no local knowledge.
According to instructions, three points must be taken up in
all Memoirs, viz.:—
1. The condition of the Commandement.
2. The state of trade and all connected therewith.
3. The character of the people and of the native
chiefs.
The last point will most probably be of the greatest importance.
I will, therefore, speak first of all of the inhabitants of this
Commandement, viz., those who live in the four Provinces, in
The Islands, and on the boundaries of the Wanni. They may
be truly called an evil and perverse race, as described in the
instructive Memoir of the Honourable Mr. Hendrik Zwaarde-
croon of blessed memory. They are usually full of jealousy,
and will hurt and trouble their fellow men by unrighteous
means, even if they have to suffer for it themselves. Yet they
will not allow the persons whom they thus harass to be
disgraced. If this is likely to happen they not only withdraw
their accusations, but even hunt up witnesses in their favour.
This is the reason that usually the prisons are filled with those
who turn out to be innocent, while the streets are full of
criminals. Too much care cannot therefore be exercised when
administering justice, to protect those unrighteously accused,
and to discover the real culprits who ought to be punished.
1 From May to August, 1765,


Notwithstanding this, we enjoy here the desired peace, and
even when the conflagration of revolt was raging most strongly
in the southern part of this Island a few years ago, 1 when it was
feared that it would also spread to the north, we found that
the natives here were quite tractable and manageable. This
is proved, for instance, by the fact that they worked for six
years at the moat and the covered road around this fortress
without grumbling, and performed instead of their usual 12
days of oely service a year, twice as many, or 24 days, without
any pay, while they paid their poll tax and whatever else was
exacted from them by the Company promptly every year.
The Government of Ceylon, seeing the heavy burden which
the poor natives had to bear, reduced the number of Oeliam-
mers who were required to perform labour to half the number,
viz., 300 men, so that they only need to attend as formerly
12 days. Out of pity for them it was also agreed to give each
man who worked a medied 2 rice daily, or one parra of rice or
two parras of nely monthly, as an allowance. This may be
seen in the correspondence carried on between this place and
Colombo, the latter bearing date August 26, October 30, and
September 28, and the former September 21 and October 16
last year.
I do not propose to enter into a description of the services of
the people, nor to specify the various castes there are among
the natives, nor will I state here which services each caste has
to perform for the Company, or what each person has to pay
as Poll, Adigary, Officie, and Chicos taxes, as well as Land
rent; because Your Honour has had acquaintance with all
these matters, and they are all stated in the Thombos and
family rolls, while in some of the Memoirs of my predecessors
a detailed account of them may be found, especially in
that of the Honourable Mr. Zwaardecroon, bearing the date
January, 1697, where the most essential points are set down.
And these, so far as the particular circumstances have not
changed in the course of time, may be useful as a guide in
furthering the interests of the Company, and to these I will
here refer.
According to the latest Compendium, the number of inhab-
itants was 187,599. The Thombohouder, Mr. van Hek, and two
1 This probably refers to the treacherous acts of the Sinhalese in the
Matara District which preceded the war with the King of Kandy.
• This is a word of Portuguese origin which was of frequent use in
Ceylon. It was the same as the choondoo or quarter seer. Valentyn
(Beschryving van Ceylon, p. 56), defining it as a measure of weight,
makes it equal to seven “ mutsjens” or quarterns.


Special Commissioners are engaged in the revision of the head
Thombo, 1 and will submit a report of their work. The inhab-
itants of the parish of Warrime, 2 who complain of the vexations
that they are subject to owing to the covetousness of the
Majoraals, Canganys, and Lascoreens, in the extortion of
fanum for each coconut tree, have asked that these trees may,
like the jak trees, be counted and entered in the Thombo, and
that it may be decided how much oil they have to deliver yearly
for each tree. The Political Council here has passed a resolu-
tion, bearing date October 9 last, that not only in Warrime,
but in all the four Provinces, a correct enumeration should bo
made of all coconut trees by the Porremonde Mudaliyar and
the Mayoraals, in the presence of the owners, and the state-
ments taken down on oath. This is to be done in each village
when the reports are received, with a view to a proper estimate
being made, not only to facilitate the delivery of oil, but also
for the cutting of olas for the elephants, as this latter also used
to cause a great deal of trouble. This being done, the request
of the petitioners may be disposed of.
The second subdivision of the third point to be treated of
in my Memoir is, according to instructions, the subject of the
Native Princes; but as there are none of these here, and as the
Kandyan King rules in the East, or rather in the centre of this
Island, and his territory is sufficiently separated from this
Commandement by a wilderness, and as, moreover, we have
nothing to do with him, I do not wish, nor am I able, to treat
of this subject. I will now take up the description of the
largest part of this Commandement, called the Wanni, which
consists mostly of large forests, and is an extensive, but, for the
greater part, barren and uncultivated territory, which, as said
above, separates our dominion from that of the Kandyan King.
This territory is, on account of its great extent, divided into
eight Provinces, which are placed in temporary possession of
some of the Mayoraals, under the name of Wannias, who, in
return, deliver yearly 42£ alias 3 to the Honourable Company,'
as stated in the aforesaid instructive Memoir of the Honourable
Mr. Zwaardecroon, in which this matter, like all others, is
fully explained.
The Wanni consists of six Provinces, which are at present
1 The Thombo, or register of lands, was divided into two parts, viz.,
the “Head Thombo,” which contained the names of the proprietors,
and the Land Thombo, which gave the names and description of the
lands.
• Varane.
• “ Alias” were elephants without tusks.


held as fiefs by the following Wannias, their yearly tribute
being stated after the name of each Province, namely:—
• Elephants.
The Province of Paunegammo, 1 under the feudal
tenure of the Wannitje Maria Kajlerie Naatje,
tribute .. .. .. 16
Under the rule of the Wannia Don Diogoe
Poevinelle Mapane are the four Provinces of—
Garrecattemoele, 2 tribute.. .. 7
Camawelpattoe, 3 tribute .. .. 4
Moeliawalle, 4 tribute .. .. 1
Meelpattoe, 8 tribute .. ... 1
The Province of Tinnemarrawaddy, 8 ruled by
Francisco Sedoegawela Mapane, tribute .. 1
Total .. 30
But these people are so very slow about the delivery of their
tribute, that, whatever efforts I made, I could not succeed in
collecting the full number of animals from them, and still less
in making them pay up the arrears. The plan ordered to be
followed by the Honourable Mr. van Mydregt, 7 on November
29, 1690, in answer to certain points submitted to him by
Commandeur Floris Blom on October 20 that year, has long
got into disuse. He ordered that one of the Wannias should
be kept in the Castle as a hostage, each Wannia taking his turn
for three months at a time. These Wannias are very vain and
conceited. It seems that the title of Wannia makes them so,
as they seem to imagine that it is something very grand, and
that those who hold it need show but little regard to the Com-
pany. It looks as if they were in doubt whether or not they
ought to obey the orders issued by the Company, and it not
infrequently happens that the demands of the Company are
disregarded. The Wannia Don Diogoe Poevinelle Mapane
excels in this conduct. I have often rebuked him and sent
him sharp olas, which he answers, according to the nature of
the Mallabaars, with all kinds of false excuses. There are,
however, no definite proofs of their disloyalty towards the
Company.
1 Panankamam Division. 8 Karikkaddumulai Division.
5 Kaninavalpattu. 4 Mulliyavalai Division.
* Melpattu Division. • Tenmiradchi Division.
7 Hendrick Adriaan van Kheede, Lord of Mydregt, High Commis-
sioner to Bengal, Coromandel, Ceylon, &c., 1684-92.


What I have said with regard to the inhabitants of Jaffna-
patam applies also to the natives of Manaar and the three
Provinces of Mantotte, 1 Nanathan, 2 and Moesely 3 belonging
thereto, except that the Parruas, 4 who are otherwise very
useful to the Company in their work at sea, are prone to revolt;
because some among them are given to drink and lead the
others away. A strict vigilance must therefore be kept over
thenr. Formerly, the three Provinces Mantotte, Nanathan,
and Moesely, as also Prinsgaly,® were under the subaltern rule
of Wannias, but the Company has now appointed an Adigar
and other Chiefs over the first three of these Provinces, who
are responsible for the collection of the tithes and have to look
after the capture of elephants; while the inhabitants of Prins-
galy, in return for the freedom from the control of Wannias
given to them in 1692, have to deliver yearly two alias to the
Company. From Manaar are obtained yearly on an average
for sale 8 or 10 elephants, a small fixed compensation having
been from olden times granted to the hunters.
I will not discuss here the form of government, nor how
justice is administered, or how far the practice here differs
from the laws in the Netherlands. I will only state that the
natives are very anxious for the old customs to be maintained,
although these do not agree with any natural or written law.
It was most probably for this reason that in the year 1707 the
Dessave here at the time, Claas Isaacsz, made a list, by order
of the Government of Ceylon, of all the old practices in use
here, which was revised by the native chiefs (see letter from
Colombo dated June 4, 1707).* It is extremely difficult,
although quite necessary, to administer even justice in this
Commandement, so as to maintain the reputation held by the
Netherlanders for wise and just government, and at the same
time to win the hearts of the natives and secure their loyalty.
I found it most difficult to protect the poor when they had the
right on their side from the peculation and oppression of their
own countrymen. .Those who have the power and are held in
estimation by the authorities are like birds of prey, who strip
their victims to the bone of everything they have and leave
them hardly their lives. When a poor man brings a charge
1 Mantai. * Nanaddan. 3 Musali.
* Paravar ; fishermen of the first class. A second, third, and fourth
class were called, respectively, Karaiyar, MukkuvcU, and TimUar. See
Lewis’ Manual of the Fannt, p. 82.
3 Pringale = Perunkalai, north of Mantota.
• The reference here is to the compilation of The Tesawalamai by
order of the Governor Cornelis Joan Simons. This has been reprinted
in Vol. L of the Ceylon Legislative Enactments.


against an influential Mallabaar, or has been injured by him,
the latter uses his influence in such a way that if steps be not
taken to bring the offender to justice, the offence either remains
undetected, or, if detected, the facts are so perverted that the
poor man does not receive the justice which he is entitled to;
while again, many others are accused who are perfectly
innocent. Powerful or rich Mallabaars, and even ordinary
Lascoreens, often bring charges against innocent people towards
whom they have a grudge, or when they fail to extort from
them as much as they wish to. They sometimes even bring
witnesses, simply to make themselves important and feared.
A pious Government should guard against such practices as
much as possible; justice should be administered to poor and
rich alike.
Since the Company took possession of this territory, the
Reformed Christian religion has been preached and taught
with much zeal and perseverance, in the Dutch language, in
the church, in the Castle, and in the schools in the town, and in
Mallabaar, in the churches which are found in the country
numbering 38, but alas, with little success among the Malla-
baars. Because, although most of them have been baptized
and are known as Christians, yet they do not believe in the
least in the crucified Saviour Jesus Christ. Yea, the blindness
and hardheartedness of these people remain still great, in spite
of all that has been done, and they prefer to worship their
heathen idols in the face of the strict placaats that have been
issued, thus following in the ways of their fathers. It is only
known to God, who is the Knower of Hearts, what is the cause
of this. Perhaps it does not please the Lord yet to enlighten
their hearts and prepare them for acceptance of the Holy
Gospel. But it is our duty to promote the teaching of our
doctrines, in order that, with the Divine aid of the Holy Ghost,
their eyes may be opened and they may be brought into the
Path of Life. It is a fact, which has been also testified to by
the Rev. Mr. Jansz, in the report submitted by him with regard
to the school inspection, that not only many of the ordinary
Mallabaars in the interior, but even those of the higher classes,
who have daily intercourse with the Dutch, or are employed
in their service as Christians, are so in name only, and are
heathen at heart, while they allow themselves and their chil-
dren to be baptized with a view to have their names entered
in the church register, and thus secure the advantages which
they otherwise would have to forego.
There are also found here a great number of inhabitants who
yet adhere to the Roman Catholic religion, which was intro-
duced among them by the Portuguese. This has been secretly


kept up by some vagabonds who pretend to these poor people
to be ordained priests of the Catholic Church. In this matter
also the natives are very stubborn and obdurate. The Rev.
Mr. iTansz, in the report referred to, proposed some measures
for a better propagation of Christianity, which at present is in
a sad condition, or rather has never flourished here. I referred
him, in my marginal notes to the report, to the meeting of
the Scholarchen, with a view to submit his recommendation
to the Political Council for consideration and approval. May
God grant to us the discovery of other means of bringing to
the fold out of their errors these poor blinded people, besides
the example set before them of the exemplary life of the zealous
teachers who earnestly wish to build up God’s Church.
The next point to be touched upon in terms of the aforesaid
order is the condition of the Commandement. This is a point
of great importance, on account of the great extent of the
territory, covering as it does one-third of the Island of Ceylon,
and because it is quite independent of the Kandyans, the
inhabitants of it differing from the Kandyans in language,
customs, and form of government; so that association between
them is little to be feared. The cost of the administration is
also made up by the inhabitants. More than 100,000 guilders
nett profit will be made out of the revenue and the profit
on elephants, horses, &c., if used with economy without extra
expenses being incurred, and also if the trade in elephants
should flourish.
The strongholds by which the Commandement is defended,
which were built by the Portuguese and later on added to by
the Company, are the following:—
The Castle, named after the Commandement. 1 Orders have
been given by the Ceylon Government for the digging of a
moat as far as Melioratie and the making of a covered road,
which work has been commenced and particulars about which
will be found in the Memoir of my predecessor Commandeur
De Jong, 2 according to which the work has been carried out.
Since then the plan for the projected work has been altered as
described in the letter from Colombo of August 25. I could
state at length how far this work has been completed, but the
monthly reports of Captain Brohier, 3 of the Artillery and
Engineers, which are regularly submitted and sent to Colombo,
make it unnecessary. According to the arrangements made
1 The’Castle of Jafianapatnam.
8 His brother-in-law Jacob de Jong.
8 Captain Jan Brohier, who entered the Service of the Dutch from
that of the English, and married and died in Ceylon.


by Government in the letter just referred to, the work can be
speedily completed. The houses in the Castle which have
suffered owing to the blasting of rocks out of the moat must be
repaired. A large quantity of prepared coral stones and lime
is ready to be used for this work during the next south-west
monsoon.
With regard to the Oeligammers employed in this work,
I have mentioned already that they receive 6 fanums. It
only remains to add that all repairs have been done at the
Castle, and that there are no defects but those which have
been there from the commencement. I will now proceed to
speak of the other strongholds.
The Fort Hammenhiel, for the protection of the harbour and
the river of Gaits, 1 to the north-west of the Castle, and the
redoubts Ponneryn, south-east of the boundary of the Wanni,
with the Elephant, the Beschutter, and the Pyl to the east
between Patchelepalla and Carretje, chiefly serve the purpose
of closing these Provinces of the Wanni and protecting the
inhabitants of this territory against any attack of the Sinhalese.
They further prevent any persons entering or leaving, or goods
being brought in or out without a license, and also elephants
from coming into the Provinces, while they are also a check on
the Wannias. They are all in the same condition in which
they were when I became Commandeur, as I had all repairs
done whenever they were required.
The same is the case with the fort Manaar, in the island of
that name, situated to the south, which, like the fortress
Aripo, six hours’ journey from Manaar on the Ceylon coast in
the Province Moesely, serves not only to protect Jaffnapatam
on that side, because no one from the opposite coast of Madura
can come here without passing Manaar, but also to prevent
all smuggling,, which it is 'easiest to control in that place,
because the passage of the river there is very difficult owing to
the sand bank. Vessels have therefore to be unloaded and
brought across during flood with much difficulty. This place
besides is of profit on account of the elephants, dye-roots, as
well as other sources of revenue.
With regard to the ordnance belonging to the fortifications,
nothing particular is to be said. There are, besides other
requisites and the 64 gun-carriages composing the ordnance
standing on the rampart, 29 gun-carriages in the Arsenal, 25
of which are provided with guns and 4 without them, as also 46
spare wheels. No more wheels could be made to be stored
away owing to the want of thick planks, which have not been
1 Kayte.


supplied to this station for some years by the officials in Trin-
coomaly, on account of the tumults ; while the wood that is
grown here, and with which Mr. de Jong made an experiment,
proved to be too narrow and for the most part warped. A
quantity of 56,648 lb. of good gunpowder is kept in the gun-
powder magazine.
All the buildings in the Castle have been well kept, so that
none but small repairs are necessary. The exceptions are the
crack in the wall of the house in which the Captain used to
live, which was caused by the last heavy storm, and the Dutch
Reformed Church, which requires new beams, as the old
ones have become partly decayed in the walls, and, though
supported, are not sufficiently strong. This work could not
be carried out for want of carpenters, and the master of the
carpenters employed here and at Gaits could not be sent to the
forest for the felling of the required beams and other timber.
This could be done when carpenters are sent from Colombo as
requested {vide letter of November 30). No suitable timber is
found close by, but it must be fetched a long way from the
seashore, so that the transport will be very difficult. The
best plan would be to obtain it through the Wannitje of
Pannengamo, who previous to this has obliged the Company
by the delivery of thick planks for the manufacture of gun-
carriages during the time of Commandeur de Jong. An able
carpenter could be sent to this Province, where very thick
trees are found, to select the required timber, which could be
dragged to the seashore by elephants. But there will be time
for Your Honour to consider this matter. I did not have it
done partly on account of the change in the government of
that Province at the time, and partly because there were no
masons to commence the restoration of the church. There are
only two men here, whose time is fully occupied in doing the
small repairs which are daily required, while all the others
work at the covered road, and, according to instructions,
none of these are to be employed in any other work. As Your
Honour knows, even the repair of the churches St. Joan, Nal-
loer, and Wannearponne, which were damaged during the last
storm, had to be deferred. Ido not consider it necessary to
speak of the other churches and buildings, because Your Honour
was in charge of them as Dessave.
In the Journal of Mr. Jan Schreuder 1 orders were given for
the building of a new carpenters’ yard instead of the one
broken down in the gale, according to the plan preserved at
1 Governor of Ceylon, 1757 to 1762.


the Secretariat, but for want of the required workmen and
materials the work could not yet be commenced.
The last point I am to deal with is that of trade and all
connected therewith. The principal trade here is in the sale
of pepper, powdered sugar, Jaffna bar-copper, rafters, pewter,
and lead, a large quantity of which articles must be kept in
store, as they find a ready sale. Some other articles are also
kept for sale at the warehouse for the convenience of the people.
The profits from the sale of elephants and horses must be con-
sidered more as revenues derived from the country, like the
land rents and tolls, which have brought in a considerable
amount during the last year. The income from land rents
both here and in Manaar was 161,731.4 guilders, while the
tithes on nely have been leased for 313 lasts of nely. The sale
of elephants and horses used no doubt to be more profitable
formerly than it has been during the last few years. This is
attributed by the agents to the impoverishment of the chief
merchants on the coast and to the importation of elephants
from Kitta in Porto Novo and elsewhere at a much lower rate
than is charged by the Company. The regular purchasers of
elephants agreed together to see not only that the fixed price
would be reduced, but also that the value of the Pagodas would
be raised to Rds. 2. According to their request we submitted
a report on this matter with our Considerations to the Govern-
ment at Colombo in the letter of October 18. Their proposal
was not found acceptable, and, seeing that they could not
thus force the Company, they have apparently changed their
mind; so that the last “ book-year ” shows a sale of 18 elephants
for 20,092.16 guilders, and from then until now the sale has
been 7 for 4,540.16 guilders. I think that the elephant trade
will regain its former proportions when the troubles which
have been so long going on on the opposite coast have ceased,
and the Company will be provided again with large elephants,
while the Ceylon elephants will still find a ready sale on
the coast.
The horses obtained from the islands Delft and De Twee
Gebroeders also yield, after deduction of the necessary expen-
diture, a considerable profit when they are publicly sold, as
used to be done formerly. Another advantage is that in this
way the stables in Colombo, where many horses are required,
can be supplied. At present there are only foals here, because
the rest, with the exception of those belonging to the stud,
have been sent to the Colombo stable. According to a letter
from Colombo, dated August 19, the breeding is now carried
on in the old way, and no longer in the manner introduced by
Mr. Swynhouber, Captain of the Horse.


•
Guilders.
The Dessavony, for advances for the
purchase of jakwood laths and other
requisites, both to meet the demand
for sale and for use
3,560.18.0
For lands sold to the inhabitants of
the four Provinces Waddemoraatje,
Timmoraatje, Patchelepalle, and
Welligammo, as also The Islands ..
6,188. 8.0
In Manaar the remainder of the amount
for lands sold
22,698.19.0
Total ..
32,447. 8.0
The arrears of the tributes of the Wannias altogether amount
to 25 5/12 elephants, namely : —
( Elephants.
The Province Pannegammo
i
The four Provinces Carrecattemoele, Caanawel
pattoe, Meelpattoe, and Moeliawalle
22|
The Province Tinnemarrewaddy
4
The same for animals lent to them
2
Total
.. 28 5/12
The purchases made for ready cash have been small, as the
jakwood which is exported, and is for this purpose obtained
from the natives, may be classified among the products of the
country ; and the thornback-skins and other sundries which
are procured here in small quantities for export to some place
or other are of little importance, so that the Company derives
little profit from the trade here, although a considerable
amount is realized from land rents, tolls, &c., as stated on
page 11. The Poll and Adigar taxes which are levied yearly
on the inhabitants here and in Manaar proved to be at the last
closing of the books 85,483.1 guilders. Of the Poll and Adigar
taxes and the land rent here, which have already been credited
in anticipation in the general revenue, I have collected the
two'first quarters and part of the third and fourth, of which
31,225.17.8 guilders is to be collected yet. Of the Chicos
taxes and the tithes of the nely harvest 2,541.12 guilders are
yet to be received, while a profit is also made on the dye-roots
which are mostly found in the islands of Manaar and Carrediva.
The arrears of amounts due to the Company were at the last
closing of the books as follows ;


The amount due by the Dessavony cannot, however, be
considered as arrears, because, as stated above, it is money
laid out to purchase different materials. The lands were sold
to the inhabitants on condition that they should pay in
instalments. In Jaffna these payments have been gradually
collected during the last two years by the Thombo-keeper, but
in the Wanni this was commenced much later, so that the
officials there must be told to hurry on the collection a little in
order to cancel this item out of the books. The Company does
not run any risk of loss with regard to these lands, because the
lands can be claimed until the full amount is paid.
The difficulty in collecting the arrears from the Wannias I
have already mentioned. I will only state here that since Jhe
last closing of the books the Wannitje of the Province Pannen-
gamo has delivered 4 elephants in deduction of arrears and
towards the tribute for this year, which, according to the usual
reduction, have been taken as 3J. The request on ola of
December 2, by the Wannia Don Diogo Poevinelle Mapane, for
a deferment of the payment of his arrears (vide Resolution of
October 9 last) has been granted till next February, pending
approbation of the Ceylon Government, which has been
informed of the matter, and whose decision must be awaited.
Meantime the Wannia must, by a severe warning, be ordered
to keep his promise.
Thus I have complied with the instructions regarding the
Memoir to be left by me; but I consider it necessary to state
here for Your Honour’s information, that, on the occasion of
the sale of a great many lands in Carretje, I was instructed to
form this district into a fifth Province, and, after the purchase
money had been paid, to raise land rents from these fields.
This order I have until now not been able to carry out, because,
although the money has been collected with much difficulty,
the place is yet uninhabited, in spite of all inducements held
out to people to settle there.
I must also mention that on my arrival from Colombo I
brought with me 775 reals in old silver, which have been handed
over to the master silversmith, Ambien, in the presence of
a special committee consisting of the Trade Accountant,
Mr. Schrader, and the Sworn Clerk, Mr. de Niese. The silver
is to be used for such articles as are specified in the instructions
of the Committee, which are to be sent to Colombo when
completed.
With regard to the General and the Petty Funds and that
of the Winkdier, the Warehouse, &c., I refer to the general
transfer herewith submitted to Your Honour.


Nothing else remains for me than once more to pray for
God’s blessing on Your Honour and this Commandement in the
rule you are just commencing.
Sir,
Your Honour’s faithful friend,
(, Signed ) A. MOOYAART.
(In margin)
Jaffanapatnam, January 31, 1766.
Correct:
(Signed) CARL FRED. SCHREUDER,
Secretary.
H. O. COTTLE, GOVERNMENT PRINTER, COLOMBO, CEYLON.
