

HOME OFFICE
Feb., 1935
MEMORANDUM ON THE
INDUSTRIAL DISEASES OF
SILICOSIS AND ASBESTOSIS
Crown Copyright Reserved
LONDON
PRINTED AND PUBLISHED BY HIS MAJESTY’S STATIONERY OFFICE
To be purchased directly from H.M. STATIONERY OFFICE at the following addresses:
Adastral House, Kingsway, London, W.C.2 ; 120 George Street, Edinburgh 2 ;
York Street, Manchester I ; I St. Andrew’s Crescent, Cardiff;
80 Chichester Street, Belfast;
or through any Bookseller
I935
Price 4 d. Net
34-228




CONTENTS
Page
1. Introduction 3
2. The origin and development of silicosis 3
3. Industries and processes in which silicosis occurs 5
4. Means of prevention:—
(i) dust suppression; (ii) exhaust ventilation; (iii) other methods;
(iv) initial and periodic medical examinations 6
r
6. Provision for compensation 9
6. Medical arrangements for certification of cases 9
7. Note on asbestosis ... 12
APPENDICES
APPENDICES
I. Bibliography 14
11. List of Compensation Schemes and processes to which they apply ... 15
HI. List of Panels of Silicosis and Asbestoeis Medical Board 16
IV. Fees payable for examinations and certificates by Medical Board ... 17


1. —Introduction.
The disease of the lungs now known as silicosis was recognised
in this country in very early times as a trade disease affecting
those who worked on certain kinds of stone. It occurred amongst
masons working with sandstone, and was called “ stone masons*’
phthisis ” ; in later times it was found in those employed in grinding
metals on sandstone wheels, and was called “ grinders’ rot ” ; it
appeared too in potters who worked with ground flint, and was
called “ potters’ asthma,” and amongst miners in lead, tin and
gold mines; it was known as “ miners’ phthisis.” All these terms
indicate the same disease, silicosis, which may be accompanied ,by
tuberculosis. It has been found to occur in many, industries ah 4
processes, all of which have one characteristic in common —exposure
of the workers to the inhalation of silica dust.
The incidence of silicosis continues to be serious and widespread.
During the three years 1932-4 the Silicosis Medical Board have
certified 52 cases of disablement and 17 deaths from ganister mines
and silica brick works; 252 cases of disablement and 79 deaths
from the getting and manipulation of sandstone at quarries or
premises worked in conjunction therewith; 289 cases of disable-
ment and 92 deaths from the pottery industry; 532 cases of dis-
ablement and 105 deaths from coal mines; 319 cases of disable-
ment and 142 deaths from other industries. • In some cases of
death the workmen ha(3 previously been, certified as disabled.
Asbestosis is a disease of the lungs which resembles silicosis
in many ways. It is produced as a result of the inhalation of dust
of asbestos, and the increased use of this mineral in manufacturing
processes during recent years has been followed by the occurrence
of a considerable number of cases of the disease. During the three
years 1932-4 the Medical Board certified 60 cases of disablement
and 5 deaths among workers in the asbestos industry.
The object of this Memorandum is to set out briefly what these
diseases are, how and where they are produced, the measures which
can be taken to prevent them, the provision made for compensation,
anfi the arrangements for the medical examination and certifica-
tion of workmen.
Research is going on, under the direction of a Committee ap-
pointed by the Medical Research Council, with a view to extending
the knowledge and understanding of silicosis and other pulmonary
diseases due to the inhalation of dusts.
2.—The origin and development of Silicosis.
Silicosis is produced by the action of minute particles of silica
dust which have been inhaled in the act of breathing. These
particles make their way into the deepest recesses of the lungs
where some of them remain and produce a slow inflammatory
process, which eventually destroys the lungs.
28128 A 2


Silica is almost the sole constituent of rocks such as quartz,
flint and chert, and forms a considerable proportion of others such
as sandstones and granite. In order to produce silicosis the dust
must be in the form of minute particles, so small as to be invisible
to the eye, except that in a beam of sunlight they may appear
as a cloud, like smoke. This dust is produced when any of these
rocks are broken, crushed, ground, or cut with a chisel or drill,
or when any ground silica is manipulated in the dry state, unless
special means are taken to suppress the dust.
These minute particles of silica dust float in the air, and when
inhaled pass through the nose and throat and along the bronchial
tubes to the smallest branches which end in the expanded balloon-
like air-sacs of which the respiratory tissue of the lungs is com-
posed. The nasal passages have an important function in helping
to cleanse the air from dust before it reaches the lungs, and
although the value of this function varies very widely in different
individuals and under different conditions, it is always better to
take advantage of the protection afforded by breathing through the
nose. Many of the dust particles do not come into contact with
the walls of the bronchial tubes or air-sacs, but are breathed out
again in the returning air stream. Some of the particles are
caught on the moist lining of the bronchial tubes and are readily
removed with the mucous secretion. A certain proportion of the
particles which find their way to the air-sacs come to rest on the
walls, and these are attacked by living cells from the lung tissues
and are conveyed either outward to the bronchial tubes or towards
the drainage channels and spaces of the lung. If the quantity of
dust is small the cells will be able to deal with it successfully, but
if it be excessive they will be unable to remove it and the dust laden
cells will accumulate and give rise to an inflammatory process.
Once this process has commenced it continues more or less slowly
to produce a kind of scar tissue (fibrosis) which ultimately replaces
the lung substance, at first in small spots or nodules which may
become joined up to form larger areas. The extent of lung tissue
involved will depend on the concentration of silica dust in the
atmosphere and the period of time over which the worker has been
exposed to it.
When silica dust is inhaled, even in injurious amount, it pro-
duces no immediate effects, because it does not irritate the nose or
throat. Sooner or later, however, the effects begin to be felt.
When the fibrosis of the lung has advanced to a certain extent
shortness of breath appears and increases, it may be to such a
degree as to render the worker incapable of continuing at work.
Moreover, chest trouble arising from infections such as tuberculosis,
influenza and common colds, is liable to be much more serious
in persons affected with silicosis than in those with healthy lungs,
and at any time in the course of its development silicosis may be


come complicated by these or other infections of the respiratory
organs.
It is possible to determine the concentration of particles of dust
in the atmosphere of any workplace by means of instruments of
several kinds. Samples of the dust can be collected and the
particles counted and measured by microscopic examination. Such
examinations of the atmosphere have been made in many in-
dustrial processes, and it has been found that the concentration of
dust varies within wide limits of less than 100 particles to more
than 10,000 particles in a cubic centimetre of air. When it is
remembered that a man during ordinary quiet breathing inhales
600 cubic centimetres of air with each breath and breathes 16 times
a minute, it will be seen that the number of particles which can
reach the lungs during a working day is enormous.
It has not yet been possible to determine for all industries the
limit within which a concentration of dust may be considered safe.
Attempts have been mdde to determine the limit for special in-
dustries carried on under uniform conditions, as in the United
States granite industry, the South Africa gold mining industry, and
in tunnelling in sandstone at Sydney, Australia. Such stan-
dards may be of value in estimating the relative efficiency of the
methods used for suppressing dust in a single industry, but it would
be wrong to adopt any of these standards as the measure of
safety under different conditions and in other industries.
Before standards of safety can be set up, more knowledge must
be obtained of the factors which influence the action of dusts on
the lungs, and methods of precision must be devised for measuring
the concentration and character of dust clouds which cause disease.
Much progress has been made in these directions as a result of
co-ordinated research, and more is hoped for from work at present
being carried on.
3.—Industries and processes in which silicosis occurs.
Silica is widely distributed in nature and occurs as the chief con-
stituent of many rocks such as quartz, quartzite, ganister, grit-
stone, sandstone, chert, flint and in the natural quartzose sands, and
it is present in many of the igneous rocks, including granite. The
chief areas where sedimentary silica rocks are found are in York-
shire, Lancashire, Northumberland and Durham, Derbyshire,
Cheshire and North Wales, South Wales, Somerset and Gloucester-
shire, and parts of Scotland, including Angus, Ayrshire, Dumfries-
shire, Fifeshire, Lanark, Midlothian, Morayshire and Stirling.
Granite and other igneous rocks are found principally in Cornwall
and Devon, parts of Leicestershire and North Wales, the Lake
District, and in the West and’North of Scotland.
28128 -A- 3


Certain natural deposits of silica occur as the remains l of animal
and vegetable life, the best known of these deposits being perhaps
kieselguhr.
All processes which involve the manipulation of any of these
materials in the dry state in such a way that the silica is broken
up into minute particles and inhaled, are liable to give rise to
silicosis. Chief among these are: — ;
mining or quarrying of quartz, quartzite, ganister, sandstone,
gritstone or chert; ■ ,
drilling, and blasting in these rocks;
breaking, crushing and grinding of such rocks, or of dried
quartzose sand or dry deposits or dry residues of silica, and'the
manipulation of the crushed or ground material in the dry state ’;
mason’s work on sandstone or granite;
manufacture of ganister or silica bricks and other refractory
materials;
breaking, crushing or grinding of flint, and processes in the
pottery industry involving the use of powdered flint or materials
containing flint;
grinding of metals by means of grindstones composed of
natural or artificial sandstone;
fettling of steel castings; and
sandblasting done by means of compressed air- with use of
quartzose sand or crushed silica rock or flint.
4. —Means of Prevention.
The most important means for prevention include (i) suppression
of dust; (ii) ventilation; (iii) other methods of preventing the in-
halation of dust; (iv) medical examinations.
(i) Suppression of dust includes all measures which prevent
the dust from being produced. It is sometimes successfully
accomplished by the use of water, but to be effective the supply
of Water must be sufficient to keep all surfaces of the material
wet during the whole process. In some cases, ais in grinding
of metals, effectual dust suppression is only attained by the
complete immersion of the metal being ground. , .
(ii) Exhaust Ventilation. —One of the most widely applied
means of prevention is by localised exhaust ventilation which
to be effective should be applied at or as near as possible to
the point of origin of the dust and so arranged with reference
to the air inlets and general ventilation of the room as t 6
prevent the dust from entering the atmosphere of*the work-
place. Where the dust is produced over a large surface, as ih
crushing machinery, conveyors, or mechanical sieves, it is
usually necessary to enclose the machine as completely as


possible and to apply exhaust draught to the inside of the hous-
ing, sufficient to maintain a slight negative pressure and pre-
vent escape of dust from apertures. In the case of silica dust,
where the particles are minute, considerable care and experience
are required in designing the plant for the removal of dust.
It is also necessary to prevent the dust from the exhaust plant
entering the atmosphere of any room or place where persons
are working, and for this reason systems of localised exhaust
ventilation must be provided with dust collecting appliances.
The percussive drills worked by compressed air, which are
largely used at mines and quarries and produce large quanti-
ties of fine dust, can now be provided with a “ dust trap ” which
gives,the workman efficient protection. A considerable number
of these dust traps are now in use. The principle in these
drills has been adapted to pneumatic tools for stone
dressing by a device the working of which is demonstrated at
the Home Office Industrial Museum.*
In this Museum there are also exhibited a Series of photo-
graphs of the chief processes in the pottery, metal grinding,
and refractories industries, and the protective measures re-
quired, as well as specimens of the materials giving rise to
silica dust, microphotographs and dust counts of the dust con-
tent of the atmosphere of the work-places, and X-ray photo-
graphs of the lungs of workers affected by silicosis due to work
in these industries.
(iii) Other preventive measures. —A breathing apparatus
consisting of a helmet or closely fitting facepiece provided with
an air supply drawn through a tube from a pure source affords
protection for workmen employed in processes giving rise to
dust and is most useful in industries which are carried on
occasionally only or for short periods.
Eespirators can never be regarded as a substitute for ex-
haust ventilation, but for processes which are outside the range
of such ventilation an efficient respirator is desirable. Eespira-
tors at present available with a filtering medium of fibre or
tissue afford insufficient protection against fine dusts, but. in-
vestigations are being made by the Department of Scientific
and Industrial Research with a view to the provision of a satis-
factory type. Considerable progress ha,s been made and it is
hoped that before long a respirator possessing, the necessary
properties will be produced.
The effectual segregation of dusty processes, so as to protect
workers employed in non-dusty processes from unnecessary
exposure to dust, should be adopted wherever practicable. It
is required, for example, in racing grindstones by the Grind-
ing of Cutlery and Edge Tools Regulations.
* At 97 Horseferry Road, Westminster, S.W.I. Open on every week-day
10 a.m. to 4 p.m. Admission free.


The success of preventive measures depends not only on the satis-
factory design and installation of the exhaust ventilation system,
but to an even greater extent on the proper maintenance of the
apparatus or plant provided. In this connection there is a respon-
sibility on the workman as well as on the management, and the
undermentioned codes of Regulations make it obligatory on the
workmen employed to make full and proper use of the appliances
provided and to report forthwith to the management any defect
in the same.
Regulations to safeguard the workman against the inhalation of
silica dust are now in force for the grinding of metals and cleaning
of castings,* the manufacture of cutlery and edge tools,! hand-
ling, moving, breaking, crushing, grinding or sieving of refractory
material, and the manufacture of silica bricks, + and certain pro-
cesses in the manufacture of pottery. §
For the detailed requirements regarding each industry reference
should be made to the particular code of Regulations, but broadly
they consist of the effective enclosure of the apparatus with pro-
vision of efficient localised exhaust ventilation, and an approved
system of mechanical general ventilation, the provision of a steam
or water spray, the segregation of the dusty processes; and general
measures for securing greater cleanlineiss of the premises and
appliances.
In factories and workshops to which special Regulations do not
apply, the powers given in section 74 of the Factory and Work-
shop Act to require the provision of localised exhaust ventilation
or other mechanical means for removing dust for any process in
which dust is generated to an injurious extent are exercised to
prevent exposure to silica dust.
Section 78 of the Coal Mines Act, 1911, requires generally that
mechanical drills used for drilling in highly siliceous rocks shall be
provided and used with an efficient means to prevent the escape of
dust into the air.
Under the same Act general Regulations]] have been made for
ganister mines, and under the Metalliferous Mines and Quarries
Acts, special rules have been established in tin mines and in many
quarries where ganister, sandstone and other silica rocks are worked.
(iv) Initial and periodic medical examinations. —Workers in
certain processes are required to be examined medically when
.* The Grinding of Metals (Miscellaneous Industries) Regulations, 1926
S.R. & O. 1925, No. 904).
t The Grinding of Cutlery and Edge Tools Regulations, 1925 (S.R. & O.
1926, No. 1089).
+ The Refractory Materials Regulations, 1931 (S.R. & 0. 1931, No. 359.)
§ The Pottery (Silicosis) Regulations, 1932, (S.R. & G. 1932, No. 393).
H S.R. & 0. 1920, No. 873.


first employed, and also at intervals during their employ-
ment.* The object of the initial examination is to prevent
workmen whose respiratory physique is defective and who, if
not more liable to contract silicosis, run much greater danger
if silicosis develops, from entering the industry. The periodic
medical examinations which are carried out at the works should
be of great value as a preventive measure. They enable cases
of silicosis to be detected at an early stage, and if the work-
man is then excluded from, or voluntarily gives up, further
employment in the dusty processes, the development of the
disease may be arrested. They also enable persons'found to be
suffering from pulmonary tuberculosis, who not only expose
themselves to additional risk by remaining in the dusty in-
dustries but are also a possible source of infection to their fellow
workers, to be eliminated; and they provide cumulative evi-
dence as to the changes in the workman’s condition which is
of the greatest assistance in diagnosis when the question arises
of certification for purposes of compensation. Further, they
indicate where the conditions are still giving rise to the disease,
and may thus be of material assistance in enabling the neces-
sary precautions to be taken.
s.—Provision for compensation.
Compensation in cases where death or disablement is caused by
silicosis or silicosis accompanied by tuberculosis contracted during
‘employment is now payable in all the industries where a serious
risk of the disease exists. Owing to the nature of the disease a
special compensation procedure different from the ordinary pro-
visions of the Workmen’s Compensation Acts has had to be devised.
Special Compensation Schemes have been made by the Home Office
under the powers given by Parliament for the purpose, a list of
which, and an indication of the processes to which they apply, is
given in Appendix 11. Before making claims to compensation or
applications to the Medical Board for Certificates (see below) the
actual Compensation Schemes should be carefully studied, particu-
larly the definitions of the processes given in paragraph 2 of the
Schemes.
6. —Medical Arrangements for examination and certification of
cases,
Any workman desiring to make a claim to compensation must
have a certificate from the Medical Board appointed by the Home
* See the Silicosis and Asbestosis (Medical Arrangements) Scheme, 1931,
paragraphs 12 and 13 as amended by the Scheme of 1934. The requirements
apply to the processes in the Refractories, Sandstone and Pottery Industries
which are set out in the Schedule to the Scheme of 1934.
t These arrangements are based on the recommendations of a Departmental
Committee appointed to advise as to the medical arrangements which could
be made for the diagnosis of silicosis. The Report of the Committee was
published by H.M. Stationery Office in 1929. Price 6d.


Office unless his employer, agrees that he is liable to pay compen-
sation without such certificate! !
This Medical Board, consisting of a Chief Medical Officer and
eight Medical Officers, is divided up into four “ panels ” of two
Medical Officers each, with centres at Bristol, Manchester, Sheffield
and Stoke-on-Trent. The Chief Medical Officer is stationed at
Sheffield. A list of the panels and the area assigned to each is
given in Appendix 111. .
The remuneration and expenses of the Medical Board are paid out
of a general Medical Expenses Fund, which is maintained. out of
fees payable by the employers and workers or their dependants.
These fees, and the directions as to when and how they are to be
paid, are set out in Appendix IV.
The Medical Expenses Fund is administered by five Trustees,
consisting of two employers’ and two workers’ representa-
tives and one official representative. The present address of
the Secretary of the Fund is the Home Office, Whitehall, London,
S.W.I.
Certificates of disablement or suspension. —A workman desiring
to apply to the Medical Board for a certificate is advised in his own
interests to consult, in the first instance, his Approved Society,
who will arranged for him to be examined by the Eegional Medical
Officer appointed under the National Health Insurance Acts. This
examination will be free of cost to the workman. If the Regional
Medical Officer is satisfied that there is reasonable cause for sus-
pecting the existence of silicosis he will certify accordingly. On
production of this certificate the workman will be entitled to
examination by the Medical Board at a reduced fee. He should
send the certificate, together with the prescribed fee, either to the
chief officer of the Medical Board, or to the senior member of the
panel for his area (see Appendix HI) stating the Compensation
Scheme under which the claim is made, the name and address of
the works of the employer who last employed him in a process in-
cluded in the Scheme, the nature and duration of, the employment
and the date when he left the employment. The Medical Board
will then fix a time and place for the examination and will notify
the workman accordingly.
There is no appeal from the;Medical Board’s decision, and hence
it is important that all material information and especially the
employment history should be given to the Board.
If the workman fails to obtain the certificate from the Regional
Medical Officer he may still decide to proceed with his application
for examination by the Medical Board, but in that case he will
be required to deposit a fee based on the full cost of the examina-
tion, part of which will, however, be refunded to him if the Medical
Board issue a certificate and the liability of the employer has
been established.


Before issuing any certificate the Medical Board send a notice
to the employer, or, where a Compensation Fund has been estab-
lished under the Scheme, to the Fund, and consider any statement
made or submitted to them in writing by or on behalf of the em-
ployer or the Fund.
Except in cases of death —see below —the Medical Board are not
required to issue a certificate unless the workman is found to be
suffering from silicosis or silicosis accompanied by tuberculosis to
such a degree as to make it dangerous for him to continue work in
the industry or process, but an intimation of the result of the
examination is sent to the workman in every case.
If a workman who is subject to initial or periodic medical exam-
ination is, as the result of such examination, excluded from employ-
ment on account of silicosis or silicosis accompanied by tuberculosis,
the Board issue a certificate (for which no fee is payable), and on
this the workman can base a claim to compensation subject to the
provisions of the appropriate Compensation Scheme.
Certificates of death. —ln cases of death from silicosis, compensa-
tion can only be claimed on a certificate given by the Medical
Board. Save, in exceptional cases where the deceased workman was
entitled to weekly payments under a Compensation Scheme during
life and the Medical Board are satisfied that a post mortem examina-
tion is unnecessary, this certificate will only be given after a post
mortem examination. It is important, therefore, that when it is
desired to claim compensation for the death of a workman, applica-
tion should he made without delay to the Medical Board, who will
arrange for the post mortem examination except where H.M.
Coroner orders one to be made. The application should be accom-
panied by the fee prescribed by the Regulations (see Appendix IV),
and information as to the nature and duration of the deceased work-
man’s employment. In cases where inquests are held, H.M.
Coroners' have been invited to consult with the Medical Board as
to the arrangements for the post mortem examination, and to give
the Board an opportunity either of making or of being represented
at the examination.
Disposal of certificate. —If, as in the Refractories and Sandstone
Industries, Joint Committees representing both employers and
workers have been appointed for the settlement of claims, the
Medical Board will forward the certificate to the Secretary of the
appropriate Joint Committee, who will communicate with the work-
man or his dependants, as the case may be, in regard to the claim.
In cases arising in other industries the certificate will be sent
to the workman or his dependants who should then notify the
claim to compensation direct to the employer. Under the Schemes
for these other industries, compensation is recoverable from the
employer who last employed the workman in one or more of the


processes, and the procedure for recovering compensation is sub-
stantially the same as that laid down in the Act for recovering
compensation for accidents or scheduled diseases.*
7.—Asbestosis.
Asbestosis is a disease of the lungs produced as a result of the
inhalation of asbestos dust usually over a period of several years
and occurs in workers in occupations associated with production
of asbestos dust in a fine state of division. 'lt is characterised by
a special type of fibrosis of the lung tissue which resembles silicosis
in its general features of causation and development, but differs
from it in some of its clinical and pathological manifestations.
The characteristics of the dust which gives rise to the disease
differ in some ways from the silica particles which cause silicosis.
In the case of asbestos, owing to the fibrous character of the
mineral, many of the free particles are elongated and extremely
thin.
The change produced in the lungs is a gradually developing
fibrosis in the form of a network throughout the lungs. The nodular
distribution of the fibrosis, so characteristic of silicosis, is not seen.
Tuberculosis may co-exist but apparently does not supervene so
frequently as in silicosis.
Once the fibrous tissue change is established in the lungs, the
disease becomes progressive. The first prominent symptom is
usually shortness of breath and it remains the most prominent
one throughout. Bronchitis, bronchiectasis and broncho-pneumonia
are complications frequently met with.
Industries and processes in which asbestosis occurs. —Processes
involving exposure to asbestos dust which are known to give rise
to asbestosis or in which the conditions are such as to be liable to
produce the disease, are the breaking, crushing, disintegrating,
opening and grinding of asbestos and - the mixing or sieving
of asbestos or any admixture of asbestos, the manufacture of asbestos
textiles, the making of insulating slabs or sections and the making
or repairing of insulating mattresses composed wholly or partly
of asbestos, and the sawing, grinding and turning in the dry state
of articles composed wholly or partly of asbestos such as motor
car brake and clutch linings, jointings, electric insulating materials
and some types of electrodes.
Means of prevention. —As in the case of silicosis, suppression or
control of the dust is the chief means of preventing the disease.
The Asbestos Industry Regulations f require the adoption of wet
methods, effective enclosure of dust-producing machines, adoption
* See Home Office Memorandum on the Workmen’s Compensation Acts,
1925-1931. H.M. Stationery Office, price 3d.
t S.R. & 0. 1931, No. 1140.


of enclosed mechanical methods instead of hand conveyance and
dusty hand work generally, and application of exhaust draught at
dust-producing points.
As in the silica industries, initial and periodic medical examina-
tions may be of great value as a means of preventing or arresting
the development of asbestosis; and these are obligatory* for work-
men employed in the processes of breaking, crushing, disintegrat-
ing, opening or grinding of asbestos, and the mixing or sieving of
asbestos or any admixture of asbestos, and in the making of asbestos
textiles and insulating mattresses.
Provision for Compensation. —Compensation is provided for under
a special Scheme in cases of death or disablement caused by
asbestosis or asbestosis accompanied by tuberculosis. This Scheme
applies to workmen employed in the processes, a list of which is
given in Appendix 11, at any time on or after Ist May, 1931. The
compensation is recoverable from the last employer who employed
the workman in the processes and the procedure for recovering
compensation is substantially the same as that laid down in the
Act for recovering compensation for accidents or scheduled diseases.
Medical arrangements for examination and certification of
cases. —The medical arrangements for the examination and certi-
fication of cases are similar to those described in the earlier pages
of this Memorandum for silicosis.
* Silicosis and Asbestosis (Medical Arrangements) Scheme, 1931, pars. 12
and 13 (S.R. & 0. 1931, No. 341), as amended by the Scheme of 1934 (S.R. <fe
0. 1934, No. 889).


APPENDIX I.— Bibliography.
(1) “ Industrial Pneumonoconioses with Special Reference to Dust
Phthisis.” By Dr. E. L. Colli s. H.M. Stationery Office, 1919.
(2) “ A Study of Pulmonary Silicosis.” By Dr. E. L. Middleton.
Journal of Industrial Hygiene, March, 1921.
(3) “Manufacture of Silica Bricks and Other Refractory Materials used
in, Furnaces, with special reference to the effects of Dust' Inhalation upon
the Workers.” By W. Sydney Smith and Dr. E. L. Oollis.
H.M. Stationery Office, 1917.
(4) “ Report on the Grinding of Metals and Cleaning of Castings, with
special reference to the effects of Dust Inhalation upon the Workers.”
By E. L. Macklin and Dr. E. L. Middleton. H.M. Stationery
Office, 1923.
(5) “ Report on the Occurrence of Silicosis among Sandstone Workers.”
By Drs. C. L. Sutherland and S. Bryson. H.M. Stationery
Office, 1929.
(6) “ Report on the Incidence of Silicosis in the Pottery Industry.”
By Drs. C. L. Sutherland and S. Bryson. H.M. Stationery Office,
1926.
(7) “ Report on the Occurrence of Silicosis among Granite Workers.”
By Drs. C. L. Sutherland, S. Bryson and N. Keating. H.M.
Stationery Office, 1930.
(8) “ First Report of the Departmental Committee on Compensation
for Silicosis dealing with the Refractories Industries (Silicosis) Scheme,
1919.” H.M. Stationery Office, 1924.
(9) “ Report of the Departmental Committee on Compensation for
Silicosis dealing with the Pottery Industry.” H.M. Stationery Office,
1928.
(10) “ Report of the Departmental Committee as to the Medical
Arrangements which could be made for the Diagnosis of Silicosis.” H.M.
Stationery Office, 1929.
(11) “ Silicosis —Records of the International Conference held at Johan-
nesburg in August, 1930.” International Labour Office, Geneva, 1930.
(12) “ Report on the International Conference on Silicosis held at
Johannesburg in August, 1930.” By Dr. E. L. Middleton. H.M.
Stationery Office, 1931.
(13) “ Physical Methods for the Estimation of the Dust Hazard in
Industry, with special reference to the Occupation of the Stonemason.” By
H. L. Green and H. H. Watson. Special Report No. 199 of the Medical
Research Council of the Privy Council. H.M. Stationery Office, 1935.
(14) “ Report on Effects of Dust on the Lungs, and Dust
Suppression in the Asbestos Industry.” By Dr. E. R. A. Merewether
and Mr. C. W. Price. H.M. Stationery Office, 1930.
(15) “ The Occurrence of Pulmonary Fibrosis and Other Pulmonary Affec-
tions in Asbestos AVorkers.” By Dr. E. R. A. Merewether. Journal of
Industrial Hygiene, May and June 1930.
(16) “ A Memorandum on Aebestosis.” By Dr. E. R. A. Merewether.
Tubercle, November and December, 1933 and January,. 1934.
(17) “Report on Conferences between Employers and Inspectors concern-
ing Methods for Suppressing Dust in Asbestos Textile Factories.” .H.M.
Stationery Office, 1931.


APPENDIX II.
List or Compensation Schemes and the Processes to which they apply.
1. Refractories Industries ( Silicosis) Scheme, 1931*.—A Scheme for the
Refractories Industries, that is, the getting of ganister and other highly
siliceous materials, and the manipulation of such materials in the manu-
facture of silica bricks and other articles for lining furnaces. '
2. Sandstone Industry ( Silicosis ) Scheme, 1931 t Scheme covers
the getting and manipulation of sandstone with a view to manufacture,
sale or use at mines. or quarries or on premises worked in conjunction
with a mine or quarry.
3. Metal Grinding Industries ( Silicosis ) Scheme, 1931+. —This Scheme deals
with the grinding of metals on grindstones composed of natural or artificial
sandstone, and certain incidental processes.
4. Various Industries ( Silicosis ) Schemes, 1931, 1934 and 1935 §. —A general
Scheme embracing a variety of processes in different industries, including
mining and quarrying of silica rock except in so far as this is covered
by the Refractories Industries and Sandstone Industry Schemes (see above);
drilling and blasting in silica rock in or incidental to the getting of other
minerals; any operations underground in coalmines and haematite iron ore
mines; stone mason’s work on silica rock or granite or other igneous rock
(in so far as it is not included in the Sandstone Industry); breaking, crush-
ing, grinding, sieving, mixing or packing of silica rock and certain other
highly siliceous materials or dry admixtures containing such materials;
certain specified processes involving exposure to silica dust in or incidental
to the manufacture of china or earthenware including sanitary earthenware,
electrical earthenware, and earthenware tiles; fettling of steel castings;
sandblasting of metal or articles of metal by means of compressed air
with the use of quartzose sand or crushed silica rock or flint; and all
underground and certain surface operations at tin mines.
5. Asbestos Industry (Asbestosis) Scheme, 1931||. —This Scheme covers
the following processes in which asbestosis is liable to occur, namely, break-
ing, crushing, disintegrating, opening and grinding of asbestos, mixing or
sieving of asbestos or any admixture of asbestos, the manufacture of
asbestos textiles, the making of insulation slabs or sections or mattresses
composed wholly or partly of asbestos, other manufacturing processes carried
on in the same room as any of the foregoing processes, the cleaning of
machinery and plant used in the processes and of chambers, fixtures and
appliances for the collection of asbestos dust, and the sawing, grinding
and turning in the dry state of articles composed wholly or partly of
asbestos, except articles composed wholly or partly of woven asbestos
impregnated with bitumen or other bond of an adhesive nature.
* S.R. & O. 1931, No. 345. This Scheme superseded the Refractories
Industries Schemes, 1919 (S.R. & O. 1919, No. 12) and 1925 (S.R. <fe O. 1925,
No. 79). . . ••
t S.R. &O. 1931, No. 346. This Scheme superseded the Sandstone Industry
Scheme, 1929 (S.R. & O. 1929, No. 171).
J S.R. &O. 1931, No. 343. This Scheme superseded the Metal Grinding
Scheme, 1927 (S.R. & O. 1927, No. 380), as amended by the Order of 1930
(S.R. & O. 1930, No. 118).
§ S.R. & O. 1931, No. 342, 1934, No. 1155 and 1935, No. 69. The 1931
Scheme superseded the Various Industries Scheme, 1928 (S.R. & O. 1928,
No. 975), as amended by the Order of 23rd December, 1930 (S.R. * 0. 1930,
No. 1095).
|| S.R. & O. 1931, No. 344.


APPENDIX III.
Silicosis and Asbestos Medical Board.
The Chief Medical Officer is C, L. Sutherland, M.D., D.P.H., 37 Exchange
Street, Sheffield 2.
The centres at which panels have been set up, the members of the panels,
and the areas assigned to the panels are as follows:
Centre, and Members of Panel.
Sheffield, 37, Exchange Street.
S. Bryson, M. 8., Ch.B.
(Senior Member).
H. Blyth, M. 8., Ch.B.
Manchester, 14a, Blackfriars Street.
J. M. Tyrrell, M. 8., Ch.B.
(Senior Member).
J. C. McVittie, M. 8., Ch.B.
Bristol, Atlas Buildings, Clare
Street.
N. Keating, L.R.C.P., L.R.C.S.
(Senior Member).
R. W. Thomas, M.D.
Stoke-on-Trent, Lonsdale House,
Lonsdale Street.
A. Meiklejohn, M.D. (Senior
Member).
F. N. R. Price, M. 8., Ch.B.
Area.
The Counties of York East and
West Ridings, Nottingham and
Lincoln, part of the County of
Derby, viz., the Boroughs of
Buxton, Chesterfield and Gloasop;
the Urban Districts of Bolsover,
Brampton and Walton, Clay
Cross, Dronfield, and New Mills;
and the Rural Districts of
Chapel-en-le-Frith, Chesterfield,
Clown, Gloesop Dale, Hayfield and
Norton.
The Counties of Northumberland,
Durham, York North Riding,
Cumberland, Westmorland and
Lancaster; and Scotland.
The Counties of Cornwall, Devon,
Dorset, Gloucester, Hereford,
Monmouth, Salop, Somerset,
Warwick, Wilts and Worcester;
and Wales.
The Counties of Chester and
Stafford and the County of
Derby except the portion assigned
to the Sheffield Panel.
For any area not assigned to any of the above-mentioned panels of the
Board, arrangements ■will be made by the Chief Medical Officer as and when
necessary.


No.
of
Fee.
Description of examination or certificate
in respect of which fee is payable, and
directions as to payment.
Amount of Fee.
J
Cases of death (see paragraph 7 of
Scheme).*
On application for certificate
£2 2s. This fee, less
This fee is payable by or on behalf
12s. is returnable to
of the applicant through the Medical
the applicant if the
Board.
Medical Board issue
2
On issue of a certificate that the death was
a certificate that the
death was due to the
disease and Fee No. 2
referred to below has
been paid over to the
Fund.
due to the disease
£10
This fee is payable by or on behalf
of the employer f on demand from the
Secretary to the Silicosis and Asbestosis
Medical Expenses Fund.
Cases of Total Disablement or of Suspension
(see paragraph 8 of Scheme).
3
On application for examination—
£1 10s. This fee, less
(i) where there is produced a certificate
10s. is returnable to
of the Regional Medical Officer of
the applicant if the
the Ministry of Health that there
Medical Board issue
is reasonable cause for suspecting
a certificate of total
the disease
disablement or sus-
pension on account
of the disease and fee
No. 4 referred to be-
low has been paid
over to the Fund.
APPENDIX IV.
Fees payable fob examinations and certificates by Medical Boabd.
Prescribed by the Silicosis and Asbestosis (Medical Fees) Regulations
(5.8.0. 1931, No. 412 and 19Si, No. 1063).
* Throughout these Regulations “ Scheme ” means the Silicosis and
Asbestosis (Medical Arrangements) Scheme, 1931 (S.R. &> 0. 1931, No. 341),
as amended by the Silicosis and Asbestosis (Medical Arrangements) Amend-
ment Scheme, 1934 (S.R. & 0. 1934, No. 889).
f Paragraph 21 (2) of the Scheme provides that where a fee is prescribed
as payable by or on behalf of an employer, and no provision is made in the
Compensation Scheme for the payment of such fees from a Compensation
Fund, the employer liable to pay the said fee shall, except as otherwise
provided, be the employer from whom the compensation due to the workman
is recoverable.


No.
of
Fee.
Description of examination or certificate
in respect of which fee is payable, and
directions as to payment.
Amount of Fee.
(ii) where no such certificate is produced
This fee is payable in either case by
or on behalf of the applicant through
the Medical Board.
£8. This fee, less 10s.,
is returnable to the
applicant if the Med-
ical Board issue a
certificate of total
disablement or sus-
pension on account
of the disease and
Fee No. 4 referred to
below has been paid
over to the Fund.
4
On issue of a certificate of total disable-
ment or of Suspension on account of the
disease
This fee is payable by or on behalf
of the' employer on demand from the
Secretary to the Silicosis and Asbestosis
Medical Expenses Fund.
Re-exhminations of workmen (see paragraph
9 of Scheme)'. >
£8.
5
On application for any such re-examination
This fee is payable by or on behalf
of the applicant through the Medical
Board.
Initial examinations of newly engaged work-
men (see paragraph 12 of Scheme).
£1 10s. And in any case
where a radiographic
examination is
directed by the
Medical Board, an
additional fee of
£1 11s. 6d.
6
For every such examination
This fee is payable by or on behalf of
the employer responsible for arranging
for the examination, either through the
member of the Board or other medical
practitioner making the examination or,
where not so paid, on demand from the
Secretary to the Silicosis and Asbestosis
Medical Expenses Fund.
Periodic Examinations (see paragraph 13 of
Scheme).
6s.
7
For every such examination of a workman,
including the issue of any certificate as
the result of such examination
This fee is payable by or on behalf of
‘ the employer by .whom the workman is
employed at the time of the examina-
tion, on demand from the Secretary to
the Silicosis and Asbestosis Medical
Expenses Fund. - Vf
19s. And in any case
where a radiographic
examination is
dire Cted by the
Medical Board, an
additional fee ' of
£1 11s. 6d.


No.
of
Fee.
Description of examination or certificate
in respect of which fee is payable, and
directions as to payment.
Amount of Fee.
Arbitrations or other Proceedings in the
County Court.
8
Where a reference is made to the Medical
And in any
Board for a certificate under section 19 of
case where
the Workmen’s Compensation Act, 1925—
a radio-
(i) if the workman has previously been
graphicex-
examined by the Medical Board
£2 10s.
amination
(ii) if the workman has not previously
is directed
been examined by the Medical
by the
Board
£6 10s.
Medical
This fee is payable in either case by
Board, an
the applicant for the reference as and
additional
when directed by the County Court
fee of
Begistrar.
£1 11s. 6 d.
9
Where the Medical Board make a report
on a case under section 23 or paragraph
And in any
(11) of the First Schedule of the Act—
case where
(i) if the workman has previously been
a radio-
examined by the Medical Board
£2 10s.
graphic ex-
(ii) if the workman has not previously
amination
been examined by the Medical
is directed
Board
£6 10s.
by the
This fee is payable in either case by
Med i c a 1
the employer or workman as and when
directed by the County Court Judge or
other arbitrator or the County Court
Begistrar.
£1 11s. 6d.
10
Where in the case of a wprkraan desiring to
receive his -jn .-pur-
suanco of section 16 of .the Act, a refer-
enoe is made to the Medical Board for a
certificate as to the permanent nature of
the incapacity
£1 in*
This fee is payable by the workman
on application to the County Court for
the reference.
Miscellaneous.
11
For a copy of any certificate issued by the
Medical Board under the Scheme
Is.
This fee is payable by the applicant
for the certificate at the time of the
application.
(28128 —34) Wt. 3481—1074 1250 5/35 P. St. G. 373
