

MEMORANDUM
AND
ARTICLES OF ASSOCIATION
OF
THE SYDNEY
Tramway and Omnibus Comyany
LIMITED.
Sydney:
JOHN WOODS & CO., LIMITED, Printers, 13 Bridge Street.
1886.


w
!>


MEMORANDUM
AND
ARTICLES OF ASSOCIATION
OF
THE SYDNEY
Tramway and Omnibus Comyany
LIMITED.
Sjibtuj) :
JOHN WOODS & CO., LIMITED, Printers, 13 Bridge Street.
188 6.




MEMORANDUM OF ASSOCIATION
OF
The sydney Tramway and Omnibus
Company, Limited.
1. The name of the Company is “ The Sydney Tramway
and Omnibus Company, Limited.”
2. The registered office of the Company will be situate m
Sydney in the colony of New South Wales.
3. The objects for which the Company is established are
as follows :
(a) To purchase or otherwise acquire and undertake all
or any of the business property and liabilities of the
Sydney Tramway and Omnibus Company Limited
upon the terms of a certain agreement expressed
to be made between the said Sydney Tramway
and Omnibus Company Limited and William
Shenstone the liquidator of the said Company
of the one part and the Company of the other
part a copy whereof is set forth in the schedule
to the Articles of Association of the Company.
(b) To carry on in Sydney and the suburbs thereof
V within a radius of fifteen miles from the boundaries
of the city the business of carrying and trans-
porting passengers and goods in vehicles propelled
bv steam cable horse or other motive power upon
and over any tramways or lines constructed
or to be constructed or any roads streets or bridges
and (in connection with such tramways or lines) of
carrying and transporting passengers and goods
by ships boats or other vessels propelled by steam or
other power upon any harbours inlets rivers or inland
waters.
(c) To purchase take on lease or otherwise acquire
absolutely or for any limited period and to build
construct or manufacture and maintain any tram


ways or lines and the materials thereof and any
rights concessions or privileges of or connected
therewith or with or for the purposes of vehicular
traffic ot any description in all or any of the places
aforesaid and also any engines motors tramcars
carriages omnibuses carts waggons and other
vehicles horses steam and other ships boats and
vessels machinery plant wharves piers or jetties
or rights easements or privileges connected there-
with necessary or convenient for the business of
the Company.
(<?) lo purchase take in exchange or on lease or in any
manner acquire for any estate or interest any lands
buildings and real property in Sydney or elsewhere
necessary or useful for the company’s business and
to build erect or alter or adapt any buildings as
may be deemed necessary or desirable for the
purposes of the Company or any of them.
(e) To sell exchange let or otherwise dispose of any of
the property of the Company.
(/) To purchase or otherwise acquire and undertake
all or any part of the business property or liabilities
of any person firm or company carrying on any
business which this Company is authorised to carry
on or possessed of property suitable for the purposes
of this Company.
(d) To promote any other company for the purpose of
acquiring all or any of the property or liabilities of
this Company or of advancing directly or indirectly
the objects or interests thereof and to take or
otherwise acquire and hold shares in any such
company and to guarantee the payment of any
debentures or other securities issued by any such
Company.
(Ji) To enter into partnership or any arrangement for
amalgamation sharing profits union of interests or
co-operation with any person firm or company
carrying on or about to carry on any business which
this Company is authorised to carry on or any
business or transaction capable of being conducted
so as directly or indirectly to benefit this Company
and to take acquire and hold shares or stock in any
such company and to make and enter into such
arrangements and agreements with any person firm
or company carrying on any such business as may
be deemed conducive tu the interests of this Com


pany including any agreement or agreements or
other arrangements reciprocal or otherwise having
the effect of restraining this Company from carrying
on its business or any branch thereof in any place or
places within the limit of the Company’s con-
templated operations.
( i ) To purchase or otherwise acquire on such terms
and in such manner as the regulations of the
Company from time to time provide any shares in
the Company’s capital.
To receive money on deposit at interest and to
borrow and raise money for the purposes of the
Company’s business and to secure the repayment
thereof by bonds or debentures payable to bearer or
otherwise bills or notes mortgages with or without
powers of sale or other instruments or in such other
manner as may be determined and for this purpose
to charge all or any of the property of the Company
including its uncalled capital for the time being.
(k) To make draw accept endorse and execute
promissory notes bills of exchange and other
negotiable instruments.
(J) Generally to do and transact the business of a
tramway omnibus steamboat and carrying com-
pany in all its branches and all business incidental
to the same or conducive to the attainment of
the above objects This general statement of
objects being deemed as enabling and not in any
way as restrictive of the foregoing objects.
4. The liability of the members is limited.
5. The capital of the Company is One million
pounds divided into One million shares of One pound each.


We the several persons whose names and addresses
are subscribed are desirous of being formed into a
Company in pursuance of this Memorandum of Association
and we respectively agree to take the number of shares
in the capital ol the Company set opposite our re-
spective names.
Names, Addresses and Descriptions of
Subscribers.
Number of Shares taken by
each Subscriber.
JOHN WOODS, Manly, Contractor ...
Three thousand six hundred
and two.
W. R. HALL, Sydney, Freeholder
Four thousand three hundred
& sixty-five.
JOHN HIGGINS, Sydney, Gentleman...
Two thousand seven hundred.
A. W. GILLES, Sydney, Freeholder ...
Four thousand seven hundred
and twenty-five.
J. R. CAREY, Sydney, Contractor
Five thousand three hundred
and thirty.
JOHN YOUNG, Sydney, Contractor ...
Three thousand threehundred
and seven.
C. C. SKARRATT, Sydney, Gentleman
One thousand seven hundred
and fifty-five.
Dated the first day of October One thousand eight hundred
and eighty-six.
Witness to the above signatures,
FRED. O. BOULTON, Clerk
66 King-street, Sydney.


ARTICLES OF ASSOCIATION
OF THE
Sydney Tramway and Omnibus
Company Limited.
PRELIMINARY.
1. The regulations contained in table A in the
First Schedule to the “ Companies Act ” shall not
apply to the Company except so far as the same are
repeated or contained in these presents.
INTERPRETATION.
2. In these presents the following terms shal' have the
meanings next hereinafter respectively assigned to them if
not inconsistent with the subject or context.
“ The Company ” means the Sydney Tramway and
Omnibus Company, Limited.
“The Act” means and includes “The Companies
Act ” and every other Act from time to time in
force in New South Wales concerning Joint
Stock Companies and affecting the Company.
'< These presents ” means and include these Articles
of Association and the regulations of the Com-
pany from time to time in force.
“Special Resolution” means a special Resolution of
the Company passed in accordance with the Act.
“ Capital ” means the capital from time to time of the
Company.
“ Shares ” means the shares into which the capital is
from time to time divided.
“ Dividend ” means any sum arising from the division
of the profits of the Company.
“ Shareholders ” and “ Members ” respectively mean
and include the holders frofn time to time of the
shares inscribed on the Shareholders’ Register.


“ Attorney ” means and includes any person duty
appointed by power of Attorney and any duly-
appointed substitute of any such Attorney.
“ Directors ” means the Directors of the Company
assembled at a Board unless the context means
obviously the Directors in their individual
capacity.
“Auditors” “Secretary” “Manager” mean those
respective officers from time to time of the
Company.
“ Meeting” means a meeting of the members duly
called and constituted in accordance with these
presents and any adjourned holding thereof.
“ Board ” means a meeting of the Directors duly
called and constituted or as the case may be the
Directors assembled at a Board.
“ Office” means the registered office for the time being
of the Company.
“ The Shareholders’ Register ” means the register
of members to be kept pursuant to the Companies
Act.
“ Seal ” means the common seal of the Company.
“ Month ” means calendar month.
“ Business ” means the business which the Company
shall or may from time to time or at any time
carry on.
Words importing the singular number only shall
include the plural number.
Words importing the plural number only shall
include the singular number.
Words importing the masculine gender only shall
include the feminine gender.
Words importing persons shall include corporations
mutatis mutandis.
GENERAL PROVISIONS.
3. The Company shall be deemed to commence in
interest and liability as of and from the first day of
October One thousand eight hundred and eighty-six
and shall so continue until dissolved.
4. The Company may unite or amalgamate with buy up
or absorb any other Company upon a resolution being passed
to that effect by two-thirds at least of the votes of the share-
holders present in person or by proxy or attorney at any
extraordinary general meeting but not otherwise.
5. The Directors shall forthwith affix the seal to the
agreement mentioned in paragraph (a) of clause 3 of the


Company’s Memorandum of Association and set out
in the schedule to these presents and shall carry the
same into effect with full power nevertheless from time
to time to agree to any modification of the terms of such
agreement either before or after the execution thereof.
6. The objects and business of the Company shall be
those stated in the Memorandum of Association until and
unless varied under the provisions herein contained.
7. All past and future expenses attendant upon the
formation of the Company and of drawing and perfecting
the Memorandum and Articles of Association of the
Company and the transfer of all lands and other property
and the costs and charges incidental thereto shall be paid
out of the capital or profits of the Company.
8. Any branch or kind of business which the Company
is authorised to carry on may subject to any directions of
the Company in general meeting be undertaken by the
Directors at such time or times as they shall think fit and
further may subject to any such directions of the Company
be suffered by them to be in abeyance whether such a branch
or kind of business may have been commenced or not so long
as the Directors may deem it expedient not to commence
or proceed with such branch or kind of business.
9. The business shall be carried on by or under the
management of the Directors subject only to such restric-
tions as are or shall be imposed by these presents or by the
Memorandum of Association of the Company or by the
Company in general meeting.
10*. The Board shall meet and the office business of the
Company shall be carried on at the registered office of the
Company or at such other place or places as the Board
shall from time to time deem advisable.
11. The registered office shall be in Sydney or such place
as the Board shall from time to time appoint.
CAPITAL AND SHARES.
12. The capital of the Company shall be One million
shares of One pound each of which number Eighty-
one thousand shares shall be issued forthwith and shall be
allotted and taken up according to the stipulations contained
in the said agreement with reference to the shares to be
allotted in pursuance thereof at Fifteen shillings each paid
up and the balance of Five shillings payable on each
of such shares shall be called up as the Directors may think
expedient. The remaining Mine hundred and Nineteen
thousand shares shall be allotted and issued to such persons
at such times and upon such terms as the Directors may


think fit and any shares which may be allotted as payment
or part payment for any property transferred, or services
rendered to the Company, may be issued and if so issued
shall be deemed to be fully paid-up shares.
13. The Directors shall be at liberty to commence and
carry on the business of the Company or any part thereof
nothwithstanding that the whole of the capital may not
have been subscribed and taken up.
14 If two or more persons are registered as joint holders
of any share any one of such persons may give effectual
receipts for any dividends bonuses or other moneys payable
in respect of such share.
15. No person shall be recognised by the Company as
holding any share upon any trust and the Company shall
not be bound by or recognise any equitable contingent
further or partial interest in any share or any interest in
any fractional part of a share or (except only as by these
presents otherwise expressly provided) any other right in
respect of any shares except an absolute right to the
entirety of such share in the person or persons for the time
being registered as the sole holder or as joint holders
thereof.
16. Every sole holder of shares shall without payment
be entitled to one certificate under the hands of two
Directors specifying the shares held by him and the amount
paid up thereon.
17. Joint holders of shares shall without payment be
entitled to one certificate under the hands of two Directors
specifying the shares held by them and the amount paid
up thereon and delivery ol such certificate or certificates
to any one of the holders of such shares shall be sufficient
delivery to all such joint holders thereof.
18. If any such certificate as aforesaid is worn out or lost
it may be renewed on payment of one shilling or such sum
as the Directors may prescribe and such proof of loss in case
of loss as the Directors may require provided that the
Directors may if they think fit refuse to renew a lost certificate
save upon satisfactory indemnity being given to them.
19. A corporation or married woman may hold shares in
the Company.
20. The Company shall have a first and paramount lien
and charge on all the shares of which any person is the
holder or one of several joint holders for all moneys due to
the Company from him either alone or jointly with any
other person whether a Shareholder or not and where a
share is held by more persons than one the Company shall


have such lien thereon in respect of all moneys so clue to
the Company from all or any of the holders thereof and the
Company may on non-payment of all moneys due for
twenty-eight days after demand thereof absolutely sell and
dispose of any shares the holder or any of the holders whereof
shall be indebted to the Company as aforesaid and apply the
proceeds so far as the same will extend in satisfaction of the
amount due to the Company and of all expenses incurred
by the Company in respect thereof and upon such sale the
Company may transfer the shares sold to the purchaser and
substitute such purchaser as member of the Company in
place of the member whose shares shall have been sold and
issue a new certificate representing such shares and such
purchaser shall not be affected by any irregularity in the
proceedings with respect to such sale and transfer
respectively.
21. No member shall be entitled to receive any dividend
or to vote until he shall have given to the Company
particulars of his name and address for the purpose
of registration and no member who shall change
his name or place of abode or who (being a female)
shall marry and no husband of such last mentioned
member shall be entitled to receive any dividend or to vote
until notice of the change of name or abode or of the
marriage shall have been given to the Company for the
purpose of registration and reasonable evidence thereof
given to the Directors if so required by them.
22. No member shall be entitled to vote or to exercise
any rights or privileges as a member until he shall have
been registered in the Shareholders’ Register and shall
have paid all calls and other moneys for the time being
due on every share held by him.
CALLS.
23. The Directors may from time to time subject to the
conditions of these presents at their discretion make calls
upon the holders of any shares in respect of all moneys
unpaid on their said shares A call shall be deemed to
have been made at the time when the resolution authoris-
ing it was passed by the Directors No call shall exceed
two shillings and sixpence for each share held by the share-
holder and no call shall be made at an interval of time
less than one month from the last preceding call.
24. The joint holders of a share shall be jointly as well
as severally liable for the payment of all calls in respect
thereof.


25. Each member shall be liable to pay the amount of
every call so made on him to the persons and at the time
and place appointed by the Directors upon receiving not
less than fourteen days’ notice of such call and of the time
and place so appointed for the payment thereof and of the
person or persons to whom the same is to be paid.
26. If before or on the day appointed for payment
thereof the call payable in respect of any share is not
paid ihe holder for the time being of such share shall pay
interest for the same at the rate of ten pounds per
centum per annum from the day appointed for the pay-
ment thereof and no shareholder shall be entitled to
receive any dividend or to vote or exercise any privilege as
a shareholder while any call due and payable in respect of
any share of which he is the holder or one of the joint
holders or any interest in respect thereof is unpaid.
27. The Directors may if they think fit receive from
any member willing to advance the same all or any part cf
the moneys due upon the shares held by him beyond the
sums actually called up thereon and upon the moneys so
paid in advance or so much thereof as from time to time
exceeds the amount of the calls then made upon the
shares in respect of which such advance has been made
the Company may pay or allow interest at such rate as
may be agreed upon between the Directors and the
shareholder paying such sum in advance but any amount
for the time being paid in advance of calls shall not be in-
cluded or taken into account in ascertaining the amount in
the dividend or bonus payable upon the shares in respect
of which such advance has been made.
TRANSFER OF SHARES.
28. Subject to the restrictions of these presents any
member may transfer all or any of his shares but every
transfer must be in writing and in such form as the
Directors shall from time to time approve and must be left
at the office of the Company accompanied by particulars of
the name address and description of the intended transferee
and by such evidence as the Directors may require to prove
the title of the intending transferor.
29. The instrument of transfer of any share shall be
executed both by the transferor and transferee and the
transferor shall be deemed to remain the holder of such
share until the name of the transferee is entered in the
Shareholders’ Register in respect thereof.


30. Shares in the Company shall be transferred in t e
following form “I AB of . (hereinafter
called the transferor) in consideration of the sum of
paid to me by C D of
(hereinafter called the transferee) do hereby transfer o
the said transferee the share [or shares] numbered
standing in my name in the books ■ of Ithe Sydney
Tramway and Omnibus Company Limited to hold
unto the said transferee his executors administrators
and assigns subject to the several conditions on which I
hold the same at the time of the execution he ™
and I the said transferee do hereby agree to take
the said share or shares subject to the same conditions.
£< As witness my hand the day of
thousand eight hundred and eighty-
£{ Signed by the said
transferor in the V
presence of )
££ Signed by the said j
transferee in the V
or in form as the Directors may from time to
time prescribe and the instrument of transfer shall when
duly executed be deposited with the Secretary o
Company to be retained by the Company.
31 The Directors may refuse to register any transfer o
shares (whether fully paid up or not) by ™y holder or
ioint holders who is or are or any of whom is either alone
or jointly with any other person indebted to the Company
on any account whatsoever.
32. For the purposes of the last preceding article but not
otherwise a member shall be deemed indebted to the
Company in respect of a call made hut not yet payable in
respect of his shares. . ,
33 The Register of Transfers shall be closed during the
fourteen days immediately preceding every ordinary general
meeting of the Company.
transmission of shares.
34. The executors or administrators of a deceasied member
not being one of several joint holders shall be the only
persons recognised by the Company as having any title to
hL shares and in the case of the death of one or more of
such joint holders the survivors shall be the only P e ”°“®
recognised by the Company as having any title to or
interest in such shares.


35. Any person becoming entitled to a share in conse-
quence of the death bankruptcy liquidation by arrangement
or insolvency of any member or the marriage of any female
member may upon producing such evidence of title as the
Directors shall require either be registered himself as holder
of the share or elect to have some person nominated by him
registered as the transferee thereof.
36. If the person so becoming entitled shall elect to have
a nominee registered he shall testify his election by
executing to his nominee an instrument of transfer of such
share.
FORFEITURE AND SURRENDER OF SHARES.
37. If any member fails to pay the whole or any part of
any call on the day appointed for the payment thereof the
Directors may at any time thereafter during such time as
the call or any part thereof remains unpaid serve a notice
on him requiring him to pay such call or such part thereof
as remains unpaid together with interest at the rate of
ten pounds per centum per annum from the day appointed
for the payment of such call and any expenses that may have
been incurred by reason of such non-payment.
38. The notice shall name a further day on or before
which such call or such part as aforesaid and all interest
and expenses that have accrued by reason of such non-
payment are to be paid. It shall also name the place
where payment is to be made and shall state that in the
event of non-payment at or before the time and at the place
appointed the shares in respect of which such call was made
will be liable to be forfeited.
39. If the requisitions of any such notice as aforesaid are
not complied with any share in respect of which such notice
has been given may at any time thereafter before payment
of all calls interest and expenses due in respect thereof has
been made be forfeited by a resolution of the Directors to
that effect.
40. For the purposes of the provisions of .these presents
relating to forfeiture of shares the sum payable upon allot-
ment in respect of a share shall be deemed to be a call
payable upon such share on the day of allotment.
41. Where any person entitled to claim a share by trans-
mission and not having entitled himself according to these
presents either to be registered himself as the holder thereof
or to have some person registered as the transferee thereof
fails for six months after being thereunto required by notice
from the Directors so to entitle himself such share may at


any time after the expiration of that period be forfeited by
a resolution of the Directors to that effect.
42. Notwithstanding any such forfeiture as aforesaid the
Directors may at any time before the forfeited share shall
have been , otherwise disposed of permit the same to be
redeemed upon the terms of payment of all calls, and
interest due upon and expenses incurred in respect ot such
share and upon such other further terms (if any) as they
sllß/11 SGG fit*
43. Every share which shall be forfeited shall thereupon
become the property of the Company and may be either
cancelled or sold or re-allotted or otherwise disposed ol
either to the person who was before forfeiture the holder
thereof or to any other person upon such terms and in such
manner as the Directors shall think fit.
44. A member whose shares have been forfeited shall
notwithstanding be liable to pay to the Company all calls
made and not paid on such shares at the time of forfeiture
and interest thereon to the date of payment in the same
manner in all respects as if the shares had not been forfeited
and to satisfy all (if any) the claims and demands which
the Company might have enforced in respect of the shares
at the time of forfeiture.
45. The forfeiture of a share shall involve the extinction
at the time of forfeiture of all interests in and all claims
and demands against the Company in respect of the share
and all other rights and liabilities incidental to the share
as between the member whose share is forfeited and the
Company except only such of those rights and liabilities as
are by these presents expressly saved or are by the statute
given or imposed in the case of past members.
46. A certificate in writing under the seal of the Com-
pany and under the hands of any two of the Directors that
a share has been duly forfeited in pursuance of these
presents and stating the time when it was forfeited shall as
against all persons claiming to be entitled to such share
adversely to the forfeiture thereof be conclusive evidence of
the facts therein stated and such certificate together with a
certificate of proprietorship of such share under the hands
of two Directors delivered to a purchaser or allottee thereof
shall constitute a good title to such share and the holder
thereof shall be discharged from all calls made prior to such
purchase or allotment and shall not be bound to see to the
application of the purchase money nor shall his title to such
share be affected by any fact omission or irregularity
relating to or connected with the proceedings m reference


to the forfeiture sale re-allotment or disposal of the said
share.
CONSOLIDATION AND SUBDIVISION OF SHARES.
47. The Directors may from time to time with the
sanction of the Company previously given in general meet-
ing consolidate and divide the capital into shares of larger
amount than the existing shares.
48. The Company may from time to time by special
resolution subdivide its shares or any of them and divide
its capital or any part thereof into shares of smaller amount
than is fixed by the Memorandum of Association so as such
division be carried into effect in accordance with the pro-
visions in that behalf in the “Companies’ Act.”
INCREASE OF CAPITAL.
49. The Directors may from time to time whether all the
shares for the time being authorised shall have been issued
or not with the sanction of a resolution of the Company
previously given in Extraordinary General Meeting and
passed by two-thirds at least of the votes of the Share-
holders present personally or by proxy or attorney increase
its capital by the creation and issue of new shares such
aggregate increase to be of such amount and to be divided
into shares of such respective amounts as the Company by
the special resolution authorising such increase or by any
special resolution directs and thereupon the notice required
by Section 32 of the “ Companies’ Act ” shall be given
and such shares shall be paid-up either forthwith or in such
calls or instalments as the Directors may determine.
50. All new shares shall be offered either at par or at a
premium as the Directors think fit to the members in pro-
proportion to the existing shares held by them and such
offer shall be made by notice specifying the number of
shares to which each member is entitled and limiting a
time within which the offer if not accepted will be deemed
to be declined and after the expiration of such time or on
receipt of an intimation from any member to whom such
notice is given that he declines to accept the shares offered
the Directors may dispose of the same in such manner as
they may think most beneficial to the Company.
51. Subject to any directions that may be given by
special resolution under the powers in these presents con-
tained relating to the issue of new shares any capital raised
by the creation of new shares shall be considered as part
of the original capital and shall be subject to the pro


visions with reference to the payment of calls and the for-
feiture of shares on non-payment of calls or otherwise
hereinbefore contained.
PREFERRED AND DEFERRED SHARES.
52. New shares (beyond the said one million
shares) from time to time created or any of such shares
may from time to time with the sanction of a special reso-
lution of the Company be issued with any such guarantee
or right of preference whether in respect of dividend or
re-payment of capital or both or with any such special
privileges or advantages over any shares previously issued
or then about to be issued or with any such arrangements
as to the amount of calls to be paid thereon and the time
of payment of such calls or at such premium and with such
deferred rights as compared with any shares previously
issued or then about to be issued and subject to any such
provisions or conditions and generally on such terms as
the Company may by special resolution direct.
GENERAL MEETINGS.
53. General meetings shall subject as hereinafter ex-
pressed be held at such time and place as the Directors shall
appoint in the respective months of April and October in
each year or in the month immediately succeeding such
months respectively if found to be more convenient and the
first general meeting shall be held within four months ol
the registration of the Memorandum of Association
pursuant to Section 70 of the Companies’ Act and the next
General meeting shall not be held until the month of April
One thousand eight hundred and eighty-seven. Ihe
meeting held in the month of October in each year shall be
called the annual general meeting.
54 The above-mentioned general meetings shall be
called Ordinary meetings. All other general meetings shall
be called Extraordinary.
55. The Directors may whenever they think fit and they
shall’upon a requisition made in writing and signed by not
less than Five members of the Company (by themselves or
their attorneys duly appointed) holders in the aggregate ol
not less than one-tenth of the shares then issued convene an
extraordinary general meeting at such time and place as
they shall think fit.
56 blvery requisition so made by the shareholders shall
express the object of the meeting proposed to be called and
shall be left at the registered office of the Company.


57. If the Directors within twenty-one days after the
delivery of such requisition do not issue notices calling a
meeting in accordance therewith the requisionists by
themselves or their attorneys duly appointed as aforesaid
or any other members amounting to the required number
and holding the required amount of capital may themselves
convene an extraordinary meeting at such time and place
as they think fit.
NOTICE OF MEETINGS
58. Seven days’ notice at least exclusive of the day of
service but inclusive of the day for which the notice is
given specifying the place the day and the hour of meeting
and in case of special business the general nature of such
business shall be given to the members in the manner
mentioned or in such other manner as may be prescribed
by the Company in general meeting but the non-receipt of
such notice by any member shall not invalidate any
proceeding taken or any resolution passed at any such
meeting,
PROCEEDINGS AT MEETINGS
.59. Ordinary business shall consist of the election of
Directors appointment of an Auditor the consideration of
the accounts balance-sheet and the report of the Directors
and Auditor and the sanctioning or declaring dividends
but all other matters and the exercise of all other powers
shall be deemed special No business shall be transacted
at any general meeting unless a quorum is present and
such quorum shall be ascertained as follows :
For ordinary business —Ten shareholders present in
person or by proxy representing at least ten
thousand shares in the Company.
For special business—Ten shareholders present in
person or by proxy representing at least twenty
thousand shares in the Company.
60. No shareholder shall as regards any special business
be at liberty to move at any general meeting any
resolution not previously approved of by the Directors un-
less he has given not less than seven days previous notice
in writing of his intention to move such resolution at such
meeting and shall have left a copy of the resolution at the
registered office of the Company.
61. If within half-an-hour after the time appointed for
the holding of a general meeting the requisite quorum be
not present the meeting if convened on the requisition of
members shall be dissolved and in any other case shall
stand adjourned to the same day in the next week at the


same time and place and if at such adjourned meeting a
quorum be not present within half-an-hour after the time
appointed for the holding of the meeting the meeting shall
be adjourned sine die.
62. The Chairman with the consent of any meeting at
which the requisite quorum shall be present may adjourn
any meeting from time to time and from place to place as
the meeting shall determine and members shall not be
entitled to any notice of the adjournment or of the business
to be transacted at any adjourned meeting but no business
shall be transacted at any adjourned meeting other than
the business left unfinished at or for which notice was given
for the meeting from which the adjournment ter k place
and which might have been transacted at that meeting.
63. The Chairman (if any) of the Board of Directors
shall preside at every general meeting but if there be no
such Chairman or if at any meeting he shall not be present
within ten minutes after the time appointed for holding the
same or shall be unwilling to act as Chairman the members
present may choose one of their number to be Chairman of
the meeting. _ , ,
64. At every general meeting a resolution put to tne
vote of the meeting shall be decided by a show of hands by
a numerical majority of the members present in person or
by attorney or by proxy and entitled to vote unless before
or upon the declaration of the result of the show of hands a
poll be demanded by any two members present m person
and entitled to vote and unless a poll be so demanded a
declaration bv the Chairman of the meeting that a resolu-
tion has been'earried or negatived thereat shall be conclusive
and an entry to that effect in the book of proceedings of the
Company shall be sufficient evidence thereof without proof
of the number or proportion of the votes recorded m favour
of or against such resolution.
65. If a poll be demanded in manner aforesaid the same
shall be taken at such time and place and in such manner
as the Chairman shall direct and the result of the poll shall
be deemed to be the resolution of the meeting at which the
poll was demanded.
66. In the case of equality of votes either on the show ot
hands or at the poll the Chairman of the meeting at which
the show of hands takes place or at which the poll is
demanded as the case may be shall be entitled to a further
or casting vote.
VOTES OF SHAREHOLDERS.
67. On a show of hands every member whether present


in person or by attorney or by proxy shall have one vote
only In the case of a pell the voting shall be on the
following scale :
Members holding 25 or more shares and under 50—1 vote
„ „ 50 „ „ 100—2 votes
and an additional vote for every 100 shares in excess of 100.
Holders of less than 25 shares shall not be entitled to vote.
68. If any member is a lunatic or idiot he may vote by
his committee or other legal curator and such last-mentioned
persons may give their votes either personally or by proxy
or under power of attorney,
69. If two or more persons are jointly entitled to a share
the member whose name stands first on the Shareholders’
Register as one of the holders of such share and no other
shall be entitled to vote in respect of the same.
70. No member shall be entitled to vote or take part in
any general meeting unless all calls interest and expenses
due from him alone or jointly have been paid and no
member shall be entitled to vote in respect of any shares
that he has acquired by transfer at any meeting held after
the expiration of three months from the registration of the
Company unless he has been registered in respect of the
shares in respect of which he claims to vote for at least
fourteen days previously to the time of holding the meeting
at which he proposes to vote and no member shall be
disentitled to vote upon any question by reason of his being
pecuniarily or personally interested or co ncernedtherein.
71. Votes may be given either personally or by proxy or
under power of attorney.
72. The instrument appointing a proxy shall be in writing
or partly in writing and partly in printing under the hand
of the appointor or if such appointor is a corporation under
their common seal and shall be attested by one or more
witness or witnesses.
7'S. No person shall be appointed a proxy who is not a
member of the Company.
74. The instrument appointing a proxy shall be deposited
at the office at least twenty-four hours before the time
appointed for the meeting at which the person named in
such instrument proposes to vote otherwise the person so
named shall not be entitled to vote in respect thereof.
75. No proxy shall be available for any meeting other
than that for which it is expressly given or any adjournment
thereof and every proxy shall be in the form following or to
the same effect: —“I hereby appoint my
proxy (or the proxy of A. B. as the case may be) to vote


for me (or him) at a meeting of the shareholders of the
Sydney Tramway and Omnibus Company Limited to be
holden on the day of
thousand eight ' or any adjournment thereof”
And if two or more proxies shall be presented from the
same person at any meeting all such proxies shall be null
and void.
76. The attorney of any member absent from the colony
of New South Wales holding a general power under seal to
attend meetings of companies or a special power to attend
meetings of this Company may whether a member or not
attend and vote or appoint a proxy to vote for such member
at such meetings but shall not otherwise take part in the
proceedings of such meetings provided such power be pro-
duced to the Manager or Secretary aforesaid for inspection
forty-eight hours previous to the meeting.
DIKECTORS.
77. The Directors shall be six in number until the
shareholders shall otherwise determine Three shall form
a quorum or Board of Directors and be competent to per-
form all the acts which the whole could do or perform
The continuing Directors for the time being may act not-
withstanding any vacancy in their body Provided always
that in case the Directors shall at any time be reduced in
number to less than three it shall be lawful for them to act
as Directors for the purpose of filling up vacancies in their
body in manner hereinafter provided but not for any other
purpose.
78. John Woods John Randal Carey Alfred William
Gilles Jenkin Collier William Cain and John Higgins shall
be and are hereby appointed the first Directors.
79. Candidates for the office of Director shall in all cases
give not less than seven days’ notice in writing to the
Company of their intended candidature or they shall not
be eligible for election.
80. The qualification of a Director shall be the holding
in his own right alone and not jointly with any other person
of not less than five hundred shares and this qualification
shall be required as well of the first Directors as of all
future Directors unless otherwise determined by the share-
holders.
81. There shall be paid to the Board by way of remunera-
tion the sum of Four hundred pounds per annum or such
other sum as the Company in general meeting may from
time to time determine which sum shall be divided among
’them as they may think fit.


82. Two of the Directors shall retire at each annual
general meeting the retiring Directors to be determined
by lot amongst the first Directors until the whole of the
first Directors shall have retired and thereafter by seniority
of office the Directors who have been longest in office first
retiring Provided that if any disagreement shall at any
time occur between any of the Directors as to those who
are to retire in pursuance of this article or any difficulty
shall at any time arise in carrying out the mode of retire-
ment the Directors to retire shall be decided by lot.
83. A retiring Director shall be eligible for re-election.
84. The Company at any general meeting at which any
Directors retire in manner aforesaid shall fill up the vacated
offices by electing a like number of persons as Directors.
85. If at any annual general meeting or adjourned
general meeting at which an election of Directors ought to
take place the place of the retiring Directors or Director
shall not be filled up such retiring Directors or Director
shall continue in office until the next annual general
meeting and so on from time to time until their or his
place is filled up.
86. Any casual vacancy or vacancies occurring in the
Board of Directors may be filled up by the Directors by the
appointment of a duly qualified Shareholder but any person
so chosen shall only continue in office until the next annual
general meeting.
87. Any Director or Auditor may at any time retire from
office on giving written notice to the Board and the Share-
holders may at any meeting by a special resolut ; on remove
any Director before the expiration of his period of office
and may by an ordinary resolution appoint another person
duly qualified in his stead The person so appointed shall
hold office only during such time as the Director in whose
place he is appointed would have held the same if he had
not been removed.
88. The Company may from time to time in general
meeting increase or reduce the number of Directors and
may also determine in what rotation such increased or
reduced number is to go out of office.
89. Any Director who shall be or be about to
be absent from the colony of New South Wales
may from time to time by writing under his hand
appoint any duly qualified Shareholder not being a Director
to act as a Director in his place during such absence and
such appointee until revocation of his appointment shall


have and may exercise all the powers ot a Director Pro-
vided that such appointment be approved by a majority
of the Board.
DISQUALIFICATION OF DIRECTORS.
90. The office of Director shall be vacated.
t. If being liable for any call he fails to pay the
same on or before the day appointed for payment
thereof.
11. If he cease to hold Five hundred shares at least.
hi. If his estate is sequestrated for the benefit of his
creditors or if he takes any proceedings for liquidation
by arrangement or fcr composition.
iv. If he is declared a lunatic or confined in a lunatic
asylum or in a gaol as a lunatic.
v. If he resigns his office or refuses to act.
VI. If he is convicted of any felony or misdemeanor.
Vii. If he hold any other office of profit under the
Company.
VIII. If he shall during such term without leave from
the Board of Directors absent himself for two
months from the meetings of the Board.
lx. If he is concerned in or participates in the profits
of any contract with or work done for the
Company.
91. Ho Director shall vacate his office by reason of his
being a member of any Company which has entered into a
contract with or done any work for this Company or which
is concerned in or participates in the profits ot any
contract with the Company No proceedings of the Board
of Directors shall be invalidated by reason of any Director
taking part or concurring therein being then disqualified
Provided that the Board of Directors may temporarily
appoint any Director with or without remuneration for the
management or transaction of any special business con-
nected with the affairs or concerns of the Company
without thereby vacating the office of such Director.
POWERS OF DIRECTORS.
92. The business of the Company shall subject to any
directions of the Company in general meeting be managed
by the Directors who may carry on the same in accordance
with these presents and with the iviemorandum of Associa-
tion in such manner as in their judgment and discretion
they may think expedient Provided that the Directors
shall not without the sanction of the Company in general
meeting exercise any of the powers of the Company other


than those expressly conferred on them by these presents
and such other powers as may be requisite for the due
management and carrying on in the ordinary way of the
business of the Company or of any other business hereafter
acquired or undertaken by the Company.
93. In particular and without prejudice to the generality
of the last preceding article the Directors may in the
management of the business of the Company subject to the
restrictions herein contained without any further power or
authority from the members immediately on the incorpo-
ration of the Company commence business and do the
following things in the name and on behalf of the
Company.
(a) They may and shall pay and reimburse them-
selves out of the current income of the Company or of
any other moneys of the Company in their hands all
such law costs and charges and all such preliminary
and other expenses incurred in the formation registra-
tion and incorporation of the Company or incidental
thereto as may to them in their discretion seem just
and reasonable.
(b) They may adopt such measures as they may
from time to time deem expedient for the purpose of
carrying on the business of the Company and for
improving developing and realising it.
(c) They may purchase or otherwise acquire
absolutely or for any limited period build construct or
manufacture and maintain any tramways or lines and
the materials thereof and any rights concessions or
privileges of or connected therewith or with or for the
purpose of vehicular traffic of any description and also
any engines motors tramcars carriages omnibuses carts
waggons and other vehicles horses steam and other
ships boats and vessels machinery and plant wharves
piers or jetties or rights easements or privileges
connected therewith which they may consider necessary
or convenient for the business of the Company and
may at their discretion again sell let or dispose of any
such property.
(d) They may purchase take in exchange or on
lease or otherwise acquire and for any estate or interest
therein any real estate which the Company is authorised
to acquire and which they may think it requisite or
expedient to acquire for the purpose of the Company’s
business and may at their discretion again sell let or
dispose of any property so to be acquired.


(e) They may pay for the acquisition of any pro-
perties which the Company is authorised to acquire
either in cash or in shares or partly in cash and partly
in shares or in such manner as the Shareholders in
General Meeting from time to time may direct.
(f) They may bring conduct defend compromise
refer to arbitration and abandon legal and other pro-
ceedings and claims by and against the Company and
the Directors and officers of same and otherwise con-
cerning the affairs of the Company
(g) They may affix the Seal of the Company to
and may subscribe and otherwise execute and complete
or cause to be executed and completed all agreements
conveyances transfers grants bonds deeds bills of ex-
change leases and all other deeds assurances and docu-
ments which they may from time to time think neces-
sary.
(Ji) They may refer disputes to arbitration and
compromise any debts or claims due to or from the
Company other than sums due to the Company for
arrears upon calls.
(' i ) They may give time to any debtor to the Com-
pany for payment of his debt with or without security.
(k) They may invest on Government or real or
leasehold securities or on such other securities as they
may determine or at their discretion leave in the busi-
ness of the Company all capital money and other
moneys of the Company not immediately applicable for
any payment to be made by the Company or not
required as working capital or otherwise for or in the
current business or operations of the Company.
(l) They may from time to time receive money
upon deposit at interest and raise and borrow in the
name or otherwise on behalf of the Company such sums
of money as they may from time to time think
expedient and may secure the repayment thereof by
bonds debentures bills or notes or by mortgage or
charge of or on any of the property or assets of the
Company including its uncalled capital.
(mj They may insure against damage by fire or at
sea any insurable property of the Company.
(n) They may act on behalf of the Company in all
matters relating to bankrupts and insolvents.
(o) They may appoint suspend remove and again
appoint all such managers secretaries solicitors agents
clerks workmen and servants either for permanent


temporary or special purposes as they may from time
to time deem necessary upon such terms in all respects
as they may think proper and determine their respec-
tive salaries or emoluments and require security in
such instances and to such an amount as they may
think fit for the proper and efficient discharge of their
duties respectively.
(p) They may draw accept make endorse transfer
discount guarantee and negotiate such cheques bills of
exchange and promissory notes deposit notes and
other obligations as may seem to them to be expedient
for the purposes of business of the Company Any
such cheque bill of exchange or promissory note shall
be drawn made accepted or endorsed by two Directors
in the name of the Company or in such other manner
as the Board shall direct.
(q) They may enter into and execute and also
release modify vary or discharge any contract agree-
ment or engagement lease or other instrument respect-
ing any matter in which the Company may be
interested.
( r ) They may at any time and from time to time
by power of attorney under the seal of the Company
appoint any person to be Attorney of the Company for
such purposes and with such powers authorities and
discretions (not exceeding those vested in or exercised
by the Directors under these presents) and for such
period and subject to such conditions as the Directors
may from time to time think fit and any such appoint-
ment may if the Directors think fit be made in favour
of any Company or of the Directors nominees or
managers of any company or firm And any such
power of attorney may contain such provisions for the
protection or convenience of persons dealing with such
attorney as the Directors think fit Any such delegates
or attorneys as aforesaid may be authorised by the
Directors to sub-delegate all or any of the powers
authorities and discretions for the time being vested in
them.
( s) Generally the Directors may at their absolute
discretion execute and do every act assurance and thing
which they may judge necessary or expedient for the
purpose of carrying on the business of the Company
except any such act assurance or thing as is by these pre-
sents or by the act prohibited Provided always that


if and whenever by these presents or by the act the
previous sanction of a general meeting is required
they shall not act without such sanction.
PROCEEDINGS OF DIRECTORS.
94'. The Directors may meet together for the despatch of
business adjourn and otherwise regulate their meetings as
they think fit Provided that a meeting of Directors shall
be held not less than once in each month and that the
■Chairman may at any time summon a meeting of the Direc-
tors.
95. Questions arising at any meeting of the Directors
shall be decided by a majority of votes Each Director pre-
sent shall have one vote and in case of an equality of votes
the Chairman shall have a second or casting vote.
96. The Directors shall elect a Chairman of their Board
and determine the period for which he is to hold office The
Chairman so elected shall preside at all meetings of the
Board but if no such Chairman be elected or if at any
meeting the Chairman be not present at the time appointed
for holding the same the Directors present shall choose
some one of their nnmber to act as Chairman of such meet-
ing and the Director so chosen shall preside at such meeting
accordingly.
97. All acts bona fide done by any meeting of Directors
or by any person acting as a Director shall notwithstanding
it be afterwards discovered that there was some defect in
the appointment of any such Directors or persons acting as
aforesaid or that they or any of them were disqualified be as
valid as if every such person had been duly appointed and
was qualified to be a Director.
98. The Directors shall cause minutes to be made in
books to be provided for the purpose- of all such matters as
they shall think necessary and of all resolutions passed and
proceedings had by and at all meetings of the Company or
Directors and any such minutes as aforesaid if purporting to
be signed by the Chairman of the meeting at which resolu-
tions were passed or proceedings had (as the case may be)
or by the Chairman of the next succeeding meeting of the
Company or Directors (as the case may be) shall be suffi-
cient evidence without any further proof of the facts therein
stated.
SEAL OF THE COMPANY.
99. The Seal of the Company shall not be affixed to any
instrument except by the anthority of a resolution of the


Board and in the presence of at least two Director's and the
said two Directors shall sign every instrument to which the
seal shall be so affixed in their presence.
DIVIDENDS.
100. The Directors may at such times as the circum-
stances of the Company warrant the same declare dividends
co be paid to shareholders in proportion to the number of
their shares and the amount paid up or deemed to be paid
up thereon No dividends shall be payable except out of
the profits arising from the business of the Company The
Directors may deduct from the dividend payable to
any shareholder all such sums of money as may be due by
him to the Company on account of calls or otherwise.
101. The Directors may before recommending any
dividend set aside out of the profits of the Company such a
sum a 3 they think proper as a reserve and depreciation
fund which shall at the discretion of the Directors be
applicable for meeting contingencies for the gradual liquida-
tion of any debt or liability of the Company or for repairing or
maintaining the property plant and premises connected with
the business of the Company or shall with the sanction of the
Company in general meeting be as to the whole or in part
applicable for equalizing dividends or for distribution by
way of bonus among the members of the Company for the
time being or for any other purpose of the Company on
such terms and in such manner as the Company in general
meeting shall from time to time determine.
102. The Directors may leave in the business of the
Company the sums from time to time set apart as a reserve
fund or invest the same upon such authorised securities as
they may select.
103. Notice of any dividend that may have been declared
shall be given in manner hereinafter mentioned to such
members as are under the provisions hereinafter contained
entitled to receive notices from the Company.
104. No unpaid dividend bonus or interest shall bear
interest as against the Company.
ACCOUNTS.
105. The Directors shall cause a banking acconnt to be
opened and kept in the name of the Company in New
South Wales and in such other places (if any) as they
think proper.
106. The Directors shall cause proper books of account
to be kept of the transactions of the Company and of the
credits and liabilities thereof which books of account shall


be kept at such place or places and under the charge of
such person as the Directors may from time to time direct
The Directors shall from time to time determine whether
and to what extent and at what times and places and under
what conditions or regulations the accounts and books of
the Company (or any and which of them) shall be open to
the inspection of the members and no member other
than is hereinbefore provided shall have any right of
inspecting or taking any copy of any account or report or
balance sheet or profit and loss account or any book or
document of the Company except as conferred by the Act
or authorised by the Directors or by a general meeting
but no general meeting shall be entitled to require any
information as to the prices charged by the Company for
any work done whether by contract or otherwise nor as to
the prices paid for any goods material or labour nor with
respect to any of the means employed or results arising
or profits or losses made in any particular part of the
operations of the Company nor any other information
which the Directors may consider to be inconsistent with
the interests of the Company to make public.
107. An account shall be taken yearly of the stock-in-
trade of the Company and once at least in every year the
Board shall lay before a general meeting a report com-
prising a balance-sheet and profit and loss account made up
from the accounts to be kept for the purpose of the
Company showing as accurately as circumstances will
permit the financial position of the company up to a date
to be therein mentioned which date shall be the thirtieth day
of September or some other day as near the day of meeting
as can conveniently be fixed.
108. The accounts of the Company shall from time to
time be examined and the correctness of the balance-sheet
ascertained by two Auditors to be appointed as hereinafter
provided.
AUDITORS AND AUDIT.
109. There shall be two Auditors of the Company one of
whom shall be a professional accountant.
110. The election of Auditors shall be made by the
Company at their annual meeting in each year.
111. The Auditors may be members of the Company
but no person shall be eligible as an Auditor who is
interested otherwise than as a member in any transaction
of the Company and no Director shall be eligible during
his continuance in office.


112. The remuneration of the Auditors shall be fixed by
tne Directors.
113. Any Auditor shall be re-eligible on his quitting
office.
114. If any casual vacancy occurs in the office of Auditor
the Directors shall make the appointment.
115. Every Auditor shall be supplied with a copy of the
balance-sheet and it shall be his duty to examine the same
with the accounts and vouchers relating thereto.
116. Every Auditor shall at reasonable times have access
to all the books and accounts of the Company for the pur-
pose of audit.
117. The Auditors shall report to the Members upon the
balance-sheet accounts and affairs of the Company either
generally or specially as they shall think fit.
118. The shareholders in extraordinary general meeting
may appoint two or more special Auditors to enquire
generally into all the transactions of the Company and to
report thereon to the special general meeting And such
special Auditors shall if they think fit employ professional
assistance at the expense of the Company.
NOTICES.
119. A notice may be served by the Company upon any
member either personally or by sending it through the post
in a prepaid letter addressed to such member at his address
or place of abode as entered on the Shareholders’ Register
or in the case of any intended meeting or call may be given
by advertisement appearing not less than three times on
different days the last of such advertisements appearing at
least seven days before the day appointed for the holding
of such meeting or the payment of such call in one or more
daily paper or papers published in Sydney and all notices
by the Company to members not given by advertisement as
aforesaid shall be deemed to have been sufficiently given
and to have been received by the members not only if the
same shall have been served on them personally but also if
the same shall have been left at their address or places of
abode appearing in the Shareholders’ Register or if the
same shall have been put into a post-office addressed to
them at such address or places of abode.
120. All notices directed to be given to the members
shall with respect to any share to which persons are jointly
entitled be given to whichever of such persons is named
first in the Shareholders’ Register and notice so given shall
be sufficient notice to all the holders of such share.


121. Any notice if served by post shall be deemed to
have been served at the time when the letter containing
the same is deposited in any post-office or any receiving
box belonging to the post-office and in proving such
service it shall be sufficient to prove that the letter con-
taining the notice was properly addressed and put into a
post-office or receiving box.
122. When the signature of any person is necessary to
authenticate any notice the signature may be printed and
need not be written.
123. Any summons notice order or other document re-
quired to be served upon the Company or upon any officer
of the Company may be served by leaving the same at the
registered office of the Company or sending it through the
post in a prepaid letter addressed to the Company or to
such officer at the office.
124. Where any notice refers to special matters to be
done transacted or brought forward it shall be sufficient to
indicate such matters so as to inform and prevent surprise
to a reasonable mind and it shall not be necessary to set
out resolutions or propositions in detail.
WINDING DP.
125. The Company shall be wound up voluntarily when-
ever a special resolution as defined by “ The Companies
Act” is passed requiring the Company to be wound up
vol untarily.
DISPOSAL OF PROPERTY OF COMPANY ON WINDING UP OR
OTHERWISE.
126. In case the Company shall be wound up either
voluntarily or compulsorily or shall be dissolved in any
other manner whatsoever then all the assets and property
whatever of the Company shall subject to the payment
and satisfaction thereout of all the debts and liabilities
whatsoever of the Company belong exclusively to the
members for the time being of the Company and
accordingly the net balance or surplus arising from the
realization of such assets and property after payment and
satisfaction of all such debts and liabilities shall be divided
among the holders of all the shares for the time being of the
Company rateably and in proportion to the amounts then
actually paid up or considered as paid up on such shares
respectively.
127. Any member whether a Director or not and
whether alone or jointly with any other Director or member


or with any person not a member may become the pur-
chaser of the property of the Company or any part thereof
in the event of the winding up or dissolution of the Com-
pany or at any time when a sale of the Company’s property
as well real as personal or any part thereof shall be made
by the Directors under the powers hereby or otherwise con-
ferred upon them.
128. In the event of the Company being wound
up before the whole of the amounts of the shares shall have
been called up no person or persons to whom fully paid up
shares shall have been allotted shall be entitled to have calls
made on such unpaid shares for the purpose of any contri-
bution to the holders of such paid up shares whether by
way of equalisation or otherwise.
ARBITRATION.
129. Whenever any doubt difference or dispute shall here-
after arise between the Company or the Directors on theone
hand and any member his heirs executors administrators or
assigns on the other hand or between any member touching
the construction of these Articles or any clause or provision
herein contained or any valuation of shares or any division
of profits or declaration of dividends or any other thing in
anywise relating to the Company or the business profits or
assets thereof (except any question or matter which under
these Articles is to be decided by a majority of votes of the
Members or as to which the decision or discretion of the
Directors is hereby made conclusive or absolute) the matter
in difference shall be referred to two arbitrators or their
umpire pursuant to and so as with regard to the mode and
consequence of the reference and in all other respects to
the provisions in that behalf contained in the Act 31
Victoria No. 15 or any now existing or future statutory
modification thereof and upon any or every such reference
the arbitrators and umpire shall respectively have power
to examine the parties and witnesses upon oath or affirma-
tion and either to fix settle or determine the amount of
costs of the reference and award respectively or incidental
thereto to be paid by both parties or by either party or to
direct the same to be taxed either as between solicitor and
client or otherwise and to direct and award when and by
and to whom such costs shall be paid.
POWER TO ALTER CLAUSES.
130. A general meeting shall from time to time have
full power to regulate and control all the affairs manage-
ment capital and concerns of the Company and shall have


power bjr -special resolution to alter or repeal all or any of
the clauses of the Articles of Association and the laws
regulations and resolutions which shall from time to time
be made subsequent to the date thereof in pursuance of any
power therein contained or in force for that purpose
affecting the capital profits business or concerns of the
company and may from time to time make and pass any
new law or laws regulation or regulations resolution or
resolutions for the better management of the Company and
the capital profits business or concerns thereof and the
same shall be as binding and effectual to all intents and
purposes as if the same were inserted and contained in the
Articles of Association.
INDEMNITY.
131. The Directors Auditors and other officers for the
time being of the Company acting in relation to any of the
affairs of the Company and every of them and every of
their heirs executors and administrators shall be indemnified
and secured harmless out of the funds and profits of the
Company from and against all actions costs charges losses
damages and expenses which they or any of them their or
any of their heirs executors or administrators shall or may
incur or sustain or by reason of any act done concurred in
or omitted in or about the execution of their duty or sup-
posed duty in their respective offices or trust except such
(if any) as they shall incur or sustain by or through their
own wilful neglect or default respectively and none of them
shall be answerable for the acts or default of the other or
others of them or for joining in any receipts for the sake of
conformity or for any bankers or other persons with whom
any moneys or effects belonging to the Company shall or
may be lodged or deposited for safe custody or for the
insufficiency or deficiency of any security upon which any
moneys of or belonging to the Company shall be placed out
or invested or for any other loss misfortune or damage
which may happen in the execution of their respective
offices or trusts or in relation thereto except the same shall
happen by or through their own wilful default respectively


THE SCHEDULE HEREINBEFORE REFERRED TO.
HgmWCltt made the day of
One thousand eight hundred and eighty-six between the
Sydney Tramway and Omnibus Company Limited
(hereinafter called “ the old Company ”) and William
Shenstone of Sydney in the Colony of New South Wales
Esquire the liquidator thereof of the one part and the
Sydney Tramway and Omnibus Company Limited
(hereinafter called “the new Company”) of the other part
WHEREAS the old Company was incorporated in the
year One thousand eight hundred and seventy-seven under
the Companies’ Act with a nominal capital of One hundred
thousand pounds divided into Twenty thousand shares of
Five pounds each. And whereas of the said shares there
have been issued Six thousand on which the sum of Five
pounds per share stands credited in the books of the old
Company as having been paid thereon and Six thousand
on which the sum of One pound per share has been similarly
credited and the remaining Eight thousand shares have
not been issued AND WHEREAS the said Twelve
thousand shares so issued are now held by the persons
whose names are mentioned in the first column of the
schedule hereto who are the only shareholders of the old
Company AND WHEHEAS by special resolution of the
old Company passed and confirmed at extraordinary general
meetings thereof held respectively the third day of
August and the twenty-fourth day of August one
thousand eight hundred and eighty-six it was resolved
(1) That it was desirable to re-construct, the Company
and that with a view thereto the Company should
be wound up voluntarily and that the said William
Shenstone should be and he was thereby appointed
liquidator for the purpose of such winding-up. (2) That
the said liquidator should be and he was thereby authorised
to consent to the registration of a new Company to be
named “ The Sydney Tramway and Omnibus Company
Limited” with a Memorandum and Articles of Association as
therein mentioned (3.) That the draft agreement in
the resolution referred to (being the draft of these
presents) should be and the same was thereby approved
and that the said liquidator should be and he was thereby
authorised to enter into an agreement with such new
Company (when incorporated) in the terms of the said
draft and to carry the same into effect AND
WHEREAS pursuant to the resolution aforesaid the


new Company has since been incorporated under the
Companies’ Act with a nominal capital of One million
pounds divided into One million shares of One
pound each AND WHEREAS by the Articles of
Association of the new Company it is providedthat
the same Company shall forthwith execute the agree-
ment therein referred to being these presents. NOW IT IS
HEREBY AGREED as follows
1. The old Company and its liquidator shall sell and
the new Company shall purchase all and singular the lands
tenements and hereditaments goods chattels moneys credits
debts bills notes and things in action of the old Company
and the undertaking business and goodwill thereof with the
full benefit of all contracts and agreements and of all
securities in respect of the said things in action to which
the old Company is entitled and all other the real and per-
sonal property of the old Company whatsoever and where-
soever subject nevertheless as to all the said premises to the
several mortgages charges liens and incumbrances affecting
the same or any part thereof.
2. As a part of the consideration for the said sale the new
Company shall pay satisfy and discharge all the debts
liabilities and obligations of the old Company whatsoever
and shall adopt perform and fulfil all contracts and engage-
ments now binding on it and shall at all times keep the old
Company its liquidator and contributories indemnified
against such debts liabilities obligations contracts and en-
gagements and against all actions proceedings costs dam-
ages claims and demands in respect thereof.
8. As a further part of the consideration for the said sale
the new Company shall pay and at all times keep the old
Company its liquidator and coutributories indemnified
against all the costs and expenses of and incident to the
winding up of the old Company and of carrying the said
sale into effect.
4. As the residue of the consideration for the said sale
the new Company shall allot to the members of the old
Company whose names are mentioned in the first column
of the schedule to these presents eighty-one thousand
shares in the capital of the new Company (upon each of
which the sum of fifteen shillings shall be credited
as having been paid up) so that each such member
shall receive the number of shares in the said capital
set opposite his name in the second column of the said
schedule and upon such allotment and issue as aforesaid
the respective allotees of such shares shall become and


be deemed to be shareholders in the new Company
in respect of the shares so allotted and shall hold tho
said shares as if the sum of fifteen shillings in cash had
actually been paid on each such share.
5. The new Company shall accept without investigation
such title as the old Company has to all the real and per-
sonal property and premises agreed to be hereby sold.
6. The old Company and its liquidators shall as soon as
conveniently may be execute and do at the expense of the
new Company all such assurances and things as shall be
reasonably required by the new Company for vesting in it
the said property agreed to be hereby sold or any part
thereof and giving to it the full benefit of this agreement
And in the meantime (subject as aforesaid) the old Com-
pany shall stand possessed of the property agreed to be
hereby sold in trust for the new Company and it shall be
lawful for that Company in the name of the old Company
or its liquidator but keeping them indemnified against all
costs and damages which might arise thereby to bring
take and defend actions and proceedings and to do all
other things which shall be necessary or expedient for
obtaining the full benefit of the said sale.
7. These presents are intended to operate as an agree-
ment only and not as a conveyance transfer or assignment
8. Until the dissolution of (he old Company the new
Company shall at its own expense produce and show at
such times and to such persons and in such places as the
liquidator for the time being of the old Company shall
require all the books documents and papers of the old
Company agreed to be hereby sold.
s!tt (ffittttess whereof the said Companies have caused their
respective common seals to be hereunto affixed and the
said liquidator has hereunto set his hand the day and year
first above written.
THE SCHEDULE.
Column One.
Column Two,
Names of Shareholders,
No. of Shares.
AUSTIN, C. R
67
BOULTON, F. C
112
Carried forward ...
179


Column One.
Column Two.
Names of Shareholders.
No. of Shares.
Brought forward
179
BROOKE, T. C
1,125
CAIN, W.
6,750
CARES'. J. R
5,330
CLARK, J
2,250
COLLIER, J
4,050
DAVIES, W
1,125
EDWARDS, F. W
225
FEHON, Mrs. A
225
GILLES, A. W
4,725
GILLIES, B. E
225
HALL, W. R
4,365
HIGGINS, J
2,700
HOLTOM, J
4,050
HOYT, Hy
270
LEWERS, T
2,700
MORETON, G
225
MUNRO, L
6,750
O’GRADY, T
2,475
OSWALD, L.F.G
225
PRATT, J. M
1,350
PROUDFOOT, D
70
ROBERTSON & WAGNER
1,080
SHENSTONE, W
225
SIMMIE, G
5,625
SKARRATT, C. C
1,755
SPRIGG, W. G
1,350
STEDMAN, T. J
2,205
THOMSON, J. G
1,350
THOMSON, Mrs. H.
225
WALKER, J
900
WATSON, Robt
450
WEBSTER, G
450
WILLIAMS, D. (Forrest, executor of)
6,750
WILSON, D
225
WOODS, H. R,
112
WOODS, J
3,602
YOUNG, J.
3,307
81,000


We the several persons whose names and addresses
are subscribed being subscribers to the Memorandum of
Association hereby agree to the foregoing Articles of
Association.
Names, Addresses and Descriptions of Subscribers.
JOHN WOODS, Manly, Contractor.
W. R. HALL, Sydney, Freeholder.
JOHN HIGGINS, Sydney, Gentleman.
A. W. GILLES, Sydney, Freeholder.
J. R. CAREY, Sydney, Contractor.
JOHN YOUNG, Sydney, Contractor.
C C. SKARRATT, Sydney, Gentleman.
Dated the first day of October One thousand eight
hundred and eighty-six.
Witness to the above signatures,
FRED. C. BOULTON, Clerk
66 King-street, Sydney.




