

ytjr * . x /-'s x txx > r
[ON DON . /' itlistldl hi "..-i-l- M,iln ia (rf. XC ftu,i nf,cf /7<w Strut .


MEMOIRS
OF
MRS. CAROLINE CHISHOLM,
WITH AN ACCOUNT OF HER
PHILANTHROPIC LABOURS,
IN
INDIA, AUSTRALIA, AND ENGLAND;
TO WHICH IS ADDED
A HISTORY OF THE
FAMILY COLONIZATION LOAN SOCIETY;
ALSO THE QUESTION, WHO OUGHT TO EMIGRATE?
ANSWERED.
BY ENEAS MACKENZIE.
SKCOND EDITION.
J, O N D 0 N :
W E P. D , J l E I N G T ON, AND GO.,
5. WINK OFFICE COURT, FLEET STREET;
ALSO LE4IPR AND OTLEV,
J 853,


LEEDS AND OTLEY :
PRINTED BY WEBB, MILLINGTON, AND CO.


PREFACE.
The age of hero worship is rapidly passing away
in the murky cloud of barbarous feudalism, and
that of the champions of moral virtue benign-
antly dawning over the surface of the civil-
ized world. The truly noble who give know-
ledge, dignity, peace, and love, to mankind, are
becoming the recognized heroes of all people.
The sun of truth is emerging into mental light
a glorious phalanx, too long hidden by false teach-
ing and interested policy; while justice ordains
them, those positions in national honour, which
have been, for ages past, hideously usurped. The
mission of “ nature’s nobles ” comprises the alle-
viation of the miseries attendant upon the human


family, the teaching man his duty to man,
the exalting him to self-respect, the instilling
humanity, and thus creating that most illustrious
of characters—a practical Christian;
“ The drying up one tear has more
Of honest fame, than shedding seas of gore/’
Firmly impressed with the conviction, that
among the benefactors of the human race, the
subject ot the following pages will occupy the at-
tention of future biographers, while the inter-
esting documents relative to the distinguishing
features of her career can readily be collected,
and inaccuracies corrected by living witnesses,
we have taken upon ourselves the pleasing duty
of arranging them in chronological order;
tracing the flow of active benevolence from its
source until widened into a broad and useful
purpose. We have attended more to positive
r colic facts than to minute personal illustrations,
as during the life*into of an individual, more


especially a lady, there is ever a feeling of
delicacy against gratifying a mere morbid taste
by rudely peering behind the veil of domestic
life. The recounting the public acts of this
amiable female allows of no scope for cutting
sarcasms and anatomizing by the pen —we believe
all her works “works of mercy,” justly worthy
of praise—and praise we therefore have accorded
in the sincerity of our convictions—we have, in
our investigations of the facts placed before the
public, seen no seeking, in the spirit of vanity,
for public applause, but a high-minded principle
pervading every act —a self-denying zeal daily
in operation—a practical wisdom ever exercised
—a gentle womanly sympathy continually applied
—a kind of intuitive knowledge of the secret
workings of the human breast, added to a woman’s
keen penetration, by which the feelings of others
were divined, and led into a channel either for
personal or public benefit.


The woes and pains of those in affliction were
soothed with a nobleness of mind, a disinterested-
ness of purpose, and a sublimity of virtue, that
acts powerfully on our sympathies. We record
them that they may be admired and imitated.
Philanthropist ! a word mighty in significance,
encircles with humanizing radiance the name of
Caroline Chisholm.
' Emigration is the seed from whence germin-
ates a future nation. Its mode, its source, and
other facts, are the first entries on a country's his-
toric page, which succeeding generations pore over
with intense interest. In its records are traced
the blood and kindred that gives character to a
people, and show from whence sprang their ideas
of politic, social and moral laws, deeply imbuing
the community at its sun-rise, and permeating its
destinies in its zenith.
On emigration, Mrs. Chisholm has produced,
by indomitable perseverance, a deep impression,


the results of which will long be acknowledged, as
it has given life, energy, and moral character to
an important and rising colony. She found the
stream polluted, and she has purified it. The
weak she has protected, and the poor she has shel-
tered tenderly and affectionately. With a wo-
man's courage and resolution she has asserted the
dignity of her sex, and caused the unscrupulous
voluptuary to shrink appalled, and respect nature s
loveliest creation, although in want and in rags.
The chances, perils, and difficulties of a new far
off home she has reduced; the outset rendered
more independent, the voyage one of health,
industry and protection, the reception kind and
secure, and the future prospects of life one of
earthly happiness.
To add to the charms and delights of the ten-
derest chords that vibrate in the human bosom,
to prevent them being bruised or torn asunder,
has been a task performed with apostolic fervour


and enthusiasm—a labour of love worthy of a
heroic woman and the gratitude of her fellow
beings.
So potent is truth, that a powerful government
has made concession to its representations and
the demands of humanity.
In this place it is but justice to state that we
are indebted to Samuel Sidney, Esq., for many
facts which he generously placed at our disposal.
This gentleman has made the subject of coloniza-
tion peculiarly his study, and with ardour and
talent, successfully advocated a liberal policy,
conducive to the present and future benefit of
emigrants, and honourable to the parent country.
In conclusion, we would remark, our biographi-
cal duties have been easy, as we have had no hid-
den motive in the individual to probe to its source,
no ambitious aim to follow in a tortuous path, and
the good and evil results of actions we have not
had to weigh and call in the aid of philosophy to


decide. When the time and the able pen come
to trace the growth and developement of the
mind that has actuated to the achievement of the
facts related in this work, we hope our collection
and arrangement may prove serviceable to such a
literary contribution.
Whenever the opportunity presented itself, we
have freely availed ourselves of Mrs Chisholm s
public statements, and any official document in
relation to her. We were first urged to our pre-
sent undertaking for the pages of a serial publica-
tion, and it has been printed at a distance from
our residence, these facts we hope will excuse any
alight errors in style, arrangement, or typography
that may have escaped our notice in passing
through the press.
E. M.
5,' Wine Office Court, Fleet Street, June, 1855.




MEMOURS, &c.
FATHER OF MRS. CHISHOLM—EARLY—IMPRESSIONS
—OLD SOLDIER—INFANTILE COLONIZATION -LOSS
OF FATHER-COUNTRY LIFE—MARRIAGE.
England at one time abounded witli a class
among its people called yeomen, of -which, the
conntry was justly proud. In a circuit around
their homes they were looked upon as the presid-
ing and fostering chiefs, their doors were open to
tho inquiring or weary -wayfarer, hospitality was
their distinguishing characteristic, and the needy -
the struggling or the unfortunate sought their
sympathy, advice, or assistance—seldom, indeed,
fruitlessly. Money did not form the absorbing
abject of their pursuit, but to live honoured and
respected by their neighbours was the happiness
at which they aimed. To this sturdy class of
Englishmen belonged Mrs. Chisholms father,


Mr. William Jones, u native of Wootwu, North
umptonshire. Proud of his country and its insti-
tutions he contributed handsomely to the “ Voluu-
lary lund that was subscribed during the
existing war,—while his superior understanding
and probity caused his advice to be sought by
those who found pleasure in the exciting turmoil
ol political affairs.
A natural unbending love of truth gave to him
a pride of demeanour, and also abhorrence of
sccrcx y that was carried into the minutest details
in the government of his family; thus however
young a child might ho it was allowed to remain
m (lie apartment while important matters of
business were discussed, or subjects of grave
political importance canvassed. On the suscepti-
ble wind of youth this must have produced a deep
impression, more especially us. when the child was
seen to he attentive, its opinion was asked.
One day this high minded man introduced to
ids house a poor maimed soldier whom he attended
wi ll respect and affection, and calling his children
pointed out what obligations they were under to
(his veteran; lie having fought the enemies of
Hnsland amid (bo penis „f sca and land, ami


sacrificed his limbs, that they might live in ease,
comfort and security at home. This old soldier
excited the curiosity of the children by descrip-
tions of other countries, the beauty of the scenery,
the excellence of climate, the abundance of food,
the advantages that would accrue by the posses-
sion of those paradises as colonies, and the for-
tunes emigrants might reap. This event, and
family correspondence with some American set-
tlers set the busy mind of the infant Caroline, the
heroine of these pages, to ponder over the subject,
and its effects are thus recollected and described
in a letter to a friend in Sidney.
My first attempt at colonization was carried
on in a wash-hand basin, before 1 was seven years
old. I made boats of broad beans; expended all
my money in touchwood dolls; removed families,
located them in the bed-quilt, and sent the boats,
filled with wheat, back to their friends, of which 1
kept a store in a thimble case. At length I up-
set the basin, which I judged to be a fac simile of
the sea, spoiled a new bed, got punished, and
afterwards earned out my plan in a dark cellar,
with a rushlight stuck upon a tin kettle; ami.
strange as it may seem, many of Ike ideas which


1 have since earned out first gained possession of
my mind at that period ; and, singular as it may
appear, I had a Wesleyan minister and a Catho-
lic priest in the same boat. Two of my dolls were
very refractory, and would not be obedient; this
made me name them after two persons I knew
who were always quarrelling, and I spent hours in
listening to their supposed debates, to try and find
out ■ how I could manage them ; at length I put
the two into a boat, and told them if they were
not careful they would be drowned; and having
landed them alive, I knelt down to pray to God
to make them love each other.”
An early loss of her father caused the education
of the mind of the youthful Caroline to devolve
upon her mother, who was left in easy circumstan-
ces, and fortunately being a woman possessed
of surprising resolution, acute perceptions, abund-
ant humanity and a firm reliance on the love of
God, the lessons taught ripened those extraordin-
ary mental powers of her daughter so admirably
belitting'to the great works of her future destiny.
The life of a young country girl presents but
!bw points of interest. The sphere is prescribed
"‘fbui a narrow compass, still an isolated active


mind will in some manner develops its vital
powers, and w'e find that the practical benevolence
of visiting the poor and the sick, of advising and
soothing the distressed, shed a lustre around the
girlish days of this noble woman.
When about twenty years of age the subject of
these memoirs married Alexander Chisholm, an
officer of the British army. There existed in the
young couple a sympathy of disposition most
remarkable, and thus the husband has ever most
ardently reciprocated all the philanthropic aspira-
tions of his wife.


DEPARTURE FOR INDIA—THE BARRACK ROOM—
SCHOOL OF INDUSTRY—YOUTHFUL COMMITTEES—
ECONOMY—BENEVOLENCE—NOBLE SUBSCRIPTIONS
—ORPHANGE—RULES—ADDRESS—INTERNAL ECO-
NOMY—LESSONS.
Captain A. Chisholm, of the Madras army, and
his wife, about two years after their marriage,
sailed for India, and it was here that first were
begun those practical public works that have so
eloquently appealed to the feelings, and done
honour to the heart and understanding of Mrs.
Chisholm.
The language and scenes of a barrack room are
decidedly unsuitable to the ears and eyes of
female youth. Familiarity with licentious and
profane expressions, and indecorous conduct must
obliterate all delicacy of mind and action. Moral
torpitude ensues and vice loses its horrors. What,


other result would be expected but that which did
occur to the poor creatures? In budding wo-
manhood the playthings of passion, in their youth
loathsome and abandoned, and in their prime the
tenants of a premature tomb. Their lives dis-
graced humanity, the object of existence by them
was unfulfilled, and they perished lost to the
merits and rewards of their sacrificed Redeemer.
The fashionable excitement of life allowed few
of then- own sex, placed in happier circumstances,
even to cast a thought upon these sacrifices to
man’s selfishness. Ladies shrank from entertain-
ing such a subject in their minds, and if they did
they feared the derision and scorn that would be
levelled at their sympathy. God in his wisdom
has given superiority of moral courage to some
minds, an enduring love of their species, and firm
reliance in Christian truth. Mrs. Chisholm indig-
nant at the degradation of her sex resolved to effect
a reform, but with a discrimination, unoffensive-
ness and completeness peculiar to herself. Deter-
mined to commence at the root, that no further
growth should take place, she proposed to form a
girl’s school of the children and orphans of the
soldiers, in which education should be blended
B


with the duties of housekeeping. The room ac-
corded for this purpose was in the precincts of the
barracks, which Mrs. Chisholm soon discovered
would prevent, from its immediate contaminations,
her ulterior views. The neighbourhood was dense
and unhealthy, notwithstanding which, as the
humane founder of the project was acting from the
purest motives, seeking no vain-glorious applause,
but devoted to carrying out in sincerity the objects
undertaken, and stating that as she had taken
upon herself the sacred duties of a mother to the
girls she must personally watch over and direct
their actions; therefore, this noble lady, with her
worthy husband, removed from their comfortable
habitation to a district where, from dread of infec-
tion, many families of their acquaintance refused
to visit them. The utility of the establishment
becoming apparent it was shortly afterwards re-
moved to a distance where really commenced
“The School of Industry.” The matron selected
was an excellent housewife, and considered more
suitable from not being able to read or write, as
the responsibility of the reports consequently
entirely devolved on the pupils. A committee
was formed of the little girls, who deliberated


aud arranged the duties to be performed.
Arithmetic and writing were learnt by keeping
a stnct account of the expenses and consumption
of every article. The receipts and disbursements
of all food, utensils, clothing, firing, wages, the
duties performed, and incidental occurrences
were all minutely recorded. The stores were
given in charge to another set, some enacting
the part of vendors weighing out and setting-
down the price per lb. and gross amount of
all the items. Thus there was practical shopping
and shopkeeping. The tiny members of the
committee consulted on the kind and quantity
of food for each day’s requirement; the loss sus-
tained by boiling, baking and roasting; all articles
being carefully estimated: a girl by this mode of
procedure knew' what amount of provisions
would be required in a family of three or thirteen,
giving reasons for such calculations, and also the
cost, hence the income necessary under such cir-
cumstances. They superintended and assisted in
every domestic duty and thus resulted practical
housekeeping.
When sickness afflicted any of them the causes,
symptoms and cure were regularly registered,


befitting the pupils for the duties of the sick
room.
When food was left from the meals it formed a
subject for consideration whether too much had
been cooked or it had not been relished. A test
of a few days corrected the error, if one: then
the little conclave debated how the food could be
most satisfactorily used on the morrow or the
same day—here was a lesson on economy —or in
what manner it could be nicely dressed up to give
to some poor or sick person—thus the divine
attribute of charity was indelibly implanted on
the fair mind of susceptible childhood.
Eagerly were those valuable housekeepers
sought for as servants and as wives of non com-
missioned officers. While many youthful hut
deficient helpmates of the soldiery beseeched to
be admitted that they might participate in the
advantages of such instruction.
Proud are we to record, and honourable is it to
the Madras presidency and officers of our brave
Indian army, that the then secretary, Mr. Cha-
mier, took a lively interest in forwarding this
valuable school; Sir Frederick Adams, the gover-
nor, subscribed JC2O. and in five days 2000 rupees


were raised by a few officers and gentlemen in
order to render effective the plan of Mrs. Chis-
holm. This institution was the commencement
of what is now an extensive orphanage, rearing in
industry, and protecting in virtue, those who have
lost the guardianship of parents who have fallen a
sacrifice to the glory of their country.
Considering the rules, the moral lessons, and
the details of the system by which “ The School of
Industry ” was governed, not only in the light of
a curious document, but as a valuable model for
carrying out similar institutions in an economical
manner, we are pleased to have it in our power to
give insertion to an authentic copy of the regu-
lations. Be it remembered that a useful and
virtuous direction of the mind of female youth tells
powerfully afterwards on society, for the true
education of future generations is ever centered in
the maternal parent.


THE FEMALE SCHOOL OF INDUSTRY.
FOR THE
Daughters of European Soldiers.
The chief object of this Institution is to enable
such European Soldiers as may feel disposed to
remove their children from the Barracks and
Butchery Lines. A House for their reception is
to be procured in Black Town, Madras, where the
children will be instructed in reading, writing,
arithmetic, needle-work, and domestic manage-
ment. Their religious instruction and moral con-
duct will be made an object of particular attention.
RULES.
I. —Each child is to come provided with two
plates, one cup and saucer, one knife and fork,
one table and tea spoon, one drinking mug, and
one common box for clothes.
11. —Each child is to be furnished with a
separate bed, they are to be clothed in one uni-
form dress (after they have worn out such clothes
as they may have brought with them to school)
and to have one general mess.


111-—They are to get up at an hour so as to
be able to take some recreation in the cool of the
morning, either on the Beach or Esplanade, they
are first however (after having washed themselves)
to say a short prayer, and after they have come in
to say their regular morning prayers, and then to
have their breakfast. The children are to be
assembled for prayers and meals by the ringing of
a bell. They are never to go out without being
accompanied by either the mistress or matron of
the school.
IV. —No child is to be sent or allowed to go to
the Bazaar. No male visitor is to be permitted
into the school without the sanction of one of the
managers.
V. —A child can at any time be withdrawn
from the school, but will not afterwards be re-ad-
mitted on the establishment.
VI. —Parents who may have a daughter in this
establishment may, during illness, send any of
their younger children, on paying the expenses of
their food.
VII. —lnfant children will also be received
from the Regiment Hospital a few hours daily, as
the main object of this school is to teach girls the


domestic duties according to the station in life
they may expect to move in.
OFFENCES.
For telling an untruth.
For stealing, and how-
ever trifling the offence.
Second offence.
In breaking crockery,
if immediately acknow-
ledged, but if discovered
afterwards by the mis-
tress or matron.
Parties to the conceal-
ment.
PUNISHMENTS.
To forfeit five tickets,
and to be kept for that
day separate from the
other children in the
school-room that visitors
may at once know the
offender.
The same punishment
as above.
Black bracelets in
addition.
No punishment
To forfeit three tickets.
To forfeit one ticket;
for conniving at trifles
may in time lead to
great crimes.


If discovered quarrel- To be put on low diet
ing or fighting. for a day, the same
punishment for all con-
cerned.
If sulky for six hours Low diet double the
or a day. time.
Any girl who refuses Not to partake of the
to assist in making a same,
pudding.
If any part of the The girl to be imme-
dress is torn at play. diately sent into a room
to repair it.
A black book is to be kept, into which all offen-
ces and punishments are to be entered by the
mistress, the offenders are to be made to affix
their names thereto. This book to be shown to
every visiting member.
ADDRESS TO BE READ BY THE MISTRESS.
My dear little Girls,
It is my wish that you should have read to
you once a month the list of punishments. The
rod in appearance is quite frightful, and J think


you will have the same opinion of it, and I trust
you will look upon the Bracelets with a determi-
nation never to wear them. It is, I assure you,
much easier to be good than to be had, and you
must bo the one or the other. It will be a very
shocking thing and would distress your parents
and friends to see your name in the Black Book.
If you tell lies, I fear you will soon learn to steal,
for one generally follows the other; and if you
steal sugar and little things, I fear you will in
time steal broaches, and I dread to think what
your end may be. But I hope better things of
you, and fully expect you will pay great attention
to the good instructions you receive, and be really
good girls. But if you are idle you cannot be
good. I therefore hope you will be industrious,
this will he setting a good example to the natives,
for let me tell you, and I speak the truth, that
there is no situation in life in which you cannot
do some good. I wish you never to forget how
kind your parents are to place you in a situation
where you are not surrounded by vice and wicked-
ness. They are now giving up some of then-
comforts to add to yours, and it is not enough
that vou love them and feel grateful, but you


must show your gratitude by your good conduct,
and learn to be useful now, that you may here
after be of real use to them, and perhaps in their
old age; think if your mother should he ill, how
happy it would make you to be able to nurse her
and make her nice jellies, and light puddings, and
do all that was required for her. You cannot, my
children, think how dearly a mother loves, and the
comfort she would feel in having a daughter for a
nurse, and you must learn to do those things
before you can have this pleasure, and you have
now the opportunity. Think too how rejoiced
your father would he to see you do all this, and
how much such conduct would repay him for
having given up his Arrack allowance to make
you a good and dutiful girl. I wish you also to
consider how proud your parents will he of you, I
fancy I already hear your father say, in honest
pride, that my girl can keep accounts, cook a
dinner, and she is only fourteen years of age;
and your mother says, yes, and make a shirt and
cut it out as well if not better than I can. That
you will be able to do these things I fully expect,
and I have no doubt but you will have a great
pleasure in doing so, and your being able to do


them will give you a proper feeling of pride and
independence, that is, if your parents should die,
you would be able by your good conduct and
management to support yourselves and little bro-
thers and sisters, for God will never forsake the
good. Before I conclude this, I must again
refer to that frightful Rod, that shocking Black
Book, and those ugly Bracelets, and as I think
you will, with pride becoming soldier’s daughters,
consider it a disgrace that they should be seen.
I will promise you, that if at the end of one year
the Rod has never been used, that you shall have
a day’s holiday to bury or bum it, and that you
shall invite your parents to be present on the
occasion, giving them cake &e., made by your own
hands. When the Rod is fairly out of the house,
the Rewards will be distributed, and the ladies
and gentlemen who have so kindly supported this
institution shall be invited to attend at the distri-
bution of the prizes, and you will know how
necessary it is that the Rod should be removed
ere this could take place. Your united good con-
duct could also remove the Bracelets and Black
Book. Try then, my dear little girls, to be good,
never tell lies, never steal the smallest thing,


never fight and quarrel, and never make use of
bad words, and obey and do what you are told,
and you will then be the pride of your parents, a
credit to your religion, and the admiration of all
your friends.
TO THE MATRON AND MISTRESS.
You must never forget that children are early
lovers of justice, and that peace and harmony can-
not dwell where favouritism reigns. In this
establishment, much will depend upon your con-
duct, as children learn more from example than
precept. They are generally close and faithful
imitators of those they reside with, and will judge
by your acts and not by your professions; they
will in the twinkling of an eye discover whether
the way to your favor is the high road of sincerity
or the bye path of hypocrisy and dissimulation ,
and will either love and respect you, or fear and
despise you. If you rule justly, you will find it
easy to govern; encourage them to be kind to
each other, and lovers of peace; reprove them for
their faults privately, and if possible without the
knowledge of each other; never bring up old


faults ; be just and impartial in the distribution
of tickets; and enter faithfully into the Black
Book all punishments and the cause of them,
and if you should have any particular complaint
against any one of the children, report the same
to the Managers that they may direct you how to
act. You are not to use the Rod except you
have permission of the visiting Manager. It will
however be better that the children should not
be aware that it is necessary for you to obtain
this permission.
EXTRACTS FROM THE ASSISTANT HOUSE-
KEEPERS ACCOUNT BOOK.
Breakfast ready at half-past seven.
Weighed the bread and meat, found them
correct.
Gave out of the stores, 3 measures of rice, Jib.
tea, lib. sugar.
Extra, 2 spoonfuls of barley to make barley
water for Mary McMillin, who is not very well.
There are only 20 measures of rice remaining
in stores.


For dinner, boiled Remarks, rice too
mutton, curry and rice, much boiled.
At two o’clock, made Mary McMillin a cup of
Tea. She is now much better.
As there was some cold meat left, and a small
quantity of rice which would not keep until to mor-
row, we made it into pish-pash and gave it to the
poor blind woman.
The tea leaves were given to the other poor
women as usual.
The tea kettle wants repairing.
Paid the butcher’s bill, 4r. la. 6d.
Mary Smith, 13 years,") Assistant
Jane White, 12 years, I House-
June Ist, 1836. Kitty McCarthy, 8 yrs.) keepers.
Questions to be answered by Maiy Smith.
Jane White.
Kitty McCarthy.
How long was the rice boiling ?
By referring to the accounts, I find there ought
to be five pounds of sugar in stores, how do you
account for the deficiency ?
What have you done with the butcher’s receipt ?
What use did you make of the boiled barley
after draining of the water ?


VISIT TO AUSTRALIA —HIGHLANDMEN —CAPT. CHIS-
HOLM LEAVES FOR INDIA—MORALS—SIDNEY—EVILS
TO BE CONQUERED—PERILS OF FEMALE EMIGRANTS
—EMIGRANT’S BARRACKS—MEETS WITH FLORA—
COMMENCEMENT OF A HOME.
In the career of usefulness, sketched in the
previous chapter, was Mrs. Chisholm employed
until 1838, when, for the benefit of her hus-
band’s health, with her infant family she left
India, to visit the more salubrious climes of
South Australia and Van Diemen’s Land. To-
wards the end of the year she landed at that great
field of her philanthropic exertions, Sydney. The
first objects that came under her notice, and were
benefited by her benevolence, were a party of
Highland emigrants who had been sent to the
shores of a country where the language spoken
was to them strange and unknown, and without a


friend to assist or guide them in that path of
honourable labour which they desired. As a
temporary means of relief Mrs. Chisholm lent
them money to purchase tools and wheelbarrows,
whereby they might cut and sell fire-wood to the
inhabitants.
The success of this experiment was gratifying
both to the bestower and receiver, in the one it
revived drooping hopes, the other it incited to
larger enterprises of humanity.
In January, 1840, Captain Chisholm had to join
his regiment in India, but it was considered more
prudent for the health of the family that they
should remain for some time longer in the more
favourable climate of Sydney. While the devoted
and noble minded husband urged his beloved and
courageous wife to carry out those views over
which they had pondered for the reformation of
evils detrimental to morality, the success of the
colony, the honour of their native country, and
to the mission of man on earth.
Many now living may remember the laxity of na-
tional morals in our country during the reign of a
former monarch. The roue was then a character
extolled, envied, and glorified. In every large


town tlxe sustaining of this character was the bu-
siness of many men’s lives, who were either high
in station, wealthy, or nearly related to others who
were so. Crimes were perpetrated that would
now cause a man to he abhorred or stand at the
bar of justice. Marriages had to have the inde-
cent excitement of a flight to Gretna Green,
disgusting elopements were fashionable, and wo-
men considered mere automatons of dress and
passion. Female intellect w T as derided and
shunned, that this “ noblest work ”of nature
might be continued in slavish animal degradation.
Morality rejoices then in the brilliant and elevat-
ing change effected by the glorious example of a
female monarch, as now the domestic, social, and
intellectual virtues are cultivated, reverenced
and esteemed as a duty that womankind not only
owes to herself but to society.
It cannot therefore be a matter of wonder that
this miasmatic moral depravity was wafted to our
colonies where it could riot even more freely, from
being less likely to receive public censure and
exposure than at home. Painful is it to think
that the unprotected children of poverty or of
crime were deemed the rightful spoil of degraded


minded men, while the lax morality of the colony
rendered them callous to feeling, to honour, and
manliness.
The narratives of the treatment of females emi-
grating to the shores of the New World, that
reached this country were very sparing, and by
interested parties asserted to be exaggerations or
falsehoods, which for the satisfaction of conscience,
was readily admitted as the most probable repre-
sentation.
Let us then lift the veil and see the state
of Sydney when Mrs. Chisholm arrived there, and
the hydra corruption with which in her love of
her species, and dependence on the Almighty, she
nobly dared to grapple and destroy.
At the government depot in England, writes
Mrs. Chisholm, “ we find congregated together bro-
ken up families; young couples without children,
or single young women, perhaps perfect strangers
to all around them; each party leaving behind
them in all probability, parents, brothers, sisters,
&c., without almost any hope of re-union ; here is
a mass of human beings inwardly lamenting their
separation from those most dear to them; they go
on board under harrowed feelings, and the young


women are placed under the care ot a matron,
who is viewed as a very subordinate character.
These are trying situations for human nature, and
a dangerous position for young women to find
themselves in, for amongst these there exists no
common feeling except that of perfect indifference
to each other, —the innocent and the helpless
stand there exposed to the wiles of the snarer.
Who has not been shocked by the frightful details
we have read in the public papers, how orphan
after orphan had been victimised on board emi-
grant ships by men calling themselves Christians ■
how modest maidens have been brutalized over
and insulted by those whose peculiar duty it was
to protect them.”
Upon the voyage being completed, continues
Mrs. Chisholm in her appeal to the clergy of Syd-
ney, “ one of the most serious evils I know is the
practice of young women being allowed to make
engagements on hoard ship. Some families of
high respectability do engage servants in this way ;
hut I also know that some people, of the very
worst character, go there and engage servants —
sofvants? No I They are not required as ser-
vants- They arc not wanted !o mrk. Many have


] known wlio Lave been taken to Louses of the
worst character the first day of their arrival. Shall
this evil continue ? God forbid I The latter go on
board ship with impunity: how can the captain
or surgeon be expected to know them? They
judge from appearances. A silk dress —a little
talk about attending church on a Sunday, and the
poor girl gets high wages-—leads an idle life—
visits the theatre-—dresses well, and leads some
of her shipmates into the same hands. Some say
it is the duty of the clergy to prevent this system
—others say, of the ladies: that it is a duty that
ought to he met few will deny.”
This was a monstrous, overgrown evil for a
woman single handed to contend with, but like a
good Samaritan Mrs. Chisholm went amongst the
helpless and gave them advice, the captains and
agents she besought to act with caution and hu-
manity, and sacrificing every domestic comfort and
privacy when she saw a poor creature amid dangers
and ruin she took her to her own house; having
as many as nine at one period there, sheltered
and protected. Still the benefit capable of being
effected was so trivial to the magnitude of tire
evil, that sire saw it was far bevond her limited


means, in fact, it was a national work. A stran-
ger and uninfluential, she found her appeals
must he comparatively disregarded. A circum-
stance at length took place which made her
determine at all risks of ridicule and painful
public indifference to commence in earnest her
mission of mercy and charity. We prefer giving
the history in the simple, unaffected language of
Mrs. Chisholm’s narrative.
“ On my first visit to the emigrants’ barracks,
which was about five in the evening, my attention
became fixed on a young and beautiful Highland
girl (in tent No. 1); the arm of a gentleman was
round her waist. lam a great admirer of beauty,
and her style pleased me exceedingly. On my
two following visits, I still saw the same gentle-
man; I observed too, a little extra finery on Flora.
I could not make out the name of the gentleman ,
but I cautioned the poor girl’s mother, and bade
her beware. The poor woman said, ‘there was
no fear of Flora, for her head had never rested
but on her mother’s hearth.’ She was all inno-
cence —the mother all hope. The following day,
I made a few purchases in Mr. ’s shop, in
George Street, when the same gentleman I had


seen with Flora entered; an elegant woman
hung on his arm. I enquired his name—‘ the
lady was his wife.’ I still doubted: I went to
the next shop; I enquired, whose conveyance is
that ?—still the same name : I no longer doubted
his intentions. The following evening, seeing
him in a tent with Flora, I made enquiries if
any ladies felt an interest in these young crea-
tures, or afforded them protection? I was told,
there was a committee, but the ladies never
visited the institute, or in any way interfered;
and after many enquiries, I was obliged to leave
Flora to her fate.
From this period I devoted all my leisure time
in endeavouring to serve these poor girls, and
felt determined, with God’s blessing, never to
rest until decent protection was afforded them.
In January, 1841, I wrote to Lady Gipps, and
from that time I never ceased in my exertions.
I knew that every ship’s arrival would increase
the necessity for such an institution. I felt con-
vinced the evil which struck me so forcibly would
soon be made apparent to the good people of Syd-
ney ; and I felt assured that the God of all mercy
would not allow so many poor creatures to be lost,


without disposing the hearts of the people to unite
and save them. I now considered the difficulties,
and prepared the plan: for three weeks I hesi-
tated, and suffered much. I was prepared to
encounter the opposition of some, the luke-warm-
ness, or the actual hostility of others, to the plan
I might suggest. I saw I must have the aid of
the press; for I could only anticipate success by
soliciting public sympathy for the cause I had
undertaken, notwithstanding which, as a female
and almost a stranger in the colony, I naturally
felt diffident. I was impressed with the idea,
that God had, in a peculiar manner, fitted me for
the work; and yet I hesitated. About this time,
several young women, whom I had served, advised
others to write to me. I did all I could to aid
them in their prospects by advice, or recommend-
ing them to situations; but the number increased,
and I saw that my plan, if carried into effect, would
serve all. My delay pressed on my mind as a
sin; and when I heard of a poor girl suffering
distress, and losing her reputation in consequence,
1 felt that I was not clear of her sin, for I did not
do all I could to prevent it.
During the season of Lent of that year, I suf


fered much; but on the Easter Sunday, I was
enabled, at the altar of our Lord, to make an
offering of my talents to the God who gave them.
I promised to know neither country nor creed, but
to try to serve all justly and impartially. I asked
only to be enabled to keep these poor girls from
being tempted, by their need, to mortal sin ; and
resolved that, to accomplish this, I would in every
way sacrifice my feelings—surrender all comfort
—nor, in fact, consider my own wishes or feelings,
but wholly devote myself to the work I had in
hand. I felt my offering was accepted, and that
God’s blessing was on my work; but it was his
will to permit many serious difficulties to be
thrown in my way, and to conduct me through a
rugged path of deep humiliation. I may here
remark that, with one exception, every person I
wrote or spoke to on the subject acknowledged
the need of. such an institution; promised to sub-
scribe when one was established, though with few
exceptions, all declared they thought the thing
impossible. I determined on a visit to Sydney.*
and on my arrival there, I requested two friends
• Mrs, Oliisholm resided at Windsor.


to call at the Herald office; both refused. I
went myself, and am glad of this opportunity to
acknowledge the attention I met with, and the
support the proprietors of that journal gave me—
indeed, to the press of Sydney I feel indebted,
and thank them sincerely for their support.
From his Excellency’s letters, and what he said,
I came to this conclusion, that, under existing
circumstances, he would not refuse me, though he
would rather not grant my request. I knew I
had an able general against me, and that much
caution, patience, and temper, -were necessary on
my part. I was advised by a friend to form a
committee immediately—a thing easier said than
done; but I was not certain of his Excellency, the
governor, giving me the use of a part of the immi-
gration barracks, and as I had more than forty
letters in my possession, detailing the miseries of
some of the young women then in Sydney, I had
determined, as the forlorn hope, to publish these ;
and ten of them would, I knew, be sufficient to
cause a feeling on the minds of the public, which
would have raised funds at once: but I was told
their publication would injure the colony, and I
had no wish to do this, for I feel an interest in


its prosperity, and should have lamented making
a passing and transient distress known in Eng-
land, when I was certain there would be no neces-
sity for this measure.
I waited on the ladies who now form the com-
mittee, viz.— Lady O’Connell, Lady Dowling,
Mrs. Richard Jones, Mrs. Roger Therry, Mrs. W.
Mackenzie, Mrs. J. Wallan, and Miss E. Cham-
bers ; and it is pleasing to he able to state, that
not one refused me—all expressed themselves as
feeling an interest in the work.


LUKEWARMNESS AND OPPOSITION—SAVES FLORA
FROM SUICIDE—RESOLVES TO PERSEVERE—INTER-
VIEW WITH THE GOVERNOR—DESCRIPTION OF THE
HOME—OUTGENERALLING THE RATS—PERSONAL
SACRIFICES—STATE OF DESTITUTION.
Thus did this excellent lady labour to arouse the
public to a sense of justice and humanity on behalf
of helpless females, and project plans to efface a
stain and disgrace on the colony; the response was
but feeble, private interest did not exist to quicken
into action, and naan is proverbially selfish in his
deeds. Still the nucleus was formed, additional
names added weight, and a distinct plan traced
out; —action and energy were now the chief powers
to be exercised to bring the scheme into useful
operation.—when private interest, jealous prejudi-
ces, and weak-mindedness, privately and publicly
assailed the plan as a wild hallucination. The


ardent grew cool, the friendly frigid, and the “first
promised supporters withdrew their pledges,”
Bigotry, that can no more comprehend the life—
giving impulses and ardent aspiration of the true
spirit of Christianity, than the crippled Chinese
female the elastic spring of the mountain habitant,
was effectively at work as the tool of the base and
hypocritical, and by it the unthinking and weak-
minded were easily deceived, and truth distorted.
The opposition raised, though it did not daunt the
spirit of Mrs. Chisholm, relying as she did on the
divine nature of her work, yet it harrassed and
wearied out her body. Even the humane and
pious, erring in judgment, advised her to relin-
quish her intention. Thus, worn out, she resolved
to retreat to her cottage at Parramatta, that by
prayer and contemplation she might strengthen
her mind to firmly proceed in her good work,
when the following circumstance, as related by
herself, took place.
I started in good time, as I thought, for the
Parramatta steamer; indeed, 1 was so certain of
this, that although a friend overtook me in
ning-gtroet with a conveyance, and told me he
should be only just in time, I refused to ride-


I wished to be alone for a few minutes; I was
aware I had been much tried, and I knew a few
minutes alone would give me time to soothe my
feelings, and meet my friends at the steamer with
spirit—perhaps I did not walk so quick as usual,
at all events I was too late. I then walked to-
wards the Flagstaff.
Near Petty’s Hotel, I caught sight of a frail
beauty; her dress told her fate; she evidently
knew, and wished to avoid me ; I was determined
to overtake her; I was able to do this, for I hur-
ried onward; I laid my hand on her arm, and
the wreck of my Highland beauty stood before me.
Alas, how different from the lovely girl she once
was! the ruddy rose of the Highlands was
changed for the tinge of rum: she had been
drinking, but well knew what she was about.
“ Tell me where you are going ? ”
“ To h—! ” was the answer
I continued to walk by her side: she became
insolent; but I was determined not to leave her.
She made for Lavender’s Ferry, and said, “my
mistress lives over there.” I said, I will go to
the other side with you, as I want to say a few
words to you. She was unwilling; but I per ;


sidted: we crossed over; I felt certain, from her
manner, she meditated suicide; I passed to the
left of her, and bade her sit down. I knew the
circumstances of her family well, and my first
question was of her mother.
“Did you see your mother die?” (I knew she
did not, for her mother consented to her remain-
ing in service in Sydney.)
“ No.”
“ She died happy.”—No reply.
“Are you a mother?” She seized my hand
and placed it on her heart. “ God is merciful! ”
—she shook her head.
I saw a letter in her bosom; I drew it out, with
her nodded consent. It was from her brother;
he felt her disgrace ; he taunted her with being
the first in the family who had known shame.
“ I loved ***** better than any, save ”
And again she shook her head.
“ Your brother loves you even now.”
“ No, no.”
“Were there any in your family who ever com-
mitted murder ? ”
She shook with horror.
“ Then why will you ? ”


'■ Its there I meant to drown myself,” pointing
to a distant spot; “It’s there we met often, and
there I would die ! ”
I did not leave the place until, with subdued
feelings, I heard her vow never to attempt self-
destruction. I procured her lodgings; my spirits
returned; I felt God’s blessing was on my work.
From this time, I never thought of human help ;
I neglected no steps to conciliate ; I increased my
exertions; but from the hour I was on the beach
with Flora, fear left me.”
Sir George Gipps, the governor, looked on the
plan with doubt and suspicion. He thought Mrs.
Chisholm was some wild enthusiast, and paid the
least possible attention to her letters. The news-
papers, wondering, doubting, and hesitating, dis-
cussed the proposition. The clergy considered
the object laudable and praiseworthy, still they had
doubts of the power and object of the promoter ;
but as the extent of moral good to be effected
became apparent, and an appeal being made to
them, through the press, they heartily responded,
all denominations vying in assisting the indefati-
gable lady.
Mrs, Chisholm persevered nobly; and at length


the governor grudgingly granted an interview to
the “ lady labouring under amiable delusions
A. philanthropic lunatic was a rarity, perhaps an
excitement.
“ I expected,” said sir George Gipps, when re-
lating the story to an English friend, “to have
seen on old lady in white cap and spectacles, who
would have talked to me about my soul. I was
amazed when my aide introduced a handsome,
stately young woman, who proceeded to reason the
question as if she thought her reason, and expe-
rience too, worth as much as mine.”
At one of these interviews, after Mrs. Chisholm
had explained what she wished and intended to
effect by her Emigrant’s Home, Sir George re-
marked, “ I believe you have overrated the powers
of your own mind, and believing so, and also in
your disinterested views, I think it right to tell
you.”
Sir George at last, on receiving a guarantee
against the government being put to any expense,
granted the use of a government building. It
consisted of a low wooden erection. The room
appropriated to Mrs. Chisholm’s own occupation
was not more than seven fret in length and


breadth, without afire-place. She was compelled,
when requiring a cup of tea, to send for water
to a public boiler, in which hundreds of kettles
had been dipped. At length a prisoner, engaged
in the government printing office, brought a
kettle of boiling water every morning.
Mrs. Chisholm writes, “in acknowledging
this boon, I would thank lady Gipps for her kind
and generous support; she strewed a few flowers
in my path—l knew them by their fragrance, and
I thanked God she had a woman’s heart! But I
must take possession of my office. On closing
the door, I reflected on what I had been compel-
led to endure for forty nine square feet. My first
feelings were those of indignation that such a
trifle had been so long withheld; but better feel-
ings followed. I determined to trust to Provi-
dence, to increase its size, and prove my useful-
ness. I soon observed, to do any good, I must
sleep on the premises ; and as soon as Mr. Mere-
weather was aware of my determination, he gave
me the best room then vacant. I cannot say
vacant, for it was used as a store room. This
was, however, cleared for my accommodation; and
having been busy all day, 1 retired wearied to


rest. My courage was put to the proof at starting.
Scarce was the light out, when I fancied, from a
noise I heard, that dogs must be in the room, and
in some terror I got a light. What I experienced
on seeing rats in all directions, I cannot describe!
My first act was to throw on a cloak, and get at the
door with the intent of leaving the building. My
second thoughts were, if I did so, my desertion
would cause much amusement, and ruin my
plan; I therefore lighted a second candle, and
seating myself on my bed, kept there until
three rats, descending from the roof, alighted
on my shoulders. I felt that I was getting
into a fever, and that in fact I should be very ill
before morning—but to be out-generalled by rats
was too bad. I got up with some resolution;
I had two loaves and some butter (for my office,
bedroom, and pantry were one); I cut it into
shoes, placed the whole in the middle of the
room, put a dish of water convenient, and with a
light by my side, I kept my seat on the bed read-
ing “ Abercrombie,” and watching the rats until
four in the morning. I at one time counted
thirteen, and never less than seven did I observe
at the dish during the entire night. The following


night I gave them a similar treat, with the addi-
tion of arsenic; and in this manner I passed my
four first nights at the Home.”
After a time, four rooms of similar size to that
named, were added, and thrown into one for the
Home.
“My plan was to have apartments near the
office for my children, hut this did not answer—
at night I must be in the Home. I gave up one
child, although I could keep two with me; hut I
found the elder a source of so much anxiety that
I consented to part with him. I knew under the
honest care of Miss M. Galvin, of Windsor, they
would be well fed, and kindly treated, and I
could still keep one, my youngest. Some sick-
ness among the children in the tents told mo
plainly my duty, still I would not, could not part
with my dear boy. A lady, whose esteem I
value, told me I ought not to risk my child’s
life ; that I must give up my Home, or my selfish
feeling for my child; I was aware of the truth
of the observation, but refused. At night, as
was usual with me, I saw the girls after they
retired to rest. Ninety-four wore in the Home :
1 if limy had any place to go to if I turned


them out; not one had a place of shelter. On
my return to the office, I found a poor woman
waiting for a white gown, to make her dead bairn
decent. I went into my room, packed up my
little fellow’s wardrobe, and the next day he was
at Windsor. This was the last sacrifice it was
God’s will to demand.
After obtaining possession of the building,
which I named the ‘ Female Emigrant’s Home,’
I appealed to the public for support: after a time,
this appeal was liberally met. There were neither
sufficient arrangements made for removing emi-
grants into the interior, nor for protecting females
on their arrival. A few only were properly pro-
tected, while hundreds were wandering about
Sydney without friends or protection,—great
numbers of these young creatures were thrown
out of employment by new arrivals. I received
several into the Home, whom, I found, had slept
out many nights in the government domain, seek-
ing the sheltered recesses of the rocks rather than
encounter the dangers of the streets. It was esti-
mated that there were 600 females, at the time I
commenced, unprovided for in Sydney. I made
an offer to the government of gratuitously devot


ing my time to the superintendence of a Home of
Protection for them in the town, and also to exert
myself to procure situations for them in the
country.


SINGULAR ADVENTURE —RESTORATION OF A SISTER
TO A BROTHER’S LOVE AND STATION IN SOCIETY—
STORY OF THE FAMILY —SENDS FEMALES INTO THE
COUNTRY—FUNDS OF FEMALE EMIGRANTS—WATCH-
FULNESS AND ITS REWARD—SORROWS OF THE HEART
SOOTHED—RESCUE OF A GIRL, AND THE GRATEFUL
BOATMAN.
One evening, says Mrs. Chisholm, just after the
opening of the Home, a gentleman of most serious
demeanour called.: he handed his card, and said,
as his visit was to do good, no apology could be ne-
cessary. He commenced by saying, women were
creatures of impulse and feeling; he admired
their virtues, but deplored their want of judgment
and stability. “You are doing wrong, ma’am—
you are sending souls to perdition! to send girls
to the country is monstrous. lam an old colo-
nist, a man of experience, the father of a family;


you do not know the country —the people are worse
than barbarians, they are monsters.” I told him
I had visited Goulborn and Port Macquarie, and
I saw no danger in either. “ Bad places, ma’am;
Bathurst and Yass are horrible—if you only knew
half the horrors of these places! but see—(he
dragged out a roll from his pocket)—read these,
ma’am.” I found his packet consisted of extracts
from the Sydney papers, giving an account of all
the murders and outrages for years past. “ Read
these and abandon your country plan Seizing
the papers, he walked up and down the office.
‘‘lf you do not, I will publish the whole—yes,
9,000 copies—l will let the people of England
know what they may expect if they send their
daughters to New South Wales.” His step be
came more hurried, and I really thought him mad,
and quietly removed the pen-knife and ruler. I
knew that even madmen will sometimes fall into
the same pace as their keepers, I therefore joined
him in his promenade, and he soon kept pace
with me. I asked him what was to be done with
the girls in Sydney, that there was not honest
employment for them, and that many were losing
character. “ Human depravity—the want of


God’s grace, or rather, the want of gospel preach-
ers.” I ventured to ask what church he attended ;
he acknowledged ho had been under the ministry
of five, but, according to his opinion, they were
not faithful preachers. I promised to look through
his horrid collection; and so far yielded to his
earnest entreaties as to tell him I would seriously
consider what he said; at the same time I told
him, if I failed, my failure would be a valuable
appendage to his book; for, that the fact being
proved that girls lost character in the country,
would strengthen his argument.
“ Yes facts are stubborn things, Mrs. Chisholm,
I once had a sister, but she is dead—worse than
dead ! ” He paced the room. “ I did not mean
to tell you this—a villain, a convict, ruined my
sister! ”
“ Does she live in sin ? ”
“ I believe not.”
“ Is she in poverty ? ”
“ She is, and justly deserves it.”
“ That is not the doctrine of the gospel; have
you seen her lately ? ”
“Not during the last four years.”
“ Have you given her any pecuniar)- assistance
during that time ? ”


“ Yes.”
“ How much ? ”
“ I think seven pounds.”
“ Where is her seducer ? ”
“ In Van Dieman’s Land.”
“Have you the means to aid her? for if she
does not live in sin, it is your duty; —who knows
but this night she may be in want ? ”
“ She brought it on herself.”
“ Where does she live ? ”
“ In street.”
I told him that his pride would be brought low
—that she might do something to bring him to
public disgrace. I spoke of his mother —his
father —and I saw home feelings were doing their
worh. I determined on taking advantage of his
feelings. I put on my cloak and bonnet, and
opening the door, said, this is the moment, the
night, for a work of mercy. I shall go and see
your sister; you 'must go too.
“ But see, it rains.”
Now as I stood as fair a chance of a sprinkling
inside the building as out, it was no great sacrifice
to me ; and I pointed out the advantage of a night
that kept the careful at home. Ho followed, and


ill less than forty minutes we were at Alice’s door
She occupied the half of a kitchen, in street;
she had been washing, but was then at her needle;
and as she sat, looked respectable; her face bright-
ened as 1 spoke of giving her work. I questioned
her as to her circumstances; her tale was soon
told: she struggled hard to pay her rent, and to
keep herself and child decent.
I asked if she was married ?
“No; but if I could get to Van Dieman’s
Land, George would marry me.”
“ Have you no friends? ”
“No.”
“No relations ? ”
“Yes, a brother” —in alow voice—“an only
brother.”
There was a movement from the door; nature
had done its work. I retreated, that I might be
no restraint on this happy reconciliation; my
feelings could not be explained. Mr. came
out.
“ Have you given her any money ? ”
“ No; how much shall I give her ? ”
“ All you have in your pocket—l see it’s
all hers—give her X’lO. You must not break


God’s blessing ; devote it to her; pay her pas-
sage ; employ some friend to see her married ;
stock a nice farm ; in fact, you must make a de-
cent woman of your sister.”
I continued to talk to my silent companion ;
he saw me, to the Home door; he shook hands
with me, and so fervent was his acknowledgment,
that my fingers ached for an hour afterwards,
I think I shall not give offence by stating a
few particulars of Mr. . He was the gentle-
man of the family ; he had received a good educa-
tion ; he had a little money ; he and his sister
came to the colony on the death of their mother.
Alice was a humble and affectionate girl; she
acted as his servant; they did not even dine
together ; she was contented, and he was happy :
he was getting on. He kept a “government man ”
that could read and write—never was a servant
more attentive to his mistress ; hut still, to use
Alice’s words, “ I never had a thought of him
then.” About this time, mailing butter paid
remarkably well; Alice was a good dairy woman ;
the brother was tempted to take a farm, and send
his sister to it; the “ government servant ” ac-
companied her: true, the brother did intend to


send a man and ins wife to her aid; but the but-
ter came regularly; it sold well; and he forgot is
duty —hence her ruin; his long resentment fol-
lowed ; his change from one religion to another—
for it has been wisely ordered, that a heart full of
resentment shall never find peace.”
Seeing this gentleman afterwards, he said to
Mrs. Chisholm, that he had come to the resolution
never to cut out extracts from newspapers, or
visit a philanthropist with money in his pocket.
This recital beautifully illustrates the active
works of mercy and charity which Mrs. Chis-
aolm was ready to seize every opportunity of
practising. While the mind naturally reverts to
the history of sympathy and affection to the sinner
that is recorded in the acts of our divine Teacher,
and from which the Christian mind derives its
impulse.
It having been the custom for gentlemen and
idlers to frequent the emigrant’s barracks, Mrs
Chisholm found it a task of some difficulty and
delicacy to stop this practice, and have only one
place of ingress and egress instead of many.
Those points, however, she succeeded in accom-
plishing.


“Although the Home was crowded,” says Mrs.
Chisholm, I could not get a girl to go into
the country —T found it necessary to go first
myself. A party promised to be ready, but their
fears overcame their good resolutions, and I had
the dray to send array empty (this I kept a secret.)
I had ninety-six on rations, a serious number;
however I ordered two drays the next day, and
sent them off in spirits. The inmates of the
Home being most suited to rough country work,
I proceeded into the interior, to form committees,
and to establish country “ Homes,” taking, in
some cases, parties of females with me. When I
commenced taking them up the oountiy, I had to
meet, in the first instance, their travelling expen-
ses, which were afterwards refunded. The inha-
bitants of the district cheerfully supplied them
with food; the committees afforded them protec-
tion and advice. I took them to Campbell-Town,
Maitland, Liverpool, Paramatta, and Port Mac-
quarie. The first parties of young women varied
from fifteen to sixty in number. I went from
farm to farm, getting them places in service. I
quickly disposed of the first venture, and then
returned to Sydney, after having made arrange


ments for the establishment of country depots.
I also got married families to promise shelter and
protection to such young females as might re-
quire it.
Soon after the opening of the Sydney Home, I
received sixty-four girls from ships then in har-
bour, and all the money they had amounted to
fourteen shillings and three half-pence; twenty-
two had no money; several two-pence; others
four-pence. These girls I sent into the country,
The majority are married, and not one lost her
character.”
One evening when Mrs. Chisholm was taking
her rounds to see that all was right outside the
establishment, she saw a party of men trying to
conceal two girls. She immediately went to the
young unthinking females and asked them if they
had friends in the colony, and as they had not,
desired them to go into the Home. One only
did so. In a few minutes Mrs. Chisholm and the
girl went back to induce the other to leave the men,
when they were surrounded by the rough lawless
looking fellows. They stated they had come to
her to apologize, that knowing she did not get a
pennr r for all her labour, and did it only for the


good of the girls, they were not the men to
obstruct her in her endeavours, and then bid her
good night. One of these men afterwards came
and privately beseught Mrs. Chisholm to save a
young girl who was in danger, She did so—the
girl got well married—and thus the adventure of
that night was the means of enlisting others in
her virtuous mission.
No one ever undertook a voluntary unthankful
and gratuitous duty upon themselves, and exe-
cuted it with more personal sacrifice, careful
watchfulness, and humanity, than did Mrs. Chis-
holm in carrying out the intention of the Homes.
Those whom she had under her protection, had a
maternal and friendly eye ever upon them, never
would she sleep away from hor flock, if a barn
floor or the bush was their portion, she cheerfully
partook of its inconveniences ; and her regard for
their feelings was beautifully illustrated by her
custom, when all were supposed to be asleep, of
gently entering their dormitory. If she saw a
closed eye, which by its tremulous motion, betrayed
it was not sleep that hid the orb below, or the
'•huok glistened with recent tears, Mrs. Chisholm
would affectionately whisper to the party to rise


and follow her to her little apartment. The
source of woe was enquired into, perhaps some
near or dear relative in a far off land, —or feelings
lacerated by separation from the object of the
heart—was the tale recounted. They were
soothed and comforted—hope was held out—and
the will of God shown in the steps of humankind.
The very opening of the mind to one who breathed
words of sympathy gave courage and ease to those
who knew not of a friend before to whom they could
unbosom the secret turmoil of their feelings, and
they entered with spirit and confidence on their
future career.
We cannot forbear relating another instance of
the watchful zeal with which Mrs. Chisholm pro-
secuted her good work. A vessel arrived and it
was mentioned that a beautiful young girl had
attracted much notice on board; when the females
came to the Home, one was missing from those
who had left the ship—this proved to be the
favourite. Mrs. Chisholm then learnt that the
ship’s boat had been seen hovering about, and
she immediately engaged one in the harbour and
proceeding to the place which she suspected as the
most likely resort, and there discovered tho misled
E


girl. She told her if she returned at once she would
not be missed, and avoid such a disgrace. The
girl hesitated, her companion was insolent, but
Mrs. Chisholm was firm, and threatened exposure
in the public press—he quailed at the mention of
the press. May the press of Sydney long maintain
its power and preserve its influence ! Each paper
has its own interest; each editor his own opinion,
but in the exposure of villany—in any moral
movement, they are one.
“ I went to the girl,” says Mrs. Chisholm,
“ led her on towards the boat, and desired her to
get in willingly, that the man should suppose it
was entirely her own will. I was hastening along
when the man who had been with the girl fol-
lowed and said, “ I must have one word with you;
that poor girl is innocent and good—do you
believe it?”
“ I do.”
“ Then may God bless you! ”
He assisted me into the boat, and was soon
out of sight. I landed at the jetty, and on offer
ing the boatman his hire, he refused, to accept it,
in a manner at once respectful and grateful.
“You do not know me, ma’am, but I know you;


and may my arm wither from the socket, if ever
I touch money of yours.”
“ Wll y, I have never seen you before—who are
you?”
“ Flora’s cousin.”
Alas, poor Flora! many loved you.


REGISTRY OFFICE FOR FARM LABOURERS —WANT OF
WORK—PROCEEDS WITH MEN UP THE COUNTRY—
PEOPLE SETTLED—WAGES —MAKING FINE LADIES—
MODE OF ENQUIRING—MRS. CHISHOLM IN THE BUSH
—GRATITUDE—DISSATISFACTION OVERCOME—IN-
CONVENIENCE OF FAME.
While the affairs we have narrated were proceed-
ing in favour of the destitute females, Mrs. Chis-
holm did not loose sight of the interests of the
male emigrants. She found many arrived quite
ignorant of the manners and customs of the
colony, and were therefore, in many instances,
imposed upon. Frequently the agreement was
that wages had not to commence until the arrival
of the employed at the place where he had to la-
bour, which might be a three weeks journey; the
luggage was heavily charged for conveyance ; per.
naps the food supplied was innutritions, wliile the


poor man was liable to be discharged at a mo-
ment’s notice, the verbal arrangement being often
disputed. To check this evil Mrs. Chisholm com-
menced a registry office for servants, having a
printed form of agreement. This document was
signed by both the employer and employed, and
kept at the office. A duplicate being given to
both parties. On this was stated the wages, the
day of their commencement, the notice to leave re-
quired to be given, the supply of flour or of com,
fresh or salt meat, and other particulars. This
new system was not at first liked, but as both
master and servant perceived their interests were
served, they readily availed themselves of the bond.
Out of all the agreements made ten only were ever
disputed, and they were arranged by a reference
to the original documents At the time labourers
were required in the interior there were numbers
idle in Sydney, supported at the expense of the
government. Things wore a serious aspect, mis-
chief-making parties, for some paltry gain, fed the
spirit of discontent. The Irish lay in the streets,
looking vacantly, and basking in the sun. Apart
from them, Englishmen, sullen in feature, sat on
gates and palings, letting their legs swing in the


air. Another group was composed of Scotchmen,
their hands thrust into their empty pockets, sus-
piciously glancing at every thing and every body
from beneath their bushy eyebrows. Mrs. Chis-
holm ventured to produce a change, she provided
for the leaders first, showed how she desired to
be the friend of the industrious man, and went
with numbers in search of employment, far into
the country. She undertook journeys of 300
miles into the interior with families; and the
farther she went the more satisfactory was the
settlement of the parties accompanying this brave
lady.
“ When the public had an opportunity of judg-
ing of the effect of my system,” writes Mrs. Chis-
hol,” “ they came forward and enabled me to go
on. The government contributed, in various
ways, to the amount of about £IBO. I met with
great assistance from the country committees
The squatters and settlers were always willing
to give me conveyance for the people. The
country people always supplied provisions. Mr.
William Bradley, a native of the colony, author-
ized me to draw upon him for money, provi-
sions, horses, or anything I might require, but


the people met my efforts so readily that I had
no necessity to draw upon him for a sixpence.
At public inns the females were sheltered, and I
was provisioned myself without charge * my per-
sonal expenses during my seven years’ service
amounted to only £l. 18s. 6d.
As numbers of the masters were afraid, if they
advanced the money for the conveyance by the
steamers, the parties would never reach the sta-
tions. I met the difficulty by advancing the fare,
confiding in the good feeling of the man that he
would keep to his agreement, and to the princi-
ple of the master that he would repay me. Al-
though in hundreds of cases the masters were
then strangers to me, I only lost £l6. by casual-
ties. At times, I have paid as much as £lO. for
steamers, and, from first to last, in following
out my system, I have been the means of settling
11,000 souls. The largest number that ever
left Sydney under my charge, at one time, was
147, but, from accessions on the road, they in-
creased considerably. The longest journey of
this kind occupied five weeks; three weeks of
which were passed on the road.
The rate of wages for a single man averaged


£3O. per annum, with weekly rations of flour
9 lbs., meat 10 fbs., tea 20z., sugar l£lbs. A
married man and his wife, with one child, £25.
per annum, and weekly rations of, meat 18 fbs.,
flour 20 fbs., tea 4 oz., sugar 3 fbs.
I established a female registry office in Sydney
where all persons that required service used to
attend in the morning, from ten till four. My
first endeavour was always to get one female
servant placed in a neighbourhood, and having
succeeded thus far left the feeling to spread.
With some persuasion I induced a man to take a
servant, who said that it would be making a fine
lady of his wife. The following morning a neigh-
bouring settler said, ‘You are quite upsetting
the settlement, Mrs. Chisholm; my wife is un-
commonly cross this morning, and says she must
have a servant, and I think she has as much right
to one as others.’ It was among this class that
the girls married best. If they married one of
the sons, the father and mother would be thank-
ful ; if not, they would be protected as members
of the family—they slept in the same room with
their own daughters. I have been able to learn
the subsequent progress in life of many hundreds


of these emigrants. Girls that I have taken up
the country, in such a destitute state that I have
been obliged to get a decent dress to put upon
them, have come to me again, having every com-
fort about them, and wanting servants. They are
constantly writing home to get out their friends
and relatives.”
Of the system pursued by Mrs. Chisholm, the
colonial emigrant agent says, “ I do not think a
better plan could be adopted than that one pur-
sued about the end of the year 1841 and beginning
of 1843, during a great influx of emigrants.
Advantage was taken of return drays, by means
of which they were removed, in small numbers at
a time, and at a very moderate expense, into the
inland districts. To districts on the coast they
were sent by steamers, and were, in the first
instance, committed to the care of the police
magistrates, and subsequently received into
‘Homes,’specially provided for the purpose, and
supported partly at the expense of the districts,
and partly hy contributions from the government
It is curious to observe in the above evidence
the official manner of hiding the short comings of
government, and by implication, seizing upon any


credit that arose from a sound plan. Honestly, he
should have said that these Homes had been
established, and the emigrants distributed, from
the arrangements, and by the personal labour, and
pecuniary risk of Mrs. Chisholm, and that the
only assistance from government was a tardy con-
tribution of £150., or about one-tenth of the total
expenses.
The following extract from a circular will give
an idea of the business-like style in which Mrs.
Chisholm went to work; —
Jamieson Street, Sydney, Oct. 31 st, 1841.
“ Sir, —I am endeavouring to establish a ‘ Home
for Female Emigrants,’ and, as my first object is
to facilitate their obtaining employment in the
country, I shall feel obliged if you will favour my
intention (should you approve of the same) by
giving me the information I require regarding
your district; and any suggestion you may think
useful will be considered a favour.
“ Ist. Whether girls who at home have merely
been accustomed to milk cows, wash, and the
common household work about a farm, would
readily get places? at what wages? and how
many do you think would, in the course of the
next two years, be required ?


“ 2nd. Good Servants, such as housemaids and
cooks, the rate of wages ? and the probable num-
ber required for the same period ?
“ 3rd. Married couples with small families, say
two or three children, ditto ?
“4th. Could employment and protection be
found for boys and girls from seven to fourteen
years of age ?
“sth. Have you had opportunities of observ-
ing if the young women can save any part of
their wages? for they are generally of opinion
that nothing can be saved in the country, every
article of wearing apparel being so much dearer
than in town.
“ 6th. What would be the cheapest and best
way of conveying the young women to your
district ?
“ I have to observe that the servants will be
classed according to their qualifications, and dis-
tributed fairly, so that those who are absent will
have an equal chance of getting a good servant
with those who are present.”
In 1842, we find in one of the Sydney journals;
Mrs. Chisholm, the undaunted and enterprising
bush pioneer writes : ‘ I wish you would use your


interest to try and borrow a horse and covered
cart for me. I require the cart to sleep in at
night, and carry little children by day; I have a
saddle-horse for my own use. I have now pro-
vided for seventy families; the weather is, how-
ever, very changeable, and I require a covered
cart to enable me to continue my exertions.’ ”
It was during one of these journeys that a
gentleman travelling came up to a party of emi-
grants camped on the side of a swampy ford. He
found Mrs. Chisholm employed in effecting the
passage of the women and children; she made
her docile horse cross the ford with two children
at a time, slung across his back hammock-like,
encouraging him with her voice each time until
all were safely landed. She had previously ridden
thirty miles in search of employment for the
parties
On one occasion, arriving at a particular loca-
tion and finding the surveyor’s work incomplete,
Mrs. Chisholm at once took the chain in band
and divided off the plots as well, for all practical
purposes, as if performed by the most scientific
man of business.
At another time she writes, “ When we landed


from the steamer and entered into the bush, we
found there was no water. I had thirty women
and children in the party, all tired, hungry, and
thirsty, the children crying. Without saying a
word, I sent one of my old bushmen off on horse-
back three miles to get enough of milk or water
for the children. In the meantime, some of the
emigrants came up and said, in a discontented
tone, ‘Mrs. Chisholm, this is a pretty job, what
must we do ? there is no water. 1 I knew it w T ould
not do for them to be idle; anything was better
than that in their frame of mind; so partly judg-
ing from the locality, I said to them without hesi-
tation, ‘lf you will dig here, I think you will
find water.’ Directing the tools to be got out,
they immediately set to work, and providen-
tially, they had not dug many feet when they
came to water. This had such an exhilarating
effect upon their spirits, that they instantly threw
off their coats, began to dig two other fresh holes,
and did not leave of till moonlight.”
On one of her first journeys, she was met by a
discontented party of emancipists, shepherds, and
shearers, of the district, who said, “we believe
you are a very good sort of a person, Mrs, Cliis


holm, and have great respect for you; but we
cannot allow emigrants here to lower our wages.”
Her answer was, “ I hear you want wives, is that
true?’ The reply was a universal “Yes.”
“Then, don’t you see, I can’t send single girls
into a district where there are only bachelors.
Let me fix a few married families down on the
different stations, and I will send to them decent
single lasses that you can marry. ”
This settled the question: a government offi-
cer on the same errand would have been mobbed.
At one station, where a female was in charge,
the utmost alacrity was shown in providing for
the party, and Mrs. Chisholm was informed there
was a nice snug bed-room made up for her.
“ My good neighbour,” replied the lady, “ I must
sleep where my girls sleep.”
Accommodation was then made in the large
room of the house, and all slept under cover.
Breakfast was ordered at five o’clock, as Mrs.
Chisholm always found the advantage of an early
start. On demanding her bill she was told it
was at the door, on reaching, which she found a
strange horse, ready saddled. “Where is Cap-
tain ? the name of her favourite horse, which


is well known all over the colony, demanded the
lady. “ I have sent him on early this morning
to the next station that he might have a rest,”
replied the female inhabitant of the hush : “and
there are some provisions to help yourself and par-
ty on the road; as to payment, we are all in your
debt, your good actions pay us all.” This kind-
ness was of frequent occurrence, and displays the
feeling of the settlers.
Difficulties had frequently to be met by policy.
A large party of men, on one occasion, hung sadly
behind, she saw discontent on their countenances,
and that the slightest spark would cause an explo-
sion and countermarch of the whole. Affecting
Hot to perceive it, she told them they must feel
fatigued but that soon they would have a rest and
something to eat. Then leading them about two
miles out of the road they arrived at a station.
The bushman preferred plenty of food. “ Well,”
said Mrs. Chisholm, “ while the meal is being
made ready, let us have a little chat.”
“ Who owns that com in your barn ? ”
“Why, ma’am, who should hut me?”
“ Who owns the house ? ”
“ It’s mine ”


“ How many cattle do you call your own ? "
“ Sixteen cows, five hundred sheep, and eight
horses.”
“ What will you get for your com ? ”
u Why, there it is, if any body wants it I’ll sell
it: I have plenty of every thing, I don’t want
money. I have been free four years; I have
gained what I have by my own work, and there's
not a man in all your party, if he choses, but may
do the same.”
The food was eaten with a relish; ail were in
high spirits; and after starting the difficulty was
to keep up to them, so eager they to proceed.
The inconvenience of fame is sometimes felt,
thus: on arriving for the first time in a remote
district, a rough bushman came up and said,
Well, Mrs. Chisholm, I have been waiting for
your coming some time, here’s this new fash-
ioned machine of mine somehow wont work.”
Mrs. Chisholm declared her inability to rectify it;
the bushman was incredulous, but upon being
assured this was the fact he went about saying to
his neighbours that he thought nothing of Mrs.
Chisholm, whom people said could do all tilings
ami everything, she could not direct bow his


machine was to be mended, so was no cleverer
than other people. Mrs. Chisholm felt this
was injurious to the prestige of her renown, and
as she “ever stooped to gain all sorts of know-
ledge that is, if she had work to be done
by a blacksmith or carpenter, she saw it done,
and enquired the reason for various operations,
therefore, on returning to Sydney she took care
to learn the mechanism necessary for the repairs
of the implement in question, and visiting the
district in about three months afterwards, she
was able to direct the necessary repairs. “ Aye,
that’s it, I knew if you would try you could do
it—every body said so of Mrs. Chisholm,” cried
the delighted bushman, and she was reinstated,
in the mind of the rough countryman, as the
presiding genius of Australia.
F


WOULD BE GOVERNESSES—FALSE PRIDE CAUSES
VICE TO BE PREFERED TO INDUSTRY—MISFORTUNE
OF BEAUTY—LITTLE SCRUB—THE HAPPINESS OF
SOMETHING REPULSIVE—HOW OPINIONS DIFFER
RESPECTING SERVANTS—AN EASY LIGHT PLACE—
FIRST REPORT OF THE HOME.
Of the singular and presumptuous ideas of emi-
grants we have an interesting account portrayed
by Mrs. Chisholm in her “ Pictures of Australian
Emigrants.”
Many applications were made by young women
who professed to he governesses, but were utterly
incompetent for such a situation. Among others
came M R , who offered herself as nur-
sery governess ; and whom Mrs. Chisholm found
could neither write, read, nor spell correctly. The
following dialogue, exemplary of profession and
practice, too common in all societies, took place.


“ Can you wash your own clothes ? ”
“ Never did such a thing in my life.”
“ Can you make a dress ? ”
“ No.”
“ Cook?”
“No.”
“ What can you do ? ”
“ Why, ma’am, I could look after the servants;
I could direct them : I should make an excellent
housekeeper.”
“ You are certain? ”
“ Yes, or I would not say so.”
“ Do you know the quantity of the different
ingredients wanted for a beefsteak-pie of the size
of that dish, and a rice pudding of the same size ? ”
“Oh no, ma’am—that’s not what I meant: I’d
see that the servants did it! ”
“ Dot there might be great waste, and you not
know it; besides, all, or nearly all, the servants
sent to this colony require teaching.
Nothing, observes Mrs. Chisholm, but my faith
in Providence, that there must be a place fitting
for every body in society, enabled me to bear
such inflictions; this faith made me labour in
seeking some suitable employment for each, and


had I not possessed it, but turned them out, their
fate would have been inevitable and horrible.
Our next extract is illustrative of higher class
would-be governesses.
“ R was entered as a governess; I was
glad of this, for I had then several applications
from the country for governesses,: she was a pretty
girl, too ; and I knew, when pretty girls have no
money—no friends—Sydney is a very bad place
for them. There is nothing so unpleasant as to
question a young lady as to her competency. She
could teach music, French, drawing, &c.; she
was satisfied with the salary, and her testimonials
were first rate.
“ You say you can teach music ? ”
“Yes, Ma’am.”
“ You thoroughly understand it ? ”
“ Most certainly.”
“ One of your pupils is nine years of age. How
long do you think it will take her to get through
Cramer’s Instruction Book? ”
A pause.
“ Perhaps you have not seen it ? ”
“ No, ma’am ; but I was very quick myself—
I have a good ear for music.


What hook did you study from ? ”
“ I learnt singing and music at the same time.”
“ Tell me the name of the first piece you
played ? ”
“Cherry ripe.”
“ The second ? ”
“ Home, sweet Home.”
“ The third ? ”
“ We’re a’ nodding.”
I said no more about music. I gave her a
sum to do in addition ; and she made a total of
sixteen pounds five shillings come to eighteen
pounds four shillings. Now this girl, I after-
wards ascertained, at home had lived in a family
as nursemaid, and washed the clothes of five
children every week; but she was a pretty girl-
somewhat of a favourite at sea; I removed her
the following day far from any pernicious
influence.
One girl, having health and strength, had
refused five situations; at last I thought I had
suited her. She was to live in a settler’s family
and teach five children to read and write; she
was not required to wash the children; but as the
good and thrifty woman kept no servants, she


was to wash her own clothes (or pay for the same
out of her wages,) make her own bed, and clean
her own room: the good woman also said, she
would teach her anything she knew, but ask her
to do nothing. I thought there could be no
objection to this; but when I told her, once a
week she must scour her own room (the best in
the house) —when I said this—she burst into a
passionate flood of tears; the degradation was
more than she could bear ! I thought it then my
duty to refuse her the benefit of the Home. In
less than three months this victim of false pride
was living ; anything rather than work ;
I have since regretted I did not give her one
more trial.
“ Pretty girls,” writes Mrs. Chisholm, “no
matter what their qualifications or characters,
were difficult to dispose of; they are not, it ap-
pears, liked as servants, though they are preferred
as wives.
Mrs. , wanted a servant; I sent one—
a good servant girl, and a very beautiful girl, I ac-
knowledge. I thought the place would suit her
—no son in the house—no nephews—cook mar-
ried—groom married—quite a safety. In less


than an hour the girl returned, with the following
note :
“ My dear madam,
What can you be thinking of, to send
such a handsome girl to my house ? Heavens,
the place would be beset! besides, I do not like
such showy women in my house ; send me a
plain, homely looking girl, and oblige yours, &c.”
I always found it wearisome work to get pretty
girls off; but after much patience, and many dis-
appointments, I generally succeeded. Some ladies
were easily pleased ; but I had one I could not
suit. She would go to a girl:—
“ Can you make up a room very neat ? ’’
“Yes, ma’am ”
“ Can you cook ? ”
“ Yes, ma’am ”
“ Can you work well at your needle ? ”
“ I can do plain work neatly.”
Looking at her from top to toe —after a pause
—“ Ah, you won’t do; it’s a thorough servant
I want."
Day after day did she repeat this ; and, when
it had occurred for at least the twentieth time, I
went into my own room, mustered over in my


mind her different objections to different girls,
and came at last to a conclusion and a decision.
The same evening I received a cargo of sixty
girls, one of them a parish pauper, her hair not
combed, her face not washed; her clothes looked
as if she had first jumped into, and then slept in,
them; her features and figure quite justifying the
name she had earned from her shipmates of
“Little Scrub.” A gentleman who was present
at the time said, “ I suppose you intend her for
the bush ? ” I answered, “ There is a place for
every body in this world, and I think I have had
one waiting for her several weeks past.” On the
following morning the fastidious lady came, and
I saw at once that, while reviewing the late arri-
vals, her eye fell with peculiar complacency on
Little Scrub.
Being rather afraid that I could not keep as
grave a countenance as the gravity of the affair
required, I thought it best to call her into my
own room, and told her that I had a girl that
would suit—“ not a good servant, but a good
girl.” I then called in Little Scrub, and the
following dialogue took place—
“ Can you wash ?"


Staling wildly.—“ Wash, marm ! ”
“ Can you cook? ”
“ Cook, marm!”
“ Can you make a bed! ”
“ Make a bed, marm ! ”
“ Will you do all that this lady bids you ? ”
“Oh! yes, marm.”
The lady looked at the poor girl with the scru-
tinizing and pleased air of a connoisseur in front
of a fine dusty picture, and her countenance
glowed with satisfaction.
“ I will take the girl,” said she ; “ I dare say
she will turn out a good servant. Oh, Mrs. Chis-
holm, you’ve not been long in this colony: it
takes years to know it. You will make the agree-
ment for six months. (With a deep sigh.) Oh,
it is such a comfort to have something a little
repulsive ! ”
Mrs. Chisholm’s favourite axiom, or faith in
Providence, “ that there must be a place for every
body” seems borne out by the contradictory
opinion of mistresses in regard to the same ser-
vants; thus one writes, “ I received last week the
servant you sent me; when I saw her I was
astonished how you could have selected such a


person for my family. She has, as I fully ex-
pected she would prove herself, an idle, lazy,
dirty, insolent, girl.” Another place was procur-
ed for this same girl, and four months afterwards
her new mistress writes ; “ As , whom
you were so kind as to send to us, has conducted
herself remarkably well, I am induced to trouble
you again on the subject of servants. Our house-
maid is about to leave us, Mrs. ■ would rather
trust to your selection than her own.”
The next example proves how much depends
on temper: a lady writes :
“ I don’t think it possible you could have seen
the girl you sent me. I have had great experi-
ence ; have had numbers from the factory, hut,
in all my life, I never met with any person who
tried me as did. I was incessantly
talking to her, but it was of no use : and, as I
cannot be everlastingly teased, I returned her to
you. She is slow at her work ; abominably filthy
in her habits; and was, to me, most insolent. I
would not keep her for nothing.”
This girl’s next mistress, some months after-
wards, writes, “ I send in for medical
advice ; she has hurt her hand ; if you will allow


her to sleep a night or two in the Home, I shall
consider it a favour. I shall also feel obliged if
you will send me a girl to assist at her
work until she gets well; for we have found her
such a- deserving good girl, we would gladly do all
in our power for her. With our best thanks for
your kindness, I remain, &0., &c.”
A lady writing for a servant says, “As I keep
two other servants, I have put on a piece of paper
all this girl will have to do; and you must read
it over, and explain every part of it, so that there
may be no mistake afterwards. * * Mine is a
very easy, light place.” The duties referred to
are: “To be dressed at half-past six; the hall
and steps to be cleaned by half-past seven; the
breakfast to be ready by eight; three beds to be
made by nine; walk with the children till ten;
needlework until eleven; to cook the children’s
dinner, and have it ready by half-past twelve;
then she will have to dust the dining-room out,
(and once a week to clean the windows) —this she
can do well by a quarter-past one; needlework
till three; lay the cloth; wait at table. Now,
she has nothing to do with washing the dishes,
only the glasses, though I give her till half-past


four; then she can take the children out; give
them their tea, wash them, and put them to bed
—this will be over by seven, when she can amuse
herself with needlework. Of course she takes the
entire charge of the children’s clothes, which, I
have a right to expect, should be kept in good
order. lam no way particular what religion she
is, but she must attend family prayers—l would
not take her else. Say wages from .£lO. to £14.;
but this I suppose I must leave to you.”
A summary of the benefits derived from the
Sydney Female Emigrant’s Home is thus stated
by Mrs. Chisholm in the first report published of
the Institution.
Since the establishment of the institution, 735
young women have been provided with situations,
at wages varying from £lO. to £lB. a year. Of
this number 291 have been distributed in the
country districts, of whom only 211 had been in
service at home; 108 were orphans who had
received their education in charity schools; 394
were Eoman Catholics, 107 of whom could read,
whilst 81 could read and write; 238 were Pro-
testants of the Established Church; of these 42
could read, and 35 read and write, and 103 were


Presbyterians, 35 of whom could read, and 21
read and write: total number of Irish, 516 ;
English, 184; Scotch, 35. To the number of
131 was taken by parties who never before kept
servants ; 13 have broken their agreements, whilst
26 employers have broken theirs ; 8 have had char-
ges of drunkenness brought against them, two of
which were proved ; 5 were charged with thefts,
none of which could be substantiated : 2 were guilty
of insolence : 1 obtained a situation by a false char-
acter, and 19 were removed from their situations
by the secretary; 13 left their places without
giving notice ; 17 were discharged without notice
by their employers, and 2 after eight o’clock in
the evening without any charge being proved
against their characters ; 19 left their places with
proper notice, and have not been paid their wages;
in Sydney 81 have changed their situations; in
the country 11 ; pecuniary assistance has been
afforded to 47 persons, and 263 have received
donations of provisions. The amount of subscrip-
tions received is £156, ; the expenditure, £154.;
cash in hand, £2, ; subscriptions due, £ll, ;
debts none,”


THE DO NOTHING EMIGRANTS —CONDESCENDING TO
TAKE A COUNTRY MAGISTRACY—A PLOUGHMAN
TURNED GENTLEMAN—A PAUPER WITH A COMPLI-
CATION OF DISEASES—HOW HE IS MANAGED AND
PASSED OFF.
Having given a few characteristic anecdotes of
the females whom Mrs. Chisholm had to manage,
we will now exhibit the other sex. The “ do-
nothings ” or “black-riband gentry” are a class
which, Mrs. Chisholm says, “are numerous;
amongst them men are to be found, who enter
themselves as clerks or tutors, who are as ignorant
of the duties of one as they are incapable of filling
die office of the other. Some of these men by
dint of impudence, push themselves into a little
consequence on board ship. When they appeared
at my office, I instantly said, ‘ are you one of the
emigrantSj per ship ? ’ Their usual hesitat.


ing answer was, • I came by that ship.’ (They
wished to lead me to suppose they paid their
own passage, or, if I would oblige them by taking
them as cabin passengers it would he as well.)
' What situation do you want ? ’ ‘0 ma’am,
I’m in no particular hurry; I’m on the look
out for a government situation ; I have some
very good letters; I have one to the attorney-
general ; and I expect he will offer me the cleric-
ship of the bench; I am told it is a very fair
thing to begin with.’ Another told me he ex-
pected Mr. Thomson would make him an out
country magistrate. ‘ Why, I am certain Mr.
Thomson never promised you that. ’ ‘ No,
ma’am ; hut all I want is a note from you, just
to say that I’d take it, and I am sure he would
give it me.’ I told him I had no interest in
that quarter, and if I had I would not recom-
mend any person for a situation he could not fill.
I gave him good advice ; told him he must work;
that it was the only certain way of getting on in
this country.”
This class, observes the discriminating lady
“ seems to be manufactured on board ship: as
soon as they land in Sydney, they go to a dra


per’s shop, and purchase two yards and a quarter
of black riband; this is put round their necks—
sometimes a spy-glass is suspended; this is, how-
ever, rare —a dressing-case key, with a silver
top, is the favourite trinket of these fashionables.
I expose this foppery and vanity, as it proves
that there is as much vanity in one sex as the
other Finger rings are much worn by this class,
and if they can meet with a cheap signet ring,
they are delighted. The wife of one of this class
of men told me, that her heart was nearly broken
by her husband’s crank ways; that, at home, he
was obliged to work hard for nine shillings per
week, and keep his family out of the same. ‘He
can plough, ma’am, and delve, and do all kinds of
work; but he seems to think the government
will make him a something out of the common
way.’ She begged me to try and persuade him
to take a place where they might do well, and
urged me to keep her application a secret; ‘ For
I know, ma'am, he’d be the death of me, if ho
knew I told you he was a poor man at home.’
A passenger on board ship, with a kind intention,
gave this man his cast-off ship clothing, and I
believe he had received three pounds, a few days


before be left home, for some services at an elec-
tion ; the fine clothes and money did him harm.
It is almost impossible to serve such a man if he
has two shillings in his pocket. The following
morning I sent for him, told him I had a situ-
ation that would suit him; he expressed himself
thankful to hear it—what was it ? ‘ An overseer
at a bachelor’s station; you will have twenty-five
pounds per annum, and full rations for your wife
and three children.’ ‘What shall I have to do ? ’
‘Work; there are sixty cows; two men are on
the station—these you must look after; and there
is a small farm and garden—as the latter is near
a township, the vegetables sell well; you are al-
lowed what you require for your own family; your
principal work will be in the garden and on the
farm. You can plough, I should say, judging
from your looks; you have worked hard, and will
find this place easy.’ ‘ I don’t think I would
wind taking a situation as head superintendent,
if you have one on your books.’ The settlers of
this country are clever, shrewd men; they sel-
dom engage a newly arrived emigrant, for they
require men of colonial experience, and they gen
erally take them from their working overseers
G


‘So, you do not intend taking the situation I
have offered you?’ ‘ Certainly not.’ ”
A pauper who had been sent out never appeared
in the office until he had been three months in
the colony; nor would he then, hut that he was
struck off rations and turned out of the tents; he
then came to me, looking as idle, miserable, and
wretched as he could make himself.
“ If you please ma’am, I want relief.”
“ What relief? ”
“ I am turned out, and I have four children,
and nothing to eat.”
“ Where are you going to stay ? ”
“ With a shipmate.”
“ Come to me every morning at seven, and I
will give you rations for your family until you get
work.”
“ Oh, ma’am, I can’t get work! ”
“ I will find you work in two days.”
“Thank you! Heaven bless you! but I am
not well enough to work. I was thinking of
going to the hospital; but I am a little afraid of
the doctors here not understanding my complaint.
“ What is it ? ”
“ It’s called a compleracation.”-


“Dr. Harnett would cure you in a week.”
“ Would he though, really: you see, ma’am, I
am very weak.”
“ Very? ”
“ Very; I require something strength’ing.”
“Dr. H. has great faith in blisters; they are
said to be the best things in your complaint.”
“ Ah! but I could not bear them: you see,
ma’am, they would throw me into a fever—that
is the worst of my complaint, what does me good
one way, does me harm another.”
“ But with low diet there would be no fear of a
fever, I will write you a note to Dr.
“ Why, no ma’am; I’ll wait a day or two, thank
you Are there any parishes in this town ? ”
“ Several.”
“ Will you please to tell me where the parish
officer lives ? ”
“ There are no parish officers.”
“Do you say so, ma’am ? .(A long pause.)
Where is there a vestry? for you see, ma’am, I’ll
never be able to do without a little relief. Have
you a benevolent society here ? ”
“Yes.”
“ Do they give relief? ”


“Yes.”
“ Will you please to give me an order ? ”
“ You are not old enough by twenty years.”
“ Oh, ma’am, cannot you do something for me ?
Do you not know any kind people who will help
me with a trifle ? ”
After trying his patience for some time longer,
I gave him two days’ provision for his family, and
told him I would try and find an easy place for
him. A few days after this he came, and renewed
his demands in the following manner: —
“ If you would only give me six shillings for a
pair of shoes.”
“ I will the day you are engaged. Now here
is a little coffee for you, and here is a needle,
cotton, and thimble for your wife, to mend your
coat; you must come to me to-morrow, at nine,
and I will give you a waistcoat and shirt.”
I then spoke to him about a shepherd’s life;
told him of the flocks that belonged to men who
came here without a sixpence. I gave him a
sheet of paper and pencil, and told him to go
home and calculate what he could save in five
years. I was glad to observe his step was quick-
ened ; the following morning he was punctual,


I had a new loaf, quite hot, some tea, sugar, a
beef-steak, a few pounds of potatoes—these were
in a basket.
“That’s fine beef, John—it is for your break-
fast.”
“Do you say so, ma’am? Well, lam lucky.”
“You must get a good place to-day. Now
here is sixpence; go and get shaved and your
hair cut; and here is twopence—you are obliged
to buy water here; and, as soon as you come
back, you can take the basket, for I have some-
thing else for you yet.”
In less than half an hour he returned, quite
another man; and, as I reminded him of mv
promise to give him the six shillings, he went off
in high spirits; and at half-past ten John Bald-
win sat in the office as a candidate for work.
Though the improvement was very great, still he
had an idle look: I therefore sent to Thorp’s for
one of their cheap neckerchiefs, and I must con-
fess I never laid out one shilling and threepence
better. The office was crowded when Number
Five entered; in a loud voice, he talked of the
dreadful times; cheap labour; still he wanted a
few shepherds; but he was on the look out for a


bargain—a cheap bargain. I could perceive John
view him attentively, and then cast a wistful eye
at the money that lay on the office desk. At
last, Number Five praised John for his apparent
anxiety for work: he blushed at the compliment;
and, as I saw it was likely to be a bargain, I
went into the room—(it might be that I felt
guilty of using a little starch, or my dread of the
ridiculous, that made me retreat to where I could
see and hear without being observed). My suc-
cess pleased me, for I was certain Number Five
would make John earn his wages and fit him for
making an honest livelihood in future ; and I, at
the same time, knew he had half a lawyer to deal
with. I returned to the office, entered the agree-
ment at £lB. per annum—a man and his wife for
£18.! I could see Number Five was delighted; so
was I, for methought what a change, what a bless-
ing for his family, that he has come to a country
where there is no home for the idle: what an
advantage to his children! This man has been,
at the time I write, some months with his master,
and if he turns out well, I shall be bound to
acknowledge that even grinders may do good. I
may also remark, with reference to these idlers.


that when the men in barracks were ordered by
the emigration agent to work in the domain, nine
came to me very sick:—Would I give them a
ticket to Mr. McLean, to say they were unable
to work? ‘No; but I will to the doctor.’ They
were not quite ill enough for that, and therefore
returned to their work.”


A CHAPTER ON WIVES—THE PLANS OF A MOTHER
TO HAVE HER SON MARRIED NO BOUNCE THE
BUSHMAN'S LETTER FOR A WIFE—HOW TO SELECT
A GOOD WIFE—SEARCH FOR “A PERFECT BLESS-
ING”—STOPPED ON THE HIGHWAY FOR A WIFE—
MODE OF SUPPLYING WIVES—MATRIMONIAL EXCUR-
SIONS.
If there be one point that we admire more
than another in the feeling that prompted Mrs.
Chisholm to her Christian deeds, it is that in
which she desired the fulfillment, of the law of
nature and the commands of God by promoting
marriages, and the delight expressed in seeing
man blessed with an ample offspring, as holy writ
breathes forth a hope he will be. We feel the
utmost loathing of the brutal doctrines of heart-
less economists who in their blasphemous lan-
guage dare to term the “ olive branches ” sent in


the love of Providence to his creatures “ incum-
brances ”
“ I should not feel the interest I do in female
emigration,” says Mrs. Chisholm, “If I did not
look beyond providing families with female ser-
vants—lf I did not know how much they are
required as wives, and how much moral good they
may spread forth in society as wives.
When I saw his Excellency regarding the
establishment of ‘The Home,’ I observed that
there were many hundreds more females in Syd-
ney than were registered, and that if they were
protected on their arrival, and sent into the
interior, in six months many would be married.
His Excellency exclaimed with some astonish-
ment ‘Am I to find the settlers wives ? ’ ”
What his Excellency thought was not his duty
Mrs. Chisholm considered hers.
The following story is an amusing instance of
a good hearted, illiterate woman, in simplicity of
mind speaking her private thoughts; Mrs. Chis-
holm writes, “ I had one very beautiful girl; she
could read and write well, was of an amiable tem-
per, and willing to take advice: I provided her
with a situation; she was returned to me solely


on account of her good looks. I was at a loss
what to do with her; being afraid to allow her to
go out for exercise, I was obliged to limit her out-
goings to attendance at church on Sundays. She
was the daughter of a lieutenant, who had spent
twenty-four years in the service of his country:
and he having a large family and limited means,
sent one of his treasures to seek an independent
livelihood abroad. Providence provided for her
in an unexpected manner. A very respect-
able woman, a settler’s wife, waited on me for
advice; she was one of those sensible, shrewd
women, that help to keep a home together. She
told me she had five boys and a girl, none of
whom could read or write, and that she wanted a
teacher.
“ My eldest boy. Jack, ma’am,” said she, “is as
fine a young man as you would wish to see, only
he is too wild: he is past learning; but the
others are willing enough.” At this time, I had
three of these helpless creatures, just referred to,
that I wished to provide for; but I told the wor-
thy woman was so good tempered, that she
would suit her best, if she did not mind her
being handsome.


‘ Has she any bounce about her ? ”
“ None.”
I went into the room with her; as her eye rested
on —, there was a look of satisfaction, followed
directly by one of deep thought and reflection.
There was something so intelligent of a deep emo-
tion in her mind flitted across her countenance,
that I became curious; she left the room; and on
returning to the office, said, “ I’ll see you again
at five o’clock, ma’am; but don’t let the girl
engage, any how: a thought has come into my
head I must think over.” At five she came.
“ Now, Mrs. Chisholm, I would like to tell
you my plan—Do you see, says I, if any gal
would keep a man at home, it would be the crea-
ture I saw this morning: now says I, tho’
Jack’s not taken to drink, yet he’s uncommonly
fond of company, and is for going to every horse-
race he hears of; and I expect, some time, he’ll
make a very foolish match, wi’ some one more
ignorant than he is: yet, ma’am, tho’ he can
neither read nor write, he’s uncommonly ’cute.
Now, I think, if I take home, she’ll tempt
him to stay at home; and then, when I see he’s
taken, and his heart is touched, I shall call him


on one side —bounce a bit, and say ‘ I’ll have no
fine ladies living wi’ me.’ This opposition will
make him more determined; then, in a day or
two, I’ll cry a bit about it—he’s kind-hearted,
and can’t stand that: then he’ll come coaxing
me, and I’ll consent, and talk over the old man;
and the clergyman shall settle every thing, and
it will be a good thing for us all, ma’am.” 1
consented to arrange with , who should be
ready the next day: she was engaged as a teacher
for one year, salary £l6.
Although Mrs. Chisholm received hundreds
of applications for wives, she would not make
matches; but placed single girls as servants or
teachers with families, in districts where wives
were most wanted.
On one occasion, says Mrs. Chisholm, I receiv-
ed a letter from a man who wanted a wife. I
found he was well known to several persons as a
man of integrity. He stated it would be a seri-
ous thing to visit Sydney for a wife; first, a
loss of time; second, money; and, after all, per-
haps not be suited. His letter, interested me;
and I determined on trying to serve him ; I give
his epistle verbatim et literatim, that the reader
may judge for himself:—


“Reverend madam, I heard you are the best
to send to for a servant, and I heard our police
magistrate say, it was best to leave all to you;
and so I’ll just do the same, as his honour says
it’s the best. I had a wife once, and so she was
too good for me by the far, and it was God’s will,
ma’am; but I has a child, ma’am, that I wouldn’t
see a straw touch for the world; the boy’s only
four yeare old: and I has a snug fifty-acre farm
and a town ’lotment, and I has no debts in the
world, and one teem and four bullocks; and I’se
ten head oh cattle, and a share on eight hundred
sheep, so I as a rite to a desent servant, that can
wash and cook and make the place decant; and
I don’t mind what religion she bey, if she is
sober and good, only I’se a Protestant myself;
and the boy I have, I promised the mother on
her death bed should be a Catholic, and I won’t,
anyhow,have any interferance in this here matter.
That I do like in writing nothing else, I wouldn’t,
mam, on any account in the world, be bound to
marry; but I don’t wish it altogether to be left
out. I'll ge her fourteen wages, and if she don’t
like me, and I don’t like her, I’ll pay her back to
Sydney. I want nothing in the world but what


is honest, so make the agrement as you like, and
111 bide by it. I sends you all the papers, and
you’l now I’m a man wet’s to be trusted. I
sends you five pounds; she may get wages first,
for I know some of the gals, and the best on um,
to, are not heavy we boxes; and supposing any-
thing should happen, I would not like it to be
said she come here in-rags. I wants, also, a
man and his wife; he must be willing to learn to
plough, if he don’t now how, and do a good fair
day’s work at anything: his wife must be a
milker, and ha dustrious woman; I’ll give them
as much as they can eat and drink of tea and
milk, and, whatever wages you set my name
down for, I’ll be bound to pay it. With all the
honer in the world I’se bound to remain your
servant till death.”
There was something, remarks Mrs. Chisholm,
in the character of this honest bushman, during
his colonial residence, to admire; he had gained
his freedom, sent home money to his parents, and,
during a long and tedious illness of twenty
months, had attended his sick wife with pa-
tient care. Who would not get up an hour ear-
lier to serve such a man ?—I did, for I knew that


early in the morning is the best time to choose a
wife. I went first into the govemess-room—all
asleep; I unlocked the Home-door—some dressed,
others half-dressed, some too very cross : I have
often remarked, that early in the day is the best
time to judge of a woman’s temper; but I wish
this to be kept a secret. I remained half an
hour in the Home; I then went through the
tents, could not suit myself, and returned. At
the Home-door, I found a girl at the wash-tub;
she was at work with spirit; she was rather good
looking, very neat and tidy. I went into my
office, and ascertained that, on board ship, her
character was good. I desired the matron never
to lose sight of her conduct, and report the same
to me. Day after day passed, and I was at last
fully determined to place her within reach, of my
applicant in the bush, that is, in a respectable
family, in his near neighbourhood; but I was
able to arrange better, for I found that, amongst
the families wanting situations, there was one re-
lated to her. I immediately engaged them as the
bushman’s servants; they were a respectable cou-
ple ; the man a very prudent person. I told them
to take the girl with them, and get her service


near them, and on no account to allow her to live
with a bachelor. I gave the girl three letters to
respectable ladies, and she was engaged by one
the fourth day after her arrival at . About
a fortnight after, the bushman wrote to thank me
for sending him the married couple; and con-
cluded by saying, “With regard to that other
matter, upon my word, you have suited me ex-
actly ; and, as 'soon as our month is up, we is to
be married.”
I received, says Mrs. Chisholm, forty-one appli-
cations of this land; but the above is the only
girl I ever sent into the country with a direct
matrimonial intention.
The following is another specimen of an earn-
est appeal for a better half.
13th December, 1844.
Dear Madam.—Matrimonial engagements, at
all times, require and demand mature delibera-
tion, and should not needlessly and thought-
lessly be entered upon, even with a prior know-
ledge of the party—how much more then does it
call for when coupled with a perfect ignorance of
the person and qualifications of your future com-
panion through life. Such then is the present


case, and 1 hesitate not, with the most perfect
confidence, and a firm reliance on your experi-
ence and discriminating judgment, to throw my
fate in your hands, and entreat your kind offices
in the obtaining for me a suitable companion for
fife, in other and plainer words—“ a wife.” With
reference to my character, position, and prospects,
I respectfully beg leave to refer you to Mrs.
to whom I have the honour of being known, and
I trust they will prove satisfactory, If, dear
madam, you will be pleased so far to oblige me,
I doubt not my happiness will be accomplished,
as there must be many worthy young women in
Sydney, in eveiy way qualified to render connu-
bial ties what it is intended to be—a perfect bles-
sing. The kind of person I would most desire
would be a young woman, between the years of
35 and 35, English, clean in person, neat in
habit, mild in manners, and an accomplished
needlewoman, my late wife being a most excel-
lent sempstress. With renewed apologies, and
a request that you will favour me with an answer,
I am, dear madam, your most obedient servant,
We will give one more instan e, more espe-
II


cially as it illustrates the indefatigable labours of
the benevolent lady in the wild bush of Australia.
When travelling with a large party of emi-
grants —while they were sleeping in camp—as
Mrs. Chisholm entirely depended upon the set-
tlers for food for her party, she was to be seen
at the dim break of day in her gig, driven by a
prisoner from Hyde Park Barracks, going about
to collect from the settlers food for the breakfast-
ing of her party. On one occasion, just as she
came to a solitary part of the road, near a val-
ley, she heard a man shouting to her, “ Stop,
stop I ” A stout, rough bushman, clearing a few
bushes at a leap, placed his hand on the horse’s
head, and said, “Are you Mrs. Chisholm?” “Yes:
what do you want ? ” “ Want—want—why, what
every man like me wants when he sees Mrs.
Chisholm. Come now, do look up that hill, and
see that nice cottage and 40 acres under crop;
and I have in it 20 hams and flitches of bacon,
and a chest of tea, and a bag of sugar; the land
is paid for, and the three cow's ; Oh, it would do
you good to see the cows; ” and then pulling out
a roll of papers, continued, “ See, what a character
I have got from the magistrates in charge of the


Jistnct; and look here, ma’m, at this roll of
notes these are the things to hasten the matter
and get over difficulties with the clergyman-
come now, Mrs Chisholm, do be a mother to
me, and give me a wife; the smile of a woman
has never welcomed me home after a hard day’s
work you 11 have pity on me—you don’t mean
to say no; you’ll never be so cruel as to say no ?
It makes a man’s heart light to look at your
camp. Now, you don’t mean to say you have
not got a nice girl from Tipperary. Never mind
the breakfast: I could keep the whole party for
a week; and what peace of mind it would be to
you to know what a kind husband I shall make
one of your girls.”
“It was upon the principle of family coloniza-
tion,” says Mrs. Chisholm, “and actuated by
such feelings, that I carried out my matrimonial
excursions in the Australian bush.
I, at times, took a number of single young
females with me, in company with emigrant
families, but then I allowed no matrimonial en-
gagement to be made on the way, at the same
time I took care to place the young women in
situations from which they might, with that con


sideration due to the feelings of woman, enter
with propriety and respectability into the matri-
monial state.”


CONVICTS BLESS GOD THEIR CHILDREN ARE NOT IN
ENGLAND—PLEA FOR THEM TO HAVE THEIR WIVES
—HOSPITALITY—MORAL SENSIBILITY—A REFORM-
ED LONDON PICKPOCKET—GOD’S POLICE—EARL
GREY’S CONSENT, AND CAPTAIN CHISHOLM’S BENE
VOLENCE—LAND TICKETS—DECENCY IN INTER-
MENTS—“UNFORTUNATES.”
Among the people in Mrs. Chisholm’s field of
labour were many who had been convicts, termed
in the colonies “emancipists,” one writer in
speaking of this class says, “ Nothing struck me
more in the colony than the good behaviour of
men who had been convicts; and I was continu-
ally inclined to ask ‘ Why have these men been
transported ?’ ” The emancipists were often to be
met with in the bush, living in a horrible state of
bachelorism, having sufficient means to support
their wives and families who were, most probably.


either in abject poverty or burdens on their
parishes in England. Others again were living
with women and having families while their
wives were at home, but had no means of reach-
ing those to whom, at the altar of God, they had
plighted their troth.
In a letter on “ Emigration and Transportation
relatively considered,” by Mrs. Chisholm, ad-
dressed to earl Grey, we get a vivid picture of
the emancipist.
“ Often, my lord, have I heard the emancipist,
at family prayer, return thanks to Almighty God
that his children were not in a country where
they might be tempted by hunger to perpetrate
crime.
In all the systems, and every system which
has hitherto been tried, I do not, as far as my
observation has gone, see much to approve; on
the whole, I am bound to say, that the ease with
which men can earn a living honestly, has done
more for the reformation of the prisoner than any
other observable cause. One of the most demo-
ralizing evils of the old system, has been the
separation of men from all domestic influence—
rending for ever asunder the links of nature.


The spirit of British justice never contemplated
to sever for ever those whom “God had joined
together; ” nor is it in accordance with the dic-
tates of religion and pure morality, that such a
state of things should exist, as to doom men to
be for years incarcerated together by hundreds,
like a menagerie of wild beasts, or to live a soli-
tary hopeless life in the bush; but so it is, thou-
sands upon thousands are thus victimized, and
destined to undergo all the frightful and deterio-
rating effects of this more than savage life.
Painful experience then has, by this time, ex-
emplified to Her Majesty’s Government the fright-
ful consequences attending the aggregation of so
many men in a state of close and galling bond-
age in Norfolk Island, Port Arthur, &o. If those
unhappy victims to a principle promulgated but
too successfully by a modern popular author, and
who, I hesitate not to say, iniquitously tried to
depreciate and thwart the decrees of Providence
in the propagation of the human race, be so far
sunk in the scale of humanity as to give but lit-
tle prospect of their reformation; yet I have
every reason to hope, that their truly lamentable
condition may excite your lordship’s commisera


tion, and dispose you to co-operate with those
good Christians and philanthropists who in all
faith believe that while there is hope of heaven,
there is hope on earth; so that those who have
escaped—and I am happy to think, vast numbers
have escaped—this ‘evil communication,’ and
have gained through the force of an innate virtue,
and the interposition of a merciful Providence, a
respectable position in the ranks of social life;
may receive from the hands of Her Majesty’s
Government that moral consideration, that degree
of justice, which their domestic wrongs require.
No individual, perhaps, has had so many op-
portunities as I have had of becoming acquainted
with the people of New South Wales. Wander-
ing for hundreds of miles in search of suitable
homes and eligible employment for the emigrant
families and tioket-of-leave men, I had been ac-
customed at nightfall to find shelter at the nearest
hut; as one of the family I have shared in the
hospitality of all classes, whether rich or poor;
consequently, I have had opportunities of gaining
an intimate knowledge of the peculiarities and
feelings of the people, and these justify what
might otherwise appear uncalled for—my record


ing here my humble testimony to the sterling
worth and exemplary conduct, as a body, of the
emancipists of New South Wales. At a time
when slander outruns truth and charity, as re-
gards the moral character of that people, I must
honestly tell your lordship, that as parents, their
extreme—nay, I must call it, nervous anxiety,
regarding the moral and religious welfare of then-
children ; —the efforts they make to educate them ;
—the miles they travel to attend a place of wor-
ship on the Sabbath; —their deep sympathy for
the unfortunate; —their Christian liberality and
charity;—their open-hearted hospitality, have
endeared numbers of them to my remembrance.
Amongst this class it may be truly said, ‘the
schoolmaster is abroad.’ I only wish that the
noble lord who has immortalized this saying, had
the domestic opportunities I have had of witness-
ing the efforts made by this class. When en-
gaged at one time in providing for some emigrant
families in the interior, I was accommodated at a
farm-house, where both the heads of the family
happened to have been sent out by Her Majesty’s
government; neither could read or write. Here
I found a man engaged as teacher; certainly not


the person you would wish to see trusted with
the tuition of a promising young family of boys
and girls. Their parents, a few weeks previous
to my seeing them, had sent a few bushels of
wheat to market, just to find them tea and sugar,
until they could go to Sydney to sell their regu-
lar crop; they sold to the amount of 355.; six-
teen shillings of this sum were expended on books
and stationery for their children. The books
were handed to me by the mother, who remarked,
“ they cost a good hit, hut we could not do better
we our money.” One of the hooks was the life
of ; the hero of this tale distinguished him-
self hy his prodigies of adroit exploits in Newgate
and its environs,—a wild story of facts and fic-
tion. I remarked that I had been informed it
was a dangerous hook; that it made what was
bad look like good; was particularly enticing to
youths of a certain turn of mind. “ Now do you
say so? How glad Jack will he you called—
what a Providence ! ” and before I could even be
aw r are of her intention, it was in flames on their
hearth-stone. It never entered into her mind it
could be exchanged, re-sold; that my opinion
might be wrong; but, at the mere mention of


apprehended danger, the book was destroyed.
It was dashed into the fire, as if a venomous rep-
tile had clung to a part of her garments. Is not
this, my lord, a bright example for imitation?
I knew an emancipist father refuse his daughter
in marriage to a respectable emigrant, until he
had paid some debts he had contracted before he
emigrated; he was willing to pay the sum out of
the portion he intended for his daughter, remark-
ing, “ Their prosperity would be greater, when
no man could say they had wronged him.” This
scrupulous regard for property was entertained by
a man who was once a notorious London pick-
pocket. A pick-pocket! yes, we must not
scorn or think lightly of those who have returned
from the path of evil to the course of rectitude.
I crave your lordship’s patience a little longer;
for while I love to linger on those little domestic
incidents—those traits and fruits of returning
tirtue, and like to point them out to others as
matters deserving their pious contemplation, I
wish to bring to your lordship’s notice one of
those facts which ought to appear to the moralist
and philanthropist, as one of paramount interest.
Shortly before I left Sydney, the father of a large


family came a journey of upwards of a hundred
miles to see me. The object of his mission was
a serious one. If, my lord, you are pressed for
time, lay down this letter, for the prayer of his
request deserves a tranquil moment; one that I
would like you to think about, when, having for
a time hid adieu to the cares of State, you seek
the solace of domestic society; his prayer is ona
that I would like to cling about your heart, as
one of your own household honey-suckles. It
must not meet you at your office; but you must
take it with you wherever you go. I would fain
obtain for it a clinging place in your recollection,
that when you think of your own dear ties, the
wish of the emancipist father should present it-
self to your remembrance. He sought a wife for
his son! a girl of good fame! “ If,” said he,
“you could only get me a good girl; if I could
see my son married to a good woman, then I
should die in peace.”
You have heard enough, my lord, of the hor-
rors that have resulted from the Penal system; a
system which has doomed thousands and tens of
thousands to the demoralizing state of bachelor-
ism, Calmly consider the evil which has thus


been created, and in common justice to the vir-
tuous part of the community there, remedy it, by
giving a due encouragement to a respectable sys-
tem of female emigration.
They are a class of men sensitively alive to
virtuous marriages in their families, for no one
more fully appreciates virtue than the reformed.
* * If Her Majesty’s government be really
desirous of seeing a well conducted community
spring up in these colonies, the social wants of
the people must be considered. If the paternal
government wish to entitle itself to that honoured
appellation, it must look to the materials it may
send as a nucleus for the formation of a good and
a great people, For all the clergy you can dis-
patch, all the schoolmasters you can appoint, all
the churches you can build, and all the books you
can export, will never do much good, without
“ God’s police ” —wives and little children—good
and virtuous women.
We may here state that, following up this pub-
lic letter to earl Grey, by repeated personal appli-
cations at Downing street, and presenting a list
of women, the wives of convicts holding tickets of
leave in New South Wales, desirous of joining


their husbands, the government yielded, Captain
Chisholm becoming individually responsible for
expenses incurred by them. The poor people
came, many from Ireland, to Woolwich to be
shipped off in the female convict ship, they were
there met by the kind and warm-hearted lady and
her husband—their necessities supplied, and by the
generosity of Mr. Silver and Mr. Robert Brooks,
of Oornhill, clothed. Arrangements were made
for their reception in Sydney, and the inhabit-
ants there viewed the measure as one beneficial
to morality, consistent with humanity, and the
most sure way of making steady, virtuous, and
devoted citizens of the men.
When Mrs. Chisholm was on her journeys on
humanity’s behalf, she discovered that many poor
people buried the money they had saved as a mode
of security. She therefore, through the press, pro-
posed that the colonial government should issue
land tickets representative of the value of five
shillings and a pound, that these should be offer-
ed to working men in exchange for their then
useless money. That the funds accumulated
from this source should be applied to assist the
emigration of industrious people desirous of set


tling in the colony, and that the tickets he re-
ceived by the government in payment for land.
The Sydney papers do not state whether this ex-
cellent suggestion was ‘ever carried into effect.
But we suspect that it was not from the contracted
views generally taken of liberal propositions by
governing bodies.
It was the custom at Sydney to convey the
bodies of the poor to the cemetery in a common
rubbish cart. The lively feeling of respect to
God’s creatures, whether rich or poor, dead or
living, with which Mrs. Chisholm is endowed
was shocked at the sight, and making an earnest
appeal to the public to obliterate such a foul stain
on their civilization, the proposition was warmly
taken up, the worthy bishop of Australia heading a
subscription list. A horse, harness, hearse, and
suitable appointments were procured, and for about
four shillings was ready with a driver to make the
last act of the living to the dead consistent with
the solemnity of the awful occasion. It is singu-
lar from people considering what is everybody’s
business is nobody’s, how they will allow the best
feelings of human nature to slumber torpidly in
their bosoms.


There is one subject it would be wrong to pass
over in recounting the singular toils of this lady,
because it is ever calling for the sympathy and
commiseration of the Christian mind, and its
duty exemplified in an act of our Redeemer, but
is shunned by the daughters of luxury, ease, and
virtue. It must be acknowledged there is great
merit in reclaiming sinners wandering from the
paths of righteousness and by making them sensi-
ble of their crime, teaching them to seek forgive-
ness of their errors at the throne of divine grace
It was to be expected from our previous details of
Sydney society that the streets of that place would
be crowded with “ unfortunate ” females. Women
who have once swerved from virtue’s path are
abhorred and repulsed by their own sex, while
man, by whom they were tempted and corrupted,
is ever ready to denounce and condemn them.
Despised by society, the agonies of the mind are
sought to be alleviated by plunging deeper into
vice,—dissipation produces disease, she falls ere
her prime—the grave offering repose to the body,
but discovering the doom of the soul.
To bring to a sense of repentance, to draw
from the showy path of sin such lost creatures is


surely a work of true Christian piety, meriting
the sincerest approbation of the virtuous. To
this duty did Mrs. Chisholm, in the large benevo-
lence of her heart, apply herself, and the result is
one so cheering in its consummation as to stand a
noble precedent for others to attempt a similar
work of mercy. Seventy-six of these women
were reclaimed, and only seven returned to a
career of infamy.


SOCIAL ARRANGEMENTS—SMALL FARMS SUCCESSFUL
—GOVERNMENT SUCCUMB—BUSH PARTNERSHIPS—
SYDNEY YEOMEN—JOURNEY INTO THE BUSH—TES-
TIMONIAL TO MRS. CHISHOLM—DEPARTURE FOE
ENGLAND.
To take a broad view of mankind at the present
day it will he apparent to the thinking mind that
forms of government are not considered so im-
portant as social improvement. Various are the
schemes of the lovers of our species to alleviate
the miseries that have grown up in the progress
of civilization, time only will show which among
the crude propositions shall receive the stamp of
truth. The under current that agitates society in
every quarter of the earth and engages the atten-
tion of philosophers is the question of the distribu-
tion of the land. Without being guided by either
political or social ideas, but from observing the


workings of the mind as presented for observa-
tion by the various and numerous classes that
passed under the searching review of Mrs. Chis-
holm, she came to the conclusion “ that in ninety
nine cases out of a hundred, emigrants emigrate
in order to live and have land.
It appears that land could only be purchased
in large quantities and at a fixed price. The
consequence of this was that persons with nu-
merous children and moderate capital, could
neither get employment from having large fami-
lies nor could they purchase small farms to sub-
sist comfortably upon by means of their labour.
The government at home thought that as the
system of competition and legal expenses effect-
ually prevented small farms in England, and
believing the system worked well here, some such
scheme as making capitalists the only proprie-
tors of land, and labourers never able to rise
from the sphere in which they commenced life,
they were adapting to an infant colony those
principles by which England has attained its
renowned character for wealth and commerce,
and therefore henefitting it in a wise and judi-
cious manner.


It seems the government was mistaken and
misled by interested mischievous theorists, who
with pen and ink drew beautiful plans, but which
in practice were found impracticable.
The squatters who proceed into the solitary
wilds of unexplored parts and are the pioneers of
colonization, were too powerful, they banded
together and the government thought it prudent
even to grant them more than they demanded.
Another large party united and took possession
of land near to Port Philip and were too strong
for the colonial force to oppose.
The humble and industrious emigrants with
large families were exactly the parties that would
enlist the energy of Mrs. Chisholm in their
behalf. Seeing the great difficulty of obtaining
land by purchase she procured the consent of
some large proprietors to grant on easy terms
farms of fifteen, twenty, and forty acres; on these
she planted worthy families, their industry and
skill was remunerative, they throve excellently,
and not only did their families have abundance of
every requisite of life but they saved money.
After having proved by actual experiment, that
labouring men with large families, rejected on


that account by the squatters as servants, could
support themselves and become independent by
being placed upon from ten to twenty acres of
good land; Mrs. Chisholm ardently followed up
her representations in favour of this class, she
had the gratification of seeing, under the govern-
ment of Sir George Gipps, land put up for sale in
lots of fifty acres.
The next work that falls under our notice
which this lady undertook, for one of the most
surprising traits of her character is the fertility
of beneficial and practical ideas, was that of
Bush Partnerships; a kind of co-operative asso-
ciation of two or more individuals who by
joint labour created capital, brought farms
into a remunerative state and then separated.
After recommending great circumspection in the
choice of associates, Mrs. Chisholm says, “ What
I would particularly recommend to new settlers
is 1 Bush Partnership ’ —Let two friends or neigh-
bours agree to work together, until three acres
are cropped, dividing the work, the expense, and
the produce—this partnership will grow apace;
I have made numerous bush agreements of this
kind. One settler’s wife was an excellent milker;


her next-door neighbour could not manage a cow.
An agreement was made, much to the advantage
of both.—Settler A. was to bail up and milk B’s
cows —while 8., in return, agreed to give one
hour's instruction, daily, in reading and writing
to A’s children.
C. was an excellent gardener, but not equal to
D. at sawing; D agreed to take C’s place at the
saw, while he worked in D's garden. A., 8., G.,
B. were neighbours. A, had a large family, but
little money—they agreed to buy a bullock and
water-cart for their domestic use—B., C., D.
found the money, A. agreeing that his son should
take charge of the bullock, and go for the water
for twelve months, as his amount of the contribu-
tion. At the close of the year, 8., 0., D. had
horses ; the bullock and dray were valued ; they
drew lots who should take it at the price named ;
it was A’s draw; but lie had no money; 8., C.,
D. were glad to agree that A’s son should give
them labour as payment. I was present the day
the son had paid the last day’s labour. 8., C.,
I), said, ‘it has done us all good, and A. has
behaved so punctually, the boy has worked so
well —never been anv excuse ; ’ —the four farmers


talked the matter over, shook hands, wished the
boy luck, and the same evening entered into a
bush agreement respecting the joint management
of their cows.”
The last great labour of Mrs. Chisholm in the
colonies was one of a most arduous nature, from
which many a bold hearted and muscular framed
man would have shrunk, it was to collect “ Volun-
tary Information from the People of New South
Wales; ” to make known, as Mrs. Chisholm
writes, to a British public the resources of the
Australian colonies; to furnish the labourer, the
mechanic, and the capitalist, with information
that can be depended upon; to point out obstruc-
tions to emigration which ought to be removed;
and to expose evils which ought to be eradicated.
** * To supply flock masters with shepherds
is a good work! To supply those shepherds with
wives is a better!! To find employment for
families that will enable them to rear a well-fed
peasantry is a God-like undertaking.
Australia can boast of her high-spirited sons—
her virtuous daughters—her sunny sky—her
rich pastures —her ships laden with wool —her
cattle wild and countless on her mountains—her


sheep crowding her hills, and seeking the shelter
of her yallies; she can grow her own sugar—make
her own wine—press her own oil—spin her own
cotton—weave her own wool—grow her own com
—but, until Australia can prove that she can he
peopled by her own children—where God’s bles-
sings are not considered ‘ encumbrances,’ she
will never be able to maintain a proud position or
be competent to defend the noble harbours which
Providence has given her- —harbours to be defend-
ed by her sons, who, at the call of Old England,
would issue forth, and by their gallant aid and
meritorious deeds do honour to the race from
whence they sprang.”
The evil most prominent in this lady’s idea
was the horrible disparity of sexes, causing the
colony to rely on emigration for a supply of inha-
bitants, and that too in a country where industry
defies want, and the honourable pride of a nu-
merous family, free from poverty and temptation,
could be indulged in—man’s heart teeming with
thankfulness for such a natural and divine
blessing.
The information collected was “ Brief Biogra-
phies ” of settlers and servants, taken down in


their own words, in answer to a list of printed
questions.
In carrying out this plan, Mrs. Chisholm
travelled into the Bush and collected upwards of
six-hundred biographies, as a fair example of the
working classes. These journeys she accom-
plished in a covered spring van, travelling from
farm to farm, and from station to station; one
night sleeping at a wealthy squatter’s residence.
the next at a humble settler’s cottage, welcomed
and known to all. She was accompanied by her
husband, who joined her from India in 1845.
In one of her printed letters to the public, she
states, “ the facts in question were collected by
me some months previous to my leaving the
colony, by visiting their farms and homesteads;
sometimes taking down their statements in their
own dwellings, sometimes on the road side, and
sometimes in the ploughed field, having the
plough as my table. I was indeed so well known
to the people, and as they knew my motive
was to convey faithful information to their re-
latives, friends, and countrymen at home—
they invariably related to me their circumstances
with the greatest readiness and cheerfulness. I


have in my possession a large mass of these facts,
which I have named ‘The Voluntary Informa-
tion of the People of New South Wales;’ and
they present a fair average of the condition of
the working classes there. My object now in
giving some of them publicity is the desire I
have of their being made the basis for the forma-
tion of a Family Colonization Loan Society.”
One small tract, containing a few statements,
was published in Sydney, and another in London,
in 1848; many hundreds, of a very interesting
description, remain in manuscript.
In February, 1846, a public meeting was held
at Sydney, for the purpose of taking into consider-
ation the presenting to Mrs. Chisholm, then on
the eve of her departure for England, a testimo-
nial of the estimation in which her labours on
behalf of tho emigrant population were viewed by
the colonists. Some idea may be formed of the
respect felt for the admirable lady, and acknow-
ledgement of her public services, when eight
members of the Legislative Council, the Mayor
of Sydney, the High Sheriff, thirteen Magistrates,
and many leading merchants formed themselves
into a committee to cany the wishes of the meet


ing into effect. The amount of each subscription
was limited.
In a very short time 150 guineas were raised,
and presented to her with the following address ;
“ We, the undersigned members of council,
magistrates, landholders, merchants, and others,
inhabitants of New South Vv 7 ales, beg to offer you,
on the occasion of your departure from this co-
lony, the expression of our thanks for your active
and zealous exertions on behalf of the emigrant
population during the last seven years.
“ We feel assured that the extraordinary efforts
which you have made have been dictated by a
spirit of the most enlightened benevolence. In
the establishment of an Emigrant’s Home in Syd-
ney, and in procuring the advantageous settlement
of great numbers of the emigrant population in
the interior, as servants, and occupants of small
farms, your exertions have proved of signal ad-
vantage to the community.
“ In the large collection of statistical facts and
‘ voluntary information ’ which you have derived
from the labouring classes, you have accumulated
materials for establishing the great advantages
which New South Wales possesses as a favourable
field for the emigration of British Settlers.”


Mrs. Chishom accepted the testimonial, in
order to expend it in further promoting emigra-
tion, in restoring wives to husbands, and children
to parents. In the course of her answer, she
said “ It is my intention, if supported hy your co-
operation, to attempt more than 1 have hitherto
performed.”
She left Australia in 1846, bearing with her
the warm prayers of the working colonists, whose
confidence and gratitude, both bond and free, she
had thoroughly secured, charged with the self-
imposed mission of representing in England the
claims of those powerless classes who have neither
honour nor pensions to bestow on their advocates.


OPENS AN OFFICE IN ENGLAND—THE GOVERNOR
ORDERS CHILDREN OF EMIGRANTS TO BE SENT OUT
—EARL GREY DESIRES MRS. CHISHOLM’S OPINION
—SUMMONED BEFORE A COMMITTEE OF THE HOUSE
OF LORDS—SECURITY IN TRANSMITTING MONEY—
FAMILY COLONIZATION LOAN SOCIETY—A, B, C, OF
COLONIZATION.
Faithfully and earnestly has Mrs. Chisholm, in
this country, performed her promise to the people
of Sydney.
Immediately upon her arrival, her private resi-
dence was thrown open to aid persons desirous of
emigrating, she communicated with the friends of
settlers, gave gratuitous and friendly advice to
others, and personally superintended the shipment
of the inexperienced. Not only did her noble
husband become responsible for many expenses,
but by the joint exertions of this oxemnlary man


;uid woman iiie starving were fed and the naked
clad. Such was the tax on their moderate in-
come that postages alone amounted to upwards
of .€l. in a week. With the assistance of their
young family and incessant labour of both captain
Chisholm and his wife, the clerical duties became
more than they could accomplish, which compel-
led them to engage assistance in this department.
All these works of humanity were performed at a
severe sacrifice to their limited means, still they
looked at the holy work as far surpassing any pri-
vate consideration, and thought but of the good
they were bestowing on their fellow mortals.
They have made a still greater sacrifice of per-
sonal fooling, captain Chisholm having proceeded
in 1851 to the Australian colonies with the view
of promoting the re-union of separated members
of families, while Mrs. Chisholm for the present
remains in England to carry on her plan of Fa-
mily Colonization.
Immediately following the departure of these
missionaries of mercy, we find in a “blue book ’
that the governor of Sydney, Sir George Gipps,
wrote to Mr. Secretary Gladstone in England,
that it having been represented to him “by Mrs.


Chisholm, a lady who has on many occasions
made herself useful to this government in mat-
ters connected with the disposal of emigrants,
that during the course of great emigration many
children had been left behind in consequence of
the inability of their parents to pay * * for the
passage of each child.” His excellency then
gave a list of children, and stated that he had is-
sued an order for their emigration at the public
expense. To this both the Government Emigra-
tion Commissioners and lord Grey gave their
cordial approval.
The correspondence between the governor and
the government was sent from Downing Street to
Mrs. Chisholm with a request to “have the kind-
ness to favour him (earl Grey) with your opinions
as to the feasibility of the suggestions there offered,
together with any remarks which your knowledge
and experience in these matters may enable you
to communicate.”
Mrs. Chisholm sent a noble reply, pleading for
families to be sent entire, showing the iniquity of
making children a bar to emigration, and that it
became “ the duty of the state to throw protection
around the child.” That the clause in which


“ couples who have no children ” being considered
most eligible, was “ fraught with most fatal conse-
quences ; ” throwing a horrible temptation in the
way of undisciplined minds. That she had “heard
the iniquitous warning coolly given, ‘ Remember,
you must have no children when you are with me;
that breaks our agreement.’ And this alone, and
paramount to all other considerations, determined
me to locate families.”
Mrs. Chisholm issued the pamphlet before
referred to, addressed to earl Grey, and his lord-
ship honoured her with an interview, paying
marked attention to her representations of the
wants of the colonies. The Government Emigra-
tion Commissioners, too, twice had the advantage
of receiving her opinion, viva voce. She was
next summoned before a committee of the House
of Lords, referring to which, earl Grey in a dis-
patch to the now governor, Sir C. A. Fitzroy, says
he begs to inform him that in Mrs. Chisholm's
evidence she had mentioned “ the want of proper
accommodation for the reception and protection
of young -women immediately on their landing
from emigrant ships. This is a point to which I
would request your early attention, and lam sure


I need not impress upon you the importance,”
&o.
It is pleasing thus to record the attention paid
by a powerful aristocratic government to the voice
of a sincere uninfluential woman when pleading
in the cause of humanity.
The wives and families of convicts were the
next objects on which Mrs. Chisholm’s energy pre-
vailed. An account of their shipment we have
detailed in another page.
Among the many evils Mrs. Chisholm promis-
ed the poor of Sydney she w T ould endeavour to
rectify, was that of the insecurity of the transmis-
sion of money to friends in England. Many
sums were sent to pay the passages of the aged
and children who had been left behind, which
money frequently never reached its destination or
fell into the hands of persons by whom it was
misapplied.
On July 29th, 1847, Earl Grey sent a dispatch
to the governor, Sir C. A. Fitzroy, commencing
thus, “ Sir, it has been intimated to me by Mrs
Chisholm, of whose benevolent exertions you are,
no doubt, well aware, that there are many of the
settlers in New South Wales who, having pros-
K


pered in the colony, are exceedingly desirous of
applying a part of their savings in assisting then-
friends and relations, whom they have left in this
country, to join them in the colony, and share in
the advantages which they themselves enjoy, hut
who are prevented from sending by the difficulty
of securing the safe remittance of the necessary
funds, and their application to the intended
purpose.
I consider it of the greatest possible importance
to adopt means for obviating that difficulty, and
for affording the utmost practicable facility to
those who, having already emigrated, wish to de,
vote a part of their earnings to so commendable
a purpose.” His lordship then details a plan—
and thus was another of the labours of Mrs. Chis-
holm triumphant.-
Indefatigable in her zeal on the subject of
emigration, Mrs. Chisholm, on one occasion, when
going to the government emigration office, was
detained among the crowd of persons desirous of
emigrating, and hearing their plaints of the
necessity of lies to attain their object by denying
their having families, and regret on a separation
from the objects of their affectionate love, resolved


from that moment on the formation of a Family
Colonization Loan Society, the leading princi-
ples of which are repudiatory of government or
parochial assistance. The class of persons gener-
ally who desire to emigrate are those who having
industry and skill, desire a larger and more remu-
nerative field for their powers than they find in
their native country, and, impressed with that
idea, they are willing to make personal sacrifices
to obtain their object, while being thus worthy
minded, they feel pain in separating themselves
from those parental ties which exist in the bosoms
of the good disposed.
The founder of this new system of emigration
proposes that a fund shall be created by the sav-
ings of the parties desirous of going abroad, of
not less than two-thirds of the passage money;
that they shall meet in groups; learn each others’
character; become friends; and he mutually
bound to aid in causing to be refunded the re-
mainder of the expense when at their destination,
within a certain time ; that this money, as paid,
shall aid others to go out, and subscriptions from
the benevolent be applied to the same purpose.
Robert Lowe, Esq., member of the legislative


council of New South Wales, in a speech deliver-
ed in London, June Ist, 1850, says, “ there is a
very benevolent and amiable lady, Mrs. Chisholm,
to whose exertions too much praise cannot be
given, who is now sending emigrants out at £l2,
but the government price is £18.” Thus then it
seems there is not only more independence, secu-
rity, and family ties preserved, but that it is a
cheaper mode.
The arrangements made on board of ship are
such as to form a perfect security to children and
young females. In fact, nothing can be more
consonant with good will, kindness and watchful-
ness, than the plan laid down. The responsibility
on fathers and families is of such a moral nature
that they must feel proud of the trust, and none
dare abuse it. The gratifying feeling that cheers
this lady on in the work of humanity is that of
having entire families, bound together by affec-
tion, seeking a new home, and supporting each
other in their trials and labours; thus a dear
parent, perhaps seventy or eighty years of age,
goes abroad with her children or grandchildren
and shares their fortunes instead of being left a so-
litary deserted being relying on the frigid support


of poor rates, and the chilling attendance of hire-
lings in a workhouse. So truly noble is this plan
that it ranks in its committee lord Ashley, M. P.,
the right honourable Sydney Herbert, M. P., the
hon. Vernon Smith, M. P., John Tidd Pratt, Esq.,
F. G. Neison, Esq., M. Monsell, Esq., M. P.,
Wyndham Harding Esq., while Captain Chis-
holm takes the unpaid and arduous duty of hon.
Secretary.
In 1850, Mrs. Chisholm published her cele-
brated pamphlet, called “ the A B C of Coloniza-
tion,” in which she denounces the existing plans
of emigration. There is a genuine womanly feel-
ing throughout, and such a spirited assertion of
the dignity of womanhood, and love for the aged
and young, that we cannot forbear a few short
extracts; she says, “ I should like every one to
feel that under that revered name (Queen Victo-
ria) it mattered not, when they made application
for a passage, what country they came from, so
that they were British subjects—what creed they
professed, so that they were loyal and peaceable
men. I hold it to be derogatory to the high and
moral feeling of Englishmen, that under the
insignia of the royal arms of England, modest


matrons should be asked the question ‘ Whether
any increase to the family is expected, and when?
I consider it a gross outrage to humanity—a vio-
lent rending of the tenderest ties of nature, and
injurious to morality, that heads of families above
forty years of age, and those who have a certain
number of children under ten years of age, should
be excluded from the advantages and rights of
emigration—that under other rules children
beyond a certain number should be taxed £7.
each on account of passage money—that again
single men passed the age of thirty-five should
not be considered eligible, and that the ‘ candi-
dates most acceptable are young married couples
without children.’ These, indeed, are evils, trials,
temptations, and stumbling blocks, thrown in the
way of weak human nature, which ought not to
be; humanity should forbid it, and religion ought
to raise her voice against it; the aged, if able to
go, should not be left to pass the remainder of
their days round a lonely and cheerless hearth, or
to find their way to the workhouse. * * *
“The emigrants sent by the government as-
semble at Deptford or some other port: not two
families know each other, or perchance until their


meeting at the depot had ever seen one another
before: young females find themselves there as
perfect strangers. But what scenes take place
before they have got thus far; what conflicts of
nature are endured ’ere they leave their homes;
what harrowing scenes arise out of the taxation
clause; at times young children may be seen
handed over to the care of a grandfather, an aunt,
or a cousin, or as one poor man in Australia said
to me, ‘my wife was obliged to take the child
from her breast by the side of the ship, and hand
it to a friend.’ Others, on account of having
just passed the prime of life, are necessitated to
remain behind. What wailings in the cottage!
What sad farewells outside the village! How
nature will then exclaim, ‘Never see that dear
face more —never look at that venerated parent
again,’ now sunk in agony in the darkest comer
of his dreary habitation. This is not a piece of
romance, but one of the scenes of real life.
Which are most to be felt for, the intended emi-
grant or the desolate being left behind ? These
heart-burnings of nature are not extinguished
here; the same feeling which a benign Provi-
dence, for the wisest of designs, has implanted in


the human heart, keeps the flame alive in the
distant colonies; the child longs for the parent —
the father or the disconsolate mother sighs for
the offspring. I cannot tell how often I have
been entreated by sons and daughters in New
South Wales to do all I could to see their parents
sent to them, or the numerous applications I
have had made to me by parents to forward to
them their children. These appeals follow me
to this country. * * *
“ There are many evils that will doubtless pre-
sent themselves to every reflecting mind attend-
ing our present mode of filling ships, but may we
not hope that we shall 'go on suggesting and im-
proving until our young women can be sent into
a ship with the same confidence with which fe-
males now enter our trains and mail coaches;
something more humanizing is required than the
present mode ; something that will bring all our
social and religious feelings to bear upon one
common object.”
To those horrible evils, and disregard of our
natural ties, has Mrs. Chisholm, by her plans,
presented a mode of redress.


MRS. CHISHOLM—PHRENOLOGICAL DEVELOPEMENT
OF HER HEAD—PHILANTHROPY—A LADY FRANKING
LETTERS—TESTIMONIES TO MRS. CHISHOLM —CON-
CLUSION.
Before concluding, it may be thought in our
memoirs of the labours of this good and extraor-
dinary woman that we should give some idea of
her personal appearance.
Mrs. Chisholm is tall, embonpoint, and as the
governor says, “stately in her bearing;” frank,
easy, and lady-like in her manners; her mouth
expresses the firmness and decision of her charac-
ter; her eyes are grey, penetrating in their
glance; and her countenance beaming with kind-
ness, which at once causes confidence in her in-
tentions ; a certain calmness and earnestness rest
on her features, which is aroused into powerful
expression as, the subject of her discourse is that


of advice, affection, or contempt; her voice is musi-
cal, without the slightest provincialism, she speaks
with fluency and appropriateness of phraseology,
and, as occasion calls forth, can be affecting,
sarcastic, or witty. In the midst of a vast corres
pondence and personal superintendence of busi-
ness details, certain periods are sacredly assigned
to domestic duties.
Mrs. Chisholm has six children living, the
three eldest of whom have aided in the labours of
carrying into effect the gratuitous and philan-
thropic plans of emigration as propounded in the
Family Colonization Society, and it is truly grati-
fying to see the species of adoration and love with
which they look upon their amiable parents.
Piety, in deeds as well as words, matrimonial,
filial, and paternal love knit together, and form
one of the happiest of happy family circles
The head of Mrs. Chisholm is one which a
phrenologist contemplates with immense interest
Unknown to De Yille, she was urged to present
herself to him, and not enter into conversation,
when that celebrated manipulator thus declares
his opinion of the organization that appeared to
him : “ This lady’s memory is rather extraordin


ary; there are very few persons who possess so
strong an one. Few people have greater power in
the acquirement of languages. If she had at-
tempted improvisation, she would have excelled
in it; there are few organizations with more
power for it. Has a very high sense of justice,
hut she must take of it. If offended her expres-
sions will be strong.
Attachments and friendships few, and verv
strong. Diffident among strangers, but cheerful
in society. It is not often a lady takes to mathe-
matics, but this individual would not find it diffi-
cult. If she would take up poetry she would do
well at it. With theology and sacred history she
should be well acquainted: has a high sense of
religion.
The organization is not confined to a single
thing, it would give power in many, though to
afford her pleasure it must partake of the practi-
cal feeling. Theology must have undergone a
good deal of consideration. Has a severe strug-
gle with herself and inward feelings. Annoys
herself more than her neighbours; knows her-
self better than others. There are few organiza-
tions so good if they have been well cultivated.


Drawing is not difficult. Music pleasing. This
organization partakes more of the male than the
female character. Is capable of going through a
great deal of struggling with difficulties. Fond
of approbation, but does not stoop to servile means
to obtain it; will have a little struggle with this
organ. Kind and benevolent as far as her means
go. Love of children strongly developed.
This is the most powerful organization which
I have seen, with one exception. This is amaz-
ingly powerful, more destined by nature for a
male than a female head. It is a most general
organization, and though it may now be confined
to one subject, it can apply and excel in any
number ; mathematics, natural history, the scien-
ces, chemistry, analysis, &c. She could excel in
anything. This organization is most like Certini,
an Italian improvisateur, and was originally in-
tended for a male. Her memory is so strong
she can excel in anything, and would never be
confined to one subject. If she were to apply to
the dead languages she would become a proficient.
There is nothing she would take up in which she
could not excel. Form and size are good. Min-
iature and landscape painting, and drawing gener


ally, would be acquired with facility on this
account. Few would go more readily into the
Hindostanee language, having memory to recol-
lect the characters. She has a very strong
memory. Music (organ of) requires more devel-
opement; has enough power in Time (organ of.)
She principally wants a quicker arrangement
in her ideas. She has the power good, but a
little more would make it gigantic. It is not in
proportion to the rest of the organization. She
will excel in the arts and sciences.
There are not half a dozen male organizations
in the kingdom with such a powerful memory.
She is a thorough improvisatrice, give her a sub-
ject, and she will make you a speech on it, or
write sheets full.
She is communicative on common topics, but
has judgment to discriminate when she may
speak and when to be silent; would not disclose
a matter of importance, would suffer death first,
rather than do so, did the honour or character of
another depend upon it. Has a gigantic organ>
zation, more powerful than that of the Marquis
Mascati. Signed,
Jan. 30th, 1833, James He Yille.”


Measubement of Head
in.
From 2to 22 .. .. 7 8-10ths.
Measures to 22 ..5 l-10th.
2 .. .. 4 7-lOths.
13 .. ..6 2-10ths.
15 .. .. 5 7-10ths.
This professor of Phrenology remarked, on pre-
senting the above document, “I am willing to
stake the truth of Phrenological science on the
developement of this head being in accordance
with the mind and actions of the individual.”
Those who have had the honour of intimately
knowing Mrs. Chisholm, and others who have
read of her acts may form a judgment of the reli-
ance to be placed in Phrenological science from
the above curious document, given before she
attained the public position she now occupies.
“The distinguishing character of Mrs. Chis-
holm,” writes Mr. Sidney, “is philanthropy—
extending to all classes and all sects —directed
by a degree of common sense that almost amounts
to genius, united with an energy, a zeal, an
untiring perseverance that renders nothing she
undertakes impossible.
“Her philanthropy is not a mere amusement'


to be taken up at odd hours, like a new romance
—to be laid down as quickly as it was taken up—
to be satisfied by a distribution of cheap tracts,
or, at most, of cheap superfluous guineas—by
capricious visits to poor cottages, whose misery
renders the change from the luxurious drawing-
room a pleasing excitement. It is a part of her
life—of her daily duty. For the cause she em-
braced, she has chosen to abandon the luxuries,
nay, the comforts, to which her fortune and sta-
tion entitled her; to wear stuff instead of silk;
to work hard, to live hard, to save, that she may
spend upon her poor. * * Thousands have
reason to bless Mrs. Chisholm. We find her
not like Mrs. Fry—descending from the drawing-
room to the prison, to return, carriage borne, to
that drawing room, when her errand of mercy
was done—but in the small room of a small house,
in an obscure suburb, writing at a rickety table,
amidst piles of colonial documents, and answers
to her thousand correspondents.”
The governor, Sir George Gipps, frequently
expressed the esteem he felt for Mrs. Chisholm’s
works of humanity, and so important to the exe-
cutive power did he consider the nature of her


labours that he conferred a privilege upon her
never but once known to have been granted to
a female, and that was the wife of the American
president, Jefferson, —he allowed her to frank
letters.
Sir George Gipps observed in council—“ I
cannot give a stronger evidence of the economy
of the people working for themselves, than by
referring to what has been done by Mrs. Chis-
holm, and I am glad of this opportunity of doing
justice to that lady’s exertions, and do it with
much greater pleasure and satisfaction, from hav-
ing at the commencement of her labours thrown
cold water upon her plans.”
The bishops of the colony, and the clergy of
every denomination, aided and applauded her
works of mercy. Lord Stanley, in 1844, wrote
to the governor, saying, “you will express to
Mrs. Chisholm the high sense I entertain of her
services in behalf of the emigrants.” Lord Grey
has frequently added his testimony of admiration
and approbation of the exertions of the benevo-
lent lady. The committee of the legislative
council of New South Wales, in their report,
“ desire to record their grateful sense of the


valuable services of a lady, to whose benevolent
exertions on behalf of the unemployed, as well as
free emigrants of the humbler classes generally,
this colony is under the highest obligations—
Mrs. Chisholm, whose name is so well known in
the colony for her disinterested benevolence,”
Robert Lowe, Esq., late Fellow of Magdalene
College, Oxford, in a speech in the legislative
council, says, “ One person only in the colony
has done any thing effectual—anything on a scale
which may be called large—to mitigate this cry-
ing evil and national sin, and to fix families on
our lands in lieu of bachelors. And, strange to
say, that one is an humble, unpretending, quiet-
working female missionary! an emigrant mission-
ary —not a clerical one! The singularity of her
mission, looking to the nature of her work, is one
of the most original that was ever devised or
undertaken by either man or woman; and the
object, the labour, the design, are all beyond
praise.”
After all these tributes to the humane acts of
this lady from the most influential sources,
strange does it seem that there is no mode of
rewarding civic virtue. There seems something
L


“rotten in the state,’’ where Mrs. Waghorne
is pining in neglect, while the descendents of a
demoralized female excite sympathy and court
favour. Mrs. Chisholm’s zeal and achievements
are publicly acknowledged.
Amid personal sacrifices made every hour of
her life, she still earnestly perseveres. Her plans
are not confined to the contracted circle of indi-
vidual interest, but it is the duty and work of a
government that she is, and has been for some
time assiduously labouring to accomplish. On
the page of Colonial History, Mrs. Chisholm’s
name is now brilliantly written. In the biogra-
phical records of the friends of mankind, she has
worthily earned a prominent position.
In her God-like mission, self has been absorbed
in fervid devotion to the Christian duties of
charity and mercy. Her zeal has been apostolic,
and with purity of faith, love of mankind, and
reliance on God, she has toiled until triumphant.
Bequeathing results that will make thousands
yet unborn, in their prayers to heaven, call down
blessings on the name of the philanthropist
CAROLINE CHISHOLM.


ADDENDA.
The following Rules and Regulations of the Society
will elucidate the entire system and show the minuteness
of the details to secure to the Emigrants’ health and
comfort:—
Membership. —lntending Emigrants, and more espe-
cially young and aged people, who desire to participate in
the protection this system of emigration affords, must
become Members, and comply with the Rules and Regula-
tions of the Society,
Testimonials. —Certificates of good character must be
produced, from at least two respectable householders,
before applicants can be enrolled, or obtain a passage- All
testimonials are sent to the Colony before the sailing of
the vessel conveying the Emigrants, and are stamped with
the Society’s seal. By the adoption of this plan the Certi-
ficates so stamped will be found of essential benefit to the
Emigrants on their arrival in Australia. To preserve the
respectability of the Society, and for the comfort of the
passengers, married persons are required to show their
marriage certificates.
Fees, —Persons entered on the books of the Society have
to pay an entrance-fee of Is. each (the same for children).


Certificates of character must be forwarded and approved
before the entrance-fee can be taken, or the name entered.
To meet the current expenses of the Society, a further fee
of 10s. each by all adults, and ss. each for all children
under fourteen years of age, must be paid in the Colony,
with the last instalment of the loan.
Payments, Loans, &c. —lntending Emigrants are, in the
first instance, required to pay at least two-thirds of their
passage-money, which amount may be paid in instalments,
free of charge; the other portion of the passage-money will
be lent by the Society (if its funds admit of such loan
being granted), to be returned by the borrower. As a
security for this loan Emigrants are required to sign an
Agreement (previous to receiving their Embarkation
Orders), that they will refund such loans, through the
instrumentality of Agents in the Colonies, within one year
after their arrival in the said Colonies, or sooner, if
possible, in order that the money so repaid may be re-lent
to others in like manner: while the borrowers can nom-
inate their own relatives and friends for a passage and a
loan, equal to the sum refunded by them, provided the
persons so named meet the approval of the Committee.
Loans are granted to persons paying their passage-money
by weekly or monthly instalments, and whose membership
has extended over a period of at least four months.
Passages are granted only to those persons who have paid
to the Society the whole proportion of money required for
■their passage.
Amount of Loan . —This is entirely, dependent upon the


state of the Society’s funds, and eligibility of the party for
colonial employment, or other circumstances; but in no
case will the loan exceed <£4. for each adult.
Family Groups. —Each body of Emigrants is divided
into groups containing twelve adults, who can take their
meals together during the passage. The object of this
arrangement is that friends and relatives may unite and
aid each other in their common emigration, and induce a
social intimacy among strangers previous to embarkation,
by which means they enter the vessel as acquaintances and
friends, ready to assist in those little services so conducive
to happiness and comfort in a sea voyage. Families and
individuals who cannot meet with persons wishing to
emigrate from their own locality, have thus an opportunity
of meeting desirable associates, and mutually forming a
group advantageous both to their present and future views.
By this means an interest in each other’s welfare in a new
home is created by personal reciprocal interests, and
cemented by mutual obligations. A list of the Associated
Groups embarked, with their names and ages, the place
from which they emigrated, their destination and subse-
quent settlement, the amount of loan advanced, repayments
made, the sums still due and by whom, will be published
as often as the Committee may deem proper.
Protection to Orphan Girls and Friendless Families .—
The friendless young women are grouped with, and in_
troduced to families (at the Group Meetings held at Mrs*
Chisholm’s residence, on Mondays, at seven o’clock in the
evening, previous to embarking), and placed under their


special guardianship. Arrangements are also made to
insure mutual reponsibility for good conduct during the
passage. In like manner youth and young men are asso-
ciated with family groups. Members of groups must
pledge themselves not to admit into their body persons of
doubtful character, as their comfort during the voyage
would be greatly lessened by so doing.
The Re-union of Families. —Relatives and friends now
separated (some being in England, others in Australia),
when they are unable to pay the sum required for their
passages, may jointly, in both countries, make weekly and
monthly deposits, until they have by their united efforts
raised the necessary amount, which, with the aid of a loan
from the Society, may enable ench parties to emigrate.
In like manner, parties in England anxious to emigrate,
and who cannot at once pay the required sum, can make
weekly and monthly payments towards their passage either
through the Committee or local Agents. If there happens
to be a family with some grown-up children, not possessing
the necessary means to emigrate, one or two of the most
eligible precede the rest to the Colonies, and through the
mode of the re-union of Families, contribute to the emigra-
tion of the remainder of the family. It will be the duty of
the Society’s Agents in the Colony to remit these payments
to the Committee in England, for the specific purpose of
enabling such parties to emigrate. The Regulations of the
Society do not admit of the separation of man and wife, or
of children without the consent of their parents.
Notice of Departure. —One month’s notice is given of


the sailing of the vessel to which Emigrants may have
been nominated as that in which they can have a passage.
Price of Passage. —The exact sum to be charged as
passage-money cannot be positively stated until a ship is,
engaged. Children between one and fourteen half-price.
Infants nothing. The reason of any fluctuation in the
charge arises from the variation in prices at which vessels
can be procured at different periods. Any advantage
resulting from favourable circumstances is always given
to the Emigrants,
N.B.—The Society engage none but A 1 ships, and each
vessel carries an experienced surgeon.
Application for Membership. —Persons desirous of be-
coming members of the Society must state: —l. Their
name and age.—2. Place of residence and occupation.—
3. Whether married or single, male or female.—4. How
much they can contribute towards their passage.—s. What
part they can pay immediately.—6. If they require a loan,
by what time, and by what instalments, they can complete
their payments.
Information. —Any information that may be desired
can be obtained by applying (personally or by letter) to
Mrs. Chisholm, 3, Charlton Crescent, Islington, London;
or at 29, Bucklersbury, City. If application be made by
letter, Two Stamps must be enclosed for reply, or no
answer can be sent. N.B. No charge for information.
Colonial Agents. —Captain Chisholm is now in the
Colonies for the purpose of appointing Agents. It will be


the duty of these Agents to receive from Emigrants all
loans made by the Society, and remit the same to the
Committee in England. They will he required to keep a
register of all agreements entered into, and the districts to
which the Emigrants have proceeded; and also to afford
advice and assistance to Emigrants in obtaining employ-
ment; and facilitate, by every means in "their power, the
satisfactory settlement of each in the locality of their
choice. All advice and information in the Colonies will be
furnished free of charge , but no pecuniary aid can be
given.
ARRANGEMENTS ON BOARD THE SOCIETY’S SHIPS.
Cabins. —Enclosed cabins are furnished to each family,
of a size according to the number of individuals. Children
above fourteen years of age are provided with compart-
ments for sleeping separate from those of their parents.
One enclosed cabin is allotted to seven single females;
also an enclosed cabin for seven single men, in parts of the
vessel appropriated by classification for those berths. The
arrangement of the cabins is such as to provide for perfect
order, decorum, and morality.
Personal Comfort. —Much personal comfort arises from
the feeling that all the passengers are on a footing of
equality, there being no classification in the Society's
vessels, and all possess the privilege of walking on the
poop. When preparing their meals, also, the passengers
are not disturbed by cabin or intermediate passengers, as
none other than the Society’s Emigrants are allowed a
passage in the same ship.


Ventilation. —The novel contrivance for ensuring venti-
lation between decks, fitted up in the “Athenian,” at the
Society’s expense, from plans by Dr. Bowie, being found
extremely effective in preserving health and comfort, will
be continued in all future vessels dispatched by the Society.'
Cooking. —The provisions being prepared by the Emi-
grants, and delivered as directed in the “Ship Rules and
Regulations,” will be cooked by an Emigrant’s cook,
provided to perform that duty by the Society.
Children. —lt will be at the discretion of the Surgeon to
issue, three times a week, to children under seven years of
age, four ounces of Rice, or three ounces of Sago, in lieu of
Salt Meat.
Medical Comforts. —For the information of the Com-
mittee of the Society, the Surgeon of the vessel is required
to keep an account of the issue of medical comforts, with
the names of the parties receiving them.
Luggage . —The bulk of luggage (free of charge) allowed
to each adult passenger is fifteen cubic feet, ten in the
hold and five in the cabin, with half that amount for
children. This includes the cabin box, which must not
be more than 1 ft. 6 in. long, 1 ft. 10 in. broad, and 1 ft. 2 in.
deep. [A carpet bag is far more useful than a box.] The
cabin box (or bag) is to contain sufficient linen or other
articles for fourteen day’s use, as no other packages can on
any account be allowed in the cabins. The remainder of
the baggage, marked “ Wanted on the voyage,” will be so
stowed in the hold that it can be got at once a fortnight


(or oftener) during the passage, for the purpose of making
any required exchange of apparel. All packages of baggage
must be distinctly marked with the name of the passenger,
and also with the words “Wanted on the Voyage,” or
“Not wanted on the Voyage;” and they must be at the
docks, ready for shipment, at least Five days prior to the
day appointed for sailing. Persons residing in the country
can have printed baggage tickets forwarded upon applica-
tion, by enclosing Two Stamps for the same, and stating
the number they require. The Society does not make
arrangements for extra luggage.
Articles to be Provided by the Passengers. —The Society
provide cooking and mess utensils, but the following
Articles must be provided by each Emigrant:—
Knife and Fork.
Table and Tea Spoons.
Metal plate.
Hook pot.
Drinking mug.
Water-can.
Washing-basin.
Two Cabbage-nets.
One Scrubbing-brush.
Half-a-gallon of Sand.
Half a Bath-brick.
Two sheets of sand-paper
Two coarse canvass aprons.
Hammer.
Tacks.
Leathern straps, with buckle,
to secure the beds neatly on
deck when required to be
aired.
Three Pounds of Marine Soap.
Bedding. —Passengers must provide themselves with bed-
ding : the size of mattress for a double bed place, 3 ft. by
6 ft.; for a single berth, 2 ft. by 6 ft. Feather beds are on
no account permitted.
N.B.—Bedding, and all the Articles above named, can
be supplied by the Society to the Emigrants at contract
price, if preferred.


Biscuit, per week.
3Ibs.
Beef, do.
J]b.
Pork, do.
lib.
Preserved Meat, do.
11b.
Soup BouilU, do.
11b.
Fish, do.
4 lb.
Flour, do.
3£lb.
Raising
do. Jib.
Preserved Fruit, do. ± lb.
Suet,
do. 6oz.
Peas,
do. 2-3ds. of a pint
Rice,
do. lib.
Preserved Potatoes, do. J lb.
Carrots
do. Jib.
Security for the Emigrants’ Comfort and Health . —ln
order that the Society’s passengers may be amply secured
against any curtailment of their comforts, or their health
impaired by the over-crowding of the vessel, the Society add
ten per cent, to the space allowed by the Passengers’ Act.*
In addition to a vastly increased space, the passengers are
accommodated with a Wash House upon Deck, an arrange-
ment tending greatly to increase the Emigrants’ comfort
and health. The Charter-party (or agreement made with
the Ship Agents and Contractors by the Committee of the
Society) also guarantees that every detail tending to the
comfort and health of the Emigrants shall be strictly ob-
served. &o wine, beer, or spirits, is allowed to be sold to
the Emigrants ; and shaving on crossing the line, burning
tar barrels, or throwing water over the Emigrants (as has
been customary), is strictly prohibited. For the due ful-
filment of the above Regulations a bond of £2,500 is signed.
Duration of Voyage. —Sixteen weeks is the average
duration of the voyage; and every Emigrant is entitled to
draw sixteen weeks rations, according to the Society’s
Weekly Dietary Table, for March, 1852. here given :
Weekly Dietary Scale for each Adult .
• It may be as well to explain this more fully:—lf the Govern-
ment (or passengers’) Act states that there is space enough for one
Awnrfredpassengersjthe Family Colonisation Loan Society occupy
that space with only ninety, or ten per cent, less than the law
permits.


Tea, per-week.
oz.
Coffee, do.
2 oz.
Sugar, do.
Treacle, do.
fib.
lib.
Butter, do.
| lb.
Cheese, do.
| lb.
Oatmeal, do.
2oz.
Lime Juice, do.
Igill
Pickles, do.
IglU.
Mustard, do.
4 oz.
Salt, do.
2 oz.
Pepper, do.
4 oz.
Water, do.
5 galls. 1 qt.
Do., eacli Infant,
1 gall. 3 qts.
To prevent waste, parties not drawing the quantity to which
they are entitled, will receive the quantity due to them on leav-
ing the Ship. This reserve will he useful to them if they go
up the country, or until they have permanent employment.
N.B.—The Society put on board Water and Provisions
for twenty-two weeks, in case the voyage should last so
long; the Emigrants are only allowed to draw, on leaving
the Ship, what they have saved from their weekly allow*
ance for sixteen weeks.
All the Groups are provided with printed receipts for
their weekly rations, and also for medical comforts should
they be required. Scales, weights, and measures, are put
on board. The Captain will have to deliver the receipts of
the Emigrants, or the provisions, to the Society’s Agent in
the Colony on his arrival.
Debarkation. —On the arrival of the Society’s vessels at
Port Phillip, or any other destination, tents will be erected
(under the superintendence of the Society’s Agent) for their
temporary residence. The u Mariner” has taken out tents
for the sole use of the Society’s passengers. By this means
persons of both sexes will be secured from many expenses
and inconveniences too often resulting from seeking lod-
gings in haste. One large tent will be used as an office for
the engaging of Emigrants. Persons engaging will be


furnished by Captain Chisholm, or the Society’s Agents,
with every advice and information tending to their benefit
and security, free of all charge, but no pecuniary aid can
be given.
Pledge of the Members. —The following resolutions were
passed at a Group Meeting, held at Mrs, Chisholm’s 3 ?
Charlton Crescent, Islington, consisting of parties proposing
to emigrate to Australia by the aid of the Family Coloniza-
tion Loan Society. Since the sailing of the first vessel they
have been adopted by every Group, and are earnestly recom-
mended to allfuture Groups.
Resolved —“That we pledge ourselves, as Christian
fathers and heads of families, to exercise a parental control
and guardianship over all orphans and friendless females
proceeding with the family groups; to protect them as our
children, and allow them to share the same cabins with our
daughters.
‘*We further resolve to discourage gambling, and not to
take cards or dice with us, or to enter into any pernicious
amusements during the voyage. We likewise resolve, by
parental advice and good example, to encourage and
promote some well-advised system of self-improvement
during the passage.
“As the system of repayment proposed by this Society
is one that, if honourably kept, will add to the credit of the
working-classes as a body, and be the means of encouraging
the generous and good to assist our struggling countrymen,
we hereby solemnly pledge our honour as men, and ot*r


character as Christians, to repay the loan advanced to us
and impress the sacredness of fulfilling this duty on each
and all of the members constituting the groups. We also
promise to aid the colonial agents in the recovery of all
loans, and to make known, in whatever part of the colonies
we may he, the means by which parties well to do there, may
assist their relations in this country through the medium
of the Family Colonization Loan Society.
“We further pledge ourselves not to introduce as candi-
dates for membership of the Society any men but those we
know to be of good character, or families but of good repute.
“We also determine not to accept of payment for any
services we may render on hoard ship, but endeavour in-
dividually and collectively to preserve the order of a well-
regulated family during our passage to Australia, and to
organize and establish a system of protection that will enable
our female relatives to enter an emigrant ship with the
same confidence of meeting with protection as respectable
females can now enter into our steamers, trains, and mail-
coaches.
“That all members constituting groups be asked for then-
approval and fulfilment, as far as they may be individually
concerned, of the above resolutions.”
Resolved. “ That the group do record and tender their
grateful thanks, and those of all members comprising
groups, to Mrs. Chisholm and the gentlemen who form the
Committee of the Family Colonization Loan Society.”
Maternal Superintendency.—The Committee have re-
quested -To undertake the motherly duty of seeing that all


the young females are in their sleeping apartments at a
proper hour, and they are most earnestly solicited never to
retire to rest leaving any girl on the Poop or Deck of the
Ship. They are also requested to visit the Female Cabins
at least once a day, in order to give such directions as may
be necessary for the preservation of order, cleanliness, and
that propriety of demeanour so becoming in young females.
The above-named persons are also particularly desired to
caution the young females against song-singing, or any
noisy amusement, in the Stem Cabins, or on the Poop, or
Deck of the Ship.
The parties named above are likewise requested to make
arrangements with the Surgeon for rendering any assistance
to sick persons that may be necessary.
AMUSEMENTS.
Arrangements will be made for amusements; and parents
of mature age are requested, for the sake of the young, to
be present on such occasions, so that there may be mirth
without danger and amusement without remorse.
FAMILY GROUPS.
We, the undersigned heads of Families, associated as
Mr. Group, having produced our marriage certi-
ficates to each other and made personal enquiries into the
respectability of all in our group, and being satisfied, have
voluntarily agreed to mess together during our voyage to
Australia, and to afford parental protection to such young
persons as are admitted into' our Group, and will consider
and treat them as members of our family.
Equal [two children under a certain age are counted as


lb.
oz.
Biscuits
36
0
Beef
12
0
Pork
12
0
Soup Boulli
9
0
Preserved Beef ..
9
0
Flour
63
0
Eaisins
6
0
Suet
4
8
Rice
9
0
Preserved Potatoes
6
0
Carrots
6
0
Cheese
3
0
Peas
8 pints.
lb. oz.
Tea
... 0 13
Coffee
... 1 8
Sugar
...9 0
Butter
... 3 0
Treacle
... 6 0
Mustard
... 0 6
Salt
... 1 8
Pepper
... 0 6
Oatmeal
... 1 8
Vinegar
Pickles
Water
63 gallons.
And 7 quarts for Infants.
one adult,] to 12 Adults, who are entitled to a weekly sup-
ply of Provisons as under stated :
It is arranged that Mr. will enter on the
duty of Captain of the Mess for the first 7 days, Mr.
for the second, Mr. for the third, Mr.
for the fourth, Mr. for the fifth, Mr.
for the sixth 7 days, and so on through the voyage.
Mr* has been elected by the Group to keep
the dietary account book.
N - B - —The Groups should be composed of a party of 12
or 24 persons, as they can then take their meals together
luring the voyage.
EULES AND EEGULATIONS TO BE OBSEEVED
ON BOAED THE SOCIETY’S VESSELS.
Superintendent—The Surgeon.
Eule I.—The Groups are to choose six persons from their
to be called the Group Committee, whoso duty will
be to preserve order on the Lower Deck, and see that deck


kept clean; to attend during the issue of provisions, to see
that each mess has the proper allowance; and to keep a
register of the Brands on the various casks of provisions,
that they may know they are consuming the provisions put
on board for their use. The appointment of the first Com
mittee (to act for one mouth only) devolves upon Mrs.
Chisholm ; at the expiration of that period the Groups can
elect others. The following six persons have been selected
by Mrs. Chisholm, for the reasons assigned opposite their
names:—
3. —For the more effectual preservation of order and re-
gularity, all complaints are to be made to the Surgeon,
through the medium of the Group Committees, in order
that he may apply to the Captain, should it become neces-
sary, with a view to remedy the cause of complaint.
3—No smoking allowed on the Poop, Lower Deck, or
abaft the Main Mast on the Upper Deck.
4. Single Men are not allowed to go abaft the Main
Hatchway on the Lower Deck (except during meals).
5. One side of the Poop Deck to be retained clear of
Passengers, for the Captain’s use and comfort, and that of
his Officers. ■ The Group Committee are to see this rule
strictly carried out.
6—The Passengers are to leave the Poop Deck at Half- .
past Eight in the evening, and the lamps extinguished at
Ten, with the exception of four on the Lower Deck, and one
in the Poop, which are to be left burning during the night.
No lights of any kind are permitted in the Cabins, nor
may those hanging over the tables be removed
*


7. —No lines for drying clothes to be placed in the
Cabins, or between decks, such practice being very injurious
to health.
8. Fire-arms, Gunpowder, Lucifer Matches, or other
inflammable materials, are to be delivered to the Captain
on going on board. If discovered in any Passenger’s cus-
tody during the voyage, they will be taken possession of by
the Captain.
9*—The Surgeon is to appoint two careful persons to
clean and trim the lamps, who are also to see that the Pas-
sengers’ mess utensils are brought on the Upper Deck to be
cleaned, perfect cleanliness between decks being imperative
to health.
10. —The Scuttles are not to be opened, except by the
Carpenter of the ship, who will have orders to do so, when-
ever deemed advisable, by the Officer of the Watch.
11. —Provisions are to be issued at the following hours :
—Water, daily, at Half-past Six in the morning; and all
Provisions at Ten o’clock in the Morning of the days speci-
fied in the Ration Regulations.
12. The Rules for Meals are as follow The odd
Messes, viz., 1,3, 5, &c., will Breakfast at Eight o’clock in
the Morning, Bine at One in the Afternoon, and Sup at
Five in the Evening. The Even Messes, viz., 2,4, 6, &c.,
will Breakfast at Nine in the Morning, Bine at Two in the
Afternoon, and Sup at Six in the Evening.
13. —The Emigrants are to prepare their food for cook-
ing, and take it to and receive it from the Cook appointed
in the Emigrants’ service. This duty, it is hoped, will


always be done by one of the men of each mess, as it is not
proper for respectable females to go forward amongst the
ship’s crew.
14. Passengers are strictly prohibited from giving any
Wine, Spirits, or Beer, to any of the Ship’s Company or
Passengers’ Cook,
15. The Surgeon will attend on the Lower Deck daily
at the hours of Ten in the Morning and Five in the Even-
ing. It is requested that all applications for Medicines will
be made at those hours, except in cases of emergency.
I®- As Ventilation and Cleanliness are essential to the
health and well being of every person on board, it is
earnestly recommended, and hoped the Group Committees
will strictly enforce, that the Beddings, &0., from the Berths,
be brought on deck twice in each week (viz., Tuesdays and
Fridays, if practicable), aired, and the Berths well cleaned.
17.—1 t is requested that for the washing of Passengers'
clothes and articles in use, the same days (viz., Tuesdays
and Fridays) will be employed, and washing concluded
before Eight in the Morning.
AUSTRALIA AND WHO SHOULD EMIGRATE.
The following brief, but excellent advice on the subject
is published by the Committee of Austealias Coionists
now sitting in London.
AUSTRALIA includes Five Colonies :
NEW SOUTH WALES.
Capital City and principal Ports— Sydney and Moeeton
Bat; Population by last Census, 180,000; Imports,


£1,670 5 500; Exports, £1,990,900; Sheep, 7,026,000;
Cattle, 1,360,100; Horses, 111,200.
VICTORIA (late PORT PHILLIP).
Capital City— Melbourne ; Ports— Melbourne, Gee-
long, and Portland Bay ; Population, 78,000; Imports,
£744,295; Exports, £1,041,796 ; Sheep, 6,033,000 ; Cattle,
346,562 ; Horses, 16,743;
SOUTH AUSTRALIA.
City— Adelaide.
Ports— Port Adelaide and Port Lincoln. Popula-
tion, 67,000; Imports, £887,423; Exports, £571,348;
Copper Metal, 44,594 cwt.; Copper Ore, 8,784 tons;
Sheep, 1,200,000; Homed Cattle, 100,000; Horses, 6,000.
WESTERN AUSTRALIA.
Ports— Perth and King George’s Sound.
VAN DIEMEN’S LAND.
Ports and Cities— Hobart Town and Launceston.
With two exceptions, the chief occupations of Australia
are the same, viz.: —Pastoral and Agricultural; Sheep and
Cattle have long been the favourite investment of settlers ;
and shepherds, herdsmen, bullock-drivers, and the like,
will find an unlimited demand for their services.
Agriculture is earned on extensively and successfully in
all the Colonies by small farmers, who work with their
families, and hire not more than one or two men, except in
harvest time. Agriculture cannot be curried on successfully,
after the European plan, by a farmer hiring much labour,
except in rare cases near a large town.


In South Australia, Copper Mining has been actively
pursued since 1845. The exports are large; and one mine,
the Burra Burra is the richest in the world.
Gold has been found in very large quantities in New
South Wales, chiefly near Bathurst, 160 miles from the
coast, and in Victoria, at Ballarat, 40 miles from the port
of Geelong, and Mount Alexander, 90 from Melbourne.
As Sydney has 60,000 inhabitants, Melbourne 25,000,
and Adelaide 15,000, there are the same trades and profes-
sions carried on there as in the most thriving towns,
of the same population, of Europe ; but the fluctuations of
trades are rapid, and professions are easily glutted.
Gentlemen of education without capital, clerks, and per-
sons of that class, should not emigrate unless they are pre-
pared to become shepherds, or to dig for gold, or accept
menial employment.
Gentlemen of capital, large or small, will act most wisely
in refraining from making any investment for at least
twelve months after arriving in the colony.
A working farmer, or a market gardener, may readily
earn a comfortable living by renting or purchasing land
within a convenient distance of a town.
The following Trades are good:—Carpenter; Blacksmith,
first rate; Bricklayer; Stonemason ; Sawyer; Well-sinker ;
Miner ; Wheelwright; Tailor; Bootmaker ; Tanner.
A Tailor married, need not be first rate; should be pre-
pared to become a shepherd, also, if necessary.
Ornamental trades are in very moderate demand, such as
Carvers and Gilders, fine Cabinet-makers, &c.
Demand for Compositors limited.


The man who works in iron must do anything from repair ■
ing a steam-boiler, to shoeing a horse, and the same with
the man who works in wood.
A man who can handle tools in a rough useful manner,
drive a team, fell, dig, and plough, and understands cattle,
will do best of all. The working man who knows only how
to work will make a good shepherd.
There is a steady demand and high wages for female do-
mestic servants and for stout country girls, accustomed to
dairy and country work. All these can, if they please,
marry respectably.
For Governesses there is little demand, unless such as
are prepared to be generally useful in assisting the mistress
of the house. A few well-introduced may do well, but the
market is generally soon overstocked.
Sewing is not a good trade in the sea-ports; in the ul-
terior it pays for a married woman.
For industrious, sober, married couples, suitable for farm
servants and shepherds, and for stout, intelligent boys, of
ten and upwards, the demand may be said to be unlimited.
Good wages may also be earned by the young children of a
shepherd or ploughman, from even the age of eight.
The discovery of gold has so much disturbed and raised
the rate of wages that it is difficult to state an average.
But for many years the wages of a shepherd have ranged
from £2O. per annum to jE3I. 45., with a hut and rations of
10lbs. flour, 12 lbs. meat,ilb. tea, and 2 lbs. sugar, per week.
A shepherd's wife, cooking for him and one other man,
has received £9, with the same rations, and an allowance
for children, above eight years old. These money wages.


have recently risen fifty, and more, per cent, and the skilled
mechanics in proportion.
A common Labourer digging at the Gold Fields earns
from Bs. to 12s. per day.
Gentlemen desiring to embark in the purchase of live
stock, and become, according to the Colonial phrase, squat-
ters, will have to purchase the tennant-right of a run, or
grazing ground, from an occupier holding at a rent under
the Crown, as all the pastures accessible from a port are
occupied. Brothers, or friends in partnership, with capital,
will have a better chance in sheep and cattle than single
individuals.
Letters of introduction are generally useless, unless ac-
companied by letters of credit
Certificates, properly attested, of good character, are
useful to men seeking employment.
OUTFIT, &c.
As little baggage, and as much money as possible. No
goods on speculative investments. There are plenty of
mercantile firms, with whom a stranger cannot compete.
A workman should take his tools.
No wooden furniture. A family may take linen, plated
goods, knives, and forks, if they have them.
Letters of credit may be obtained from the
Bank of Australasia,
Union Bank,
South Australian Bank, &c.


THE FAMILY COLONIZATION LOAN
SOCIETY.
An account of the labours of Mrs. Chisholm would be
imperfect without the details of that Society which she has
so perseveringly struggled to establish during the last three
years of her life. The faith that she had amission to perform,
the carrying out of which was aduty to her Creator, and over-
flowing With love of her fellow-beings, has borne her
triumphantly through difficulties that would have appalled
many a stout, manly heart. Personal deprivations have
been incurred and cheerfully endured which wives and
mothers, ordinarily, from self-love and family interest
shrink from encountering; and that elegant display, luxuri-
ous home, and enjoyment of refined society, which position
and means places at command and maintains, have been
by Mrs. Chisholm totally disregarded. With meagre means
to carry out a great national undertaking, a governmental
duty, and selfish as well as bigotted prejudices ever rising
m her path, she has combatted and conquered—every ob-
stacle subdued—and now firmly established a society and
system that has given a death blow to the horrible practices
of emigration the offspring of sordid and callous hearts,
and rendered a model to the world for the safe, moral, and
comfortable transit of vast bodies of people seeking across
a broad ocean, a new home, and the entire enjoyment of
the fruits of their toil. Truly applicable were the words
applied to her by the Earl of Shaftesbury “ the children
shall arise and call her blessed.”


The Society, as we have already stated, was projected by
Mrs. Chisholm in 1847, on her return from Australia, after
successfully working at colonization for seven years. By
the end of 1849 she had collected some two hundred parties,
who, by small instalments, had paid nearly two-thirds of
their passage-money. In 1850 she procured the patronage
of her first committee, including the Earl of Shaftesbury,
(then Lord Ashley) Mr. Sydney Herbert, Mr. Vernon
Smith, Mr, Wyndham Harding, and Mr. Tidd Pratt. A
small sum of money was subscribed, towards which the!
Countess of Pembroke gave £350. The society was brought
before the public in May, 1850; in September, 1850, the
first ship, the Slains Castle, was despatched with 189 sta-
tute emigrants, or about 250 men, women, and children.
Towards their passages the emigrants paid, by instalments,
£1403. The Society lent £865, to be repaid in two years
by earnings in the colony; part of this loan has been repaid,
we give the following account of this vessel and its depar-
ture which will convey an idea of all the others to the
reader.
The Slains Castle, whilst lying at the East India Export
Dock, Blackwall, was visited by great numbers of persons,
who were highly gratified with the arrangements and con-
trast afforded to other vessels engaged in the same service.
On descending to the lower deck the scene was most
striking. All usual erections being removed, there was a
clear length of 100 feet of deck. The cabins, ranged on
each side, were numbered, and resembled a ward in Green-
wich or Chelsea Hospital. Those intended for a man and


Ms wife were of a certain size, wMle those for a party of
females were larger. The bedsteads for a married couple
consisted of broad stout laths, one-half of the length of
which were placed to fit into the other, so that when not
needed to sleep upon they could be slid back, and the bed-
stead become one half the size. By this contrivance there
was a couch formed for the day, and by a board, sliding in
a support for the back, while the room gained left a private
cabin for the occupants. A wash stand in a corner, and
some other trifling articles, completed the fittings. In some
of these there was a small bed-place a little above for a
young child. In the young women’s cabins two sides had
each two berths, while another side had a couch which drew
out to allow a mother and daughter, or elderly female and
young child, to sleep upon. This last-named party had
charge of the young women in the cabin ; and, as one of
the girls in the group was selected from having parents on
board, her mother had a right to entry to see her daughter:
thus a double guardianship become exercised. By a space
being left at the bottom, and the frame-work not reaching
the roof by several inches, a free and perfect circulation of
air was allowed in each cabin, besides, there being a small
window covered by a piece of coloured cotton; thus there
were privacy, air, and light. At the end of this deck were
domestic offices for females and children while others for
men were on deck. At the bows a part was, partitioned off
for the young men, where there were two ranges of bed
places, and tables, with ample room, where in quiet and re-
tirement they could pursue their studies during the voyage


Down the centre of the deck between the cabins were tables
for the meals and other purposes of the emigrants, above
which were shelving for the dishes.
The completeness and excellence of the arrangements are
thus seen, while, the passengers having the use of the entire
deck and poop of the vessel, it must be acknowledged that
every means was taken to render them comfortable and
healthy; their interest being considered paramount in every
particular.
The emigrants were not of that class who have sunk in
poverty and despair, who, reckless of consequences, sought
but for change; they seemed men stem in purpose, borne
forward by self-respect; they appeared to feel that within
themselves they possessed powers to attain a higher destiny
in society than their efforts in this country could achieve ;
that by changing the field of their exertions God in his
mercy and love would accord, as a reward for their labour,
peace, love, and plenty : in that reliance fear become dim
and hope radiant.
During the early part of Saturday, the 28th ult., there
was all the usual bustle, confusion, and hurry of embarka-
tion on the decks of the Slains Castle. The flag that has
“ braved the battle and the breeze ” boldly graced the bows,
others gaily decorated the vessel, but that which most at-
tracted attention was one symbolic of the spirit that guided
the present enterprise, and hung from the mizen. It was
a present from a party of ladies to Mrs. Chisholm, of “ true
blue ” colour having in gold-coloured type a monogram of
Mrs. Chisholm’s name, C. C., linked together by the stout


part of the letters, and surrounded by the letters F. C. L. S.
—Family Colonization Loan Society. The indefatigable
-frs. Chisholm was on board, practicially and beneficially
bestowing her experience, and with her maternal solicitude
superintending all arrangements for the domestic comforts
of the emigrants. A party of six friendless handsome Irish
girls seemed to have a large share of her attention and care;
all that circumstances and human foresight could provide
for their well-being, and exhortation to prudence and cau-
tion of conduct was judiciously bestowed. It was surpris-
ing to watch how any unexpected difficulty that arose was
promptly removed, how every petty detail was regarded and
controlled, by this extraordinary woman. A family at the
last moment found they could not go by this vessel-an-
Other anxious and ready, filled their places; a family pre-
sented itself, the mother of whom but four days before had
undergone the ordeal of maternity—Mrs. Chisholm, in res-
pect of her sex, promised a passage in three weeks by an-
other vessel, but was met by a refusal; she then declined
the responsibility of receiving the anxious emigrant without
» doctor's certificate ; this was procured, and the invalid
earned on board. The searching eye of Mrs. Chisholm
caught the face of a baby, and she detected incipient measles
m the family. They were tenderly refused admission, and
carefully placed in a cab. with money for their immediate
requirements, and promise of future attention and an early
passage. We noticed with melancholy feelings a poor
youth who had set out in life with all the bright aspirations
Of fame as an artist; his first public attempt met with dis


favour; his buoyant hopes were prostrated a blight seized his
mind and he sank under the unexpected blow; despondency
overshadowed him, and paralyzed in action, he sought a
new life, home, and country, where, unknown, and with
other occupations, he might gain a renewal of energy of
mind. We have at many ports witnessed the departure of emi.
grants when it seemed as if the separation was a violent tearing
up of sturdy roots ofaffection,agony, and despair beingwound
up to the highest pitch of human endurance. In the pre-
sent instance, when the command for departure was given,
it appeared to us as if the affections about to be separated
were but slender tendrils; and in this one fact is shown
the nobleness and virtue of the scheme. Among these
emigrants were many about to join in ease and comfort
their dearest friends, while others had on board around
them their relatives and families, all that was nearest and
most beloved by them on earth. Thus it is a system in
accordance with nature—with God’s holiest laws. Certainly
in all cases there are exceptions— two children were parting
with their parent; at the last moment they dropped on
their knees and besought, with stifled voice, a father’s bles-
sihg ; he knelt, his feelings for a time chocked his utterance,
when with fervid words he resigned them into the hands
of Almighty God, and besought them ever by their conduct
to merit His mercy—His love.
The large crowd moved with the stately vessel to the last
point of the dock, when, the word for “ all hands on shore ”
being given, the mongrel crew of dock labourers rapidly
tumbled out of the ship, and as if by magic, in the next in


stant the forecastle was crowded by as noble a crew of power -
ful British tars as could be seen, ready and able to perform
their laborious and dangerous duties. We would defy any
Englishman to witness such a sight without feelings of
pnde in his country. The steam-tug being affixed, the last
rope on shore was cast loose, when cheer after cheer from
the windows and roof of the crowded inn, and mass of
people arose, and was responded to by the emigrants. Mrs.
Chisholm, who was gazing at the scene from a prominent
part of the vessel, turned round and observed, “Well, at
length, here is emigration for and by the people! ” Mlv’w,
with the crowd on deck, we observed the prolonged gaze of
many a reddened eye—we saw the silent tear trickle down
the cheek—we heard the deep sigh and subdued sob—the
cheek and lips of manhood blanched and the agitated nerver
make the trembling of the hand. The grief of some was
calm and deep, while a few appeared as hilarious as if proceed-
ingon a gipsying party. Thevesselproceededdownto Graves-
end, where she anchored, Mrs. Chisholm making a continued
round of inspection during the time, assisting and advising
in every particular.
Sunday on Board.— Two hundred friends of the emi-
grants lodged at Gravesend during Saturday night, and early
on Sunday morning proceeded on board the Slains Castle.
A clergyman of the Church of England, the Eev. Edward
Bullock, commenced the religious duties of the day by
reading prayers, after which the Wesleyans performed
service according to the mode of their Society; next follow-
ed twoJHornau Catholic priests, who delivered most appro


priate exhortations, but dispensed with the usual ceremonies
of their church. Never in any country (and it has been
our fate to see many) did we ever see so truly a Christian
spirit prevail, such harmony of sentiment and brotherly
love. The sight was most exciting and admirable;
it gave us hope; and we felt assured, were such meetings
of more frequent occurrence, the painful asperities of sec-
tarianism would die away, and the true spirit of Christi-
anity be prevalent. But a still more extraordinary scene
presented itself—one which, perhaps, never before occur-
red on board any vessel, and was deeply impressive on
the now immense crowd on board, for it appeared about
800 persons visited the ship. In the afternoon there
issued from the captain’s apartments a train of clergy-
men, arrayed in surplices, about twenty-four in number •
They mounted the poop and went through the beautiful
services of our Established Church; then a sermon was
delivered, which produced a deep and serious impres-
sion on the assembly, while the Psalms sung, perhaps,
were never echoed on the vault of heaven with more fer-
vour and sincerity. Later in the afternoon an address on
teetotalism was delivered. The sacred day was spent in
listening to the sublime truths of holy writ, and in show-
ing that they must be the guide of erring man, who would
desire happiness on earth and deserve eternal life in
heaven.
We found that among the emigrants were 120 com-
municants of the Church of England, two Jewesses, and
the others about equally divided between Wesleyans and
Boman Catholics.


On Monday Mrs. Chisholm went on board to bid the
emigrants farewell. The men all came on deck and seated
themselves around their noble patron and friend. She
exhorted them as to their conduct, when they unaminously
pledged themselves “ as Christian fathers and heads of
families to exercise a parental control and guardianship
over all orphans and friendless females proceeding with
the family groups, to protect them as their children, and
allow them to share the same cabins as their daughters ;
also to discourage gambling and any pernicious amuse-
ments during the voyage ; and by parental advice and
good example to encourage and promote some well-devised
system of self improvement during the passage.” The
lady likewise begged of them not only to be the guardians
of the females, but also of religious liberty to their fellow-
voyagers. Mrs. Chisholm, proceeding below, in a most
feeling manner addressed the females on their conduct and
duties. The moment for separation now arrived, but the pen
is powerless in describing the scene that took place. A
young Jewess clasped her in her arms, kissed her, and
called her “ her dear mother.” Other females wept
The old women hung about her praying for the “ blessings
of God to be her portion.” The men in silent grief grasped
her hand ; and the last cheer given was one which must
ever tell forcibly on the feelings of a mother : it was
“ Three cheers for Mrs. Chisholm’s children ! ” On Tues-
day afternoon the anchor of the Slains Castle was weighed
—her sails spread to the wind. The second ship, the
Bhmdelh sailed in May, 1851, with 218 adult emigrants,


and several children, who paid «£1942, and borrowed
.£674 from the Society. The third ship, the Athenian ,
sailed in September, 1851, with 209 emigrants, and their
young families, who paid 4U942, and burrowed £524*
Thus, in twelve months, during a period that the govern-
ment had been unable to fill several of their ships with
emigrants to whom they gave a free passage, and when
filled had only been able to obtain a class whom Earl
Grey termed the refuse of workhouses, inferior to convicts
Mrs. Chisholm had been able to collect families of the
most industrious and frugal class, numbering one thou-
sand souls, and contributing £6237, this vessel the sur-
geon, E. Bowie, Esq., who had been one of the most ac-
tive professional men of the Board of Health, during the
raging of cholera, finding that interest, not capabilities
and a rigid self-sacrificing to duty, led to a just public
reward for labour, in disgust sought with his family a
home on Australia’s shores; this gentleman fitted up two
perforated zinc tubes extending from the stem to the
stern of the vessel, and continued of to the deck, one tube
was placed along the roof of the cabins, the other the
floor, the first carried off the used air, the latter brought
iu fresh, and such was the excellence of this plan that all
the effluvia from the close congregation of so many people
and from the large quantity of cooked meat was completely
decks, drawn away as it arose, while at the equator, between
the temperature was two degrees less than underthe poop.
He also had a simple contrivance for distilling sea-water
which extra supply was distributed for santiary measures.


These contrivances being found so valuable, efficient,
and even economical they now form a portion of the’
arrangements in the Society’s vessels. Economical, cer-
tainly, for they save the “ medical stores,” ’and instead of
(he vessel arriving with a number of emigrants worn out
with sickness, their constitutions injured, and requiring
months to recover a tone of health that they may be able
to labour, they find themselves capable of entering on
active employment the instant they land, as has been
practically proved for there was not one un-engaged the
second day after the arrival of the Blundell. On the
Athenian touching at the Cape four female children had
been added to the passengers, bom on the ocean wave.
It is curious to read the written bills of entertainment on
the voyage. The recitations, concerts, &c„ «by particular
desire” “under distinguished patronage* “ from indisposi-
tion ” “ previous engagements” M—M.— “willnot appear
until the following public entertainment of which due
notice will be given.” “ First appearance.” “ Glorious hit,”
and that “ between the first and second parts refreshments
will be handed to aU the audience,” a species of liberality
much to be envied under more favourable circum-
stances.
The Athenian sjilefi'in February 1852, with 209 adults,
and their children, the passage-money in which being
.£l3, and the society lending an average of £2 per head,
the emigrants contributed about £2700 ; a remarkable*
trait of the superior moral character of the emigrants.
All this amount of emigration with the multitudinous affairs


of the Society, has been accomplished without the usual ex-
pensive machinery of colonising companies “ Mrs. Chis-
holm and her family ” says Mr. Sidney gave up theirtime
gratuitously to the work, with the aid of one clerk, and one
old woman to open the door to the inquirers who knocked
from morning to night. She had received eighty letters
and forty calls on the subject of emigration in one day.
Mrs. Chisholm’s success was owing not less to her common
sense, her business-like habits and experience, than to her
energetic philanthropy. Her plan was extremely simple -
Every Monday evening she held meetings of intending
emigrants at her small house, No. 3, Charlton Cresent,
Islington, where they obtained information, and made
acquaintance with each other. Croups were formed of
from three to eight families, who co-operated for mutual
assistance on the voyage. These groups each elected a
representative, and these formed committees for a variety of
useful objects onboard. Instalments were taken as low as Is.
a week. When a sufficient number had paid up to justify
the society in taking a ship, an economy was effected in the
passage-money, while the bestprovisions, good ventilation,
enclosed berths, and superior arrangement for the decent
comfort of families and the protection of single girls and
friendless children were secured. Every ship was an im"
provement on the preceding one; and the society aimed
not only at assisting as many emigrants as possible, but
at affording an example of model emigration.”
On the 18th of February, 1852, the Family Colonization
Loan Society held in London one of the most numerous


tod enthusiastic meetings ever assembled in this country
<m the subject of emigration; the Earl of Shaftesbury in
the chair, who stated “he had seen in the last ship a fa-
mily Which included a child six weeks old, and a grand-
mother who had attained eighty-four years,” More than
500 PerBons were P rese "‘; corner, every rafter that
could be reached was crowded, and the great hall, viewed
trom the platform, presented an undulating sea of faces, all
deeply intent on the business of the evening. The flags
of all nations ornamented the bare walls. At the end of
the room, opposite the chairman, in huge letters, the mot-
toes “Advance Australia,” “Speed the Plough," and
an initial monagram of F. C. L. S. on the blue flag of the
ship about to sail, were displayed. The Earl of Shaftes-
bury had Mrs. Chisholm on his right hand, and on his
left the Eight Hon. Sidney and Mrs. Herbert, with a party
of their friends ; Messrs. Gone, William Jackson, James
Levick, M'Clellan, and others engaged in the Australian
trade; and Messrs. Stanley Carr, S. Devonport, M‘Nab,
Churuside, Eussell, and other Australian colonists were
among the parties who crowded the platform. The street
was thronged by parties unable to obtain admission.
The Australian city of London merchants seeing the
want of labour in the colonies subscribed about .£4OOO to
aid the movement, and in the first instance, using Mrs.
Chisholm's name, endeavoured to set on foot a plan of
emigration, but ultimately abandoned it to the guidance
of that lady, they taking the honorary post of committee-
men in addition to the older members who had aided the
labours of Mrs. Chisholm.
addenda.


The discovery of gold m the Australian colonies has
increased the demand for emigration, and the energy of
emigrants to attain their passage; this, likewise, has great-
ly risen the price of freightage of vessels, while the ferment
in the colonies themselves unhinge matters from that calm
and progressive state that formerly could he almost posi-
tively ensured. From these circumstances the same urgency
for loans does not exist, and prudence dictates that they
should not he on the same scale as heretofore- The es-
tablishment of the society is a new era in the history of
emigration.
THE END
Webb, Millington and Co., Printers, Leeds and Otley.
