

IN MEMORIAM.
HER MOST GRACIOUS MAJESTY
QUEEN VICTORIA.
Her Court was pure; her life serene;
God gave her peace; her land reposed ;
A thousand claims to reverence closed
In her as Mother, Wife, and Queen—


BORN MAY 24th, 1819.
CROWNED JU/IE 28th, 1838. .
MARRIED FEBRUARY 10th, 1840.


DIED JANUARY 22nd, 1901 ;
AGED 81 YEXRS.
“ Full of Years and Honor.”


CONVERSATIONS'WITH JHE QUEEN.
“FRIENDS, THE WATCHWORD IS PEACE.”
SOME remarkable conversations of the Queen with one
of her maids of honor. In one of these Her Majesty is
reported as saying“ Sovereigns have their influence,
and when they die it stops, or seems to. In only a few
instances is it otherwise. King Alfred turned the
national mind to learning, and perhaps the influence'he
exerted never wholly died. William I. set a hammer
going, that in the end turned a nation of iron into a
nation of steel. The last Henry made the country
Protestant. Elizabeth, the great Elizabeth, transformed
it into a nation of heroes. I can hardly hope to leave
such an influence: and yet under my rule the people
who were counted by hundreds have grown to thousands,
the thousands to millions: and that has come about
because, for the most part, my reign has been one of
peace. There have been wars, but they have been to
establish peace, to give people security in pursuing the
arts of peace. Wars for that end are justifiable, but for
no other. My influence has ever been for peace.
“ I would not have the English people study less
and practice themselves less in the art of war; I would
not have them show one whit less of that high spirit
that has carried them so far; but if it were in my power,
I would have all those ships when they meet in the
ocean, and when they touch at port—l would have
them say to each other, ‘ Friends, the watchword is
peace;’
“ If, when I am dead, they honor me enough to think
of what I should wish and what I should pray for on
their behalf,! would have them always associate my name
with peace and the amity that promotes the ends of
justice and of right. . . .
“ The English people have been exceptionally blessed
by Providence, and great things, I believe, are expected
of them by the Almighty : and in what way could they
please Him more than by promoting the ends which,
during my rejen, have been the means of causing so much
general happiness, such widespread content ? I have
the confidence to believe that such is their destiny.”
Copyright Reserved.
