









SKETCH of The Island of Java from the Latest and best Documents extant


Bengal Artillery Library
The Gift of
Major Genl. Sir J. Hartford V.C.B.


MEMOIR
OF THE
CONQUEST OF JAVA;
WITH THE SUBSEQUENT OPERATIONS
OF
THE BRITISH FORCES,
IN
The Oriental Archipelago.
TO WHICH IS SUBJOINED,
A STATISTICAL AND HISTORICAL SKETCH OF
JAVA;
BEING THE RESULT OF OBSERVATIONS MADE IN A TOUR THROUGH THE COUNTRY;
WITH AN ACCOUNT OF ITS DEPENDENCIES.
MAJOR WILLIAM THORN,
Late Deputy Quarter-JM to the Forces serving in Java,
ILLUSTRATED BY PLANS, CHARTS, VIEWS, &c.
LONDON;
I’RINTED FOR T. EGERTON, MILITARY LIBRARY, WHITEHALL.
1815.




TO HIS ROYAL HIGHNESS
FREDERICK,
DUKE OF YORK AND ALBANY,
COMMANDER IN CHIEF OF ALL HIS MAJESTY’S FORCES.
&c. &c. &c.
SIR,
THE permission to inscribe this Memoir to your
Royal Highness, flattering as it must be to the feelings
*>fa Soldier, is only an evidence of that benign attention,
under the influence of which the Military Character has
risen in this country to an unrivalled degree of excellence,
diffusing the glory of our arms over every part of the
globeT While the most powerful exertions were making
to rescue the people of Europe from the chain of a despot,
whose object was to yoke all Sovereigns to his chariot-
wheels ; it must have been peculiarly gratifying to the
friends of humanity to find, that correspondent efforts
were carried on with equal vigour, in remote regions, for
the accomplishment of the work of universal deliverance.
Though the operations which took place in the farthest
parts of Asia, to curb the aspiring domination of France
over the commerce and liberties of the world, were in a


great measure eclipsed by the rapid succession of brilliant
achievements in the Peninsula, under the command of the
first Captain of modern ages ; the value and splendour of
those which attended the Conquest of Java, were not
without the praise of Government, or the gratitude of
the nation.
Thus, amidst the revolutions which it has been the lot
of your Royal Highness to witness, the perseverance
and energy of Britain have commanded the admiration of
mankind; and afforded a solid ground of confidence, that
whatever changes other States may be destined to
these Islands, under the paternal rule of the House of
Brunswick, will ever continue to be a check to ambition,
and an example of loyalty, presenting a barrier against the
encroachments of licentious power, and a refuge to the
persecuted and afflicted of every land.
That your Royal Highness may be long instru-
mental in maintaining these blessings, by promoting the
interests of that important Service over which you preside,
is the prayer of.
Your Royal Highness’s
Most dutiful and obedient Servant,
i WILLIAM THORN.


PREFACE.
The Island of Java and its immediate dependencies, present so
many interesting objects for the consideration of intelligent observers,
that no relative change with respect to the possession and government
of these remarkable portions of the globe, can affect their importance,
or lessen the desire of being more intimately acquainted with countries
which have been too much secluded from examination by local diffi-
culties and commercial jealousy.
- surprize, that while the Dutch fixed here the
seat of their Eastern Empire, and for above two centuries drew from
/~
hence immense supplies of wealth, so little should have been compa-
ratively done under their direction, either for the improvement of such
valuable possessions, or in satisfying the natural desire of men to
acquire a knowledge of regions, the productions of which have
been sought with avidity. This frigid insensibility to the concerns of
science, and to the progress of the human mind, certainly did not arise
from any apathy in respect to the value of their Oriental settlements,


or for the want of energy in turning them to the most lucrative ad-
vantage. On the contrary, the entire history of the Dutch dominion
in the eastern world, exhibits a perpetual spirit of encroachment, and
of incessant activity to prevent the intrusion of others on a trade which
they considered as their exclusive property. With this view of uphold-
ing their power, and of making a deep impression on the nations
among whom their settlements were formed, these people, who haVe
been proverbially plain and frugal in Europe, were as much distin-
guished by the splendour of their foreign establishments.
The City of Batavia might well obtain the appellation of being the
Queen of the East, on account of the wealth of its inhabitants, the
grandeur of its buildings, and the vast extent of its commerce. This
was indeed the heart of the Dutch empire in India, as the Island of
Java itself constituted the principal source of all its opulence and
strength. The kingdom of Bantam formed the western division of this
large territory, while in the opposite direction the Dutch enjoyed the
sole command of the rich and beautiful line of coast on the north side
of the island, abounding with populous towns and numerous harbours.
Possessed of so much power, it could not be a matter of wonder that
the influence of these enterprizing people should be felt and obeyed
through the neighbouring seas; and that with such multiplied means
of increasing riches in their hands, the most valuable productions of
this prolific part of the earth should be emptied as it were with exube-


ranee into that celebrated mart, which united in itself the pomp of
Asiatic luxury, with the activity of European industry.
But this ready accumulation of wealth, connected as it was with a
very defective system of internal administration, proved the source of
corruption to the members employed by the state, and of idleness and
debauchery to the mass of the people. Large fortunes, it is true, were
made by individuals, but the revenue became deteriorated, so that for
some time before the French revolution, the affairs of the Dutch in the
East were in a declining condition ; and the subjugation of Holland to
the gigantic power which arose out of that event, accelerated their
absolute ruin. Deprived of the protection afforded by an alliance with
Great Britain, the Dutch soon had to lament the loss of Ceylon,
Malacca, and the Spice Islands; besides their settlements on the Con-
tinent of India. Java indeed remained, but the trade was in a great
measure annihilated-; muLthe resources of this great possession, how-
ever considerable they might be intrinsically, could hardly be of much
benefit to the parent state. The local government had, in fact, long
exercised an arbitrary rule over every branch of commerce and culti-
vation for present interests, rather than for the general good; looking
only to the proceeds of the sales, and the immediate returns of colonial
produce. But the annexation of Holland to France, after the tempo-
rary mockery of erecting the United Provinces into a Monarchy,
opened enlarged views with respect to the destination of Java, and it
b


was rightly considered, that this important island would yield many
advantages to the new empire, independent of the prospect which it
held out of creating a rival power in the East. Accordingly, some of
the most sagacious statesmen of that nation, turned their thoughts
closely to this subject, and endeavoured to kindle in their countrymen
a spirit of emulation and enterprize, by setting before them a brilliant
picture of the benefits to be gained in a migration to the distant
regions which were now added to the French dominion. This artful
policy was admirably calculated to free the country of a dangerous
and redundant population, at a period when the revolutionary tempest
had scarcely subsided, and when there yet remained many disaffected
and turbulent spirits who wanted employment, and were guided by no
principles of morality. On the other hand, the successive changes
which had taken place throughout France and her dependent states,
had thrown multitudes of unfortunate persons into poverty, from which
they were now flattered with the assurance of being delivered, by pur-
suing the certain course to affluence in the oriental settlements.
The ardent and aspiring, the inquisitive and industrious, were
alike stimulated to turn their minds towards the colonial establish-
ments, for the acquisition of riches and the retrieval of their misfor-
tunes, The avaricious were lured by the promise of gain, and the aim-
bitious were fired by the prospect of glory. Thus did the intriguing
Government of France endeavour to profit by the possession of this


remote appendage to the Empire, in holding out such allurements as
were most powerfully adapted to render it beneficial in itself, and in-
strumental to the general object of natural aggrandizement. Nor can
it be denied, that the exertions of France to improve the Island as a
military position, to strengthen its relative connexions, and to make it
answerable to the professions which had been artfully thrown out in
the way of temptation, were such as denoted equal energy and ability.
But it could not escape the observation of those who felt the impor-
tance of this settlement, that the change which had taken place must
necessarily call the particular attention of the British nation to the
possession of Java by France. This was indeed a matter of such
pressing and unavoidable moment, that the most vigorous measures
were immediately taken to secure the island from the attempts which
it was natural to expect would be made, to wrest the settlement from
the bauds of tho&e_jwh£L were known to entertain other views in the
possession of it, than such as were merely commercial and pacific.
General Daendels, one of the most active and intelligent officers in
the French service, was therefore appointed to this government; and
immediately on his arrival, he began to prepare for any attack which
might be made upon the island by the British naval and military forces
in India. The plans of this officer were for the most part exceedingly
judicious, and his means were commensurate with the important trust
of which he had the care, and the opposition which he had reason to
b 2


expect. His powers were unlimited, and he had twenty thousand well-
disciplined soldiers at his disposal; while over the actual resources of
the colony he had an absolute controul, and he made no scruple of ap-
plying them at his pleasure to the accomplishment of the designs
which he conceived to be the best for the defence of the island against
an invading force. At an immense charge, therefore, and with a pro-
digious waste of human life, roads were constructed throughout the
island; while Fort Ludowyck was erected to command the straits
between Java and Madura In pursuance of the same plan, the seat
of Government was removed to the suburbs of Batavia, and a more
salubrious military station was also chosen in the interior, where the
new fortifications, aiding the natural advantages of the position, seemed
to render the settlement impregnable. But this enterprizing Com-
mander did not confine his views to mere measures of defence only,
for in the true spirit of the new master whom he served, his mind was
inspired with the desire of conquest, and the Moluccas were already
threatened, and our spice 'trade would soon have fallen, had the pre-
parations been suffered to go on for naval purposes, and the French
continued much longer in the absolute command of the island of Java,
from whence they could sweep the seas and annoy our settlements.
The subversion of this rising power, therefore, became an imperious
duty on the part of the British Government in India, and it was hap-
pily accomplished under the judicious and personal direction of Lieu-


tenant-General Sir Samuel Auchmuty, and by the overbearing valour
of our troops. Of this great achievement, and of the arduous services
with which it was attended, a detailed Memoir appeared necessary,
as the authentic record of an interesting event, and to enable the public
in Europe to appreciate the value of the acquisition, and the nature of
the operations by which it was attained.
Any apology for such a performance would be justly treated as
superfluous, where, from the nature of the subject, criticism must be
ill employed in censuring what could not obtain the advantages of
literary composition, without the chance of doing injury to the simpli-
city of the narrative. The sketches and details of operation reported
in the following sheets, were, for the greatest part, noted down on the
spot, after the close of each action; consequently, no merit can be
claimed for any thing beyond a diligent attention to passing occurrences,
and a scrupulous regard to fidelity in the representation of them. The
inclination of the author to mark the esteem which he entertains for
his companions in arms, would have led him to notice their particular
exploits, in language suited to the high sense which he entertains of
them ; but in so doing he is aware, that he should thereby have justly
incurred the charge of presumption. But while he is silent on the
distinct merits of the living and the dead, he must be permitted to say,
generally, that no terms could be found adequately to express his sen-
timents of those with whom he was happily associated in the labours
here narrated; and he can, with great propriety, adopt the glowing
XIII
PREFACE.


lines of the poet, which are perfectly responsive of the emotions that
animate the breast of the patriotic soldier.
Oh War ! thou hast thy fierce delight,
Thy gleams of joy intensely bright!
Such gleams, as from thy polish’d shield
Fly dazzling o’er thy battle field !
Such transports wake, severe and high,
Amid the pealing conquest-cry ;
Scarce less, when after battle lost
Muster the remnants of a host,
And as each comrade’s name they tell,
Who in the well-fought conflict fell,
Knitting stern brow o’er flashing eye,'
Yow to avenge them or to die !
.Scott’s “Lord of the Isles. 0
On the passage to England, the leisure afforded by being detained
six months at St. Helena for the want of convoy, suggested the idea of
adding to the Memoir a brief statistical view of the Islands of Java and
Madura, substantially compressed from personal observations made in
a tour through those parts ; which, with some interesting sketches of
the Oriental Archipelago, constituting the dependencies on the govern-
ment at Batavia, may be relied on in respect to accuracy of description,
and the authenticity of the details with which the writer was favored,
concerning the operations that added the Moluccas to the British
possessions.
XIV
PREFACE.


When it is considered that the jealous policy of the Dutch had suc-
ceeded but too effectually for two centuries, in preventing any correct
information relative to their eastern territories from being made known
in Europe, this addition to the stock of geographical knowledge,
though simple in its particulars, and unadorned in the language, may
probably have some claims for an indulgent attention on the ground
of practical utility. Similar pretensions may be urged in behalf of the
Plans and Views, which, though the nature of the volume rendered
themindispensible, yet are they to be esteemed in no other light than as
mere graphical illustrations of the objects they represent, and correct
surveys of the countries and districts which they delineate.
On the candour of the Public, the work must now rely for that favour
which rarely fails to reward those who seek rather to deserve credit for
what they relate, than for their skill and address in cloathing and
embellishing the History.
London , April 5, 1815.




CONTENTS.
PART I.
Page
Tract of the several Divisions of the Fleet 1
Rendezvous at Penang—Malacca—High Islands—Sambar, on the south-west coast of
Borneo—Difficulties of the Navigation—Arrival in the Bay of Batavia.
PART 11.
ACCOUNT OF THE CAMPAIGN.
SECTION I.
From the Landing of the Army to the gaining Possession of Batavia 17
Disembarcation —Position of the Army—lts Movements—Passage of the Anjole—
The Suburbs—Surrender of Batavia—A Night Attack—The Enemy foiled—Provi-
dential Discovery.
SECTION 11.
The Action of the 10th of August, near Weitervreeden . . 30
SECTION 111.
Bombardment and Battle of Corn el is ... 41
French Orders—Measures of Defence—Batteries erected before Cornel is—Sortie of
the Enemy—Bombardment—Strength of the Enemy—Preparations for the Assault
c


Page
—Columns of Attack—Perplexing March—Advanced Picquet surprized—The
Lines forced—Dreadful Explosion—Reserve defeated—Pursuit—Charge of the
Cavalry—Rout of the Enemy—Flight of Generals Janssens and Jumel —Possession
of Buitenzorg —Official Report—General Orders.
Review of the Battle of the 26th of August, 1811 .... 75
Sir Samuel Aucbmuty’s Dispatch to Lord Minto .... 80
Lord Minto to the Earl of Liverpool ...... 88
SECTION IV.
Conclusion of Lieutenant-General Sir Samuel Auchmuty's
Campaign in Java .... 90
Escape of the French Frigates from Sourabaya—General Janssens’ Report—Possession
of Cheribon, and General Junot taken Prisoner—Taggal Fort surrendered—Cap-
ture ofSamanap, and Surrender of the Island of Madura —Expedition to Samarang
—Proposals to General Janssens —His Answer—Gun-boats taken—Lauding effected
at Samarang —Action of the 16th September—Cessation of Arms—Capitulation
and Surrender of General Janssens, with the whole Island of Java and its De-
pendencies—Possession of Sourabaya and of Fort Ludowyk —Character of the
Expedition in Official Documents—The Prince Regent’s Approbation.
PART IH.
SUBSEQUENT OPERATIONS OF THE BRITISH FORCES.
SECTION I.
Disturbed State of Java . . . 121
SECTION 11.
Expedition to Palimbang under the Orders of Colonel Gillespie 127


Page
Nanka Island—Palimbang River—Difficulties of the Passage—Order of Sailing
Malay Duplicity —Batteries at Borang taken, 1812—Flight of the Sultan—Colonel
Gillespie gains possession of Palimbang, by surprize—Appalling Spectacle Con-
flagration—Account of the Massacre of the Dutch—Pangerang Adipaty—Character
of the Court—Unlucky Affray—Tranquillity restored—Coronation—Description
of Palimbang—Articles of Commerce—The Sultan’s Family—Settlements in
Sumatra —Banca, named Duke of York Island, formally annexed to the British
Dominions —Fort Nugent—Minto the Capital—Official Document.
SECTION 111.
Hostilities with the Sultan of Mataram, and Capture of
Djoejocarta . . . . . 174
Court of Mataram—Policy of the Dutch—General Confederacy—Dangerous Crisis —
Provoked Hostilities—Bombardment commenced—Cavalry Skirmish—lmportant
Junction—Conflagrations—Preparations for the Assault—Magnitude of the Object
—Storm and Capture of Djoejocarta—The Sultan taken Prisoner —Dissolution of
the Confederacy—Character of this Exploit—Peace established.
General Order, by Major-General Gillespie ..... 192
by Lieutenant-General Sir George Nugent, Commander-in-Chief in
India T' . . . . . . . , 197
■ by the Earl of Minto, Governor General , , 200
STATISTICAL AND HISTORICAL SKETCH OF JAVA,
Being the Result of Observations made in a Tour
through the Country 203
State of the Island —Face of the Country—Military Roads—Climate —Produce —
Animals—Manufactures —Exports and Imports.
Internal Administration . . . 219
Revenue Department—Old System abolished —New Landed Tenure —Port Regulations.
c 2


Page
Judicial Department .... 226
Courts of Justice —Native Jury—General Police—-Its Divisions —Village Adminis-
tration.
Population and State of Society . . . 232
Of Malays and Javanese in General—lnhabitants of Batavia—Enfranchised Slaves—
Arabs —Baliers—9 u gg ese —Amboynese—Madurese—Chinese—Dutch —The City
and Environs—The Bay—Rivers—Roads and Avenues—Molenvliet —Ryswyck—•
Tanabang—Markets—Weltervreeden.
ITINERARY.
From Batavia to the Westward . . . 260
Tangerang—Kingdom of Bantam—Ceram—City and Court of Bantam—Change of
Administration—Marack Bay—The Bantamese—Anjier—North-west Coast—ln-
land Districts—Edible Birds’-nests.
From Batavia to the Eastward . . . 271
Route to Samarang—Tjimangis—Tjiloar—Soucarajah—Buitenzorg—-Dutch Farms—
Blue Mountains—Tjiceroa—Tjipanas—-The Hill Regencies—Tanjore—Bandong—
Samadong—Karang Sambong—Cheribon—Forts on the Coast—Taggal—Pacca-
longang—Samarang.
From Samarang to the South Coast . . 285
Oonarang— Salatiga—Boyollalie—Volcano—Selo—Carta Soura—Chain of Forts inland
—Soulo, or Soura Carta —The Soosoohoonan, or Emperor—Klattan—Sultan of
Mataram —Djoejocarta—Water-Palace—Guard of Amazons—-Tiger Fights—Euro-
pean Town—The South Coast.
From Samarang—Eastern Route continued . . 296
Damack Japara Joanna Rembang Lassem Toubang Zedayo—Sourabaya
River—Fort Ludowyck—Harbour of Gressie—Town of Sourabaya—Environs—.
De Noyo Cantonment—Passarouang—Probolingo—Melancholy Catastrophe-
Insurrection suppressed—Eastern Extremity of the Island—Banyowangy—Straits
of Baly.


Page
Island of Madura .... 311
Samanap—Parmacassan —Bancallan—Gallion and Pondi Isles— Carimon Java,
DEPENDENCIES ON JAVA.
The Eastern Archipelago . . . 314
Timor —Coupang Town and Fort Concordia—‘Tributary Isles—Roma—Kisser—
Semao —Rotto—Savu —Sumbawa— Beema—Harbour—Horses—Volcanoes—Allas
S trai t — Lorn bock—Baly—l n habi tan ts.
Borneo, Banjirmassin and Fort Tatar . r 324
Pontiana —Sambas—Account of the Capture, IS 13 —Trade of Borneo.
Macassar Town and Fort Rotterdam . . 333
Island of Celebes—Assassinations—The Buggese—Native Chieftains—Fort Bulo
Comba—Expedition of General Nightingale—Rajah Boni—Dependencies of
Macassar—Maros—Salayer and Booton Isles—Buggese Bay—Goonong Telia
River—Manado and Fort Amsterdam.
MOLUCCA ISLES. 343
Ternate and Tidore—Account of the Capture of Ternate—Gillolo—Bachian—Xulla
Isles.
Amboyna . . . 349
Account of its Capture—Produce of Amboyna—Population—Clove Islands belonging
to Amboyna—Ceram—Bouro.
Banda Isles . . . 356
Nutmeg Plantations—lnhabitants.
Commercial Intercourse with Japan . 360
Factory at Desima in Nangasacki—Articles of Trade —Institutions—Conclusion.


ERRATA.
Page
3, Line 5, for the necessary articles of life, read that necessary article of life.
36, —— for Captain French, read Captain Trench, eighty-ninth foot.
97, ."'—mi 6, for Captain Maxwell, read Captain Maunsell.
124, ' —6, for surrendered, read surrounded.
145, 1, for laterated, read lacerating.
173, 4, for many, read may.
176, —— for Soosoohoon, read Soosoohoonan.
259, Heading line, for Bantam, read Weltervrceden,
282, Line 20, for respectfully, read respectively.
312, ■ 6, for old sovereign, read elder son.
313, ——6, for Sanap, read Saraanap.


LIST OF PLATES.
Page
1. Map of Java - facing the Title page
2. Tract of the Fleet ------ 1
3* View of High Islands - - - - - 13
4 ■ Plan of the Brigades of the Army - - - - 17
5. Plan of the Landing ----- 19
6- Route of the British Army - ----- 23
7. View of the Town-House at Batavia 26
8- View of the Wharf at Batavia 29
9- Plan of the Action near Weitervreeden - - - 31
10. Plan of the Battle of Cornells _ - - - 57
11. Plan of the Town and Environs ofSamarang 97
13. Sketch of the Action near Samarang - 99
13. Harbour of Gressie and Sourabaya - 105
14- Tract of the British Force against Palimbang - - 127
15. Sketch of the River of Palimbang - 129
16. Sketch of the Batteries at Borang - 137
17. The Fort, Batteries, and Palaces, at Palimbang - - 143
18. View of Palimbang ------ 157
19. Plan of the Assault on Hjoejocarta - - - 185
20. View of a Chinese Funeral - 246
21. Fort of Cheribon ------ 279


Page
22. Ditto of Taggal - - - , - - 282
« -■ | , r - i
23. View of Samarang ------ 284
24. Fort of Salatiga ------ 286
25. The Water-Palace at Djoejocarta - - - - 292
26. View of Damack ------ 296
27- ViewofJapara ------ 297
28. View of Joana ------ ib.
29. View of Rambang ------ 298
30. View of Gressie ------ 302
31. View of Sourabaya River ----- 303
32. View of Passarouang ----- 305
33. Chart of the Eastern Archipelago - 314
34- Amboyna ------- 349
35. Banda Isles ------- 356




TRACT
ot the
of the
British Fleets
of the Expedition against
JAVA
1811


MEMOIR
OF THE
CONQUEST OF JAVA.
PART I.
TRACT OF THE SEVERAL DIVISIONS OF THE FLEET.
Rendezvous at Penang—Malacca—High Islands—Sambar, on the South-West Coast of
Borneo—Difficulties of the Navigation—Arrival in the Bay of Batavia,
At no period in the history of the British dominion in India, have
the power and prosperity of that empire shone with a lustre so bril-
liant, as at the present moment. Among other great results which
distinguished the splendid government of the Marquess Wellesley,
whose brother here commenced his illustrious career, the historian
will have to record two remarkable facts, that of the British standard
waving on the banks of the antient Hyphasis, and the terms of a
general peace being dictated by Lord Lake, at the head of his gal-
lant army, on that very border which was already celebrated by the
altars of Alexander. Such were the events which closed the admi-
B


nistration of that great statesman in the eastern world ; while, to
his successor, the late Earl of Minto, was reserved the glory of
carrying into effect, the important object of strengthening our poli-
tical and commercial interests by the conquests of the isles of France
and Bourbon, of Java and its dependencies.
Without weakening the parent state by draining its resources, the
government of India equipped and dispatched in rapid succession,
two expeditions, proportioned to the magnitude of their respective
objects, and to insure the absolute subjugation of those establishments
yet remaining in the hands of the enemy; and which for position,
strength, and connexion, were always considered as their most for-
midable possessions in fhp oripnfal seas.
The expedition destined against Java, having completed its pre-
parations, the first division under the command of Colonel Robert
Rollo Gillespie, sailed the eighteenth of April, in the year 1811,
from Madras Roads, under the convoy of His Majesty’s ship Caroline,
Captain Cole. The remainder of the troops followed in about a week
after, under Major General Wetherall.
A tremendous hurricane, which came on the very day after their
departure, threatened to involve the whole in a general and direful
wreck. His Majesty’s ship the Dover, and all the other vessels that
had remained in the Roads, w ere driven on shore by the violence of
the tempest, and were lost; but happily, all the transports, having
left the place in time, escaped; thus, the first setting out of the
Expedition was surprizingly marked w ith that wonderful good for-
tune, w hich by the mercy of Providence continued to attend it, during
a long and dangerous passage, and through unknow n seas.


A slight part only of this violent storm overtook the last convoy,
and occasioned in one of the ships the loss of forty cavalry horses,
which died of suffocation. This was the principal, and, indeed, almost
the only loss sustained by the troops during the passage.
The salutary regulations laid down by Colonel Agnew, Adjutant
General, by order of the Commander in Chief, for the treatment of
both men and horses, on board the transports; and the provident care
of Sir Samuel Auchmuty, who, like an affectionate parent, was at-
tentive to every suggestion that could contribute to the preservation
of the health of the troops, were productive of the most beneficial
effects, during a voyage of nearly four months. The few casualties
which happened either among scs-xhrrmg a
passage, and that too in an Indian climate, ought to be recorded as a
circumstance which, considered in every point of view, is without a
parallel.
In the first division, scarcely any losses were sustained; for the long
experience acquired by Colonel Gillespie in the \Test Indian expe-
ditions, and his particular acquaintance with the means necessary to
be adopted in all hot climates, caused him frequently to inspect the
several transports, during the passage, and to enforce a strict
observance of the prescribed orders. In this he was ably assisted
by all the officers embarked in that convoy. By this attention and
care, both men and horses, notwithstanding the almost insufferable
heat and long confinement on board the ships, preserved perfect health
and spirits, and were all able to enter into immediate action.
On the eighteenth of May, we anchored in Penang harbour; the
first rendezvous of the expedition. The Akbar frigate, with his Ex-
n 2


cellency the Commander in Chief, arrived on the thirteenth, and de-
parted again on the twentieth for Malacca. The Modeste frigate, with
Lord Minto, had touched at this place, and continued her passage to
Malacca before our arrival. Mr. Seton, governor of Prince of Wales’
Island, had also proceeded on to Malacca with his lordship.
On the twenty-first of May, the second division under Major Ge-
neral Wetherall, arrived under convoy of His Majesty’s ship Phaeton,
Captain Pellew.
Penang, or Prince of Wales’ island, is a flourishing settlement, and
the troops, during their stay, received a plentiful supply of fresh (buf-
faloes) beef, which was procured from the opposite coast, in conse-
quence of the permission granted by the Xing of Queda, who had
himself come over to Penang on a visit to the governor.
This island extends from latitude 5 degrees 16 minutes, to 5 degrees
30 minutes N. being nearly fifteen miles in length, and seven or
eight miles in breadth. The entrance into the harbour is very pic-
turesque. Mount Olivia and several villas agreeably interspersed
among the shady groves near the shore, pleasingly attract the eye ;
whilst the lofty signal mountain, covered with immense trees up to the
very summit, adds greatly to the beauty of the scene. The perpendi-
cular height of this mountain is 2170 feet above the level of the sea,
and the signals for ships approaching the island are here displayed ;
but at a small distance from hence is another mountain, higher than
the former by about seventy feet. Both within the town and in the
environs are many houses, which in their construction unite elegance
with accommodation. That of the governor, three or four miles in
the country, is particularly handsome, and well adapted to the cli-


mate.. At the foot of the signal mountain, there is an establishment for
grinding corn and baking bread and biscuit, belonging to a Chinese
named Amie. This building is erected on a water course which turns
the machinery ; and here, ships that touch at this place are abun-
dantly supplied with the necessary articles of life. Pulo Penang was
erected into a colony, in the year 1786, when Captain Light, to whom
the King of Queda presented the island, as a marriage portion with
his daughter, took possession of it, for the use of the East-India Com-
pany. Considering the comparatively infant state of the settlement,
we may be justly astonished at the rapid rise and progress of George
Town in so short a time ; and the population is proportionably great,
consisting of Eu ro peart s, Ch inese, and others Trom Tlindos-
tan and other parts of India. Cultivation however has not yet ex-
tended far; except towards the Southern part, and on the Eastern side
of the island where the town is situated, and where the land, being
low and contiguous to the sea, admits of improvement. The body of
the island is high, uneven, and covered with trees.
Fort Cornwallis is built on the N. E. point of the island, close to
the town. It is in latitude 5 degrees 24| minutes North; longitude
100 degrees 21 h minutes East. Ships are constructed here of all sizes
and dimensions. The trade of Junk Seylon, Queda Selanger, and
other Malay ports, has, since the establishment of this colony, concen-
trated here; and for the loss of which the king of Queda has a
grant of ten thousand piastres from the Penang government, as a
compensation. The commerce here consists in commodities of ex-
change, pepper, beetle nut, rattans, and some gold, brought hither
from the main land, as well as from Sumatra and other islands to the


Eastward, by the Malay prows, and for which they receive opium,
piece goods, arrack, dollars, and other articles.
The harbour, which appears like a river, is about two miles across,
from the Fort point to the main, where a considerable tract, front-
ing the island, has been added to the Company’s possessions, and
whence bullocks and poultry are brought over in great abundance.
We went out by the North channel, the same way that we came in ;
as the South channel is too dangerous for large ships, unless a good
pilot can be procured. This last passage is bounded by the long
sand which begins about three quarters of a mile to the South-
ward of the fort, and stretches nearly to the North point of Pulo
Jarajah, having a small channel of three, four and five fathoms be-
twixt it and the western shore.
On the twenty-fourth of May we sailed for Malacca, which we
reached on the first of June. The weather during this time was ge-
nerally clear, with moderate breezes, but now and then it was very
rainy and squally, and we were often obliged to come to an anchor.
The Bengal troops, under convoy of his Majesty’s ship the Cornelia,
Captain Edgell, had arrived here five or six weeks before us, and
were encamped along the shore ; Lord Minto, Sir Samuel Auchmuty,
and Commodore Broughton, had also arrived.
A dreadful accident happened while we lay at this place. One
of the store ships from Bengal, laden with gunpowder, &c. acciden-
tally caught fire, and when it was found that she could not be
saved, the people were taken out, and the vessel was set adrift;
fortunately she blew up soon after, otherwise, as she drifted towards
the fleet, many of the squadron might have been destroyed by the
explosion.


On our landing we observed a cloud of smoke ascending from
a funeral pile, which was formed of various instruments of torture,
as the rack, the wheel, &c. which had been in use among the
Dutch, but which Lord Minto had now ordered to be burned ;
the more equitable laws of England having superseded the former
system of terror in the administration of justice. It was highly
gratifying to the liberal mind to see these dreadful machines, the
invention of ingenious cruelty, consigned to the flames; and as this
sacrifice on the altar of humanity, was the spontaneous act of ho-
nourable feeling, it was no doubt propitious to the great cause in
which we were now engaged ; for what could be a more striking
contrast than a tbe penal
laws, prolongs the sufferings of the victim doomed to death, and the
spirit of a mighty power, marking its progress in arms by acts of
mercy, and a solicitude for the rights of human nature?
The fourth of June, being the anniversary of His Majesty’s birth-
day, was celebrated as splendidly as circumstances in this remote
part of the world would permit. Royal salutes from the men of
war of the expedition, and from the batteries on shore, announced
the happy day, and at noon the discharge of cannon proclaimed the
number of years our venerable and beloved sovereign had attained.
Lord Minto held a levee in the morning, and at four o’clock he
gave a dinner to a great part of the naval and military officers,
when many loyal toasts were drank with enthusiasm, and afterwards
the noble lord himself was drank to, as a volunteer on the present
service, with three times three. In the evening a ball closed the fete.
Malacca has suffered a considerable declension from its former state


of prosperity. The few Dutch families who inhabit the town, carry
on very little commerce. Idle habits, even among this people, so
proverbially industrious in Europe, have gained such an ascendency
as to weaken the spirit for mercantile pursuits ; while the desolate,
wild, and impenetrable woods, which run up close to the town,
debar the inhabitants from any intercourse or communication with the
inland parts of the Peninsula.
This city, originally founded by the Mussulmans in the thirteenth
century, became early a powerful and flourishing settlement of the
Portuguese. The Dutch laid siege to it in 1640, and on the fourteenth
of January, 1641, they carried it by storm after an obstinate resistance.
The Portuguese had four churches in the town and one in the fort,
which last is the only one now in use. It stands on a hill in the
center of the fort, and is seen at a great distance off at sea; on the spire
a flag is hoisted when a ship is seen coming in. Its latitude is 2 de-
grees 12 minutes N. Longitude 102 degrees 15 minutes E. The fort
is now little better than a heap of rubbish ; and some batteries on the
tops of commanding hillocks, constitute the only defence of the
place. These batteries are on the south side of the river, and as the
town lines the sea shore on the north side, the communication is
maintained by a drawbridge. The town, which is inhabited by Dutch,
Chinese, Malays, and various Indians, contains a number of very good
houses. Of this mixt assemblage of people, professing different reli-
gious tenets, the followers of Mohammed are the most numerous.
It is remarkable, that though the land adjoining’ the town is low,
with offensive mud banks, which dry every tide, close to the houses,
and the country around is almost an impenetrable forest, this is not-


withstanding the most healthy place known in India, so near to the
Equator. Several very commodious villas and pleasant garden-houses
are interspersed along the sea shore, among cocoa nut topes, and other
fruit trees; with the much esteemed mangosteen, whose growth is
confined to very few places.
About seven leagues and a half inland is a high mountain called
Goonong Ledang, also Queen’s Mount, or Mount Ophir, whose height
is 13,843 feet above the sea, which is only about two thousand feet less
than Mont Blanc.
Malacca, at the time when the Portuguese were masters of it, carried
on a considerable trade with Japan ; but the Dutch, when they gained
possession of the place, made a total alteration in its commercial cha-
racter, by transferring that as well as every other source of wealth,
which lay in their power., to Batavkn
lacca has been ever since gradually decreasing, still the importance of
this place is evident, from its advantageous position in commanding
the straits, which are only sixteen miles broad, and through which
every vessel must pass, that is bound to Java, Sumatra, Borneo, and
the Moluccas. Possessed of Malacca, therefore, a very small cruizing
squadron suffices to command the entire intercourse, and the whole
coasting trade of the eastern seas. It was this consideration of its
importance which first induced the Portuguese to establish themselves
here, and the same reason urged the Dutch to drive them from it;
who in their turn were expelled by the English. This acquisition
has of course afforded a safe passage for our China fleet through the
straits of Malacca, during a time that the Sunda straits were rendered
impracticable, or at least when they were considered as unsafe, so long
* I
as Java continued in the hands of our enemies.
c


Owing to the shallowness of the water, ships are obliged to lie off at
a considerable distance from the shore. Boats proceeding- into the
river must steer for the church on the hill, keeping it rather on the
4'
starboard bow, and when the bar is approached, the channel may
be discovered by the stakes at the entrance of the river. Fish is
very plentiful, and a variety of excellent fruit, yams, sago, poultry,
and Buffaloes may here be obtained, besides grain which is imported
from Java, Sumatra, or Bengal. Dammer for caulking is an article
of trade, and spars for masts brought over from Siak river, on the
opposite coast of Sumatra, are bartered at Malacca.
Intelligence was received here that General Daendels had been
recalled from the government of Java, in which he was succeeded by
General Jansens, who, it was also reported, had already arrived at
Batavia witli a numerous body of troops from France.
Before leaving Malacca, it became expedient to decide on the best
course to be pursued for reaching the place of our destination. It was
universally allowed, that a passage through the straits of Banca was,
at that advanced season of the year, totally impracticable. It was at
the same time extremely doubtful whether one could be effected by-
coasting along the south side of Borneo, within the Caramatta pas-
sage, so as to gain the benefit of the land and sea breezes, and to be able
to stietch across the Java sea from. Sambar point. It was, however,
considered, in favour of this last navigation, that if it should prove
successful, the fleet would be thereby enabled to fetch any station to
the westward of Cheribon.
A third, and, as it should seem, the only certain passage, was that
round Borneo, and by Celebes. This course, it was considered,


would enable the fleet to attack any of the posts in Java, as they
would approach from the eastward ; and consequently the eastern
monsoon would thus give them the command of the whole line of
coast. Such were the advantages which recommended the choice of
this passage in preference to the others; but on the other hand, the
extreme length of it made it doubtful whether the fleet could reach
Java in sufficient time to accomplish the object of the expedition, be-
fore the rainy season, which there commences in October, should have
set in ; added to which weighty objection, very serious apprehensions
were entertained with respect to the health of the troops, during a
passage and subsequent operations, conducted in tracts subject to vio-
lent rain. These were the considerations that induced Sir Samuel
Auchmuty to decline this route, if it could well be avoided; and that
more particularly, as he had already resolved to attack the capital ;
and therefore it was not an essential object to be able to reach the
eastern part of the island. Fortunately, at this time, a small vessel,
which had been sent to explore the southern coast of Borneo, returned
with a favourable account of that navigation ; upon which information
it was immediately determined to proceed in squadrons to Sambar ,
and from thence to stretch across the Java sea towards Cheribon.
Accordingly, the army having been brigaded, and the ships supplied
with water, the different convoys again got under weigh, on the ele-
venth of June.
The Bengal division sailed first, followed by the first division from
Madras, and so on in succession ; and in a few days the fleet entered
the straits of Sincapore. Here we experienced occasional squalls, with
sharp lightning, thunder, and rain ; and the tide drifting forcibly over
c 2


to the Malay coast, obliged us frequently to come to an anchor. The
depth of water through these straits, is generally from sixteen to seven-
teen fathoms; and the scenery along the shores is highly beautiful.
After passing through the straits, the fleet stood direct for Borneo,
for the purpose of profiting by the land breezes, which blow over that
vast line of coast. Having passed Timbalan, and a number of other
islands, we arrived, on the third of July, at the High Islands, which
constituted the third rendezvous of the fleet.
The High Islands, which form an extensive Archipelago, from their
number and unknown positions, render navigation in those seas ex-
tremely difficult and dangerous.
The Island, where the greater part of the fleet anchored, has two
watering places, which supplied all the ships with that necessary
article, of an excellent quality, as fast as they arrived ; and this essen-
tial service was completed in the course of a week. Hogs, mousedeer,
and monkies are found here, but no inhabitants of the human species
have hitherto been discovered ; and only a few Malay fishermen and
pirates pay occasional visits to these places.
On the morning of the tenth of July, while preparing to get under
weigh, a stiff squall with rain came on, which lasted a considerable
time, and brought a great portion of the fleet into imminent danger.
Several horse-transports drifted from their anchorage close in shore,
and a violent pitching, which was rendered more perilous on account
of the shallowness of the water, threatened destruction to the ships.
A more frightful sight can scarcely be conceived ; —large vessels with
a hundred horses, and double that number of men on board, were
tossed up into the air at one instant, and precipitated the next to the




Plate III
Departure from High Islands


bottom of the ocean, with such violence that their keels actually
struck the ground, and the earth which was thereby torn up with
great force, gave the sea all around a thick muddy appearance.
At last, the wind abated a little ; and after many efforts, the distressed
ships having succeeded in getting off at a late hour in the evening, they
came to an anchor in thirteen fathoms.
We continued sailing through a cluster of islands, leavingOarramata
to our right, the coast of Borneo on our left, generally close in land ;
and on the twentieth of July, reached Point Sambar, which was
the fourth rendezvous of the expedition, at the extremity of the south-
west coast of Borneo.
The information which had been received by Sir Samuel Auchmuty,
before his departure from Madras, and which was confirmed both at
Penang and Malacca, had finally determined him to attach Batavia.
From the intelligence which was imparted to him, he was induced to
believe, that though the enemy would, in all probability, endeavour
to present obstacles to any operations that might be attempted in
other quarters, yet, that the great stand would be made near Bata-
via; that, in fact, their greatest force was collecting there; strong
positions were taken up at Cornelis and Buitenzorg; and finally, that
all the principal magazines were removing to that spot.
The only point upon which any indecision as yet remained, was the
choice of the place of landing. The coast was favourable within
few miles of Batavia, after which it became altogether impracticable
from thence to Cheribon. In the one case, a vigorous opposition was
to be expected at landing; and some risk, and much loss must of
course attend a disembarkation in the face of an army of twenty thou-


sand men; for such, according to computation, was the disciplined
force with which we should have to contend. On the other hand,
in the event of landing at Cheribon, a long march of nearly two
hundred miles was to be encountered through a mountainous and
intricate country, in the entire possession of a hostile foe, having
every advantage of annoyance, while the invading army would be
without the means of moving their guns, and of transporting the
provisions and other stores. That the general might be the better
enabled to come to a positive conclusion, immediately on his reaching
Java, without being there perplexed by delay or uncertainty, he
detached Lieutenant-Colonel Mackenzie, of the engineers, and ano-
ther able officer. Lieutenant Blakiston, with suitable instructions,
the purport of which pointed out that Sir Samuel Auchrnuty would
prefer landing at Batavia, if the Sourabaya division had not been
called thither; but that should the whole army be there collected,
it would be, in his opinion, most prudent to land near Cheribon.
The armament having thus, after a very tedious, but in other respects
most fortunate navigation, assembled on the twenty-sixth of July, at
this last point of rendezvous ; on the day following the whole made sail
for Java. On the thirtieth, the fleet reached Bumpkin Island, on that
coast, near Xndramay river, and the same night they had a very narrow
escape, being closie to a reef off that island. Here we continued from
this time till the second of August, in expectation of the frigates which
were to have joined with intelligence, but as it was determined to
wait no longer, the fleet proceeded towards Batavia. This unavoid-
able delay afforded an opportunity to the enemy of discovering the
fleet, and General Jansens was accordingly apprised of our being off


the island. In the coarse of the day, the expected ships, with Colonel
Mackenzie, joined ; and from him it appeared that he had reconnoi-
tered the whole coast, and that a landing was most advisable at the
village of Chillingching, a situation well known to the navy, and lying
about ten miles from Batavia. The Colonel having been induced to
land with a few men, was surprized by a corps of the enemy stationed
there for the purpose of capturing those, who, according to the custo-
mary practice of the ships, might be sent on shore for cattle. The
Colonel and his suit escaped, but an officer and a few men of the sixty-
ninth regiment were taken, though the enemy obtained no discovery
from them, as they all pretended to be marines belonging to the
squadron. .
From the information now received, and which agreed perfectly with
his previous inquiries and intentions, the resolved
upon landing at Chillingching. The fleet, therefore, which had brought
to in the afternoon, again got under weigh, and every preparation was
completed for effecting the disembarkation without delay.
On the evening of the third, the squadron made Cape Carawang, and
early the next morning ran in for the mouth of Marandi river. The
ships anchored during the interval between the land and sea breezes,
' \ . ; l ' / .
but when the latter came in they again stood in, and before four, being
off Chillingching, the signal was made for the troops to land.


The Fleet employed in this Expedition consisted of the following Ships:
LINE OF BATTLE SHIPS.
Scipion, Rear Admiral Stopford, joined at Batavia.
Illustrious, Commodore Broughton—Captain Testing.
Minden, Captain Hoare.
Lion, Captain Heathcote.
FRIGATES.
Akbar - - Captain Drury
Doris - - Lye
Nisus - - Beaver
President - - Warren
Bucephalus - Pelly
Phoebe - - Hillyar
Modeste - - Elliot
Hussar - - Captain Crawfurd
Drake - - Harris
Phoeton - - Pellew
Leda - - Sayer
Caroline - - Cole
Cornelia - - Edgell
Psyche - - Edgecumbe
SLOOPS.
Barracouta - Captain Owen
Hesper - - Reynolds
Hecate - - Peachey
Dasher - - Kelly
Samarang - Captain Drury
Harpy - - Bain
Procris - - Mansell
HON, COMPANY’S CRUIZERS.
Malabar - - /£ om *S ay ?, J
\Capt. Maxfield
Aurora - - Watkins
Momington - Pearce
Nautilus - - Walker
Vestal - Captain Hall
Ariel - - Macdonald
Thetis - Lieut. Phillips
Psyche - - -
Fifty-seven transports and several gun-boats, amounting in all to one hundred sail.




Plate IV.


PART 11.
ACCOUNT OF THE CAMPAIGN.
SECTION I.
From the landing of the Army, to the gaining possession of Batavia
When the conquest of Java is attentively considered with a due
regard to the magnitude of the object, the means employed, and the
formidable obstacles which were opposed to the enterprize, it will
not shrink in the comparison with the most splendid achievements of
modern history. The votes of thanks which passed both houses of
parliament, to those who were engaged in this addition to the glory
of the British empire, affords indeed a sufficient proof of the high
importance of the acquisition and the value of their services by whom
' • *.
it was obtained.
The fleet, about one hundred sail, including gun-boats, anchored, as
before stated, in the Bay of Batavia about two o’clock P. M. on Sun-
day the fourth of August, 1811; and the landing was immediately
carried into effect at Chillingching, a village about ten miles to the
eastward of Batavia.
D


Officers.
Native Officers.
Non-commissoned
Officers and Privates.
Total.
European tforce
Native Force -
200
124
123
3144
3530
5344
5777
Pioneers, Lascars, &e.
324
123
10,674
11,121
839
Grand Total
-
-
-
11,960
The army was divided, agreeably to the arrangements ordered at
Malacca, into four brigades; one forming the advance, two the line*
and one the reserve*.
The Leda frigate. Captain Sayer, having been off this coast before,
and reconnoitred this part, ran in close to the shore to protect the
landing on our left, whilst on the right were stationed several gun-
boats which had been captured from the enemy, and also several of
the Company’s cruizers, or gun-brigs.
The place of our landing is one of those spots which, like that of
Cap Malheureux at the Isle of France, are generally left unguarded,
being considered as points of such difficulty on account of their natural
obstacles, that no invading army, it was reasonable to suppose, would
there attempt to make a descent. This idea of security on the part
of the enemy enabled us to effect our debarkation without loss, in
the same manner as happened at the Isle of France.
The advance under Colonel Gillespie proceeded first on shore,
followed by his Excellency the Commander in Chief, and immediately
moved forward, taking up a position beyond the village, to gain pos-
* General Abstract of the Army under the command of Sir Samuel Auchmuty,
Malacca, June 4,18 U.
But of this number about twelve hundred were sick at Malacca, and about fifteen hundred
on landing at Java.




Plate V.
The Landing
of the
British Army
at
CHILLINCHING
on the
ISLAND of JAVA
4th. Aug. 1811


session of the road to Cornelis, and protect the landing of the remain-
der. The brigades of the line when landed occupied the road to
Batavia *.
* THE FOLLOWING ARRANGEMENTS WERE ORDERED;—
G. O. By the Commander in Chief.
When the army is ordered to land, the various corps of which it is composed will prepare
to disembark in the following order of succession.
First division—The Infantry and dismounted troop of Native Cavalry of the advance, rein-
forced by the flank battalions of the Line—the Royal Artillery and Lascars attached, and the
detachment of Bengal Pioneers—the whole under the orders of Colonel Gillespie :
1 The Right Flank battalion of the Line.
2 The Left ditto.
3 The battalion of Royal Marines.
4 Detachment, H. M. 89th regiment.
5 The Royal Artillery with their Lascars "and six six-pounders complete, with their
ammunition and persons for conveying it when on shore.
6 The Governor General’s Body-guard.
7 The Light Infantry Volunteer battalion,
8 The Bengal Pioneers.
Q Horses for officers on the Staff.
Second division—The Line under Major General Wetherall, with the Bengal Artillery,
guns, Madras Pioneers, and Lascars.
Right Brigade, Colonel Gibbs s
1 H. M. 14th regiment.
2 H. M, 59th regiment.
S Fifth Bengal Volunteer battalion.
4 Bengal Artillery and Lascars, with ten six-pounders and ammunition complete, as
ordered, with persons to convey it when on shore, and a party of Artificers.
Left Brigade, Lieutenant Colonel Adams.
5 H. M. 69th regiment.
6 H. M. 78th regiment.
7 Sixth Volunteer battalion.


The arrangements ordered for the landing were most judicious; but
a considerable delay in the operation occurred, owing to the insur-
mountable obstacles the boats met with in their attempt to assemble
round their respective rendezvous ships : both wind and tide were
against them, and prevented their proceeding in the prescribed order.
It became therefore necessary at last to direct the boats to land as
expeditiously as they could, without attending to order. Fortunately
there was no opposition, and though certainly this was the most con—
8 Madras Pioneers.
9 Madras Tent Lascars.
10 Ditto Donly "Rpa rprc.
Third Division —The Reserve undeir Colonel Woods.
1 The Flank battalion of the Reserve.
2 First battalion 20th regiment Native Infantry.
3 Third Volunteer battalion.
4 Fourth Volunteer battalion.
Par. 2. The horse artillery, the cavalry, and the remaining staff, horses, and bullocks for the
artillery, to be landed as soon as possible after the infantry of the army, &c. &c. &c.
Par. 4. Colonel Gillespie will immediately on landing occupy such posts in the vicinity of the
landing-place as will cover it completely, and he will limit his operations in the first
instance to this object, until the Line has landed, when Major General Wetherall will form
that part of the army to cover the landing of the remainder, while Colonel Gillespie
with the advance moves forward to a moderate distance and occupies such advantageous
positions as may present themselves more in front, but not so far separated from the line
as to risk a possibility of interruption to their communication, or to deprive his own
corps of the advantage of certain and immediate support if necessary. The movcments-
ef the Line will be made to co-operate on this subject, &c. &c. See .
(Signed) P. AGNEW, Adj. Gen.
N. B. The Order goes into great length and embraces every essential subject, in the mosit
satisfactory manner.


venient place near Batavia for the purpose of defence, not a man in
arms was found in the village.
The corps of the army had ground allotted to them as they landed,
on which they were to form, and as soon as the principal part of each
battalion was on shore it Was marched off to gain the position where
it was intended the whole should halt during the night.
Though the country is low, and intersected with swamps, salt-pits,
and canals, yet before night the whole of the infantry, with their guns,
were on shore; the advanced posts were pushed on, two miles from
the landing-place, and the troops were formed in two lines, one
fronting Batavia and the other Cornells.
strength portion, which was sufficient to
secure the army, the Commander in Chief was not without some
uneasy apprehensions with respect to the consequences that might
attend an alarm during the night, as the troops were of necessity
totally unacquainted with their relative situations, and a fire rashly
commenced would in all probability have been the cause of much
mischief. Every precaution was taken to guard against this inconve-
nience, and happily with effect; for though a patrole of the enemy’s
cavalry galloped during the night into the advanced posts, on the
Batavia road, where they received the fire of tw o six-pounders and that
of a picquet of infantry, no farther firing or unnecessary alarm ensued.
An Aid-de-Camp of General Janssens was with this party, of whom an
officer and two or three soldiers were killed.
On the fifth the horse artillery and cavalry landed, and the
position of the army was advanced towards Batavia. The country here
is low, but the ground occupied is strong, as from the Marandi river.


close on our left, a canal runs parallel to the shore nearly a mile in
length to the Anjole river. General Wetherall occupied this point
with his right to the sea and his left to the canal. The great road to
Batavia intersected this position. The village Chillingching was
directly inland from the landing-place, beyond the canal, over
which the enemy had very imprudently suffered a bridge to remain stand-
ing. Colonel Gillespie occupied the ground some distance beyond
the village, and guarded the road leading from thence to Cornelis.
The reserve remained at the landing-place, to support each point.
Had the enemy destroyed the bridge at Chillingching, they might
securely and at their leisure have cannonaded our position, but they
never ventured near the lin#» Information, however, was obtained
that a column had approached within four miles of Chillingching,
and accordingly on the fifth the advance was pushed forward for the
purpose of attacking them.
This detachment marched a considerable distance, and took post at
Suyrannah Chapel, about six miles on the road to Cornelis; but it was
soon ascertained that the enemy had immediately retreated upon hearing
of this movement. The heat was so excessive that several of the party
were attacked with coups-de-soleil, which proved instantaneously fatal
tp some, while others lingered out till the evening, and died after our
return. The labours of this day, which of themselves were exceed-
ingly severe, were rendered still more so by the circumstance of our
having but just landed.
As this was the road by which the General intended to advance,
preparations were made for the conveyance of the necessary stores and
provisions, since a communication with the shore must be uncertain.


Route
of the
BRITISH ARMY
AND
Correct Plan of the Environs
of
Batavia




and no dependence could be placed on resources in a country where
the enemy had it in his power to remove or destroy all that might be
of any benefit to the invader.
It was arranged therefore that every man who did not bear a musket
should carry a load; and that every private follower, except one to each
officer, should be taken for the public service. The troops would have
been obliged to carry five days provisions ; and by these means it was
hoped that the army might calculate on enduring an absence of ten days
without any material inconvenience. But the consequence of so short
a march as that already mentioned, performed by the advance, induced
the General to practise the men and horses before the commencement of
his operations. It was his determination to feel the enemy on the side
of Batavia, and when he had engaged their attention in that quarter,
then to fall back rapidly, and advance on the road to Cornelis.
On the morning’ of the sixth. Colonel Gillespie aeeompanied by the
officers of his staff, and Captain Dickson, Aid-de-Camp to the Com-
mander in Chief, with a small escort of dragoons, reconnoitred the road
and country all along the coast towards Batavia, proceeding as far as
Anjole Point, about two miles from the capital. The videttes of the
enemy were discovered on the other side of the water, but the bridge
across the Anjole river was already burnt.
From the report made to the Commander in Chief, his Excellency
directed the advance to countermarch that evening, and occupy a new
position at Tanjong Priock, some distance in front of General We-
therall, and about six miles from the capital. The reserve took up the
ground which had been quitted by the advance beyond Chillingching.
The country to the Anjole river was so intricate, as to occasion no


small surprise at its being surrendered to us without any opposition.
The inactivity of the enemy, tlie little appearance of force on the Bata-
via side of the river, and a very serious conflagration in that city, fixed
the resolution of the Commander in Chief to attempt a passage the next
night. Accordingly, on the seventh of August, the infantry attached
to the advance pushed forward and crossed the Anjole river at ten
o’clock at night, over a bridge of boats which had been rowed in after
dark for that purpose, under the direction of Captain Sayer of the
Leda, and Captains Reynolds and Mansell of the Hesper and Procris.
The troops could only pass over in single file, having to step from
one boat to another, which delayed the passage considerably.
A part of the horse artillery and the Bengal light infantry battalion,
were drawn up behind the banks of the river, which concealed them,
and served as a parapet to protect the passage, and to act as a reserve,
according to circumstances. It was, indeed, natural to have expected
that the passage of the Anjole river would have been warmly con-
tested by the enemy, as they could not fail to be apprised of our inten-
tion, by observing the boats that had been rowed up the river; and
certainly few countries exhibit greater difficulties than this, to an
attacking army, and such as when proper advantage is taken of them
are peculiarly favourable in defensive warfare.
By midnight the whole party had crossed over, and at the dawn of
day the advance was posted near the suburbs, about one mile from
the town, in positions which the nature of such an intersected country
pointed out as most eligible, amongst the numerous canals and rivu-
lets ; the bridges over which had all been broken down and carried
away or burnt by the enemy, in the view of impeding our approach by


every difficulty they could throw in the way, without hazarding'the
consequences of actual engagements. While the advanced troops
were thus gaining ground, the line was moved forward to the river,
ready to support them ; the reserve, reinforced by a battalion of ma-
rines and a troop of cavalry remaining at Chillingching.
The following morning, the eighth of August, Captains Tylden and
Dickson, Aids-de-Camp to the Commander in Chief, having sum-
moned the town, returned with the head magistrate. Mayor Hille-
brink, who was deputed on the part of the burghers to crave our
protection. Though no correct information, could hereby be obtained ;
yet it was evident that the whole of the enemy’s force was in the neigh-
bourhood of Batavia, at Weltervreeden and Cornells; and might, for
any thing we knew to the contrary, even occupy part of the suburbs,
or be concealed in the town.
The houses all along uui present position were deserted as all the
respectable inhabitants had been compelled to retire into the interior
by positive orders from General Janssens, to prevent the possibility of
their giving to the British any assistance or intelligence. By a gene-
ral proclamation no more than one jar of water was permitted to
be kept in any house or family for their own consumption ; and
lastly, as we advanced, the conduits by which the water used
for drinking was conveyed from the inland parts of the city, were
destroyed, in order to distress the army by cutting off that indis-
pensable article.
Thus situated, surrounded by every thing inimical, it became
necessary to proceed with great caution. A small party on 1 y was
directed to enter the town, to feel their way and make a report.
E


This consisted of the ride and light company of the fifty-ninth
regiment under Captain Watts, accompanied by Captain Thorn,
Brigade Major of the advance. Several of the enemy’s scouts
shewed themselves as the party marched through the suburbs;
but they instantly gallopped off in the direction of Weltervreeden.
The detachment repaired immediately to the town-house, which
they occupied, and by their presence put a stop to the plundering
which had been carried on by the Malays since our landing, and
thus several large stores of colonial goods were timely saved from
plunder or the flames.
Colonel Agnew, Adjutant General, arrived shortly after, and
communicated to the assembled magistrates and captains of the
different classes of native inhabitants, the pleasure of the Com-
mander in Chief with respect to such local and civil arrangements
as the case required; the town having surrendered at discretion.
A royal salute was fired from the shipping* in the Roads, on
hoisting the British colours at the Crane Wharf. In the evening
Colonel Gillespie with the greater part of the advance entered the
town, and after drawing up in the grand square in front of the
town-house, and taking formal possession of the place, the troops were
dismissed to their quarters.
Various reports were circulated in the course of this evening
of a meditated attack from the enemy, who were at Wfeltervreeden,
not more than three miles distant. The suspicious and extraor-
dinary manner of several of the French officers in the town, whose
conduct could not escape notice, with other concurring circum-
stances, rendered it but too probable that these rumours would




Plate VII.


be soon verified ; and this apprehension received additional strength
from the consideration of the smallness of our force, which, in the
town, did not exceed eight hundred men. And as there were no
guns or defences to the place, our vigilance was increased, and every
precaution of course was adopted to prevent a surprise. Captain
Robison, Aid-de-Camp to Lord Min to, who carried a summons to
General Janssens to surrender the island, returned about ten o’clock
P. M. with his answer, wherein he stated that he was a French
General, and would defend his charge to the last extremity.
Captain Robison was conducted blindfolded through their lines ;
but as he went along he heard a great bustle of men and horses,
with the moving of wheel carriages of the artillery, which served
still more to confirm our suspicions.
About eleven o’clock at night, the troops were silently called
out, and ordered to lie on their arms in the grand square in front of
the town-house. Scarcely had they reached the square, when the
head of the enemy’s column appeared, and opened a fire of musquetry
upon our picquet that was stationed at the bridge leading from
Weltervreeden to the town, under the orders of Captain Trench of
the eighty-ninth regiment, who had just time to raise the drawbridge.*
The firing was now heard in all directions round the town, when
Colonel Gillespie sallied out at the head of a party, at a gateway on
the west side of the city, with the intention of suddenly falling upon
* On hearing the firing, the Mayor, who had been observed particularly alarmed the
whole time of supper, and the officers before mentioned, who were present at the Com-
-ruanding Officer’s quarters, instantly started up and attempted to escape 5 but they were
stopped, and a guard was placed over them.
E 2


the enemy’s advance by surprize and charging- them in flank. This
movement had the desired effect. The firing soon afterwards ceased,
and the enemy were no more heard or seen during the remainder of
the night.
Several of the assailants were killed by our videttes posted on the
outside of the drawbridge, who fired into their column to give the
alarm ; but not one casualty happened on our side. The darkness of
the night, and the positive orders given to our troops not to fire un-
necessarily, but to trust to their bayonets, prevented the enemy from
discovering our several posts ; and consequently this want of direction
for his fire, rendered it ineffectual.
The enemy had imagined that the two enmpanies which marched
into the city in the morning would fall an easy sacrifice, not having
been aware at first of the reinforcement which very fortunately joined
them in the evening.
On being informed of it by their emissaries in the city, and finding
that the rest of the British army was still at a distance, separated from
the town by the river Anjole, they still flattered themselves with the
expectation of realizing their project by employing a larger force,
and accordingly marched a strong column on this night attack ; the
rear of which, it was reported, extended to Weltervreeden, when the
head of the column reached the suburbs.
They had also relied on the effects which they expected would have
been produced on our soldiers from the great quantity of deleterious
liquor stored up in every house, and which the Chinese and other
inhabitants (in conformity doubtless to instructions from the enemy)
pressed on the soldiers in lieu of water, which they wanted; but ail




Plate VIII.
Castle and Wharf at Batavia


these contrivances were timely counteracted, and their ill effects pre-
vented, by the decisive measures adopted by Colonel Gillespie, who
commanded in the city.
The troops continued under arms the whole night, and the next day
part of the horse artillery and a troop of dragoons joined our little
garrison.
In the Castle, and the arsenals at the Wharf, a number of guns
were found, mostly of brass, together with a great quantity of naval
and military stores.
In the following night the town had nearly been destroyed with
every soul in it, by a Malay, who most fortunately was discovered in
time, with a fire-brand in his hand, in the act of firing wooden
zincs, which contained a great quantity of gun-powder. It was at
two o’clock in the morning of the tenth of August, when relieving
the guards, preparatory to an attack on the enemy’s positions near
Weltervreeden, that this circumstance happened, and its providential
discovery saved the town and thousands of people. The incendiary
was hanged the next day.


SECTION II
The Action of the Tenth of August.
The bridge over tlie Aiijole river Laving been rendered suffi-
ciently strong to bear the passage of guns, the army prepared to cross
early on the morning of the tenth of August; while the advance
marched from Batavia under the orders of Colonel Gillespie, amount-
ing to about one thousand European troops, and four hundred and
fifty natives.
This force moved at four o’clock in the morning from the town, and
continued along the road to Weltervreeden, through Molenvleet, in
profound silencef.
t The Commanding Officer’s quarters, which the magistrates had allotted to Colonel
Gillespie, were kept by a Frenchman who had been a menial servant of General Daendels.
This man, just before we mounted our horses, poisoned the coffee which had been called for,
with some villainous drug; and it had such an immediate effect, that Colonel Gillespie and
every officer of his staff, and others who had tasted of it, were all at once seized with most
violent pains and vomitings. The fellow had a cup poured down his own throat, though very
much against his will ; and it produced the same effect on him, only a little more powerful.
The occupation of the moment, and other more serious matter which then engaged every
person, prevented a farther examination into this abominable act, of which the motives were
but too obvious—at a moment when the fellow well knew that we were going into action.
He afterwards got off to America.




Plate IX.
Plan
OF THE ACTION NEAR WELTERVREEDEN
Between the British Advance Commanded by COLONEL R.R. GILLESPIE, and the French
Advanced Division, Strongly posted under GENERAL JUMEL, 10th Aug. 1811


The houses, mostly very superb buildings, all along this tract,
were deserted for the reasons already mentioned.
Various signals, blue lights, &c. were exhibited by the enemy as
we approached the Champ de Mars. At the break of day we ar-
rived at the cantonment of Weltervreeden, and found it abandoned;
the enemy’s troops having all retrograded to their strong position,
about a mile further on the road towards Cornelis. We advanced to
the attack in two columns. The enemy’s right was protected by
the Slokan ; their left by the Great River, over which there was a
bridge, at that time in flames. Pepper plantations covered and con-
cealed their line, and an abbatis had been felled to block up the road
leading to Cornelis, which was a continuation of the one on which
Colonel Gillespie’s left was advancing, and behind this the enemy
had placed four horse artillery guns, which opened their tire as soon
as our troops composing the left column arrived within range of
their grape. The infantry of the enemy occupied two villages
which ran along the wood on both sides of this road, and from which
they kept up a very brisk Are of musquetry.
The enemy’s guns were answered with great effect from one twelve
and two six pounders horse artillery attached to the British advance,
whilst our sharp-shooters made sure of their aim along the whole
front. Dispositions had already been made for turning the enemy’s
flanks ; which object was carried, after surmounting very great obsta-
cles from the nature of the country. The villages occupied by the
enemy were set in flames, and the British troops, rushing forward,
charged their guns at the point of the bayonet.
About this time our Commander in Chief, having preceded his
31
ACTION OF WELTERVREEDEN.


army, arrived at the scene of action, where he had the satisfaction
of beholding* a handful of heroes defeat five times their own number.
The action lasted full two hours, owing to the abbatis and other
impediments which had been thrown in our way, and which the
troops were obliged to remove before they could close with the enemy,
who during all this time maintained a very severe fire. They were
however completely defeated, with the loss of their guns, a number
of killed, wounded and prisoners, both Europeans and Natives,
amongst whom were several officers of distinction. General Alberti,
Chef d’Etat Major, who arrived recently from France with General
Janssens, after having served three campaigns in Spain, was very
severely wounded, and narrowly escaped being taken prisoner. General
Jumel commanded the post; Brigadier Lutzow was second; and the
whole were under the general directions of General Janssens himself,
whose head-quarters were at Struiswyk; but being chased from
thence by our victorious advance, be removed to Cornells.
The army bad now come up and supported the troops in the
pursuit, and Colonel Gillespie at the head of a squadron of the twenty-
second dragoons pressed hard upon the fugitives, who were followed
close under the works of Cornells, when a shower of grape and
round shot opened upon them from their batteries, but without any
injury, as their guns were too highly elevated, and before they could
be depressed our cavalry were sufficiently withdrawn to be covered
from their sight. The infantry now occupied the advanced posts
within eight hundred yards of the French redoubts, covered by the
jungle from the view of the enemy. A very heavy cannonade was
kept up all the day. In the arsenal of Weltervreeden were found


upwards of three hundred pieces of ordnance and a quantity of military
stores, &c. which the French had abandoned on our approach.
This affair was highly creditable to all the troops who were engaged
in it, particularly to the eighty-ninth regiment, who charged the guns,
and the grenadier company of the seventy-eighth. The consequence of
it was that the enemy shut themselves up in their works, and gave up to
us the undisturbed possession of Batavia and of the adjacent country.
Their loss on this occasion was about five hundred men and four
horse artillery guns, remarkably well found in every respect. A few
prisoners were also taken from them. But the most material object
gained by this brilliant action was the immediate possession of the very
salubrious cantonment of Weltervreeden, which was most essential to
the preservation of the health and lives of our soldiers. The capture of
this place was therefore of the greatest importance to the success of the
expedition, as it had always been the policy of General Daendels, in
case of invasion, to tempt us with the possession of Batavia, well aware
that the unhealthiness of the town and the noxious climate of the sea-
shore would in a short time destroy our troops and compel the crippled
remains of an exhausted army to return without effecting their
purpose. This appears to have been also the idea of General Janssens ;
but these views were completely frustrated by the success of this day;
and the severe blow thus inflicted on the elite of the French army
gave them a foretaste of what they had to expect hereafter, and
augured their defeat as certain in the event of a general action*.
* A strict regard to the sound military maxim, that soldiers ought never to be deprived
of the glory which is their due, and which is the most potent stimulant to great actions, will


Brigade Orders by Colonel Gillespie.
Weltervreeden, 11th August, 1811.
“ Colonel Gillespie, in appreciating the gallantry of the troops whom
he had the honor to command in the action of yesterday, cannot find
words adequate to express his thanks, and the admiration which their
heroic behaviour has excited. He will take the earliest opportunity of
particularizing to His Excellency the Commander in Chief, the meri-
torious conduct of the officers and men during the whole of that brisk
affair, and trusts that the victory gained will be considered worthy
the glory of adding a sprig to the laurels already worn by the distin-
guished troops composing the advance.
(Signed)
“ WM. THORN, Maj. Brig.”
Copy of Colonel Gillespie's Official Report to Colonel Agnew ,
Adjutant General.
Weltervreeden, 11th August, 1811.
“ SIR,
“ I Have the honor to report to you, for the information of His Excel-
lency the Commander in Chief, that in conformity to His Excellency's
be a sufficient reason for the insertion in this place, of the official reports, the brigade and
general orders, wherein are detailed the names of those officers whose services were deemed
worthy of being particularly noticed. This in fact is no more than an act of simple justice
to the memory of those who fell in the field, that their relatives and friends may have the
mournful satisfaction of knowing that their loss was properly felt by those who could best
judge of their merits; while the survivors will consider the record as an incentive to pursue
with unabated ardour that course which has been stamped with public approbation.


permission, 1 moved with the advance from Batavia yesterday morn-
ing, at 4 A. M. with the corps detailed in the margin*.
“ After passing through the cantonment of Weltervreeden, in two
columns, I found the enemy strongly posted beyond it, in a difficult
country, having a battery of guns on the road to Cornelis, behind an
abbatis;
“ The action commenced soon after day dawned. From the disposk
tion made for the advance, we succeeded in attacking the enemy in
front and both flanks, which enabled us to force their position ; and
this appears, from what we afterwards saw of the ground, and the very
great strength of the post they occupied, to have prevented a greater
effusion of blood on our side.
\
“ After an action of full two hours we pursued the enemy under theit
works of Cornelis.; and when on the point of advancing the cavalry
to attack, a very heavy fire opened from the batteries, which obliged
me to recall them under shelter of the wood.
“ His Excellency had the opportunity of witnessing a part of this
business ; it is unnecessary therefore to enter into a further detail.
* CONSISTING OF T»E FOLLOWING DETAILS:
Horse artillery, four guns, Captain Noble.
Troop of the 22d dragoons, Captain Chadwick,
Right flank battalion. Major Miller.
Left flank ditto, Major Fraser.
Detachment of the 89th regiment. Major Butler.
Governor General s body-guard. Captain Gall,
Detachment of the 22d dragoons dismounted. Lieutenant Dudley.
Detachment of the Bengal light infantry battalion, Captain Leys.
Madras pioneers, Captain Smithwayte.
f 2


The enemy’s guns were taken at the point of the bayonet, after a defence
of the most determined and obstinate nature. It is reported that the
greater part of the European force of Marshal Janssens were at that
spot; and from the number of European officers killed and taken, we
have every reason to suppose that it was so.
“ In appreciating the heroic conduct of the troops in this sharp ser-
vice, I can hardly find words to express myself. The fatigue they have
suffered since they came on shore, and the almost impassable country
through which they had to penetrate and push the enemy, will I
hope be considered by his Excellency the Commander in Chief as it
deserves.
Of the conduct of the Officers commanding different corps and
companies, (as in many parts, from the thickness of the jungle, com-
panies and even sections were detached,) I have to express my
admiration—particularly Major Fraser and the left column under his
command, who bore the severest part of the action. In the capture of
the guns, Major Butler and Captain French eighty-ninth foot. Captain
Forbes seventy-eighth, and the officers and men composing these corps,
I have particularly to mention : Captain Lindsay commanding the
light company of the sixty-ninth regiment, Captain Cameron com-
manding the rifle company of the seventy-eighth regiment, Captains
Oakes, Nunn, Hose, and Ramsay, which last was severely wounded, and
Lieutenant \ oung eighty-ninth, in fact all the officers and men of
this column fought like British soldiers ; and their gallant commander
Major Butler, ably seconded by Captain French, deserve my warmest
acknowledgments, as does Captain Forbes of the seventy-eighth regi-
ment for the same gallantry. I cannot say too much of Captain Noble,


and the officers and men under his command, who so gallantly fought
the two guns that drew a most terrible fire from the enemy ; indeed
the zeal and ability displayed by Captain Noble throughout this service
demand my particular commendation.
<£ I must also express my acknowledgments to Major Miller com-
manding the right column, to Captain Stanus of the 14th light infan-
try company, Captain Watts of the 59th regiment, Lieutenant Cochlan
commanding the rifle company of the 14th regiment, and Lieutenant
M‘Pherson commanding the rifle company of the 59th regiment, and
the officers and men of their different corps, as that column contributed
much to the success of the day, by turning the enemy's left flank.
I have also to thank Captain Leys, officers and men of the Bengal
light infantry battalion, and Captain Evans and Captain M £ Pherson,
the officers and grenadiers under their command of the sth and 6th
Bengal volunteer battalions attached to the flank battalions. Captain
Leys commanded the detachment of Bengal light infantry in the
absence of Captain Fraser and Major Dalton, whom I found it neces-
sary to leave in command of Batavia.
“ I have also to thank Captain Gall of the body-guard. Lieutenant
Dudley of the dismounted dragoons twenty-second regiment, and
Captains Smithwayte and M‘Craith of the Madras pioneers, for their
support during the affair.
“To Captain Taylor, of His Majesty’s twenty-fourth dragoons, mili-
tary secretary to the Governor General, 1 have to return thanks for his
indefatigable assistance during the whole affair, and his very zealous
exertions during the whole time since we landed, as also to Captains
Dickson and Blakiston, his Excellency’s Aid-de-Camp, from whom


I experienced every assistance, and whose conduct has been most
gallant.
“ Captain Mears of the seventeenth Madras native infantry, who
volunteered with me on this service. Lieutenant Hanson of the Quarter
Master General’s department, and Lieutenant Taylor twenty-fifth
dragoons, who have been attached to me since the commencement
of the service, I have to thank for their gallantry, activity, and
persevering conduct.
“ To Captain Thorn, of His Majesty’s twenty-fifth dragoons, my
Brigade Major, who, I can venture to say, has hardly slept since we
landed, it is difficult to express my value of his services; they are
great; but lam sorry to say he has met with two contusions. I
should not thus have entered into a detail of the individual services
of so many officers, had I not ocular demonstration of their fully
deserving such notice, and should feel myself remiss were I to be silent.
“ I have the honour to be,
(Signed) “ 11. R. GILLESPIE, Colonel.”
“ P. S. Subjoined is a list of the killed and wounded. The gallant
soldiers who have fallen I much lament, in particular Lieutenant
Monro of the seventy-eighth regiment.
“ The loss of the enemy must have been severe. It is difficult to
estimate it exactly, their dead and wounded being carried off the
ground, as fast as possible, in light carts and litters, and conveyed to
Cornelis. Amongst them were several officers of distinction. Besides
capturing the enemy’s guns that were opposed to us in the action,
upwards of three hundred pieces of ordnance have been abandoned
by them in their arsenal at Weltervreeden, and a quantity of military
stores, ammunition gun-carriages, &c. &c. have been taken.


KILLED.
WOUNDED.
HORSES.
s
a.
o
s
rr
a
«
J
a
s
U3
c
Sr
$
| Rank ami file.
iS
o
H
Captains.
Lieutenants.
Ensigns.
Sergeants,
Rank and file.
O
H
Missing, rank and file.
Total killed, wounded,
and missing.
Killed.
Wounded. ■
bC
G
%
s
O
H
Brigade Staff
1
i
1
1
i
Horse Artillery
5
5
2
2
4
Detachment 22d dragoons
2
9
Body Guard .
■)
Detachment 1 4th regiment
1
3
4
4
Right Flank (
Ditto 59th ditto
3
3
3
Battalion (
J
Grenadier company 5th vol. bat.
Light infant, comp. 69lh regt...
3
3
3
Left Flank [
Detachment 78th ditto
J
7
8
1
C.
13
3
16
91
Battalion f
Grenadier companv 6th vol. bat.
3
1
4
Detachment F
I. M. 89th regiment
9
Q
1
2
o
33
38
47
Total
1
—
16
17
3
3
1
4
62
73
]
91
3
4
.Tj
7
RETURN OF KILLED AND WOUNDED
Of the Advance commanded by Colonel R. R. Gillespie, in the Action
of the 10 th of August, 1811, near Weltervreeden.
OFFICERS NAMES.
Killed. —Lieutenant Monro, H. M. 78th Regiment.
Wounded. —Captain Thorn, 25th dragoons, Brigade Major to the advance.
Lieutenant and Adjutant Driffield, horse artillery, died of his wounds.
Ensign Nickison, 14th regiment.
Captain Cameron, 78th ditto.
Captain Ramsay, 89th ditto, severely.
Lieutenant French, 89th ditto.
Lieutenant and Adjutant Young, 80th ditto.
Lieutenant Robinson, 69th ditto
From information just received, one General Officer, a Biigadier, and several field Officers
and Subalterns, are amongst the killed and wounded of the enemy.


Extract of the General Orders by the Commander in Chief
Head-Quarters at Weltervreeden, 11th August, 1811«
“ The Commander in Chief takes the earliest opportunity of express-
ing - his public thanks to Colonel Gillespie for his conduct yesterday.
<c He entirely approves the gallant manner in which that officer
profited by the permission given him to exercise his discretion in
pushing the enemy some distance towards Cornelis, should he see an
opportunity, after possessing himself of the cantonment of Welter-
vreeden.
“ The gallantry of all the corps of the advance has been reported to
the Commander in Chief, as highly honourable to their characters as
soldiers ; but he thinks it proper to name the detachment of the 89th
regiment as particularly distinguished by the energy of their attack
on the strong position occupied by the enemy, and the capture of
their guns. The prompt advance of the corps of the line under Major
General Wetherall to support the advance, and the spirit they dis-
played to come into action with the enemy, gave the greatest plea-
sure to the Commander in Chief, in the conviction that a short time
will enable him to gratify their wishes.
(Signed) “ P. AGNEW, Adj. Gem”


SECTION III
Bombardment and Battle of Cornelis.
Preparations were now made for driving the enemy out of their
strong-hold of Cornells, an entrenched camp defended by two rivers,
one on the east, the other on the west, w ith a number of redoubts and
batteries guarding each of the fatal passes. The circumference of
these fortified lines comprised nearly five miles, defended by two hun-
dred and eighty pieces of cannon.
Here the whole of the French force was concentrated under the
command of General Janssens, Governor General, and General Jumel,
Senior Military Officer. This force had been augmented by the troops
lately brought out from France, of whom a great number were
voltigeurs. But to provide against all exigencies, in the case of any
reverse, the French Commander in Chief addressed the following
circular to the several General Officers and Brigadiers after the action
of the 10th of August, 1811.
TRANSLATION.
“ Sir, ' •
(C The position of Cornelis, the works that have been constructed, the
number of our troops in it, and the quantity of ordnance with which it is provided, rendels
it capable of a most desperate defence against the enemy- It the troops pertorm their duty,
G


and the officers commanding corps execute the orders which have been given to them, it
cannot be carried by a coup-de-main. However, as it impossible that by a sudden surprise
by night, or the neglect of some portion of our troops, the enemy might introduce himself
into the place, and maintain himself there ; I have thought proper to communicate to you
the measures expedient to be adopted for the security of our troops.
u In case of accidents, four openings remain for us to retreat by—First, the passage near
the redoubt No. 3, at the Slokan, a small rivulet.—Second, the bridge opposite to the
redoubt No. 5; this road leads to Pondockghede, and the road to Buitenzorg.—Third, the
bridge on the rear face.—Fourth, the passage of Campong Malayo, which leads also to
Buitenzorg by Bonjonghede, and the road called the Western Road,
<( Should the enemy attempt an open attack by force, and succeed, he will make his
greatest efforts on the front face, and on that of the Slokan, near about the redoubt No. 5,
In this case tire retreat will be made by the rear face ; and if that road is shut against us, a
retreat can be made either through Campong Malayo, or the road to Bonjonghede.
t( If the enemy should penetrate through the face of the great river, or the Campong
Malayo, the retreat will be by the road of the redoubt No. 5, and that of the redoubt
No. 3, both which lead (as has been said) to Pondockghede, so that whichever way the
enemy may penetrate, there will always be a retreat for the troops,
“ At whatever point the enemy may attack, the troops placed near that point will receive
orders to fight to the last man, and wait in their post for support from the reserve. If
these are not sufficient to renew the combat with advantage, and that his Excellency, or tlie
General commanding the troops, should deem it necessary to order a retreat, you will in
that event order the guns to be spiked of the redoubt entrusted to your care, and you will
retire rapidly but in good order as mentioned above. The retreat will be protected by the
cavalry and light artillery. You will exert every means to form your troops in column, and
keep up the street-firing, which is the best for checking the pursuit of an enemy. It must
be tried to induce the soldiers to charge with bayonets.
“ In order to make the retreat as orderly as possible, the troops that are retreating will
rally always near the Castle, and the Bazar of Cornells whether the enemy shall'have
penetrated by the Campong Malayo and the Great River, and that it is necessary to retire
by tire Slokan ; or whether he shall have made his way by the Slokan itself, or the fron t face;
and that consequently it will be necessary to retire by the rear face, and Campong Malayo;


the park of artillery to file ofi first with an escort of cavalry, and the first corps of infantry
that is formed upon the rallying point, the light artillery, and the rest of the infantry,
beginning by those corps that may have suffered most in the action.
“All the grenadiers who can be assembled, the company of the imperial corps, the
regiment of chasseurs, the dragoons, and two light pieces of artillery, the whole commanded
by Brigadier Lutzow, will form the corps charged with the protection of the retreat. The
troops will march in regular order, and observe silence; the last retreating corps will set
fire to the bridges.
“At the distance of three palls from camp, the column will halt to take breath, and
collect stragglers. Should any corps have been datached in advance an attempt must be
made to reunite it by marching again upon a new position at Tanjong,
“ In the beginning of the action, the baggage will have taken the route to Tanjong,
Ijfecare to move as quickly as possible, so as not to encumber the road, by which
the march of the troops would be impeded.
“ I. The principal dispositions are, first to defend ourselves desperately against any
attack of the enemy, without quitting our posts.
“ 2. To renew our efforts, with the reserve, to throw the enemy into the ditch.
“ 3. Not to retreat without orders ; but when such shall be given, to spike the guns, and to
repair quickly, and in good order, upon the square fronting the Castle, assemble
there, protect the retreat of the artillery, and retire by the side opposite to that
by which the enemy shall have penetrated,
,e 4. To set fire to the bridges in retreating.
“ In operations of this nature a number of events must unavoidably occur, w hich cannot
be foreseen ; hut when the general dispositions are known, a brave, zealous, and active
officer will easily find the means of saving the troops, and surmount every obstacle which
may be thrown in his way.
“ His Excellency relies upon your zeal on the present occasion for the services of the
Emperor. . i '
“ I have the honor to be,
“ Sir, &c, &c.
To General de Brigade, commandant les Troupes.” ■ ,
(Signed) " JUMEL.”
G 2


The success that had hitherto attended our operations, was alto-
gether unexpected. The nature of the country from Chillingching to
Batavia, and from thence to Weltervreeden, opposed serious obstacles
at every step. The passage of the Anjole river might have impeded
the army many days, and consequently must in that case have been
attended with some loss; and though the fortifications of Batavia
were injudiciously destroyed, an enemy might still have suffered se-
verely, before he could have penetrated into the town. Again, had
the houses on the Weltervreeden road been occupied, and all the bridges
between the cantonment and Batavia destroyed, it would have been
very difficult to have advanced. But every thing appears to have
given way in the estimation of the enemy to the confident idea, that
their lines could not be carried, of which indeed, according to account,
they were perfectly convinced. The plan of defence resorted to by
General Daendels, was certainly judicious in part. A position in the
country, and in a healthy situation, was no doubt preferable to a
defence at Batavia; but the place chosen in this instance was too near
the Capital, and an enemy had the advantage of water carriage within
two miles of it. Instead of this the situation, especially where the
selection of places was at his command, ought to have been twenty
or thirty miles inland, and all the stores and magazines, should have
been removed thither. These, on the contrary, were left either at
Batavia or Weltervreeden. It has been observed that the fortifications
of Batavia were injudiciously destroyed. Enough should have been
left to have obliged the invader to open batteries against the place. The
garrison indeed might have been small, but select; and in so extensive
a place, a retreat was at all times certain. If three weeks or a month


had been gained by these impediments, the face of affairs might have
been materially altered ; —instead of which, in the course of a week,
an enemy was permitted to pervade a strong country, to pass an un-
fordable river, to occupy the Capital without loss, to possess himself of
warlike stores, provisions, and carriages of every kind, with comfortable
barracks for the whole of his forces, within two miles of their lines,
and to drive them into their works, after a struggle, severe indeed
for a short but which was never for a moment doubtful, and
which must have impressed them with the highest ideas of British
valour and discipline. The only active measure pursued, that of
the destruction of the magazines- in Batavia, was an act of wanton
mischief without answering any military purpose. The immense store-
houses in the citadel, filled with valuables, were all committed to the
dames. Those in the city could not with safety be set on fire ; but the
doors were thrown open, the roofs were untiled, and the doors were
torn up, in order that as little might be left as possible. On Colonel
Gillespie’s entrance into the city, the immense population was employed
in carrying off the contents of the public stores, and the streets were
completely strewed with coffee and sugar.
It was natural that the army should be so elated by their suc-
cess, as to be impelled by an ardent desire to decide the contest, in
an immediate attack on the enemy’s works, but prudence dictated
precautionary measures. The position, though it could only be par-
tially reconnoitred, appeared very formidable; and when so much
had been gained, it would have been rashness to risk the ad-
vantage by any precipitate attempt. Sir Samuel Auchmuty there-
fore determined to gain further information, and to make him-
self better acquainted with the position, before he attacked it;


and in the mean time every exertion was made to facilitate operations
by the landing of the battering guns, and collecting materials for the
erection of batteries. Though from the nature of the defences the
General was aware that our guns would not open the position, he
trusted that they would make the situation of the enemy uneasy,
divert their attention to one point, and reconcile our troops to the
loss which must inevitably be the result of an attempt to carry that
by assault, which their own conviction must ussure them was imprac-
ticable by any other plan of attack. It was expected that a very
few days would be sufficient for these purposes, but obstacles occurred
which greatly retarded the operations.
An advanced position had already been taken up after the action
of the tenth, and our picquets were posted within eight hundred yards
of the enemy's works. A battering train was landed from the ships,
and every exertion was made for its speedy equipment, under the su-
perintendance of the commissary of stores. Captain Limond of the
Madras artillery.
When the enemy were driven into Cornelis, it was not thought
necessary or safe to keep a corps at Chillingching. The reserve
therefore fell back on Batavia, and joined the army; the commu-
nication beyond Anjole river being abandoned, and the bridge taken
away.
During the interval a correspondence had taken place with General
Janssens. He sent in his Aid-de-Camp, with the Master of the Ad-
miral's ship, and some seamen taken on one of the Eastern Islands,
requesting that they might be exchanged for the prisoners taken on
the tenth. The Aid-de-Camp was sent back with Sir Samuel


A uclnnuty’s answer: but a Colonel of Militia, who accompanied the
flag as interpreter, was detained, and General Janssens informed, that
it was in retaliation for the detention of a Lieutenant of Burghers,
who had accompanied a flag as an interpreter, on our part, on the
eighth. The consequence was, that a mutual release of these persons
was immediately effected;
The fifteenth of August, being, the birth-day of Buonaparte, was
ushered in by the enemy with a thundering discharge of cannon from
their numerous batteries, on which occasion also their whole line was
drawn out and inspected by General Janssens.-
On the nineteenth* the enemy endeavoured to fill the ditch of
their entrenchments between the Slokan and Great River; but
observing the damage it was doing to their ramparts, they turned
off* the water towards our advanced posts. It was night when the
inundation was discovered. Two trenches, which were dug to aid
our communications, and shelter the troops intended to guard the
batteries, were filled with water, and serious apprehensions were
entertained of the extent of the mischief; but before day-break the
cause being, discovered, a remedy was instantly applied.
Materials having been collected, the army broke ground on the night
of the twentieth, within six hundred yards of the enemy's works. A
battery of twelve eighteen-pounders was intended to play upon the left
of their entrenchments, and on a redoubt that overlooked them. A
second battery of eight eighteen-pounders on its left, was in-
tended to play into their works, and annoy their position. A third
battery of nine howitzers and mortal's was constructed on the same
line, but more to the left


The troops of the advance guarded the trenches under the orders
of Colonel Gillespie, and every precaution was taken for the security
of the working parties, who continued their labours unmolested
the whole night. The batteries, however, were far from finished on
the morning of the twenty-first. The enemy had kept up a fire
from their works every day since the army had taken post in their
front, but in general they were silent during the night. Fortunately
they did not discover the men at work till the dawn of the twenty-first,
when they opened a severe fire, which somewhat damaged the unfi-
nished batteries, and greatly annoyed the troops in their operations of
relief, the advance being that morning replaced by the left brigade of
the line, commanded by Colonel Adams of the 78th regiment, in the
duties of the trenches, under the superin tendance of Major General
Wetherall.
The batteries being nearly completed the night following, the guns
were brought up by the seamen and mounted early in the morning
of the twenty-second of August, when the enemy made a sortie and
attacked our works. A body of their troops had lain concealed in
the low jungle in front of our batteries ; whilst a strong column,
with four pieces of horse artillery guns, made a circuitous march to
come round upon our left on the side of Weltervreeden. The firing
from this body was the signal agreed on for those concealed in front
to attack the batteries. But the right column of the enemy lost its
way in the dark, and the day beginning now to dawn, their left,
which lay in the jungle, impatient of delay, rushed on a sudden upon
our batteries, and gained a momentary possession of one of them,
whilst the working parties and seamen ran to their arms. The


mieiny, who had not time to injure the guns, were immediately dri-
ven back by a part of the fifty-ninth and seventy-eighth regiments ;
while their other column, after marching and countermarching all
night, found themselves at day-break nearly in the same place from
whence they set out; but they resolved to make an effort, and not
being able to turn out left as was intended, they attacked in front.
Lieutenant-Colonel Clarges, of the sixty-ninth, instantly advanced
against them, from the lines at Struiswyk, with a part of his regiment;
but the enemy having no inclination to stand his charge, soon
retired, after firing a few rounds from their horse artillery, by which
that gallant officer was mortally wounded.
Colonel Gibbs’s brigade, which was quartered in a village, be-
tween the advanced posts and Weltervreeden, was immediately pushed
forward by the Commander in Chief, who had hastened to the spot
on the first alarm, and gallantly supported the troops in the trenches.
The enemy having been thus completely foiled in their combined
attacks, and in their attempts to render our guns and batteries unser-
viceable, began to open a tremendous fire from their redoubts. About
forty pieces of their heaviest cannon, consisting of twenty-four and
thirty-two pounders, bore upon our front, and kept up an incessant
cannonade. The working parties, seamen, and soldiers, employed in
carrying cartridges to our batteries, were much exposed to the ene-
my’s shot, and several officers were killed and wounded*.
* Total Soldiers killed and wounded on the 22d of August, 1811.
Europeans - - - 67
Natives 29
H


On the twenty-third, the enemy were busily employed in making
parapets to their nearest works, and in erecting other batteries. They
did not fire, nor did we disturb them during these operations, as Sir
Samuel Auchmuty was desirous of having every thing completed for
opening with effect the next day.
At eight in the morning of the twenty-fourth, a salute announced
his intentions, which was returned in the most spirited manner, and a
very severe cannonade continued the greatest part of the day. But it
was soon apparent, that though the enemy were superior in number of
guns, they were inferior in the management of them. Their nearest
redoubt was repeatedly silenced, and before the close of the day most of
their batteries were damaged, and many of their guns were dismounted.
During the night preparations were made on both sides for a renewal
of the attack. Our batteries had been originally manned by a com-
pany of His Majesty’s artillery, two companies of Bengal artillery, and
five hundred seamen, which latter were commanded by Captain Sayeiv
Officers killed and wounded on the 22d of August, 1811.
Captain Stopford, R. N. lost his arm.
Lieutenant Farnaby, Bengal Artillery, killed.
Lieutenant Munro, Madras Horse Artillery, lost his arm.
Lieutenant Colebrooke, Royal Artillery, wounded.
Lieutenant Shephard, Madras Pioneers, killed.
Lieutenant Colonel Clarges, 69th Regiment, mortally wounded.
Ensign M'Leod, Madras Pioneers, mortally wounded.
Lieutenant Mitchell, 69th Foot, wounded.
Captain Shaw, 6th Battalion N. 1. Bengal, wounded, since dead*
Ensign Pringle - - - Ditto, - - . - ditto.


of the Leda*. As from the casualties of the day, and the fatigues neces-
sarily incidental to the service, in weather excessively sultry, the num-
bers were much reduced, every man in the several regiments accus-
tomed to the exercise, was sent into the batteries during the night.
The firing having recommenced with great vigour, the avenue from
Struiswyk was so completely enfiladed by the enemy’s shot, that the
* The following distribution of the Artillery and Seamen was ordered for the service of
the several Batteries, under the superintendance of Lieutenant-Colonel Caldwell, Bengal
Artillery.
Captain Napier, Royal Artillery, Commanding the Batteries.
No. I.
12 Iron 18 Pounder Battery.
Captain Richards.
Dundas.
Lieutenant Colebrook.
Ralfe.
Bengal Artillery, «* 36 men.
Royal ditto, - - 36
Seamen, - - - 96
Madras Lascars, - IS
Bengal - - - 18
No. 11.
8 Iron IB Pounder Battery.
Captain Smith, Commanding.
Lieut. Munro, Madras Artillery.
■ Farrington.
Royal Artillery, - 18 men.
Bengal ditto, - *■ 30
Seamen, - - - 64
Madras Lascars, - 12
Bengal ditto, - * 12
No. 111.
8 Inch Howitzer Battery.
Captain Faithful, Commanding.
Lieutenant Scott.
Bengal Artillery, - 18 men;
Seamen, - - - 18
Bengal Lascars, - 12
No. IV.
8 Inch Mortar Battery.
Captain Byers, Commanding.
Lieutenant Paston.
Royal Artillery, - 19 men.
Seamen, - - - 24
Madras Lascars, - 16
No. V.
2 Howitzer Batteries on the rear of the right
hand Battery, to fire across the river.
Lieut. Harris, Commanding.
Bengal Golandauze, 12 men.
Seamen, - - - 20
Total men to work the Guns 479*


liavock made among’ the trees, will long’ remind the passenger of the
awful scene. The accustomed retreat to the cool shade under the
rich foliage and spreading branches of these beautiful productions of
nature, in a climate where their protecting shelter is so needful, was
destroyed; and a new path-way cut through the middle of extensive
betel plantations, through which our communication with the ad-
vanced posts was next established, had also very soon the tire of the
enemy’s batteries directed on it, which obliged us at last to move along
the winding banks of the great river.
Though the enemy suffered very much both in men and guns,
it was evident that to make a practicable breach, our approaches and
batteries must be considerably advanced, which however from the
exhausted state of the troops, the fatigue they had to endure, and
the heat to which they were exposed, were measures that could not
be adopted *. In the mean time the enemy continued their entrench-
ments, extending a double ditch along their front, and erecting inter-
mediate fleches, thus strengthening their position daily, and using
every means to render it impregnable.
The period therefore had now arrived beyond which an assault could
no longer be delayed. It had been evident from the tirst view of the
enemy’s works, that this must be eventually the mode of our attacks
* Casualties which occurred on the twenty-fourth of August .
Lieutenant Paston, Royal killed.
Captain Richards, hSjSK Artillery, wounded.
Captain Smith, Engineers, ditto.
Ensign Sim, Madras Engineers, ditto.


and to this end indeed all the operations of our army were effectually
conducted. It had been found impossible to gain any satisfactory
information of the enemy's strength, or the precise state of his posi-
tion ; such precaution having been taken by General Daendels and
his successor, that the inhabitants of Batavia were totally ignorant
on these points. The nature of their situation rendered it extremely
difficult to approach near enough to reconnoitre, and a very imperfect
knowledge was obtained, by repeated efforts which were made for that
purpose. Prom observations thus obtained, and the incomplete infor-
mation which some deserters could furnish, it was evident, that
uncommon pains had been taken to render the front towards Batavia
as strong as possible ; that the entrenchments could not be forced
without great loss, and that when gained, the redoubts within them,
supported by the whole of the enemy's power, would remain still
to be carried. Under all these circumstances therefore a trout attack
might be considered as unadvisable. A project for turning the
enemy's left by a path which led round the entrenchments by the
Great River was given in, and a deserter offered himself as a guide ;
but on investigation it appeared, that this path would only admit of a
file abreast, and to attack thirteen thousand men, strongly entrenched,
by so narrow an aperture* appeared highly imprudent. This plan
of attack however was not altogether abandoned, but was judiciously
combined by the Commander in Chief with other movements.
Prom the nature of the ground, and the design ot the works, it was
natural to conclude that the enemy would be equally well-secured
towards their rear as on their front face ; and in fact it turned oul
that this was the strongest side. An assault on theii left dank uas


equally objectionable, as the Great River which covered it was unford-
able, with steep high banks and almost impenetrable jungle. Their
position on this front was totally hid from view, and secure from
attack. The only bridge across the river, within their lines, was at
Campo Malayo, close to the rear face, but it was covered with strong
works, and combustibles were ready tor its destruction on the least
alarm.
The only remaining front to be noticed, that of their right on the
Slokan, was unquestionably the weakest. The country was more
open, 'and it could be more closely examined. It was believed that
one of their redoubts was beyond that stream, and might be seized
by surprise. This might have been ascertained by moving a strong
corps on that flank, and pushing forward parties at night, but the
suspicion which this movement must produce would greatly have
counteracted the advantages Sir Samuel Achmuty hoped to derive
from keeping the enemy wholly ignorant of his intentions. With
these views he discouraged any reconnoitring on that flank except
by a few officers on whose judgement he placed entire reliance.
This desirable point, upon which so much depended was at last
clearly settled by an intelligent serjeant, who deserted from that very
part on the twenty-fourth. He described its position and strength,
the bridge that connected the redoubt with the other works, and the
defence by which it was protected.
On this information the principal attack was xdanned ; and the
day that was to fix the destiny of Java arrived. The memorable
twenty-sixth of August was that on which the formidable lines of
Cornells were -stormed.


Colonel Gillespie commanded the principal attack. The troops
under his orders consisted of the infantry part of the advance, which
formed the leading column, and a part of the right brigade of the line,
with Colonel Gibbs at their head, as in the following order :
Sharp Shooters, 14th Regiment, Lieutenant Coghlan.
Pioneers, Madras, Captain Smithwayte.
Grenadier company, 78th Regiment, Captain M‘Leod.
RIGHT FLANK BATTALION, MAJOR MILLER, CONSISTING OP
Light company, 14th Regiment, Captain Stanus.
Light company, 59th Regiment, Captain Bowen.
Grenadier company, sth Volunteer Battalion, Captain Evans.
Rifle company, 59th Regiment, Lieutenant . M'Fherson.
LEFT FLANK BATTALION, CAPTAIN FORBES, 7Bth REGIMENT, CONSISTING OF
Light company, 69th Regiment, Captain Lindsay.
Light company, 78th.
Grenadier company, 6th Volunteer Battalion, Captain McPherson.
Rifle company, 78th Regiment, Captain Cameron.
Detachment 89th Regiment, five companies, Major Butler.
Royal Marines, Captain Bunce.
Dismounted Dragoons, 2'2d Regiment, Lieutenant Dudley.
Governor General’s Body Guard, dismounted. Captain Gall.
Detachment of Volunteers, Light Infantry Battalion, Captain Frazer.
Ditto, 4th Volunteer Battalion, Major Grant.
colonel gibbs’s, column, consisting of
Grenadier company, 14th Regiment, Captain Kennedy.
Ditto, 59th, Captain Olphert.
Ditto, 69th, Captain Ross.
His Majesty’s Ist Battalion, 59th, Lieutenant Colonel A. McLeod,
Detachment of Volunteers, Light Infantry Battalion, Major Dalton.
Ditto, 4th Volunteer Battalion.


These troops moved off soon after midnight on the morning of the
26th of August, and took the route by which the deserter, who now
acted as our guide, had escaped. We had to make a detour of many
miles, through a very difficult country, intersected with ravines, enclo-
sures, and betel plantations, resembling hop-grounds, many parts of
which could only be passed in single file, and though the head of the
column moved at a snail’s pace, the great darkness of the night caused
the troops in the rear to separate from them and miss their way.
On arriving at a place where several roads met, our guide was per-
plexed which to pursue ; but Captain Dickson, of the Madras Cavalry,
Aid-de-Camp to Sir Samuel Auchmuty, having been reconnoitering
in this direction some days before, very fortunately recollected the right
one, which was pursued accordingly, and our guide soon confirmed the
choice, by recognizing objects which he had marked in his escape, and
being now convinced that it was the right road, he went forward with
full confidence at the head of the column, accompanied by Serjeant
Smith of the 22d Dragoons, and both behaved with great intrepidity
and cool steady courage.
The head of the column had arrived very near the enemy’s works
when a report was brought to Colonel Gillespie of the rear not being
up. He halted. It was an awful moment! One of those pauses of
distressful anxiety, which can be better conceived than described ;
and can be felt only in all its force by a soul engaged in a great
undertaking, on the success or failure of which depend the lives of
thousands, and the honor and credit of a whole army. Too near to
the enemy’s works to escape being descried by their scouts and
patroling parties, it became necessary to make a retrograde movement.




PLAN OF ATTACK
on the FORTIFIED LINES of
Cornelis,
Taken by Asault by the BRITISH ARMY under the Orders of
LIEUT. GENERAL SIR SAMUEL AUCHMUTY
Commander in Chief
26 August, 1814
I'iwK c i ; o )~?)
A. Principal,Attack Commanded by CoFßobert Rollo Gillespie.
VONSISTINe,
leading Column,
1. Rifle Company H.M.14^ 1 Regiment Lien, f Coy lan,
2. Detaehm'Madras Pioneers Cap* Stag thwagte.
3. Grenadier Company H. M. jd*!‘Reg*. Cap*. Mi Lend.
4. Right Flank Battalion, Major Miller 14*'.'Regiment,
5. Left Flank Battalion,Caff. Forbes jSj'Regiment,
6. Detachnf. H. M, dg*!f Reg* (5 Companies) Major Butler.
7. Royal Marines Captain Bunco.
3. Detaehm*. Dismounted Dragoons 22 m *Reef. If. Dudley.
g. Di (iovi den*:'Body Guard Cap*. Call,
10. One Winy Light Infan 1 ! Foil BattaF! Cap! Fraser.
11. D° 4*!'Bengal. Di Major F. Grant.
12. Detachment Royal Artillery. Cap*. Byers.
C®l®mel Gifcfcs’s Brigade,
13. Grenadier Company 11. M. 14*j Rey* Cap *. Kennedy.
14. If sg** Di Captain Olphert.
, 13. Di - 69*D". Captain Ross.
id. H. M. sg*jßegiLieu*. Colonel, Alexander Mi Lend.
77. One Wing Light‘ InfaniVal’iliattaliMajor Dalton.
15. Di - 4'!' Bengal. D? Captain Knight.
ip . Detachment Royal Artillery.
B. Attack on the Enemy's Left Commanded by Lieutenant Colonel
If"Mi Lead at the Head of H.M. 6ffl‘ Reg*. '
C. Attack on the Enema's Rear at Company Malayo by the
Column under Motor Yule.
CO It SIS Tltrs 3
1. Detachment Pioneers.
2. Grenadiers 20!' Regiment Benya! N.L,
.3. Two Guns Madras Horse Artillery.
4. A Troop H.M. 22'!'*Dragoons.
Two Companies H.M: Ggj 1 Regiment.
o'. Flank Battalion of the Reserve.
D. British Batteries A Entrenchlf the Remainder of the. Army sta-
tioned, here under Mayor Gen'. Weth era II joined by a Column of
Seamen, under caff Sager R.N. threat':'the Front of the Erusmtfs Position.
E. Corps in. Reserve occupying the Fines at Struiswifk.
The Fortified Lines of Cornelia Comprize about Five Miles in
Circumference Defended bt/ 2<lo Pieces of Canno/v.
The French Arnut Concentrated, within the Works Amounted
to above 13000 regular Troupes, Commanded by teener at,
Jansens Governor General,.
a. The, Front Face of the. Enemy's Position, was Commanded by
Brie/adier GenfJauFfret, under thie Central direction. of
CenlJumel Commander in. Chief, Brigadier Central Canpp
Commanded the. Fact of the S/ollcan, Colonel LEerevisse the
side of the, Croat liver his Chief Fast was FT 7. Redoubt.
The Post of Company Malay o was under
Major Schultz oC the Engineers with, orders to set
the Bridge in Fire the instant the British, Column
appeased which, prevented Major Yule from, penetrating
by that Route, ACa valry Ficy net was Posted at
the Junction, of the. Roads behind Company Ma/nyo
with two Fieees of Liyht, Artillery and a
Detachment of an Officer and Forty Chassanrs, all under
the direction of Major Schultz,
h. The Reserve under Brigadier Ceneral Lutznw formed up
in Rear of the Parle Cans covered by
e. . . . The small Fort of Cornells and
/. The Barracks on the right hand side, of the Road.
e. Four Florse Artillery Cuns directly Facing the Little
Bridge over the Sloklau.
C. Enemy's Cavalry threatening to Charge,
y. . . Powder Magazine.
h. h.h. Barracks.
i. i. i. Numerous Batteries.
I. I. Deep Cuts across the Roads.
in,in.. lions de Loup and chausse Trapes
A. (rn//tm,/i.Slemtts /if:'-’Fr/frr 1.,/nr. London.


and after taking a few paces to the rear, we again faced towards the
enemy, waiting in anxious expectation for the return of the messengers
who had been sent to the rear to close up the column. The day was
now fast approaching; to delay longer therefore for the rear would
have exposed us to a discovery ; while a retreat would have been
pregnant with incalculable mischief, for as all the secondary attacks
were to be guided by our’s, these must of necessity have miscarried if
the main column had retired.
These considerations determined Colonel Gillespie to venture on the
attack with what troops were already up; trusting for timely support
to Colonel Gibbs, whose gallantry and military ardour he knew would
bring him to the scene of action, the instant the report of the firing
should serve to point out the direction of the route. With full confi-
dence, then our leader placed himself at the head of his little band,
and we moved on in silent expectation.
A deep cut across the road close to the enemy's lines, obliged us
to advance slowly, to afford time for the men to form up after they had
passed over.
The morning dawn now shewed us the videttes of the enemy, who
Were posted outside, on the left of the road. They challenged us twice,
and were answered “ Patrole." We passed on. An officer's picquet,
stationed close to one of their principal redoubts, (number three), situ-
ated without the river Slokan, challenged us next, when Colonel Gil-
lespie gave the word {C Forward," and so rapidly was the advance con-
ducted, that the enemy's picquet had not time to effect their retreat,
but every man was either killed or taken.
A general blaze now suddenly arose ; blue lights and rockets being
j


sent forth by the enemy to discover our approach, whilst the artillery
on the redoubts, (numbers three and four,) discharged their grape and
round shot, which, however, past chiefly over our heads. The foe in
the nearest redoubt, (number three,) had not time to reload, for our
soldiers instantly assailed it at the point of the bayonet, and carried it
with such celerity, that not a man escaped.
Colonel Gillespie continued to press forward in order to secure the
passage over the SI ok an, leading into the enemy's lines; and which
was defended by four guns, horse artillery, directly facing the bridge,
and flanked by all their batteries. This therefore was a severe strug-
gle, but the passage being secured, the Colonel next turned to the left,
and attacked a second redoubt, (number four,) within the body of their
works. Here a sharp conflict ensued. The handful of soldiers by
which this was attacked, were opposed by such great numbers of
the enemy, as to call forth the most extraordinary efforts of gallantry
on the part of the assailants. It was however carried at the point of
the bayonet in the same determined manner, notwithstanding the tre-
mendous fire kept up by the enemy both of grape and musquetry.
Several officers here lost their valuable lives in the very bosom of vic-
tory, and many gallant soldiers were killed and wounded.
These two captured redoubts mounted each twenty eighteen flounders,
and several twenty-four and thirty-two pounders, while the ditches
were filled with musqueteers.
Another large redoubt, (number two,) on the right of our entrance was
now to be assailed, and Colonel Gibbs just arriving at this time at the
head of the grenadiers of the fourteenth, fifty-ninth, and sixty-ninth
regiments, Colonel Gillespie directed him to carry it, which was done


in the same gallant and successful manner as the preceding had been,
and under a severe lire of grape and musqnetry. A dreadful explosion
took place in this redoubt by the blowing up of the powder magazine,
which occasioned the loss of many lives. A great number of shells
and rockets were fired by this means, and a sulphureous blast of min-
gled ashes, smoke, and fragments of every kind, bloke upon us like a
volcano, stunning all around, both friends and foes. This catastrophe
was followed for a minute by an awful silence. The Captains of each
of the grenadier companies of the above regiments, and many others,
all found a death, but few a grave ! Numbers of the enemy also Were
destroyed, and the ground was strewed with the mangled bodies and
scattered limbs of friends and foes, blended together in a horrible state
of fraternity. Colonel Gibbs, and several other officers were thrown
by the shock to a considerable distance, but fortunately without sus-
taining any material injury. This magazine is reported to have been
fired by two Captains in the French service, named Muller and Osman,
both of whom perished in the explosion. Here Brigadier Jauffret was
taken prisoner, by Colonel Gillespie in person.
The enemy now renewed their fire upon our troops with increased
fury from their park guns and batteries in the rear, and upon the
little bridge across the Slokan, over which they had to pass.—While
Colonel Gibbs proceeded on to the right. Colonel Gillespie continued
his operations on the left, and towards the enemy’s rear. All the bat-
teries in succession w r ere stormed and taken ; alid being now joined b\
the fifty-ninth regiment under Lieutenant Colonel Alexander M'Leod;
Colonel Gillespie directed the attack of the enemy’s park of artillery
and reserve. The enemy’s cavalry formed upon the left of the line,
i 2


threatened to charge, but were repulsed by the well directed fire of a
party of the fifty-ninth, which were sent against them. The same
gallant corps then moved on in column along the face of the redoubt,
number four, and gained the saliant angle of the enemy's line of re-*
serve, drawn up in the rear of their park guns and horse artillery*
with a double front nearly at right angles, their rear and flanks being
covered by the barracks and the small fort of Cornelis.
The attack was carried into effect with the greatest promptitude,,
and though the assailants were saluted with a shower of grape, the
enemy was driven from all his guns. An attempt was then made to
effect a stand in front of Fort Cornelis, sheltered by the barracks from
whence a sharp fire of musquetry was maintained ; but being soon dri-
ven from this last ground, and the small fort itself at Cornelis having
been carried by our troops, the enemy broke and dispersed in all-
directions.
Whilst these operations were going on by the force under the orders
of Colonel Gillespie, two other attacks were made ; one on the oppo-
site side of the Great River, by the column under Major Yule at Cam-
pong Malayo, but finding the bridge in flames and almost burnt down,
the troops here employed were obliged to content themselves with
firing their two six-pounders of horse artillery across the river, by
which the enemy were excessively annoyed in their retreat. The other
attack under Lieutenant Colonel William M‘Leod of His Majesty's,
sixty-ninth regiment, was made on the opposite side from the main
assault and had for its object the redoubt (number one) which was
gallantly carried ; though unfortunately with the death of the brave
officer by whom that column was conducted.


The remainder of the army, with the Commander in Chief at
their head, and Major General Wetherall, Colonel Wood com-
manding’ the reserve, and Colonel Adams commanding the left
brigade of the line, threatened the enemy’s lines in front, where oar
batteries were placed; joined by a body of seamen armed with pikes
under Captain Sayer of the Royal Navy.
With the view of disconcerting the enemy as much as possible. Sir
Samuel Anchmnty had directed asmalJ party to be placed behind a ris-
ing ground about two hundred paces in front of the right of the enemy’s
lines, with orders to open a fire as soon as Colonel Gillespie’s attack
should commence. This injunction was punctually obeyed, and the
enemy concluding it to be a front attack, opened a heavy fire along
the whole face which produced the effect that had been expected,
for the enemy being persuaded that their front was the object of attack
could not draw any supplies from thence to resist that which was
really made, and it exhausted their fire before, our troops on that side
were exposed to it.
The main attack having been so successfully accomplished, all the
other parties rushed in from their respective points, and together
joined in pursuit of the flying enemy.
The Dragoons now coming up Colonel Gillespie* placed himself at
# Colonel Gillespie, weakened by a slow fever, and quite overcome with fatigue, from his
extraordinary exertions which were all on foot, as the nature of the country did not permit
the use of horses at the onset, and from a blow or contusion he had just received in the
attack on the enemy’s park, fainted in the arms of Captains Dickson and Thorn, by whom
he was supported ; soon, however, recovering, and seeing the cavalry come up, he accompa-
nied them on a horse cut from the enemy’s guns, till his own charger arrived, which he in-
stantl} mounted and headed the fine charge made by. our cavalry in the pursuit*.


their head followed by a detachment of horse artillery, and by a rapid
pursuit of the enemy for ten miles, cut off nearly the whole of them.
They rallied several times, but though their generals and other superior
officers made every exertion in their power to effect a retreat under
cover of the woods, all their efforts were in vain. Our infantry, (the 14th
Regiment,) under Lieutenant-Colonel Watson, and a party of Bengal
"Sepoys, directed by Colonel Gibbs, drove them from their fastnesses,
and forced them from the woods upon the road, where they were
charged by the dragoons.
At Campong Macassar, the flying foe again rallied, and attempted to
make a stand behind broken-down carts and thick hedges, supported
by four horse artillery guns, which they had saved from the wreck of
their army. But our cavalry, led on by Colonel Gillespie, charged in
sections through the different avenues, notwithstanding the enemy’s
Are of grape and musquetry, with such impetuosity, as to bear down
every thing in their way. They now dispersed, and tried to save them-
selves by flight. Arms, caps, accoutrements, and pouches, were flung
away, and marked the direction of their course. Our cavalry rapidly
pursued, and took upwards of six thousand prisoners. The pursuit
was continued with such activity beyond Tanjong Oost, nearly half way
to Buitenzorg, (distant from Batavia thirty-five miles, and a post of great
strength,) that nearly every fugitive was secured, and few succeeded in
reaching that place. Had the French been able to effect a retreat on the
new-erected batteries at Buitenzorg, the fate of Java might still have re-
mained doubtful. But now it was decided. Those who escaped among
the marshes and jungle were very few, and dispersed over the country.
The carnage amongst the enemy was very great. Six thousand
prisoners fell into our hands, among whom were two Generals, two of


General Janssens’ Aids-de-Camp, the Chief of Engineers, the
sary General, and Heads of all the Departments, five Colonels, four
Majors, twenty-one Lieutenant-Colonels, seventy Captains,, one hun-
dred and thirty-four Lieutenants, seven Ainboynese Lieutenants, three
Native Lieutenants, five Sub-Adjutants, and one Cadet. Two hundred
and eighty pieces of ordnance, mostly fine brass cannon, were captured
in the works of Cornells, and several stands of colours*.
Thus the whole of Janssens’ assembled forces, who were here con-
centrated, were either taken or destroyed, amounting to upwards of
thirteen thousand regular and well disciplined troops, a large portion
of whom consisted of Europeans, and troops fresh from France; among
which, an entire and very fine regiment of Voltigeurs, laid down their
arms.
Only a small party of horse, under Major Le Blanc, succeeded in
getting off with Generals Janssens and Jumel. The two latter escaped
by mixing with the foot soldiers in the jungle, and thus were passed
v*
by our dragoons without being known.
Our loss was indeed great; though from the nature of the service, it
was much less than what might have been expected. This fell chiefly
* The new French eagles had not been delivered out to the army at the time of this
action. They had been preparing before our arrival at Batavia, and Buonaparte’s birth
day was to have witnessed the formal presentation of them to the troops; but our taking
possession ofthecity on the eighth of August, frightened them so much, that the eagles were
never hatched, at least nothing was ever seen or heard of them. Our intrusive visit spoiled
altogether the gaiety and sport of Napoleon’s intended lete on the fifteenth of August,
for which great preparations had been already made at Goonong Sarie, the residence of
General Janssens, and which were afterwards found very convenient, and turned to good
account at a banquet given by the British officers toLordMinto and Sir SamuelAuclimuty,
previous to their departure.
63
ROUT OF THE ENEMY.


on the troops engaged in the principal attack. In the two columns
upwards of five hundred men were killed and wounded, among whom
were forty-eight officers*.
General Janssens first fled to Buitenzorg. He had been twice
* B. O. hy Colonel Gillespie, 27th August, 1811.
u Colonel Gillespie feels extremely happy in again having the satisfaction of expressing
his thanks to the troops of the advance, whom he has the honour to command, for their
bravery and gallantry displayed in the action of yesterday, at Cornelis.
“ The high sense and admiration he entertained of their conduct in the action of the
10th instant, was fully upheld in that of yesterday. He has made a faithful report of their
heroic conduct to his Excellency the Commander in Chief.—Where all have behaved
with such distinguished bravery, and praise is equally due, it is difficult to mention indivi-
duals. Colonel Gillespie therefore requests every Officer commanding Corps and Detach-
ments belonging to the Advance, and Captain Bunce, Marines, and Captain M‘Leod, Gre-
nadiers, 78th Regiment, who were attached, to accept his warmest acknowledgements for
the zeal and gallantry, which has been displayed by them all, and they are desired to commu-
nicate to the officers and men under their respective command, the grateful sense he enter-
tains of their merits. Colonel Gillespie begs they will accept as a soldier’s tribute, the
expression of his sincerest applause and heartfelt gratitude !
{Signed) <( WM. THORN, Maj. Brig.”
Official Report from Colonel Gillespie, Commanding the Principal
Attach, to Colonel Agnew, Adjutant General.
“ August 27tb, 1811.
« SIR,
41 I have the honor to state to you, for the information of the Commander in Chief, that
agreeably to the instructions received from his Excellency, I moved soon after midnight on
the morning of the 26th instant, to the attack of the enemy’s batteries at Cornelis. The
infantry part of the advance, including the dismounted cavalry, formed the leading column,
followed by Colonel Gibbs’s brigade. We had to go through a very difficult country, many


summoned to surrender by Lord Minto ; the first time when our troops
obtained possession of Batavia ; and again after the action of the tenth
parts of which could only be passed in single file, and the night being exceeding dark, part
of the troops in the rear were for a time separated from the rest; the day now beginning
to dawn, and the head of the column being challenged by the enemy’s sentries, no time was
to be lost. I accordingly pushed rapidly forward, the Rifle Company of the 14th Regiment
leading, supported by the Grenadiers of His Majesty’s 78th Regiment, followed by the
remainder of the Right Flank Battalion, and the rest of the Advance.
“ We arrived within pistol-shot of number three battery, when the enemy discharged a
round of grape and musquetry, but the work was carried at the point of the bayonet, and
every man in it was either killed or taken prisoner.
“ We continued pressing forward, and got possession of the bridge over the Slokan, upon
which the enemy kept a tremendous fire from almost all their batteries; but we immediately
proceeded to the ailack of number four redoubt, on our left, which was also carried at the
point of the bayonet, under a shower of grape and musquetry.
“ The remainder of the column having now arrived, I directed Colonel Gibbs to the right,
to attack number two redoubt, which was effected in the same gallant manner, by the Gre-
nadiers of His Majesty’s 14th, s<Jth v and 69th Regiments. A dreadful explosion here took
place, which has deprived the service of several valuable lives.
i( Whilst Colonel Gibbs continued pushing forward to the right, and driving the enemy
from their works in that quarter, I attacked and carried the remaining redoubts on my left,
and towards the enemy’s rear, and being now joined by a part of the 59th Regiment, undcr
Lieutenant-Col. Alexander M‘Leod, proceeded to the attack of the enemy’s park of artillery,
which was effected by Lieutenant-Colonel McLeod, in a most masterly manner. A body of
the enemy’s cavalry who had drawn up the moment before, were put to flight by a few sec-
tions of the 59th Regiment. A long and sharp fire of musquetry was now kept up by a
strong body of the enemy, who had taken post in the lines, in front of the fort of Cornells,
but being at last driven from this also, the fort was taken possession of, and the enemy dis-
persed in all directions.
“ Colonel Gibbs, at the head of the 14tb Regiment, and a party of Sepoys, followed up
the fugitives through Campong Malayo, driving them along the road and through the woods.
K


of August. Captain Robinson, Lord Minto’s Aid-de-Camp, was now
sent to him a third time; but General Janssens obstinately refused to
“ A body of seamen, under Captain Sayer, of the Royal Navy, joined in the general pur-
suit of the enemy.
« Part of His Majesty’s 22d Dragoons, under Major Travers, arrived very opportunely,
and at their head, followed by the Horse Artillery, under Captain Noble, I continued the
pursuit, cutting up the enemy, and taking an immense number of prisoners, amongst whom
are a great many of the first distinction.
( f It is needless to enter into further details ; His Excellency was an eye witness of the
total defeat of the enemy, from the extent and strength of whose works, and the num-
ber and heavy metal of their cannon, he can fully appreciate the merits and gallantry of the
troops who conquered on this occasion.
“ The gallant manner in which Colonel Gibbs conducted the attack on the right, and the
various services performed by him during the day, will, I trust, obtain the approbation of
His Excellency, which they so richly deserve,
u To Lieutenant-Colonel M‘Leod, of His Majesty’s 59th Regiment, who so ably con-
ducted the attack already noticed, my warmest thanks are due; as also to Major Miller, who
commanded the Right Flank Battalion, which headed the Advance Column, and who, I am
sorry to say, was severely wounded. To Major Grant, of the 4th Bengal Volunteer Bat-
talion, and Captain Forbes, of His Majesty’s 78th, who commanded the Left Flank Bat-
talion ; and Major Dalton, and Captain Fraser, of the Bengal Light Infantry Volunteer
Battalion, my particular thanks are due for their able support. To Lieutenant Dudley and
the Officers and Men of the dismounted detachment of His Majesty’s 22d Dragoons; to
Major Travers and the Officers and Men of the mounted detachment of the same regiment,
my acknowledgements are due; as also to Lieutenant-Colonel Watson, who headed the 14th
Regiment; and Captain Gall, of the Body Guard ; in short, to every man engaged in this
active service.
te The Officers of my Staff, and those of His Excellency attached to me, all behaved with
their wonted gallantry, and deserve my warmest acknowledgements.
iC I lament the fall of many a valuable officer and soldier, but severely as our loss is felt,
it is much less, than .what might have been expected, when th'e strength of the enemy’s posh


EUROPEANS,
NATIVES,
HORSES,
Kiikd ,
Wounded,
Killed,
Woun-
ded.
Dfissin
13’
Killed.
Jroun -
[
i
JV
jl
J
*T3
1.
X
V
s
p
6
z
£
&
£
Drummers
"C
c
C3
M
c
n
©
5
s
ti
<d
c
U
©
15,
n
3
TDj
5
‘d
C/3
©
a
c
Q
•a
p
cz
c
d
C
r-»
bC
c
£
M
a,
u|
(-
cS
’>
eg
X
“O
c
d
M
z.
o
e
a
c
T3
X
c
c
£
£
1 9
£
o
c
d
2
’>
X
“C
c
H
C
u
©
c
u
z
rj
§
1 P
©
1 =
i
0*
£
■ Cj
0
p
o
p
bJL
<U
p
p
at
at
o2
r .
i
—
__
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
Staff
J
2
2
2
2
2
■«
4
5
i
6
17
23
Mounted Detacjit, 22d Drag,
i
1
12
12
13
6
1
1
i
i
6
8
9
Gov,-General’s Body Guard
J
1
5
5
6
Detachment Royal Marines..
3
3
2
3
22
27
30
Right (
Do, 14th Rgt, Lt. Co. &Riflos
4
4
1
1
1
1
19
23
27
Flank <
Ditto 59th ditto ditto
2
3
6
t
10
11
q
19
BatU (
5th Vol B.ift. Gren, Comp.
1
1
•i
i
5
8
Left r
Detachmt.69tliRgt, Lf, Com,
1
4
5
5
Flank <2
Do. 78tii Light Cam, & Rifle
7
7
12
12
19
Batt, (
Do, 6tli Vol, Batt. Gr, Comp
1
1
19
2
i
2
3
S
1
17
27
78th Grenadier Company ..
5
5
1
2
22
Detachment 89th Regt, ....
A
-A
4
5
3
22
31
3
38
Liglit Infty. Vol, Battalion.
1
1
2
i
4
1
3
’ 1
21
4th Bengal Vol, Battalion ..
1
1
1
2
3
i
9
1
1
26
1
43
Right
Brigade
of the
(■Detachment 14th Res
62
120
68 i
■Ph, M, 59th ditto • • • ■•
1
2
12
IT
i
1
8
3
2
Dd
105
.37
Line*
Company 69th ,.
1
1
4
7
2
119
21
28;
29
3
ti
5
48 62
S
5|29
19
2
313
371
8
2
2
13
4
7
50
V '
1
* V
yield, relying on the resources which he vainly imagined were yet at his
disposal, and by which he might still hope to turn the tide of fortune
in his favour.
tion is considered. The carnage in the different batteries has been immense, and from the
great number of prisoners brought in, both Europeans and Natives, very few can have
escaped.
u I have the honor to be, Sec. Bcc.
(Signed) “ 11. R. GILLESPIE, Colonel.*
List of Killed, Wounded, and Missing, of the Columns commanded by
Colonel R. R. Gillespie , in the Attack on the Enemy's Works at Cor-
nelis, 26th August, 1811.


On the day following, finding that of the remnants of his army, only a
few horse had joined him, he proceeded immediately with them for the
Names of Officers Killed and Wounded in the principal attac k; in
reference to the following Return.
KILLED
22d Dragoons, Lieutenant Hutchins
14th Regiment, Captain Kennedy
59th ■ - —, Captain Olphert
—— , Lieutenant Waring
... , Lieutenant Llovd
/ %/
. . . , —, Lieutenant Litton
59th Regiment, Ensign Wolfe
69th •■■■' ■ ■, Captain Ross
■ , Lieutenant Hipkins
sth Vol. Batt, Jamidar Ransing
6th Ditto do. Subadar Cassa Rain
WOUNDED.
Staff, Lieut. Hanson, A. Q. M. G,
22d Dragoons, Lieut. Dudley, severely
14th Regiment, Major Miller, severely
■ , Captain Stanus
■, Lt. Coghlan, do. since dead
.. - ■', Captain Rawlins, do.
—, Lt. M‘Kenzie, ditto
59th , Brevet Lt.-Col. Alx. M‘Leod
—■ ■ , Captain Campbell
-• , Lt. McPherson,since dead
■ ■— ■ —, Lieutenant Butler
■■——, Lt. Sampson, since dead
■ ■■■ ■ , Lieutenant Dillon
, Lieutenant Penny feather
■■ , Lieutenant Gordon
, Ensign Waters, severely
■ ", Lt. Lowe, Madras service
, Lieutenant Jourdan, do. do,
69th —-■ , Lieutenant Lowry
11 1 ■" j Lieutenant M f Pherson
78th Regiment, Ensign Pennycaugh
■ 1 , Lieutenant Hart, severely
89th —— , Major Butler
, Lieutenant Rowe
, Lieutenant Coates
, Lt. and Adjt. Young
—■ l , Lieutenant Daniel
o6th - - , Lt. Cairns (attached to 89th}
sth Vol. Batt. Lt. McDonald, since dead
6th , Captain M‘Pherson
i Lieut. Murrall, since dead
Light Inf. Vol. Batt. Captain Fraser
, Lieutenant Pearson
4th Bengal V . B. Captain Knight
» Captain Campbell
—■—■■■ •} Lieutenant Hunter
—- } Ensign Anstice
Royal Marines, Lieutenant Haswell
—■■ —> Lieutenant Elliot, ditt«


KILLED.
WOUNDED.
6
>5
TOTAL
K LLED
WOUNDED
HORSES,
Europeans.
Natives.
Europeans.
Natives.
|
AND
MISSING.
Kill*
ed.
JO
a
*
JS
13
c
c
U
y
>Jajois.
c
d
c
3
c
V
5
w
Mi
S
W
5
3
Si.
X
its
2
X
3
as
bp
C
CO
"C
c
X
u
c
sa
*
Subidars.
| Jemidars.
3
■c
*?
1
( RankandFile.
Lieut. Colonels.
| Majors.
Captains.
| Lieutenants.
s
bL
i n
a
| Staff Sergeants.
C
ca
G
w
X
Drummers.
Rank and File.
Subidars.
X
~x
E
3
Havildars.
I
S
s
5
Rank and File.
Europeans.
Natives.
Europeans.
Natives.
0
O
5
<u
§
"bk
a.
*
a,
'C
c
bC
2
o
H
10 August, 1811.
12
1
16
3
4
i
4
66
3
3
1
95
3
4
2
4
7
15
1
1
20
1
1
22
1
i
1
16
1
6
1
2
3
3
2
'37
1
1
i
19
i
67
29
24
1
2
1
1
8
4
13
5
25.
1
1
26
i
3
6
i
i
5
59
1
1
2
16
o
2
8
29
3
1
26
2
397
1
3
Q
80
10
1
556
114
1
11
17
3
31
——
__
—
—
„
1
3
9
2
i
6
93
1
2
2
23
3
2
14
36
7
1
32
2
513
2
4
9
i
107
11
2 736
153
1
13
21
3
38
eastward, accompanied by General Jumel ; and our troops under the
command of Col. Gibbs, reached Buitenzorg the day after. This place
would have been soon converted into a much stronger hold than even
that of Cornells, if we had given the French time to finish the nume-
General Return of Killed, Wounded, and Missing, in the British
Army, from the 10 th to the 26th August, 1811, both inclusive.
Names of Officers Killed and Wounded in addition to those already
named .
Lieutenant-Colonel M<Leod, His Majesty’s 69th Regiment, killed.
Lieutenant-Colonel Campbell, 78th, wounded, since dead.
Lieutenant Ferguson, Madras Native Infantry, killed.
Captain M'Kenzie, 78th, wounded.
Captain J. McPherson, ditto, ditto.
Lieutenant McDonald, sth Battalion Benga],Native infantry, wounded.
Lieutenant W. H. Burroughs, 69th, wounded.
Lieutenant Wm. Matthewson, 78th, ditto.


rous batteries which they had here begun to construct. It has
been already shewn that the intention of the enemy was to have re-
treated to this post in the event of being forced out of Cornells ;
but this design was completely frustrated by the vigorous exertions
of the British cavalry, who followed up the victory with such energy
in the pursuit, and dispersion of the defeated foe, that Buitenzorg
was occupied without opposition by our troops, who found in the bat-
teries forty-three pieces of cannon, with a considerable supply of
powder, shot, and other stores.
The following were the public expressions of approbation which
immediately rewarded those who had been engaged in this arduous
conflict:
General Orders. —By the Commander~in~Chief
Head-Quarters, Weltervreeden, 29th August, 1811.
PAROLE. —MADRAS.
“ The Commander in Chief having received the reports of the Officers
commanding the several divisions employed in the late attack of the
Seamen and Marines Killed and Wounded, from the 4th to the 26th
August, on shore.
Total, Seamen 11—Marines 4, killed. Six officers—Twenty-nine Seamen—Twenty
Marines, wounded. Three seamen missing. Total 73.
Names of Officers Wounded .
Captain Stopford, severely.
Lieutenant Noble, of the Scipion, slightly.
John D. Worthy, Master’s Mate, ditto.
Robert Dunlop, ditto ditto.
Lieutenants Hasweil and Elliott, of the Marines, wounded, already mentioned.


enemy’s assembled forces, performs a pleasing part of his duty in ex-
pressing to the gallant army he has the honour to command, and to
the officers and seamen of the Royal Navy, and battalion of Royal
Marines, who, by the kindness of the Hon. Rear-Admiral Stopford, were
placed under his orders, his highest approbation and admiration of
the ardent zeal and irresistible bravery which marked their conduct,
during the whole of the recent operations, and particularly in the deci-
sive assault, by which, on the morning of the 26th instant, the strongly
fortified position of the enemy, at Cornelis, was carried, and their army
completely dispersed, their Commander in Chief, with a few cavalry,
saving himself by precipitate flight, while a large proportion of his
generals, staff-officers, and troops, were made prisoners in the action
and pursuit.
“ Where ardent gallantry was universally displayed, both by the
European and Native troops, the Commander in Chief can only parti-
cularize those whose rank and situations of particular trust, in the
course of the attack, rendered their conduct pre-eminent.
“ To Colonel Gillespie, who commanded the principal attack, and
to Colonel Gibbs, who headed the second column under that officer’s
orders, it is impossible to say too much ; but the Commander in Chief
will confine himself to the public declaration, that those officers fully
performed every service which he had expected to derive from their
well-known gallantry and conduct, displayed throughout the attack
that heroic spirit of enterprise, which proved them worthy to command
the gallant troops they led.
“ To Major-General Wetherall, the Commander in Chief offers his
cordial thanks for the great assistance he has constantly derived from


his zealous exertions, as well on the last attack on the enemy’s po-
sition at Cornells, as on the various operations by which it was pre-
ceded.
The full success of the several attacks, led by Colonel Wood, of
the Bengal Native Infantry, by Lieut.-Col. IVTLeod, of H. M. 69th
Regiment, who fell in conducting* his column, with that distinguished
gallantry, which had ever marked his long career of active military
service, and by Major Yule, of the 20th Regiment Bengal Native In-
fantry—attacks expected only to distract and divide the attention of
the enemy, is the best proof of the ability and energy with which those
officers conducted the divisions entrusted to their direction.
“ The prominent and meritorious exertions of Lieut.-Col. Adams,
H. M. 78th Regiment, commanding the left Brigade of the line, of
Lieutenant-Colonel Alexander M‘Leod, of His Majesty’s 59th Regi-
ment, Lieutenant-Colonel Watson, of the 14th Regiment, Lieutenant-
Colonel Campbell, of the 78th, Major Miller, of the 14th, Command-
ing the Right Flank Battalion, Major Butler, of His Majesty’s 89th,
Major Grant, of the 4th Bengal Volunteer Battalion, Major Dalton,
Bengal Light Infantry Volunteer Battalion, Captain Forbes of His
Majesty’s 78th Regiment, Commanding the Left Flank Battalion,
Captain Fraser, Commanding Detachment Light Infantry Battalion,
Lieutenant Dudley, Commanding dismounted Party 22d Dragoons,
and Captain Gall, the Governor General’s Body Guard, have been re-
ported to the Commander in Chief, in terms of strong applause, and
the conduct of Major Travers of His Majesty’s 22d Dragoons, and
Captain Noble, of the Horse Artillery, with the detachments under
tiieir command, in their eager and animated pursuit, and dispersion of


the enemy, when the roads were cleared for their advance, merits
every commendation.
“ The Commander in Chief thinks it proper to express his satisfaction
at the support he has received from all the Officers of the Staff, but he
deems it particularly incumbent on him to mark his fullest approbation
of the active energy and gallantry of Captain Dickson, and Lieutenant
Blakiston, his Aids-de-Camp, whom he had permitted to act with
Colonel Gillespie, on the morning of the attack.
“ Colonel Gillespie has also reported the conduct of Captain Taylor,
Captain Thorn, and the Officers particularly attached to his Staff, as
highly meritorious.
“ The Commander in Chief requests Captain Sayer, the senior officer
of the detachment, and all the officers and seamen of the Royal Navy,
under his command, to accept his thanks, for the able and active
assistance rendered by the naval detachment, from the moment of their
disembarkation to join the army, and assist in the batteries. The eager
exertions of the corps of seamen, when permitted at their request,
to leave the batteries, and join in the pursuit of the enemy, gave the
most satisfactory proof, that British sailors, though not acting the
element peculiarly their own, are in every situation ready, able, and
happy, to oppose with vigour and effect, the enemies of their King
and Country.
“ The Commander in Chief laments in common with the whole army,
the many brave men who fell in the late arduous attack; but it is
ever a pleasing consolation to the surviving friends and relatives of
a gallant soldier, when he meets that fate, which sooner or later, is
L


common to all men, in the execution of his noblest duties—dies with
honour- as these brave men whom he now laments have done, glo-
riously supporting the cause of their beloved Sovereign and their
Country.
(Signed)
“ P. AGNEW, Adj. Gen.”


Review of the Battle of the 26th August, 1811.
While the immediate fate of Europe, and remotely that of the
whole civilized world, appeared to be suspended, as it were, by a single
thread, it was natural for the public attention to be so absorbed in the
momentous events of the peninsular war, as to regard with comparative
indifference the arduous conflicts which were maintained for the same
cause in remoter regions. Thus, the splendour of the action which has
been just described, became obscured by the distance of the scene, and
the pressing interest excited by nearer atchievements. Yet, without
forming the slightest wish to lower the estimation of those exploits,
by which an unprincipled Despot was driven to seal his disgrace in the
snows of Russia, it is but justice to those who had to contend with the
enemy on the burning plains of Java, to say, that a harder fought or
more sanguinary combat, considering the force of the British as con-
trasted with that to which they were opposed, is not to be found in
modern times. When, in addition to this disparity of numbers, we
take into account the peculiar circumstances by which this battle was
characterized; the almost impregnable position held by the enemy;
the skill and vigour with which it was defended; the difficulty and
danger attending all approaches to it; the innumerable Trous de Loup
und Chausse Trappes every where interspersed about the line of
l 2


inarch, together with abbatis formed by the levelling of the forests,
stumps of trees, and various other impediments that rendered the
movement singularly appalling and intricate, some idea, though even
then but an inadequate one, may be formed of the exertions of our
troops on this service.
The loss of the rear of the column, by missing its way for a time,
when the head was within musket shot of the enemy’s lines, at which
moment only the fact was reported to the commanding officer, added
to the perils by which we were surrounded. The fast approach of day,
however, left no time for deliberation. —An attack of such a body of
works, with a handfull of men, was, indeed, most hazardous; but then
the rapid opening of the dawn rendered retreat equally fatal, as the
guns on most of the batteries and redoubts would have been instantly
brought to bear on the only road by which that retreat could be ef-
fected.
As in such a state nothing was more to be deprecated than delay,
the Advance were under the necessity of coming to a prompt decision;
since to have waited for a junction with the rear might have been the
destruction of all, and the ruin of the expedition. It was,
instantly resolved to push on to the attack, knowing that a speedy
support from Colonel Gibbs was to be relied on ; —nor was that confi-
dence erroneous; for, the moment the firing commenced, it served as
a beacon to those who had left the road ; and the gallant and rapid
assistance which was afforded by that excellent officer, effectually con-
tributed to our success.
The overbearing and determined rapidity of the head of the
column* who, by the positive orders of the commanding officer.


trusted solely to their bayonets, ensured the victory; the pic-
quets were destroyed in a moment; the outward redoubt, (number
three,) was carried, whilst with a part of the seventy-eighth grenadiers,
Colonel Gillespie took possession of the narrow bridge over the Slokan,
which was indeed the key to the main object of the attack. This
bridge, which was the only point of entrance, was so constructed with
bamboos, that six men could have destroyed it in a minute.
It was natural to believe that the enemy were aware of the import-
ance of this pass, and the commanding officer was not mistaken in the
supposition that it would be strongly and vigorously defended, as he
found the principal part of the held train, and many of the guns on the
works bearing upon it. The fire was here concentrated to a focus. To
preserve this post therefore, was most difficult; but to abandon it defeat.
By undaunted perseverance the former was done, till a sufficient force
could be collected, to make an attack on the guns, and at the same in-
stant, to diverge outwards on the batteries. These different objects were
at once gained, though with great loss, the operation, however, in which
they were combined, constituted the leading and prominent feature of
the day. When most of the redoubts and batteries had been carried,
and the light became sufficiently clear to render objects visible, the
enemy's line was seen composed of several battalions; upwards of
twenty pieces of horse artillery, four-pounders, besides many heavy
guns, with a large body of cavalry on their left, the whole forming
nearly two faces of a square, were drawn up on the plain, in front of
the small fort of Cornells, by the fire of which we were commanded.
The whole of the column under Colonel Gillespie being now within
the works, at once rushed from different points on this formidable


reserve, and with the rapidity of lightning, overthrew every thing that
impeded their passage. The powerful sweep of that characteristic Bri-
tish arm, the bayonet, was never more vigorously displayed than at
this awful moment; and though wielded only by a handful of troops,
deeds of gallantry were wrought which cannot be forgotten, even in
the distant quarter where they were accomplished.
The main struggle being now decided, and the cavalry soon after
joining the advance, poured destruction and defeat on the enemy.
The attack directed against their retreat, was remarkably line. The
French superior officers and sharp shooters all remained in the rear,
using every means to get their people off, who retired between two
rivers, along a broad road, equally divided by a hedge. Across the ap-
proach, in many places, heavy carts, carriages, and baggage-waggons,
were formed, and behind them were planted several light artillery guns.
When the dragoons advanced, a severe lire both of grape and musque-
try opened upon them,, but the charge of our cavalry, though directed
to a disadvantage, by being obliged to act in sections, in order to force
their way through such passages as presented themselves, was made
with such rapidity, that the rout was rendered complete, without any
material loss on the part of the victors. An excellent officer, however.
Lieutenant Hutchins, of the 22d Dragoons, was killed by a grape-
shot, by the side of Colonel Gillespie ; and so close was the combat in
general, that every officer was engaged at times hand to hand. Colonel
Gillespie took one General in the batteries, another in the charge, and
a Colonel ; besides having a personal affair, in which another Colonel
fell by his arm.
This gallant officer had very nearly been added to the melancholy


list of lamented heroes; for soon after his return from this field, he was
attacked by a violent fever, which brought him to the brink of the
grave. But when medical skill appeared to be almost baffled in its
exertions, and became hopeless, nature happily prevailed in restoring
him to the service of his country, and to renewed exertions in the
career of glory.


Sir Samuel Auchmuty's Dispatch to Lord Minto.
“ Head-quarters, Weltervreeden, August 3 1st, 1811-
“ My Lord,
“ After a short but arduous campaign, the troops you did me the
honor to place under my orders, have taken the Capital of Java, have
assaulted and carried the enemy’s formidable works at Cornells, have
defeated and dispersed their collected force, and have driven them
from the Kingdoms of Bantam and Jacatra. This brilliant success,
over a well appointed and disciplined force, greatly superior in num-
bers, and in every respect well equipped, is the result of the great zeal,
gallantry, and discipline of the troops ; qualities which they have pos-
sessed in a degree certainly never surpassed. It is my duty to lay
before your Lordship the details of their success, but it is not in my
power to do them the justice they deserve, or to express how much
their country is indebted to them for their great exertions. Your
Lordship is acquainted with the reasons that induced me to attempt a
landing in the neighbourhood of Batavia. It was effected without
opposition, at the village of Chillingching, twelve miles East of the
City, on the fourth instant. My intention was to proceed from thence
by the direct road to Cornells, where the enemy’s force was said to be
assembled, a strongly fortified position, and to place the City of Bata-
via in my rear, from whence alone I could expect to derive supplies
equal to the arduous contest we were engaged in. As some time was


required to make preparations for an inland movement, I judged it
proper to reconnoitre the road by the coast leading to Batavia, and
observe how far it would be practicable to penetrate by that route. I
was aware that it was extremely strong, and, if well defended, nearly
impracticable. Advancing with part of the army, I had the satisfac-
tion to find that it was not disputed with us, and the only obstacle to
our progress was occasioned by the destruction of the bridge over the
Anjole River. I approached the river on the 6th, and observing dur-
ing that evening a large fire in Batavia, I concluded it was the
intention of the enemy to evacuate the city, and, with this impression,
I directed the advance of the army under Colonel Gillespie, to pass
the river in boats, on the succeeding night. They lodged themselves
in the suburbs of the city, and a temporary bridge was hastily con-
structed in the morning of the Bth, capable of supporting light artil-
lery. On that day, the Burghers of Batavia applied for protection,
and surrendered the city without opposition, the garrison having re-
treated to Weltervreeden.
The possession of Batavia was of the utmost importance, though
large store-houses of public property were burned by the enemy, pre-
vious to their retreat, and every effort was made to destroy the remain-
*
der, we were fortunate in preserving some valuable granaries and
other stores.
The city, although abandoned by the principal inhabitants, was
filled with an industrious race of people, who could be particularly
useful to the army. Provisions were in abundance, and an easy com-
munication preserved with the fleet.
In the night of the Bth, a feeble attempt was made by the enemy, to


cut off a small guard I had sent for the security of the place; but the
troops of the Advance had, unknown to them, reinforced the party
early in the evening, and the attack was repulsed. The Advance,
under Colonel Gillespie, occujiied the city on the Bth.
<c Very early on the morning of the 10th, I directed Colonel Gilles-
pie, with his corps, to move from Batavia towards the enemy’s canton-
ment at Weltervreeden, supported by two Brigades of Infantry, that
marched before break of day through the city, and followed his route.
The cantonment was abandoned, but the enemy were in force a little
beyond it, and about two miles in advance of their works at Cornelis.
Their position was strong, and defended by an abbattis, occupied by
three thousand of their best troops, and four guns horse artillery. Co-
lonel Gillespie attacked it with spirit and judgment; and after an
obstinate resistance, carried it at the point of the bayonet, completely
routed their force, and took their guns. A strong column from their
works advanced to their support; but our Line being arrived, they
were instantly pursued, and driven under shelter of their batteries.
“ In this affair, so creditable to Colonel Gillespie, and all thecorps
of the Advance, the grenadier company of the 78th, and the detach-
ment of the 89th regiment, particularly distinguished themselves, by
charging and capturing the enemy’s artillery. Our loss was trifling
compared with the enemy’s, which may be estimated at about 500
men, with Brigadier-General Alberti dangerously wounded.
Though we had hitherto been successful beyond my most sanguine
expectations, our further progress became extremely difficult and
somewhat doubtful.
“ The enemy, greatly superior in numbers, was strongly intrenched


iii a position between the great river Jacatra and the Slokan, an arti-
ficial water course, neither or which were fordable. This position was
shut up by a deep trench, strongly palbsaded ; seven redoubts, and
many batteries mounted with heavy cannon, occupied the most com-
manding ground within the lines; the fort of Cornells was in the
centre ; and the whole of the works were defended by a numerous and
well organized artillery. The season was too far advanced, the heat
too violent, and our numbers insufficient, to admit of regular ap-
proaches. To carry the works by assault was the alternative, and on
that I decided. In aid of this measure, I erected some batteries to dis-
able the principal redoubts ; and for two days kept up a heavy fire
from twenty 18-pounders, and eight mortars and howitzers. Their
execution was great; and I had the pleasure to find, that though an-
swered at the commencement of each day by a tar more numerous
artillery, we daily silenced their nearest batteries, considerably dis-
turbed every part of their position, and were evidently superior in our
fire,
“ At dawn of day on the 26th, the assault was made: the principal
attack was entrusted to that gallant and experienced officer, Colonel
Gillespie. He had the infantry -of the Advance, and the grenadiers of
the Line with him; and was supported by Colonel Gibbs, with the
£9th regiment, and the fourth battalion Bengal volunteers. They were
intended, if possible, to surprise the redoubt, No. 3, constructed by the
enemy beyond the Slokan, to endeavour to cross the bridge over that
stream with the fugitives, and then to assault the redoubts within die
lines, Colonel Gillespie attacking those to the left, and Colonel Gibbs
to the right. Lieutenant-Colonel IVTLeod, with six companies oi the
m 2


09th, was directed to follow a path on the banks of the great river;
and when the attack had commenced on the Slokan, to endeavour to
possess himself of the enemy’s left redoubt. No. 1. Major Yule, with
the flank corps of the Reserve, reinforced by two troops of cavalry,
four guns of horse artillery, two companies of the 69th, and the grena-
diers of the Reserve, was directed to attack the corps at Campong
Malayo, on the west of the great river, and endeavour to cross the
bridge at that post.
te The remainder of the Army, under Major-General Wetherall,
was at the batteries, where a column, under Colonel Wood, consisting
of the 78th regiment, and the sth volunteer battalion, was directed
to advance against the enemy in front; and at a favourable moment,
when aided by the other attacks, to force his way, if practicable, and
open the position for the line.
" The enemy was underarms, and prepared for the combat; and
General Janssens, the Commander in Chief, was in the redoubt when
it commenced. Colonel Gillespie, after a long detour through a close
and intricate country, came on their Advance, routed it in an instant;
and with a rapidity never surpassed, under a heavy fil e of grape and
musquetry, possessed himself of the advance redoubt, No. 3. He
passed the bridge with the fugitives under as tremendous a fire, and
assaulted and carried with the bayonet the redoubt, No. 4, after a most
obstinate resistance.
“ Here the two divisions of the column separated: Colonel Gibbs
turned to the right, and with the 59th and part of the 78th, who had
now forced their way in front, carried the redoubt, No. 2. A tremen-
dous explosion of the magazine of this work (whether accidental or


designed is not ascertained) took place at the instant of its capture,
and destroyed a number of gallant officers and men, who at the mo-
ment were crowded on its ramparts, which the enemy had abandoned.
The redoubt, No. 1, against which Lieutenant-Colonel McLeod's at-
tack was directed, was carried in as gallant a style; and I lament to
state, that most valiant and experienced officer fell at the moment of
victory. The front of the position was now open, and the troops rushed
in from every quarter.
“ During the operations on the right, Colonel Gillespie pursued his
advantage to the left, carrying the enemy’s redoubts towards the rear;
and being joined by Lieutenant-Colonel Alexander M‘Leod, of the
50th, with part of that corps, he directed him to attack the park of ar-
tillery, which that officer carried in a most masterly manner, putting
to flight a body of the enemy’s cavalry that formed, and attempted to
defend it. A sharp fire of musquetry was now kept up by a strong
body of the enemy, who had taken post in the lines in front of fort
Cornelis ; but were driven from them, the fort taken, and the enemy
completely dispersed. They were pursued by Colonel Gillespie, with
the 14th regiment, a party of Hepoys, and the seamen from the batteries,
under Captain Sayer, of the Koyal Navy. By this time, the cavalry
and horse artillery had effected a passage through the lines, the former
commanded by Major Travers, and the latter by Captain Noble ; and
with the gallant Colonel at their head, the pursuit was continued, till
the whole of the enemy’s army was killed, taken, or dispersed.
“ Major Yule’s attack was equally spirited, but after routing the
enemy’s force at Campong Malayo, and killing many of them, he
found the bridge on fire, and was unable to penetrate further.


I have the honour to enclose a return of the loss sustained, from
our landing on the fourth, to the twenty-sixth inclusive ; sincerely I
lament its extent, and the many valuable and able officers that have
unfortunately fallen ; but when the prepared state of the enemy, their
numbers., and the strength of their positions are considered, I trust it
will not be deemed heavier than might be expected. Their’s has
greatly exceeded it. In the action of the twenty-sixth, the numbers
killed were immense, but it has been impossible to form any accurate
statement of the amount.
“ About one thousand have been buried in the works. Multitudes
were cut down in the retreat, the rivers are choaked up with dead,
and the huts and woods were filled with the wounded, who have since
expired. We have taken near five thousand prisoners ; among whom
are three General Officers, thirty-four Field Officers, seventy Captains,
and one hundred and fifty Subaltern Officers. General Janssens made
his escape with difficulty during the action, and reached Buitenzorg, a
distance of thirty miles, with a few cavalry, the sole remains of an
army of ten thousand men. This place he has since evacuated, and fled
to the Eastward. A detachment of our troops is in possession of it.
“ The superior discipline and invincible courage which have so
highly distinguished the British army, were never more fully dis-
played, and I have the heartfelt pleasure to add, that they have not
been clouded by any acts of insubordination.
<£ I have the honor to enclose a copy of the orders I have directed to
be issued, thanking the troops in general for their services, and parti-
cularizing some of the officers, who from their rank or situations, were
more fortunate than their equally gallant companions, in opportunities


of distinguishing themselves, and serving their Sovereign and their coun-
try. But I must not omit noticing to your Lordship the very particu-
lar merit of Colonel Gillespie, to whose assistance in planning the
principal attack, and to whose gallantry, energy, and judgement in
executing it, the success is greatly to be attributed.
£C To the general Staff of the army, as well as rny own Staff, I feel
myself particularly indebted: the professional knowledge, zeal, and
activity of Colonel Eden, Quarter Master General, have been essenti-
ally useful to me ; but I cannot express how much I have benefited
by the able assistance and laborious exertions of Colonel Agnew, the
Adjutant General, an officer vhose activity and meritorious services
have frequently attracted the notice, and received the thanks of the
Governments in India.
“ It is with particular pleasure I assure your Lordship, that I have
received the most cordial support from the Honourable Rear Admiral
Stopford, and Commodore Broughton, during the period of their com-
manding the squadron. The former was pleased to allow a body of
five hundred seamen, under that valuable officer Captain Sayer, of the
Leda, to assist at our batteries. Their services were particularly use-
ful, and I have the satisfaction to assure you, that both the artillery
and engineers were actuated by the same zeal in performing their
duties, that has been so conspicuous in all ranks and de-
partments, though from the deficiency of the means at their disposal,
their operations were unavoidably embarrassed with uncommon diffi-
culties.
“ I have the honor to be, &c.
(Signed) et S. AUCHMUTY, Lieut. Gen.”


Letter from Lord Minto to the Earl of Liverpool , Secretary of
State for the War Department.
u Batavia, September 2d, 1811.
ef My Lord,
“ I have the honor to submit to your Lordship a copy of my letter
to the Honourable the Court of Directors, of the first of September,
inclosing his Excellency Sir Samuel Auchmuty’s report of military
proceedings, in Java, to the 31st of August.
“ Your Lordship will observe, with satisfaction, that the conquest of
Java is already substantially accomplished, although the operations of
the army have not hitherto been directed to the eastern parts of the
island. But a powerful force is now embarking against Sourabaya,
where, with the exception of the crews of two French frigates, the
enemy has only a small body of native troops.
“ The Armament, which is now proceeding under the personal
command of his Excellency the Commander in Chief, and which may
reach its destination in ten days, cannot fail of overpowering any re-
sistance the enemy may make, if any should be attempted, and finally
terminating the contest in Java.
“ An Empire, which for two centuries has contributed greatly to
the power, prosperity, and grandeur of one of the principal and most
respected States of Europe, has been thus wrested from the short usur-
pation of the French Government, added to the dominion of the Bri-
tish Crown ; and converted from a seat of hostile machination and


commercial competition, into an augmentation of British power and
prosperity.
“ For this signal, and as your Lordship will collect from the inclosed
Documents, this most splendid and illustrious service, Great Britain is
indebted to the truly British intrepidity of as brave an army as ever
did honour to our country ; to the professional skill and spirit of their
officers; and to the wisdom, decision, and firmness of the eminent
Man who directed their courage, and led them to victory.
“ Your Lordship will, I am sure, share with me the gratifying reflec-
tion, that by the successive reduction of the French Islands and Java,
the British nation has neither an enemy nor a rival left from the Cape
of Good Hope to Cape Horn.
I have the honour to be, &c.
(Signed)' " MINTO”


SECTION IV.
Conclusion of Lieutenant General Sir Samuel Auchmuty’s
Campaign in Java.
The two French frigates La Nymphe and La Medusa, under the
command of Commodore Reval, who were blockaded in Sourabaya
Harbour, succeeded in making their escape the moment they received
the news of the destruction of their army. In these ships several
Officers, Aids-de-Camp to General Janssens, with Dibbatz, Chef de
Battalion, Major Godders, Larienty, Auditor to the Council of State,
and Monsieur Panat, went passengers, carrying home with them to
France, the General’s own account of the defeat which he had sus-
tained, and the consequent fall of this valuable settlement.
In this cc afflicting report” to the Minister of Marine and the Colo-
nies, who is instructed by Janssens to lay it before “ His Majesty the
Emperor,” he states that his army was considerably weakened by
disease and that he never could muster eight thousand effective men
under arms *.
* The French have been always very apt to attribute their defeat to a superiority of num-
bers, on the part of their opponents. An instance of this occurred in the enquiry into General
De Caen’s conduct, on the occasion of the capture of the Isle of France, by Sir John Aber-


Having thus depreciated his own force, and aggravated that of his
adversaries, he proceeds to express his intention of repairing to Sama-
rang, with the view of seeking some resources among the Javanese
and Madurese, it being his determination to maintain himself on the
Island as long as possible, though he candidly adds, “ I must not con-
ceal from your Excellency, that I cannot expect the Indians will resist
regular European troops, or that they can stand against the discipline
of the British.”
When Sir Samuel Auchrnuty was informed of the flight of General
Janssens to the Eastward, he immediately dispatched by sea, a detach-
ment to Cheribon, which place, from its situation, was now become of
considerable importance. The mountains which separate the northern
cromby. The British force is there estimated at above twenty thousand men, whereas the
total number of troops landed on that service, amounted to nine thousand nine hundred and
ninety-nine men.
From the reports and other official papers found at Cornelis, the French army concen-
trated there, could not have been less than thirteen thousand men, on the morning of the
twenty-sixth of August; while the British army, from the number of sick in the hospitals,
&c. could not have mustered eight thousand effectives on that day; and the number of
combatants actually engaged, was much more widely disproportionate, compared with the
enemy’s force opposed to us, without mentioning the strength of their position, their nume-
rous and well-served artillery, and other important advantages.
General Janssens* dispatch is also incorrect in the article of dates, for he states that the
landing of the British did not take place till the fifth, whereas it happened on the fourth;
that the batteries were erected on the night of the nineteenth, instead of the twentieth;
that they opened on the twentieth, when, with the exception of a few' shot on the morn-
ing of the twenty-second, it was the twenty-fourth before they commenced a regular can-
nonade. The General also asserts, that his sortie took place on the twenty-fourth, when
it actually happened on the twenty-second of August.
N 2


from the southern coasts, approach the former so closely near Cheribon,
that the occupation of this place not only commanded the great road,
but tended most effectually to impede, if not to cut off entirely all com-
munication with the eastern part of the Island. A squadron of fri-
gates, therefore, with the marines, commanded by Captain Beaver, of
the Nisus, and a battalion of Sepoys, under Colonel Wood, were em-
ployed on this service. The frigates sailed from Batavia on the thirty-
first of August, and when they appeared off Cheribon, that fort in-
stantly surrendered at the first summons. General Janssens had passed
through this place on his route to the eastward, only two days preced-
ing ; and soon after the possession of it by our marines. General Jumel,
the second in command, also arrived there, without knowing of the
change that had happened, in consequence of which he was taken,
with the Chef de Battalion Knotzer, Aid-de-Camp to General Jans-
sens. Jumel had assumed the command of the troops on quitting
Buitenzorg, but after witnessing a mutiny among the Malays, who had
murdered one of their officers, and then disbanded, be abandoned the
remainder, to follow the footsteps and the fortune of his chief.
The enemy’s remaining force, principally cavalry, consisting of
about fifty Officers, two hundred Europeans, and five hundred Na-
tive troops, who had followed General Janssens by the eastern route,
finding themselves cut off in consequence of our possession of Che-
ribon, surrendered by capitulation, and returned to Buitenzorg as
prisoners of war, together with Major Le Blanc, their commandant.
Carang Sambong was also occupied by a party of seamen and ma-
rines, under Captain Welchman, R. M. on the 6th of September,
nnd the public stores were there placed in safety. Many of the


straggling parties found here, on their way to the Eastward, sur-
rendered themselves prisoners of war. 4 and thus not a man in arms
was left to the Westward of Cheribon.
The fort of Taggal, situated between Cheribon and Samarang, sur-
rendered to Captain Hillyar, of his Majesty’s ship the Phoebe.
Soon after the capture of Batavia, a communication had been
opened with the Rajah of Madura, and a detachment from the naval
force, consisting of his Majesty’s ships the Sir Francis Drake, Captain
Harris, and the Phaeton, Captain Fleetwood Pellew, with their ma-
rines, and a part of the fourteenth regiment of foot, acting in the latter
capacity, was now despatched to make an attempt upon that island.
This attack, through the judicious arrangement of Captain Harris,
with the able assistance of Captain Pellew, and the efficient gallantry
of the men employed, was crowned with complete success.
After taking the fort of Samanap, Captain Harris completely de-
feated a desperate attempt which was made to recapture that place.
Some Dutchmen who headed the natives on this occasion, were made
prisoners, and of such decisive importance was the affair, that the
Chiefs of Madura immediately declared themselves in favour of the
English, and seized the several garrisons that were still remaining on
the island.
A force under the command of Sir Samuel Auchmuty in person
having been prepared for the purpose of following* Janssens to the
eastward, the General left Batavia on the fifth of September, the
troops being directed to make the best of their way to Zedayo, which
was the appointed rendezvous.
Here Sir Samuel intended to land, having concluded that General


Janssens would proceed to Sourabaya, and endeavour to defend both
that place and Fort Ludowyck. The General, on touching at Cheribon,
there found, from intercepted letters, that the object of his pursuit was
at Samarang, with the intention of making a stand there, and of even-
tually retiring upon Solo, the capital of the Emperor. This intelli-
gence determined Sir Samuel to meet Janssens at Samarang; and after
forcing him back upon Solo, to leave him for the present, while pos-
session was taken of the eastern part of the Island, a measure which
the Admiral conceived to be absolutely necessary for the safety of the
shipping before the change of the monsoon. '
In pursuance of this plan of operations, vessels were dispatched with
orders for all the transports to repair to Samarang; and the General
fortunately meeting Commodore Broughton with the-squadron, having
troops on board, requested him to hasten to those roads. On the ninth,
the General reached that place, where he was joined the same evening
by Admiral Stopford, and the Commodore arrived the next day.
Though the relative situation of the two armies by no means ren-
dered such a measure essentially necessary as that of inviting Janssens
to a surrender, yet there were circumstances which rendered the pro-
ceeding advisable. Immediately after the assault at Cornells, a verbal
message was sent to Buitenzorg, with an offer of terms; which Gene-
ral Janssens rejected, on the plea that his resources 'were by no means
as yet exhausted. Notwithstanding this refusal and boast, a consider-
able object was obtained by this step, as it was ascertained that no troops
were on the road; and consequently, that no part of the army had
eluded pursuit. By the present flag, the accounts of his being at
Samarang were fully confirmed. and it was observed also, that he was


attended by a numerous Staff, besides which it was also discovered
that there was an encampment in the neighbourhood. The following
invitation was sent on this last occasion :
General Sir Samuel Auchmuty and Rear-Admiral Stopford, to
General Janssens.
“ September 10, 1811.
“ Sir,
“ After the proposals made to your Excellency at Buitenzorg, we
might be excused again offering favourable terms of surrender. But
your Excellency was not then perhaps aware, that the whole of your
efficient force was killed, taken, or dispersed in the action of the 26th.
You had not, perhaps, reflected on the miseries to which the Euro-
pean inhabitants of the Colony must be exposed from a protracted
warfare. You must be now sensible that the Colony is lost to France;
and though by intriguing with the Native Powers, its possession may
be rendered for some time inquiet, the unfortunate Colonists alone will
be the sufferers.
<c Enough, Sir, has been sacrificed to reputation : think now of the
interests of those placed under your protection. By submitting to a
destiny that cannot be avoided, you immediately arrest the hand of the
armed ruffian, that now riots in the blood of the Colonists. The Bri-
tish troops will then be employed in the grateful office of giving them
protection. But if, Sir, you continue deaf to the cries of a distressed
people,—if blood must be unnecessariJy shed, —if the Natives must be
let loose to plunder and massacre the European inhabitants of Java,
we shall hold you. Sir, and those who continue to support you, as
answerable for the consequences. It is our earnest intention to pie-


vent those horrors. Your perseverance in a hopeless cause, will coun-
teract our efforts.
“ We have directed Colonel Agnew, of the Army, and the Honour-
able Captain Elliott, of the Navy, to wait on you with this Letter;
and we beg to refer you to them for particulars.
<e We have the honour to be, &c. &c. &c.
(Signed) “ S. AUCHMUTY.
“ P. STOPFORD. 3 *
THE ANSWER.
(translation.)
“ Samarang, the 10th September, 18L1.
f( The Govern or-Gen era Z, to His Excellency Lieutenant-General Sir
Samuel Auchmuty, Commander in Chief of the Army, and Rear-
Admiral Stopford, Commander in Chief of His Britannic Majes-
ty's Naval Forces .
Generals,
“ Colonel Agnew, and the Honourable Captain Elliott, have deli-
vered to me the Letter your Excellencies did me the honour to address
to me. Notwithstanding the losses of the 26th of last month, there yet
remain resources in the Colony. The faithful Vassals of the Govern-
ment have the same cause to defend with ourselves ; and I owe to them
the same protection as to the Europeans, the direct subjects of His
Majesty the Emperor and King. I am not insensible to the evils
which the inhabitants of the Colony suffer; but it is not I that am the
cause of their sufferings. I have the highest opinion of the personal
qualities of your Excellencies not to be persuaded, that in the same




Plan
of the
ENVIRONS
of Samarang


manner that you combat those who carry arms, you will protect the
peaceable Colonists and Natives who inhabit the territory occupied by
the troops of his Britannic Majesty, and prevent those horrors which
are not the necessary consequences of a state of war.
“ I have the honour to be, with perfect consideration, &c. &c.
(Signed) “ JANSSENS.”
As General Janssens refused to treat, and the number of troops
judged necessary to attack Samarang were not yet arrived, the Ad-
miral determined, in the mean time, to cut out some boats which
flanked the approaches to the town. This plan was carried into exe-
cution, on the night of the tenth, by the armed boats of the squadron,
under the orders of Captain Maxwell, of his Majesty’s sloop the
Procris. Six of those that were anchored west of the town, with
French colours flying, were taken possession of; but the crews had
abandoned them, and the guns were taken out. Those to the east-
ward of the town had been already carried up the river.
In the mean time, the General waited in hourly expectation, and
with some impatience, for the arrival of the transports.
On the 12th, it was fully ascertained, thaithe formidable works which
commanded the landing were dismantled; and therefore preparations
were made to land that night with the little force which the Gene-
ral had at his disposal. It was discovered, however, in the afternoon,
that the town was evacuated, on which Colonel Gibbs took quiet pos-
session of it the same evening.
o


As it was now ascertained that General Janssens had collected a
considerable force, principally from the Native Princes ; among whom
was Prince Prangwedona, with fifteen hundred men, chiefly horse,
and that having been joined by a regular battalion from Soura-
baya, he had taken up a fortified position within a few miles of the
town, Sir Samuel Auchmuty determined to attack the place, and
force him further into the interior before he began his own operations
to the eastward.
The troops were accordingly landed on the 13th, but at so late an
hour that the attack could not take place, as it had been intended, till
the next morning. During that day many ships appeared in the offing,
and the General again delayed his design, in the expectation of a rein-
forcement, which was very desirable. One transport only, with Se-
poys, however, came in, and the others continued their course towards
Zedayo, owing to a mistake in the delivery of orders. The Admiral
himself sailed on the 15th, to make arrangements for the attack on
Fort Ludowyck ; and the slender reinforcement which the General
had obtained, enabled him to march the same night with about 1200
firelocks and six guns, to attack the enemy.
This force, under the command of Colonel Gibbs, moved at two
o’clock on the morning of the 16th from Samarang; and after a march
of six miles over a hilly and difficult country, descried the enemy’s
forces at Jattoo. The Colonel halted in front of the position before
the dawn, in order to reconnoitre, which was essentially necessary pre-
vious to an assault, as no information, on which any reliance was to be
placed, could be obtained at Samarang.
The enemy were posted on some very high and rugged hills, which




Plate XII.
Sketch
of the Enemy's Position on the Retrenched Heights at
JATTY near SAMARANG,
16 th Sept. 1811


extend for many miles to the back of Samarang ; and the high road to
Solo intersected their line. This road, which had been cut at a vast
expense, was now shut up in many places by chevaux de frise. The
flanks of the position were protected by the extreme difficulty of
the approach, and could not be turned in any other way than by
a circuit of many miles through an intricate country. About thirty
pieces of cannon, regularly placed on platforms, covered the front;
and a valley, of about twelve hundred yards in breadth, separated the
two armies.
At the first dawn of day, the enemy’s position appeared to be so for-
midable, that the general opinion was against a front attack; which,
however, was the measure that the General had determined upon,
though he was neither insensible of the difficulty of the attempt, nor
regardless of the loss which he might sustain. But then it was to be
considered that his hopes of a reinforcement were at an end, as all the
other transports had sailed to Zedayo. His w eakness would have been
exposed by delay, and confidence thereby given to the enemy, whose
flanks he knew were not to be approached. To these imperious rea-
sons, for the resolution which the General had formed, was to be added
the entire trust he placed in his troops; together with his conviction,
that the enemy, on the contrary, could have no dependence on them-
selves.
A detachment with two guns, was sent to occupy a hill, which ap-
peared to overlook the left of the enemy’s line ; and the remaining guns
were brought to throw shot at a great elevation across the valley into
their position. As soon as these pieces opened, the Advance, with
Colonel Gibbs at their head, rushed across the valley, and up to the
great road, till they nearly reached the summit of the hill. Here they
o 2


halted to take breath, and to allow the main body to advance. The
enemy being taken by surprise, did not open their tire till our
were under shelter. Some of their guns then attempted to reach them,
while, at the same time, others tired at the Line as it was crossing the
valley. But the confusion attending an unexpected attack, the tire
from our artillery, the vicinity of the Advance, and the imposing ap-
pearance of the column, will account for the little execution done by
their numerous artillery. With the loss of two men killed, and a few
wounded, the Line crossed the valley ; and as soon as they had taken
breath, the whole advanced on the enemy; who were already van-
quished, and retreating in all directions, leaving their guns behind
them, with the exception of a few light field-pieces attached to the
cavalry. Colonel Gibbs followed as fast as possible ; but though
many European officers and some men were taken, it was soon evident,
that as their principal force was mounted, pursuit would be fruitless.
It was, however, determined to assault the fort of Onarang, a small
square brick-work, about twelve miles from Samarang, on the Solo
road; and as a force appeared to be collecting there, the troops ad-
vanced without halting. The enemy fired from their works on the
Advance ; but perceiving that movements were making to surround the
fort, they evacuated it, though not without committing many enor-
mities ; then throwing away their arms and clothing, they disbanded
in all directions.
This was the last effort of General Janssens, who fled to the Fort
of Salatiga; but finding himself totally deserted by his men, he sent
the same night a request to the General for a cessation of arms, and an
offer to treat for a capitulation. This proposition was the more accep-


table, as the British Commander had given up all intentions of ad-
vancing farther into the interior, until the operations to the Eastward
should be completed, which he had promised the Admiral immedi-
ately to commence.
There were, however, some difficulties to be surmounted in this ne-
gociation ; one of the principal of which lay in the proposal of General
Janssens, to treat with Lord Minto, who was then at Batavia, three
hundred and fifty miles distant from the scene of action, and therefore
an acquiescence with this request would have been attended with seri-
ous delay, at the precise period when it was of the utmost importance
to take advantage of the impression which had been made by our suc-
cess. Sir Samuel Auchmuty was persuaded, that the Admiral would
attempt fort Ludowyck, with his ships, if he saw any chance of re-
ducing it; but there was reason to apprehend, that a failure in this
point, and he knew that fort Ludowyck was very formidable, would
give an unfortunate turn to the campaign : added to all this, General
Janssens might, when the panic of his troops subsided, be joined by a
number sufficient to induce him to fall back on Solo, or by marching
towards Sourabaya, it was probable that lie would be enabled still to
prolong the contest, while, from the knowledge which he could not
fail to obtain, of the actual force with the British General, and of its
inefficiency to the task of penetrating into the interior, he might be
induced to hold out, trusting for some change in his favour, to the
• ■ )
approaching Monsoon, and the nature of the climate. With these
impressions on his mind. Sir Samuel Auchmuty informed General
Janssens, he must treat with him alone, and that immediately. In
consequence of this prompt decision, a cessation of arms for twenty-
four hours w as agreed upon, to arrange the terms.


Sir Samuel Aucbmuty being aware that the responsibility of the
eaty would rest solely with himself, was extremely cautious in the
management of this important business taking care that nothing
should be conceded, which could be liable to objection. He therefore
determined on settling, as a basis, that the treaty should embrace all
the dependencies of Java; that all the military should be prisoners of
war ; and that government should be left unfettered on the three essen-
tial points of the future government of the island; the guarantee of
the public debt, and the liquidation of the paper money.
The articles were framed at the head-quarters at Onarang, and sent
for confirmation to General Janssens, who objected strongly to the
clauses which related to the public debts, and requested an interview
with Sir Samuel Auchmuty. This the latter declined, and intimated
his fixed resolution, not to consent to any alteration in the proposed
terms. As the armistice must necessarily expire, before a final answer
could be received. Sir Samuel determined to advance towards Salatiga;
and he had actually marched some miles, when a ratified copy of the
capitulation was received, though General Janssens was by no means
satisfied with the manner in which the capitulation was forced upon
him, and his feelings on this occasion may be judged of from the
following paper :
c ' When I applied to treat for a capitulation, it was because all my
resources were exhausted ; as long as 1 had any left me, I would never
have submitted ; I could not pretend then, in this situation, to pre-
scribe the articles.
I was affected at your Excellency’s refusal to have an interview.
It would not have bound you to any thing. The prolongation or the


suspension of the armistice, were matters equally indifferent, not hav-
ing’ one soldier left me, the possibility of making resistance no longer
existed. I am perfectly convinced, that if your Excellency had
granted an interview, you would have consented, without having
surrendered any of the advantages to be derived to your Government,
to give terms to the capitulation, less hard and humiliating to me.
“ I submitted, because I preferred putting an end to the miseries of
the colonists, my countrymen, to my private interests. In this mo-
ment, it is impossible, either to ameliorate my fate, or to render it
worse, and I have only to ask orders for my future destination, about
which I am perfectly indifferent. I shall only entreat your Excel-
lency, to soften as much as it is in your power, the condition of the
officers, who had the misfortune to serve under my orders.”
With every allowance for the feelings of General Janssens, which at
this time were naturally irritated by his misfortunes, it is certain that
he had no reason whatever to complain of any harsh treatment on the
part of his conquerors. On the contrary, a review of his own conduct
ought to have satisfied him, that he had laid himself open to have
harder measures exacted from him, and that the victor had, in fact,
manifested a forbearance which afforded a striking contrast to his own
example. The only justification that can be offered for General Jans-
sens, arises from the circumstance of his being in the service of a De-
spot, whose words to him, when he took leave, on being appointed to
this command, were calculated to produce a deep impression on his
mind ; “ Souvenez vous Monsieur, qu’un General Francois ne se laisse
pas prendre une seconde fois ” This observation was an allusion to


the surrender of the Cape of Good Hope to Sir David Baird, and
the whole was a pretty broad hint, that no unfortunate occurrence
would again meet with forgiveness. The remembrance of this charge,
and the apprehension of what might befal him on his return to France,
no doubt occasioned the temerity with which this post was defended,
even when it was obvious, that farther resistance was fruitless, and
that hope was at an end. But though much may be allowed to a
brave man, who is tenacious of his military reputation ; it will be
difficult to furnish an apology for the obstinacy, which indicated a
total disregard of human life, and which, without any adequate
cause, or probable consequence, exposed the peaceable inhabitants,
not only to the ordinary evils of war, but to the ravages of a Malay
banditti.
Another particular, which deprived General Janssens of any right to
complain, was the wanton destruction of the spice stores, in the castle
of Batavia, all of which were burned by his orders immediately on
our arrival. In the same spirit, he caused the rich magazines of spices
at Rustenberg, to be set on fire, after his defeat at Cornelis. These
acts of useless devastation, though they were calculated to recommend
the author of them to the ruler whose commission he bore, ill became
the character of a warrior, much less that of one who had under his
protection the property of numbers, and which thus became exposed
to the most extensive retaliation. British valour and generosity, how-
ever, proved on this occasion, a more effectual security to the natives
and settlers of Java, than the energy or justice of their own Govern-
ment. But warranted as the conquerors would have been by the laws
of nations, in retaliating with severity, and prosecuting hostilities to




THE
Harbour of
GRISSEE,
and
Plan of the Environs
of
Sourabaya


the extremity of an unconditional surrender, without condescending to
stipulate for any term ; humanity dictated a more magnanimous course.
The blood which had already been spilt, rendered it an imperious
duty on the part of the Commander in Chief to stop any further effu-
sion ; and this could only be done by pressing the conclusion of the
treaty. -
An express was immediately forwarded to the Admiral, for the pur-
pose of suspending hostilities in that quarter, as the General was
anxious to prevent, if possible, an assault on fort Ludowyck, nor was
he quite easy with regard to the situation of the troops, who had
been, as already stated, hurried away to the rendezvous at Zedayo,
and he was apprehensive that they might be ordered to land, and act
with a force which he knew was advancing from Madura. He was
not mistaken in this conjecture.
The Admiral arrived at Zedayo on the seventeenth, and on the
eighteenth, which was the same day that the capitulation of Onarang
was signed, he directed Major Farquhar, the senior officer of the army,
on board the transports, to land the troops at that place, and to act in
conjunction with Captain Harris, who was there with a body of Madu-
rese. This force amounted to about five hundred men, one half of
whom were Europeans, with some artillery.
The troops having landed on the nineteenth, occupied Gressie the
next day, and on the twenty-second, Sourabaya surrendered without
opposition, as the news of the capitulation of General Janssens, had
already reached that station.
The Admiral having reconnoitered fort Ludowyck, and finding it
too strong to be taken by a Coup de Main, fixed upon a spot for a
p


mortar battery ; but as the nearest point of land was fifteen hundred
yards from the works, there appeared no reasonable expectation of its
being quickly reduced by a bombardment. On the contrary, such was
the apparent strength of the place, with a hundred pieces of capital
ordnance, mounted on traversing carriages, that there was reason to fear
it would remain in the possession of the enemy, as long as the garrison,
which was a strong one, could be supplied with provisions. In the
midst of this doubtful uncertainty, the capitulation of Onarang took
place, which gave us possession of this formidable station, thereby
completing the reduction of all the posts which the enemy held in the
island of Java. As in this general surrender were comprehended Ma-
cassar, Timor, and all the other dependencies on the Government of
Batavia, these places were subsequently occupied by the British forces
without any further opposition.
Thus happily terminated a campaign, which, from the peculiar
hardships of the service, and the importance of its object, inde-
pendent of the achievements, by which it was distinguished, has
never been surpassed, and will indeed be found to have but few
parallels, when we consider the small number of combatants that
were opposed to the best disciplined troops of the enemy, Euro-
peans and Natives, and who had all the advantages arising from
local knowledge, the choice of positions, and the erection of batteries,
which nature had made strong, and art had almost rendered impreg-
nable. Yet, in defiance of the most formidable obstacles, and under
the pressure of continual fatigue, an inferior force succeeded, by
the combination of skdl, bravery, and perseverance, in overcoming
an army of seventeen thousand regularly organized troops; and ia


making seven Generals, with upwards of three hundred field and
inferior officers prisoners of war ; added to which, fifteen hundred
pieces of cannon were taken, with all the appurtenances of military
stores.
Most truly may it be said, that in no instance has British military
discipline shone with greater lustre, than what appeared throughout
this interesting expedition and brilliant conquest; during the whole of
which, scarcely a single instance of marauding or plunder occurred. The
mind of every soldier was deeply impressed with a sense of the honour-
able duties that were expected of him, and which the public admoni-
tions of the Commander in Chief, tended strongly to enforce. These
injunctions, which were drawn up with great perspicuity by Colonel
Agnew, Adjutant General, were ordered to be frequently read during
the passage, and thus, by being stamped on the memory of the men,
contributed very powerfully to the regularity of their conduct, and the
success which they richly merited. The expedition indeed, was so com-
pletely arranged in all its various and complicated parts, under the
immediate direction of Sir Samuel Auchmuty, whose judicious mea-
sures were carried into effect by the active management of the Adju-
tant and Quarter-Master General, that while the order which was
thereby maintained commanded admiration, the vigilance it provided,
facilitated the conquest, and added value to the acquisition. That this
is neither exaggerated praise, nor the ebullition of vanity, will be evi-
dent from the following testimony, which was borne to the exertions
of the officers on the Staff of the Army, by the most competent judge
of their services. .


Extract of the General Orders by the Commander in Chief.
“ Ist October, 1811.
fC The surrender by capitulation of the Island of Java and its Depen-
dencies, having completed the object for which the army was equip-
ped, it is the intention of the Commander in Chief to return to the
Coast of Coromandel, and to order to their respective Presidencies, by
the earliest opportunity, such corps of the army formed for the expe-
dition, which has so happily terminated, as are not required for the
security of the captured countries.
“ As the separate destination of the officers on the staff of the army
may prevent the Commander in Chief from having another occasion to
express to them collectively, the obligation he feels for their attention
to the duties of their several offices and departments on the recent ser-
vice ; he requests that the Officers of the General and Brigade Staff of
the Army, and Heads of Departments, will accept his thanks for their
conduct, during the important service on which they have been em-
ployed, under his immediate command.
(Signed) “ P. AGNEW, Adj. Gen ”
Nor should the estimation in which this conquest was held, by the
highest authorities both in India and in England be omitted, since it
marks that attention to great actions which'will always prove a power-
ful incentive to honourable exertion and virtuous imitation. The
expression of feeling which pervades the first of these documents, is


to be ascribed to that lively sensibility which must have animated
Lord Minto, in the remembrance of the personal share which he had
in this expedition. That Nobleman, on the arrival of the fleet in the
bay of Batavia, volunteered his services on shore as a private indivi-
dual, and was one of the first of the British advance, in occupying
the village of Chiliingching. Having happily witnessed the conquest
of Java, and completed the necessary arrangements for the local go-
vernment, his Lordship returned to Calcutta, where he gave orders
for erecting, at his own expence, a monument to the memory of the
heroes who fell on this occasion.
Letter from the Supreme Government of India , to the Honourable Sir
G. H. Barlow , K . B. Governor in Council, Fort St. George.
u Fort,William, 26th December, 1811.
<f Honourable Sir,
“ We have the honour to acknowledge the receipt, on the 23d in-
stant, of your letter, under date the 23d ultimo, communicating the
satisfactory intelligence, of the arrival of his Excellency Lieutenant
General Sir Samuel Auchmuty, at Cannanore, and his Excellency’s
resumption of the immediate command of the army of Fort St. George;
and we request you will be pleased to convey to his Excellency our
congratulations on this occasion.
“We have awaited the receipt of the intelligence of Sir Samuel
Auchmuty’s return to India, to convey to his Excellency, through the
channel of your Honourable Board, the tribute of those acknowledg-


merits, which are so eminently due for the invaluable services ren-
dered by his Excellency to our Sovereign, our Country, and our
immediate Superiors, in the exercise of the great and important
command, of which our previous sense of his Excellency's high cha-
racter and distinguished abilities induced us to request his accept-
ance.
tf In whatever degree the late glorious success of the British arms
on the Island of Javd, are proximately to be ascribed to the exemplary
skill and resistless gallantry of the officers and men under his Excel-
lency's command, who were engaged in the operations of the field ; we
must primarily refer the glory of the late achievements, and the final
issue of the contest, to the genius which combined the complicated ar-
rangements of the campaign, which framed the plan of each successive
attack on the enemy's posts, and directed and animated the exertions
of the troops.
“ With that reserve which ever accompanies transcendent merit, his
Excellency has abstained in his report of the operations of the field,
from drawing the public attention to any circumstances calculated to
place in a conspicuous point of view, the honour which attaches person-
ally to him. It is our duty to supply this defect, by recording our
high and grateful sense of his Excellency's merits and services in the
conduct of the military branch of the late arduous and brilliant expe-
dition.
“ We request that these sentiments may be communicated to Lieu-
tenant-General Sir Samuel Auchmuty, with the expression of our
thanks for his Excellency's most able conduct and eminent services, in
the chief command of the military branch of the Expedition ; by the


success of which, a valuable and important Colony has been added to
the British dominions ; and the last remnant of the enemy’s power and
influence in the East, has been permanently extinguished.
£C We further request that this address maybe published for general
information.
“ We have the honour to be, &c. &c. &c.
r “ MINTO.
(Signed) )“ J. LUMSDEN.
( “ H. COLEBROOKE.”
General Orders by the Right Honourable the Governor-General in
Council.
“ Fort William, 11th February, 1812.
“ The success of the late measures for the reduction of the French
power in Java, and the splendid atchievements of the army employed
on that enterprize, were in substance communicated to the public, by
order of His Excellency General Hewitt, the late Vice-President in
Council, at two several periods, when the official relations had not yet
been received, and the sense entertained by his Excellency in Council
of events so favourable to the public interest, so grateful to this Go-
vernment, and so glorious to the troops, was published under the same
circumstances to the army of this Presidency.
“ The Governor-General in Council, penetrated with admiration of


the scarcely paralleled exertions, by which the gallant troops under the
direction of their distinguished Commander, accomplished so signal a
service, cannot but be anxious to deliver in his own name, sentiments
so deeply impressed upon his mind.
“ His Excellency Sir Samuel Auchmuty, has conveyed in his Gene-
ral Orders and in his Official Reports, the applause which is due to
the officers and troops who have conquered under his command; and
that authentic testimony derives a value from his high authority, which
it could have obtained from no other quarter.
fc There is one defect, however, in the praise of these great actions,
which modesty, the companion of exalted merit, could alone have left
to others the gratifying privilege of supplying.
His Lordship in Council, therefore, seizes with the highest satis*
faction the opportunity afforded him of rendering the homage which is
due to the illustrious person, under whose superintending judgment,
firmness, energy, and prudence, the conquest of Java was atchieved
with rapidity indeed, but with as much exertion of wisdom, decision,
enterprize, and valour, as have sufficed for the lustre of much more
protracted periods of warfare. His Lordship in Council does not fear
the reproach of partial exaggeration in saying, that greater glory was
never acquired by the same number of men, in the same short space of
time.
The Governor-General in Council would scarcely think himself
justified in reciting in his own name, however grateful it would be to
himself, the merited notice which his Excellency Sir Samuel Auch-
muty, the Commander in Chief of the Expedition, has taken of indi-
vidual officers and corps who have justly obtained his commendation ;


but in recording, in full concurrence with his Excellency, his Lord-
ship’s cordial and lively sense of the glory which has been won by the
whole army in this signal service, the Governor-General in Council can-
not omit, from the seat of his more immediate authority, congratulating
the army of Bengal, on the distinguished honour which has fallen upon
the Native troops of this Presidency, serving in Java. Opposed as
they have rarely been to an European enemy, they attracted the unani-
mous applause of the whole army; and by steady as well as ardent
valour, displayed in the most trying scenes of war, proved themselves
fit comrades of our brave and illustrious countrymen, whose triumph
and glory they shared. But verbal applause alone to this army would
be a feeble and imperfect acknowledgment of services so important,
and merits so transcendant.
c< The Governor-General, before his departure from Java, has an-
nounced his resolution to propose the commemoration of this conquest,
and of the noble efforts of valour and discipline to which the country
owes so great a benefit, by Medals to be distributed to the troops ; and
his Lordship had the gratification of finding, on his return to Bengal,
that his wishes had been anticipated, and that the measure was already
in progress, by the orders of his Excellency the Vice-President in
Council.
“ To his authentic act of public approbation, the Governor-Ge-
neral has indulged the earnest desire of adding a testimony of his per-
sonal sentiments by resolving to erect at his own expence a Monu-
ment to the memory of those brave men, who in the short but arduous
war of Java, purchased the triumph of their country, and perfected
their hwn title to immortal fame, by illustrious death in the very bosom
of victory. Q


ff As just objects of similar honours, merited in the strenuous dis-.
charge of duties, closely connected with the same system of national
services, his Lordship proposes to consecrate this memorial to the
names also of those gallant and lamented officers and men, who, ani-
mated with the same spirit, fell gloriously in the conquests of Bourbon
and Mauritius.
“ The time that has been required for maturing the latter proposi-
tion has occasioned some delay ; and his Lordship in Council is pleased
to direct the immediate publication of this order to the army of Ben-
gal, to be transmitted afterwards to the Presidencies of Fort St. George
and Bombay, and to the island of Ceylon, the Government and armies
of which have so honourably co-operated in those eminent services.
t " MINTO.
) “ G. NUGENT.
(Signed) \
I “ J. LUMSHEN.
\ “ H. COLEBROOKE ”
General Orders, By the Commander in Chief in India , Lieutenant-
General Sir George Nugent.
“ Head-Quarters, Calcutta, June, 1812.
The Commander in Chief in India, feels the highest gratification
in publishing to the army on this Establishment, and to the troops of
His Majesty, apd the Honourable Company’s, serving in Java, the
following dispatch, received from his Excellency Lieutenant (general


Sir Samuel Auchmuty, announcing the gracious sentiments of appro-
bation and applause with which His Royal Highness the Prince Re-
gent has viewed the brilliant services of the army, which under the
able direction of the above distinguished Commander, so gloriously
atchieved the conquest of the last remaining Colony of France.
“ Lieutenant-General Sir George Nugent, cordially unites in the
sentiments which his Excellency Sir Samuel Auchmuty has expressed
in his General Orders to the troops he so recently led to victory ; and
feels convinced with his Excellency, that they will justly appreciate
the special marks of favour and approbation so graciously bestowed on
them by His Royal Highness.”
General Orders. By His Excellency Lieutenant-General Sir Samuel
Auchmuty, Commander in Chief.
“ Madras, May 12, 1812,
te Lieutenant-General Sir Samuel Auchmuty has it in command
from His Royal Highness the Prince Regent, to convey hi public
orders, and in the strongest terms to the troops who atchieved the con-
quest of Java, His Royal Highness’s approbation of the distinguished
gallantry and spirit displayed by them during a succession of the most
brilliant operations, and in particular on the 26th of August, when the
enemy’s entrenchments were assaulted and carried, and their army de-
feated and destroyed.
“ In communicating so gratifying an acknowledgment ot their valu-
able services,<the Lieutenant-General is convinced that the army it was
Q 2


his good fortune to command, will justly appreciate the distinguished
honour conferred on them, by His Royal Highness’s gracious appro-
bation.
<c The marks of royal approbation bestowed on their leaders, are a
source of pride and gratification to every rank in well constituted ar-
mies ; with this impression, the Lieutenant-General cannot refuse the
assailants at Cornelis, the satisfaction of knowing, that His Royal
Highness the Prince Regent has graciously announced his intention of
bestowing Medals on the Superior Officers of His Majesty’s and the
Honourable Company’s Forces, who distinguished themselves on that
memorable service.
(Signed) “ S. AUCHMUTY.”
By order of H. E. the Commander in Chief in India,
(Signed) G. H. FAGAN, Adj. Gen.
Letter from Lord Liverpool, Secretary of State for the War Depart-
ment, to Lieutenant-General Sir Samuel Auchmuty, &c. &c.
“ Downing-street, December, 1811.
“ Sir,
“ Your dispatch of the 31st August, and Lord Mintons of the 2d
September, with its inclosures, have been received, and laid before His
Royal Highness the Prince Regent.
“ The important result of an expedition which has wrested from the
enemy the only remaining Settlement which they possessed in the


East, and has left them without a Colony in any part of the world, has
afforded the greatest satisfaction to His Royal Highness.
“ Whilst he fully appreciates the wisdom and prudence with which
this most important enterprize has been planned, he is sensible that
the splendid success which has attended it, and has brought to so com-
plete and speedy an issue, is principally to be ascribed to the distin-
guished gallantry and spirit displayed by the army under your com-
mand, in a succession of the most brilliant operations, and to the
judgement and decision so conspicuously manifested by you during
their progress, from the first landing of the troops on the 4th August,
to the day on which the works at Cornelis were carried, and the whole
of the French army finally dispersed.
“ His Royal Highness has commanded me to convey to you in the
strongest terms, his approbation of your conduct, and that of the brave
army under your command ; and he designs that the high sense which
he entertains of their services on this most important occasion, may by
you be made known to them in public orders.
“ As it is His Royal Highness the Prince Regent’s intention to con-
fer Medals upon the Officers employed on this service, in conformity
to the principle which has of late been adopted with respect to the
Campaigns in Spain and Portugal, I am to desire that you will fur-
nish me with the names of those Officers of His Majesty’s land forces,
and those of the East India Company, who have particularly distin-
guished themselves, subject to the limitations explained in the en-
closed papers.
“ I have, &c. &c.
(Signed) “ LIVERPOOL,”


“ Ist. Medals are only to be bestowed upon occasions of great import-
ance, or of peculiar brilliancy.
“ 2d. Medals of a larger size are conferred upon General Officers, in-
cluding Brigadiers, who wear them suspended by a ribband round
the neck. Medals of a smaller size are bestowed upon Colonels,
and Officers of the senior ranks.
“ 3d. No General or other Officer is considered to be entitled to receive
a Medal, except he has been personally and particularly engaged
upon the occasion, in commemoration of which this distinction is
bestowed, and has been selected by the Commander of the Forces
upon the spot, and has been reported by him to have merited the
distinction, by very conspicuous services.
C£ 4th. The Commander of the Forces, (after he shall have been inform-
ed of the intention of Government to bestow Medals,) shall transmit
to the Secretary of State for the War Department, and to the Com-
mander in Chief, returns signed by himself, specifying the names
and ranks of those Officers whom he shall have selected as particu-
larly deserving.
sth. The Commander of the Forces, in making this selection of the
most deserving officers, will consider his choice restricted to the
under-mentioned ranks, as it is found to be absolutely necessary
that some limitation should be put upon the grant of this honour.
Rank and Situations which must he held by Officers , to render them
eligible for the distinction of Medals.
“ General Officers.—Commanding Officers of Brigades ; Command-
ing Officers of Artillery, or Engineers ; Adjutant-General, and Quarter-


Master-General; Deputies of ditto and ditto, having the Rank of Field
Officers; Assistants of ditto and ditto, having the Rank as before, and
being at the head of the Staff with a detached corps or distinct division
of the Army ; Military Secretary, having the Rank of Field Officers;
Commanding Officers of Battalions, Corps equivalent thereto, and
Officers who have succeeded to the actual command, during the en-
gagement, in consequence of the death or removal of the original
Commanding Officer.
(A true Copy.)
(Signed) " S. AUCHMUTY ”




PART 111.
SUBSEQUENT OPERATIONS OF THE BRITISH FORCES.
SECTION I.
Disturbed State of Java.
The Empire of Java having been thus wrested out of the hands
of France, such troops as were not deemed requisite for the defence of
the island, returned to their several stations in India. But the tempo-
rary repose enjoyed by the victors who remained in the country, was
of short duration. The treachery of the Native Powers, soon called
forth fresh exertions on the part of the British troops, whose feats of
gallantry exceeded their former exploits; and who displayed an energy
and heroism commensurate with the magnitude of the dangers which
accumulating around the settlement, threatened its utter destruction.
The Sultan of Djoejocarta, the most turbulent and intriguing Ot
these Princes, having long entertained a rooted animosity against the
Europeans settled in the island of Java, now indulged the hope, and
meditated the design of accomplishing their entire expulsion. Under
the former Government, he had evinced a degree of hostility which
R


compelled Marshal Daendels to march an army against him, and to
proceed in person to his capital. The plans of the Sultan not being
then sufficiently matured on the one hand, and Daendels fearing the
arrival of the British Expedition on the other, a compromise was En-
tered into between them, by which the former agreed to pay the sum
of two hundred thousand Spanish dollars ; which he the more readily
acceded to, as he cherished the idea of being soon enabled to carry into
full effect his vengeful purposes.
The turbulent spirit of this Chief broke out again soon after the
establishment of the British in the island ; in consequence of which,
Mr. Raffles, who had been appointed Lieutenant-Governor of Java by
Lord Minto, judged it necessary to proceed in person to the Sultan’s
Court, in the month of December, 1811, with the intention of fixing
definitively the relations between the two Governments by a Treaty,
which it was vainly imagined would prove as binding on the one side
as it would be strictly observed on the other. But the event soon
proved how fallacious are all professions of amity in the Native Princes,
who are neither to be kept within the bounds of good faith by a sense
of honour, nor by the most sacred obligations, when they cease to be
overawed by the presence of a strong military power.
A treaty, however, was concluded on terms which were considered
at the time as equally advantageous to the British interests, and bene-
ficial to the prosperity of the country which remained under the ad-
ministration of the Sultan. In this treaty, the sovereignty of the
British over the island of Java was acknowledged by the Sultan, who
confirmed to the English East India Company all the privileges, ad-
vantages, and prerogatives, which had been possessed by the Dutch


and French Governments. To the Company also were transferred the
sole regulation of the duties, and the collection of tribute within
the dominions of the Sultan, as well as the general administration of
justice in cases where the British interests might be concerned.
As the Sultan on this occasion expressed his contrition for theatroci-
ties which had been committed under his authority, and also manifested
much apparent sincerity in his professions of friendship, some confi-
dence was entertained that the conditions of this treaty would be punc-
tually observed, and tranquillity maintained. But the power which
remained in the hands of this sovereign, who made such an ill use of
it, was valued by him only in the degree by which it enabled him to
violate his engagements, and to exercise the most savage tyranny.
Experience had, indeed, already proved the necessity of modifying and
dividing this power, by associating the Prince Royal in the govern-
ment with the Sultan. But though this measure appeared to be the
best calculated for the internal benefit of the kingdom, and had long
been considered as most advisable for the general good, it was deemed
prudent, on the present occasion, to forbear the suggestion of a propo-
sition, which, however desirable it might be on all accounts, had a na-
tural tendency to provoke the personal resentment of the tyrant.
The small British escort who accompanied Mr. Rattles, consisting
only of a part of the fourteenth regiment, a troop of the twenty-second
light dragoons, and the ordinary garrison of Bengal Sepoys in the Fort
and at the Residency House, were not in a condition to enforce terms
any way obnoxious to the personal feelings of the Sultan. The whole
retinue, indeed, of the Governor were in imminent danger of being
murdered. Crisses were actually unsheathed by several of the Sul tap’s
n 2


own suite in the Audience Hall, where Mr. Raffles received that Prince,
who was accompanied by several thousands of armed followers, ex-
pressing in their behaviour such an infuriated spirit of insolence, as
plainly to indicate that they only waited for the signal to perpetrate
the work of destruction, in which case not a man of our brave soldiers,
from the manner in which they were surrendered, could have escaped.
Though at this time no act of treacherous hostility took place, the
crafty and sanguinary Sultan drew from the circumstances which he
observed a confidence in his own strength ; and being thus persuaded
that the expulsion of the Europeans from the island of Java was be-
come more feasible, he resolved at once to adopt means for accom-
plishing this favourite object of his ambition.
In the mean time, the attention of the British Government was
drawn to the noted Rebel, Bagoos-Rangin, who had assembled
in the hilly tracts of Indramayo a large force of insurgents, many of
whom were deserters and fugitive soldiers from the late French army,
who, after the battle of Cornelis, escaped across the marshes and
jungle.
This cunning Chieftain, who, during six years had eluded all
pursuit, and defeated every attempt made to seize his person by
the Dutch Government, imposed himself on the credulous mul-
titude as a Prophet and High Priest, securing the attachment of
his followers so completely, that whenever he was hard pressed he
found a sure retreat in the mountains. Such, indeed, was the fanati-
cism of the people, and their veneration of the assumed high functions
of this deceiver, that all the temptations arising from the rewards
\
which were ottered for his apprehension, could not prevail on any of


Isis adherents to seize or betray him. At this time, he had possessed
I mself of a number of villages, the inhabitants of which he compel-
led to join his standard ; and thus, flushed with success, he proceeded
so far as to threaten the town and fort of Indramayo. On this, a de-
tachment of Bengal Sepoys under Captain Pool, was immediately
despatched from Batavia to strengthen that garrison; and another
detachment of Europeans and Natives, under Captain Ralph, of His
Majesty’s 59th regiment, followed soon after, with orders to attack the
rebels, and endeavour to destroy a torrent which had already become
formidable. Captain Ralph and his detachment came at last by
surprise upon a large body of the insurgents, whom he immediately
attacked. Upwards of two thousand musqueteers, regularly drawn
up in line behind a bank, opened their fire upon the British, whilst
they were wading through the rice fields in order to close with the
enemy; but when they came within reach, the resistless charge of
the bayonet soon broke through the whole multitude, of whom
considerable numbers were killed and wounded, and the rest dis-
persed. Our loss in this affair was very trifling; consisting of one
rank and file, of the fifty-ninth, killed; and Captain Jones, of the
Bengal service, with several rank and file wounded. Though Bagoos-
Rangin himself effected his escape, the check which his troops had
received was decisive ; for as the notion of the invincibility of their
Chief no longer swayed the misguided minds of his followers, they
abandoned his standard in great numbers.
But unsettled as the internal state of the country was at this period,
we must for the present take our leave of Java, and turn our view to
the island of Sumatra, where cruelties of the blackest description had


been committed by an unfeeling tyrant, in the massacre of the peace-
able European and Native inhabitants belonging to the Dutch factory.
These unfortunate victims of lawless power, who had resided many
years at Palimbang without giving any offence by their conduct, or
exciting any justifiable apprehensions by their appearance, number,
or connections, were put to death in cold blood by the mandate of
the Sultan.




Plate XIV.
\ w
y
(m \
A\ -Y| '\g
Y* -1 5
, \ \ \ g £ *
y§7 - mJjI e 3(, 5 s .
—c tj(/a /° ®pl s % I
NkJ = \ 5-3(7 s !
1 1 if,i I
Y § -(/i)"
lg\ W /
nr
1
4 s !
z - N \
1 KJ


SECTION 11.
Expedition to Palimbang.
When the account of this shocking catastrophe at Palimbang ar-
rived at Batavia, it became a duty incumbent on the Government
there, to punish as it deserved this flagrant outrage of justice and
humanity, that had been perpetrated on the inhabitants of a settle-
ment, which being dependent on Java, was consequently under British
protection. The cruelty of the Sultan was heightened in atrocity, if
possible, by the basest ingratitude, since the unoffending objects of his
vengeance, were the agents and representatives of that very government,
by whose influence the family of the murderer had been raised to the
throne, in the person of Ratu Ahmet Badruddin, in the year 1780.
To punish this act of perfidy, an expedition was immediately fitted
out and sailed from Batavia, on the 20th March, 1812, under the
orders of Colonel Gillespie, who was entrusted with the execution of
the views of Government, and had the whole management confided to
his individual judgment and direction. The fleet consisted of
His Majesty’s Ship Cornelia, Captain Owen.
—— Bucephalus, Captain Drury.
■ Sloop Procris, Captain Freeman.
The Hon. Company’s Cruizer, Teignmouth, Captain Howitson,
, Mercury, Captain Conyers.


Gun-boats—Schooner Wellington, Captain Cromy.
. ■ ■■ ■— Young Barracouta, Captain Lynch,
Transports- Samdany, Minerva, Matilda, Mary Ann.
Captain Bowen, of his Majesty’s ship Phoenix, meeting us at sea; took the command of
the fleet as senior officer.
TROOPS EMBARKED.
Detachment H. M. 50th Regt. 3 Companies, Rifle and Flank Companies.
Ditto, 89th, 5 Companies.
Ditto, Madras Horse Artillery, and Hussars dismounted.
Ditto, Bengal Artillery, detail and detachment of Sepoys sth and 6th Battalions.
Ditto, Amboynese.
A considerable number of guns and military stores, intended for the new settlement of
Banea, were put on board the transports.
Contrary winds and currents, which, during* the Western Monsoon,
are violent and unchangeable, still maintained their influence at this
advanced season, and considerably retarded our progress.
On the third of April, the fleet reached Nanka Island, where we
continued a week at anchor. Tents were pitched on shore, and all the
artificers were employed in the completion of the boats intended for
the passage up the Palimbang River, by constructing platforms for
the field-pieces, and making coverings to shelter the troops, as much
as possible, from the burning violence of the solar heat, and the incle-
mency of the nocturnal air. On the night of the ninth of April, a
severe gale of wind occasioned the loss of several of these boats, and
damaged many others.
The fleet supplied themselves with water, of a very good quality, at
this island, which is covered with wood, and inhabited by bears, mon-




Plate XV.
SKETCH of the RIVER
of
Palimbang


kies, and wild hogs. Fish is here in great abundance, and pirates fre-
quently visit the place to take in water and fuel.
The fleet got under weigh on the tenth of April, and came to an
anchor on the fifteenth at noon, opposite the West Channel oi Palim-
bang River.
The two succeeding days were employed in getting the Frocris, Bar-
racoota, Wellington, Teignmouth, and Mercury, over the bar; and
the greater part of the troops destined to proceed up the river, were
removed in the evening of the seventeenth, from the large ships and
transports, on board the armed brigs and small craft; but a very vio-
lent storm coming on this night, with heavy rain, considerably da-
maged the boats, and destroyed the coverings which had been made
with so much labour and difficulty. The few serviceable flat-boats
that could afford any kind of shelter to the men, were appropriated to
the field artillery, and to the reception of such croops as could be ac-
commodated in them.
A number of armed prows having been seen at the mouth of the
river, a party of seamen, and thirty riflemen of the fifty-ninth, were
sent up in boats towards the close of the e ening. One was captured
and brought in, but the others escaped up the river. Of the former,
the alarmed crew leaped overboard, and got away into the jungle;
and the village of Soosang, also at the mouth of the river, was
deserted.
On the eighteenth, in the evening, the remaining troops proceeded
towards the entrance of the river, at the flow of the tide, to their re-
spective vessels, after which, the whole having got under weigh, were
carried about ten miles up the stream, and towards midnight came to an
s


anchor. The breadth ot the river thus far, runs from six to seven hun-
dred yards, and the depth by soundings throughout our progress, was
generally between six and seven fathoms.
Major Raban, of the Bengal Service, was detached with the Native
Troops, consisting of two hundred Sepoys, and the same number of
Amboynese, to effect a landing at the point which projects from Mo-
napin Hill, near Minto, on the Island of Banca, where he established
himself without opposition.
The great distance at which Palimbang is situated up the river, and
that in a country so little known to Europeans, rendered the utmost
care and observation indispensible ; while the numerous means whicli
the Sultan possessed of annoying and impeding our advance, with the
peril to which our flotilla was exposed by his fire-rafts, called for ex-
treme vigilance and unwearied exertions. The formidable resistance
also, which the batteries at Borang, from their judicious situation, ena-
bled the enemy to oppose to us, aided besides by numerous armed prows
and floating batteries, all placed in the best order of defence, and made
ready for action ; by increasing our difficulties gave an impulse to
energy, and yet reduced us to the necessity of proceeding with particu-
lar caution, as will appear from
The following directions for the Line of Battle a-head and the
Order of Sailing.
Look-out Boats
Division of Light Boats.
Gun Launches,
Flat Boats with Field Pieces.


Procris.
Young Barracouta Schooner, G. B.
Mercury.
Flats and other Boats.
Wellington.
Teignmouth.
When the signal is made to anchor, it will be accompanied with a red pendant over.—lf
the squadron are to anchor in line a-head, with the same pendant under.—lf a line a-breast,
or athwart the river, the division of Light Boats under Lieutenant Monday, will always an-
chor in line a-breast, about half-a-mile a-head of the leader of the line of battle. The
other boats will anchor in their stations. The Gun Boats, Flats, and Launches, rather a-head
of the leader of the line, and on each bow.
The line of battle abreast, will be formed by the division of Light Boats in advance,
anchored in a line a-breast.
The Gun Boats, Flats, and Launches, in the next line, Mercury, Wellington, Procris, Young
Barracoota, and Teignmouth. In this order, if it should become necessary to bring the
broadsides of the ships to bear up the river—the signal will be made for the boats Ist and
2d line, to retire through the intervals of the 3d line, and form in the rear, in two lines as
before. The light boats are to keep a strict look-out and have the fire grapplings and dogs
constantly ready.
The Look-out Boats of the Light Division, are never to be more than one mile from the
headmost ship or vessel of the squadron, unless otherwise directed by signal; and no boat
whatever, except the Commander of the Forces be in her, to pass a-head of the headmost
look-out boat without permission. The boats of the Light Division are never to lose sight
of the squadron, even though the winding of the river should enable them to do so without
exceeding their prescribed distance.
On the approach of armed Boats of the Natives, the Look-out Boats are to retreat in
silence and good order to the body of their Division, which is also to fall back to the Procris,
where they will receive further orders. And no boats are, on any account, to fire a shot, or
to attempt adash, though the circumstances be ever so favourablej nor in short, commit any
act of hostility without orders.
s 2


The squadron are to observe and obey the signals of the Barracouta, where the Com-
mander of the Forces is embarked. The Barracouta wears a Union Jack, while the Com-
mander of the Forces remains on board.
Here follow various signals for forming the line of battle according to circumstances.
The unavoidable delay which the fleet experienced by encountering
contrary winds and currents in the Straits, afforded ample time to the
guilty Sultan, to prepare either for resistance or flight. With a view
to the latter course he had, as we afterwards learned, removed his
treasure and women, at a very early period, into the interior; whilst
himself and his ministers, putting on the air of duplicity, sent mes-
sage after message to the British Commander, filled with expressions
of respect, and framed with apparent candour; but hypocritical in
their language, and treacherous in their object.
The continuance of the ebb tide during the whole of the nineteenth
of April, obliged us to remain stationary till about four in the after-
noon, when a gentle sea breeze favouring our progress, enabled the
flotilla to move, though it was only for a short distance, as the wind
soon failed, and the flood tide being very slack, some of the vessels
got entangled among the branches of the trees and bushes, which,
therefore, it was necessary to cut away. At the turn of the tide, which
was about six on the following morning, we came to an anchor.
In the early part of this day, Pangarang Sheriff, arrived from the
Sultan of Palimbang, begging to know the intention of the British
Commander, in thus advancing with such a force : to which Colonel
Gillespie returned for answer, that he must acquaint the Sultan in
person, with the propositions he was entrusted with on the part of his
Government, and the messenger returned immediately.


At five in the evening we proceeded on our passage; but the tide
becoming slacker every day in proportion to our distance from the
sea, and the wind being against us, we did not gain above six miles
all night. The ebb tide, at six the next morning, or the twenty-first
of April, obliged us to come to an anchor, near the junction of False
River.
Another messenger, Pangarang Pranah, arrived this morning from
Palimbang, bringing with him a letter from the Sultan, to whom he
was related. In this epistle, the crafty Monarch congratulated our
Commander on his arrival in the River Soosang, and professing at the
same time, to be the friend of the English, with other expressions of
duplicity, the design of which was too obvious to impose upon those
who were acquainted with the writer’s character. Colonel Gillespie
replied, that he meant to be at Palimbang in two days, where he ex-
pected to see the Sultan, having matters to disclose to him in person,
of the greatest consequence ; and, at the same time, assuring the inha-
bitants of Palimbang, of the protection of the British Government.
Before the ambassador could receive this reply in writing, another ar-
rived with a similar letter from the Sultan, requesting an immediate
explanation. Both messengers therefore returned together about five
in the evening ; and as soon as the tide permitted, at seven the flotilla
got again under weigh. At sun-rise on the twenty-second of April, we
descried the batteries at Borang ; but about the same time, the Procris,
to our great disappointment, got aground, and the tide failing, we were
obliged to come to an anchor before the village of Slot Jarrong, distant
about five miles from the batteries.
In the course of the forenoon, Captain Ow r en, of the Royal Navy,


with Major Thom, Deputy Quarter-Master-General, reconnoitred the
batteries and armed prows stationed here, and which had been joined
by a large Arab ship, armed for the occasion, sent down from Palim-
bang by the Sultan to add to the defence of this post. These vessels,
with the floating batteries, were moored across the river in ec hell on,
raking with their guns the whole length of the passage, whilst the nu-
merous artillery on the three fixed batteries, bore across on the channel
by which we had to advance, thus enabling them to bring the fire of
their guns almost to a ray on any point in the line of our course. Nu-
merous fire-rafts were placed on the front and flank of the batteries,
ready to be set adrift to fire our shipping. Piles of wood, driven into
the river, defended ihe approach to the batteries in boats, whilst a
strong palisade protected the rear and flanks. A great deal of bustle
and activity was observable within the several defences, which ap-
peared to be fully manned and prepared for resistance.
The violent rain which lasted all the afternoon, and continued
during the night, proved of considerable annoyance, particularly to
the men who were embarked in boats. Great, indeed, and scarcely to
be conceived, was the fatigue which the sailors and soldiers had to
undergo in a region, where, during the day, they were exposed, while
employed in laborious rowing, to the rays of a burning sun, directly
under the equator, and deprived in the night of the refreshment of
sleep.
But notwithstanding the excessive hardships which all ranks and
descriptions of persons in the service were called to bear, and the pri-
vations they had to endure, nothing could shake their resolution or
abate their ardour in the performance of their duty.


In the evening another messenger, named Pangarang Martoo, ar-
rived, with a letter from the Sultan, importing that he should be happy
to see his friend, the Commander of the Expedition, at Palimbang;
but requesting that he would dispense with so large an armed force,
and visit the capital unattended, being fearful, as he pretended, that
the appearance of so many troops would occasion serious disturbances
among the inhabitants at Palimbang.
It was easy enough to perceive the insidious drift of this proposition ;
but the treachery of the Sultan had already been too notorious to
allow such fallacious declarations and hollow professions the slightest
respect, or even a moment’s attention.
The Sultan had grossly insulted Government by his arrogant and
offensive treatment of the British mission, which was sent to him in
the preceding November. He afterwards carried his insolence still
farther, by sending to Java, in January, Tumangung Lanang, who had
executed his orders, in the massacre of the Hutch. This man, who
4
had been appointed to reside at Batavia as the Ambassador of the
Sultan, and to present to the British Government there, a false state-
ment of the iniquitous transactions in which he had acted so distin-
guished a part, was now in the fleet, and was one of the principal
Tumangungs; but though deserving of the gallows, his person was
respected in consideration of his public character.
Colonel Gillespie demanded of the messenger who last arrived, an
unmolested passage up the river, and also a hostage as a security for
their good behaviour; to which Pangarang Martoo instantly assented,
offering at the same time to give us possession of the batteries, and to
leave them entirely at our disposal, as also the ship which was lying


there, to be made use of as the British Commander might please to
direct. As a pledge of their sincerity, a person bearing the title of
Commandant of the batteries, and who accompanied the messenger,
remained behind for the purpose of conducting us to Borang.
The Procris bad been fortunately got afloat again; but being far
astern, it took her the whole night and the following day to come up
with us. On the twenty-third, Captain Owen and Major Butler, with
several boats of the advance, proceeded in the afternoon to inspect the
ship lying in the river, and which, as already mentioned, was offered
to be given up ; but on their approach, they were met by several boats
from the batteries, and advised not to go any farther. At this time
also, the armed prows made a show of resistance, attended with great
shouting from the batteries, and other demonstrations of hostility, on
which the boats of the advance returned, in conformity to their
orders.
Where the chiefs of a nation act with so much treachery, and where
the breach of faith uniformly marks their character, it is a most un-
pleasant and difficult task for a generous mind to counteract and
oppose their proceedings. To avoid bloodshed, as far as possible,
and to prevent those calamities attendant on war, which were in-
curred by the crimes of the Sultan, from falling on the innocent part
of the community, was a duty equally imposed by justice and agreeable
to the feelings of humanity. It w T as not so much against the state of
Palimbang generally, as the Government of the Sultan and his adhe-
rents, that measures of hostility were requisite to be directed on the
principle of retaliation, and for the maintenance of public faith, in
order that enormities such as those of which we had to complain might
not be repeated.




Plate XVI.
SKETCH of the Batteries at BORANG,
in the
PALIMBANG RIVER,
Taken Possession of by the British Troops,
under
COLONEL GILLESPIE.
24 th April, 1812.
K. E MARK S .
The. three Fattaies are/ advanlapeously situated'/ to opposes The passage/ up the/ hives - , and/ hie/ numerous Fire/ hurts
were tilled, with Combustibles to fire/ Che > Shipping attempting to pass; the/ Wooden/ Files driven/ in the Fiver are for the
purpose/ of obstructing the approach to the Works . floating Fattaies, armed Frows, and a large drab Ship, arriv-
ed, were all/ stationed there by o?'der of the Sultan/ to add to the defence, in all/ JO2 Guns, mounted, and Flenty
of Am unition. F.F. Ore both banks of the/ Fiver there/ is a/ thick impenetrable Jungle, and at high water
is entirety overflowed.


The proper arrangements being made to carry these objects on the
following night, Captain Meares, Malay interpreter to the Com-
mander of the Forces, was directed to proceed to Borang, accompa-
nied by the officer who had been left with ns as a hostage, and to de-
mand a decisive answer whether or not they would let the batteries be
taken possession of amicably, or whether they would resist the passage
of the flotilla. No time was allowed for equivocation, on the part of
the Chief Pangarang ; and Colonel Gillespie followed close after, at
the head of the small but formidable array of the British advance,
composed of detachments of the 59th and 89th regiments, in light
boats, supported by the gun-launches and field artillery, in the flat
boats. On their arrival at the dawn of day, within half gun shot dis-
tance of the batteries, the Pangarang came off with Captain Meares,
and offered to deliver up the works with all the other defences, which,
in consequence, were immediately occupied by the British troops. The
garrison, terrified at our sudden approach, and unmindful of the posi-
tive orders of the Sultan to defend the passage to the last, took them-
selves to flight, and escaped in some prows that had been kept con-
cealed round the eastern part of Borang island, and on the western
side of Binting isle. All the guns taken, to the number of one hun-
dred and two, were ready charged and primed. The large ship
afforded quarters for a great portion of our soldiers, but the remainder
were placed in huts and floating batteries which had coverings.
In the evening, the troops were all reimbarked, and we proceeded
on to a little distance. Fires now appeared in all directions, and
several of the rafts were set in flames by the enemy, with the view of
effecting, if possible, the destruction of our shipping, which had not as


yet passed the batteries ; but though they were coming up at this time
(8 P. M.) fortunately, the exertions of Captain Owen, with the crews
of the light boats, were successful in cutting the rafts asunder before
they were thoroughly in flames, by which means, a general conflagra-
tion was seasonably prevented*. Several shots were fired from one
of the Cornelia’s boats at the Malays, who were seen setting fire to the
rafts, which had the effect of instantly dispersing them.
This strong hold, about forty miles from the coast, seems peculiarly
well calculated for a haunt of pirates, who have of late resorted to it
for shelter, the fastnesses in the wood always affording them a secure
retreat, where all search and pursuit would be useless. The batteries
are built upon artificial ground, raised on a stone foundation, in the
water, inclosed with wooden piles. The sides of the ramparts are
faced with strong bamboos and tar trees, the space within being filled
up with earth to the thickness of from twenty to thirty feet. The elas-
ticity of the bamboos on the exterior side, and of the stockades of
cocoa-nut or tar trees, by which the ramparts are surrounded, prevents
any great impression being made on them by gun-shots. But though
the position of the batteries is judicious, the construction of them is
wretched in the extreme. The embrazures are covered in, close down
to the muzzles of the guns, like the port-holes of a ship. These works
* These fire-rafts are large magazines, filled with combustibles of every kind, and as
many are fastened together as will reach across the whole breadth of the river, where,
floating with the tide or current, they are extremely dangerous, when once in a blaze, to
ships coming in the opposite direction. The heat produced is so great, that no boats can
venture to approach sufficiently near to throw graplings into them for the purpose of drag-
ging them aside and fastening them to the shore.


however, are very difficult of access; for being entirely surrounded
by water, and fenced on the flanks and rear by strong stockades,
whilst in front, massy wooden piles are fixed, which, like chevanx
de frise , run out one hundred and fifty or two hundred yards into the
river, they effectually prevent the approach of boats, and the landing
of troops.
Early on the following morning, the twenty-fifth of April, an Arab
arrived, who stated himself to be the owner of the ship before men-
tioned, and begging that she might be restored, which request was
granted. He brought information that the Sultan immediately fled
from Palimbang, on hearing that the defences at Borang, which had
been considered such a formidable barrier, no longer obstructed the
farther progress of the British troops.
Colonel Gillespie, on hearing this, determined to push forward with
the light boats; and whilst making this arrangement another Arab
arrived, the Pangarang Sheriff, who confirmed the account of the Sul-
tan’s flight, adding the afflicting intelligence, that the greatest confu-
sion, plunder, and assassination prevailed, not only within the interior
of the fort and palace, but in many parts of the city. Upon this. Co-
lonel Gillespie resolved to lose not a moment, but to hasten by the
quickest possible manner, to put a stop to this scene of horror, and by
his immediate presence, prevent the execution of the massacre, which
it was reported the Sultan’s adherents meditated to perpetrate the very
next night, upon the wealthy Chinese and other inhabitants, whose
property was to become the prize of the assassins.
The Colonel, therefore, proceeded instantly with the Arab Chief in
his canoe, accompanied by Captain Meares and Mr. Villneruby, a Spa-
t 2


nish gentleman, who acted as Malay interpreters. In that and another
small canoe, which accompanied them, were distributed seven grena-
diers of the fifty-ninth regiment; and these were followed by Captain
Bowen, of the Royal Navy, Major Butler, Deputy Adjutant-General,
and Major Thorn, Deputy Quarter-Master-General, in the gig belong-
ing to the Phoenix, and ten more grenadiers of the same regiment, in
the barge of the same ship, with Lieutenant Monday, R. N. and Lieu-
tenant Forrest, of the fifty-ninth ; the remaining troops, under Lieu-
tenant-Colonel M‘Leod, having orders to follow with all possible
speed. The distance was twenty miles, so that it was dark when the
party arrived at Old Palimbang. The canoes, in one of which the
Colonel was, had gained much on the other two boats ; and were now
completely out of sight, when the report of a signal gun, fired by the
enemy, not a little alarmed us, and increased our anxiety for our
friends; the more so, as every thing around us tended to excite sus-
picion of some treacherous design being in agitation. A dreadful yell
and shrieking in all directions was next heard, and lights and confla-
grations were seen throughout the whole extent of this large tract of
population, which stretched along both banks of the river for upwards
of seven miles. By the redoubled exertions of the crews, the boats in
the rear were soon brought up to the support of our friends, and thus
happily formed in time an important junction.
To paint the horrors of the scene that presented itself to our view in
proper colours, or to attempt an expression of the sensations it was
calculated to excite, would be a difficult task. Romance never de-
scribed any thing half so hideous, nor has the invention of the imagina-
tion ever given representations equally appalling, with what here struck


us in reality. Nor will the undaunted act which gained us possession of
the fort, the palace, and its batteries, scarcely be credited. Undis-
mayed, in the face of numerous bodies of armed men, Colonel Gillespie
boldly stepped on shore at eight o’clock at night, and with those who
had accompanied him in the canoe, and the seven grenadiers, he
marched with a firm step, through a multitude of Arabs and treache-
rous Malays, whose missile weapons, steeped in poison, glimmered by
the light of torches.
Huge battlements, with immense gates leading from one area to
another, received onr friends, and presented to them the frightful spec-
tacle of human blood, still reeking and flowing on the pavement. The
massy gates closed upon onr rear, and the blood-stained court-yards
through which we were conducted, appeared as if it were the passage
to a slaughter-house.
A Malay, who had pressed through the crowd, approached the Colo-
nel, and was walking by his side, when a large double-edged knife
was secretly put into his hands by one of his countrymen. It was a
dark stormy night, and a ray of lightning at the very instant when the
fellow was pushing the knife up his long loose sleeve to conceal it, dis-
covered the weapon. The Colonel’s eye caught the object, and in-
stantly turning round, he had the fellow seized, totally regardless of
the crowd ; thus fortunately frustrating by his firmness the murderous
design. The weapon was found as described; but the fellow contrived
to steal away in the crowd and escaped.
The palace, at our arrival, exhibited a still more melancholy picture
of devastation and cruelty. Murder bad here been succeeded by


rapine ; and while the place was completely ransacked, the pavements
and floors were clotted with blood. In every direction spectacles of
woe caught our sight, and rendered peculiarly awful by the glare of
the surrounding conflagration, and vivid flashes of lightning, amidst
loud peals of thunder. The devouring flames which continued to
spread destruction, notwithstanding the heavy rain that poured down
in torrents, had now reached the outer buildings of the palace, and
threatened the part where we had taken up our temporary abode. The
crackling of bamboos, resembling the discharge of musquetry —the
tumbling in of burning roofs, with a tremendous crash—the near ap-
proach of the fire, situated as we were in the midst of an immense
hostile multitude and assassins, altogether gave to our situation a most
appalling prospect.
Our little band, consisting only of seventeen British grenadiers, with
the officers naval and military already mentioned, and a few seamen
belonging to the gig and barge, had to secure possession of the fort,
and to provide for their safety in the determined resolution of selling
their lives dear, should any attack be made before the arrival of rein-
forcements. Having carefully reconnoitred by the light of torches, the
interior of the palace court, and ordered all the entrances except one
to be shut and barricadoed, Colonel Gillespie stationed the grenadiers
at the principal entrance, and the strictest guard was kept up. Soon
after midnight, we had the satisfaction of hailing the welcome arrival
of Major Trench, with about sixty men of the 89th Regiment; and
the remaining part of the ordered advance, under Lieutenant-Colonel
M‘Leod, joined our little garrison early the next morning.




Plate XVII.
SKETCH
of the PALACES, FORTS and
Batteries of Palimbang.


Tims an act of unexampled fortitude and daring enterprize, con-
ceived with judgement, and executed with intrepidity, put us in pos-
session of the fort and batteries, defended by two hundred and forty-
two pieces of cannon, without the loss of a man. This formidable posi-
tion could not have been carried under any other circumstances of
attack, but by the sacrifice of many lives, and by hazarding altogether
our little armament.
The rapidity of the movement, and the sudden and unexpected arri-
val of the few British at that late hour in the evening, whose num-
bers were greatly magnified, by the panic which seized the foe, caused
the immediate dispersion of the Sultanas adherents, who fled in confu-
sion, thereby timely preventing their barbarous intent from being car-
ried into execution, and relieving the town from the miseries with
which it was threatened, of plunder and destruction. An American,
who was the supercargo of a large Chinese junk, then lying at Palim-
bang, gave us a melancholy recital of the woe by which they were
threatened, and which would have burst on them that very night, had
our little force not arrived in time to prevent it. This junk, with all on
board, had, in fact, been marked out as the first victims.
With that feeling regard for the interests of humanity which always
distinguishes the British character in the midst of the fiercest conflicts,
and the moment of victory, the most prompt measures were immedi-
ately taken to restore order and maintain tranquillity. These were so
effectual, that the inhabitants assumed confidence, and many who had
fled into the woods returned to their homes. The great body of the
people were pleased at the change, and rejoiced in being relieved from
the tyranny of the Sultan, which seems to have attained its height.


The eldest son of that Sovereign, Pangarang Rattoo, had been particu-
larly notorious in the wanton exercise of every species of oppression
and cruelty. The vile libidinous habits of this Prince, occasioned the
late horrid massacre of the Dutch, who- fell a deplorable sacrifice to
his sanguinary vengeance. The Pangarang, in one of his nocturnal
visits, had been disappointed through them, in the indulgence of his
criminal designs upon the wife of an industrious native, whose screams
brought the patrole from the Dutch factory, near which it happened,
to her assistance, and the guard, unconscious of whom they were in
pursuit, pressed so hard upon him, that he was obliged to plunge into
the river, and with great difficulty Reached his boat. That resentment
which naturally fills the mind of the wicked against those who have
thwarted their malevolent purposes, took full possession of this Prince,
who vowed to extirpate the whole Dutch settlement; and this he spoke
loud enough to be heard by all around his person. Two days after-
wards, the Sultan sent a messenger to invite the Dutch Resident to
come over to the palace at Palimbang, with which he imprudently
complied, contrary to the salutary advice of his friends ; and notwith-
standing the strength of the fort, and the means possessed by the gar-
rison of making a long defence. Armed Malays then intruded them-
selves, one by one, and under various pretences, into the fort, where
they suddenly overpowered the guards ; seized upon the Garrison,
both Europeans and Natives, whom they bound, and hurried them off'
from their weeping families, on board the prows, prepared for their
conveyance down the river, at the mouth of which, near Soosang,
they were all put to death. Every cruelty was practised to prolong
the sufferings of those unhappy persons, by poignarding them with


crisses, and shockingly lacerated them, after which, the prows were
set on fire, and all were reduced together to ashes.
An interesting European woman, the wife of an officer, not being
able to bear the thoughts of a separation froth her husband, followed
him on board wfith her infant child, and shared the same unhappy
fate, after being first polluted by the monsters in a manner too shock-
ing to relate. The other unfortunate women with their children, took
refuge in the woods, where they lingered out a miserable existence
among the wild beasts, naked and forlorn, a prey to hunger and
disease. The few who, survived were brought, though naturally in a
most deplorable state of wretchedness, to the British head-quarters,
in consequence of the search that was instituted for the purpose, im-
mediately after our capture of Palimbang.
The exact day on which this me ! ancholy catastrophe took place,
could never be correctly ascertained ; but, from the circumstance of the
Sultan’s refusal in November, 1811, to renew his relation with the new r
Government in Java, and from his forbidding the British detachment,
which accompanied Captain Phillips, the appointed Resident, sent
for the purpose, to advance to Palimbang, there is reason to believe,
it must have happened soon after the news of our conquest had
reached that treacherous court. The Sultan, no doubt, thought the
invasion of Java a favourable moment for throwing off all dependency
on the Government there, and of erecting himself supreme on the
ruins of the Dutch establishment. By the entire destruction of their
fort, he entertained the hope of becoming an independent power; and
he expected also, that, in assuming the lead amongst the Piratical
v


States, be should be able to commit depredations at his pleasure, on
the commerce carried on in these seas. In support of this, the follow-
ing Depositions upon Oath, of Toonko Mahomed, and Syod Abu
Bakir, of Pulo Penang, %ho had been sent as Agents by Mr. Raffles,
to Palimbang, bear strong testimony ;
EXTRACT.
“ On the 2?th of the month Sabon, being equal to the 14th September last, the principal
Chiefs of the place were sent bj the Sultan to the Fort, in order to inform the Resident of
the surrender of Batavia.
“ That successively all the Chiefs with their suite, were sent to the Fort, under pretext of
consulting with the Resident, which lasted until three or four o’clock in the afternoon, when
the Fort was filled with people.
“ The Chiefs now informed the Resident, that he and his troops must now quit the Fort,
on which the Resident answered, ‘ Where shall I go ? I have no vessel to depart with ; I
request to be allowed to remain three days longer, that I may prepare a vessel to convey me
from hence.’ The Chiefs said they had orders from the Sultan, to direct the Resident to
quit the fort immediately, and if he had any request to make, he must address himself to the
Sultan. The Chiefs sent a messenger to the Sultan, to inform him of this request. The
Sultan granted the Resident an audience, and sent two Chiefs to conduct the Resident
to him.
“ The Resident and his Assistant, the Commander of the Troops, and Secretary, followed
the two Chiefs, who had been sent to conduct them, and within a short distance of the
palace, w r ere met by several other Chiefs, who interrogated the Resident w'hat he had to say
to the Sultan. The Resident replied, ‘ I intended to request to be provided with a vessel
whereupon the Chiefs said, ‘ It is unnecessary, here are two vessels in readiness for the gen-
tlemen to embark in.’ They now took from the Commander his sword, and ordered all the
servants of the Company, with the exception of the women, on board a Pantyallang,
which was lying there ; this vessel remained there until evening, when she disappeared,
lt That shortly after this, some of the Chiefs came to the said Toonko, and said, that they
had orders from the Sultan to murder all the Company’s servants on board the Pantyallang,
and to demolish the fort and buildings.


“ That said Toonko, upon hearing this, addressed himself to the Sultan, and requested
that the people of the Dutch factory might not be molested, but that they might be allowed
to depart to Batavia, and not to demolish the fort, because it was unlawful, as Batavia had
surrendered, its dependencies must be considered a conquest likewise j on which the Sultan
,/t
replied, * I am not like other Native Princes, I dread nobody, I fear no Nation, I shall listen
to nobody, and let me not hear this a second time/ This he uttered in a violent passion.
That three days after this, the said Toonko and Sayed saw the fort and buildings demolished,
and enquired of some of the Chiefs why this was done; they were answered, { What have
we to do with the fort any longer, as all the Dutchmen have been murdered/ It is said,
they consisted of twenty-four Europeans, and sixty-three Native soldiers.
“ The Sultan’s eldest son, Bangarang Ratoo, by order of his father, extorted six days
afterwards, a fictitious declaration of those facts (which was forwarded to Java,) from the
deponents. The latter were in great danger of their lives. They were forced to swear by
order of the Sultan, never to divulge the truth; that if they did, they should be punished
with death, and their family at Palimbang murdered. Suspecting that the Sultan’s emis-
saries were lying in wait to murder them, they made off to Malacca, leaving their family
and baggage behind,- —and there made the Deposition, in presence of the Members of the
Court of Justice, by order of Major Farquhar.
The Deposition is signed by,
" J. H. STOCKEN, Sec.
Commissioned Members of the Court of Justice C “ A. KOECK,
at Malacca, 1 « c. WALBECHM.
And “ VAN BEUCHEM,Translator.”
At noon, the twenty-eighth of April, the British flag was hoisted on
the Sultan’s Bastion, under a royal salute ; and the same day, Pan-
garang Adipatti, brother to the Sultan, who had been invited by the
British Commander to a comerence, returned from his retreat in tl^e
v 2


country. This Prince had obtained the reputation of being a mild and
beneficent character, on which account he was greatly beloved by all
descriptions of the people. As a proof of the goodness of his dispo-
sition, it was known that he had strongly dissuaded his brother from
the barbarous conduct pursued by him towards the Dutch, and that
he had warned him of the vengeance which would surely await him
from the British Government.
This person being the nearest of kin to the family so justly excluded,
the Commander of the Forces determined to place him on the vacant
throne. On the 29th of April, the Prince paid his first visit, being
received at the landing place by Captain Meares, with other Officers of
the General Staff; and Colonel Gillespie met him at the door of the
Public Hall, where seats were arranged for all the Company. The
Pangarang was saluted at his landing with nineteen guns from the
Mercury, and, on his entering the Hall, with the same number from
the guns on shore. After sitting some time, he was conducted by
Colonel Gillespie to another apartment, where they had a private
conference; and, in the afternoon, the Commander of the Forces
Feturned the visit.
On the first of May, various reports were circulated of a body of
Malays having resolved upon running a Muck, which is a desperate
custom peculiar to this people, who, infuriated with opium, run about
the streets in the wildest state of phrenzy, with drawn crisses, stabbing
or killing every one they encounter. The reported arrival of Panga-
rang Ratoo, in the neighbourhood of Palimbang, and the intercourse
that was suspected to be kept up between him and some of the princi-
pal Chiefs in the town, gave additional weight to these rumours; in


consequence of which, orders were given for all to be on the alert. In
the middle of the night, a considerable uproar was heard, and large
fires were observed on the East side of the town, but the precautionary
measures which had been taken, prevented any mischief.
The deceitfulness of the Malay character, which was uniformly
displayed in their conduct, became at the present time so remarkably
conspicuous, as to render the situation in which Colonel Gillespie was
placed extremely embarrassing. To establish an efficient government,
under existing circumstances, in order to save from the horrors of
anarchy, a nation whose chiefs are distinguished solely by craft and
treachery, was a most important but difficult undertaking. The ma-
nagement of the negotiation was indeed of the most delicate nature;
in the progress of which, the cunning and intrigue so inseparable from
Eastern Courts, obtained full exercise on the part of the Malay Chiefs.
Every hour, in fact, produced some fresh evasion to create difficulty,
or a new subterfuge to protract the time and impede the business.
The dethronement of the Sultan had already been resolved; but the
treasures carried off by him, gave him such weight as to prove a serious
object of consideration in the choice of a successor, who might be pos-
sessed of the requisite means to maintain his seat and authority against
the influence of riches and bribery, which advantages there could be
no doubt the deprived Sultan would exert to the great misery of the
people as soon as the British armament should have quitted the place,
To obviate these evils, an arrangement was formed and almost com-
pleted, but, by an unlucky accident, it was well nigh frustrated.
On the third of May, a report was made of a quantity of arms being
introduced from a boat into a house, which afterwards proved to be


that of Pangarang Adipatti. The Guard, sent to examine into the
business, imprudently forced their way into the house, not aware that
it was the residence of a Prince who was under our protection. Several
Chieftains were assembled here to consult together on the proposed ar-
rangements just alluded to, when this armed party arrived; and, owing
to the sudden surprize which their appearance occasioned, one of tho
Chiefs drew his criss and struck a blow at the Officer who commanded
the party ; but fortunately he missed his aim, and in return received the
cut of a sabre, which was instantly followed by one of the Soldiers run-
a bayonet through his body. The Chief kept hold of his criss and
made efforts of resistance, but was at last disarmed, after giving and
receiving several wounds. During this scuffle the Pangarang Adipatti
ded from his house, and all who were able went off with him. The
Arab Chief who had so gallantly conducted us into the Fort on the
25th of April, was one of those who were present, but luckily sustained
no other injury than that of having his criss taken from him by the
Soldiers, who did not know him, and to which disgrace he quietly sub-
mitted. With manly confidence in our Commander, he came imme-
diately to Head Quarters, where his appearance without a criss, and
the terror depicted in his countenance, was the first intimation received
of the sad affray. The party, ignorant of any wrong, were now
returning from the search, carrying spears richly gilt and crisses set
with diamonds, as trophies of their triumph ; but they were instantly
ordered back, and every article was safely restored to their owners.
The wounded Malay Chief was still weltering in his blood, and medi-
cal assistance was instantly afforded him, but without effect, for he died
a few minutes afterwards.


This melancholy occurrence proved extremely distressing to Colonel
Gillespie, as the painful work, the result of several weeks anxious soli-
citude in the settlement of a permanent government, was rent asunder
by a momentary accident which could not have been foreseen, and the
consequences of which it was impossible to trace. Proclamations were
immediately issued to restore tranquillity among the people, and ex-
plaining the affair as an accidental affray, originating in mistake, and
deploring the misfortune. The Pangarang Adipatti had a friendly
letter sent to him by the Commander of the Forces, assuring him of his
protection, upon the receipt of which he returned ; and the following
day, in the evening, Colonel Gillespie, attended by his Staff, paid a
visit to the Pangarang, at his house, which greatly tended to restore
confidence, and gave general satisfaction.
On the fifth of May, Pangarang Adipatti came early in the morning
to the palace, and held a long conference with the Colonel upon the
business that had been so unluckily suspended. The necessary preli-
minaries and general heads of a treaty having been agreed upon with
the new Sultan, and signed by both parties, the fourteenth of May
was fixed for the inauguration, that being the day of the new moon ;
which was purposely chosen, that the influence of this planet might
°ive success to the new monarch ; and that the rather, as the old one
had proved so unfortunate to his predecessor, of whose miserable con-
dition report gave a dismal account, representing him as being utterly
forsaken by his former subjects; and obliged to roam in the recesses
and wildernesses of the interior, whither it would have been in vain to
have followed him. His treasure, the only means by which he might
be enabled to raise fresh disturbances, he had carefully concealed in


haunts known only to himself ; and the persons employed in burying
it, were put to death by his orders, to prevent the possibility of a
discovery.
The new Sultan, however, relied on being able to counteract the
mischievous tendency of this measure, by compelling the exile to give
up a portion of his treasure, as the purchase of personal security, and
in consideration of having a place of retreat granted him in the inte-
rior of the country for the remainder of his life.
The day appointed for the Coronation having arrived ; about half-
past nine in the morning, the Pangarang Adipatti landed at the stairs
in front of the Palace. He was there received by Lieutenant-Colonel
Alexander M'Leod, attended by the Officers of the Staff, and con-
ducted to the gate of the inner court; where, being met by Colonel
Gillespie, he was led by him to the Public Hall, in which a Throne
was erected, under a canopy of Yellow Silk, the distinguishing colour
of Royalty at this place. The Colonel conducted him first to a Couch,
on the left of the Throne, and covered with Crimson Velvet, where
they both seated themselves.
The troops were drawn up so as to form a street from the landing-
place, and a square which encompassed the Public Hall. A great
concourse of Natives, among whom were several of the Chief Panga-
rangs, and two of the brothers of the newly-elected Sultan attended on
this occasion. These being seated on the ground, and the European
Gentlemen standing on the left side of the Couch, the following Pro-
clamation was read in the Malay Language :
“ Whereas the We Sultan Ratu Mahmoud Badruddin, having forfeit
ed his right to the Sovereignty of Palimbang, by various Acts of Rapine,


Treachery, and Barbarity, especially by the Murder of the Members
of the late Dutch Factory, the Plunder of their Goods, the Demolition
of their Fort, contrary to the Laws of Nations, and his existing En-
gagements with the Dutch, to whose Rigdit the English Company
have succeeded, in virtue of the Cession of Java and its Dependencies;
and, moreover, has abdicated the Throne by his shameful flight. The
Commander of the British Forces, in virtue of Powers vested in him
by the Government of Java, hereby declares the said Mahmoud Bad-
ruddin, to be deposed from the Throne of this Kingdom. And the
Commander of the Forces, in consideration of the virtues of Panga-
rang Adipatti, and of the love, esteem, and veneration with which he is
regarded by the Natives, Inhabitants of this Country, as well as the
Arab and Chinese Colonists, has, in pursuance of his instructions,
selected the said Pangarang Adipatti, to fill the vacant Throne of this
Kingdom, subject to the confirmation of the Government of Java, and
the Supreme Government of India. The said Pangarang is hereby
declared true and lawful Sultan of Palimbang and its Dependen-
cies, under the style and title of Sultan Ratoo Ahmed Najmuddin;
and all the Inhabitants of this Kingdom, are enjoined to yield him
obedience accordingly.”
Adipatti was evidently much affected by the notice taken of his bro-
ther’s crimes, with the reflection of their having been the cause of his
own elevation to the throne ; and he was observed to wipe his eyes
several times during the recital of this part of the Proclamation.
Particular care was taken to afford every protection to the Chinese,
which industrious people, since the destruction ot\the Dutch Factory,
under whose protection they had always been, suffered so much from
x


the rapacity of the Malays, that the idea of the approaching departure
of the British, impressed them with the fear of experiencing still greater
oppression, in our absence. The new Sultan did indeed possess great
personal popularity; yet, as his relations were equally those of the
deprived Sovereign, it was to be apprehended, that on their return,
they would exercise a power of savage persecution, on the Chinese and
other defenceless persons, from a spirit of revenge, or the desire of
gain. To guard against such evils, and to secure the safety of the
helpless as far as possible, was a concern which occupied much of the
attention of the British* Commander, who, had recourse to the only
precaution that could be adopted, in the formation of a solemn and ex-
plicit Treaty, binding the Court to the observance of strict justice to
all parties and descriptions of persons therein specified. This prelimi-
nary measure being settled. Colonel Gillespie desired Captain Mears
to address the crowd, demanding whether “ it was their wish that
Pangarang Adipatti should reign over themto which they gave a
hearty assent, by loud acclamations.
Colonel Gillespie then led Pangarang Adipatti and seated him on
the Throne, which was raised three steps above the level of the Hall.
When he had taken his Seat, a Royal Salute was tired from our Artil-
lery on shore, and the Colours of the Sultan being displayed from
the walls of the Palace, instead of the British, which had been hoisted
during the Interregnum ; the new Monarch received the salutations
and congratulations of all who were present.
The European Officers passed first in front of the Throne, and hav-
ing saluted the Sultan, who returned the compliment by taking off his


cap, they took their stations on the opposite side. The Natives then
came according- to their order of precedency up to the Throne, and
some kissed the hands, others the knees or feet of the Sultan. When
this ceremony was ended, the Natives again seated themselves upon
the ground, and silence being proclaimed, the Commander of the
Forces, by an Interpreter, addressed the Sultan in the following
Speech ;
“ In the name of His Britannic Majesty, and the Honourable the
East India Company, I have the honour to place you, Pangarang
Adipatti, on the Throne of your brother Mahmud Badruddin, deposed
for atrocious and barbarous Murders, and now declare you duly con-
stituted Sultan of Palimbang and its Dependencies, under the title of
Sultan Ratu Achmed Najmuddin.
“ Long may you live to enjoy the high and exalted rank which the
English Nation have conferred on you! May God watch over your
Actions, and direct your Councils ! and may the Punishment inflicted
on the late Sultan, (who, by listening to evil Counsellers and wicked
Men, has drawn on himself the vengeance of a great and powerful
People,) be a warning to you to avoid similar errors.
“ May your Reign be prosperous and happy ! May you contribute
by your goodness and justice, to the happiness and welfare of your
Subjects ! and may they have reason to bless the Nation that have
placed you on the Throne of the City of Safety ! *■”
* Palimbang, in the Malay Historical Books, is emphatically styled, “ The City of
Safety.”
x 2


This Ceremony, which was very striking and impressive, appeared
to produce a powerful effect as well on the feelings of the Prince, who
was the immediate object of it, as on many among the European and
Native part of the audience, exhibiting a brilliant display of that mag-
nanimity for which the British character is celebrated through the
whole Eastern world.
The Speech being concluded, the Sultan descended from the Throne,
and Colonel Gillespie taking his hand, conducted him to the stairs,
where his boat was waiting to receive him. He was attended by all
the British Officers, and a great number of Natives to the beach, which
presented a very beautiful spectacle. The Brigs of B ar, and the
Sloops in the River, decorated with the Colours of all Nations, fired
each a Royal Salute, as the Sultan’s boat left the shore, and this cir-
cumstance excited the admiration of all the inhabitants.
On the sixteenth, Colonel Gillespie, with a large party of Officers,
supped by invitation with the Sultan ; and the next day, the troops
having embarked, the Sultan took possession of the Palace.
The City of Palimbang, the Emporium of the inland Commerce of
the Island of Sumatra, is situated in a fiat marshy tract, on the left
bank, and a few miles above the Delta of a large river, which rises in
the district of Musi, within two or three days journey of Bencoolen,
and running to the Eastward, receives many subsidiary streams, till it
falls into the Straits of Banca. The mouth of this river lies in lat.
2 deg. 18 min. S. and long. 105 deg. 8 min. E. There is a bar on
which the depth is only two fathoms and a quarter at low water; but
after passing that, although vessels unacquainted with the channel are
apt to get a-ground, it is reckoned to have a sufficiency of depth to




Plate XVIII.
Fort, Palace, and Line of Defence at Palimbang.


carry a frigate as far up as the town. The river is of very considerable
breadth, its banks low and woody, very much resembling the Sunder-
bunds, at the mouth of the Ganges.
The town is, by estimation, about sixty miles from the sea, its lat.
being 2 deg. 58 min. 51 seconds S., and long. 104 deg. 54 min. E. The
Dutch Factory was on the right bank, which is higher than the left,
and where there are consequently more extensive tracts of dry ground.
Scarcely a vestige, however, of it now remains, and even the found-
ations of the walls of the fort, and of the houses have been dug up and
carried away. Immediately below the scite of the Factory, is a small
branch of the River called Sungi Awar, which gives name to the ad-
joining Campong, inhabited chiefly by Chinese. But there are also
some Malays in this district, all the inhabitants of which, appear to
have been formerly under the authority and protection of the Dutch
Factory. The Chinese Campong is on the side of the rivulet opposite
the Factory, and is divided into two parts, the old and new Campongs.
The inhabitants of both amount to about seven hundred families, and
these are the principal merchants and artizans in this place.
On the left bank of the river, a little below the Palace, is a colony
of about three hundred Arabs, among whom are some merchants ol
eminence. The remaining inhabitants of Palimbang are Malays, and
estimated at between twenty and thirty thousand. The city is inter-
sected by several little branches of the river, which form a number of
islands, said to be between twenty and thirty: whence the place has
also been called “ The City of Twenty Islands/’ One of these con-
tains the Palaces of the late Sultan, and his son, Pangarang Ratoo;
and the house of Pangarang Adipatti, the present Sultan. In front


of the Palaces of the Sultan and Pangarang Ratoo, is an exten-
sive battery, facing the river. It is a rampart of mud, about
twenty feet thick, faced within and without with bamboos, and
pierced with embrazures close above, like the ports of a ship; but,
the outer part of each embrazure being the narrowest, there is little
room to alter the direction of the guns. This lower range of batteries,
which covers the front of both Palaces, is again supported by the
bastions of the inclosed outer wall of the Sultan’s Fort, with a num-
ber of cannon mounted upon them. Of the iron and brass guns found
in these works, the latter were chiefly Dutch, though some of them
appear, by inscriptions on them, to have been cast at Palimbang.
One of the largest of these, a forty-two pounder, which was sent to
England in the Java, to His Royal Highness the Prince Regent,
in the name of the Captors, has the following in Arabic: “ Made
by Sultan Ratoo Ahmed Naj-muddin, in the City of Palimbang,
the Abode of Safety, in the year 1183.” This date corresponds
to A.D. 1769. Between the two batteries is seen the Maidan, or
/
Plain, at the extremity of which appears the Bateron, or Hall, where
the Sultan gives audiences in public. Beyond this, nothing was known
to Europeans before our arrival, as it was death for any one to venture
farther without the Sultan’s express permission ; and none but females
were admitted into the interior court of the Palace.
The houses of the Sultan and Pangarang Ratoo, are square areas,
surrounded with very high brick walls. Each of these Palaces con-
tains several detached buildings of the pavilion form, having portions
of ground planted with fruit-trees and ornamental shrubs.
Part of the materials of the demolished factory have been used by


the late Sultan, in the construction of a new Haram, which joins the
inner Palace ; but the buildings are still incomplete. A large reser-
voir of water, with pleasure-boats in it, occupies the middle of this
area; which is surrounded by numerous detached buildings, for the
females of the court.
Between the outer walls of the Sultan’s Palace and that of Panga-
rang Ratoo, is a road leading to the principal Mosque, which is a
pretty large building, nearly square, and covered with a pavilion roof
of tiles. Adjoining to it, is a high octagonal tower, from which the
Muezzin calls the people to prayers.
The houses of the common people are made of bamboos, with mats,
and thatched. They stand on platforms of bamboos; and some of
them are raised on stakes of the same; others, which are constructed
on rafts of wood, or bamboo, float on the river, where they rise and
fall with the tide, and are fastened to the shore with ropes of rattan.
Buildings of this description are often constructed up the country,
where the materials are cheap, and are then brought down the stream.
Some of these floating rafts are very large, having, in addition to com-
modious dwelling-houses and out-offices, pleasant gardens, with trees
and various plants.
About two miles above Palimbang, the river divides into two large
branches ; that on the left, leading to a country seat of the Sultan, con-
sisting of several bungalows and gardens, delightfully situated on a
cluster of small islands, called, in allusion to their multitude, “ Pulo
Sariboo,” or “ The Thousand Islahds.” We found here, immense
heaps of door and window-frames, with other articles belonging to the
razed Dutch factory, which the Sultan caused to be transported hither.


for the purpose of building- a new country residence. These materials
were sent by Colonel Gillespie to Banca, to be used in the construction
of quarters for the troops.
The articles of commerce supplied by this country are, pepper.
Rattans, Gambir, Silk Cotton {Bombax Ceiba), Damor, Ivory, Cat’s
Eyes, Sulphur, Salt, Wax, Rice, Benzoin, Indigo, Tobacco, Areca,
Buffaloes, and Gold ; most of which are brought from a great dis-
tance up the country. The forests of Sumatra also abound, among
other valuable productions, with the ebony tree. The pepper trade at
Palimbang, was formerly exclusively in the hands of the Dutch ; and
this was so very profitable, that at least two millions of pounds weight
were annually exported. A metallic composition named Calin, found
here, was also a very lucrative branch of trade ; but the most considerable
article of commerce, was the Tin of Banca ; which the Sultan was
obliged to furnish to the Dutch monopolists, at a comparatively very
low rate, to what they charged for it in the Chinese market. Much
■rf-
lower still was the price which the Sultan allowed his subjects for that
and every other article of trade. These he obtained on his own terms,
and almost for nothing ; while from the Dutch, with whom he trans-
acted business, he received Spanish Dollars for all that he sold, so
that in consequence, an immense influx of specie poured into the
Royal Treasury, which, together with the great quantity of Gold
Dust collected in the hills, rendered him one of the richest Sovereigns
in the East.
At this time, the deposed Sultan was about forty-seven years of
age, of which he had reigned about eight when he was expelled for his
atrocities by the British power. His brother, the present Sultan, is


two years younger, and there are two more brothers, Pangarang
Argo, and Pangarang Surge. The sons of the late Sultan are many,
but the three eldest by the Queen are first, Pangarang Ratoo, then
aged twenty-one years, whose infamous conduct occasioned the ruin
of his family ; the second Pangarang Nadi, aged seventeen, respect-
ing whose character accounts were various and contradictory. The
third son, Pangarang Rabhu, aged ten years, was reported, as far
as could be judged at his tender age, to be of a good and gentle
disposition.
The Court of Palimbang has always been considered as taking
*
the lead, and fixing the Court Etiquette among the Malay Princes;
The Malay language as here spoken, is esteemed by the other native
Courts the standard of perfection.
There are two other tongues, the Rajang and Batta, in use among
the inhabitants of the interior of Sumatra; and these are both written
in characters totally distinct from each other, as well as from the
Malay on the coast. The people in the inland parts of the island
are still in a wild uncivilized state; and though all along the coasts
the inhabitants are more tractable, they are exceedingly treacherous,
and the Dutch have repeatedly fallen victims to their perfidy. For-
merly a small Factory was maintained on the River Bengalis, by
means of which the Dutch carried on a very profitable trade with the
inhabitants of the interior, in Opium, piece goods, and other valuable
articles. v
Jambi was formerly a considerable place, and the Factory of Siack
on the great River of Androgiri, was also once in a flourishing con-
dition, but on account of its extreme unhealthiness it has been deserted.
Y


At'first, the principal Settlement possessed by the Dutch, on Su-
matra, was Padang, which being closely connected with the regency of
Achen, was considered as so valuable and lucrative a Government,
that the person exercising its functions was changed every two or
three years. Gold is here so abundant as to be considered by the
people in the interior of little value, and great quantities of the dust
are, in consequence, suffered to flow with the rivers into the sea. When
the Dutch were in full possession of power, the Mines of Irion and
Marincabo used to yield five thousand pounds weight of this metal
annually, and considerable fortunes were amassed by the simple
operation of spreading nets or blankets across the streams to arrest
and receive the floating mud which was mixed with gold-dust.
With all these riches, the Island has many disadvantages. In the
interior, an immense Volcano frequently convulses the country with
dreadful Earthquakes, and sends forth rivers of burning lava. The
stagnation of the waters in the low grounds, and along the coasts, by
infecting the atmosphere, generates diseases ; whilst the western
Monsoons are attended with heavy rains and storms of thunder
and lightning exceeding in violence all the powers of description.
Mount Ophir, which is situated nearly under the Equator, and is about
the height of the Peak of Tenerifie, appears like an obtuse cone by itself,
being seperated from the chain of other mountains. It is about eight
leagues inland to the eastward of Seacarboa. Bencoolen, nearly op-
posite to Palimbang, comprizes the Residency of Padang, Achen and
many minor places along the South Coast of this vast Island. The
Fort and Town of Pedang are situated on the north bank of a river,
about a mile up from the sea, with houses and gardens on the oppo*


site side. Provisions for supplying ships are to be had in abidance
at a moderate rate ; here also is excellent water, which, issuing from
the rocks on the south side of the river, is conveyed in spouts to the
boats. Gold dust, benzoin, and other articles are bartered here for
opium, blue and white cloth, and various piece goods.
Fort Marlborough, which is in lat. 3 deg 48 min. South, and long.
102 deg. 28 min. E. or 4 deg. 25 min. W. from Batavia, is, together
with the town of Bencoolen, built on a point of land called Oossong
Currang moderately elevated. The land in the country to the north-
eastward is high and hilly, but very little known. Could a commu-
nication be opened across this tract with Palimbang, which is a mea-
sure that would, on trial, be found less difficult to accomplish than is
supposed, it must be productive of very great advantages ; new chan-
nels of trade would be hereby opened, and a secure intercourse
established with the inland country of the Lampoons ; an object
which General Daendals had in view, and endeavoured to effect by
means of the river Toulang Boowang which he caused to be surveyed,
and ordering batteries to be erected on its banks.
The island of Banca ceded to the British Government by the new
Sultan, was formally taken possession of on the twentieth of May,
1812, by Colonel Gillespie, and named w 3>uke of York Island.” ■J
Banca produces Tin, an article of primary consequence in the com-
merce with China, in greater quantity than any other place; while from
Billiton, another island that was then ceded to us, is procured almost
all the Steel used by the Malays, in making their arms and tools of
various kinds. Besides the benefit derived to commerce from the pos-
session of these islands, another advantage of equal, if not greater
y 2


importance, consists in the security hereby afforded to trading vessels
against pirates, who used to assemble here under the protection of the
Sultan of Palimbang, and to commit numerous depredations.
Fort Nugent, constructed by us at Banca, is situated on a rising
ground, about two miles to the Westward of the small town of Minto.
The beach is sandy, and a fine rivulet of sweet and clear water runs
between the fort and the town. The situation had ail the appearance
of being favourable to health ; but the mortality which has since pre-
vailed among the troops of the garrison, and by which several valuable
officers, and many private soldiers have found an untimely grave,
proves the uncertainty of human expectation.
Minto, the Capital of the Island, is situated near the sea, towards
the West, at the foot of the Mountain called Monapin, and nearly
opposite to the River of Palimbang, between two points forming the
road, of which that to the East is called Tanjong Poeni, and the
Western, Sandy Creek, distant from the former fourteen, and from the
latter four miles, where there is a Bank or Flat, running in a Western
direction, about five miles towards the extreme point, called Tanjong
Onlar.
The Campong, or residence of the Governor, named Dato Toma-
gong, is surrounded to the East by an irregular entrenchment, which
is now falling into decay ; and facing this Fort, on the opposite bank
of Minto River, stands a Village, that extends on the hills to the dist-
ance of about four hundred, and along the sea six hundred yards,
bearing the resemblance of an amphitheatre, one house rising above
the other.
Here is good anchorage in from six to twelve fathoms of water, and


ships find shelter from the Sandy Point to the N. and W. against the
boisterous waves which roll into the Straits from the China Sea, as
well as against the North and West winds, which blow very hard
along the coast of Sumatra, during the Monsoon.
The point of Tanjong Poeni, affords shelter during the E. and S. E.
winds, which blow from the coast of Sumatra, into the Roads ; but as
they raise no great swell, little danger is to be apprehended from
them.
Extract of the General Orders issued by the Honourable the
Lieutenant Governor.
“ Cheribon, May 27th, 1812.
The Lieutenant Governor has the highest satisfaction in commu-
nicating to the army, during the absence of the Commander of the
Forces, and to the public in general, the full and complete accom-
plishment of the objects which the British Government had in view,
in adopting measures of hostility against the Sultan of Palimbang.
“ In addition to the Military operations detailed in the following
letter from Colonel Gillespie, the Lieutenant Governor is happy to
state, that tranquillity and confidence have been established at Palim-
bang; and that, under the sanction of the higher authority of the
Supreme Government, subsequently received, a permanent arrange-
ment has been made for its future Government, to the exclusion of the
late Sultan and his adherents.
4 To estimate the superior conduct of the forces employed on this


delicate and peculiar service, it maybe proper to advert to the proceed-
ings of the Sultan, which rendered hostilities indispensable ; and a full
statement of the occasion and result of this decided interference of the
British Government, cannot be less interesting to the Dutch inhabit-
ants of this Island than beneficial to the Native States of the Eastern
Seas in general. [Here, after detailing a variety of particulars and
documents, the orders proceed as follow :]
“ On the importance of the service, and the ardent zeal, superior
ability, and discernment, with which it has from its commencement
been directed by its gallant Commander, the Lieutenant Governor will
refrain from offering his sentiments, until the return of the Commander
of the Forces, which may be hourly expected.
“ The conduct of the forces employed on this service, and particularly
that of the officers, noticed in such high terms by Colonel Gillespie,
entitles them to the warmest approbation of Government. The for-
bearance which has been evinced in effecting the object of the arma-
ment without the effusion of blood, is as creditable to their discipline,
as honourable to their character.
“ The assistance rendered by Captain Owen, of His Majesty’s ship
Cornelia, in the earlier arrangements, claims the particular acknow-
ledgements of this Government. The sentiments expressed by Colonel
Gillespie, in favour of Captain Drury, of His Majesty’s ship Bucepha-
lus, are likewise entitled to the same mark of public attention ; and
the Lieutenant Governor requests that Colonel Gillespie will convey to
Captain Bowen, of His Majesty’s ship Phoenix, his thanks for the cor-
dial co-operation and effectual support, rendered by His Majesty’s
Navy.


“ Colonel Gillespie is also requested to inform the Captains of the
Honourable Company's Cruizers, that the Lieutenant Governor will
have much pleasure in communicating to the Supreme Government,
the favourable sentiments which are entertained of the conduct of this
branch of the Naval service.
“ By order of the Honourable the Lieutenant Governor,
(Signed) “ C. G. BLAGRAVE,
“ A. Sec. to Gov.”
Extract of a Letter from Colonel Gillespie, to the Honourable T. S.
Raffles, Lieutenant Governor of Java and its Dependencies, in
which, after detailing the several operations, it concludes as
follows:
“ Dated Palimbeng, 2Sth April, 1812.
“ I cannot avoid expressing to you, the high sense I entertain of the
cordial co-operation and support that has been afforded to me by every
branch of the Naval service, during the progress of our voyage ; particu-
larly the arrangements which were made in the first instance by Captain
Owen, of the Cornelia, and conducted subsequently by Capt. Bowen, of
the Phoenix, who relieved him in the command. Captain Drmy, of the
Bucephalus, was necessarily separated from the body of the expedition,
where he had previously manifested great anxiety to forward the pub-
lic interest. Although I am not qualified to give a professional opinion
upon the value of their services, I cannot refrain from offering my most
grateful acknowledgements to Captain Bowen, and bearing public


testimony to the energy, zeal, and exertion displayed by those valuable
officers, in executing the important; duties of their situation, which
tended materially to lessen the difficulties we experienced, and to
overcome the obstacles opposed to our success.
44 The military reputation and gallantry of Lieut. Colonel M’Leod,
of H. M. 59th jfieg. are already so well established, that any panegyric
of mine would add little to the fame he has so justly earned. —I shall
therefore content myself on the present occasion, with returning him
my very best thanks, for the activity, anxiety, and attention, he has
manifested during the progress of the service.
“ Major Trench, and the detachment of the 89th Regiment; Captain
Campbell, and the detachment of the 59th Regiment; Captain Li-
mond of the Artillery, and all who were embarked at Batavia, are
entitled to my warmest approbation. To Major Butler, Deputy Adju-
tant-General, Major Thorn, Deputy Quarter-Master-General, and the
Officers composing General, Personal, and Brigade Staff, I am much
indebted, for their assiduity and attention. lam desirous, however, of
bringing particularly to your notice, the superior qualifications of
Captain Meares, who has been acting both as my Aid-de-Camp and
Interpreter, and who has displayed an activity, zeal, and acquirement,
that enables him to discharge the delicate and important duties of his
situation, with honour to himself, and great advantage to the Public
Service.
u I have the honour to be, &c. &c.
(Signed) tf ROBERT ROLLO GILLESPIE,
s
“ Colonel Commanding H« M. Troops,”


:.
BRASS.
Pounders.
—
IKON.
Pounders.
Total.
s
i
14
12
9
8
6
4
Battery on Borang Island, -
4
1
9
6
5
1
26
Ditto, West-side of the River, -----
1
7
4
1
2
15
Ditto, Binting Island, on the East-side of the River, -
2
1
l
9
3
J
17
Floating Batteries, Nos, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6,
4
2
8
14
War Prows, Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5,
4
9
2
2
2
8
30
Grand Total,
■ ■ ■■■ — " ~ t ~
10
10
2
1
17
24
2
3
18
102
BRASS.
J HON.
Founders,
Founders.
r-J
42
y
8
G
3
C U
.1
24
12
9
8
4
o
H
North West Cavalier on the River, -
-
-
23
23
Line of Defence along the River,
-
-
1
16
1
13
37
17
12
97
North-west Bastion of Palace Square,
-
-
4
6
1
10
21
South-east ditto, -
-
-
21
21
Outer Gate of the Palace,
-
-
4
13
. 4
23
fnner Gate of ditto, - - -
-
-
2
2
4
Palace Yard, -
-
-
5
40
13
GO
Grand Total,
1
4
2
6
jl
GO
10
1
13
32
27
16
249
Return of Ordnance on the Batteries at Borang River , Palimbang,
Captured Twenty-fourth of April , 1812, by the British Forces
under the Orders of Colonel R. R. Gillespie.
(Signed) J. LIMOND, Capt. Com. Artil.
Return of Ordnance on the Works of Palimbang, Captured Twenty-
fifth of April, 1812.
General Total of Ordnance Captured by the British Forces in the
Expedition to Palimbang, 351 Guns.
(Signed) J. LIMOND, Capt. Com. Art.
z


In the seventh article of the treaty concluded with the new Saltan,
he engages to protect the Chinese and Arabs who were settled in Pa-
limbang, and all those persons who formerly lived under the protec-
tion of the Dutch Factory ; to punish such as may commit any act of
violence towards them, and to attend to the representations which may
be made to him by the agent of the British Government on their
behalf
By the eighth article, the Sultan Ratoo Ahmed Nujm-ud-din engages
to use his utmost diligence to obtain possession of the treasure which
has been carried away by the late Sultan Mahmoud Budruddin, and
to pay to the Commander of the Forces on behalf of the British Go-
vernment, half of the sum which he may recover, partly to defray the
expense of the armament fitted out against the said Sultan, and partly
as a fine imposed for his acts of tyranny, cruelty, and perfidy.
In the ninth Article the Sultan Ratoo Ahmed Nujm-ud-din engages
to use every exertion to obtain possession of the persons of those who
were the principal advisers and instigators of the cruel and rapacious
acts of the late Sultan, together with their property wherever it may
be found. He promises to inflict on those persons condign punishment
for their enormous offences, which are deserving of death, and out of
their confiscated property to appropriate a sum to alleviate the distress
of the families of the deceased members of the Dutch Factory. He
further engages to make search for the remaining men, women, and
children of the Dutch, who may still remain alive in this country, and
to send them to Java by the first opportunity.


'■ I, Sultan Ratoo Ahmed Nujm-ud-din of Palimbang, do, of my own
free will, as an acknowledgement of the favour conferred on me, by
the English Government of Java, in advancing me to the throne of
the kingdom of Palimbang, and relying on the liberality of the En-
glish Government, for a suitable provision to maintain my Rank and
Dignity, cede to His Majesty, the King of Great Britain, and to the
Honourable the English East India Company, in full and unlimited
sovereignty, the islands of Banca and Billiton, and the islets thereon
depending; hereby renouncing on my own behalf, as well as on behalf
of my heirs and successors for ever, all claim and title to those islands,
with the mines and produce thereof, which, together with all the pri-
vileges and prerogatives heretofore exercised there by the Sultans of
Palimbang, I acknowledge to be henceforth the sole and exclusive
property of His Majesty, the King of Great Britain, and the Honour-
able East India Company. And Ido hereby enjoin all the inhabitants
now residing in those islands, as well as those under my authority,
who may hereafter be desirous of settling there, and may obtain the
permission of the British Government for so doing, to yield to the Bri-
tish Government due submission and obedience. And I do hereby
further promise and engage to protect the property and families which
may be now or hereafter at Palimbang, belonging to the inhabitants of
Banca, Billiton and their dependencies, with perfect freedom of re-
moval to those islands when demanded. In witness whereof, I have
hereunto put my hand and seal, together with the hands and seals
of my heir apparent and of the principal Pangarangs of this Kingdom.


“Written on the sth day of the month Jam a d-ul-A n null, or Sunday,
in the year 1227.
(Signed) “ PANGAR ANG SURYA.
“PANGARANG ARYA.
(Seal of Sultan Ratoo, Ahmed Nujm-ood-deen of Palimbang.)
“Signed and sealed at Palimbang this 17th day of May, 1812, in
presence of,
(Signed) “ WILLIAM HUNTER.
“R MEARES.”
Proclamation of the Commander of the Forces, published at Minto,
the 20 th May, 1812.
“ The Island of Banca having been ceded in full sovereignty to his
Majesty the King of Great Britain, by Sultan Ratoo Ahmed Nujm-
ood-din, of Palimbang, I, Robert Rollo Gillespie, Commander of
his Britannic Majesty’s forces to the eastward, do hereby take pos-
session of the said Island, in the name and on behalf of our gracious
Sovereign and the United East India Company of England ; requiring
and commanding that all manner and description of persons shall
honour and respect the British Flag, hereby established, and yield
obedience to the constituted authorities that may now or hereafter be
appointed to govern them.” (In pursuance of which the following
Oath of Allegiance has been administered to all the chiefs and princi-
pal inhabitants ot the said Island: “I, A. 8., do hereby solemnly


swear that I will be true and faithful to his gracious Majesty, the King
of Great Britain, and neither directly nor indirectly hold communica-
tion or intercourse with his enemies ; that I will respect and obey the
Officers, both civil and military, who many be appointed to govern
the said Island; and that I will assist and succour all British subjects,
and their Allies, to the best of my ability and power/’)
“ I do also will and command that this Island shall be henceforward
named Duke of York’s Island, in honour of his Royal Highness the
Commander in Chief of his Britannic Majesty’s Forces; that Minto
shall be the capital of the said Island, and called Minto, in honour
of the Right Honourable the Governor General of all India; that the
Fort now building near Minto, shall be named Fort Nugent, in honour
of his Excellency Sir George Nugent, Commander in Chief of all
the land forces serving in the East Indies; and that Klabut Bayor
harbour, on the N. E. side of the Island, shall be called Port Welling-
ton, in honour of General Lord Viscount Wellington, of the British
army.”


SECTION 111.
Hostilities with the Sultan of Mataram, and Capture of Djoejocarta.
The objects of the Expedition to Palimbang being accomplished,
the Commander of the Forces, and Staff, sailed on the 22d of May, in
the Wellington schooner, from Fort Nugent, and, after several narrow
escapes from numerous perils, which more than once threatened the
destruction of our little vessel, she arrived at Batavia on the Ist of
June; and on the 6th, we set out over land for Samarang, where, the
same day, were published the following General Orders':
l< Samarang, June 6th, 1812.
<e The Lieutenant-Governor is happy to congratulate Colonel
Gillespie on his return to Java, and on the full accomplishment of the
objects of the late Expedition.
The successful termination of these operations in a manner so
highly beneficial to the interests of humanity, and to the security and
advantage of the British possessions in those seas, must be entirely
attributed to the prompt, judicious, and politic measures adopted
under the personal direction of the Commander of the Forces. And
although the applause so justly due on this occasion may rather fall
within the province of a higher authority, to whom the proceedings will
be submitted, it is gratifying to the Lieutenant-Governor that he is not


precluded from bearing public testimony to the services which have
been rendered, nor of expressing his admiration of the superior talent
and character which has been so conspicuous throughout.
“ The Lieutenant-Governor requests Colonel Gillespie will accept
his best thanks for the zeal, ability, and precision with which the
service has been executed ; and, in recording his entire approbation,
and unreserved confirmation of the whole of the arrangements made
for the future security and advantage of the British interests, the
Lieutenant-Governor is satisfied that he only anticipates the senti-
ments of the supreme Government.
“ By order of the Honourable the Lieutenant-Governor,
(Signed) “ J. ECKFORD, Act. Sec,”
The troops of the Expedition, with the exception of the necessary
garrison for the security of the new Colony, had directions to proceed
to Samarang, where a new field of glory opened for the display of
British valour, in the very heart of Java,
An incidental notice has already been taken of the power of the
Sultan of Djoejocarta, and of the ambitious views of aggrandizement
entertained by that monarch. In addition to that statement, and as
illustrative of the conduct pursued by the natives, it may be proper
here to give a brief account of the rise of the Court of Mataram,
which is of modern date, and owes its origin entirely to the very
colony of Europeans which it sought now, by ingratitude and trea-
chery, to annihilate.


When the Dutch had succeeded in despoiling the dominions of their
first victim, the Sovereign of Jaccatra, whose capital was destroyed,
and his country seized by the victors, they next directed their attention
to the Soosoohoon, who, being too formidable to be attacked by arms,
was assailed by stratagem. The Dutch flattered the credulous Prince
with assurances of succour against one of his own family, who had
been secretly instigated to rebellion. The Soosoohoon being deceived
by these offers, was induced, by a fatal confidence in the good faith of
his pretended friends, to adopt the advice which they gave him, but
which was, in fact, the very course he should have avoided. By this
management, the infatuated monarch became completely entangled
in the toils which superior cunning had laid for him ; and when it was
found that he was utterly incapable of extricating himself, they, whose
arts had brought him into that situation, made an open avowal of
their alliance, offensive and defensive, with the rebellious Chief. Still
their designs extended no farther than to the w eakening of the Sovereign
whose confidence they had so egregiously abused ; and, therefore, on
his submission to the allies, he was allowed to retain a large propor-
tion of his territory, w ith the ancient capital of Solo, or Soura-carta.
On this occasion, the Dutch took as their share of the spoil, the whole
of the North coast, as that part only being navigable, this alone could be
serviceable to their purposes. The remainder was created into a separate
Sovereignty for the rebel who assumed the title of Sultan of Mataram,
and whose residence was fixed at Djoejocarta. But with the charac-
teristic bad faith which invariably marks the conduct of those who have
been associated together in acts of treachery and plunder, the new Sul-
tan very soon began to manifest his enmity to the very power that had


elevated him to the throne ; and these hostile proceedings were the
cause of the expedition which General Daendels found it necessary to
form, and of which some notice has already been taken. A compro-
mise was entered into by both parties for their mutual convenience;
but the radical hatred of the Sultan continuing unabated, or rather
being probably increased by the humiliation which he had been com-
pelled to endure, the state of the colony excited his hopes, that he should
be soon enabled to carry into effect his favourite project of completely
overturning the European Government in Java.
Having now matured his measures, he Considered the present mo-
ment as the most favourable for carrying his design into execution ;
and that the rather, as he stood at the head of a general confederacy
of all the native Courts, constituting, as it were, the Pith, the Sinews,
and the Strength of Java. Even the animosity, which had subsisted
between the Emperor of Solo and the Sultan, owing to the defec-
tion and rebellion of the latter ; and which * it was supposed, would
have proved an insurmountable bar to their union, yielded in the pre-
sent instance to other motives, and all fhmily feuds subsided, the better
to enable these princes to combine their forces in effecting #ur destruc-
tion) as well as that of the whole Colony, consisting of a vast multitude
of European settlers, extended along a coast of more than seven hun-
dred miles, and who naturally looked to the British Government
for protection. The magnitude of the threatened danger, therefore,
calling for immediate action, no procrastination could possibly be ad-
mitted.
The troops of the Palimbang expedition had not yet returned, except
one Company of Grenadiers of the 59th Regiment, in the Phoenix
2 a


Frigate, which came by the direct passage, whilst the remainder of the
Fleet had to go round the island of Banca, and to pass over to Borneo,
by which their passage was lengthened out to a month. But matters
were now come to such a crisis, that to have waited for the arrival of
these troops, would have been extremely dangerous. It was therefore
resolved, to move such of the military force as could be collected to
Djoejocarta, and in the event of hostilities being unavoidable, to break
at once that chain of combination, which, if suffered to increase and
strengthen, would, in all probability, prove the absolute ruin of the
European settlements in this part of the East
On the evening of the 17th of June, the Lieutenant Governor and
Commander of the Forces arrived at Djoejocarta ; and immediately on
their arrival, the Sultan, who had long before prepared for active ope-
rations, sent out strong bodies of horse to intercept the communication
in our rear, by burning and destroying the bridges, and laying waste
the country. Upon receiving this intelligence. Colonel Gillespie went
in person, escorted by fifty Dragoons, to reconnoitre the country ; and
after making several detours, we fell in with a large body of the Sul-
tan’s Horse ; but as no final determination with respect to offensive
measures had yet taken place, the Commander of the Forces, withheld
by sentiments of honour, from dispersing those people by force, endea-
voured, through Mr. Crawfurd, the Resident, who accompanied him
as Interpreter, to induce them, by every amicable means, to return
peaceably to the C rattan. To all solicitations, and even threats, how-
ever, they paid no regard for a long time ; and some stones were actu-
ally thrown at us from slings, which they use very dexterously. Still,
amidst these provocations, forbearance was observed on our part, and


at last they consented to return, but, on a sudden availing them-
selves of the growing darkness, they threw their spears at our men, by
which a serjeant and four dragoons were wounded. Thus they were
the first to provoke hostility, which ended in their defeat. This act
of treachery was followed by several other attacks during the night
upon the cavalry patroles, which obliged our Dragoons to cut then
way sword in hand, through the surrounding multitudes, with the loss
of one man killed and one wounded.
The following day, the Lieutenant Governor being still anxious to
avoid the effusion of blood, and, if possible, to bring matters to an ami-
cable adjustment, sent a messenger with the final resolution of his
Government to the Sultan. But the arrogant Chief continued deaf to
every proposition that was made to him, and feeling confidence in his
accumulating force, and the strength of his fortifications, he scrupled
not to add threats to his insult, and dismissed the messenger.
This unfavourable result of the negociation, the particulars of which
were instantly communicated by the Governour to the Commander of
the forces, shewed clearly that every thing now depended on the issue
of a battle; and that any farther delay from a principle of lenity,
would only serve to heighten the insolence of the enemy, and conse-
quently to injure the colony.
Though the troops which we had collected at this period were
but few in number, they were formidable by their intrepidity. These
consisted of a part of the fourteenth Regiment of Foot, part of the
Bengal Light Infantry, and the Third Volunteer Battalion; a propor-
tion of Artillery, and two troops of the 22d Dragoons. The remainder ot
2 A 2


our force, with the principal supply of Ordnance, were coining forward,
under the Orders of Lieutenant Colonel Alexander M’Leod, and
might be expected to join during the night.
It may be proper here to remark, that when the Dutch had obtained
the undisturbed possession of the finest portion of the Island, they
entered into such agreements with the native Princes as were calcu-
lated to maintain the influence they had so artfully acquired over
them and their councils. Among other stipulations, they succeeded
in gaining permission to erect forts, which, being built close to the
Capitals of the respective Chiefs, gave the Dutch nearly the command
qf those places where they were so powerfully settled.
Upon the return of the messenger, a fire was instantly opened from
our Fort, and which was as soon returned from the Crattan ; and thus
presenting the singular spectacle of two contiguous forts, belonging to
nations situated at opposite extremes of the globe, bombarding eachother.
The Crattan or residence of the Sultan of Mataram, and of all his
Court, is about three miles in circumference, surrounded by a broad
wet ditch with drawbridges; a strong thick high rampart with bas-
tions, and defended by near one hundred pieces of cannon. In the
interior, are numerous squares and court-yards, enclosed with high
walls, all very strong within themselves, and defensible.—At this time,
the principal entrance or Square in front, had a double row of cannon
facing the entrance, besides which, it was flanked with new-erected
batteries to the right and left. Seventeen thousand regular troops
manned the works; whilst an armed population of more than ope
hundred thousand, surrounded the exterior Campongs for many miles


round, and also occupying the walls and fastnesses along the sides of
the different roads leading to the Crattan.
The Fort built by the Dutch, which is about eight hundred yards from
the nearest face of the Crattan, is but ill calculated for any other use
than as a depot for military stores. These were scanty, and the pow-
der, which was of the old Dutch manufactory, proved very bad; so
that our firing was only intended to amuse the enemy, whilst our little
force was concentrating. One of the depots of powder belonging
to the enemy exploded soon after the firing commenced; and a similar
accident happened on our side, by which several officers and artillery
soldiers were severely burned ; among whom were Lieutenant Young,
Brigade-Major, and Lieutenant Hunter, of the Bengal Service ; Cap-
tain Teesdale also, of the Royal Navy, who volunteered his services,
was wounded by this occurrence. This explosion set fire to one of the
buildings in the Fort; but it was rapidly extinguished, and the can-
nonade continued. Light parties were detached to scour the Cam-
pongs on the right and left, to keep the Sultan's troops in play, and
prevent their passing to our rear, and harassing the detachment under
Lieutenant-Colonel M c Leod, who were marching from Salartiga to join
the forces at this place. Towards evening, the Sultan sent out a flag
of truce, attended by a large body of troops, and in the pride of hi>,
heart, imagining himself already victorious, he demanded our uncon-
ditional surrender; an act of arrogant exultation which could alone
proceed from the fullest dependence he placed on his internal strength
to resist every attack, and the overwhelming superiority of his force,
which, in respect of numbers, was undoubtedly immense.
Major Dalton, with a part of his Battalion of the Bengal Light


Infantry, who occupied part of the Dutch Town, between our Fort
and the Crattan, was spiritedly attacked, during* the night, four succes-
sive times, but repulsed the enemy with steadiness and good conduct.
On the high-road by which Colonel M e Leod’s detachment had to
march to join us, numerous parties were employed in burning or
breaking down the bridges, and throwing every obstacle in the way to
impede their advance. Frequent skirmishes ensued between those
Parties of the enemy and our Dragoons, who were sent to keep the
communication open ; in which rencontres, some astonishing traits of
gallantry were exhibited, our men being forced to make up for their
extreme inferiority in numbers, by the most strenuous exertions of
their superior activity, valour, and skill. Late in the evening, a party
of Dragoons, under Lieutenant Hale, of the 22d Regiment were sent
out to force their way to Colonel M‘Leod’s detachment, of whom no
tidings had been heard for some time ; the messenger, despatched by
the Lieutenant-Colonel, having been murdered on the road. The
country was so thickly beset by the Sultan’s people, that it was almost
impossible to send a report or order by a messenger on foot; and even
a Native could neither pass undiscovered, nor escape being murdered.
In this dilemma, Colonel M‘Leod offered a reward to any man who
would volunteer to carry an order to Captain Byers, then command-
ing a detachment of Royal Artillery, and who was a day’s march in
his rear. John O’Brien, private in the Madras Horse Artillery, imme-
diately undertook this desperate service. He galloped through the
midst of the enemy’s parties, delivered his orders, and hastened back
again, fortunately without being touched. The Commander of the
Forces, ever attentive to individual merit, rewarded this brave soldier


with the public expression of his thanks, and bestowed on him a gold
medal to commemorate his gallantry.
The party of Dragoons were attacked by a numerous body of the
enemy, who fired on them from behind walls, whilst multitudes, drawn
up across the road, presented to them a formidable and deep array of
spears, through which our men had to cut their way, most gallantly
maintaining a running fight the w hole w ay, till they joined the detach-
ment. The officer, Lieutenant Hale, was wounded, and narrowly
escaped being speared to the ground; which was the case with six of
his party, who were killed, and found the next day, mangled in a most
barbarous manner.
In the morning of the nineteenth of June, the whole of the troops
under Lieutenant-Colonel M'Leod, reached Head-quarters, consisting
of a detachment of Royal Artillery, the Grenadiers of the 50th Regi-
ment, and the Flank Companies and Rifle Company of the 78th
Regiment, a small party of Hussars, and a detachment of Madras
Horse Artillery. The long marches performed by the troops, and
their exposure to a burning sun, rendered some repose necessary. In
the mean time, the cannonade was continued on both sides. The
enemy, posted behind the walls, outside the Grattan, were burned out
and dislodged, by setting fire to their Campongs, which brought on a
general conflagration, and prepared the way for the assault.
In the evening, Colonel Gillespie ordered all the troops both cavalry
and infantry into the Fort, which produced the desired effect of lulling
the enemy into a fatal security, and of removing from their minds all
ideas of any serious attack being in contemplation on the Crattan. By
these means also, the vanity of the Sultan becaine more inflated, and.


he was confirmed in the belief, that we were actually afraid of him,
which ridiculous fancy had taken full possession of his imagination,
when he sent the dag* of truce with the summons to surrender.
Whilst thus humouring the credulity of the enemy, care was taken
to fatigue and: harrass them. The roaring of cannon, sending forth shot
and shells at intervals, from our fort, disturbed their rest all night, till
towards three o’clock in the morning of the 20th June, when a perfect
silence ensued, which lulled the greater part to sleep;—but it was
the sleep of death.
Two hours before dawn, the leaders of columns having received
their orders respectively, instantly proceeded to execute them. To
assault a place of such magnitude with so small a force, and the know-
ledge that we had to contend with avast superiority of numbers, could
not fail to give a very serious and appalling aspect to our enterprise.
But the stake at issue was nothing less than our very existence ; and
the fate of the whole Colony depended on the event.
At Bantam, Cheribon, Sourabaya, and other places, thousands were
ready to burst forth against the Colonists at the first signal. The
alarm, indeed, had already been given at Sourabaya, where the Sepoys
were fired on in their barracks, in the night, and, at the same time, a
fire of musketry opened from the Malay part of the town, across the
river, into the streets of the European quarter. The affrighted Dutch
inhabitants shut themselves up in their houses, expecting every
moment to be massacred ; but as the troops got immediately under
arms, by the vigilance of the Commanding Officer, Lieutenant-Colonel
Fraser, of the 78th Regiment, this rising tumult was fortunately sup-
pressed.




Ilf femurs.
A. The (ratten.
I>, Small Fort possessed bp the British .
r. British Residency House.
J). Principal Attaeh, under Lien* Colonel Watson, Crenadicr i/! 1 Regiment S' Leacbnp Column*
here Crossed the Ditch and escaladed, the Ramparts Covered.. In/ the- Sharp Shooters
H- hepimer/t distributed to the Ripht and Lett of the Assault.
E. Enemas Powder Magazine Blown up in the N. E. Bastion , a Fart of Benpal Lip lit In-
fantry Battalion Crossed the. Ditch and, runninp along the Berm Let down the. Draw
Bridge, gt, the. Princes Cate for the admission, of Lieu*: Colonel AH leads Column.
F. Princes Cate, Lieul Colonel/ Mf Leads Column passing over the Draw Bridge, assented, the.
Ramparts upon, one anothers shoulders, whilst a (inn was fin dmvourine/ to blew open,
tin' Cate which was Strong Ip barricaded inside, but it was Soon removed by the Assailants.
G. Lieutenant Colonel Duwar .c Column proeeedinp by a detain to the Rear or South, Side/,
of the (ratten.
H. tamp of the Porno op onp Semoot D endup rat, who was Rilled and his Proops defeated In/
the Column under Lietf. Cobmel Duwar who afterwards entered at the. South, Cate which
was opened for their admission bp Colonel Watsons Column.
\ . Attach under Major Cranf at the Principal Entrance, to Serve as a Diversion.
L. Horse Artillery and Cavalry flitting off the Enemy s Retreat on the High Roads.
Surronndinp the Crattcn,.
M. tensive Catnponps enclosed with Walls & occupied bp an imrncnce Armed Population .
N. A Mosque the Last Stand of the Enemqs Trdops.
O. The Sultans Palace.
P. Insulated Palace with Subaqueous Entrances.
o. New Insulated Tower.
K. Princes Pul ace,.
S. Founder//.
T. Dutch Town.
Ninety two (inns Mounted on the Enemys Works.
SKETCH of the FORTIFIED CRATTEN,
of the
Sultan of Djoejo Carta
Taken by Asault 20th June, 1812, by the British Forces;
Commanded by
MAJOR GENERAL R.R. GILLESPIE.


On an enquiry being instituted the next day into the cause of
infant rebellion, it was traced to a priest, who, designedly no doubt,
had spread a story that he had seen two Eagles in his dream ; one
white, the other black ; that, after fighting in the air for a long time,
with various success, the black Eagle at last conquered the white, and
having brought his adversary to the ground, tore him to pieces. The
allusion was easily understood, and very readily credited at this critical
moment, when every eye was turned towards Djoejocarta, with the most
anxious expectation.
It was evident that no safety could be ensured to the colony but in
the capture of the Crattan, the dispersion of the forces of the Sultan,
and the seizure of his person, who was the soul of that confederacy
which it became now an imperious duty to dissolve by every means in
our power.
These were the objects to which the comprehensive and active mind
of the British Commander was directed at this important moment; and
how well his plans were laid for the accomplishment of the great ends
he had in view, will appear from the result.
A column under Lieutenant-Colonel Dewar, with a part of the Ben-
gal Light Infantry, and the third Volunteer Battalion, joined by Prince
Prangwedona’s corps, proceeded at four o’clock in the morning, by a
circuitous route, to dislodge a large body of the enemy who were
posted outside, to the southward of the Crattan, and afterwards to
force their way in at the south gate ; whilst, on the north side, a suc-
cessful diversion was made by an attack at the principal entrance,
under Major Grant.
2 B


The column under Lieutenant-Colonel Watson, with apart of the
fourteenth Regiment, a part of the Bengal Light Infantry, with Lieu-
tenant-Colonel JVPLeod’s column of Grenadiers, of the 59th Regiment,
Flank Companies, and the Rifle ditto of the 78th Regiment, composed
the main attack.
This column had to move round the north-east Bastion, and close
under it, to arrive at the point for escalade ; but such was the silence
observed, and so complete the success of the previous measures, in
taking the enemy off his guard, that this column moved on undis-
covered. The head of the column had just gained the spot for placing
the ladders, when the alarm was given by a sentry in the north-
east bastion, the guns of which immediately poured forth a shower of
grape, by which several were killed and wounded; but this only in-
creased the activity and emulation of our troops. Led on by Lieu-
tenant Colonel Watson, the column, headed by the brave Grenadiers
©f the fourteenth, under Captain Johnstone, crossed the broad and
deep ditch, and escaladed the ramparts on the north-east face, notwith-
standing the shower of grape shot poured upon them by the enemy.
This, however, was soon silenced by the irresistible rapidity of the
Grenadiers, followed by the remainder of the fourteenth Regiment,
supported by a well-directed fire from our sharp shooters, so posted as
to send their shot direct into the embrazures, which made it too hot
for the enemy to stand long to their guns.
Lieutenant Colonel Watson pushed along the top of the ramparts,
for the Prince’s gate, on the north face, whilst a party of Sepoys crossed
the ditch, at the angle of the bastion first attacked, but which had


become defenceless by the explosion of its powder magazine; and
passing along the Berm, at the bottom of the rampart, towards the
same gate, they let down the drawbridge, for the admission of Lieu-
tenant-Colonel M‘Leod’s column.
The Prince’s gate, being strongly barricaded, was with difficulty
blown open ; but, in the mean time, the troox>s, having cleared the
ditch over the drawbridge, ascended upon one another’s shoulders
through the embrazures; and, having reinforced Lieutenant-Colonel
Watson’s column, they rapidly swept the ramparts. In all this time,
a brisk fire of shot and shells was kept up from our fort, upon the in-
terior of the Crattan.
The enemy raked the ramparts with grape shot during the whole of
the passage to the south-east Bastion, which was finally taken pos-
session of at the point of the bayonet. From thence the troops rushed
on along the south face; and, after a severe conflict with the enemy,
who were here in large numbers, and fighting desperately, they suc-
ceeded in opening the gate for Lieutenant-Colonel Dewar’s column,
who arrived just at this moment, after defeating the forces in the
suburbs, in which affair their chieftain, the Toomoogong Senoot De-
ningrat, fell, who was one of the Sultan’s principal advisers and chief
instigators, in every hostile proceeding against the British Government.
The whole column together now pushed on for the west gate; and* in
tiieir progress, the captured guns were turned occasionally with such
effect upon the enemy, in the surrounding Campongs, as materially
contributed to the dispersion of those troops; after which, the pieces
were thrown off their carriages, or tumbled into the ditch ; since, from
the smallness of our force, it would have been impossible to occupy
2b 2


such extensive works, each face of the fort being three-quarters of a
mile in length. By these means, the men were kept collected, and in
possession of that impelling force, which, like a whirlwind, swept every
thing before it.
During these operations, Colonel Gillespie had so disposed the
Cavalry and Horse Artillery, in parties supporting each other, and to
scour the roads which surrounded the Crattan, as to cut off the fugitives
from the Fort in every direction ; and thus preventing any attempt to
escape on the part of the Sultan or his principal adherents. To this
measure may be attributed the complete success of the enterprize, in
ensuring the possession of the Sultan’s person, who, finding that he
had no chance of escaping, surrendered himself a prisoner ; and thus
was prevented that predatory warfare which would probably otherwise
have desolated the country for a long time.
The hereditary Prince threw himself under our protection at the
West gate; but the enemy still continued to hold out at the North
West bastion, from whence however they were soon driven.
The fortifications being all cleared of the enemy, their last refuge,
which they obstinately contested, was a mosque on the outside of the
Fort, from whence they kept up a brisk fire over the walls and through
the apertures. It was here that Colonel Gillespie unfortunately re-
ceived a severe wound in his arm, from a blunderbuss, which one of
the enemy fired at him through an opening. A small number of
Bengal Sepoys, who were the only infantry with this party, which
consisted besides of two horse artillery guns and some dragoons, be-
haved with uncommon intrepidity on the present occasion.
This arduous and unequal conflict having lasted full three hours.


terminated in a complete victory, the immediate effect of which, by
the possession of the Sultan, was an entire dissolution of the whole
formidable confederacy.
Our loss, consisting of one hundred killed and wounded, though much
to be regretted, was certainly far below what could reasonably have
been expected, considering the desperate nature of the service, and
the disparity of force which was throughout actually engaged. To the
bravery of the troops and their overbearing rapidity in the attack, alone
is this great achievement, accomplished with such a comparatively
trifling loss, to be attributed. That on the part of the enemy cannot
be correctly stated, but it must have been very great; as besides the
killed and wounded on the ramparts and in the bastions, a prodigious
number of dead were lying in heaps under every gateway, particularly
at the central one.
The conduct of the officers and men employed on this enterprize,
cannot fail to excite admiration ; for brighter traits of bravery, disci-
pline, and humanity, have never been displayed in any assault. The
handful of brave troops engaged, being less than one thousand fire-
locks, defeating upwards of seventeen thousand men, well appointed,
and obstinately bent on defending the Crattan to the last; together
with the discipline of the troops in the execution, will render this act
conspicuous in the annals of our Military History. The word was,
“ Death or Victory And so impressed were the soldiers with the
important truth in this trying moment, when one hundred thousand
armed men were ready from all points to pour vengeance upon us,
thereby rendering retreat almost impossible, as every direction pre-
sented hordes of inveterate foes, that no thoughts but their King and


Country, entered the devoted minds of our warriors. Such was the
effect of this elevated sentiment, which all orders, that not a
man attempted to leave his ranks, or to go after plunder. This it was
that ensured the victory ; in which valour was crowned by that huma-
nity so characteristic of British soldiers, but which, in the present in-
stance, was preeminently conspicuous and admirable, as the conduct of
the enemy had been marked by peculiar circumstances of atrocious bar-
barity. But the forbearance of our troops when flushed with success,
was the more honourable, as they had a fresh recollection in their
minds, of what their comrades had suffered in being mangled and
tortured to death. The females in the inner apartments of the palace
were all respected, and the property was protected. So strict indeed
was discipline observed on this occasion, that not a single person was
molested, nor did any outrage take place.
The old Sultan indeed, was exiled to Prince of Wales’s Island, and
his son, the Hereditary Prince, was placed on the Throne, by the
name and title of Hamang Kubuaxa the Third. The Emperor of
Solo, equally intimidated and astonished by the wonderful instance
of determined intrepidity which had been displayed in his own im-
mediate neighbourhood, readily acceded to the terms which were
offered to him on the part of our Government. This example was
followed by the other Native Princes; and thus the British supre-
macy over the whole Island of Java, was established on a solid basis,
and that attended by a splendour unparalleled in the history of this
distant region.
Bagoos Rangin, the Rebel Chieftain already mentioned, after having
eluded every pursuit for a number of years, was taken on the twenty-


eighth of June, together with his nephew named Bagoos Manoch,
and his uncle Griessen, otherwise Sidja Djuda. On the twenty-fifth of
the same month, a party under the noted Naireem, was also defeated,
-and thus peace and tranquillity became restored to the whole Island.
Return of Killed and Wounded of the Forces employed in the
Capture of Djoejocarta by Assault , 20 th June , 1812.
Killed.
His Majesty’s Twenty-second Dragoons, 8 Rank and File.
—— Fourteenth Regiment, - 8 Do.
— ll - Seventy-eighth, - - - 1 Do.
Light Infantry Battalion, - - 3 Do.
Djyang Sekars, B - - 3 Do.
Total killed 23 Rank and File.
Wounded.
'Staff, Colonel Gillespie, Commander of the Forces.
Horse Artillery, two Rank and File.
Bengal Artillery, Major Butler, slightly.
1 Drummer, 11 Rank and File*
Twenty-second Dragoons, Lieutenant Hale, severely.
12 Rank and File.
His Majesty’s Fourteenth Regiment, Lieutenant M'Lean, severely, since dead.
30 Rank and File.
■ i" ■ ■ Seventy-eighth Regiment, Lieutenant Robertson, slightly.
3 Rank and File.
Eighty-ninth Regiment, Lieutenant Young, Brigade Major.
Light Infantry Battalion, Lieutenant J. H. Paul.
7 Rank and File.
Third Bengal Volunteer Battalion, two Rank and File.
Fourth ditto, Lieutenant Hunter.
Amboynese, one Havildar.
Royal Navy, Captain Teesdale.
Total wounded, - 76
Grand total, - 99
N.B. Of Prince Prangwedoua’s and Nunky de Sumas’ Corps, the killed and wounded are
not included.


bO
Four.
00
Three.
O
c
w
Two
£
>
VI
V>
h*
GC
Swiveis.
CD
Eighteen.
<1
Twelve
00
Nine.
Ot
Six.
to
O'.
Four.
o
3
a-
»
o
-
Three.
*z
00
Two
to
One.
CO
to
Total
Hot ses. Killed, Wounded.
Horse Artillery. 1 2
Twenty-second Dragoons, 5 13
Hussars, 1
Staff, 1
Total killed, 8 Wounded, - 15
List of Ordnance captured on the Works of Djeojocarta, June 20, 1812.
With a considerable quantity of powder and ammunition, and some shells.
General Orders, by the Commander of the Forces.
“ Head-quarters, Djoejocarta, June 21st, 1812.
“ The Commander of the Forces congratulates the troops he had the honour
personally to command, upon the late glorious result of their arduous and honour-
able enterprize. It confirms him in the opinion he had so justly entertained of their
discipline, firmness, and gallantry, and it affords a memorable proof to the enemies
of the British Government, that British soldiers, when united by those valuable qua-
lities, must not only conquer, but be irresistible. It was the conviction of their
supereminence, that determined him in a measure where nothing but bravery could
succeed; and it was the assurance of their intrepidity that urged him to an assault,
where multitudes of men were prepared for resistance. The event has proved that
his confidence was by no means misplaced. The enemy has been routed from a
regular fortified position, and seventeen thousand armed men have been conquered


and dispersed. The person of the Sultan has been safely secured, and the circum-
stances attending his seizure, reflect so much credit upon the troops in general, that
the Commander of the Forces cannot sufficiently express his admiration and ap-
plause. In the heat of the storm, his person was respected, his family was placed
in security and protection, and no part of the property was either pillaged or
molested.
ts This remarkable instance of steadiness and discipline, shall be brought to the
notice of higher authority, and it will be the duty of Colonel Gillespie, to obtain
for this force the approbation they have so justly earned.
“ To Lieutenant-Colonel Watson, who commanded the leading column, the Com-
mander of the Forces cannot convey the high sense he entertains of his distin-
guished bravery, and of the quickness and alacrity with which he conceived and
executed the attack.
<c The animated style in which Captain Johnston and Lieutenant Hunter crossed
the Ditch, and, at the head of the 14th Grenadiers, escaladed the Ramparts, under
the fire of the East Bastion, could only be equalled by the order and zeal of their
gallant followers.
The prompt and decisive movement of Lieutenant-Colonel M l Leod, to force his
passage to the Prince’s Gate, and support the leading column, was equally daring
and meritorious. The long detour of Lieutenant-Colonel Dewar, and his battalion,
towards the Southern Gate, and his well-timed entrance through that passage, con.
tributed materially to the success of the day ; and indeed, the whole of the officers
and soldiers employed upon this spirited assault, have distinguished themselves so
equally well, that it will be difficult for the Commander of the Forces to discover
what part was more conspicuous than another. It is right, however, to specify Cap-
tain Leys, and part of the Light Infantry Battalion, who crossed the Ditch at a ford-
able part, and climbed to an embrazure on each other’s shoulders # .
* These Sepoys, after crossing the Ditch, rapidly passed along the Berm, and let down
the Draw-bridge, at the Prince’s Gale, for the admission of Lieut.-Col, M'Leod’s column.
2 c


46 It is also just to mention the conduct of Major Forbes, who attacked the right
of the Sultan’s Square, and detached Lieutenant Douglas, with a small party of His
Majesty’s 78th Regiment, to cover the guns that were directed with so much spirit
and effect by Lieutenant Cameron, of the Bengal Artillery. It would also be wrong
to omit mentioning the spirited conduct of Major Dalton and his battalion, who
scoured the ramparts to the left, and admitted Lieutenant-Colonel Dewar at the
South Gate, after preserving the life of the Prince Royal *. He therefore requests
that those Officers will accept his best thanks for their valuable services, and commu-
cate them to the troops under their several commands. It appears that Lieutenant
Douglas had the honour of capturing the person of the Sultan, with his small de-
tachment of the 78th Light Company. Major Butler, and the Foot Artillery,
Captain Byers, and the Royal Artillery, Captain Rudyerd, and the Horse Artillery,
and Lieutenant Dudley, and the Hussars, were all conspicuous for the same gallantry
and zeal 5 and the Commander of the Forces communicates his thanks to Captain
Byers, for his active exertions in joining Lieutenant-Colonel M‘Leod’s detachment,
with the Ordnance Stores; and the same approbation is also due to Captain Cole-
brooke, of the Royal Artillery, whose activity has more than once been noticed.
Captain Byers, and Lieutenant Black, rendered effectual assistance to Lieutenant-
Colonel M‘Leod, in blowing open the Prince’s Gate, with one of the Horse Artillery
guns. This valuable corps is always conspicuous when its services are required.
“ It now remains for the Commander of the Forces to particularize instances of *
personal intrepidity, and amongst these may be classed the conduct of Lieutenant
Hill, of His Majesty’s 14th Regiment, who, with a Havildar, of the 4th Volunteer
Battalion, reconnoitered the Fort, before the advance of the troops, ascertained the
depth of the water in the ditch, and furnished a most correct report for the guidance
of Lieutenant-Colonel Watson n The behaviour of this officer will be brought to the
* As a countermarch could not be effected, it now became the turn of the Bengal Light
Infantry Battalion, under Major Dalton, tp lead the column, in sweeping the rampart round
to the left, and which was done most gallantly.


notice of His Excellency the Commander in Chief in India, where jlist claims to dis
tinction are never disregarded.
44 It is also reported to the Commander of the Forces, that the conduct of Private*
John O’Brien, of the Horse Artillery, was particularly conspicuous, in having per.
formed an important point of duty, under circumstances of the greatest personal
hazard, and he therefore merits public approbation.
“ The conduct of Lieutenant Hale, and his party, has already been mentioned in
terms of just applause j but the Commander of the Forces cannot refrain from again
testifying his sense of the activity and exertion that have been manifested by Captain
Dawes, and the officers and men of His Majesty’s 22d Dragoons, during the progress
of the service.
44 The central attack was conducted by Major Grant, of the 4th Volunteer Bat-
talion, whose well-established gallantry is acknowledged and recorded. It is therefore
requested that this officer will receive his warmest thanks for his active exertions, and
communicate the same to the officers and men placed under his immediate com-
mand.
<f The Commander of the Forces performs a pleasing task in recognizing the
valuable services of Major Butler, commanding the Artillery, who has uniformly dis-
played his wonted zeal and indefatigable exertion. The Commander of the Forces is
therefore happy in the opportunity of bearing public testimony of the professional
superiority and valuable acquirements of this excellent officer.
“ Major Butler, Deputy Adjutant General; Major Thorn, Deputy Quarter-
Master-General j Captain Hanson, Military Secretary ; Captains Parsons and Taylor,
who were acting as Aides-de-Camp, and all the Staff, with the troops, continue to
deserve the approbation and praise already bestowed upon former occasions; he there-
fore requests that these Officers will accept of his warmest acknowledgements for their
assiduity, activity, and attention. Lieutenant-Colonel M‘Kenzie, of the Engineers,
and Major Thorn, Deputy Quarter-Master General, whose gallantry and conduct
have been always conspicuous, were exceedingly serviceable in arranging the plan of
2 c 2


attack. The former of these officers having been detained upon the Island, upon
professional duties, the Commander of the Forces was particularly fortunate in the
opportunity of benefiting by his valuable talents and exertions.
" Lieutenants Harris and Baker, of the Bengal army, have manifested great anxiety
to forward the benefit of the service.
“ Majors Johnson and Campbell, Captains Jones, Bethune, and the Officers of
the Honourable the Lieutenant Governor’s Staff, attended the Commander of the
Forces during the action, and he is much indebted to those, as well as to many others,
for their active assistance and exertion.
“ It would be injustice to omit the name of Captain Teesdale, of the Royal Navy,
who accompanied the Commander of the Forces, and acted as an Aide-de-camp, in
which situation he displayed all the energy and zeal so common to those of his
honourable profession, and the Commander of the Forces regrets that he was
wounded so early in the service.
“ The conduct of Lieutenant M’Lean, of his Majesty’s 14th Rifle Company, of
Lieutenant Robinson, of His Majesty’s 78th, and of Lieutenant Paul, of the Bengal
Native Infantry, has also been reported zealous and meritorious. They were wounded
in the assault; and although the Commander of the Forces cannot help deploring
the loss, however small, that we have sustained during the progress of the service, he
cannot avoid reverting to the ardour and rapidity of the attack, which ensured to the
gallant troops a most complete victory, and lessened those bitter feelings of regret,
which the loss of a brother soldier must always produce.
“ Russa Khan, Havildar, of the 4th Volunteer Battalion, and Marwam Sing,
Sepoy, in the Light Infantry Battalion, are promoted to the rank of Jamidars ; and
Roop Maran Sing, of the Light Infantry Battalion, is promoted to the rank of
Havildar, for their distinguished and conspicuous gallantry. These appointments are
to be considered as having taken place during the action, and they will also be sub-
ject to the confirmation of Government.
“ The exertions and assistance that were afforded by Mr. Crawford, Resident, Mr.


Robinson, Mr. Deans, and Mr. Hardy, shall be brought to the attention of the
Honourable the Lieutenant Governor.
(Signed) “ RICHARD BUTLER,
Deputy Adjt. Gen.**
General Orders by His Excellency the Commander in Chief in
India.
“ Head Quarters, Cawnpore, Sept. SOtb, 1812.
<f His Excellency, the Commander in Chief in India, having, while at a distance
from the seat of Government, received from Major-General Gillespie, Commander
of the Forces on the Island of Java, the official reports of the success of the
Expedition to Palimbang, and of the glorious result of the assault on the strong
fortifications of Djoejocarta, on the 20th June, 1812, offers his cordial congratula-
tions to Major General Gillespie, and all the Officers and Troops who had the
honour of serving under his personal Command on both those important occasions,
but more particularly on the ever memorable assault of Djoejocarta.
“ Although the feeble use which the enemy made of his extensive means of defence
and annoyance at Palimbang, deprived the Expedition against its barbarous Prince,
of that character of brilliancy which peculiarly belongs to active operations in the field,
the Commander in Chief considers the troops employed in that difficult service as
highly deserving of his approbation and thanks, for their exact discipline, patient
endurance of fatigue and privation, and forwardness on every occasion which seemed
likely to require their active exertions.
“ The personal intrepidity and presence of mind displayed by Major General
Gillespie on this occasion, by which the lives and property of a numerous population
were rescued from impending destruction, and placed under the safe-guard of British


humanity and good faith, reflect additional lustre on the high reputation which that
Officer had already acquired in his distinguished career of public service.
ce Nor are the wise and prudent arrangements, by which Major General Gillespie
accomplished in a short time all the important objects which Government proposed by
the Expedition to Palimbang, less deserving of the Commander in Chief's public
approbation and applause.
66 Whether the Commander in Chief views the well-timed promptitude and
decision with which the resolution to assault the Grattan of Djoejocarta was adopted ;
the judgement with which the attack was planned ; the order, rapidity, and gallantry
with which it was executed by the brave troops, who, emulating the example of their
leader, and relying on his established character and talents, and their own valour and
discipline, disregarded numbers superior beyond all proportion in ordinary warfare,
and surmounted every obstacle to complete success ; his Excellency must ever con-
sider the storming of the Crattan of Djoejocarta, by the troops under Major-
General Gillespie, as ranking amongst the foremost of those great achievements
which adorn the military annals of our country, and have increased its power and
reputation in Asia.
“ The Commander in Chief in India, desires to offer the tribute of his warmest
thanks and applause to Major-General Gillespie, commanding the forces on Java, for
the energy, skill, and valour evinced by him, in the conduct of the arduous service
in question, the successful termination of which has superadded to all the splendor
of heroism, the substantial advantage of establishing the British supremacy over Java,
and the tranquillity of the Island, on the solid foundations of justice and power,
“ His Excellency also desires to express his warmest thanks and highest appro-
bation to the undermentioned Officers, who are particularly mentioned in the Major-
General’s Dispatches, and to all the Non-commissioned Officers and Privates of the
several corps, European and Native, employed under them.
“ To Lieutenant-Colonel Watson, of his Majesty’s fourteenth Foot, for the
gallantry and judgement displayed throughout the principal attack, which he led ; to


Lieutenant-Colonel M‘Leod, of his Majesty’s 59th Foot, for the prompt and de-
cisive movement which he made to support the leading column ; to Lieutenant-
Colonel Dewar, of the third. Major P. Grant of the fourth Bengal Volunteer Bat-
talion ; Major Dalton, of the Bengal Light Infantry Battalion ; Major Forbes, of his
Majesty’s 78th, for their distinguished conduct at the head of their respective parties;
to Major Butler, commanding the Artillery, for the professional ability and zeal
displayed by him during the progress of the service ; to Captain Rudyard, of the
Madras Horse Artillery, and Captain Dawse, of his Majesty’s 22d Dragoons, for
the distinguished bravery evinced by them, and the detachments of those corps under
their respective Commands ; to Major Butler, Deputy Adjutant General, and
Major Thorn, Deputy Quarter Master General; Captain Hanson, Military Secretary;
Lieutenants Parsons and Taylor, Aides-de- Camp, for the able and zealous assistance
rendered by them on this and every other occasion of service on Java; to Lieutenant
Colonel M'Kenzie, of the Madras Engineers, who being detained on the Island by-
professional duties, afforded all the aid of his valuable talents in the formation of the
plan of attack, and to Majors Johnson and Campbell, and Captain Jones, of the
Bengal Establishment, as well as the Staff of the Honourable the Lieutenant Go-
vernor, who attended the Commander of the Forces during the action, and of whose
assistance and exertion he reports in such favourable terms.
‘ e It is difficult to particularize individual merit, where the good conduct of all was
so conspicuous; but the undaunted resolution and bravery, under circumstances of
particular difficulty and danger, which Major General Gillespie reports to have been
displayed by Lieutenant Hale, of his Majesty’s 22d Dragoons, on the evening of the
18th June, and by Lieutenant Hill, of his Majesty’s fourteenth Foot, who, with a
Havildar, of the fourth Bengal Volunteer Battalion, ascertained the depth of the
ditch previous to the assault, demand to be honourably recorded.
tl The Commander in Chief cannot conclude without expressing the satisfaction
he derived from the honourable and ample testimony borne by Major-General Gil-
lespie, in his reports to His Excellency, to the distinguished zeal and gallantry of the


detachment of Bengal Volunteer Battalions, employed at the assault of Djoejocarta,
during which they eminently sustained the long established character of the Bengal
Sepoys, for courage and discipline.
(Signed) “ C. STUART,
“ Acting Adjutant General.”
General Orders by the Right Honourable the Governor General in
Council .
“ Fort William, August 14th, 18 12.
“ Official accounts of the successful assault of the fortified Palace of the Sultan of
Djoejocarta, on the island of Java, on the 20th June, having been received at this Pre-
sidency, the Right Honourable the Governor General in Council, deems it proper to
direct, that the annexed documents, containing the details of that most brilliant achieve-
ment, be published for general information.
<e In discharging the satisfactory duty of expressing his admiration of the profes-
sional talent, personal zeal and intrepidity displayed by Colonel Gillespie, and
the heroism which animated all the Officers and men of the Detachment, headed
by that distinguished Officer on this occasion; his Lordship in Council has only to
signify his unqualified concurrence in the applause bestowed on them by the Honour-
able the lieutenant Governor of Java, in his General Order of the 28th of June,
and in the high commendations which the Detachments in general, and the several
officers, particularly noticed in the General Orders of their gallant Commander, have
had the honor to receive.
In the promptitude of decision, ardor and ability of execution, which inspired the
conduct of their leader, and in the persevering courage, zeal, and energy which per-
vaded all ranks of the troops under his direction, in the successful accomplishment of


this arduous enterprize, his Lordship in Council recognizes those eminent qualities
the display of which had already conferred immortal honour on the brave officers
and men, who, under the guidance of their illustrious Commander in Chief, effected
the conquest of Java; and contemplating the formidable difficulties opposed to them
by the strength of the enemy’s works, and the vast superiority of his force, his Lord-
ship in Council, cannot but consider the storming of the Palace of Djoejocarta among
the number of those extraordinary efforts of gallantry, whioh will ever hold a distin-
guished place in the annals of the British arms.
“His Lordship in Council deeply laments the severe wound Which Colonel Gillespie
received in the moment of victory, but has the satisfaction to observe, that it was
not of a nature to excite apprehension.
“ The Governor General in Council has great pleasure in confirming the highly-
merited Promotions which are specified in Colonel Gillespie’s General Order of the
121st of June.
“ By order of the Right Honourable the Governor General in Council,
(Signed) “ N. B. EDMONSTONE,
“ Chief Secretary to Government.”




STATISTIC AND HISTORICAL SKETCH
of
J A V A;
Being the result of Observations made in a Tour through the Country ;
WITH AN ACCOUNT OF ITS DEPENEDNCIES.
It does not enter into the design or limits of the present yrork, to give
a copious description of the Island of Java and its Resources; nor to
treat circumstantially of the different Tribes inhabiting that country;
which are subjects that would, if fully delineated, as their importance
deserve, extend far beyond the limits here prescribed; and require
more ample opportunities of examination than in the present instance
were enjoyed.
Java, and the Eastern Islands, open a wide field for speculations.
Political, Commercial, and Agricultural. By a radical reform in the
internal administration, and the blessings of peace, this celebrated
colony may hope to revive from its drooping state, to the possession of
a consequence similar to that prosperity, which, for two centuries,
2 d 2


imparted power to ancient Holland, and placed that country in the
rank of one of the most flourishing Nations in Europe.
But the depth of misery into which the revolutionary war had sunk
the Dutch at home, materially affected their colonies abroad. Subject
to the paramount authority of France, the separation of Holland from
the British interests, exposed her trade to numerous losses, which ren-
dered all intercourse precarious and unsafe, while multiplied disap-
pointments and failures in commercial speculations proved fatal to
the spirit of enterprize. The mismanagement in the affairs of their
East India Company, occasioned by the depredations and the want
of morality and public spirit in its servants, added considerably to the
mischief. No new settlers of respectability from Europe arrived to
replace those whom the sickly climate carried off, so that Batavia,
which was formerly styled the “ Queen of the East,” being thus de-
prived of a great part of its inhabitants, having also the accustomed
influx of wealth cut off, and labouring at the same time under the
yoke of French domination, sunk into a state of languor and wretch-
edness.
The great depreciation of the old Batavia Paper Currency, accele-
rated this general decline, and the means which were adopted to
remedy that evil, failed in producing the desired effect. Specie became
extremely scarce, and the want of an accredited circulating medium
caused an entire stagnation in trade. The rate at which the Paper was
fixed by a Proclamation issued under the authority of Lord Minto,
viz. Paper Rix Dollars for one Spanish Dollar, was very soon
doubled, and in the Chinese market, and Exchange shops, the value
of Silver rose over that of Bills to the height of one Spanish Dollar


for fourteen or fifteen Rix Dollars of Paper. This loss, while it
affected the Public Treasury in its receipts under the circumstances
above-mentioned, at the same time fell very heavily on the people,
who had to make their purchases, and even, perhaps, to procure
the necessaries of life, by giving at the lowest price, bills which had
been received at their original value. The seller again received no
more than the value of his goods, being obliged again to exchange the
bills to procure specie, in order to carry on his dealings with the mer-
chant vessels that supplied him with goods ; while both sustained a
considerable loss in the decrease of sale, because of the privation which
the greater part of the people were obliged to impose on themselves.
The evil was therefore increasing daily, and to remedy it, the old paper
currency was called in, by means of the sales of public lands, the
payments being made into the treasury, partly in paper, at 6j Rix dol-
lars for one Spanish dollar, and partly in specie. The circulation of
the old paper currency was stopped; but that of specie did not increase.
The general loss of credit was in consequence destructive of specula-
tive pursuits, and those who were possessed of money kept it locked
up ; which, being so much dead capital, occasioned a complete scarcity
of the circulating medium. The consequences were, an interruption
of labour, and want of employ ; suspension of useful and profitable
establishments ; a scanty market occasioned by reduced consumption,
and a necessary loss to the public revenue. But the successes of tfie
British arms in these regions have opened new sources of prosperity.
The tin from Banca, or Duke of York’s Island, supplies the want of
Spanish Dollars in the China trade; and establishments on Borneo
are also in progress. An armament which sailed in June, 1813, from


Samarang, under the orders of Colonel Watson, against Sambas,
achieved its capture, and drove into the interior Anam, the nomi-
nal of that place; but who was in reality nothing better
than a formidable Pirate. Chieftain, who had successfully resisted
the British flag, when an attack was made towards the close of the
preceding year by the late lamented Captain Bowen, of the Phoenix
Frigate.
Pontiana obtained a British Garrison in compliance with the
pressing solicitations of its Sultan. Ambassadors from the King of
Siam arrived at Batavia with offers to renew the former relations of
reciprocal Commerce with Juthea, the capital of that Empire, where
the Dutch had formerly a Comptoir. The long interrupted intercourse
with Japan was also about to be re-established by this conquest; tyvo
large ships having sailed from Batavia in June 1813, with a valuable
cargo for the seat of that Empire.
Thus, u successful renewal of its commercial relations, with the es-
tablishment of a new system of landed tenure, must improve the
internal revenue, and fix it on a certain basis, unexposed as it had been
to the vicissitudes of trade, under that ruinous system of monopoly
and forced contingents of the old Government. It is computed, that
by this change the land , revenue will be augmented more than ten
times its former assessments. At the same time, the proposed abolition
of all feudal services and forced deliveries, will emancipate the great
mass of the population of Java, from that state of vassalage and
bondage under which they were so long oppressed, and by the intro-
duction of a free cultivation, and a free disposal of the fruits of labour,
that fine country, so much favoured by nature, will, under a wise ad-


ministration, soon emerge from its gldomy and depressed condition,
into a state of wealth and prosperity/
The Island of Java lies between the fifth and ninth parallels of
South Latitude, and from the 105th to the 115th degree of East
Longitude, being in length six hundred and forty two miles, while
the breadth, which varies much, is at the greatest, one hundred and
twenty-eight miles.
The island is divided nearly in its whole length, by a range of moun-
tains, running almost East and ATest, the centre of the range, which
is however often broken, being the most elevated. Descending to the
north coast, it is in its whole extent, low and swampy, intersected by
a great number of rivers, and fine bays, with many towns and villages
being interspersed along the coast. Some shoal flats are stretched
along in several parts, and a few patches lie detached from the shore,
but in most parts this coast may be approached to 8,7, or 6 fathoms of
muddy bottom, whereas the south coast, of which, as it has not hitherto
been explored, very little is known, rises into high and rugged hills,
against which the surf dashes violently, so that, with the exception
of a few Bays, this coast is almost inaccessible.
In several hills of the great range of mountains, are the craters of
volcanoes, w r hich formerly raged with fury, and poured forth torrents
of lava; but, at present, none are known to be in activity, though
many emit smoke after heavy rain. In the neighbourhood are nume-
rous mineral springs, possessing different degrees of efficacy and
temperature/
To an enterprizing and commercial people, the number of navigable


rivers, with the canals that might be cut from them, on the north coast
of Java, would supply an endless source of wealth by the benefit of
inland communication. Almost all the towns of any note on the coast
are situated on large rivers, by which the whole produce of the sur-
rounding country is easily transported in boats or on rafts,
The great military road from Bantam to the east end of the Island,
measuring above seven hundred miles, will ever remain as a monu-
ment of the enterprize of General Daendels; though it is to be la-
mented that this great work was accomplished by a prodigious sacri-
fice of human lives. About twelve thousand natives are said to have
perished in constructing it, chiefly owing to the unhealthiness of the
forests and marshes, through which it runs. From Bantam to Bata-
via, the road is generally flat; and, except through a jungle of about
twenty miles in extent, it is made without difficulty. From Batavia to
the foot of the Blue Mountains, the road runs nearly level; the ascent
then gradually increases, and becomes so extremely difficult, to the
summit, that the aid of buffaloes is required to draw up a carriage.
Though in this mountainous region of about one hundred and twenty
miles, there is very little rock to cut through, still it is evident that the
labour by which the w ork was accomplished must have been excessive.
From hence the road runs, with a few exceptions here and there, very
level; and, for many miles along the beach, to the east end of the
Island, it is conducted through several forests, and over numerous
marshes and rice fields. The ordinary country roads in the interior
are numerous, but few of them are passable for carriages, except tire


native Pedatties, or carts, which are drawn by buffaloes; and, during
the western monsoon, it is scarcely possible to quit the high roads.
The climate of Java is various. Along the sea coast it is hot and
sultry; but, on proceeding inland, the air becomes keen and
pleasant. In some parts, particularly amongst the hills, on the great
road, at Salitiga, and many of the inland towns, it is often so cold as to
make even a fire desirable. At Weltervreeden, the thermometer is gene-
rally at 86 degrees, in the dry season, or the south-east monsoon, which
extends from April to October ; and from 83 to 90 degrees in the west
monsoon, from November to March. In the mountains about Tjipanas,
lying only sixty-two miles from Batavia, the thermometer is generally
at 65 degrees, and sometimes less, but seldom exceeding 70 degrees
of Fahrenheit
The monsoons are by no means regular. Heavy rain seldom sets in
till December, and the heaviest is in the months of February and
March. There is a constant succession of land and sea-breezes every
day, but varying a few hours in the setting in. From ten in the morn-
ing till four or five in the evening, the sea-breeze blows; and then a
calm succeeds till seven or eight, when the land-breeze sets in, and
continues, at intervals, till day-break. Where the first blows close to
the sea, and over a swampy or muddy beach, it is not esteemed whole-
some ; but the latter, particularly near the hills, is cool and refreshing.
The most pleasant and healthy season is from May to October.
Perhaps in no part of the globe is vegetation so richly luxuriant,
or the wants of man so easily supplied, and with less trouble of
2 E


cultivation, as in Java. In the low lands are extensive rice fields, ex-
hibiting’ the variegated hues of emerald and gold ; one spot, newly sown,
being verdant, while close to it is another ripe for reaping, the whole
interspersed with topes of cocoa-nut trees. A variety of esculent fruits
and vegetables, which may be gathered throughout the year, grow
around each cottage, and in every village. On the mountains are lofty
trees, fit to be converted into masts, while forests of teak supply the
place of oak for building ships, adapted to all purposes. The Kappok
and the Jambos grow to a very great height; and so does that which is
called by the Chinese and Malays the Kanarie, which is one of the
highest of the forest trees. The Kijatil tree supplies the best planks
and timber for all kinds of architecture. The Makandon is a large
tree, as also is the Mangam, which is a species of the Palm. To this
last are ascribed many virtues. It is consecrated to kings and princes,
being placed round their tombs.
The Sagamunda, or Sago tree, is another species of the palm. From
it is extracted a sap, which, being mixed with one called Houbat, and
other ingredients, constitutes a beverage named Sagonar, which is
very commonly used, especially in the Molucca isles, where the co-
lonists have often nothing else to drink. This liquor is intoxicating
when drank to excess. The Sago here mentioned is also boiled and
made into soup; and in many places it is the ordinary food of the
lower class of people.
The Rossamala, or Turennapi, resembles the beautiful Jati w ood,
of which such elegant cabinet w ork is made.
The Kubab Sini, which grows only in the kingdom of Bantam, yields


a balsamic oil, or jelly, resembling’ the much-esteemed Kayoo Pootee
oil. It partakes of the smell and taste of camphor, and is taken in-
wardly, in violent coughs, or disordered stomachs, and also in various
other cases.
✓
The odoriferous Benzoin tree is also found on Java. It is a kind of
laurel, growing to a great height; and the leaf is not unlike that of
the citron, or lemon tree. It produces a gum, which is obtained by an
incision under the crown, and is at first very thin and fluent, like water,
and transparent, if taken away in time : but when suffered to settle, it
turns to an orange colour, and loses its clearness. This gum forms a
lucrative branch of conlmerce. Plantations of cocoa-nut trees sur-
round every cottage; and the peasant considers it a duty most sacred
to bestow his principal care and attention on the preservation of these
trees, which he transmits with care down to his children, not only in a
flourishing state, but augmented by new plantations, thus constituting
a regular inheritance from father to son. The Bamboo also is gene-
rally planted round the cottager’s little garden, in which grows the
Dorian and Plantain, with a few culinary plants. Such are the simple
articles with which the Indian villager satisfies almost all his wants;
while numerous kinds of fruit-trees, dispersed over the fields, pro-
duce a superabundance. Of these, the Mangosteen is, perhaps, the
most delicate and finest tasted fruit in the East; but it is singular
that its growth should be confined to particular spots. In Java, it
grows principally about Batavia, and the western parts of the Island,
there being comparatively but few in the eastern parts. The Mango
and Tamarind, Jamlo, or Jambo, Jaaka, or Jack fruit, are very plen-
-2 e 2


tiful. The latter, as well as the Dorian and the Annona, or, as the
Malays call this last, Sarborossa, are very favourite fruits with the
natives. The Ramboutan is also another of a very pleasant taste ;
besides which. Pomegranates, Custard apples. Papaya, Billimbing,
Guava, Boa-bidarra, Peaches, Oranges of various kinds, with a great
variety of other fruits, are produced throughout the Island. The
Pamplemousse are here of a very exquisite flavour; as also is the An-
nanas, or Pine-apple, both being superior to those of Hindostan.
Grapes thrive so well, that the colonists might not only produce wine
for their own consumption, but for exportation. This was once tried,
and the vineyards promised every success ; but the jealousy of the
Dutch settlers at the Cape, who considered this as likely to break in
upon the wine trade, which they had so long carried on, influenced
the Government at home to issue an order, prohibiting the culture of
vines in Java.
The Areca, called Pinang by the Malays, and Betel plantations, are
very numerous. The various kinds of plants, and great abundance of
herbs found in Java, would afford ample scope for the researches of
the botanist; as flowers exhale their perfumes at all seasons of the
year. The Fula Majori, of which whole fields are to be seen, is most
extensively cultivated, and the water distilled from it, which is superior
to rose water, is used jn washing the face and eyes, being supposed to
have the virtue of strengthening them. The Boenga dada or Eglan-
tine tree was originally imported from Persia. The leaves and knobs
resemble those of our rose trees, but the flowers are smaller. The
smell is also like that of our rose,, and the water which is distilled


from it is in great repute. Among the Heathen nations of India, in con-
sequence of their belief in the metempsychosis, we hud the culture
of a great variety of herbs and plants particularly attended to ; as their
religious abstinence from animal food lays them under the necessity
of discovering other articles of sustenance, which they find in abun-
dance among the variety of vegetable tribes, and these of course consti-
tute their principal dependance in the article of living .
This conformity in the Javanese to the practice of the continental
Indians, indicates a common origin, besides which, there are many
Hindu peculiarities observed among these people, and the ancient
traces of Hindu worship found in the island, sufficiently prove that
the present race of inhabitants are the descendants of the sons of
Brahma.
In addition to the numerous esculents which are cultivated here,
the people are in possession of many medicinal plants. The Tanda
Rousa is used as such. The Indian Alkanna or Henna, has many
virtues ascribed to it by the Malays, particularly the women, who
carry their faith in its efficacy to a degree of superstitious veneration.
A sap extracted from the juicy leaves of the Magas or Kiati tree, is
held in high estimation, as an effectual cure of wounds made by crisses
and spears that have been dipped in a poison composed of the blood
of the Gekko, and other ingredients. The leaves of the Torre tree are
esteemed by the natives to be a powerful remedy for the bite of snakes,
as also is the wild Nardus, which grows in great plenty. This last is
used by the Javanese in their cookery.
Amongst the great variety of culinary vegetables in most request,
the Kurkum is a favourite plant of the Malays, who employ the roots


ill cooking their fish and flesh, which thereby acquire the colour and
taste of saffron. The Pattatas, which is much cultivated, is a root
eaten either raw like sallad, or roasted, in which last state it tastes
like a chesnut, and is reckoned very wholesome. Focki Focki, when
boiled in wine with pepper, tastes somewhat Jike our artichoke. The
Nomeradi, which is a kind of spinach, is in general use ; the Assafoetida
is also found here; and the Cardamon is much cultivated ; all other
garden plants, such as endives, cauliflowers, beans, cabbages, pum-
pions, melons, patacas or water melons, yams, potatoes, &c. are pro-
duced in great abundance throughout the island. Maize, or Indian
corn, is a favourite article of food with the natives, who eat it roasted.
Tobacco grows very well in Java, though formerly much was im-
ported from Ternate. But the staple produce of the Island is Rice,
which is cultivated nearly the whole length of the sea coast, many miles
in breadth, and in all low grounds, ravines, &c. wherever water is to be
had ; but the greater part is grown to the Eastward, whence it is
brought to Batavia, and exported in great quantities. Upland Rice
and Cotton are grown in-land, and on the hilly parts. Indigo of a
very superior quality, yet said to be 25 per cent, cheaper than that of
Bengal, is also produced here, and might even be raised in any quan-
tity. With this all the native dresses are dyed, as the Javanese almost
universally wear blue or black cloths. Catjang is also much culti-
vated ; and the Chinese, after expressing great quantities of oil from
it, with the residue feed their hogs. It is much used throughout the
Island, and on board country ships, forming a considerable branch of
the export trade. The Coffee Plantations are extremely luxuriant,
and cultivated principally on the high grounds. From the profit ac-


cruing to the Revenue, they were much extended by the late Govern-
ment ; and in the different Regencies there was a regulation that a
certain number of trees should be planted every year ; but of late,
from the interruption of the trade with America, and the Continent,
the regulation has not only been abolished, but the plantations to the
Eastward were ordered to be entirely destroyed, and converted to
other uses. Pepper is chiefly cultivated in the country of Bantam,
whence a certain quantity was obliged to be furnished by the stipula-
tions of the former Government. Great quantities of Sugar are made,
chiefly in Jacatra, as well for the consumption of the Island, as for
exportation. Wheat and Barley are only grown in small quantities, in
the hilly tracts, chiefly in the middle parts of the Island, but enough
might no doubt be raised for the consumption of Java and its depen-
dencies, by extending the cultivation. Oats and Bengal Grain thrive
likewise in those parts of the Island, and would prove very abundant,
were the culture extended.
The natural fertility of the soil renders much labour and tillage
unnecessary. In the ordinary cultivation of the Rice and Paddy
Fields, the husbandman makes use of Buffaloes. These powerful
and often furiously enraged animals, are securely conducted by little
children ; they seem indeed to forget their own strength in the weak-
ness of the child, and are most willingly obedient to it. Cattle of
every description are plentiful all over Java, but the Cows in general
are of an inferior kind, and give very little milk. Sheep, Goats, and
Pigs are very numerous. Game, however, does not abound here so
much as in other countries; though Hares and Rabbits are pretty


common ; and Deer and Antelopes are also plentiful. The Malay
method of hunting the last is singularly curious. In the Mountain
Regencies, Horses are trained for that particular purpose. When the
Antelope is started, a Hunter immediately pursues it at full speed :
the rider lies forward close to the horse’s neck, and without minding the
bridle, for the animal having been trained, seldom loses sight of the ob-
ject, which he follows over every thing like a greyhound. On coming up
with the game, the hunter is enabled to throw a noose over its horns,
or round the neck and head, by which it is secured till the remainder
of the party arrive. Should the rider happen to be thrown, the horse
seldom gives up the chace. Instances are even mentioned of his con-
tinuing the pursuit alone, and on coming up with the Antelope, of
his pawing it down to the ground, and by mouthing and kneeling on
the prey, holding it there till tbe arrival of the hunting party. The
Horses, which are very numerous throughout the Island, are small but
active, and show a good deal of the blood and make of the Arabian.
The Bima breed is esteemed by much the best, and great numbers of
them are annually imported. The general size of the Horses in the
Island, is about thirteen hands. Wild Hogs and Monkies ar e found in
all the Jungles. The Forests, especially to the Eastward of the Island,
are inhabited by various kinds of Wild Beasts. The Royal Tiger is
here as powerful and as large as in Bengal. A species of Black Tiger,
which is often found, is very ferocious, but of a smaller kind, and in
size and shape rather resembles the Leopard. The Rhinoceros is
sometimes met with, but principally in the Western parts of the Island,
lying in the high grass jungle, remote from observation. Snakes are
found here, as in all other hot countries, in great numbers, and of


'Various kinds. Some of these are from twenty-five to thirty feet in
length. The Petoia Snake, which is one of the largest, has been known
to swallow whole sheep, hogs, and other animals ; but it is not veno-
mous, and when gorged, it twists its body round a tree, where it hangs
quite motionless, till the food is digested ; in which state it is some-
times killed. The numerous marshes on the sea coast, where the
principal towns are situated, are infested with Reptiles and Insects.
Lizards of all kind, from the variable Came Jeon to the Guana tribe,
frequent the bushes, trees, and roofs of the houses. Of these, the
Gek-ko is held by the Javanese in the greatest abhorrence, from an
idea of its being venomous ; it makes a loud barking at times, resem-
bling the sound whence its name is derived. Scorpions abound in
these marshes, and the Mosquitoes are particularly tormenting.
Of the great diversity among the feathered tribes found in Java, we
may remark the Cassowary, by the Indians called Emeu, which is
a very large and powerful bird. White Eagles have been seen here,
and every kind of Bird of prey are continually on the wing. Of the
Parrot species the Lowrys are very beautiful, and often sold at a high
price. Birds of Paradise, from Gillolo, Papua, and New Guinea,
sometimes visit this Island. The Java Sparrow is of a peculiar kind,
and very handsome. Pigeons, domestic and wild, with the most beau-
tiful plumage, abound here ; Pheasants; Jungle, and Pea-fowl, are
also numerous, together with Quail, Snipes, &c. Wild Ducks and
Geese, however, are not common, though Poultry is extremely
plentiful.
L The Aquatic tribe is equally diversified, and the extensive fisheries
2 F


along this great line of.coast, are highly productive. At some places
the fishing-stakes run out six or eight miles into the sea. Of the great
abundance daily brought to market, we may notice the Kaacop, which
grows to a large size, and is in great repute. The King Fish, which is
the best flavoured of any, sometimes measures five feet, and is very
wholesome. The Jacob Evertzen is a very fine fish, and often weighs
four hundred pounds. Sole, Carp, and many other kinds offish found
in Europe, are very plentiful here. The Clip Fish and Springer are
very good when boiled. The Eels are a favorite food with the Chinese.
Oysters, and every kind of Shell Fish are in great abundance. At the
mouths of the rivers, numbers of Aligators or Caymans, are continu-
ally lurking for their prey. The Water Guana, a smaller kind of the
Crocodile species, infests rivers and ponds, where they prove very de-
structive. In the several Bays numerous Sharks swim about the ships;
and many Animals unknown in Natural History, abound in these seas.
Java has but tew Manufactures. The principal is that of Cotton,
which is produced in sufficient quantity to furnish the coarse cloths,
handkerchiefs, and other articles of dress worn by the natives. The
greater part are fabricated in Java Proper, or the country east of Che-
nbon, whence they are brought in great quantities to Batavia, and
there sold at very reasonable rates. At Solo is a considerable manu-
facture ot Leather and Sadlery. Boots and shoes are made in the
Samarang district, and of these great quantities are exported. All
kinds of utensils of iron, brass, and tin, are also manufactured here,
but these sell at high prices.


The principal articles of exportation are Rice, Sugar, Coffee, Pep-
per, Indigo, Teak Timbers and Planks, Spices, which are brought
from the Moluccas, Tin from Banca, Cotton, Yarn, Salt, Edible Birds'
Nests, which are procured in abundance, particularly among the rocks
in the hilly range stretching through the Bantam Country, and in the
dominions of the Emperor and Sultan.
The imports are European articles of every description. Chintzes,
Silks, Hats, which are a favourite dress with the Chinese and Native
Chieftains, Tea, Japan Goods, and China Ware, Opium from Bengal,
Tin from Banca, Wines, Beer, &c.
INTERNAL ADMINISTRATION.
REVENUE DEPARTMENT.
Under the Dutch Government, every branch of the revenue was
farmed out, and sold by public auction once a year ; as also the
collection of dues on Opium, Arrack, Salt, and of Bird's Nests
throughout the whole island.
Coffee and Pepper used to be the first articles of revenue, as they
were obliged to be delivered to the Company at a stated price, gene-
-2 f 2


rally one-fourth of what they were afterwards sold for ; and the forced
collections of these and such articles of produce as might contribute to
the commercial monopoly of the local Government of Batavia, seems
to have been its great object. It is said that General Daendels at-
tempted to exchange the collection of taxes in kind for a specific sum,
which the Regent was bound to pay, and left to collect from the poor
inhabitants by any arbitrary exactions he chose ; but it had scarcely
begun to be acted upon when he was recalled. The residents living in the
principal towns of each district received the revenue from the native Re-
gents only, and the mode of collection remaining in the hands of the latter,
left the cultivators no security beyond the claims of established usage.
Thus, although custom prescribed a certain portion only of the crop
to be delivered, there was no positive means of preventing a greater
levy ; and while the power and influence of authority could be success-
fully exerted to stifle complaints, it may be concluded, that the
peasant despairing of any relief, had to endure the weight of severe
oppression and injustice.
The internal duties comprized those levied in the markets or tolls
imposed at stated places on the transport of goods.
The market duties were exacted for every article of manufacture or of
agricultural produce, which was exposed to sale, and was not confined
to one or two of the chief places in each district, but extended at the
pleasure of the farmer, to every petty village that could afford the
most distant prospect of gain.
It is sufficiently apparent from what has been said, that the former


system cherished those seeds of corruption which tended to its own dis-
solution. An amended system became therefore indispensable, and its
establishment, which the fall of Ujoejocarta was the means of intro-
ducing, and rendered secure and easy, promises the most beneficial
effects. It is founded on the following basis :
Ist. The entire abolition of all forced delivery of produce at inade-
quate rates, and of all feudal services, with the establishment of a
perfect freedom in cultivation and trade.
2dly, The assumption on the part of Government, of the immediate
superintendance of the lands, with the collection of the revenues and
rents thereof, without the intervention of the Regents, whose office is
in future to be confined to public duties.
3d. The renting out of the lands so assumed in large or small
estates, according to local circumstances, on leases for a moderate
term.
Under the new regulations, the allotments of land fall under the col-
lector’s superintendance, who is instructed to continue in possession
all such persons as he shall find to be actually holding and cultivating
lands, and to receive them as renters from Government in the new set-
tlement. Though such cultivators shall not be able to adduce proofs
of any real property in the land, yet long occupancy, improving culture
and general good conduct while in possession, are deemed to be just


claims, and to constitute a right in equity and sound policy, of being
considered preferable to any others, who have no such pretensions; it
is to be understood, however, that no positive right of any nature is
to be infringed by this settlement.
The following is the general standard for fixing the Government
share, from each species of land.
FOR SAWAH LANDS.
First sort, one-half of the estimated produce-
Second ditto, two-fifths ditto.
Third ditto, one-third ditto.
For Tagal lands, under which description are comprehended all
lands not subject to irrigation :
First sort, two-fifths of the estimated produce.
Second ditto, one-third ditto.
Third ditto, one-fourth ditto.
According to these rates, the land rental, exclusive of Batavia or
the kingdom of Jackatra and the Preanger lands, but only including
the provinces east of Cheribon, amounts for the year 1814, to 3,883,6*51
rupees ; and after deducting the amount of assessment of lands provi-
sionally assigned to native chiefs, there remains a nett land rental of
36,63,611 rupees ; add to this, the amount of farms and fixed taxes
provisionally continued, and the territorial revenue of the eastern pro-


vinces alone, is 42,06,341 rupees. In addition to this, the salt, opium,
and customs, including- town duties in those provinces, will give a
total of 53,68,085 rupees.
Such of the inhabitants, who not being cultivators, contribute no-
thing to the land rent, are to be classed as householders, and have a
tenement tax levied on them, or small rent for the ground on which
their houses stand. These will be assessed according to the classes, at
three rupees, two, or one per annum.
Collectors have been appointed to the various districts, whose
office consists in the sole and entire superintendance of the Land
Revenue.
They possess no magisterial authority whatever; but must make re-
gularly application to the Resident, as Judge and Magistrate, when-
ever it becomes necessary to call for his aid in either capacity.
The Collectors will forward to the Resident, who is the sole Trea-
surer of the District, the several sums of money he may receive in
his collections.
A native assistant, taken from among the Bopatis (nobility), Fatehs,
or Tumangungs, who have been, but are not now, in the actual ser-
vice of Government, in consequence of the new arrangements in the
landed tenure, and such number of writers, opasses, and other servants,
as may be necessary, are to form the Collector's establishment.
The simple mode of village administration, which formerly extended
throughout the Island, is ordered to be maintained in all the Provinces,
as being best suited to the genius of the people, and promising to be
most conducive to the interest of the state.


A writer, priest, and other subordinate officers and servants, com-
plete its regular establishment. The head inhabitant, therefore, who
has various denominations, according to the custom of the several Pro-
vinces, such as Potingi, Bakal, Kuwu, Mandor, or otherwise, will
have the management of the Revenue concerns in his village entrusted
to him, agreeably to the regulations that have been framed for his
guidance. His personal influence, and intimate acquaintance with the
situation and concerns of the several inhabitants in it, render him
better qualified than any other to discharge this duty ; and in con-
sideration of which, a certain portion of land is to be allowed him, free
of rent.
The heads of villages are considered in every way subordinate to
the Officer of Division, who is selected from among the JBopatis, or the
nobility, and who is empowered to lake regular cognizance of all trans-
actions respecting Revenue collections, and to inspect, whenever he
pleases, the several village accounts.
The Officers of Divisions furnish to the Collector all such papers
as may be required, and are diligently to execute the orders they may
receive from him, or his native assistant.
The option-of-kind payment in Paddy and Rice, is still left to the
renter, on many accounts, principally owing to the scarcity of specie
in the Island. But every facility and encouragement is enjoined to
be afforded to this description of renter, to induce him to pay the
Government dues in money.
The other great branches of the Revenue of Java, are the Teak
I orests, which are very productive. Those in the central districts,
which were ceded in consequence of the fall of Djoejocarta, afford em-


ployment to 200,000 persons, who inhabit these forests, thus rendering
that a fertile source of this Revenue, though of the Forest administra-
tion, as well as of the Coffee culture, which is equally considerable,
nothing precisely is known.
Another very profitable branch is the monopoly of Tin from Banca.
which is sold to the China ships.
The Salt Farms, with the exception of a few, have been abolished,
and this measure has proved a death-blow to that pernicious influence'
which the Chinese had been allowed to acquire.
The amount of annual revenue under the present circumstances of
the department, is estimated at five lacks of rupees per annum ; while
the price fixed for the internal sale of salt, renders it considerably
cheaper to the consumer, than it could formerly be retailed at, after
passing through the hands of various farmers; while an uniform mo-
derate export price, which before varied at every place of manufac-
ture, is now calculated to promote the exportation.
The Arrack Farm, which formerly embraced the monopoly of the
retail trade throughout the Island, has been abolished, and the exclu-
sive manufacture on account of Government is discontinued. Licences
are now granted for the manufacture, and for the retail trade.
A duty is likewise levied on Carriages, Horses, Slaves, Houses, and
Chinese Queues, which are taxed according to their length.
The Revenues of the Custom are collected at the seaport towns, by
means of officers, specially appointed for that purpose.
Vessels from Europe, and Foreigners, among whom are included
Arabs and Chinese, not trading from eastern ports, must enter at the
port of Batavia,
2 G


The general import duty is fixed at ten per cent. It is proper to
observe, that the duty is now only intended to be levied on articles
which are actually consumed on the Island; and that the produce of
the Eastern Islands not so consumed, is allowed to enter clear of duty;
while the establishment of a drawback equal to the amount of import
duty on all articles whatever, leaves the transit trader entirely free.
The produce of the Island exported to a foreign market, bears at pre-
sent a general export duty of three per cent,
The Anchorage Duties on vessels not belonging to the Island, are
fixed at the rate of ten dollars for every hundred tons burthen, the
payment of which, at any port, exonerates a vessel from further pay-
ment for six months. Vessels belonging to the Island are not subject
to anchorage fees, but pay an annual duty, at the rate of half a dollar
a ton on registry.
The Residents at the different Courts of Bantam, Solo, and Djocjo,
collect all the revenues that are given up by those Governments, such
as Opium, Birds* Nests, Farms of Salt, Arrack, &c.
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT.
Formerly there were separate Courts for investigating the conduct of
the immediate European Servants of the Dutch Company, and of
Europeans not included in that service; but it being resolved that
justice, under the British Government, should be administered equal
and alike to all classes and denominations, the judicial power of the
College of Schepens was abolished, and transferred to the jurisdiction


of the Courts of Justice. These Courts, composed of a President and
three Members have, since the conquest, been established in each of
the three principal towns, Batavia, Samarang, and Sourabaya : the
jurisdiction of which extended over the European inhabitants, pro-
ceeding in civil cases, by the mode before established ; but conforming
in criminal ones, as much as possible, to the laws of Great Britain ; in
all cases confronting the prisoner with the evidence, and a jury being
called to judge of the fact on the evidence so adduced. Every court is
also open and accessible to the public, which was not the case under
the old government. All tortures, and every kind of mutilation byway
of punishment, have also been abolished.
To relieve the principal Courts from numerous inconsiderable causes,
inferior ones, in the nature of Courts of Requests, have been esta-
blished in these three towns, for the recovery of small debts.
At Batavia is also a Bench of Magistrates, who have the general su-
perintendance of the Police of the town and the environs. A particular
Magistrate is likewise appointed for the districts of Batavia, Samarang,
and Sourabaya, in the former of which are dispersed several Scouts, or
Sheriffs, with'Peons, &c. wherever there is any considerable European
population.
At Batavia, Mr. Muntinghe, the second Member of Council, is
Chief Justice, and Mr. Cransen, the third Member of Council, Chief
of the Police.
In the interior, the tranquillity of the country and the duties of
police have been provided for, by preserving the original constitution
of the villages, and continuing the superintendance and responsibility
2 g 2


in the hands of those whose rank enables them to exert a due influ-
ence and to command respect.
For the administration of justice, the duties of the Resident, as Judge
and Magistrate, have been considerably extended.
In civil cases, the mode of proceeding, and the establishment of petty
Courts, have been founded on the practice of the country; while the
Criminal Jurisdiction of the provincial Courts has been extended to all
cases in which the punishment for the crime alledged, does not amount
to death.
In these Courts, which, instead of being termed Landsraad, as here-
tofore, are now styled the Resident’s Courts, the Panghoolo, or Chief
Priest, and the Superior Jaxa, of Native Fiscal, attend to expound
the law upon oath. The Bopatis or Regents, with their Patehs, are
present, to aid and assist the Resident with their opinion in the course
of the investigation, but they have no vote in the decision.
The Resident’s Court is held at least twice in every week, in the
Passerban, or Residency’s public court room, for the purpose of hear-
ing and trying all causes, not capital, whether civil or criminal, that
occur in the Residency.
Any accused person will be admitted to bail, provided the offence be
of a bailable nature ; otherwise the Resident shall sign a warrant to the-
gaoler, to receive and hold him in custody until he shall be discharged
by law.
If the crime imputed to him be murder, treason, gang robbery, or
"any other for which the sentence may amount to death, the Resident
must commit him to prison to take his trial before the Courts of
Circuit.


One member of each of the Courts of Justice has been appointed a
Judge of Circuit, who will be present in each of the Residencies at
least once in every three months, and as much oftener as possible.
The Koran, with the Commentaries upon it, and the ancient cus-
toms of the Island, form the general law of Java.
In the modeof proceeding, a native Jury, consisting of an intelligent
foreman and four others* decide upon the fact.
The right of challenge shall belong, as in the English courts, to both
the prosecutor and the prisoner. The persons composing this jury
ought to be, as near as possible, on an equality of condition with the pri-
soner. But no one under the rank of a head of a village shall be com-
petent to act as juryman ; since persons in the very lower order cannot
be supposed to possess either independence or knowledge sufficient to
qualify them to execute justly the duties of the situation.
The sentence of the Resident shall be final, and be immediately
' 9
carried into execution, in cases where the punishment awarded does
not amount to imprisonment, or transportation for life. In the latter
case, the approval of the Lieutenant Governor must be obtained; and
in all cases originating in the Resident’s court, an appeal shall be per-
mitted to the Lieutenant Governor, provided notice of such intention
is given on the day of trial, and conforming to certain conditions.
These appeals also are limited to the space of one month from the day
of trial.
It not having been heretofore usual to employ Vakeels, or native
lawyers, persons of that description are not to be admitted into the
Courts, but the respective parties shall plead in their own behalf; by
this means litigation will be considerably reduced and discouraged.


And as it is most essential to afford easy access to justice, the Resident
shall cause a box to be placed at the door of the Court, into which the
petitions may be dropped ; of this box he shall himself keep the key,
and afford the desired redress to the injured persons. By these means,
the complainant will not be dependant for a fair hearing, on the officers
or servants of Government, who might, from interested, partial, or
resentful motives, find means of preventing access to the Resident.
A Regency is divided into districts, according to population, the
extent of land, or other circumstances ; and each district is consigned
to the care of a Bopati, or native chief.
These districts again are subdivided into divisions, and a fixed sta-
tion of Police assigned to each, with a competent officer, and such
number of inferior Mantris, Peons, &c. as shall be deemed necessary
for the execution of the various duties allotted to this office, and the
due maintenance of tranquillity in the district.
The officers of divisions shall once a week, or ottener, attend at the
station of Police, with their Mantris, for the purpose of enquiring into
and deciding on petty offences, as inconsiderable assaults or affrays
committed within their divisions; trespass, nuisance, encroachment on
boundaries, and other such minor grievances of usual occurrence in
villages. These, if proved, they are authorised to punish by fine, not
exceeding ten rupees; one half of which shall be given to the party
aggrieved, the other to be carried to the account of Government.
They are also empowered to hear anti determine on all such petty
civil cases as may be referred to them, provided the amount at issue
exceed not the sum of twenty rupees.


Whether civil or military, they shall not, in any case, be authorized
to arrest or imprison, but must summons the party to appear by the
next day of sitting", when the cause shall be heard and decided on
without delay. An appeal may be made, in civil cases, from the Court
of the Officer of Division to that of the Bopati, at the chief town of the
district.
Ten per cent, on the amount of the sentence in civil cases, is, ac-
cording to the custom of the country, to be taken from the loser of the
suit, to be carried to the account of Government.
The Bopati’s Court is held twice a week, or oftener if necessary, at
the chief town of each district; in which himself, or, in his
the Patch, shall preside, assisted by the Jaxa, Panghooloo, and other
appointed law officers. His authority is, however, entirely confined
to civil matters, where the amount at issue is not less than twenty, nor
exceeding fifty rupees. All cognizance of criminal cases, beyond that
already allotted to the Officers of Divisions, being vested solely in the
Court where the Resident himself presides.
An appeal, in causes originating in this Court, shall lie to that of
the Resident* provided proper notice of the same is given on the day of
trial, and the appeal itself be made within a week after.
The heads of villages have the care of the police in their respective
villages entrusted to their charge; and for the due preservation of
peace, the prevention of offences, and the discovery and arrest of
offenders; they are required to be particularly careful that a sufficient
night watch be regularly maintained. For this purpose they are au-
thorized to require each of the male inhabitants to take his turn in
the performance of his duty; and at any time to require the aid of all


in the pursuit and apprehension of offenders, or to execute generally
any of the other duties that may occur.
They are responsible for the amount of all property belonging to tra-
vellers, which may be lost within their villages, if the same shall have
• , \ ;• I'S, ,1 f* t 4 -'"' '• “ ' " ''■ ■
been placed under their charge; and they are required to take charge
of all travellers’ property which may be brought to them for that
purpose.
The heads of villages are enjoined to look on themselves, and to act
with regard to the persons under their controul, as fathers of families ;
to maintain, to the extent of their power, a spirit of harmony and
tranquillity in the villages entrusted to them ; to curb every approach
to feud and litigation ; and with the aid of their officers, to interpose
their authority in settling, with justice and impartiality, all such petty
quarrels as may arise among the inhabitants.
POPULATION AND STATE OF SOCIETY
The entire population of the island of Java is estimated at five
millions; of which, the European Colonists form comparatively a small
number ; the natives may be classed under the general denominations
of Javanese and Malays. The latter are again subdivided into distinct
classes, according to their respective nations; and in large cities, such
as Batavia, they have separate cam pongs allotted them, under a chief of
their own, who is answerable for their good conduct to the bench of
Magistrates or chief of the police, in the same manner as the China cap-
tain is placed over the Chinese. All the slaves brought from Celebes.


Flores, and the other Eastern islands, are classed with the Malays. The
tree Malays inhabiting the coast are principally traders and navigators,
as well as builders of small prows, in which business they are very ex-
pert. They are evidently of the same race with the inhabitants of the
whole Eastern Archipelago, who had their origin in the colonies which
poured forth from the Malayan peninsula, and extended themselves
over Sumatra, Java, and the other islands. History makes mention of
many bloody wars in the twelfth century, between the Malays and the
Javanese King of Modjapahit, who was not only Sovereign of Java,
but having possessions in Sumatra and other isles, was one of the most
powerful Princes of the East. Having constrained the King of Singa-
poera, Siri Iskander Shah, to retire further to the north, in the year
1253, the latter built a new capital, which he called Malacca, whence
sprang the numerous colonies, which, in the reign of Sultan Mahomet
Shah, who, by his marriage with a Princess, united the kingdom of
Arracan to his other possessions, extended themselves and the Malay
name far and wide ; being easily excited to desperate enterprizes and
emigrations by their characteristic love of plunder, war, and navigation.
Their language, which is the softest in Asia, little accords with their
character, which certainly has not to boast of many amiable traits.
They are generally indolent, but at the same time restless, vindictive,
and treacherous, nor can any dependance be placed upon them. Their
courage, however, cannot be called in question, and they have evinced,
on numerous occasions, an utter contempt of death ; but assassination is
their prevailing vice, and they would, at any time, much rather stab an
enemy in the dark, than encounter him face to face. They are pas-
sionately fond of gambling and cock-fighting, which last diversion
2 H


they formerly carried to such an excess,-that among the poorer classes
and slaves, after losing their last stake, with such articles of their mas-
ter’s property as they could lay their hands on, their next step fre-
quently would be to intoxicate themselves with opium, and then run a
muck, stabbing with a criss all that came in their way, till they were
themselves taken or killed.
The gambling houses were, under the former Government, regularly
farmed out, and produced a considerable revenue ; but since the aboli-
tion of these receptacles of depravity, by order of Lord Minto, humanity
has not been so much shocked by dhose horrid scenes produced by the
frenzy of disappointment, which were formerly so frequent, and not an
instance of running a muck has occurred at Batavia since the conquest.
It may here be remarked, on the subject of the abolition of torture,
introduced in criminal cases, that the opinion of the Dutch was at first
against such a measure. They thought that the appalling spectacle of
excruciating torments was rendered necessary, from a general idea of
the natural obduracy of the Malay character. To frighten the ima-
gination, therefore, humanity was outraged with every cruel invention ;
and, instead of preventing crimes, by putting down the nurseries of
vice, the gambling houses, which were the source of every evil, con-
tinued open, to feed that avarice which derived emolument from the
taxes levied on them. The persons who thus encouraged a destruc-
tive passion, after indulging the deluded victims in their folly, sat as
judges upon those, who, in consequence of the ruin in which they
had involved themselves, had become frantic, and committed murder
more out of madness than malevolence. These judges, however,
having profited by the taxation of the cause, which was the impelling


principle to the misery that lollowed, could coolly consign the unhappy
criminals to a protracted death, by quartering and impaling them
alive, without feeling the least emotion for the sufferings they had in
/ r*
fact occasioned, or any desire to put an end to the evil which led to a
continuance of such atrocities. Yet it is still very difficult to root out
strong prejudices and favorite practices suddenly, and the natives con-
tinue their propensity to sports of this kind ; but as they cannot indulge
it in fighting cocks, they amuse themselves with the combats of other
animals, as quails, and even grasshoppers.
The Malays are generally of a brown or light copper colour; the
nose much flattened, and the head covered with a profusion of black
hair. In their persons, the men are often very muscular, and well
made. The Malay language is spoken on all the sea coasts, and is so
very distinct and soft as to be called the Italian of the East. It is
written in the Arabic character, and has a number of Arabic and
Persian words intermixed.
But the great mass of the population consists of Javanese, who in-
habit all tile interior parts of the Island, and are the general cultivators
of the soil. They are an exceedingly indolent race ; and nothing short
of positive compulsion, the want of the necessaries of life, or the
/ ... if - '' ' h ' I ’r ”>• ;V"j . w
prosecution of some of their favourite amusements, can rouse them
from that state of apathy which is almost natural to them. Nor is this,
perhaps, much to be wondered at, when the nature of their Govern-
ment, which is a pure despotism, is considered. No hereditary rights,
or privileges, are enjoyed by any class of people, except in some parts
of the country, where grants of lands in perpetuity have been bestowed
by the sovereign ; and these are strictly heritable. Some of these
2 h 2


grants have been made for religious uses, others as provisions for rela-
tives, or rewards to the higher order of nobility. But the actual pro-
prietary right in the soil was originally vested solely in the sovereign.
The first clearers of the soil became entitled to no more real property
in the land which had been in a manner created by their labour, than to
a claim on the state for peaceable possession, so long as they and their
heirs should punctually pay to the sovereign a due share of the produce,
and this last portion alone was that which the Government could alie-
nate. The intermediate classes between the sovereign and the actual
cultivators, were considered as no more than the executive officers of
Government, who received the revenues of villages, or districts, only
as the gift of their lord, and depended on his will alone for their tenure.
The Javanese institutions, whether civil or military, recognize a
gradation of petty officers, whose titles, rank, and income, bear some
proportion to the importance and responsibility of their charge.
Adipatti is the highest title of Javanese nobility. Tumagong is the
next inferior rank, and which is borne by most of the Regents. Petty
districts are entrusted to officers styled Ingabis, or Mantris, who do
♦
not belong to the class properly denominated the nobility, or Bopati.
The officer of superior rank, whoever he may be, is uniformly under-
stood to possess the privilege of appointing the next immediately
under him. This prerogative is equally exercised by private persons
as by the officers of Government. The Tumagong, or other chief,
who is himself nominated by the Prince, appoints the JDemang, or
jMantri-desa, and the Demang, the Bakal, who is vested with authority
over the cultivators, to whom he allots land, or deprives them of it, as
he thinks proper. He may, therefore, be considered, with respect to


the cultivators, or actual occupants, as the actual land-holder, so long’
as he continues in office. f
The tenure of the Bakal is hardly less secure than that of the cul-
tivator ; but, from the advantages acquired by actual possession, and
the capital thus accumulated, the former, generally speaking, becomes
the fittest and ablest person to pay to the superior the full rent of the
lands ;it is, therefore, the advantage of the latter not to remove Mm ;
and thus the interest of the lord gives to his situation a certain degree
of stability.
The Demang is accountable to his superior for the entire rent, re-
ceiving one-fifth of the rents of all the Bakals under him, besides
enjoying a proportion of perquisites. By this plan of settlement, the inte-
rests of the body of the people are entirely at the disposal of a numerous
set of chiefs, who exercised over them a gradation of arbitrary oppres-
sion, and exposed them to a variety of injuries. In fact, the people
seem to exist merely for the benefit of their chiefs Without freedom,
and a certainty of enjoying the fruits of their labour, the hand of in-
dustry is palsied. It has been calculated that, in some of the eastern
provinces, a husbandman possessed of sufficient land to maintain two
buffaloes, derives from the fruits of his tillage and labour, only one
fourteenth part for himself and his family ; so greedy are the Chiefs
with their numerous dependants, and lazy superintendants, all of
whom the cottager is obliged to feed. Notwithstanding these arbitrary
exactions, the natural fertility of the soil is so great, as to make ample
amends, and in general the people live very well ; their food, con-
sisting of coffee, rice, salt fish, poultry, vegetables of all sorts, and
curry stuff and chilies ; salt pickles of several kinds* sugar, fruit.


especially the dorian. Of this last the natives are remarkably fond;
and it is said to be possessed of very stimulating' qualities.
On all the frequented roads, small sheds or shops are erected at con-
venient distances, where the above articles are supplied in great plenty,
and very cheap to all travellers.
Both Malays and Javanese live in bamboo huts, divided into diffe-
rent apartments, sometimes plaistered with mud, and usually raised
two or three feet from the ground. All the villages are surrounded by
topes of cocoa-nut and other favourite fruit-trees, encircled round by a
thick bamboo hedge. The head inhabitant of a Javanese village,
whose office is elective, is invested by his fellow inhabitants with the
general superintendance of the affairs relating to that village, whether
in attending to the police, settling the minor disputes that occur within
its limits, or of collecting its revenues, or more often its services. This
limited form of village administration has been continued under the
new regulations of the British Government, but with some restraints
on the power and influence of the Regents over the lower classes of
inhabitants.
The Javanese, who are better featured than the Malays, are of a
light brown colour, muscular and well made. The women also have
a more pleasing cast of countenance than the Malay females ; and in-
some of the hilly tracts they are really beautiful. They generally wear
a long black gown, with a cloth wrapped round to serve as a petticoat;
and the men a black cotton frock, with either a cloth tied round the
waist or a short pair of drawers. The higher classes are very partial
to chintzes, silks, and velvets, which they are fond of ornamenting
with embroidery, and in which they generally appear on all festi-
vals and public occasions.


The professed religion of both the Malays and Javanese is Moham-
medanism, but mixed with many superstitions. They seem indeed to
be so very careless of its rites, that it would be difficult from common
observation to ascertain the nature of their faith and worship. Few of
them who are not of a religious turn, obey the laws of their Prophet
in abstaining from wine, for which both high and low have a great
relish, and drink it often in public.
The language both oral and written of the Javanese is quite distinct.
Hence it appears that the Aborigines of the country were of a different
race from their neighbours the Malays, and the many remains of the
Hindoo temples and that have been discovered in the
interior of Java, in the Emperor’s Dominions, and about the ancient
City of Modjapahit, seem to place it beyond a doubt that a race of
Hindoos had been originally settled in the Island.
The European Colonists, Chinese, &c. principally inhabit the sea-
port towns along the coast.
BATAVIA AND ITS ENVIRONS.
The population at Batavia is divided into the following classes. Next
to the Dutch Burghers come the Portuguese or half-casts, and other
Indian Christians ; next to them are the Papangars, or Mardykears,
who are emancipated Slaves; the Moors and Arabs. The other classes
are distinguished into the Javanese, the Baliers, Bougginese, or Bug-
gese, Maccassars, Amboynese, Boutonneers, or Madurese, Malays,
Sumbawaurese, and the Parnakan Chinese; these last are the most
numerous and most useful of all the foreign adventurers settled in
Java.


The Mardykers, also called Topassers, are Indians of different na-
tions, who have obtained their freedom, and reside in the town and its
vicinity. Most of them are in the country, or coasting- trade, others
who dwell inland, are cultivators of the soil, and bring great supplies
to market. They live in good houses, have schools for the instruction
of their youth in reading and writing, and the study of their religious
tenets, and are altogether superior to other Indians in their domestic
and social ways of life.
The Moors and Arabs who formerly possessed the uncontrouled
commerce in these parts, till the Portuguese gained the ascendancy,
have still detached Colonies in several of the principal Islands. Those
who reside at Batavia and Palimbang, navigate these seas, not only in
prows, but frequently freight large ships. They are a very fine, active
and intelligent race of men.
The Javanese at Batavia, occupy two Campongs, each under a Chief
of their own nation, on the right and left of the Great River. They
are principally husbandmen, and cultivate the rice fields in the neigh-
bourhood ; but some of them are employed in fishing.
The Baliers are very numerous at Batavia, and are divided into seve-
ral Campongs, under their respective overseers. They are naturally
indolent, and hate working ; but as they cannot indulge so much in
their slothful habits at Batavia as in their own country, they are
obliged to exert themselves in useful labour. The Baly Slaves are
much esteemed at Batavia, being considered more trusty than others,


• *
particularly the females, who are handsome, and in the houses of the
opulent, are entrusted with the superintendance of the other slaves, to
■
whom they are superior in every good quality. The Chinese of note
generally choose their wives from the Baly females. The men too, are
possessed of more bravery than their neighbours, and the Dutch were
accustomed to enlist many of them for soldiers.
The Buggese, a short but stout race of people, are partly from Cele-
bes, from Borneo, and other neighbouring Isles. They are a quarrel-
some and revengeful race of people, distinguished also by their trea-
chery and impatience of controul. But though they are furiously
passionate, yet as slaves, when well treated, they have exhibited
instances of great fidelity and attachment to their masters.
The same may be said of the Macassars, though in fact they are the
same description of people, and come under the general term of Bug-
gese. But their valour having been oftener tried, particularly in their
sanguinary conflicts'with the Dutch, in their early establishment at
Macassar, they have ever been distinguished by that name, from the
other inhabitants of Celebes ; and throughout the East, the Macassars
are held in the same estimation as the Swiss were formerly in Europe.
The Dutch formerly used to enlist many of them for soldiers.
The Arnboynese occupy a Campong on the left of the Jacatra road.
Some of them profess the Mahommedan Religion, but many of them are
Christians. They are taller and less stubborn than the Buggese, and
as soldiers, acting collectively, and therefore necessarily subject to
military discipline, they are preferable to all others. The Dutch
2 i


cavalry and horse artillery, were composed of Amboynese, intermixed
with Europeans.
The Madurese, from the Island of Madura, are generally an orderly
and well-behaved people. They are also characteristically brave, and
large bodies of them used to be taken into the Dutch service.
The Malays in Batavia live in a separate Campong, under a Chief
of their own nation. The appellation of Malay here, is confined to
those who came originally from the Peninsula. They are very nume-
rous, being chiefly fishermen and boatmen, and few of them are mer-
chants or mechanics. They all profess the Mahommedan Religion.
The number of Chinese inhabitants at Batavia alone, exceeds a
hundred thousand. There are also many dispersed throughout the
island, in the interior as well as along the coast. They are the most
industrious and useful race in the Eastern world, and in general very
peaceable subjects. No fresh disturbances have taken place since
their rebellion in 1742, and the bloody catastrophe which marked its
suppression. Their sole object is making money, in the pursuit of
which the Chinese are indefatigable, and their industry embraces
every department. Without them indeed the Island of Java would be
an unprofitable Colony, as in their hands are all the Manufactories,
Distilleries, and Potteries. They are also the principal Traders,
Smiths, Carpenters, Stone-masons, Shoemakers, Shopkeepers, But-
chers, Fish-mongers, Green-grocers, and in fact, the whole retail trade
of Java is in their hands. No work of any kind is done, nor any me-


chanical business executed, without calling 1 in the assistance of one of
the Chinese, who contract for all buildings and supplies. Under the
\
former government they farmed all the revenues and collected the
several taxes. But in this last capacity the Chinese practised so many
extortions on the poorer Malays and Javanese, as naturally engen-
dered a rooted hatred against them. It is not therefore to be won-
dered at, that the latter should seize every opportunity that offered, of
attacking the Chinese farmer, and plundering him in turn ; as was the
case during the recent disturbances in the Mataram Empire. Nor did
the rich Chinese experience favour or pity, when any cause of alledged
delinquency was brought against him before a Magistrate, or into
Court. His wealth, whether obtained fairly, or accumulated by pecu-
lation, was generally drained from him in some way or other, before he
could procure his discharge, and be at liberty to renew his career, per-
haps in the same line of knavery, though with more circumspection.
Immense sums were formerly mulcted from the opulent Chinese, when
bribery, under the pretext of pecuniary fines, was regarded as the law-
ful perquisite of individuals in power. Very large fortunes were
amassed by these means ; and the practice was considered as justified
by the known depravity of the Chinese, whom the Dutch affect to hold
in abhorrence on account of their dishonesty.
The Chinese Company at Batavia, comprizes the whole of the South
Western suburbs, and is very extensive. Every house is a shop, and
the streets being constantly crowded, exhibit a constant scene of noise
and bustle. Their Captain, Gey Hingho, has several Lieutenants
under him, who watch over the Police of that numerous population.
As no woman is allowed to be exported from China, adventurers from
2 i 2


that country intermarry with the Javanese and Malays, or purchase
slaves for their concubines and wives, who, as well as their progeny,
become completely Chinese.
Their Marriages are conducted with great ceremony, and consider-
able expense ; and though they have colonized in the Island for cen-
turies back, they still retain in every respect the manners and customs
of their nation, which may be greatly owing to the constant intercourse'
kept up with the mother country, to which the greater part return
on becoming possessed of an independence, and from whence new
adventurers arrive with every junk. Not less than five thousand of
them came to Batavia soon after the intelligence of the capture of Java
by the English had reached China.
The Chinese in Java are very fair. They dress in long silk gauze
gowns, and loose pantaloons, generally white, black, or blue, with
cotton stockings, and high-raised shoes, or boots ; a small black cap
is fitted to their heads, which are shaven, except on the back part,
where is a small tuft, having attached to it an enormous long tail, for
which they pay a tax; so that, by this capitation impost, the number
of Chinese in the Island can be pretty correctly ascertained, on which
account, perhaps, the continuance of it is politically expedient.
In their intercourse with Europeans, they are polite and well bred,
and very quick of comprehension ; but they are great cheats ; for craft
is their profession. A good Chinese workman will earn a rupee, or
more, per day ; but they are seldom employed as labourers, and never
as domestic servants. They live well, but grossly ; and their tables are
three times a day loaded with rice, fish, curry, pork, fowls, ducks, and
vegetables; a dram of arrack being taken at each meal.


The higher ranks indulge in every luxury, and spare no expense in
the pursuit of pleasure, and every worldly gratification. Edible birds’
nests, to which a fancied invigorating quality has been long ascribed;
and all other dainties, however dear they may be, are always found on
the table of the Chinese voluptuary; and it must be confessed that,
whatever be the crimes of these people, they have at least, in an
eminent degree, the virtue of hospitality general among them.
Their festivals are very grand, particularly that in celebration of the
New Year, and which lasts the first twenty days in February. On this
occasion, the streets in the Chinese Campong are thronged with
carriages and crowds of people, men, women, and children of, all'
countries, colour, classes, and denominations; masters and servants,
mistresses and slaves, forming a motley group, parade the illuminated
streets till late at night. For eight or ten days all business is at a
stand, and every house is the*scene of festivity. At these times, the
rich and higher classes of the Chinese spread sumptuous tables,
replenished with viands, and furnished with every luxury. Many of
the European visitors partake of these splendid entertainments, while
the master of the mansion strives, by his attention and good humour,
to shew how much he is delighted with the honour done him in the
company of his respected guests. Plays are exhibited on stages erected
in various parts of the Campong; but these pieces, which are called
here Wyangs, resemble our mountebank exhibitions. The per-
formers, who are females, trained up to the profession, like the
dancing girls of Egypt and the East, are dressed in the Chinese and
Tartar habits, and some of them are very beautiful. The subjects of
these exhibitions are generally taken from the history of that extraor-


dinary nation, and usually such as give the representations of battles
between the Chinese and Tartars. The dialogue is all spoken, or
sung, in the Chinese language, amidst a clangor of Gongs, and other
musical instruments.
Their Burials are the next great pompous exhibitions of the Chinese.
These are solemnized agreeably to the rank of the deceased : that of
the OeyHingho, their Captain, being the most pompous. An im-
mense multitude of Chinese attend on the day of interment, carrying
images of men and women, representing the deceased members of the
same family, with wax tapers and censers; while a numerous pro-
cession of priests, accompanied with musical instruments, precede the
corpse, which is carried in a huge coffin, slung on bars, supported on
the shoulders of sixteen bearers, in pairs, followed by the relations of
the deceased, uttering most piercing lamentations. The cemetery of
the Chinese extends over a prodigious deal of ground, on the south-
east side of Batavia. Unlike the Dutch practice of placing five or six
corpses in the same grave, the Chinese allot a separate sepulchre for
each, over which is raised a high circular mound of earth, like a
crescent, cased with stone, and ornamented according to the wealth
and importance of the deceased. To these receptacles of the dust of
their ancestors, the Chinese pay, as a sacred duty, an annual visit;
which mournful ceremony takes place in the month of April. Stages
are then erected in various parts for the priests, who deliver from them
their orations in praise of the dead there deposited; and the neigh-
bourhood of ancient Jacatra, over which their principal cemetery
extends, exhibits an affecting spectacle, of multitudes of people, pros-
trate before the numerous tombs, which are decorated with flowers,
246
CHINESE.


Plate XX.
Funeral of a Oey Hingho, or Captain of the Chinese, at Batavia, as drawn on the spot.




spreading also viands and fruits as an offering, and bowing their heads
in sorrow to the ground.
Laudable as this respect for their deceased friends doubtless is, it
does not seem to have any effect on the moral principles of the sur-
vivors ; nor can it be traced to any vital religious sentiment, uniting,
as it were, the dead and the living in one bond of amity, and in the
prospect of a reunion in another state. In fact, though these people
have temples erected in various parts of the Island of Java, and
one at Anjole, close to Batavia, the structures seem to be formed more
out of compliance with custom than for any serious purpose, since
religious rites are hardly ever observed in them, nor is any thing like
worship practised by the people who build them. An image, with
tapers burning before it, representing either a good or evil genius,
or both together sometimes, is placed in every Chinese dwelling. This
idol is frequently consulted by dropping two or more sticks before it,
and in a variety of other w ays, which the Chinese interprets according
to certain rules, and thus determines the regulation of his trading con-
cerns by lots, not very dissimilar to the divinations of the ancients, and
the practice of drawing arrows still observed by the modern Arabians.
The Burgher Class comprehends what is called the Dutch Popula-
tion at Batavia, but they can hardly be termed Europeans, so com-
pletely are they intermixed with the Portuguese and Malay Colonists.
The same may be observed of the other great towns along the coast,
and of the Dutch Settlements in general throughout the East. With
very few exceptions, that which is emphatically called the Mother
Land, or Mother Country, is only known to them by name ; and this


is particularly the case with the Batavian women, few of whom are
Europeans by birth. Their features, and the contour of their faces,
may, indeed, indicate that origin, but their complexion, character, and
mode of life, approach nearest to those of the natives. Though fair,
they have none of that rosy tint which distinguishes the sex in Europe ;
but a pale, sickly langour overspreads their countenances. Their dress
at home, and on ordinary occasions, differs little from that of their
slaves; but when abroad, they wear a petticoat or bodice, and a loose
flowing gown over all, called a Cabaya ; their black hair being plas-
tered back and ornamented with diamond pins, combs, and some strong
scented flowers.
After the arrival of the English, the younger ladies, and those who
mix much in society with them, adopted the fashionable habiliments
of our fair countrywomen, and in their manner as well as dress they
are improving wonderfully. The English language is also now much
taught among the youth of both sexes. It is, however, not a little
remarkable, that in such a country and population, no permanent
seminary should have been established for the instruction of youth; so
that parents desirous of giving a liberal education to their children,
have been obliged to send them abroad for that purpose, which was of
course attended with great trouble, expense, and danger. An attempt
was made in 1745, by M. Van Imhoff, to settle a school at Batavia,
for the instruction of youth in general knowledge, but notwithstanding
the obvious utility of the measure, and the goodness of the plan, the
institution met with slender support, and in 1756 came to an end,
since which, strange to say, nothing has been done for its revival
Public teachers of any note are not to be found in Batavia, and there-


fore, the culture of the youthful mind of either sex is, at the present
day, most shamefully neglected.
The state of society, and the intercourse between the two sexes, are
very different from what may be found in Europe. In a large Dutch
party, it is common for the men to assemble in one room, where they
smoke and drink, whilst the lady of the house entertains her female
friends in another with betel, spices, and coffee. The gentlemen also
assemble at a meeting called the Society, where they smoke, drink,
and play at cards or billiards, every evening, from seven till nine
o’clock, when they return home to a hot supper.
An elegant building for the use of that Society was recently erected,
at the corner of Ryswick, over the entrance of which is inscribed, in
large letters, “ De Harmonie.”
The higher circled, however, have to boast of ladies as well as gen-
tlemen of rather superior acquirements, who are for the most part
Europeans, either by birth or education. These meet frequently in
convivial parties, entertaining themselves with sprightly dances and
elegant suppers. But there are no places of public amusement at
Batavia ; nor a single theatre of any kind, and what is still more ex-
traordinary in such a populous capital, there is not a single assembly-
room.
The Dutch have been unjustly accused of adding unnecessarily to
the evil of slavery ; but the fact is, that the imported slaves, and those
who have been made free, with their progeny, are the only domestic
servants that can be procured. The Javanese are naturally too indolent
for employment, and they have besides an unconquerable aversion to
2 K


servitude in families, in winch dislike the Chinese participate with still
stronger feelings of repugnance.
In the selection of female slaves for the respective duties of the
house, great attention is paid to their personal appearance and musical
accomplishments, as well as to those qualifications, which might seem
to be their principal recommendation. Here the slaves are valued for
their beauty, their skill in playing on the harp, and their melodious
voices. This peculiarity of Asiatic luxury is carried to such a height,
that in some of the houses of the more opulent Europeans, as well as
of the wealthy natives, some dozens of these enchanting female slaves
may be found, as if the owners thought of realizing the promise of the
Mahommedan paradise in this world.
The condition of the slaves in Java is far from being uncomfortable ;
they are well fed and clothed, and by no means hard worked or
severely treated, except perhaps where they are made to experience
the resentment of female jealousy; which passion is not confined to
the European ladies, as many instances are mentioned of some fa-
voured slaves having taken revenge on their masters for their incon-
stancy, by different kinds and degrees of poison.
Since the Conquest of Java, the act of the British Legislature for
the Abolition of the Slave Trade, has been published and enforced in
these seas ; in consequence of which, several vessels conveying slaves
have been seized by our cruizers, and this has not a little conduced to
enhance the value of those at present in the Island.
The idea of unhealthiness has become so completely associated with
the name of Batavia, as to produce an unfavourable impression against


the whole of Java. But while the truth of the first must be admitted
to the fullest extent, the injustice of the latter imputation may be
proved by many incontrovertible facts. The causes of the unhealthi-
ness of Batavia are so generally known, as to render any minute dis-
quisition on the subject wholly unnecessary.
A town so near the equator, surrounded on all sides by a nearly stag-
nant ditch ; every street intersected with canals, mostly bordered by
trees, into which every thing offensive is thrown to find its way into
the common rivers, that have scarcely any current; with a country
which is for miles round a complete sheet of tope and rice fields ;
ought not to excite any astonishment, when it is found that fevers are
prevalent; and that an invitation to the festive board, is often followed
in a few days by another, to assist at the mournful ceremony of paying
the last funeral obsequies to the remains of one of the departed guests.
Death’s shafts fly thickest at the breaking up of the Monsoons, which
is the most sickly period of the year. Then
“ Gaily carousing,
<< Calling for all the joys beneath the moon,
“ Next night, Death bids them sup
“ With their progenitors—He drops his mask,
“ Frowns out at full, —they start, despair, expire!”
But in no country is the intelligence of the decease of a near friend
or relation received with less surprise or concern ; which indeed is na-
turally accounted for by the rapid succession of scenes of mortality at
that sickly period, when every day presents to the view a long line of
funeral processions. But the melancholy train is generally beheld
2 k 2


with indifference, on account of its frequency; and even the sable
mourners commonly smoke their segars or pipes as they move along,
with all the unconcern imaginable, though they are paid to mimick
sorrow !
Some good has been recently done by reducing the breadth of the
canals, and thereby producing a greater depth of water, with more
current to carry off the tilth.
The town has certainly a tine appearance, and contains many sub-
stantial houses, which, in their internal or external appearance or con-
struction, may lay claim to elegance, but in their economy, few come up
to what we understand by comfort. The streets are broad, with canals
in the middle, on each side of which is a gravelled road for the use of
carriages, &c. and on the side next to the houses is a pavement six feet
in width, for foot passengers. Rows of trees run along the sides of the
canal, and the edge of each foot-path, consisting principally of thelno-
phyllum and Calaba, the Canary Nut-tree, and the Guettarda Speci-
osa, with its odoriferous flowers. The canals, which have numerous
bridges over them, are generally of the same breadth as the carriage
roads. The city, however, is now much deserted, and all the wealthy
inhabitants live in the environs, principally on two roads leading to
Weltervreeden ; the one East, called the Jacatra road, the other West,
through Molenvliet and Ryswick. These two elegant roads are
planted with shady trees, and exhibit all along a number of very
handsome houses, with beautiful gardens or plantations round them,
thus forming a very agreeable excursion of about six miles, which
therefore attracts much genteel company every evening, who ride or
drive hither tor their relaxation and amusement. Numerous country


houses adorn the environs of Batavia; extending to the eastward as
far as Chillingchng, and to the westward as far as Tangerang, which
is the boundary of the kingdom of Bantam ; whilst southwards from
Batavia, they are scattered over a distance of forty or fifty miles
inland.
The fortifications of the capital were all destroyed, and mostly pulled
down before our arrival. General Daendels directed the demolition
of the ramparts, with a view of rendering the city more healthy, by
a freer circulation of air; and with the serviceable materials he built
the new cantonment of Weltervreeden. The great church of Batavia,
built in 1760, west of the Town House, was also pulled down, in con-
sequence of its foundation having given way. The new Lutheran
church, near the Castle, is the only one where the Protestant part of
the community enjoy the benefit of divine service. The Portuguese
church, which stands at the corner of the Jacatra road, is resorted to by
most of the native Christians. The Castle at Batavia is very spacious,
and contains a number of buildings and extensive warehouses; in
the construction of which, prodigious labour and expense must have
been incurred. Such, however, was the unhealthiness of the place
to the troops, that they were withdrawn, and the spot converted into
a depot for naval and military stores, magazines of spices, and other
valuable articles, which were destroyed at our landing, by the order
of General Janssens.
The hospital between Newport and Diestport, and mostly all other
public buildings in the town, and at the wharf, being no longer used
for Government purposes, have been sold, and are now warehouses foi
individuals.


The works erected on the island of Onrust, for building or repairing
ships of all sizes, were once the astonishment of every beholder,
surpassing in variety, quickness, and facility of operation, any thing
of the kind in almost every part of the world. But these works were
all destroyed by the naval armament under Sir Edward Pellew; and
the want of such an establishment is now much felt in these seas.
There are, indeed, still several places for laying down smaller vessels;
and every town and fort along the north coast of Java has conveniences
of that kind. But it would be very difficult to find the means of build-
ing or even repairing any vessels of a very large size. At Onrust, ships
were hove down by cranes, erected upon the wharfs, when they
required repairs. This little Island had a strong fortress, a handsome
church, and spacious warehouses; being, therefore, the great Marine
depot, it was crowded with inhabitants, and, in former times, was
celebrated even in the poetical works of the Dutch, as one of the
wonders of human art and enterprize in the eastern world.
On Kuiper, or Cooper’s Island, about half a mile south of Onrust,
were numerous warehouses, containing the goods intended to be sent
to Europe, and two cranes for loading and clearing ships. At Pur-
merend, about a mile S. E. of Onrust, was an hospital for infectious
and incurable disorders.
Edam, twenty-four miles N. E. from Onrust, had a flag-staff for
directing ships from the north and east; and there was another at
Middleburg, twelve miles N, W. from Onrust, for ships approaching from
the westward. But all these places are now desolate and uninhabited.
These, and numerous other little islands, which defend the entrance
of the Bay of Batavia from the violence of the sea in stormy weather,


render it not only the finest but also one of the safest harbours in the
world. It has been observed as a remarkable circumstance, that not a
single ship belonging to the Dutch company has been lost in this Bay
ever since they founded here, two centuries ago, the emporium of their
extended trade, and on its marshy shores erected the proud seat of all
their eastern dominions. The Observatory of Batavia is in latitude
6 degrees 9 minutes S., and longitude 106 degrees 5H minutes E., by
the actual astronomical observations of Johann Mauritz Mohr; and
this may be considered as very correct, being the result of many
observations of Jupiter's Satellites, taken during his residence at this-,
place.
The principal rivers are the great Jacatra or Batavia river, which
has its rise in the Blue Mountains, and encircles the town by several
branches and canals connected with it. Ankee river rises in the Salack
mountains, as also does the Tangerang, which is a very considerable
river. The Slokan is an artificial cut, which unites the smaller
streamlets in the mountains above Buitenzorg, and serves to water the
rice fields in the plains south-east of Batavia. Besides these,
numerous other streams and rivulets intersect the district of Batavia
in all directions ; and two large canals to the east and west, navigable
for large boats, or prows, of considerable burden, connect the com-
munication between the town and the two large villages of Tangerang
and Tjilinching, whence large supplies are drawn for the use of the
capital and its environs. On the banks of the rivers Ankee and
Anjole, which terminate the suburbs to the west and the east, strong
redoubts and forts were formerly erected, but they are now all in ruins,


as well as the water castle at the entrance, and the numerous other
batteries in the old line of defence round Batavia.
The roads in the environs, which are very numerous, are shaded
with trees, and, for the most part, quite straight, passing over the
canals on bamboo bridges, and over the larger rivers and streams on
bridges with stone arches, or strong timber props, resting on a stone
foundation. Besides the several lesser roads, intersecting one another
in a variety of directions, with beautiful villas interspersed in the shady
topes; a new one, commenced by General Daendels, and which has
since been carried on by the British Government, runs due east through
rice fields and tope, for many miles from Batavia, through the
country of Crawang, at which place it will join the great Military
Road, which crosses the mountains from Buitenzorg to the eastern
extremity of the Island. Two miles and a half south of Batavia, is
Weltervreeden, and the two elegant roads, or rather streets of sump-
tuous houses, leading to it, that of Jacatra and Molenvliet, have been
already mentioned. On the Jacatra road, besides a number of other
elegant buildings, that of Goonong Sarie, the town residence of the
late Dutch Governor, is situated. It is no longer public property,
having been lately sold with other buildings; but it continues to be
used as the Grand Assembly Room on great occasions, being hired by
Government at a stated rent. The buildings and grounds belonging
to ft are spacious. To the east, the eye is gratified by fertile plains,
with luxuriant rice fields, exhibiting all that is cheering and pleasant
for the comfort of human life ; while, on the opposite side, a dismal
contrast presents itself, in the vast cemetry, filled with Chinese
sepulchres, stretching to a great and melancholy extent. A Free


Mason’s Lodge, which is pretty generally frequented, stands within
the precincts of ancient Jacatra. Near this, a cross road runs past the
Chinese burying-ground into the Molenvliet road, where the Council
hold their meetings, in a large building, which also contains the
Treasury, and all other public offices, but has nothing favourable to
recommend it, either for pleasantness of situation or salubrity of air.
In the vestibule are portraits of all the Dutch Governors, to which that
of Lord Minto has been lately added. Here is also the Printing-
office, being the only press in this large and populous country.
Molenvliet House is situated about midway between Batavia and
Weltervreeden. At Ryswyck are good barracks, and pleasant officers’
quarters for both infantry and cavalry. Turning to the left, the road
conducts to Weltervreeden, and is divided in the middle by the prin-
cipal canal, which conveys the great body of w ater from the Jacatra
river by Molenvliet to Batavia. Continuing straight from Byswyck,
the road leads on the east, past the Champ de Mars ; and on the west
side, by the overstocked Dutch burying-ground. Of this antique
garden of death, which is surrounded by a wall, with palisades, it
may be truly said, that its soil is almost become hard with human
bones.
The road then continues to the fertile fields of elevated Tanabang,
about four miles from Batavia; here a market is held twice a week, to
which an immense concourse of people resort from all parts of the sur-
rounding country, and hence the inhabitants of Batavia procure most
of their supplies.
Weekly bazars are held at almost every principal place throughout
each district, to which the produce of the vicinage is brought in great
2 L


quantities, and sold or bartered for other articles under certain regula-
tions. There is something very curious in the manner of conducting
the fish market at Batavia, all fishermen being obliged to bring their
fish thither between the hours of eleven and twelve o’clock every day,
when crowds of people attend, and the neighbouring streets are
thronged with carriages; for, at Batavia, few people are inclined to
walk, and in the streets, as well as in the numerous roads and alleys in
the environs, a constant press of coaches is seen from morning till night.
The fish is sold by public auction to the retailers, and the amount,
after deducting the Vendee Office duties, is paid to the fishermen, who
return directly to renew their labours for similar earnings on the next
day. The retailers, principally Chinese, then spread their purchased
stock out on their several benches in the market, and for this licence
another duty must be paid.
The visitors from the town and country walk leisurely round, and
make such purchases as suit their inclinations and circumstances ; and
the concourse of people of all descriptions, male and female, in their
various attire, who compose this fantastic show, is highly amusing.
Here also are supplied with fish the lesser retail shops, which are dis-
persed about the town and country for many miles round.
Weltervreeden, is a pleasant and very healthy cantonment, and
the Head Quarters of the army. It was chosen as a military station by
the Dutch Government, and is far preferable to any other place in the
neighbourhood of the capital. General Daendels intended to have re-
moved to this place all the public offices, both civil and military ; thus,
making, this desirable spot the seat of Government, for which purpose,


a very large building, with numerous appendages, had been begun by
him, and it was partly roofed in before our arrival, as were also several
ranges of excellent barracks, some of which have been finished, and
are occupied by our troops. Were the whole of them completed agree-
able to the original plan, and the commendable design carried into ex-
ecution, of draining the Champ de Mars, and uniting it with the Can-
tonment by a bridge over the river, in front of the new government
house, Weltervreeden would be rendered a beautiful and a most excel-
lent military station. The officers’ quarters are in general very good,
as is also the general hospital, separated from the Cantonment by the
river. A large old building, formerly used as a government house,
where the council sometimes met, is now converted into a Commissariat
Depot. Hence a fine avenue leads through the new cantonment to the
China bazar. Near to this has been erected a new Catholic chapel.
Half a mile farther, a cross road leads to Tanabang; and here the
action of the 10th of August took place, in which the British advance,
under Colonel Gillespie, routed the Elite of the French army, who were
strongly posted, and drove them within the works of Cornelis. At
about tTpals *, commences the front line of the lately-fortified camp of
Cornelis, of which there are now few traces, the works having been all
razed, and the natural fertility of the soil and quick vegetation so gene-
ral in Java, has spread a wide jungle over this field of glory, where
British valour wrested the last and most valuable colony out of the
usurping hands of French Despotism.
* A Dutch measurement —17 pals are equal to 16 English miles.
2l 2


PROM BATAVIA TO THE WESTWARD.
Proceeding westward from Batavia, the road passes through the
suburbs, and after leaving Ankee, anda number ofold Dutch villas inter-
spersed on both sides for near fifteen miles, but which are now mostly
deserted, it arrives at the large Campong or village of Tange rang.
This is a considerable place, and before the neighbouring part of the
Bantam country was ceded to the Dutch, it was a large military frontier
station ; but the fort, barracks, &c. are now nearly in ruins. The foun-
dation of a new one was laid by General Daendels, to command the
passage of the river and the high road to Batavia, on the supposition
probably, that Bantam would be the landing-place of an English
Expedition.
A large weekly bazar is held here, to which the produce of the adja-
cent country is brought, and thence carried to Batavia, by means of a
canal which communicates with the river Tjidanee, by a fine sluice,
and then runs parallel to the road the whole way to Batavia. Near this
sluice and bridge is a beautiful villa, the late residence
Lutzow. The country is well cultivated, interspersed
seats or Dutch farms, producing lice, and the greatest part of the
grass for the consumption of the horses in town. As this article is in
great demand, and uncommonly quick in its growth, it is of course
much cultivated and very profitable.
The river Tjidanee which is broad, and in the rainy season very
rapid, is crossed here. It was formerly the boundary between the
kingdom of Bantam and that of Jacatra, and from the name of the
frontier post, has obtained the name of Tangerang river.


From Tangerang, for the distance of sixteen miles, the country is
high and open, cultivated principally with rice and cocoa-nut topes ;
but the villages are not numerous. The road then enters a thick
jungle and forest, infested by tigers, but having hardly any traces of
cultivation, and few human inhabitants, excepting the small villages
of Tjikandee and Oonderandy, both on the banks of large rivers, till
within seven miles ot Ceram, when a country rich in rice fields, and
studded with villages, surrounded with fruit-trees, on a sudden opens
to the view, and continues to the latter place, which is the present
abode of the Resident at the Court of Bantam, from whence it is
distant nearly eight miles.
Ceram is a tolerably large village, and is defended by a block-house*
which serves also as a barrack for the troops stationed in this district.
The country for several miles round appears to be in a high state of
cultivation. The road runs from Ceram through rice fields and thick
topes to
Bantam —which once rich and flourishing city, has nothing now but
ruins to exhibit, as the sad memorial of departed greatness. The for-
tifications, both European and Native; Fort Spielwyck, as well as the
Sultan’s Fort, are levelled with the ground, and what few European
habitations have not been pulled down, are falling fast into decay, and
totally deserted. Situated on a low swampy beach, surrounded by
jungle, and intersected with stagnant streams, it ought not to excite
wonder that the climate should prove so deleterious to European con-
stitutions, and cause the abandonment of the place. Of a recent


embassy, consisting of nearly fifty persons, which was sent from
Batavia in 1804, on the ceremony of the Installation of a new Sultan,
not above eight or ten survived. Even the natives are not proof against
the Marsh Fever ; and the present Sultan was, at this time of our
visit, suffering severely from its effects. He is a young man, and
were any one to indulge the expectation of finding here a Court an-
swerable to the dignified title of a Sultan, he would at his arrival be
sadly disappointed, and neither fancy himself in a Palace, nor in the
presence of a Sovereign.
Bantam Bay is about two leagues and a half S. E. from St. Nicholas
Point, which is in lat. 5 deg. 52 min. S. long. 106 deg. 2 min. E., or
fifty miles West from Batavia by the chronometer. The Bay is exten-
sive, and contains several Islands, of which Pulo Panjang, a long flat
spot, covered with trees, in the West part of the entrance, is the largest.
A tine river, navigable for large prows, flows through the city, and joins
the bay close to Fort Spielwyk. Formerly Bantam was a free port,
and open to the commerce of all nations. The trade, however, was
monopolized by the Dutch, in the reign of Sultan Agon, in the year
1683, and they erected Fort Spielwyk to shut out all other merchants.
This naturally excited great discontent, and increased the hatred of
the people, who were always the bitter enemies of the Dutch ; but the
struggles of the natives only served to rivet the chains of their vas-
salage, and in 1742 they fell completely under the yoke of their
foreign oppressors. They murmured indeed, and were still refractory,
but the Dutch Fort, commanding the whole town, kept them effectu-
ally in bonds. Of the commerce carried on here, the Pepper trade is
the most considerable, and to this the country of the Lampoons, oti


the opposite coast of Sumatra, which was formerly tributary to
Bantam, contributed largely.
The attention of our Government was called to this kingdom by
its troubled state, and the restless ambition of Pangarang Achmet,
who, after being long in arms against the Dutch, and presuming on
the services rendered at various times to our ships when cruizing off
this part of the coast, now took upon him the dominion of the coun-
try, to the exclusion of the lawful heir. 'bur interference, therefore,
having become necessary to put an end to the usurpation, the turbu-
lent Achmet was made prisoner, and sent to Prince of Wales's Island;
while the person whose rights had been so unjustly seized was put in
possession of his territories, and placed on the Musnud without any
disturbance.
Since that period, the Sultan, from apathy, and labouring under
disease, as already mentioned, has wholly resigned the government of
Bantam, and voluntarily retired on a pension allowed him by the
British Government, which has taken into its own hands the adminis-
tration of the kingdom. Subsequent to the arrangement with the
Sultan, for taking the immediate management of the country into the
hands of Government, a land rental was introduced ; and the territorial
revenues of the residency under the present arrangements, amount to
the sum of 100,000 rupees.
Continuingfrom Ceram, the road passes through Tjiligon to Marack
Bay, a distance of eighteen miles. The country, which has many
declivities, is tolerably well cultivated with rice, cotton, and catjan.
Approaching the sea, the hills narrowly inclose the site of Fort
Marak, and its Bay, which is formed by this promontory, and an


elevated island N.W., on which batteries were to have been erected
to strengthen the defences on the main land. But its extreme
unhealthiness swept off thousands of the labourers and most of the
soldiers stationed here likewise fell a sacrifice to the projects of General
Daendels. To this mortality it is to be attributed that the fortifica-
tions, now a heap of ruins, were left unfinished by the late Dutch
Government, and that the intention of making this Bay to the west
what Sourabaya is to the east, was obliged to be abandoned. Nearly
a hundred pieces of cannon were, at the time of our visit, lying buried
in the high grass, many of them as overturned by a boat's crew from
his Majesty’s ship Minden, who gallantly stormed the batteries,
though defended by two hundred men, a short time before the arrival
of the expedition. The anchorage is not very good, and consists
mostly of coral bottom. Here, as in many other places in Java, it
was evinced that, however ignorant and passive a people may be,
oppression will drive them to resistance. The system of feudal service
was most oppressive. Independently of demands for the public ser-
vice, which from the facility of making the requisition, were more
unlimited than would otherwise have happened, every public officer
deemed it fair to require the service of as many men as he found con-
venient. The native chiefs followed the same system, and thus there
could be no actual check on the part of Government.
Such was the severity of the labour required from the Bantamese in the
erection of works, making roads, &c. that these people being’ obliged to
leave their own lands untilled, numbers of them sought refuge in the
woods and in the western extremity of the island, which to this day
remains entirely unknow n to us, waging from thence a destructive and


successful warfare. These emigrations and incessant troubles occa-
sioned by the hard treatment to which the inhabitants were subjected,
are the cause that the once-flourishing kingdom of Bantam is now re-
duced nearly to a desert. It is not to be wondered at, therefore, that
the authors of so much misery should be detested by them ; and to this
day their distrust of the Europeans is very great, and this spirit is art-
fully kept up by the priests. As the ignorance of the lower classes of
the Javanese, and their implicit obedience to the orders of their chiefs,
render them liable to be influenced on any occasion by their priests, it
has been in contemplation to endeavour to ascertain the situation of
those who possess any influence in the districts under our Government,
and to secure their attachment, by granting them a certain allowance
from Government, to be continued during good behaviour. Still all
the endeavours of the British resident to conciliate the confidence of
the mass of the people, have been hitherto unavailing. Nor can it be
expected that the state of almost constant warfare they were in with
the Dutch, should incline the Bantamese very favourably towards
Europeans in general; but the more equitable administration, of which
the British Government has laid the foundation, will, it is to be hoped,
in a short period, produce more conciliatory habits, and restore that
distracted country to tranquillity and confidence.
Anjier, in latitude 6 degrees, minutes South, about two leagues to
the Eastward of the Fourth point, is situated in a bay formed by that
point and the point of Marak bay. It has a good block-house with
cannon, and excellent quarters for a proportionate garrison, encir-
cled by a mud parapet and wet ditch. It is at present far from healthy,
2 M


which may be owing to the surrounding jungle, and its stagnant ditch,
as well as a small river, which deposits the filth thrown into it, on one
of the sides of the fort. The removal of those causes would make it an
eligible military, as well as naval depot, it being our Westernmost post
on the island, and conveniently situated for watering as well as supply-
ing refreshments to all ships sailing through the Straits of Sunda. A
fine streamlet of excellent water, which flows from the mountains,
might with little expense be conveyed by an aqueduct into boats
lying at anchor. This place is now generally the rendezvous of the
homeward and outward bound China fleet, as it is considered one of
the healthiest parts of the coast, and affords very good anchorage.
The village here is large and populous, and well stocked with poul-
try, &c.; buffaloes are also easily procured, and plenty of turtle,
Fruits and vegetables would also abound were encouragement given
for their cultivation. Towards the interior, the country rises gradually
and is very beautiful. Nothing indeed seems wanting but an adequate
population to make this extensive district one of the finest and most
productive in Java.
From Anjier to Tjiringhin, a distance of 25 miles, the road runs
near to the beach over a partly-woody country, across many small rivers
and inlets from the sea, and passing through several large fishing vil-
lages. At intervals near the hills, which in many parts run close to
the beach, much rice culture is seen. The shore, with the exception
of a few fine bays, is rocky, chiefly coral, and much indented.
Tjeringhin, is a considerable fishing village, and was formerly a mili-
tary post with a block-house, which was burnt by our ships of war. It


is situated at the mouth of a river, which is navigable a long way up,
for small prows affording a ready conveyance for the rich products of
a country South East of this, the finest and best cultivated district of
any in Java. For about twenty miles farther west, the road continues
along the sea-coast to Tjibonger, the favourite haunt of insurgents,
Who, from their numbers, frequently render detachments from the mi-
litary necessary to disperse them, as happened not long since. A
formidable stand was made here by the refractory Bantamese against
Marshal Daendels, a few years ago in a small fort; the parapet of
which being composed of tiers of cocoa nut trees, was from their elas-
ticity impenetrable to balls; and when a storm was ordered, thebe-
sieged quietly walked off in the night, and found a secure refuge in the
neighbouring woods and the Western extremity of the island, where
no European had ever penetrated, and of which consequently nothing
is known.
Leaving the sea-coast, the road takes a South East direction from
Tjiringhin inland, and the country rises considerably towards the hills
With occasional declivities. This is an extremely beautiful and well-
cultivated tract, with a numerous population scattered in small
villages at short intervals; and luxuriantly surrounded by topes of
cocoa nut and other fruit trees.
Near Kuddo Helud, about ten miles, the road runs along the foot of
the high mountain Poelassarie, which was once a volcano, and still
emits smoke. Proceeding further, the country rises still higher,
after which a fine and nearly champaign country, interspersed with
numerous villages, with some irregular declivities between the hills
of Poelassarie and Carang, which furnish a thousand rills for the
2m 2


culture of the fertile ridges of the sloping grounds, presents a beautiful
appearance. Here, on turning round, and looking back to view the
extensive prospect which the height we had gained enabled us to
contemplate, the eye was gratified by one of the noblest sights that
can charm the admirer of picturesque beauty. The day was now
declining, and before us lay stretched the verdant and romantic coun-
try over which we had just passed, sloping gradually towards the sea;
while, as it were, in the back-ground of this delightful picture, the
rays of the sun, just setting in the ocean, gilded the tops of the distant
isles in the Straits of Sunda ; and the gently-diminishing splendour,
spreading a fiery veil over the distant horizon, terminated the prospect.
The same fertility and beautiful scenery continues fifteen miles fur-
ther, to Pondok Gelang, distant from Tjiringhin twenty-five miles to
the south-east. This is a fine elevated post, and still exhibits a ruin-
ous parapet and ditch, by which it is surrounded; and which w ould
form an eligible military station for the troops serving in the Bantam
country, being situated in the midst of a populous, rich, and healthy
district, commanding a ready communication with Ceram, Tjiringhin,
Bantam, Batavia, and Buitenzorg. Continuing from hence, we
passed through an equally productive country, and over a range ot
small hills, for about ten miles, when a thick jungle, where the tiger
and rhinoceros divide the command, commences, covering a low
range of hills. Little cultivation and no villages are to be seen from
the road, which the inhabitants seem purposely to avoid ; but several
of them are interspersed at different distances in the jungle, which
appears nearly impenetrable. The villagers communicate with one
another by means of very intricate path-ways, only known to them-


selves, which makes this tract a secure refuge for the turbulent and
discontented, and a very difficult one for the passage of troops.
In the heart of this jungle, a refractory chieftain, inhabiting a
village very near some thatched roofs, where darkness had obliged us
to take up our abode for the night, menaced our destruction in the
night, which, from our small number, being only three Europeans
and some black servants, without any guard, he might have easily
accomplished. But being perhaps fearful that such a step would lead
to a premature discovery of the more sanguinary plot which he was
then contriving, he left us undisturbed to continue our course through
the wilderness early the next morning. This chief, with fifty of his
gang, were afterwards seized and transported; it being discovered
that he had at his command ten thousand men ready at a signal to
rush on the neighbouring districts, with the view of plundering and
murdering the inhabitants. After proceeding about thirty miles
through this dreaiy jungle, the road becomes more and more diffi-
cult, passing over numerous ravines, and the two considerable rivers
of Oondarandy and Tjicandee, which are navigable thus far for
small prows. The road then generally declines, till within a few
miles of Tjisingha, where it enters a more open and better cultivated
country.
Tjisingha, which is about thirty-five miles from Pondok Gelang, is
a very fine Dutch farm, belonging to Mr, Reintz. It is agreeably
situated on the river Tjidorean, which, in the rains is very rapid, and
scarcely passable. A road leads from hence through Tangerang to
Batavia. After (crossing the above river, and still continuing in a
south-east direction, our road passed over a low chain of hills, covered
mostly with jungle, and divided by a number of rivulets, with steep


banks; so that this tract is rendered impracticable to carriages, and
difficult even to horses.
At a distance of about ten miles the road turns due East to Sading,
another Dutch farm belonging to Mr. Moatman, which is situated on
a fine river, and nearly surrounded by hills, some ofyvhich produce
the edible bird-nests. Continuing on to Tjiampion, about seven miles
further, we had to cross the rivers Tjikanakee and Tjiantan, and
passed through a country high and more open with better cultivation.
Here is another Dutch farm, the property of Mr. Rymsdyck, with a
large bazar ; and several hills belonging to it containing also the
edible bird-nests. It is astonishing what an immense revenue is pro-
duced by a single rock, the caverns of which are frequented by the
little grey swallows ; for the nests in some of them clear from twenty
to forty thousand Spanish dollars annually, on a moderate computation.
The Dutch farmers who possess rocks of this kind on their estates,
are therefore very careful of them, and watch them closely to prevent
the Chinese or others from privately stealing the nests ; they are also
very particular in preventing the discharge of fire arms near the spots,
for fear of frightening away the birds. These little swallows abound
chiefiy among the hilly tracts, invited thither by the insects which
hover over the stagnated pools. Their nests are constructed in regular
rows, adhering to the sides of the cavern, and to each other. The
whiter and more transparent the viscous matter is that cements the fine
filaments of which the nests are composed, the more valuable are they
reckoned, and they always fetch a very extraordinary price. A couple
°f e *?§’ s only are laid in each nest, which are hatched in about a fortnight,
and the proper time tor taking them is after the young ones are fledged..
The business of taking these nests is generally repeated about three


times a year, and is attended with much danger ; man/ serious acci-
dents having often happened. The superstition of the people usually
employed in the work, leads them to make many vows and sacrifices
with the view of propitiating the demons, who are supposed to dwell
in the caverns and dark recesses of the mountains.
After passing the river Tjidanee, near Tjiampion, the road passes
through a country high and well cultivated ; and joins at a few miles
distance the great Western road, which runs from Tangerang to Buit-
enzorg. The distance from Tjiringhin, where we left the coast to
Buitenzorg, by the route described, is one hundred and four miles.
PROM BATAVIA TO THE EASTWARD.
Proceeding from Batavia, on the new Eastern road towards Buiten-
zorg, every advantage is presented for quick and convenient travelling.
This excellent road, which is kept in the best repair* with regular post
stages at every five or six miles, greatly to the public convenience,
extended till very lately as far as Kalatigus, a distance of nearly seven
hundred miles East of Batavia. But the relays of post-horses, stationed
between Bnitenzorg and Samarang, have recently been done away
with, and consequently the facility of passing through the Regencies
does not now exist.
After passing through Weltervreeden and Cornells, and by several
elegant country-seats, farms, and villages, enveloped in topes of
cocoa-nut and fruit-trees, the road breaks through the mass of tope
which encircles Batavia, and enters on a more open and more elevated
country. In this neighbourhood, between Campong, Macassar, and


Tanjang Dost, the difference of climate is very sensible, though the
distance is not more than twelve miles from Batavia. Several of our
officers have temporary villas here, which being situated near Welter-
vreeden, they can easily pass backwards and forwards daily, and thus
their health derives essential benefit from the change of air and
exercise.
About seven miles farther, at Tjimangis, which is another Dutch
farm, temporary barracks have been erected on a high, and agree-
able situation, for the occasional accommodation of the military de-
tails during the dry season, to practice field manoeuvres. The tem-
porary removal of the European troops from Weltervreeden to this
place, after the breaking up of the Monsoons, when fevers are so pre-
valent in the low lands, would be attended with the most beneficial
effects in preserving the health of the soldiers. Such a measure would
also prove advantageous with regard to the military exercises, and
particularly the artillery practice, which could be carried on here at
such times, not less for the good of the service, than for the welfare of
individuals. A fine hospital for convalescents, with every convenience,
delightfully situated on the borders of a beautiful lake is belonging to it,
and the country around is extremely pleasant. Being situated half-way
between the coasts and the hills, the climate partakes of the advantages
of the land and sea breezes, with occasionally cool refreshing showers,
without being deluged by the rains from the mountains, as is the case
at Buitenzorg*.
* Possessed of these advantages, it is to be regretted that this post should have so long
remained unoccupied ; and that any trivial economy should suffer these buildings to go to
decay, which might be so profitably employed for the general good.


Leaving Tjimangies, the road passes by Tjibinong, which is another
of Mr. Rymsdyk’s farms, and by Tjiloar, distant thirty-one miles from
Batavia. This last is a very pretty place, and was for some time the
country residence of Major General Gillespie. It was built by the
late Mr. Tantzie, who had another very pleasant villa and farm at
Soucarajah, three miles from hence. Tjiloar had a large-sized brig,
full rigged, and mounting guns, sailing on an elevated tank or lake
made by Mr. Tantzie, and being seen a long way off, the traveller is
very agreeably surprized on first beholding this vessel under sail, ap-
parently moving through the surrounding rice fields.
The house at Soucarajah, which is situated in tiie midst of a large
tank on stone pillars, is a very beautiful place. On the North side is
the entrance, over a long passage on pillars, with a drawbridge ; and
on the South side a beautiful avenue is presented, laved by a crystal
stream, which, covering the whole breadth of the avenue like a mirror,
glides gently down on the banks of the tank, and flows into the lake
close to the house.
Half-way between Tjiloar and Buitenzorg, the road leads over the
great l iver. A bamboo raft is used for crossing the carriages and horses
over, without the necessity of quitting the carriage or taking out the
horses; the float being fastened to the sides of the river by a strong
cord or bamboo-twist; one man, by pulling towards the one or the
other end, easily moves it across, and the carriage and horses pass on
without delay or trouble. Most of the large rivers in Java are crossed
in this manner ; but others which are more rapid and broad, or much
swoln by the rains in the monsoon, are crossed on a bamboo raft fixed
on light boats like a flying-bridge, either by hauling or rowing,
2 N


carrying over carriages, horses, artillery, and other articles safely and
expeditiously.
Buitenzorg, which signifiesin Butch, rural care, is the country-seat
of the Head of the Java Government. Being situated at the foot of
the Blue Mountains, the climate is very healthy and cool ; but to de-
bilitated constitutions, the rain which falls almost every evening, ren-
ders this place far from salutary. The principal building has a
handsome appearance and is very spacious : the village also is large,
with a good bazar, besides several other houses, barracks, stables, &c.
The country round is naturally very strong, intersected by ravines and
two considerable fivers ; in the space between which last, the French
had erected numerous batteries to defend every possible approach to
the place; but these are now going to decay. The road runs from
hence South East, through a hilly but finely cultivated country, and
passes several very agreeable country residencies and farms. At Pon-
dokgedee is one beautifully situated, belonging to Mr. Engelhardt, for-
merly Governor of Samarang, and opposite to it is another farm of
Mr. Bymsdyk. Close to this, on the top of a high hill, is a new farm
of the late Mr. Tantzie, which overlooks the entire plain of the king-
dom of Jacatra, and in clear weather the shipping in the bay of Batavia
may be distinguished from thence.
The whole country, after quitting the topes of Batavia, is open, and
rises gradually towards the mountains with alternate hill and dale, the
lower parts being cultivated with rice, and the higher with pulse,
katjan, and cotton. Much however is allotted to pasture for cows,
and a great part is overrun with jungle, owing to a scarcity of popu-


Jation. For this deficiency many reasons might be assigned. One of
the principal is the constant compulsion to labour on all public build-
ings, roads, canals, &c. particularly during the Government of General
Daendels, when so many of these works were undertaken. Another
cause of the scanty population undoubtedly is, the small proportion of
Sawah, or rice land, which the inhabitants greatly prefer to all other
cultivation. When it is considered also that the whole of those lands
from Batavia to Tjicerora, as far as the interior of the mountains, and
for many miles in all other directions, belong to a few Dutch gentlemen,
no wonder can be made at the scarcity of population, and the existence
of so many uncultivated districts. The high demand for bird-nests,
and the wealth thence accruing to the few individuals who possess the
immense tracts where they are found, cannot fail also to draw the at-
tention of the landed proprietors from the improvement of their estates,
and to repress that spirit of useful industry which properly exerted and
encouraged, would be beneficial to the natives, and advantageous to
the colony in produce and population.
The distress which the poor in Batavia often experience in times of
dearth, when contrary winds delay the arrival of vessels with supplies
of rice from the eastern districts, thereby raising that article from five,
six, to seven hundred per cent, above the standard price, affects not
the rich landlords, who might prevent, or at least lessen these evils, by
grants to encourage the culture of waste lands, or by adopting such
improvements as would in a short time abundantly supply the whole
population in Batavia, and the neighbourhood. That the soil is in
general capable of such improvement, has been evinced in the farms
of the late Mr. Tantzie; by whose active exertions large tracts of
2 n 2


barren heath were converted, in a few years, into the most flourish-
ing rice fields. In the hilly tracts, the soil is extremely fertile, and
esteemed superior to what is to be found in other parts.
Near Tjiceroa, the last of Mr. Rymsdyk’s farms, the steep ascent of
the road commences, and the use of buffaloes becomes indispensible.
Two or more of these powerful animals are put before the horses, and
together draw the carriage up without any danger; though, in some
parts, the precipices on the sides of the road are really frightful.
Having reached the summit of this pass, a beautiful view breaks at
once on the sight; in which, the stupendous scenery extending over
the lesser mountains is awfully contrasted by the dreadful abysses
immediately beneath; while, in a clear day, the ocean on the one
side, and the north coast on the opposite, may be easily discerned.
At the highest point of the east side of the road, a plain wooden
pillar commemorates the successful efforts of General Daendels in
making this great road, over an extensive mountainous country, the
labour expended on which must have been prodigious.
The road, taking a more easterly direction, continues over very steep
hills, to Tjipanas, where is a small government-house and a large
garden, which supplies abundance of fine vegetables. At this place
is a hot mineral bath, which was formerly much frequented; and has
its origin most probably in a volcanic hill at a little distance, from
whence smoke is still emitted. The climate here is very salubrious.


and has proved highly beneficial to invalids. At night, however, the
cold is sensibly felt, and the evening sky is generally overcast with
clouds and rain ; but the mornings are very delightful, and are always
clear and serene.
Here commence the fine coffee plantations, which extend consider-
ably through these hilly regions, and are exceedingly valuable. The
rich produce of these regencies, so called from having had the
administration entrusted to native chiefs bearing that title, was
formerly collected into the Government storehouses and magazines for
exportation, on the public account: On the late sale of crown lands,
these extensive districts, which in Europe would be considered as
constituting large principalities, were converted into private estates,
the property of a few individual adventurers, who purchased them at
a very inferior price to that of their actual value. But nothing precise
is known of their real worth to Government, under the present
circumstances, though their increased value, since the period of the
destruction of the other coffee plantations, in the eastern parts of the
Island, is evident.
The first principal town in these highlands through which the road
leads, is Tanjore, which is the seat of the Regent of the district, and
till lately also that of an European resident. The country round is
very delightful. Passing through Byabang, a large village, pleasantly
situated on the banks of a river, the next principal town is.
Bandong, possessing the same residencies as the former, but neither
so agreeable in its position, nor healthy, being in the midst of a swampy


soil. The country, however, soon reassumes a smiling face, when
arrived at
Samadong, another large town, with its several residencies, the
beauty of the cultivated fields spreading the most luxuriant fertility
over hill and dale, mountain and valley, succeeding each other in a
charming variety, afford a picturesque and highly-gratifying scene.
The inhabitants here are fairer in their complexions, and possess
softer features, than in the other parts of the island; the women also
are gracefully shaped, and some of them are very beautiful.
At Karang Sambong, the road leaves the mountains, after having
traversed one hundred and twenty miles of perhaps as fine a country
as any in the world, or rather one that is capable of being made so.
Except in the towns where the Regents reside, and a few villages scat-
tered here and there, a want of population is generally discernible.
The soil is uncommonly fertile, as exhibited in the cultivated parts,
and in the coffee plantations, which flourish most luxuriantly. Wheat,
barley, rice, and all kinds of pulse and vegetables, are produced in per-
fection ; and as the climate is most salubrious, if these districts were
divided into farms of about fifty to one hundred acres, and superin-
tended by European farmers, the benefits would be incalculable.
This country is, indeed, particularly advantageous for new settlers,
if a liberal encouragement was offered to adventurers of good cha-
racter and ability.
Karang Sambong, is a considerable inland town, situated on a fine
river, which is navigable for large prows, and runs through Indramayo




Plate XXI.
Fort Cheribon.


into the sea. The Dutch had a large factory at this place, from whence
a shorter inland communication to Batavia is now establishing, by
means of the new road, and by the way of Crawang, which is also a
considerable town, situated on a river of the same name ; the ancient
boundary between the kingdoms of Jacatra and Cheribon.
The road now descends into a more populous and champaign country,
cultivated chiefly with rice ; and here it regains the coast at Cheribon,
distant about thirty-five leagues to the eastward of Batavia, but mea-
suring one hundred and ninety-eight miles by the post-road. This
was a considerable military station in the former government, and the
European town, which contains many good houses, was well peopled
till within a few years of our arrival, when a pestilential disease swept
off the greater part of the inhabitants, since which it has been nearly
deserted. It is remarkable, that this contagion did not extend on the
west side of the town more than two miles; as the family of the Resi-
dent dwelling at that distance entirely escaped. This malady has been
ascribed to a morass, extending many miles to the eastward of the
town, and over which the wind blows at particular periods of the year;
while others attribute it to a cold drying wind, issuing for a consider-
able time through an opening of the mountains from the southward.
The great hill of Cheribon was formerly a volcano, and still emits
smoak in some seasons.
This town lies at the bottom of the deep bay formed to the south-
east of Point Indramayo, to the westward of which there is good
anchorage in the easterly monsoon. The bay is well sheltered from
the north-west monsoon by a shoal bank, which stretches from the
north point of the bay to the eastward.
The commerce of Cheribon consists of rice, sugar, coffee, pepper.


cotton yarn, edible bird-nests, &c. ; but the splendour of its former
Sovereigns is sunk with their power. No less than four Sultans reside
at this place, to whose ancestors the whole of the territory once be-
longed ; but by different stipulations and treaties, the greater part
came into the possession of the Dutch, who suffered the former lords
to retain the empty title of Sultan, with very small districts for their
maintenance, out of which they were even obliged to pay a certain
proportion of the produce to their new masters. They are all, of
course, miserably poor; though one, who is a very old man, is looked
up to as the head, and is called by way of distinction, the Sultan.
Since the conquest an arrangement was concluded with the Sultans,
by which they were relieved from future contingents and forced ser-
vices. They consented that the internal administration of the country
should be exercised by our Government, in consideration of their being
secured in the possession of certain tracts of land, with a continuation of
the annual pension in money, which they had previously enjoyed. Ac-
cordingly the capitation tax was abolished, and a land rent introduced,
calculated according to the produce of the soil, in lieu of all arbitrary
contingents formerly delivered to Government. The abolition of fern*
dal services was proclaimed to the inhabitants, and Government
engaged to pay at an equitable rate for all articles of produce, or the
labours of the people, when they might be required for the public
service.
According to this arrangement, the territorial revenue of Cheribon,
including the duties on salt, opium, and town customs, are stated for
the year 1814, at 255,306 rupees, without reckoning the assessment of
lands provisionally assigned to Native Chiefs, and which amount to-
-34,270 rupees.


At a little distance from the town is a venerable mosque and mauso-
leum, erected to the memory of Sheik Melana, who is said to have
introduced Islamism into the Island of Java, but at what period is not
ascertained, though in all probability it was soon after the ninth cen-
tury, between which, and the fourteenth, the Arabs are supposed to
have had the uncontrouled commerce in these parts. This building
is held highly sacred by the Mussulmans, and its precincts can only be
entered by the Sultan’s family, which ceremony takes place once
a year, attended with much pomp and ceremony. It is now much
decayed, and in a few years more will be entirely crumbled into
dust.
Leaving Cheribon, the road proceeds due east, in many parts close
to the water’s edge, and after passing the neighbouring marshes, it
continues through several native towns, to Losaric, Bribos, &c. and a
delightfully fertile country to Taggak The long line of coast from
above Cheribon to Samarang, and thence to the Straits of Baly, was
much exposed to the inroads of pirates, who, having often shewn
themselves off the principal towns near the sea, rendered the erection
of forts indispensible, for the protection of the inhabitants, and to serve
as secure depots for the produce of these fertile shores. Appropriate
garrisons, with suitable supplies of military stores for their defence,
are kept up in each ; which measures became more especially neces-
sary, as the Java gun-boats were not much better calculated under the
Dutch Government to protect the coast, than they are at present. The
vessels are fine, but badly manned, and worse commanded, being with-
out a single European to navigate them ; and therefore the most pru-
-2 o


dent course the crews can adopt is, to run away, which they always do
when they meet a piratical prow, to avoid being taken. These pirates
are determined fellows, who will rather die than yield, of which an
instance occurred not Jong since off Indramayo, when one of our crui-
sers fell in with half-a-dozen of these armed prows, the crews of which
obstinately refused quarter, and when floating on the water, after their
vessels were sunk, they still resisted with their crisses, and would not
suffer themselves to be taken on board to save their lives.
The country about Taggal is extremely fertile, and the whole of this
part of Java, and further to the east, is the rice granary, not only for
the supply of Batavia, but for exportation to the Eastern Isles. The
net land rental, under the new arrangement and territorial revenue
of Taggal, for the year 1814, is stated at 245,653 rupees.
Taggal, which is prettily situated on a broad river, has a church and
a small fort, exhibiting with the town a very neat appearance. The
resident’s house is a commodious and very handsome building.
At this, and most other places to the eastward, a mounted police
guard, (Djyant Secars,) is maintained by the several De Patties for the
service of the interior. These men, who are under the orders of the
resident in each district respectfully, are mounted on Java horses, with
suitable accoutrements, armed with sword and pistols, and uniformly
clothed in blue, with caps or helmets. In large towns they are under
the charge of European officers, to superintend their exercises, &c.
Proceeding through Pamalang, and several considerable native towns,
the road conducts us to Paccalongang, another small European town
and fort, like TaggaL


Plate XXII.
Fort Taggal.




Paccalongang is also the seat of a Landdrost, or Resident, and has
a numerous population of natives and Chinese, but there are not many
Dutch families. Near this place is a forest, many miles in extent,
which is so dreadfully unhealthy that four thousand people are said
to have perished in cutting the great road through it. With the
exception of this particular place, nothing can surpass the fertility of
the country, or the number and population of the villages. Agreeably
to the same statement before alluded to, the territorial revenue of
Paccalongang amounts to 346,176 rupees. The road, for the whole
way to Samarang, runs generally level, close to the beach, crossing
numerous rivulets and inlets from the sea, over bamboo bridges.
Samarang is the principal central station of the Island, and is a
large town, with a considerable European population. It is defended
by a stone parapet and rampart, with bastions, and a wet ditch; but
only calculated for defence against a native power. The line of
fortification along the coast had been destroyed before our arrival.
Between the town and sea-coast is an impassable morass, which
any approach to the town but by two fine roads, east and
west; both of which are raised and communicate with each other, by
one running parallel to the coast, and close to the water. Ships are
obliged to lie at the distance of five or six miles from the shore; the
anchorage being six fathoms, and a muddy bottom, in lat. 6 degrees
63 minutes S., long. 110 degrees 34 minutes E.; or a ship may anchor
insor 4j fathoms nearer the shore. The Bay is bounded, on the east
side, by the high land of Japara. The river, which is navigable for
prows and coasting vessels up to the town, runs between the west side
2 o 2


of the city and the Chinese campong. In blowing weather, the bar,
at the month of the river, is deemed very dangerous.
The town has a neat appearance, with a number of good houses.
It has also a fine large church, a new town-house, and a variety of
other public buildings, both elegant and commodious, within and
*
without the city. Here was formerly a public school, where numbers
of Dutch and half-cast children were educated for the military
profession.
Samarang was always the seat of a separate Governor, having the
denomination of Governor of Java Proper, and exercising very
extensive powers under the sanction and controul of the Governor
General and Supreme Council of Batavia. All political and com-
mercial regulations with the neighbouring Courts of Solo and Djoejo-
carta, were under the immediate authority of the Governor of
Samarang, whose influence extending over so great a territory, made
this an exceeding lucrative office. But the establishment has given
way to the less expensive institutions of a Civil Commissioner, and
Residents for the transaction of business.
The climate of Samarang, though not very salubrious, is far preferable
to that of Batavia. The European inhabitants appear much more
healthy, and instead of the gloomy indolence of the Batavians, we find
here a pleasing sociability of disposition and hilarity of behaviour.
Ihe environs have numerous villas, which, from their commanding
situation, overlook the stately topes and the neat garden houses that
peep through the shady groves among the verdant fields; while the
beautifully-variegated hills and dales towards the interior, greatly en-
liven the scenery. The Chinese and native population here is very


Samarang from the Land Side.




considerable. Crowded villages overspread the neighbourhood, and
the general bustle in the town and vicinity was not a little increased
at the time of our visit, by the great concourse of strangers, and nume-
rous bodies of horse attending the Crown Prince of Solo, who had
arrived in consequence of the proffered terms for a pacific treaty be-
tween the Emperor and the British Government, after the capture of
Djoejocarta, and the discovery of the treacherous alliance that had been
made between the Soosoohoonan and the late court of the Sultan.
Under the new system of land rental, the territorial revenue of Sa-
marang for the year 1814, amounts to 508,830 rupees, exclusive of the
land assessments provisionally assigned to native chiefs. The salt re-
venue is stated at 200,000, opium at 24,080, and. the town duties at
200,000 rupees, which gives a total of 1,032,910 rupees, without reck-
oning the prolitable collections made on the edible bird-nests, which
are given up by the native courts, and a variety of other customs.
FROM SAMARANG TO THE SOUTH COAST.
Proceeding from Samarang to the South, the road soon begins to as-
cend, and passes through Oonarang, a small European town and fort.
Near this place, General Janssens made his last stand for the island of
Java, with troops which he had collected from the native chiefs, for-
midable in numbers, but unable to encounter in the field a few well-
disciplined soldiers. The country is pleasing and very healthy, and
in its neighbourhood an eligible station for troops has been chosen,
where barracks are now erecting for a battalion of Europeans. Until


lately the head-quarters of the troops in theSamarang district had been
at Salatiga, which is another small town and fort most delightfully
situated, and in a populous and extremely well-cultivated country,
yielding provisions, vegetables and supplies of all kinds, cheap and in
great abundance. Continuing to the village of Silimbi, the road crosses
the river Damak, over which is a tine bridge ; and stretching through
the middle and most elevated part of Java, it arrives at
Boyolallie, another small town and fort situated in a delightful and
most fertile country. Fifteen miles west of this is the famous burning
mountain called Meer Appi, which formerly sent forth burning lava as
far as this place, where the print of a human foot and hand, probably
of some unfortunate fugitive, whose faltering step was arrested by the
torrent, is seen to this day in the broad and now flinty tract. The ascent
up this mountain is extremely steep and fatiguing ; but when the tra-
veller reaches the summit, he forgets his toil in the contemplation of
a sublime prospect.
By the light of the moon we had been enabled to gain a considerable
height before the dawn of the morning, and the sun on his rising ap-
peared through the gray mist which enveloped the objects below us,
like an immense fiery balloon.
When we arrived at the summit of the mountain, the crater presented
to our astonished sight a tremendous abyss, the depth of which cannot
be perceived for the smoke, which is continually issuing from below.
This frightful gulph we contemplated by leaning, at great hazard to
our safety, over a vitreous and sulphuric substance which overhangs the
precipice, but the danger was sufficiently evident from the numerous


Plate XXIV.
Fort Salatiga.




fissures that presented themselves all around us. Vast pieces of the
superincumbent mass had been recently detached from the edge of
the crater, and precipitated into the depth below.
The mountain seems split to its foundation, and the central gulph,
formed by explosion, gives it the appearance of three separate moun-
tains. The crater still bursts forth after heavy rains, and the bed,
through which the lava made its way, exhibits a rough surface, like
the undulating waves of a stormy sea. On turning from this height to
view the vast expanse below, the habitations of men and all other objects
are lost in one undistinguishing mass ; and even the solitary mounts of
Cheribon, Taggal, &c. appear like insular rocks rising from the bosom
of the ocean, enveloped in clouds.
The gardens of the town of Selo, situated at the foot of this moun-
tain, produce most kinds of European fruits and vegetables ; while a
small Dutch farm affords good lodging, and comfortable refreshment
after a fatiguing excursion. Here, during the night, and till the sun
has risen considerably above the horizon, the cold is so intense, that a
blazing fire is very desirable, though the place is but seven degrees from
the equator. The whole of this part of Java is delightfully fertile, and
even the summits of the highest mountains are in a state of cultivation.
Wheat and barley thrive remarkably well here ; and the population
appears to be very great all over the country.
The road continuing on to Carta Soura, divides at that place in the
direction of the two Native Courts. This was formerly a princioal link
in the chain of forts from Samarang, by which the Dutch were enabled


to keep open a communication with either of these courts, and to con*
troul both, by supporting the one against the other according to
convenience. Any union of the natives against the Dutch, was care-
fully guarded against by the Residents at the two Courts, and pre-
vented by the subtle artifice of fomenting jealousies and aggravating
existing dissensions.
The forts in this chain of posts, which extend within half-gun shot
of the Crattan, or residence of each of these two principal Courts, are
nearly similar; being well built, of a square form, with four bastions,
mounting from six to eight guns in each, and surrounded by a wet
ditch, with draw-bridges. They have in each commodious barracks,
both for officers and soldiers, with arsenals and powder magazines;
but, of the latter, few in the Island are bomb-proof. The forts are
mostly covered with shingles, for which this reason is assigned, that
the powder is less liable to spoil under them than under vaulted roofs,
which are supposed to retain too great a dampness in this country;
but this opinion appears to be erroneous, as the powder in the magazine
of Fort Klattan, the only one that is bomb-proof, Joses nothing of its
quality. There is, however, great danger in the ordinary practice of
covering these magazines with shingles, for the want of secure roofs
was strikingly instanced in the late bombardment of Djoejocarfa;
when the spreading conflagration round our fort threw such a quantity
of burning embers on the roof of the powder magazine, as threatened
the most dreadful consequences, and an explosion was only prevented
by the great quantity of water which was poured upon the building.
Some of those forts which are the farthest from the two Crattans, have


only demi-bastions, and are placed in such situations as to be com-
manded by the surrounding heights. They form, nevertheless, safe
depots, and are sufficiently secure from a coup-de-main. The one at
Carta Souro was taken, and razed to the ground by the Chinese and
the Emperor’s troops, in 1741; and the neighbouring plain, extending
to the borders of a large lake near this, was afterwards, in Yah
Imhoff’s time, the scene of dreadful slaughter, when 20,000 Chinese
are said to have perished. It was lately the favourite retreat of
robbers, who, concealing themselves here, took advantage of the
momentary troubles at Djoejocarta, in committing dreadful outrages,
and they generally sealed the crime of plunder with the blood of
their victim.
Proceeding south-east, the road conducts to Solo, or Soura-Carta;
the capital and residence of the Soosoohoonan, or Emperor. This is a
very large and populous town, intersected with broad and shaded
avenues, or streets, running at right angles. The Crattan, where the
Emperor resides with his Court, is very spacious, and comprizes several
palaces in its area. The other chiefs and nobility live in villas, sur-
rounded by high walls, interspersed through the town and neighbour-
hood. The European town and fort are very neat. The latter, which
is not above eight hundred yards from the Crattan, contains a British
garrison ; and close to it is the Resident’s house, which is a large and
very handsome building.
The Emperor, or Soosoohoonan, is said to be of Arabian descent,
and the same may be said of all the native Princes, from their
affinity to each other; such as the three principal courts of Soura-
-2 p


Carta, Djoejocarta, and Bantam ; though now they are completely
Javanese.
The Emperor, who is about fifty years of age, is courteous in his
manners; and in his visits to the British resident, he is generally
accompanied by his favourite wife. There is little pomp observable
in his Court, and his troops, though numerous, are mostly of a
motley description ; but one regiment in his service of mounted carabi-
neers, makes a tolerable appearance.
A fine river which flows near this town, and, passing through the
dominions of the Sultan and Emperor, falls into- the harbour of
Gressie, affords, in the rainy season, a ready conveyance for the
various productions of a large tract of country, in exchange for commo-
dities which are sent up in boats from the coast.
Returning to Carta-Souro, the south-west road conducts past
Pakkies to Klattan, another of our forts, in which is a small garrison ;
and, continuing by Prambanon, which was laid in ashes by the
Sultan’s banditti, during the attack at Djoejocarta, it leads over several
difficult passes for carriages, to the capital of the Sultan of Mataram.
The name of Djoejocarta will ever bring to mind the heroism of
British soldiers, displayed in the attack and capture of a strong line
of fortifications, under very disadvantageous circumstances. Already
had multitudes of armed men cut off the communication with Sarna-
rang, and both the Emperor’s and Sultan’s troops, in countless num-
bers, were prepared to fall on our rear; but the energy of General
Gillespie frustrated at one blow these designs, by the successful assault
on Djoejocarta. Our most implacable foe was thus hurled from his
thron#, and the hostile confederacy was dissolved. The loss of several


valuable provinces, and the destruction of the defences of the Grattan,
on the north side, facing our fort, with the removal of the best part of
the ordnance, completely reduced the power of the Sultan of Mataram,
and prevent him from again committing any acts of aggression.
Among other acquisitions, the rich Province of Codoe has been ceded
to the British, the annual territorial revenue of which amounts to
nearly 600,000 rupees; besides some other districts, containing the
most valuable forests of teak in the Emperor and Sultan’s dominions ;
and, to ensure a continuance of tranquillity, a third power has been set
up, in the person of Prince Nunga de Suma, brother of the Ex-Sultan,
who had thrown himself on our protection at the commencement of
hostilities, and has obtained considerable estates out of the Emperor’s
and Sultan’s cessions. Thus the once powerful empire of Mata-
ram, formerly possessed entire by the Soosoohoonan, is now divided
among three Princes; and the long meditated attempt of the native
chiefs to overturn the European Government in Java, has ended in
the full and complete supremacy of the latter over the whole Island ;
thus promising a general termination of those violent commotions
which formerly proved so destructive to all the inhabitants, who have
now a fair prospect of enjoying permanent peace and prosperity.
The present Sultan of Djoejocarta, who is about forty years of age,
is tall and stout, but without having any thing prepossessing or dignified
in his manners. The interior of the Crattan is filled with palaces, the
most remarkable of which is an ancient edifice in the midst of a large
lake. The only entrance to this building is by a subaqueous passage, of
which nothing more is seen above the water, except the tops of some
detached turrets with windows, by means of which light is communi-
-2 p 2


cated to the vaults below. This extraordinary covert-way is very long 1
and spacious, and, thus concealed, connects the insular Chateau with
some pleasant little gardens, fountains* &c. on the opposite land, for-
merly composing a seraglio, but which had of late been converted into
a foundery and arsenal. The water-palace is a singularly antique struc-
ture with numerous apartments, which communicate with each other
in so intricate a manner as to bewilder a person, and a stranger would
stand in need of the friendly help of another Ariadne to extricate him
from this curious labyrinth.
The walls, though exceedingly thick, are now cracked in many
places, and this extraordinary edifice is falling fast to decay. The lake
is of considerable depth, and extends across the whole breadth of the
Crattan, which is about three-quarters of a mile, and in the opposite
bason it has another curious building not yet finished, resembling a
citadel oi towei which surmounts the highest trees, and has a prospect
of the whole country round. On the Platte-terre are ramparts defended
with small bastions, bordering the lake. As no access appears above
giound, it is probable that another subaqueous passage communicates
here with the insular castle ; an extensive bamboo scaffolding, on which
the labourers carried their materials, raised in a shelving manner across
the broad lake, conducted us nearly to the top of the tower, which in
appearance recalled to mind what fancy had often figured of the Tow er
Babel.
The whole of the interior area of the Crattan is intersected with high
walls, enclosing palaces and numerous court-yards. The palace in
which the Sultan actually resides, has nothing in it very magnificent,
ilie audience-hall and other places of public resort, are simply


Plate XXV.
Water Palace at Djoejo Carta.




spacious Platte-terres, surmounted with a roof ornamented within,
and supported by numerous and variously decorated colonnades.
In the private apartments, which have nothing extraordinary in
their construction and furniture, a guard of Amazons is always in
attendance, particularly at night, when every man is excluded from
the palace and the immediate neighbourhood. These heroines are
armed with spears, and are agile horsewomen. They are trained to a
domestic, as well as to a military life, and for the most part are the
daughters of petty chieftains, in the service of, or dependant on, the
Sultan. Their number, at the time of the late capture, was computed
at about three hundred.
The population, contained within the walls of the Crattan, is very
considerable ; and besides being the constant abode of the Princes and
families belonging to the Court, it also forms the temporary residence
of the principal Pangerangs and nobles, who are vassals of the Court,
and obliged to reside there themselves for two or more months in the
year, or to give domestic pledges of their fidelity to the Monarch.
At the grand entrance on the North side, is an extensive square,
where exhibitions of wild beasts, fights, and various tournaments, are
often practised. The amusement of a buffalo and tiger fight is very
general throughout Java : the animals are shut up in a large circular
court, enclosed with strong bamboos, and covered in at the top, where
men are placed to goad on the combatants. The buffalo is usually
the victor, and the tiger is killed almost instantaneously. Another fa-
vourite amusement is, to form a circle of three or four ranks of men,
armed with pikes, around a tiger, who is turned out ot a cage, which is
generally obliged to beset on fire, when the animal, after fiercely taking


several rounds, makes a spring, and is caught on the pikes, stretched
out to receive him, and is soon dispatched.
A very handsome mosque, and numerous villas, belonging to the
Sultan and other Native Chiefs, are dispersed through the surrounding
country. The house of our Resident is large and commodious ; and
the fort, in which is a British garrison, is in good repair, and con-
tains very good quarters for the troops. In the European town, which
has some very good houses, reside several Dutch families, who ar§
chiefly pensioners, and prefer living here, like those at Solo, on account
of the cheapness of provisions, and the salubrity of the climate.
From Djoejocarta to the south coast is about eighteen miles, and the
roads tolerably good as far as Krattock, a large village, near which we
crossed the broad and deep river of Allantjiengan, which four miles
from hence falls into the South Sea. Having been hospitably enter-
tained here, at the house of a Chinese farmer, or collector of customs,
we proceeded to
Spolonk, where the great South Sea arrested our progress in this
direction ; and at a considerable distance from the beach, our tract led
over high sand-hills, thrown up by the waves, on the flat shore in the
neighbourhood ; while on most other parts of this great line of coast,
stupendous cliffs oppose the roaring surf, and render the shore in many
places inaccessible. Unlike the north coast of Java, which affords a
facility for landing throughout its whole line, that of the south, from
the great violence of the surf always beating on it, and iron-bound by
steep cliffs, has very few places where vessels can take shelter, or where
any expedition could be prudently disembarked. There are no Euro-


pean settlements along the south coast; but the Bay of Pagitan, south-
east of Solo, was intended to have been fortified in the time of General
Daendels. This bay is in the form of a horse-shoe, and from its neigh-
bourhood to the two capitals, and the principal native courts, it
appears well adapted for the accommodation of shipping. In general,
the Bays nearly midway between Bally Strait and Java Head, ap-
pear to be the safest on this coast, but they are seldom visited.
Of the districts that run along this coast very little is known ; but the
parts which we visited appeared to be very fertile, and the green hillocks
dispersed in this neighbourhood give a pleasing and romantic aspect
to the surrounding scenery. The country had lately been much in-
fested by banditti, and the frightened cottagers were still keeping
themselves and their little property concealed in the cavities of rocks
and hills. Only the night before our arrival, the village of Spolonk
had been the scene of plunder ; but the chiefs of the band being taken
the following day by our small escort, the peaceable villagers returned
to their habitations.
Near this is shewn a cave, celebrated as the retreat of a Prince ot
Mataram, who for many years had eluded all his pursuers. Close to
the beach are several bungaloes, appropriated to the Sultan, or persons
of his family, who sometimes repair hither for the advantage of bathing
in the sea. Adjoining is a beautiful grotto, formed by the petrefaction
of the trunks, roots, and lower branches of a small grove, through
which runs a crystalline stream, which falling from a height, like a sun-
beamy shower, into the midst of the variegated substances, exhibits a
most brilliant spectacle, and the imagination delights in exercising its
powers on the various figures around, which bear a resemblance to


numerous objects in animated nature. Near this petrifying spring is a
small temple, embosomed among the trees, which gives an air of sanc-
tity to the place, and serves to increase the pleasing melancholy excited
by the calm tranquillity and romantic beauty of the charming scene.
A few hundred yards west, on the beach, are hot mineral springs, close
down to the water’s edge. These springs, which are nearly inclosed
and covered in, have a strong sulphureous smell, and one of them is
122 degrees of Fahrenheit.
CONTINUATION OF THE EASTERN ROUTE.
Continuing from Samarang to the eastward, the road conducts across
the river Torabaya, through a flat country, with numerous rice fields,
villages, and topes of cocoa-nut trees, to
Damack, which is a large populous town, and was formerly the
capital of a kingdom of that name. In the neighbourhood is a consi-
derable tract of marshy land, which continues many miles, and is suc-
ceeded by a level plain, spreading to a considerable distance, and
exhibiting signs of great fertility. A fine canal, navigable to the dis-
tance of twenty miles from Samarang, runs along the left side of the
road, and terminates in the river Tanganamis, which is also navi-
gable for small vessels. Beyond it a road leads off on the right to
Oonorang by Serondole. The country here is intersected by numerous
canals and rivulets, which cross the road, and after passing through


Plate XXVI.
Fort Damack.


Plate XXVII.
Fort Japara




Plate XXVIII.
Fort Joana


Codoes and Patti, two very considerable towns, and each the seat of a
De Patti; the road conducts to Joanna, situated on the east side of the
promontory of Japara.
Japara, is a place of great antiquity as a commercial mart of the
Europeans; and was among the first of the Dutch establishments in
the eastern seas. The town and fort are on the west side of the Penin-
sula, having contiguous to it some islets and rocks, with four or five
fathoms of water.
The Chinese inhabitants are very numerous at Japara, where they
have a temple similar to that at Anjole, near Batavia, and a few other
places in the island.
There are many small isles and rocks scattered along the shore of
the bay to the eastward. On the south west part of this bay stands
Joanna, which is a pleasant spot, and far from being unhealthy.
The fort and town are a few miles up the country, on a fine river,
which is navigable to vessels of considerable burthen, and has a rapid
current. The fort is in good repair, and a very excellent tavern close
to the river offers the best accommodation to travellers. Several
European families also continue to make this place their residence.
The territorial revenue under the new system of Japara and Joanna,
is stated at 342,902 rupees for the last year.
The river is crossed at this place, on a floating raft or bridge, fixed
upon boats, and after passing through rather a swampy country at
first, the road soon enters on fine culture again, and conducts to
2 Q
390 miles
from Batavia
by Kodoos.
396 miles
from Batavia.


Rembang, situated near the east part of the bay, formed by the
Japara promontory. The Dutch used to build here their principal
craft and gun-boats for the protection of the coast; and they also
maintained a considerable garrison on this station.
The fort is situated close to the sea, which washes its walls. The
town, which is large and populous, has a number of very good houses;
it appears to be a cheerful and very pleasant residence, being healthy
and abundantly supplied, owing to its advantageous situation for trade,
as well by land as by water. A considerable quantity of sea salt is
manufactured in the neighbourhood, and exported from hence to dif-
ferent parts of the island, and other places. The territorial revenue of
Rembang, is stated at 256,092 rupees. The principal district of this
residency is set apart for the forest department. A road runs from
Rembang to Solo, through a high and open country. Nine miles
farther on the road passes through
Lassam, a considerable trading village, situated at the eastern angle
of the bay, on which Rembang and Joanna are seated, and opposite
to all of which, vessels anchor in three or four fathoms among the
shoals.
Lassam is the residence of the De Patti, and has the advantage of a
fine navigable river, which runs through the town. The road from
hence lies partly over low hills, skirting the sea; and the country is
bold and irregular. Near Sarang, which is eighteen miles from Lassam,
are swampy and waste-lands; but in advancing to Toubang, the neigh-
bouring country is soon overspread with extensive jungle.


Plate XXIX.
Fort Rambang.




Toubang, the seat of a De Patti, has an ancient mosque, and is a
large and very populous town. About fourteen miles further on the
road crosses a fine river. Extensive forests of teak from hence stretch
over these rocky and hilly tracts, to the neighbourhood of Zedayo;
on a near approach to which the land becomes level and extensively
cultivated.
Zedayo, is a town of considerable importance, being situated at the
entrance of the harbour of Gressie ; and the coast may be approached
with safety from the eastern point of the bay that forms Lassam Road
to the entrance of the strait of Madura. Zedayo is also the seat of a
De Patti ; and the present chief holding that office is a man of very
superior talents, conversing pertinently with us, both on ancient and
modern history, and displaying correct notions of universal geography ;
an extent of knowledge rarely met with in a native of these regions.
All the De Patties are remarkable for their hospitality. They live in
great splendour, their mansions having the pomp of Asiatic courts ;
and though not educated in the school of European manners, they are
far from being deficient in politeness. A striking instance of liberality,
indeed, occurred in our route, for the De Patti of Toubang, who was
travelling in an opposite direction, happening to meet us just as our
carriage broke down in the midst of a dreary jungle, and far distant
from any town or village, immediately alighted, and in the most
courteous manner insisted on our acceptance of his own vehicle to
proceed on our journey, though in so doing it was probable that he
would have to pass all night in the wilderness, before another convey-
ance could be procured.
2 Q 2


A short distance from Zedayo, the river Sambaya, or Solo river, is
crossed by a ferry, and the passage defended by a strong battery. This
river, the largest in Java, is navigable, in the rainy season* as far as
the residence of the Soosoohoonan, or Emperor of Solo; and it
appears, from a recent survey, made by Captain Colebrooke, of the
Royal Artillery, that the impediments which obstruct its passage in
the dry season, might be removed without much labour or expense,
thus facilitating our commercial intercourse with the interior of that
fertile and populous country.
From Solo river, the country is almost an entire swamp, and covered
with low jungle, intersected with numerous salt-water creeks and
canals. At Banur, nine miles from Zedayo, the road crosses the river
Maniar, over a bridge; the land then rises to the right, and is well
cultivated ; while, to the left of the road, salt-pans, which are very
productive, extend as far as the town of Gressie. Siloar river, ten
miles further, is crossed by a ferry; the battery for the defence of
which passage is advantageously situated. The country now gradually
brightens, and the road enters on the fertile and pleasing plains that
environ Sourabaya; which is a large town, with a numerous popula-
tion, European, Chinese, Malayan, and Javanese.
Sourabaya, in latitude 7 degrees 14~ minutes S., and in longitude
112 degrees 55 minutes E., is situated on a fine river, which allows
vessels of considerable burthen to come up to the town. The river once
emptied itself into a marsh close to the town, but of late years a bank,
nearly a mile in length, on which is a path-way for tracking boats,
confines its course, and greatly adds to the depth and the current.
The mouth is defended by Fort Calamaas, a circular battery, mounting


forty guns, placed on a rising spot, on the east side of the river. This
battery has a commanding sweep across the strait of Madura, which is
narrowest here, being opposite to the S. W. end of the Island of that
name. It was intended, under the Dutch Government, to have
erected Sourabaya into a port of consequence, for their trade to the
eastward of Java; and with this view General Daendels expended
large sums in the construction of works for the defence of the harbour.
The eastern entrance into the straits of Madura, being impassable for
very large ships, the batteries there were only just begun, and are still
incomplete; but the north-western entrance is defended by Fort
Ludowyk, which is distant from Gressie about six, and from Point
Panka five miles, and is situated immediately on the narrow winding
channel by which alone large ships can enter. It presents, low on the
water, a very formidable battery, of a hundred pieces of the finest
ordnance, mounted on traversing carriages, besides some heavy
mortars.
The insular fort stands at the extremity of a mud-bank, which
projects into the channel about 1400 yards from the Island of Manarie ;
but the bank is not visible even at low water. The foundation for the
fort was formed by sinking rocks, and raised to its present elevation by
means of stones and earth brought from the neighbouring land, and
kept in by large xhles of wood driven round. The approach is de-
fended by rows of strong piles driven into the bottom of the sea, at the
distance of sixty or seventy feet from the ramparts, and forming a
close palisade all round, which prevents the passage of boats, and
effectually guards against a coup-de-main, or escalade.
The barracks, which are built of bamboo, plaistered over and white-


washed, may lodge eight hundred men. The ordnance stores however
are greatly exposed, having no bomb-proof magazines, and the water
required for the garrison is brought from Sonrabaya, nearly twenty
miles distant, by means of floating tanks, which, being often delayed
by contrary winds in the Western monsoon, the garrison is sometimes
put to great distress. General Daendels intended to have connected
fort Lndowyk with the island of Manarie by a causeway, which was to
have been erected on the intermediate ocean, by a similar expense and
labour that had been employed in the construction of the fort. The
principal depot for the garrison was to have been established on
Manarie, and difficult as the undertaking might have been, the
marshal felt the importance of this post so much, as affording an effec-
tual security against the attacks of our navy, especially after the de-
struction of the Dutch shipping in the harbour of Gressie by Sir Edward
Eellew in 1806, that he resolved to spare no efforts in rendering this
passage impenetrable by an enemy, and thus making the straits of
Madura the grand port and naval depot of his nation in the East.
The anchorage for large ships is off the town of Gressie, till within
one mile to the North-west of the mouth of the Calimas river, which
runs through Sourabaya; but vessels going to that place require pilots
to carry them through the straits.
Gressie, in latitude 7 degrees 9 minutes South, is not near so con-
siderable a place now that it was formerly. The town has compara-
tively but few European inhabitants, but the native population and
the Chinese settlers are still numerous. The saltpetre-works here are
extensive, and the establishment for its manufacture is very com-
plete ; but the want of good water, and the general unhealthiness of


Plate XXX.
Gressie.


Plate XXXI.
Sourabaya River.


Oressie may be considered, in a great measure, one of the causes of
its present decline.
In proportion as this place has fallen into decay, the new town of
Sourabaya has risen rapidly in population and prosperity; and the im-
provement which it has experienced within these few years is astonish-
ing. A fine arsenal, and other extensive works calculated for equip-
ments on a very large scale, were formed by General Daendels at this
place. Here guns are cast, and carriages of all descriptions constructed.
Vessels also, with their various appointments, are built and equipped at
Sourabaya, in the neighbourhood of which are considerable forests,
from whence plenty of timber is easily procured, which is floated down
the river Calimas, that takes its rise, as it is said, from a large inland
lake encircled with high mountains. A mint is likewise at work here>
on a new silver and copper coinage.
The new Government-house at Sourabaya, begun by Daendels, was
designed to be a splendid edifice, and like that of Weltervreeden, was
to have contained the various public offices collectively, instead of
being scattered as hitherto, all over a sickly town ; but the foundation
of the front range having sunk, and endangered the building, it has
been abandoned, and that part which continues firm has been con-
verted into store-rooms.
The river separates the European part of the town from that of the
Chinese and the native quarter. A fine bridge, with' draw-chains to
raise it up for the passage of vessels, connects the European town with
that of the natives.
The houses are very good, and some are elegant, particularly the
newly-erected country-seats of private individuals. The house at Sim-


pang, where the British resident resides, is a fine large building, close
to the river ; and near to it the general hospital is an attracting object.
This structure is about two miles from the town, situated on the
banks of the river, and for elegance, extent and commodiousness, has
scarcely its equal.
The roads and avenues round Sourabaya are delightful. The ground
is rather low, being chiefly cultivated with rice, interspersed with nu-
merous topes of cocoa-nut and other fruit-trees. The country about
Sourabaya is considered much healthier than most other parts of the
sea-coast; and the district throughout is exceedingly populous, and
highly productive. De Noyo cantonment, which is the present quarter
of the military in the Eastern division, is about four miles from Soura-
baya, and close to the river. The low situation however, and neigh-
bouring jungle, make it very unhealthy, and in the rains it is altogether
uninhabitable, as at that season, the river frequently overflows its banks,
and totally inundates the cantonment. Higher grounds rising in form
of a crescent, eight or ten miles from Sourabaya, appear to ofler much
better situations for a military quarter than De Noyo, particularly on
the side of the river, six miles South of that place.
The land-rentdl of Sourabaya exceeds that of any of the other dis-
tricts. Without reckoning the assessment of lands provisionally assigned
to Native Chiefs, to the amount of 72,302 rupees, the landed reve-
nue under the new system is stated at 667,178 rupees, salt at 50,000 ;
opium 100,000; and town customs 50,000, which gives a total for
Sourabaya of 867,178 rupees.
Continuing on to the eastward, the road leads through an agreeable




Plate XXXII.
Passarouang.


country, diversified with rising grounds and vallies, well cultivated
and populous, to
Passarouang, a small European town and fort, situated on a fine
river, which is navigable for brigs of considerable burden. It is a de-
lightful place, with a very healthy climate, and its native population
numerous; but the European inhabitants are few, being chiefly old
pensioners and half-cast families. The Resident’s house, and several
other buildings here, are very handsome.
Probolingo, twenty-four miles farther east, is the capital of a pro-
vince of that name, which was lately the property of a Chinese indivi-
dual, who purchased it from the former Government, for ten millions of
rix dollars, payable by instalments. The lands, which measure about
forty miles in length and breadth, were at that time mostly waste ; but
so rapid were its improvements, and so productive its soil, when private
interest was concerned in its advancement, that ten years cleared the
purchase; in consequence of which, it has now become one of the
richest provinces of Java, and is very populous.
The China Major, which was the name given to the proprietor of
Probolingo, lived here in great splendour, with every enjoyment that
riches could afford, when, in one hour, and while engaged in the exer-
cise of humanity, he was unfortunately cut off in a most tragical
manner, having, for the companions of his fate, two very valuable
British officers.
The XBth June, 1813, was the fatal day on which this atrocious act
was perpetrated, A small party, consisting of Lieutenant-Colonel
2 R


and Mrs. Fraser; Captains M‘Pherson and Cameron, and Lieutenants
Robertson and Cameron, of the seventy-eighth Regiment, had re-
paired to Probolingo for the benefit of their health ; the climate of that
country being esteemed very salubrious. On the afternoon of that
day, a report came that a banditti had descended from the mountains,
and were close to the town ; upon which, the China Major proceeded in
his carriage, with Colonel Fraser, accompanied by the other officers of
the party, to meet them; imagining that they were merely a set of
robbers, who might be easily dispersed. But the chief of the insur-
gents, seeing them approach, concealed his men among the bushes,
till, at a signal, they suddenly rushed out on our officers, who, finding
themselves abandoned by their native followers, and in danger of
being surrounded, after several ineffectual discharges from their
pistols and fowling-pieces, now tried to make their escape back to the
town ; but, exhausted with fatigue, Colonel Fraser fell down, when
attempting to step into the carriage, and Captain M c Pherson also,
through the weak state of his health, being easily overtaken, they
were seized and bound by the insurgents, and, with the China Major,
were all basely murdered. The other officers succeeded in regaining
the house ; and, after vain efforts on the part of Captain Cameron, to
rouse the Chinese and the tenants to defend the China Major’s house,
which, being enclosed, held out to him the hope of making a stand;
and thereby of gaining an opportunity to sally out for the rescue of his
unfortunate countrymen, of whose fate he was still ignorant, he found;
to his great grief, the place gradually deserted during the night;
Despairing, therefore, of doing any thing for his unhappy friends, he
turned his attention to the agonized Mrs. Fraser, and, getting into a


boat with the sad remaining* few of the party, hurried off, and stood
out to sea. They had just left the shore when the murderous banditti
appeared in sight, rending the air with their horrid shouts.
Thus oppressed with feelings, the bitter pangs of which may be easier
felt than described, was the disconsolate Mrs. Fraser exposed to the
burning sun all day, in an open boat, and on the wide ocean, till she
at last reached Passarouang, with her afflicted companions.
No sooner did the intelligence of this sad catastrophe reach Soura-
baya, than Major Forbes, with a party of the 78th Regiment, set out
on horses borrowed from the officers and other individuals, on which he
mounted his soldiers, to expedite their march, and rapidly pushed
forward to stem the rising torrent. On his arrival at Passarouang, the
Major was joined by Captain Cameron and his surviving friends; and,
on the 21st of June, they fell in with the insurgents, who had already
increased to many thousands, supported by guns, and in full march to
the above place, which they threatened to destroy. After forcing their
advanced position, Major Forbes continued to press forward, and at
last came upon the main body, drawn up across the high-road, about
midway between the two towns, and commanded by their chieftain,
who boldly advanced to the attack with colours flying ; which flag
being yellow, the standard of the Soosoohoonan, gave rise to a sus-
picion that the Emperor of Solo must have been a party concerned in
this revolt.
The bold advance of the enemy rendering every precaution necessary
on the part of Major Forbes, in his disposition for repelling such a
furious multitude, the detachment was drawn up on the sides of the
road, in such a manner as to bring a cross-fire on the main body of the
2 R 2


rebels, while, on the road towards the rear, were stationed some
Djyang Secars, provincial horsemen, armed with swords and pistols,
and a party of irregulars from Passarouang. Thus prepared, Major
Forbes waited the attack; and when the rebels were within a few
yards, a well-directed fire brought down numbers of them to the
ground; but the Chief, furiously irritated, at the head of a more
desperate party, rushed on; and, though wounded in four places, he
passed through our fire to the rear, where he was secured, and
breathed his last. Many others died in the same manner; and about
150 were left dead on the field. The rest fled, and their guns were
taken.
The bodies of Colonel Fraser and Captain M‘Pherson were found
tied up in sacks, that of the latter was much mangled, and pierced
quite through with a number of wounds. Besides the one who fell,
several other chiefs had been discovered, and steps were taken to ex-
tend an enquiry into the cause of this rebellion.
Probolingo was completely ransacked by the insurgents. The chief,
who was slain had proclaimed himself the Vicegerent of Mahomet,
and published that he was ordained to make conquests in the name
of that prophet. Melancholy as this catastrophe was to some most me-
ritorious individuals, their fate may perhaps be considered as having
proved the means of saving the inhabitants of Sourabaya, and of the
eastern districts of Java, who were, by the measures immediately
adopted, and the bravery displayed, rescued from a general massacre.
The Chinese, in consequence of their exactions, had always been
objects of hatred on the part of the Javanese, and the disturbance in
this province necessarily led to a change in its administration. Since


that occurrence, a new settlement of the land revenue has been intro-
duced, upon such principles as were considered to be best suited to the
circumstances of the country and inhabitants at that particular period.
The deceased renter’s family received a compensation, whilst, at the
same time, the cultivators were relieved from the accumulation of no-
minal arrears and alledged debts, which it had been the policy of the
landholder to keep hanging over them, and was a perpetual source of
oppression and abuses in the administration.
The newly-regulated territorial revenue of these districts, ofPassa-
rouang, Probolingo, including Poagar and Banyowangy, are stated
for the year 1814, at 1,246,000 rupees.
After passing through Besoekie, a considerable town, and Pana-
roekan, where is a small fort, the ramparts of which are cased with
bamboos, we arrived at the river Kalatigas, where the carriage road
terminates. The fine military road from Batavia to thi6 place, mea-
suring six hundred and eighty-four English miles, has scarcely its
equal in any part of the world. From hence, we pursued our journey
on horseback, for about fifty miles, through a hilly country, covered
with jungle and wood, chiefly teak ; and after passing the night in the
forest, at the small village of Sambrawary, and the next day passing
through another, Bajuramaty, the only two villages in this long tract,
we arrived about noon at Banjowangy.
The scene of wilderness, and the danger of being devoured by tigers,
or assailed by robbers, certainly made this no very safe ride for only two
persons, unattended by servants, except one Malay boy, or guard
of any kind. The mode of travelling, usually pursued through
these wilds, is by Caravans, the better to secure mutual protection.


Having passed this dreary solitude, the deadly silence of which was
occasionally interrupted by the loud roar of the tiger, or the cry of
some other wild beast; we, on a sudden, emerged from this dark pas-
sage, and experienced the most delightful sensations, in being freed
fiom a state of gloomy apprehension, to the enjoyment of the cheerful
contrast afforded by the prospect of the beautiful Straits of Baly.
Banyowangy, situated in the Straits of Baly, and in lat. 8 degrees
7 minutes, is a place of some consequence as a military post: an effi-
cient garrison being requisite here, to prevent the depredations of
pirates, who frequent these parts, being sheltered by the creeks on the
Baly shore, where they generally lurk for their prey.
The town has a numerous population of natives, and a few Dutch
half-cast families. The fort is on the banks of a river, which washes
its walls on the side fronting the sea, and from which the river is sepa-
rated by only a narrow sand-bank, that terminates about half-a-mile
lower down, and uniting it there with the ocean. The country is very
fine, extremely well cultivated, and the climate healthy. The cattle
procured here to supply the ships, are imported from the opposite
shores of Baly.
The north entrance of Baly Straits on the west and north-west side,
*s bounded by Cgpe Sandanah, the extreme of the high land that forms
the N. E., and of Java, in lat. 7 degrees 46 minutes south *. At
Banyowangy, where the Strait is narrowest; the entrance from the
southward is five or six leagues wide, and the view of the bold
* In the Dutch Charts, the given latitude is 7 deg. 52 min, S.


shores of Baly, and of the immense high mountains behind, is very
romantic.
Balambouang Bay, farther south, on the Java side, had a small
establishment formerly, for the convenience of ships touching there ;
but from its unhealthiness, it has been abandoned. In these Straits,
not far from Goonong Tkan, which is in long. 114 deg. 20 min. east,
and 8 deg. 22 min, south latitude, are the Deptford Rocks, which are
very dangerous.
The south-east point of Java, is in latitude 8 deg. 41 min. south, and
in longitude 114 deg. 25 min. east; Table Point, the southern extre-
mity of Baly Island, is in latitude 8 deg. 50 min. south. This forms
the eastern boundary of the south entrance of the Straits..
From Banyowangy, we sailed in his Majesty's sloop Baracouta, over
to Samanap, distant about one hundred miles. This is a large and
populous town, and the residence of a prince. It is situated on the
south-east side of Madura, on a fine bay, which though rather shallow,
will admit of large brigs or country prows, lying close up to the town.
This place carries on an extensive commerce; and the country
abounds in rice; and teak timber for building. Here the Dutch used
to build their largest ships for the country trade. Few European
Dutch settlers are now remaining here, but the half-cast population
is still considerable, and the number of native inhabitants is very
great. The bay is much frequented' by merchant vessels, which adds
greatly to its importance.
The fort is much out of repair, and its situation is badly chosen, s<x


that in fact, it is only of use as a depot. The British Resident’s house,
and a few others belonging to individuals, are fine buildings.
The old prince of Sainanap, worn out with age, has surrendered the
reins of government to his second son, who appears to be of a mild
disposition, and is greatly esteemed by the people. The heinous cha-
J t'-r
racter of the old Sovereign may be read in his countenance, which
is of a most diabolical cast. The Princes live separately, but their
courts shew little or no splendour.
Continuing from Sainanap through the interior of the island, the
next place of importance is Parmacassan, situated nearly in the centre
of the island, and the residence of the second son of the Sultan of
Madura, who attends to the administration of this part of the Sultan’s
dominions ; this prince is indeed a fine young man.
On our arrival at Bancallan, the residence of the Sultan of Madura,
we passed the night at his court, which, though not splendid, has
some degree of stile. The Sultan is a respectable old man, above
eighty years of age, of a cheerful temper, and much pleased with the
society of European visitors, whom he entertains very hospitably, and
sometimes in a sumptuous manner. Both he and his sons, from their
long connection with the Dutch, cast off all prejudices when they sit
down to partake of the pleasures of the table. His eldest son,
who appears to be a well-disposed young man, resides here also, but
separately from the father. He held the rank of Colonel in the Dutch
service, and the younger brother was an honorary Aid-de-Camp to
General Daendels, which mark of distinction flattered their youthful
vanity very much, and stimulated them to raise men themselves, or
use their influence in enlisting the Madurese into that service.


The town of Bancallan is large and populous. The fort is close to
the palace of the Sultan, and the environs are pleasant with good
roads, along which are interspersed pleasure-grounds and several
country-seats. The road which runs along the beach west of the town,
and opposite to fort Ludowyk, is particularly fine.
That from Sanap to Bancallan, alternately passing over hill and
dale, is also very good; the scenery is picturesque, and the country
throughout fertile and tolerably cultivated. The Madurese bear a
higher character than their neighbours, but the population throughout
the island appears in general to be very thin.
Kamal, directly opposite to Sourabaya, is distant about ten miles
from Bancallan, and the new road between these two places is very
beautiful. We crossed the Straits in the Sultan’s barge in two hours.
Of the islands belonging to Madura, the most considerable are
Gallion and Pondi. The former, which is very populous, and well
cultivated, is situated about twelve miles east of Madura, and abounds
in cattle; the latter is smaller, and is also well cultivated, and both
have a pleasant appearance.
The only remaining island worth noticing, as immediately apper-
taining to Java, is Carimon Java, which lies directly north of Sama-
rang, in about lat. 5 deg. 50 min. South, and long. 110 deg. 34 min.
East. It is a high island, with a hill in the centre ; and adjoining to it
are several small lands and rocks. The Dutch kept up a small esta-
blishment here under a resident, and an officer’s guard is still con-
tinued, to prevent pirate prows from visiting the place, which abounds
with deer; and ships anchoring here may procure both wood and
water.
2 s


THE EASTERN ARCHIPELAGO.
The position and extensive resources of Java, which has been justly*
denominated the mistress of the Dutch possessions in the East, cannot
fail to give a relative importance of corresponding magnitude to its
several dependencies. But the various commercial advantages pos-
sessed by the countries which constitute the Eastern Archipelago ;
and their immense productions, must at all times render these regions
an interesting object of inquiry to the statesman, the trader, and the
man of science, independent of other considerations. In the present
memoir, indeed, it is to be regretted, that much information cannot be
given adequate to the extent of the subject, and the numerous points
of inquiry which a minute and regular survey would embrace. The
numerous islands are here barely exhibited to view, as objects worthy
of consideration, from their relation to Java ; and as meriting particu-
lar research, from having been hitherto but little explored, and that
little still less accurately represented «•
The inhabitants of these isles are supplied from Java with rice, as
well as other articles of subsistence, and their safety depends so imme-
* In ascertaining the latitude and longitude of the several places here enumerated, the
recent and much approved “ Indian Directory” of Horsburgb,. compared with other
documents, appears to come nearest the truth. To the obliging communication of several
gentlemen, who having personally visited those islands, the writer is indebted for many
particulars. Those of the late armament against the Moluccas were extracted from
original documents, imparted by an Officer of the Royal Navy who was employed on
that service.


Plate XXXIII.
EASTERN ARCHIPELAGO.
Chart of the
BRITISH POSSESSIONS, DEPENDENCIES ON JAVA.




diately on that of the principal settlement, that, if the latter were in
possession of an enemy, Amboyna and Banda could not be retained
without the expense of an extensive military establishment. And the
same may be said of Macassar, Timor, and all the other establishments,
with their several dependencies, which the events of the war have
consigned to the British nation, and the garrisons of which are
supplied and maintained from Java.
The establishments to the westward of Java, on Sumatra, Banca,
&c. have been already mentioned, in the account of the Palembang
expedition. To the eastward, the colony farthest distant in the chain
of islands nearly in the same parallel of latitude as Java, and washed
by the great southern ocean, is Timor, an island which is about 240
miles in length, and from sixty to seventy miles in breadth. The
Dutch conquered it from the Portuguese, in 1613; who had established
themselves in various parts of the island ; and who still retain several
distinct establishments here, on the north-east side. But the principal
settlement on Timor, is Coupang, a considerable town built on the
south side of the Bay of that name, and defended by Fort Concordia,
where the Dutch have always maintained a large garrison. The Bay
is situated at the south-west end of the Island, and is very extensive.
Two safe passages lead into the Bay to the anchorage. The Island is
mountainous, and the south coast may be safely approached, within
a moderate distance, in most places. The Portuguese population is
very considerable. The Dutch, not satisfied with having driven the
early adventurers of that nation from all the Spice Islands, followed
them to this their last place of retreat; and though there was nothing
peculiarly inviting in the produce of the Island, yet, on account of its
2s 2


neighbourhood to the Moluccas, they established themselves in Fort
Concordia. The inhabitants now consist of a mixed body, made up of
half-casts, with the Chinese and native inhabitants. Coupang is a
populous town, conveniently situated for ships, which obtain here all
kinds of provisions, both cheap and in abundance; particularly buffa-
loes and poultry. Since its occupation by the British, this place has
been the general resort of our south-sea whalers, and vessels trading to.
Sydney, in New South Wales, and other places.
The flag-staff of Fort Concordia is in latitude 10 deg. 8-J min. S *
longitude 123 deg. 35 min. E.
The Portuguese settlements in Timor are Billy or Diely, and Batoo
Gady, situated on the North side of the island ; and abounding in hogs,
buffaloes, and vegetables.
In general the natives of Timor are much more hospitable and
friendly than the Northern Malays. The first island subject to Timor is
Semao, situated at the South-west end, and fronting Coupang bay. It
is of considerable extent, and moderately elevated. The channel,
which is navigable with deep water, affords secure shelter to ships,
during the strength of the Westerly monsoons.
Rotto island, to the South-west of Semao, is considerably larger, being
about forty miles in length.
Savu island is the smallest of the three, being no more than twenty
miles in length ; but it has the advantage of several bays. The chiefs
of all these islands, as well as of Kisser and Roma, lying to the North-
ward of Timor, are under the authority of the resident at Coupang.
Kisser has a town and fort, with a small bay on the Western side, in
latitude 8 deg. south, and long. 127 deg. 7 min. east. The principal


articles of trade are wax, sandal-wood, edible birds’-nests ; and, till
lately, a number of slaves might have been purchased at these isles,
but, thanks to the British Legislature, this inhuman traffic is now for-
bidden.
Separated by a passage of about twenty miles to the Westward from
Timor, lies Ombay or Mallooa island, which is about fifty miles in
length, and inhabited by a fierce and treacherous people, which ren-
ders it dangerous for ships to touch there.
Nearly in a straight line, between Ombay and the East of Java, lie
a number of islands of considerable extent, forming a chain of about
twelve degrees of longitude, and intersected by several straits. That
of Flores is formed by the Eastern part of the island of that name, and
the islands of Solor and Adenara, or Sabraon, in extent about twelve
leagues. The South entrance is in lat. 80 deg. 40 min. south, long. 123
deg. 3 min. east.
Flores, or Mangerye, is an extensive island, subject to the Sultan of
Beerna, who derives a considerable revenue from the quantity of birds*-
nests found here. Its length is upwards of 200 miles, and its breadth
in some parts from forty to fifty; but nothing is known of the interior.
Crossing Sapy strait, which has a number of little islands separating
it into small channels, that by causing rapid tides, makes it incon-
venient for ships, we reach
Sumbawa, extending nearly 200 miles in the parallel of nine degrees
south latitude. Near the North-east end, on a fine bay which stretches
seven or eight leagues South into the island, is situated the town of
Beema, where the Dutch had formed an establishment, by invitation
from the Sultan of that place, who, at some former period, applied to


■their Government at Macassar for aid to resist a threatened attack from
his neighbours at Tambora, which is another considerable town in
Sumbawa. This request was readily complied with, and a garrison
wa s sent to Beema, which place has continued ever since under the
Macassar government.
The sides of the harbour at the entrance are bold and high, and the
approach to it is safe ; but the passage through is sometimes attended
with inconvenience, from the strong current that generally prevails,
and the great depth of water ; as a hundred fathom line, though close
in shore, will hardly reach the bottom. When, therefore, ships cannot
pass through, they are obliged, for the want of anchorage, to return
to sea, and there wait for a more favourable wind. The batteries
erected on each side of the entrance, and opposite to one another, are
no longer capable of defence; and are, in fact, gone to ruin. The
channel, in some places, is only 150 or 200 yards across ; but there is
no danger whatever in the passage * ; and a ship of the line may sail
along either side within thirty yards of the rocky mountains. These
give a grand and picturesque appearance to the channel, which ter-
minates in a safe and commodious bason, presenting one of the finest
* The Dutch charts represent this passage as being extremely dangerous, full of shoals
and rocks. This, however, is the general character of their charts of these seas, which
are so extremely erroneous, stating dangers where none exist, to multiply the apparent
difficulties of access, and marking that as safe where a ship would inevitably meet with
destruction, as to make it appear less a mistake of ignorance than the effect of design.
This perversion of truth, however, is easily accounted for, by the base spirit of self-interest
and monopoly, which endeavoured as much as possible to prevent other European nations
from holding any intercourse with countries which, for two centuries, they have kept
exclusively under their own controul.


harbours in the world, both for capaciousness and security ; extending
a considerable way inland, and encompassed by lofty mountains. On
the east side of this bay stands the town of Beema. The landing here
is very unfavourable, owing’ to a mud-bank, which extends three-
quarters of a mile from the town. The Sultan of Beema is named
Abdul Ahmed ; and the population is computed to be eighty thousand.
Mr. Beth, the British Resident here, transacts the usual commercial
relations ; and the monopoly of the sappan wood, which continues to
be the exclusive privilege of the British Government, at one rix dollar
per picol. Besides that article, the island furnishes rice, horses, salt-
petre, sulphur, wax, birds’-nests, tobacco, &c., though there is but
little trade carried on now at this place. The island, however, has
means of great improvement, and would be highly productive, if the
inhabitants could be roused to exertion, and their labour turned to
industry and agriculture. The number of horses annually exported
under the appellation of Beema horses, is very considerable. The
finest of these are procured from the small island of Gonong Api*,
situated at the north-east end of Beema harbour, about three or tour
miles from Sumbawa Point, and forming the west side of the north
entrance of Sapy Straits. It is a large volcanic mountain, which termi-
nates in two high peaks, and the soil is astonishingly fertile. Another
* According to a superstitious tradition of the natives, the sea-horse is supposed to pay
a visit every five years to the mares of this place, who, after copulating with him in his own
element, return to their rich pasture, at the foot of the mountain, and bring forth the breed
which is so beautiful and valuable. The horses are small, and the prevailing colour of those
in the island is a jet black, though few of that description are to be seen among those
which are brought from hence.
319
"Brnm mnsrs.


volcanic mountain on the north coast of Sumbawa, is said to be re-
sponsive to that of Goonong Api; an explosion of the latter being
immediately answered by an irruption from the former; for which
reason the inhabitants of Goonong Api are looked upon with a su-
perstitious veneration by those of Sumbawa. The great depth of
water here makes it dangerous for vessels, except prows, to approach
the shore sufficiently near to find anchorage.
Ships may be plentifully supplied with refreshments, as buffaloes,
calves, sheep, fruit, and vegetables, both at Beema, and the town of
Sumbawa. This last place is situated on a large bay, open to the
north and north-west, and a good harbour stretches inland, between
the reefs at the west side of the entrance. Sumbawa is about 100 miles
to the westward of Beema, and is governed by a chief denominated a
.Rajah, whose name is Mahomed, but subject to the authority of the
Sultan. The other towns, or districts, are Dompoo, Tambora, Sangur,
and Pekat; all under their respective chiefs. Tambora is the place
mostly resorted to by the dealers in horses. Gold-dust is found on
Sumbawa, particularly in the district of Dompoo ; which also supplies
teak-timber, and is the best cultivated district in the Island. Pearls
are fished for in the large Bay, to the westward of Beema Bay, as also
at Pekat. Between the west coast of Sumbawa and the east coast of
Tombock, is Allas Strait, called Gilleesee by the natives, in extent
about forty-five miles. It is the safest and most convenient strait east
of Java, having soundings, whereby ships are enabled to anchor when
necessary, with moderate tides ; and the plantations and villages on
the coast of Lombock, which is low close to the sea, afford supplies
and refreshments.


Lombock Peak, in latitude 8 deg. 21 i min. south, long. 116 deg. 26
min. east, rises in a pyramidical form, to the height of about 8000 feet
above the level of the sea.
The inhabitants of Lombock are chiefly emigrants from Bally and
Sumbawa. They retain many Hindoo customs, particularly that of
burning their dead ; and the widow also, as in India, immolates herself
on the funeral pile of her husband.
Appenan, or Amppannan town, in Lombock, is situated on a large
Bay of that name, in the Straits of Lombock, nearly opposite to the
road of Carang Assem, and is very populous, as also is the level
country adjoining the Bay. The several small rivers which discharge
themselves into this Bay, make it very convenient for watering; and
supplies of bullocks, hogs, goats, poultry, and vegetables, may be
obtained here in abundance. Contiguous to this place is Mataran, the
residence of the Rajah of Lombock, who is tributary to the Saltan of
Baly.
Baly Island is very mountainous, but capable of great fertility and
cultivation. The coast rises gradually towards the interior, about ten
miles to the foot of a chain of mountains, which run across the island
from west to east, and are terminated on the east end by the Peak of
Baly. At the foot of this mountain, which is volcanic, and has a
crater, the town of Carang Assem is situated, in the midst of a rich and
populous district, which is well cultivated.
Carang Assem, which is the most considerable town, and the largest
district in Baly, is the only harbour or place of anchorage for ships.
But vessels may receive refreshments upon any part of the north coast,
where they may stand on and oflf during their communications with
2 t


the shore; and there are, indeed, no reefs, rocks, or other local dangers,
on any part of this coast. The next place of note is Boleeling. This
town is nearly screened from observation by the gardens, topes, and
rich cultivation, with which it is everywhere surrounded. It is the
residence of the Rajah Amy Boean Gidee Carang, who is said to be
a very pleasantand hospitable character. The name of another Rajah
is Moeda, whose martial exploits appear to have gained him some
celebrity among the people of Baly. These two, and the Rajah of
Lombock, are brothers.
It is remarkable that the title of Rajah, which in India is exclusively
confined to Hindoos, is in this instance adopted by Mussulmans, or at
least by Chiefs professing themselves of that faith. This is a circum-
stance which serves to prove that the Aborigines of all these islands
were Hindoos.
The Island of Baly is divided into eight districts, Car rang Assem ,
Boleeling , Taman Baly , Koolong Kong , Toeyanyer , Along oewie,
Tabana , and Badong , each under its own chief, and all independent
of one another. The district of Badong is that opposite Java. The
Dutch had formerly a small establishment at the capital, which has
since been evacuated. The refractory spirit of the Chieftains rendered
it expedient for the expedition under Major General Nightingale, to
touch at Baly, in April 1814; and their appearance happily averted
actual hostilities, by effecting the timely submission of the chiefs.
The Island produces rice in great abundance ; not only sufficient for
home consumption, but exportation to other settlements. Oil, tobacco,
and salt, are also produced here, but wood is entirely supplied from
Java. There are no forests in Baly ; teak is wholly unknown there.


Roads for horses are said to communicate throughout the island,
from one district to another ; and the population is stated at 100,000,
which, however, seems to be much below the real number.
The inhabitants are able-bodied men, and possessed of more industry
and application than the Malays, or Buggese. They appear to be
generally wealthy, and articles of European workmanship, woollen
cloths, &c. never fail to meet here with a ready sale.
Recruiting for the colonial service of Java and the eastern islands,
properly managed, is likely to succeed at this place; and, except the
Amboynese, the people of Baly seem to be the best adapted, among
the eastern tribes, for making good soldiers, from their ready subjection
to discipline.
The religion of these people partakes of the Hindoos. They burn
their dead, and the widow is frequently consumed with the body of the
husband ; a recent instance of which was witnessed, when the Hecate
touched at Boleeling, in a late cruize to the eastward, on occasion of
the death of a Rajah, with whose body were burnt his two wives. On
the other hand, they eat pork, which proves them not to be of the
bigotted Musselman faith; and beef, which makes them unlike the
prejudiced Hindoo. One of their deities is named Deewa.
The Chinese population is very considerable in Baly, particularly at
Boleeling. Opium, which, before the conquest of Java, used to be
brought to Boleeling by English traders, was thence smuggled into
Java, at an enormous profit; but, at present, the monopoly of this
article by our Government has excluded private persons from partici-
pating in so valuable a traffic.
Proceeding to the northward of Java, one of the largest, and
2 T 2


probably one of the richest islands in the world presents itself to the
view ; though little comparatively is known of its internal state or
productions, as hitherto all attempts to penetrate beyond the coast
have proved ineffectual ; nor has any friendly intercourse been
established with the jealous natives. This vast island is
Borneo, of which the kingdom of Lava, comprising the interior
of the Island, is only known by name ; and the people are called
Biajos; but of their civil institutions, language, and religion, nothing-
satisfactory can be ascertained ; while the coasts are inhabited by
tribes of savage Malays, Moors, and Buggese, who unite to a treache-
rous malignity the most brutal ferocity of manners; of which many
melancholy instances have occurred to unfortunate voyagers on these
shores.
The Portuguese, as early as the year 152 G, endeavoured to establish
themselves in Borneo, but they were, for the most part, murdered under
the appearance of friendship, in a time of profound peace.
About three or four thousand converts to Christianity, the labour
of the Portuguese missionaries, on the river Culjong Cajamp, were
also massacred about the year 1690, by order of the king of Banjir-
massin ; since which time Christianity has been entirely extinct in the
island. The Mahomedan religion prevails on the coast, and paganism
in the interior of the country.
The Dutch, in 1648, succeeded in forcing the king of Banjirmassin
to a treaty, by which he surrendered to them the exclusive pepper
trade, and in 1709 they erected fort Tatar. The Dutch also gained
possession of the commerce, with Landan and Succadana. The latter
town is situated in 1 deg. 30 min. south latitude, on the principal or


southern outlet of a very large river, which is navigable 150 miles up
for prows. This place is celebrated for the large diamonds found here,
as also the best camphor.
Banjirmassin still continues to be a dependency on Java, and Fort
Tatar is garrisoned by colonials, under the orders of the British resi-
dent. It is situated about four degrees to the Northward of the East
end of Java, on a tine river, and from its commerce and great popula-
tion, is a place of considerable importance. A great quantity of gold is
found in the mountains of the king of BanjirmassiiTs territories, and in
the sand of almost all the large rivers in Borneo. Iron, copper, and
tin are also found in this country; pepper grows in abundance, and
these articles, with the gum called dragon's-blood, camphor, and
sandal-wood, edible birds’-nests, benzoin, cambac-wood, eagle-wood,
canes, reeds, wax, with some cloves and nutmegs in the mountains,
constitute the principal productions of Borneo. Pearls are found on
the northern coast, and gold and diamonds enrich almost every part of
this extensive island. These are brought by the natives of the moun-
tains and the interior to the sea-ports, where they are exchanged with
various objects of merchandize. The articles which find the readiest
sale here are red agates, bracelets of copper, coral of all kinds, porce-
lain, rice, opium, salt, onions, sugar, linen, &c.; and this profitable
trade is carried on principally in Chinese junks.
The king of Banjirmassin usually resides at Cota Tengah, to the
westward of the river of Banjirmassin ; and a number of large rivers,
with considerable towns or sea-ports, are very favourable to the com-
merce of his kingdom. That of Mandawy, which is very large, runs
through a country which furnishes much gold, bezoar-wax, dragon’s-


blood, canes, and works in reeds. The month of the river Sampit is
remarkable for its great breadth, and terminating in a spacious bay,
forms an extensive and safe harbour.
Pontiana, on the west coast of Borneo, has very recently placed itself
under the British protection. It is situated on a fine navigable river,
nearly under the equator. The Sultan of that place, fearing the ven-
geance of Anam, the Chieftain of Sambas, applied for a British gar-
rison, which was granted ; and the subsequent capture of Sambas will
no doubt strengthen the existing relations, and improve the commercial
interests in that quarter.
Sambas river has a wide entrance, and is in lat. 1 deg. 12 minutes
north, long. 109 deg. 5 min. east. The town is about forty miles up
the river, on the south branch.
The houses here, as in almost all the ot her sea-port towns in Borneo,
are built of timber and bamboos, raised on wooden stakes or piles, on
low swampy morasses. The Sultan is a powerful Prince, but at the
period of the late capture by the British armament, he retired into the
interior of his territories.
The predatory and piratical pursuits of the inhabitants generally,
made it very unsafe for the European trader to venture near any part of
the extensive coasts which skirt this great island, and particularly the
north-west part of Borneo; where armed prows were continually on
the watch, both in Sambas and the river Borneo proper, to dart on the
unprepared and defenceless merchant vessel, which they not only
seized, but with circumstances of horrible barbarity on the unhappy
crews. A large Portuguese ship, with a very valuable cargo, which
was thus assaulted and carried to Sambas by the pirates, under the


orders of the before-mentioned Anam, was the principal cause of the
first attack directed against that chieftain, in October 1812, by the late
lamented Captain Bowen, of His Majesty’s ship Phoenix.
Of a second attack, which was successfully made by Colonel Watson,
the following official statement will give at once an interesting repre-
sentation, while it affords also an accurate description of a place which
till this event was hardly known.
To the Honourable the Lieutenant Governor in Council , &c. &c.
C£ Honourable Sir,
ct I Have the honour to inform you, that I arrived off the Sambas River on the
22d ult. with the force under my command, after touching at Pontiana, to procure
boats. See. On my arrival, I found Captain Sayer commanding a squadron of his
Majesty’s ships, and the following morning we commenced getting the ordnance
and stores into the boats, and on the 25th the troops entered the river. Previous to
our advance, a letter signed by Captain Sayer and myself, was dispatched to the
Sultan, by Lieutenant Bayley, of the Madras Native Infantry, requiring him to sur-
render the defences of Sambas; also the Pangerang Anam, and his piratical adhe-
rents, This letter it appears was received by the Pangerang, the Sultan having
previously withdrawn to the interior, but no answer was returned. We then moved
up the river, and anchored on the night of the 26th off the branch leading to Sambas.
From all the information I could obtain, the access to the batteries was so difficult,
that I determined to employ our whole force, divided into different attacks, one of
which at least I hoped would be able to penetrate to the batteries. I accordingly
sent a detachment of his Majesty’s 14th Regiment, with Captain Morris’s party, to
land from the main river, and penetrate in that direction, which Captain Morris was


confident was practicable. This officer was obliged, however, by severe illness, to
relinquish the command of this column to Lieutenant Bolton, the next senior officer.
Another party, composed of the Royal Marines from his Majesty’s ships, with one
hundred Sepoys of the Sd Volunteer Battalion, under the command of Captain
Brookes, of the Sd Bengal Volunteer Battalion, had to pass through a cut higher up,
leading into the Sambas river, down which they were to come in rear of the town.
This party, if not in time for the attack, I hoped might intercept the retreat of the
enemy.
Each of those divisions was also accompanied by a party of armed seamen, to assist
in carrying the ladders, and in making a way through the jungle.
With the remainder of the force, I proceeded up the Sambas river, and anchored
on the night of the 27th instant, out of reach of gun-shot from the batteries. As a
little a-head of our anchorage the ground appeared rather firm, from the report of
Lieutenant Bayley, whom I sent to reconnoitre the place, I determined on landing
there another party, consisting of one hundred of his Majesty’s 14th Regiment,
eighty Sepoys of the Third Bengal Volunteer battalion, and a detachment of Artillery,
with a party of the seamen. This column was commanded by Captain Watson, of
his Majesty’s 14th Regiment. It was disembarked at 3A.M. ; and after surmount-
ing many obstacles from the nature of the country, came in sight of the batteries at
half-past nine o’clock. Captain Watson immediately commenced the attack, and,
in little more than half an hour, carried by assault the two principal batteries, and
three redoubts in their rear, although resolutely defended. A battery and five
redoubts on the opposite side of the river, were then evacuated by the enemy.
“ On the commencement of the firing, I pushed up the river, with a party kept as
a reserve, in men of war’s boats, to second whichever column began the attack.
The front battery fired at the boats advancing, although Captain Watson was at that
time in its rear, endeavouring to force an entrance. It is difficult to ascertain the loss
of the enemy, as many were killed endeavouring to escape in boats and across the
boom. From the best information I can obtain, it amounts to about one hundred and


fifty men, including a brother of the Sultan’s, the eldest son of Pangerang Anom,
and twelve others. Pangerang Anom made his escape in a small quick sailing-boat.
Captain Brookes found the cut through which he had to pass, much smaller than
had been represented, and rendered impassable by trees felled across it. A little
beyond this cut, he found a boom across the main river, defended by two forts, which
opened on a reconnoitering party, and killed the boatswain of the Leda. Being late
in the evening, Captain Brookes determined to attack them early on the following
morning ; when, as he was moving for this purpose, a canoe brought a letter from the
Chief; the purport of it was— f That his batteries had fired by mistake; that he was
the friend of the Europeans.’ At this moment arrived his Majesty's ship Procris,
which had been sent up the main river. Captain Norton sent to inform the Chief,
that he wished to anchor off the battery, and desired the boom might be opened.
This request not being complied with, a party of seamen was sent to cut it. Just as
they had succeeded, the batteries commenced firing, which was returned by the
Procris. Captain Brookes then landed his party to attack them; but the enemy
immediately evacuated their forts, and fled into the jungle. In this affair two Sepoys
were killed, and a ship Lascar wounded.
“ Lieutenant Bolton’s party, it appears, took a wrong direction at first, and from
the difficulties they had to encounter, did not arrive in time for the attack.
“ I have the honor to transmit a return of our Killed and Wounded during the
operations ; also of the Ordnance found in the enemy’s works.
» Considering the number and difficulty of access to the batteries, which prevented
the possibility of exactly timing a combined attack, or of moving a large force in any
one direction, our loss is perhaps less than might have been expected.
“ Jt is with much regret I have further to relate the death of Captain Morris, on
the Ist instant. This zealous officer, although very ill, persisted in accompanying me.
He fell a victim to his unbounded zeal for the service.
« The pleasing part of my duty now remains, to bear testimony to the general good
conduct of the whole of the troops, and to the cordial co-operation of Captain Sayer,
2 u


commanding His Majesty’s squadron, who placed under my orders the marines, and
also a body of disposable seamen.
(( From the Honourable Captain Elliot, with whom Captain Sayer entrusted the
immediate arrangement and command of the armed boats of the squadron, I
experienced every assistance and readiness in complying with any of my suggestions.
My thanks are due to the whole of the officers, seamen, and marines, that landed from
His Majesty’s Ships to second our operations, particularly to Captain Leslie and the
party under his orders, which accompanied Captain Watson’s column. To Captain
Watson and his division every praise is due ; the result of their attack fully corrobo-
rates the report made by him, that nothing could exceed the coolness and intrepidity
of the men composing it.
% lam much indebted to Lieutenant Bayley, of the Madras native infantry, for his
assistance. This officer landed with Captain Watson’s column, which he volunteered
to lead; and after much perseverance, succeeded in cutting a passage through the
jungle.
u From Captain Dyson, His Majesty’s 14th regiment, major of brigade, and Lieu-
tenant Gunn, of the Bengal light infantry volunteer battalion, quarter-master to the
troops, I also derived every assistance in the previous arrangements, and during the
operations of the service.
“ I have the honor to be.
Honourable Sir,
Your Most Obedient Servant,
(Signed) JAMES WATSON,
Lieutenant Colonel of the 14th Regiment, Commanding the Troops."*
Sambas , July 3, 1813.


Regiments or Corps, and Ships Names.
Killed and
Wounded.
Officers.
'Jon Commission-
ed Officers,
Eank and File,
Seamen
on
Shore.
Grand Total.
Captains.
Lieutenants.
C
bj:
’tn
C
K
Sergeants and
Havildars.
| Drummers.
| Rank and File.
Gun Lascars.
[ Boatswains.
Seamen.
Officers.
Non-Commis-
sioned Officers,
Rank and File,
and Seamen.
His Majesty’s 14th Regiment, - -
Killed
3
Ditto, ditto, - - - -
Wounded
1
1
20
Third Bengal Volunteer Battalion, -
Killed
a
Ditto, ditto, - - - -
Woundec
1
1
IS
“O
JV
<u
'O
c
HQ
jy
S
a
Bengal Artillery, ------
Killed
1
5
3
O
>
w
o
>
Ditto, ditto, - - - -
Woundec
6
!>
His Majesty's Ship Leda, - - - -
Killed
1
1
His Majesty’s Ship Hussar, - - -
Woundec
1
16
Total
0
4
7
55
Return of Killed and Wounded during the Operations against
Sambas, including that of Captain Brookes Detachment up the
Main River, July 3d, 1813.
NAMES OF OFFICERS CORRESPONDING.
Captain Watson, His Majesty’s 14th Regiment, slightly.
Lieutenant Jennings, ditto ditto.
Trist, 3d Bengal Volunteer Battalion, wounded severely
nnd dangerously.
Hoghton, His Majesty’s Ship Hussar, severely.
(Signed) J. DYSON,
Major of Brigade.
2 u 2


GUNS
.
5
o
Pounders.
32
24
18
12
8
6
4
3
2
1
i
•i
Brass Ordnance, - - - -
1
1
2
20
7
31
Iron ditto, ------
1
6
2
8
2
4
3
10
36
Total
1
6
2
8
1
2
0
3
12
20
7
67
Return of the Ordnance Stores captured in the different Batteries
at Sambas.
Round Shot, different sizes, . . . 6000
Bar ditto, ditto, .... 30
Gun-powder Barrels, .... 26
(Signed) A. CAMERON,
Lieut. Com. Detach. Bengal Artillery.
A true Copy,
(Signed) J. DYSON, Major of Brigade.
The whole trade of Borneo has long been, and still continues, in the
hands of the Chinese, of whom great numbers are settled in the coun-
try, and where they carry on a very extensive commerce. At the town
of Borneo, which is situated fifteen miles up the country, on a fine na-
vigable river, the Chinese build junks of four hundred tons burthen,
which are navigated by themselves, and in which they export pepper,
camphor, which is here of the very best quality, spices, with a variety
of other valuable productions of the country, and wares of different
sorts. These are conveyed to Java, Sumatra, Celebes, Tonquin, Siam,
and other parts, from whence the Chinese bring back to Borneo all


kinds of Eastern and European goods, together with such articles as can
be procured in China from Japan by the way of exchange. The
Diamond mines in Borneo are very productive. Some of the stones
are exceedingly fine, and weigh from twenty to thirty and forty carats ;
but such large ones are seldom offered for sale, being religiously pre-
served in the families of the principal chiefs, and handed down from
father to son, or given as marriage portions. Those sold are gene-
rally of the smaller kind, from five to six carats, and the rose and table
diamonds seem to be valued in the East nearly as much as brilliants.
Passir, on the east coast of Borneo, and situated on a river in the
Straits of Macassar, was formerly subordinate to the Dutch, and consi-
derable for its commerce ; carrying on a great trade in gold and other
merchandize, particularly spices, which are produced in the mountains.
Of the smaller islands, to the northward of Borneo, that of Balam-
bangan presents every convenience, with fine harbours to invite the
establish ment of a colony; though the attempt of the English to settle
there, in 1773, was soon abandoned, owing principally to the jealousy
and power of the Dutch.
Macassar Strait is about 350 miles in length, and generally from
110 to 140 miles wide, except at the north entrance, where it contracts
to 50 miles.
Macassar Town, or Fort Rotterdam, is situated near the south-
western extremity of the island of Celebes, in latitude five degrees nine
seconds south, longitude about one hundred and nineteen degrees
* O ,
thirty-nine seconds east. The town and fort have a pleasing ap-
pearance from the sea, and the road is protected, in a great degree, by
the isles and banks to the north and south ; and these afford also the


means of a profitable trade in the Beach de Maar , collected here for the
China market. This article which literally signifies “Insect of the Sea/’
lias the appearance of a large leech when first gathered, and being proper-
ly dried and cured, is considered as a great delicacy, particularly by the
Chinese. Unlike most other Dutch settlements, which are encom-
passed by swamps, and divided by numerous canals, the country
round Macassar is high, fine, and healthy.
The fort, which is irregular and ancient, is considered by the natives
as impregnable. Towards the sea-face is a strong battery, which
commands the roads to a great distance ; and the water is so deep, that
line-of-battle ships might lie within pistol-shot of the shore. A
British garrison of regulars, and some colonial troops, are stationed
here.
The town is surrounded by a stone-wall, sufficiently low to admit a
defence from the houses, and yet high enough to prevent a sudden
surprise from a nightly escalade, or guard against a coup-de-main.
The settlement is flourishing ; and Chinese junks from this place,
carry on a direct trade with China; so that the mixed population of
Dutch and half-casts, Chinese and natives, is very considerable.
The Island of Celebes is nearly circular with several large Bays, and
is above five hundred miles in length. The interior has hitherto been
little explored ; and consequently its natural history is as little known
as that of Borneo. The climate is temperate, and the country diver-
sified with hills, dales, and mountains, affording a variety of beautiful
landscape scenery.
The Dutch, after the expulsion of the Portuguese from the Mo-
luccas, became masters of the entire trade of this extensive Island; the


possession of which, though not very lucrative, they deemed of so much
importance as to sacrifice seventy or eighty thousand guilders annually,
to defray the surplus expenses of their establishments on Celebes; in
order to keep out strangers, and prevent a smuggling trade with the
neighbouring spice islands.
The conquest of the country cost much blood and treasure; the
ferocious temper of the natives, and the intrepidity of their chiefs,
long opposing a powerful resistance to the settlement of foreign in-
truders. So formidable were these people in former times, that one of
the kings of Macassar, Krain Samarloka, is said, in their early history,
to have sailed with a fleet of two hundred vessels, in the year 1420,
to attack Malacca. In their protracted conflicts with the Dutch, the
Macassars murdered many Europeans, and plundered their ships; and
it was not till after repeated fights, and various unsuccessful attempts
to effect their expulsion, that the kings of Macassar, and lesser chiefs,
were at length, in 1699, compelled to make peace with the Dutch ;
by guaranteeing to them the exclusion of other European traders from
the island.
The Buggese, or inhabitants of Celebes, are trained from their child-
hood to martial exercises; and they are, in consequence, very dex-
terous in the use of the spear. The criss, which is constantly worn by
them, too often proves the fatal instrument of assassination. Numerous
instances are related of their inflamed passions bursting forth in sudden
and violent starts and sometimes, without the least provocation, they
are known to have attacked persons in the public streets, of whom they
had not the slightest knowledge, cutting and stabbing them to death,
from no other motive, frequently, than to try the metal of their crisses


or choppers. An occurrence of this kind was very recently witnessed.
While a Buggese was carrying wood through the town of Macassar,
a man whom he had never seen stabbed him in passing, with his
criss in the shoulder, without the smallest offence having been given.
The person attacked turned instantly with his chopper ; and, after a
desperate battle, at noon day, in which no person interfered, the
aggressor was at length completely cut in pieces.
Another recent instance, equally shocking and barbarous, is related
of a native who had been banished for his crimes, by the Rajah Boni,
to another district, where he continued his villany to such an extent,
that at length the Chief was obliged to give an order for his
execution, according to the customary mode among these people;
which is, by dispatching an armed party to the house of the culprit,
about midnight, and, when he has no suspicion of danger, to fall
suddenly upon him, and cut him to pieces. Such was the course
intended to have been adopted in the present case, but the criminal
unluckily had heard of their approach, and was prepared for their
reception. He inquired who were his visitors at that hour ;on which
he was told—“ The servants of the Rajah Boni.” “ Come in,” said
he, “ I shall be happy to see you.” The instant one man raised his
head in the apartment, as instantly he was crissed ; a second followed,
and shared the same fate; at length, after several unsuccessful
attempts, which were all equally fatal to the servants of the Rajah,
a consultation was held by the rest, how this desperate fellow was to
be taken ; and whilst they were thus deliberating, he extinguished the
light in the apartment above, and threw a log of wood down the ladder,
which had instantly a number of crisses planted in it, the men mis-


taking it at first for his body. Amidst the general confusion that
prevailed, he rushed frantically forward, denouncing death to his
pursuers ; and he certainly fulfilled his threat with wonderful success,
for before he fell under the crisses of his assailants, he had killed
upwards of twenty men ; and his wife, refusing to be removed from the
body, suffered the same fate.
The general state of agriculture in Celebes is very low, owing to
the extreme indolence of the natives in all works of utility and industry.
They are, however, keen sportsmen; and deer, and every other
game, abound in the island. Their mode of running down the former,
is the same as that which is practised in some parts of Java.
Though Mahommedanism is the professed religion of the native
inhabitants of Celebes, they appear to be little scrupulous in the
performance of its precepts.
They were formerly idolaters, and the objects of their worship were the
Sun and Moon, to which luminaries their adorations were paid under
the open firmament of Heaven, as they conceived that nothing on earth
was excellent enough to compose a temple worthy of the divinity.
The Buggese are possessed of many good qualities, which, if better
cultivated, would give these people a great superiority to their neigh-
bours, and produce a good effect in influencing their intercourse with
strangers. They may be rendered very faithful by liberal treatment,
and in many cases they have evinced a sincere attachment to those by
whom they were employed ; but they cannot endure ill usage, nor will
they easily forget an injury. They are remarkably courteous in their
behaviour to each other, and will very rarely descend to personal
2 x


abase ; though it must be confessed, that while they consider it as dis-
honourable to make use of scurrilous language, they have no scruple
in avenging the slightest affront with the murderous criss, which in
fact they seem to regard as the only legitimate arbiter of their real or
pretended wrongs. When roused by a sense of danger, or by the
desire of revenge, these people have been known to perform the most
extraordinary exploits of valour and intrepidity. They will, indeed,
sooner rush on death in a thousand shapes than suffer themselves to be
overcome in their contests at sea with their piratical neighbours. A
Buggese prow was lately overpowered by an armed pirate ; and when
the crew saw no chance of escape, they set fire to a barrel of gun-
powder on the very instant that the victors boarded them ; and thus
they and their foes were launched into eternity together.
The Dutch entertained a number of Buggese among their colonial
troops ; and, both at Cornelisand Djoejocarta, they fought desperately;
but all attempts at recruiting among them have of late proved
unsuccessful.
Macassar receives its principal supplies of rice from Bally. The
beef and mutton here are tolerably good ; but the only supply of cattle
that can be relied upon procuring at this island, are buffaloes.
The principal articles of export trade are gold, sapan, and sandal-
wood ; camphor, cotton, some kinds of hardware, arms for the
Indians, ginger, long pepper, pearls, &c.; and the chief imports are
tin, copper, iron, cloths of various kinds, &c.
Besides the subordinate residency of Beema, with its tributary isles,
the Government of Macassar exercises a controul over several other


establishments and places in the neighbourhood, under the general
authority of the British Government in Java.
Bonthian, situated to the south-eastward of Macassar, at the
bottom of the bay, is very fertile in rice and paddy, and affords
excellent anchorage near the village, in seven or eight fathoms sandy
bottom, at the north part of the bay. Here is a fine river of very good
water. The inhabitants are accounted the subjects of the Company,
and pay to the Resident the tenth of their landed produce ; as do those
of Booloe Comba, another small settlement farther to the eastward,
and under the inspection or superintendence of the Resident at Bon-
thian. The Fort of 80010 Comba was gallantly attacked and taken
the 12th January, 1810, by a party of one hundred men, landed from
the Cornwallis, commanded by Captain Montague, attended by
Captain Forbes and Lieutenant Duncan Stewart, of the Madras
service. This small party, after capturing the Fort from the Dutch,
had to sustain, on the following day, a furious attack, from a numerous
body of the confederate natives, headed by their chiefs, in all the terror
of Malay warfare. They were, however, repulsed, after great efforts
on the part of Captain Montague and his gallant party. One instance
of devotedness deserves particular mention on this occasion. A soldier
of the Madras European regiment, who received a shot through his
leg, fell, calling for assistance when the enemy were close upon him.
Lieutenant Stewart, observing his perilous situation, nobly stepped
from the line, threw him on his back, and, at the imminent risk of
his own life, succeeded in carrying the poor fellow to the rear in safety.
A fine river of good water, and navigable on the east side of 80010
Comba Bay, marks the European boundary from the dominions of
2x2


the Rajah Goa, at first the most powerful Chief on Celebes; but
Rajah Boni having become the principal ally of the Dutch, he was,
through their means, raised to the supremacy on the island. As late
as the year 1780, the Buggese of Goa shewed great firmness in their
attack on the Dutch Fort of Rotterdam, at Macassar; but they were
beat oflf with great slaughter.
Warjoo is another rival of Boni, but who was always opposed by the
Dutch in support of their ally. All these governments are muck
spoken of in history, as is that of Manado* or Mandar. Sapin and
Seluidrin are inland governments. They are monarchical and
elective, partaking greatly of the ancient feudal system of the Euro-
pean nations.
The restless and ambitious disposition of the native chieftains of
Celebes, had long been, as already stated, a source of trouble to the
former government of this colony. The recent conduct of the Rajak
of Boni, equally hostile and insulting, rendering an example necessary,
an expedition was fitted out at Java, in April 1814, under Major-
General Nightingale; which having arrived at Macassar, on the morn-
ing of the 7th of June, prepared to attack the Rajah; as that chieftain
had declined to make the reparation demanded of him, and refused to
surrender to the British Commander the somdang or regalia of Goa,
which he had forcibly seized. The troops commanded by Lieutenant-
Colonel M c Leod, were in consequence ordered to assault the town and
palace, as soon as the day should dawn. All the barriers were carried
successively, in the most gallant stile, though not without some loss ;
and the whole town and.residence of the Rajah were in the possession
of our troops in little more than an hour from the commencement of


the attack. Bat the Rajah had effected his escape daring the night,
attended by a few followers. His residence being the principal depot,
with a great quantity of gunpowder, fell into our hands, as well as five
pieces of cannon, of small calibre, several stands of colours, andarmsof
all descriptions. The residence was set fire to, and entirely consumed.
The strength of the enemy was about three thousand men ; and their
loss, in killed and wounded, was considerable.
These measures terminated in the deposal of the Rajah from the
authority which he had held in Celebes ; and, by the subsequent
arrangements which have been adopted, the tranquillity of the country
has been secured, while a happy reconciliation between the contending
houses has enabled the General to re-establish an efficient adminis-
tration for the country, on principles equally conciliatory to the people
and satisfactory to Government:
Maros, to the northward of Fort Rotterdam, is also subject to
Macassar. Five rivers, running close to one another, separate the two
places, and the country, which is intersected by a great number of
smaller streams and rivulets, is productive in rice and paddy, of which
one-tenth is paid to the Resident. Saltpetre is also procured in this
neighbourhood, principally near the village of Soudang, situated at the
foot of a mountain, bordering on Maros river. Of the insular depen-
dencies on Macassar, Salayer Island is the first, and gives its name to
the Straits formed betwixt its north end, and the south-east point of
Celebes. It is about 30 miles in length, very populous and well-cul-
tivated. Salayer cloths manufactured here, and cotton yarns, were
among the articles of taxation or tribute drawn from the inhabitants
of this island by their former masters, the Dutch.


Booton Island, which is well peopled, is considered as tributary to
Macassar. Some Dutch generally reside at the town of Booton, situ-
ated a little inside the south entrance of the Strait, in lat. 5 deg. 27 min.
south, long. 122 deg. 48 min. east. This island is imperfectly known,
as also is the eastern coast of Celebes, which is formed of extensive
Peninsulas, and the approach to which should be very cautious, taking
the greatest care to guard against treachery from the inhabitants.
Buggese Bay, presents a dangerous and intricate navigation, stretch-
ing near 200 miles from the south point of Celebes to the northward,
into the middle of the island; and towards the bottom of it, and on
the west side of the Bay is situated the town of Boni, on a fine river,
where is good anchorage in eight or ten fathoms water.
The next great Bays are those of Tollo and Tomminie, or Goonong
Telia river; on the banks of which the Dutch had several small forts
for the protection of their trade with the nations of those parts, con-
sisting principally in wax and gold-dust. After the reduction of
Amboyna, Captain Tucker, of his Majesty’s ship Dover, directed his
attention to these subordinate stations, and on the 16th June, 1810,
having arrived off this harbour, he established a friendly intercourse
with the King of this part of Celebes, who resides at Fort Nassan,
about five miles up the river ; and the Dutch flag, which had been
waving on the batteries that defended the harbour, was exchanged for
the British. The village, which is two miles up the river, supplies
every kind of refreshment, and horses, buffaloes, bullocks, sheep,
goats, and poultry, may be procured here.
Manado, with Fort Amsterdam, is the northernmost of the Dutch
settlements on Celebes ; whence they procured much gold in ex*


change for opium and Hindostan piece goods, chiefly blue cloth, fine
Bengal stuffs, iron and steel. This place also surrendered to Captain
Tucker, on the 24th June, 1810. In the fort were found fifty guns
mounted, with plenty of ammunition, stores, and provisions. The
garrison consisted of one Captain, three Lieutenants, and one hundred
and nine soldiers. The bay and town is situated in lat. about 1 deg.
28 min. north, on the west side of the north-east end of Celebes.
Th is place is fertile in rice, with which it supplies the neighbouring
Molucca Islands ; and it was consequently placed under the direction
of the more important Residency of Ternate.
MOLUCCA ISLES.
Ternate, the northernmost of a chain of islands adjoining to the
west coast of Gillolo, was formerly the seat of sovereignty over all the
adjacent Molucca Islands, Ternate, Tidore, Bachian, Motir, and Ma-
chian, the great work of the Portuguese who first visited them in
1510. The King of Ternate was one of the most potent monarchs of
the East, extending his sovereignty over seventeen or eighteen other
islands, and maintaining a considerable naval force. But on the ex-
pulsion of the Portuguese from the Molucca Isles by the Butch, in
1607, the native princes were forced to submit to the humiliating con-
ditions of their new conqueror ; by which they were interdicted from
all trade and intercourse of any kind with any nation but the Dutch.


Thus they soon shared the fate of the conquered provinces of the East,
and dwindled away into a state of political insignificance, poverty, and
dependence ; while their new masters secured to themselves the va-
luable spice trade on their own terms. The King of Ternate, however,
is still the most powerful of the Molucca Princes. One of that race,
in 1722, embraced the Christian Religion ; but the present Sultans of
Ternate and Tidore, both profess Mohammedanism. Next in power
is the King of Tidore. The former possessing the northern part
of Gillolo, with Mortay Bachian, Motir, &c., and part of Papua,
whence he receives a tribute of gold, amber, and birds of paradise ;
and the Sultan of Tidore holds the southern part of Gillolo, with
Mysole, and some other isles. It is not unfrequent in the Oriental
Archipelago, to observe similar instances of small isles having been
selected for the seats of Monarchy, to which the large and more exten-
sive islands are subject.
Ternate is of small extent but high, and the Dutch erected three
forts on it, named Orange, Holland, and Williamstadt. That of
Orange was the principal fort, on the east side, where the chief town
is situated, in lat. about 0 deg. 50 min. north, long. 127 deg. 32 min.
east, with good anchorage near the shore. Here Captain Edward
Tucker, of his Majesty’s ship Dover, having taken on board a rein-
forcement of one hundred men, from the garrison at Amboyna, effected
a landing on the morning of the 28th August, 1810, and with a hand-
ful of men, achieved the capture of a place which had withstood the
repeated attacks made upon it by the English in the former war. The
troops, commanded by Captain David Forbes, consisted of the fol-
lowing detail: —


Madras European Regiment Artillery - 74
Amboynese Corps ----- 32
Royal Marines ------ 36
Seamen - -- -- --32
Total 174
It was intended to have landed under the walls of Fort Kayo
Meirah, and to have instantly stormed it, but a strong* current not
only impeded their progress, but compelled them at day-light to bear
up and seek a landing place at Sasa, a village screened by a point of
land from fort Kayo Meirah, and out of its line of fire.
This place they reached at seven o’clock, and having made good
their landing, a party under Lieutenant Forbes, was immediately
moved forward to occupy the heights, and a gun was got up after great
exertion, on account of the steepness of the hill, and placed in a com-
manding position, while with the remainder. Captain Forbes pro-
ceeded towards a height which had been represented to him as com-
pletely commanding Fort Kayo Meirah, and as having been the spot
occupied by our troops in the preceding war.
In the mean time, a summons was sent from the Dover, to the
Governor, Colonel Mittman—who returned a spirited answer—and the
evening having now closed in, and there being no anchorage, the land-
wind and currents rendered it impossible to prevent the ship from
drifting out of the harbour.
Captain Forbes having determined to storm Fort Kayo Meirah that
night, set out with the greatest part of the troops on shore, at seven
o’clock, by the inland road, accompanied by Lieutenants Jefferies,
2 y


Royal Navy, Higginson, Royal Marines, and Forbes and Cursham, of
the Madras service.
After advancing a short distance, they found it impossible to proceed
further by the road they were then pursuing, the enemy having, in the
course of the day, cut down a great number of immense trees, and
thrown them in heaps across it; turning therefore to the right, and
following the tract of a rivulet, after great labour, and in total dark-
ness, the party reached the beach, and about ten o’clock arrived
within a few hundred yards of the fort undiscovered.
Having advanced within a hundred yards of the place, the enemy’s
out-sentry fired his musquet, which gave the alarm, and a volley imme-
diately followed from a strong detachment, with a brigade of guns.
This party of the enemy were driven in at the point of the bayonet,
and though under a most galling fire of grape and musquetry, our
brave assailants, led on by Captain Forbes, resolutely crossed the
ditch, and placing the ladders on the flank of the bastion, to the right
of the bridge, escaladed the walls, and carried the fort instantly.
Many of the garrison were killed, and the commanding officer and
sixty-eight prisoners were secured. The British loss was one sergeant-
major, two privates, killed; and one lieutenant, one sergeant, one
seaman, one guide, and twelve privates, wounded.
At day-light, the battery of Kota Barro opened a heavy fire. This,
however, was silenced by the Dover in the afternoon of the 29th, as
soon as the wind and current enabled her to pour her grape and can-
nister shot into the place, which quickly drove the enemy from his
guns. Observing it to be silenced, the Dover stood on for the next bat-
tery, by which she opened another, and the sea-face of Fort Orange, and


was hotly engaged with the whole, when the enemy again entered, and
recommenced a fire from Kota JBarro ; thus exposed to a heavy cross-
fire, the Dover was compelled to resume her station off the latter post,
and with a sweeping fire of grape and cannister, which nothing could
withstand, she silenced it a second time. A party, under Lieut. Hig-
ginson, were just proceeding on shore, to spike the guns in Kota Barro,
when a party of our troops were seen engaged with a detachment of
the enemy at a short distance in its rear. This party, under Lieutenant
Cursham, had been detached by Captain Forbes, to make a diversion
in the rear, while the Dover was engaging Kota Barro in front; and
after forcing a body of the enemy, with two field-pieces, that opposed
his progress, this party arrived to secure possession of the battery, just
as the Dover had silenced it.
Kota Barro being now secured, the Dover recommenced a rapid and
well-directed fire against the Strand Batteries, Fort Orange, and the
Towa, with very great effect. The enemy, however, returned it with
spirit for an hour and three quarters, when many of the inhabitants
having been killed, and his losses otherwise great, Colonel Mittman,
at 5 P. M. hoisted a flag of truce, and all firing ceased on both sides-
The terms of capitulation being settled, possession was given of
Ternate, and all the forts and batteries, on the morning of the 31st
of August. These works were defended by ninety-two guns, mostly
of heavy calibre ; five hundred regular troops, of whom many were
Europeans; besides the burghers, and a considerable number of the
Rajah’s troops, both of Ternate and Tidore.
The Dutch had spared no pains nor expense to render the fortifi-
cations of Ternate as formidable as they could, in order to keep off
2 y 2


foreign intruders. But not content with the exclusive possession of the
spice trade, they further resolved in 1638, to confine the culture of the
clove and nutmeg, exclusively to the Islands of Amboyna and Banda ;
and accordingly every such plantation in all the other places where
they used to flourish in the time of the Portuguese, was destroyed. A
small pension in money was granted to the Princes and Chiefs, to in-
duce them to lend a helping hand in this work of general devastation
within their respective dominions, and an establishment for the annual
renewal of the measure, to prevent the growth of any spice plant in
these isles, has ever since been maintained at an expense of four thou-
sand pounds a year, in order to keep up the high prices of these
articles in the European markets and throughout the worlds
At present, Ternate produces only a little rice, though the trade it
formerly carried on with New Guinea, and the Chinese, on Gillolo, &c.
was very considerable.
Tidore, and the other islands, were all provided with defences and
forts ; but like those at Ternate, they are now falling into decay. It
is nearly of the same size as its neighbour, from which it is separated
by a safe channel, with good anchorage near the town, on the east side
of the island.
Gillolo Island, partly tributary to Ternate, and partly to Tidore, is
of considerable extent and well inhabited. Oxen, buffaloes, goats,
deer, and wild hogs abound in this island, but sheep are very few.
The sago and bread-fruit trees, flourish here in great abundance. Ossa
town, situated on the south side of the great Bay of that name, in lat.
0 deg. 45 min. north, long. 128 deg. 22 min. east, affords every con-
venience for ships touching here, either for water, provisions, timber




Plate XXXIV.


for spars, or other necessary articles. There are several villages in this
Bay, but that of Golonasy was destroyed by the Dutch on the 25th
January, 1808.
Between the south end of Gillolo, and the southern extremity of
Bachian Island, is formed the Strait of Patientia.
Bachian is a high island, about eighteen leagues in length ; and the
largest of the little Moluccas. Gold-dust is said to be found here. To
the north, the little island of Machian rises like a conical mountain,
from the sea. This was regarded as the chief Dutch settlement, before
Amboyna became the metropolis of the Moluccas.
Xulla islands are four in number, of which Xulla Bessey is the most
considerable. It is in length about eleven leagues ; in good cultivation,
and well inhabited. The Dutch fort is near a village adjacent to the
south-east point, where ships may procure refreshments. The island
abounds with wax and honey..
Amboyna, wherein is situated the capital and seat of Government of
all the Spice Islands, is about sixty miles in extent, north and south,
and is the next settlement to Batavia in wealth and consequence. The
face of the island is beautiful; exhibiting a fine variety of woody
mountains and verdant vales, interspersed with hamlets and enriched
by cultivation. The entrance into the bay is between two high and
steep points, distant about six miles from each other, and gradually
narrowing towards the town, where the distance across the bay is about
two miles, without any soundings in mid-channel. This bay, stretching
about seven leagues into the island, separates it nearly into two parts.
On the south shore of this bay, in latitude 3 deg. 40 min. S:, and
longitude 128 deg. 15 min. E., is situated Fort Victoria, mounting


sixty pieces of cannon ; in which the Dutch maintained a garrison of
six hundred men; while a number of redoubts defended the other
parts of the island.
The capture of this settlement by the small squadron under Captain
Tucker, merits particular commendation. The troops employed on
this service landed, at 2 P.M., on the 16th February, 1810, consist-
ing of,
Captain Court, attended by Captains Philips and Forbes, had pre-
viously reconnoitered the enemy’s positions and defences on the side of
Fort Victoria ; and the landing having been effected without oppo-
sition, the troops moved to the attack in two columns. The one in
advance under Captain Philips, proceeded against the strong position
of Wannetto, a battery situated on the top of a small hill, defended by
three hundred soldiers, with five twelve-pounders, two eight-pounders,
two six-pounders, and two inch howitzers; and the approach to
which was rendered more difficult by innumerable trous-de-loup
_________ —— Men.
Detachment Madras Artillery - 46 Lieut. Stewart.
Madras European Regiment - - 130
Seamen and Royal Marines, from
his Majesty’s ship Dover 85
Ditto ditto, from his Majesty’s
ship Cornwallis - 105
Seamen from his Majesty’s sloop
Samarang ----- 38
Total 404 Men.


which surrounded it. Surmounting 1 every obstacle, however, this
gallant party rushed on in the most determined manner; and .Lieu-
tenant Stewart, who led the storming party, was the first that entered
the battery. Here this gallant officer was wounded; but, after a
severe struggle, and the commandant of the battery being killed, the
post was carried.
The possession of Wannetto soon gave our troops the command of
the Wayoo battery, which the enemy were not long able to retain,
after the guns of the former had been turned upon it; deserting it,
therefore, they fled into the town, carrying consternation with them.
In front of Wannetto, on an eminence of a great height, lay Fort Batto
Gautong, rendered by the nature of the ground on whish it stands
assailable only from the heights in the rear. It commenced a heavy
fire on the former immediately after it was carried by our troops, and
which they returned with equal vigour. Against Fort Batto Gautong,
Captain Court had, in the mean time, directed an attack with the
second column, having Captain Forbes at their head.
After a most fatiguing march through a thick underwood, without
any road, they succeeded, a little after sun-set, in gaining the heights
that commanded the Fort, and were forming for the attack, when the
enemy, perceiving the advantage his assailants had now obtained,
ceased firing on Wannetto, and fled with precipitation from his guns,
leaving Captain Court to take possession of this important post; and
thereby the Water-castle, becoming also untenable, was in like manner
abandoned.
The squadron, immediately after landing the troops and seamen,
had proceeded in line-of-battle up the harbour, and opened a tremen-


dous fire on the fort, town, and batteries. This was as rapidly
returned by the whole of the enemy's posts, extending- from Batto-
Meirah to Wannetto, and in several places with red-hot shot.
The breeze dying away, was succeeded by light baffling airs and
calms, which, with a strong current and no anchoring-ground, ren-
dered this a most difficult and trying service ; as the number of officers
and seamen landed had left the ships very short of complement, and
with hardly steerage-way, they were now exposed to all the fury of a
severe and galling cross-fire, which hulled them repeatedly, particu-
larly the Cornwallis.
But the successes of our troops on shore having secured to them the
possession of the whole of the enemy's line of defence to the left of
Fort Victoria, a secure anchorage was obtained in Portuguese Bay,
and the squadron was moored there in safety.
During the night, the necessary arrangements were made for prose-
cuting hostilities next day; and the guns in Fort Batto Gaudong,
having been relieved of the spikes, were brought to bear on the town
and Fort Victoria with very considerable effect, which the latter
returned with shells. While the ships were preparing for another
attack, a flag-of-truce was hoisted, and a summons sent to the
Governor, Lavinius Haukurlugt, to which a reply was returned by
Colonel Fitz, military Commander-in-Chief in the Moluccas; and
the terms of the capitulation being settled, Fort Victoria was surren-
dered on the morning of the 19th February, when a most interesting
scene took place.
The remains of the British force, originally landed, were drawn
up on tlje glacis of the fort, to receive the garrison they had conquered.


The Dutch force, consisting of Europeans and Malay soldiers, with
the crews of several vessels, although four deep, outflanked the
English by more than double the length of their line; and the dis-
content and mortification of the former, on observing the handful of
men by whom they had been beaten, could not be restrained. Exe-
crations were vented, while several of the officers were seen to break
their swords with vexation; and a determination was strongly mani-
fested by the privates, to take up again the arms they had lain down.
This, spirit was, however, soon subdued by the promptitude of our
officers, and full possession was at length obtained. Two hundred
and eighteen pieces of ordnance were found mounted in the fort and
batteries, and the garrison consisted of upwards 2000 men, indepen-
dent of the burghers, and other Dutch inhabitants.
The settlements depending on Amboyna followed the fate of the
principal, and were taken possession of immediately after, by his
Majesty’s ship Cornwallis. This ship, on the evening of the Ist of
March, discovered a strange sail under the island of Amblaw, and,
it being calm, Eieutenant the Honourable, now Captain Peachey,
Mr. Garland, Master, and Mr. Sanderson, Master’s Mate, volunteered,
and in the yawl, cutter and jollyboat, proceeded to examine her.
After an arduous and anxious chace all night, they found themselves,
at day-light on the 2d, close to a Dutch national brig corvette, fully
prepared for their reception, and who opened a heavy fire ot round
and grape. Lieutenant Peachey immediately dashed along-side,
closely followed by the other boats, and succeeded in boarding and
gallantly carrying her, notwithstanding she was most bravely and
obstinately defended from the chains, gangways, and afterwards on
2 z


deck, with musketry, pikes, and other weapons. She proved to be
the Margaretta Louisa, commanded by Captain G. Ruiter, pierced for
14 guns, having 8 mounted, with a complement of 40 men; of whom
one officer was killed and twenty men wounded. The British loss was
only five men wounded. This was considered by the respective
services, as one of the most brilliant achievements of the expedition.
While the Dover remained at Amboynafor its protection, the Corn-
wallis and Samarang, with several of the largest prize-ships, set sail
on the 16th April, for Java, to convey thither the late garrison of this
place. * r r
> Tfie unfortunate Commander, Colonel Filz, was, soon after his
arrival at Batavia, tried and shot, by order of General Daendels.
The population, Dutch, Portuguese, Chinese, and Malays, is very
considerable; being estimated at about 50,000, of whom one-third
are Christians. The climate is deemed very salubrious, and the town
and country are very pleasant. The annual produce of cloves at Am-
boyna, is averaged at a million of pounds, there being 500,000 trees,
each of which easily furnishes two pounds of cloves. This spice is in
great repute all over India; the profits, therefore, of the trade in that
quarter alone, are very considerable, independently of the European
market. Coffee and Indigo also grow here ; besides which, the Island
produces a peculiar wood, that is much used for beautiful cabinet-
; work, and which is universally admired.
Soon after the capture of Amboyna from the Portuguese, in 1605,
and when the Dutch, by their subsequent conquest of all the smaller
isles, in 1627, had secured possession of the whole of these valuable
spice plantations, they commenced that destructive work already


noticed, ot laying them waste in most of the Moluccas, properly so
called ; and confined the cultivation of the clove-tree principally tp the
Island of Amboyna ; and that of the nutmeg to Banda and the neigh-
bouring Isles, their respective dependencies. The latter, which im-
mediately appertain to Amboyna, and are properly called Clove
Islands, are Orna, or Haraucka, Honimoa, or Saparoa, Malana, on
which is Fort Durnstede and Noesa-Laut. The Government of Am-
boyna also exercises controul over the south and western part of th®
Island of Ceram.
This island is about 190 miles in length, by forty in breadth. It
abounds in curious woods and large forests of the sago-tree. There
are also plantations of the clove-tree. The village Selama is at the
bottom of Sawa bay, on the north coast, with Sawa village, in 2 deg.
66 min. South latitude.
Very little is known of the interior, being inhabited by a cruel and
savage race, Vvhose extreme poverty and wretchedness lead them to
every act of barbarity where the temptation of gain is before their
eyes; and piracies, therefore, are very frequent*.
The whole of Bouro, which, next to Ceram, is the largest and most
westerly of all, constitutes another valuable appendage of the Amboyna
Government. On the south-east part of Chajili, or Bouro Bay, is
situated Fort Defence, in lat. 3 deg. 24 min. south, long. 127 deg. 4
min. east. Ships are sheltered here during both monsoons, and the
land-winds, which prevail in the night, render departure easy, on
which account it is much frequented by the South Sea whalers. These
* Captain Blakenhagen, of the Bengal service, lately lost his life here, in an unsuccess-
ful attack made against one of the refractory Chieftain* of Ceram.
2 z 2


extensive fisheries, stretching from Timor to Gillolo, Ombay, and the
other isles tributary to Java, are frequented by more than sixty English
whalers, whose joint annual importation of spermaceti, into Great
Britain, exceeds in value a million of pounds sterling. All sorts of
refreshments abound here ; the water is very good, and the wood is
plentiful. The celebrated Caii Booty tree grows plentifully on this
island, and from it the natives extract that valuable oil in great
quantities.
Manipa, Amblaw, Kelang, and Bonoe Isles, are all subject to
Amboyna.
Banda Isles, form a group, ten in number. The Dutch first pos-
sessed themselves of Lontor, by the natives called Bandan, the largest
of these isles, which is in length nine miles, and two and a quarter
across in the widest part; and erected Fort Hollandia, and many bat-
teries, which are now mostly in ruins. A narrow strait divides this
from Neira, an island two miles and a quarter in length, and about
three-quarters in the widest part. It is defended by two forts, one
called Nassau, which commands the passage between Neira and Great
Banda, and the other Belgica, directly above it. Nassau is a square
fort, and is entirely commanded by Belgica ; which last is a pentagon,
and built of stone. The only entrance into it is by a door in one of
the curtains, which being on a level with the terrace of the lower
work, a ladder is required for access to it from the outside. This fort
is, in its turn, commanded on the north-east by several small hills.
Pappenburgh, or Signal Mountain, having had guns mounted on its
summit, which commands the whole island, is called Fort Drury, since
the period of the late capture of this settlement, in August 1810, by


Plate XXXV.
Banda Isles.




Captain Christopher Cole, of the Royal Navy, an achievement that
may vie with that which added Amboyna to the British possessions in
these parts. The hill is steep, and the road on the summit runs
through a thick wood, but it has no water. Adjoining to the espla-
nade round Fort Nassau, and the hill of Belgica, at the south extre-
mity of Neira, is the town, the houses in which are very neat, and
consist of one story, on account of the earthquakes, which are here
frequent, though of late years they have not done much damage. The
quarter on the south-west extremity is inhabited by Chinese and
native fishermen. The anchorage is abreast of Goonong A pi, a vol-
canic islet, of a pyramidical form, and in height about one thousand
five hundred feet. It is separated from Neira by a narrow strait, and
has the appearance of a heap of cinders. The wharf, at the south-
west angle of Neira, is in lat. 4 deg. 31 min. south, long 130 deg', east.
Rosingain, Pulo-Ay, and Pulo-Rhun, are small and thinly peopled,
but are deemed very healthy, in comparison of the other islands. The
former lies about four miles to the eastward ot Great Banda, and the
two latter to the westward.
The islands of Lontor, or Great Banda, Neira, and Pulo-Ay, which
last is nearly circular, and about a mile and a hall in diametei, ate the
richest in the production ot spices; the soil being particularly favour-
able for the culture of the nutmeg-tree, which flourishes not only in
the rich black mould of all these isles, but even among the Lava of
Goonong. Pulo-Ay, however, is the most fertile of all, and the nut-
megs grown there are reckoned by far the best. Ihe present annual
export produce of spices is averaged at 300,000 lbs. ot nutmegs, and
80,000 lbs of mace.


The plantations on these isles are parcelled out amongst the free
burghers, who superintend the cultivation, and live in considerable
affluence. These park-keepers, as they are called, are bound by very
strict regulations, to deliver the entire produce of their parks into the
government storehouses. After the separation of the mace from the
nutmegs, and the smoaking of them has been gone through, the nuts
undergo the further operation of being covered with lime, to preserve
them from insects, and insure their keeping a long time. The lime is
made of coral rock, mixed with sea-water, to the consistency of pap,
into which the nutmegs are immersed, the lime covering them with a
thick coat. They are then fit for exportation. The rates fixed for
nutmegs delivered into the Government stores are as follow:
First and middle-sized nutmegs, four stivers per pound.
For mace, ten stivers per pound.
And one additional stiver is granted for deliveries made from Pulo-Ay,
and Great Banda. For the broken nutmegs of bad kinds, from one to
one and a half stiver per pound is allowed.
The nutmeg-tree grows to the size of a pear-tree, the leaves resem-
bling those of the laurel. Their number in the several parts on the
Bandas from under the age of five to that of above twenty years,
is estimated at 500,000. Nearly the entire surfaces of these isles
are divided into nutmeg plantations, and vegetation is exceedingly
luxuriant.
The labour is perfoimed by slaves and convicts, the former amount-
ing to above three thousand. These are distributed among the several


parks, under charge of their respective overseers, to attend to the nut-
meg plantations. They are fed and clothed from the public stores ;
but at the expense of the park-keepers ; who, reaping the first fruits
of their labour, can well afford to pay for their maintenance. They
are generally well treated, but the sickly climate very sensibly and
rapidly diminishes their number.
None of the Aborigines of these isles are now remaining, the Dutch
having long ago exterminated them all. The present inhabitants,
besides the slaves and convicts, are a few natives of Holland, and
Half-casts, with their descendants. The whole population amounts
to above four thousand, of whom about one-fourth are free. Trade is
so far from being encouraged, that it is not even permitted, and the
reason of this rigorous restraint is to prevent smuggling.
Much distress has at times been felt from the want of provisions ;
and as the numerous works erected by the Dutch, for the defence of
these isles, required a considerable number of troops to be always
stationary here, they were often reduced to feed on wild cats and dogs.
Fish is not only scarce, but in general far from being good. Bread is
baked of a kind of sago meal ; but almost every article of sustenance
must be brought hither from other islands, principally Java and
Baly.
The last of the Dutch factories remaining to be noticed, as apper*
taining to Java, is that in Japan ; which has been always considered as
one of primary importance, in a commercial point of view. The two
British ships, which, after the conquest of Java, sailed from Batavia to
Japan, with rich cargoes, had for their object, a renewal of those rela-
tions which formerly existed between the two islands; and to ascertain


the fate of the Dutch factors, of whom no tidings had been heard for
a long time. These were, however, safely brought back to Batavia in
the above ships, which had lately returned with very rich cargoes.
This highly-civilized, but very suspicious people, had very narrowly
circumscribed the Dutch establishment in this part of the world ; nor
was the attempt in the present instance to gain admittance into their
port, under the Dutch dag, that being the only European nation with
whom the Japanese Government would allow of any intercourse, with-
out danger. The suspicions awakened in former times, and the re-
membrance of the bloody persecutions which ended in the massacre of
the missionaries, and their numerous converts, particularly in 1633, are
still alive; and the Dutch have themselves felt in their turn the
effects of that distrust and jealousy, which they had been at first very
assiduous in exciting against the Portuguese, by whose ruin they
hoped to secure here, as they had done in other parts, an exclusive
commerce. But they who had acted so basely towards others, from
the worst of all motives, soon fell into similar disgrace, and were con-
fined to the little island of Desima, near Nangasacki.
In the Dutch accounts of these transactions, it appears that, at first,
the harbour of Firanda was appropriated to the ships and cargoes of
the two rival nations ; and that, on the expulsion of the Portuguese,
those who remained in possession, established there a factory, or ware-
\
house. The folly, however, of their agent, Peter Nuyts, who was
sent out on the part of the Company, in 1628, nearly ruined their
concerns * for his vanity, in attempting to pass himself off as ambas-
sador from a King of Holland, instead of what he was, the repre-
sentative of a body of merchants, drew upon him the chastisement due


to an impostor, at the Kabo, or Emperor’s Court. The same impru-
dent man next incurred, by various acts of aggression in the govern-
ment of the Dutch establishment, at Formosa, the indignation of the
Japanese; who took him and his son, and one of the members of
Council, prisoners; and, after forcing Nuyts to subscribe to the most
humiliating terms, he obtained permission to be at large. But the
Governor soon after making his escape from the Island, to return to
Batavia, the Emperor seized on the shipping and the Dutch property,
and closely confined the garrison within the walls of their own factory.
Being equally mean and submissive when they could not exercise their
wonted treachery and insolence, the Dutch were, on this occasion,
ready enough to make the most humiliating sacrifices, for the purpose
of securing a lucrative trade. Accordingly, on the arrival of Nuyts
at Batavia, he was arrested and sent as a prisoner, with a new cargo,
exceedingly rich, to the Emperor of Japan. By this submissive act of
the Batavian Government, in delivering up one of their own body, to
receive whatever punishment the Emperor might be pleased to inflict
on him, they prevented the total ruin of their establishment. The
ships were permitted entrance; their cargoes exchanged for one of
Japan produce, and returned richer laden than ever had been the case
before. Nuyts, who expected nothing less than to be burnt alive, was
shortly after liberated, to the surprise of every person. But the
friendly intercourse which had been thus established, was of short
duration, owing to the imprudence of Mr. Charron ; wfyp arrived at the
Island of Firanda in the year 1640. He solicited and obtained per-
mission to build himself a stone house, which gradually assumed the
solidity and properties of a fort. But the Japanese, unacquainted with
3 a


the European method of fortification, betrayed no suspicion, till a
ship arrived from Batavia with the great guns, which Mr. Charron had
secretly sent for, packed up in large chests, strongly secured with iron
hoops and bars, and stowed among the spice-chests, and other articles
of the ship’s cargo. They were landed all safe ; but as ill luck would
have it, the first chest placed among those which contained spices,
being opened by the Japanese overseer of Customs, discovered one of
these guns; on which, the fort and the house of the factory were
instantly surrounded, and Charron hurried off to Jeddo ; where the
Emperor, after upbraiding him with his treachery, ordered his beard
to be plucked out hair by hair; after which he was paraded with every
mark of ignominy through the streets of this immense capital, and
then expelled for ever from the Japanese dominions. This event not
only prevented the restoration of confidence, but served to increase
the jealousy that Tiad Jong existed:; and it ended, in 1741, in the
banishment of the Dutch to the little Island of Desima, the only har-
bour now in which foreign ships are permitted to anchor; which
privilege is confined exclusively to the Dutch and Chinese. This isle
is, in its greatest length, not more than two hundred and forty, and
in breadth eighty paces, with a street through the centre, containing
the dwellings ot the inhabitants; the lower apartments being* used as
store-rooms, and the upper for the accommodation of the families,
btill even this small spot can by no means be considered as the pro-
perty of the Company ; and, on the contrary, the Japanese regard it
as a street appropriated to the Dutch, but belonging to Nangasacki,
where alone they are tolerated, without being permitted to go to any
othei pait of that town, with which it is connected by a stone bridge^


strongly guarded ; thereby preventing all communication or intercourse
that is not especially authorized ; while, on that part next to the island,
stands a high stone pillar, on which the Emperor’s regulations and
restrictions, with regard to the Dutch, are inscribed. The Ottona, or
Japanese Magistrate, for the islet, lives here, in a fine { house, sur-
rounded by his guards.
Seldom more than forty-five Dutch were living on the island at one
time, under a Commissioner; and these were obliged to be changed
every two years, a longer stay here not being permitted to the same
persons; though they may return after three or four years absence.
Accordingly, three commissioners, or parties, have been always main-
tained; and, while one carries on the duty at Desima, the second
is returning to Batavia, and the third sets off again from that place to
Japan.
As soon as the Dutch ships arrive, the chief in the town of
Nangasaki, dispatches a number of sloops and boats to bring away
the guns, arms, sails, anchors, &c. to be placed in security. The mer-
chants, passengers, and crews are then landed, and shut up in Desima.
Nor are more than four at a time, after especial permission has been
obtained, allowed to walk together about the town. The exchange of
the import and export trade is entirely regulated by the Japanese
commercial overseers, who repair on boaid, and take an account of
the goods brought by the ships ; and for which they substitute what-
ever articles in the way of barter they judge to be a fit equivalent in
return. Nor is there the least cause to apprehend that any embezzle-
ment or fraud will be committed on the property by the Japanese,
3 a 2


whose exemplary conduct in this business, amply justifies the praise
universally bestowed on these people for their honesty.
Whilst this is going' on at the depot, the commissioner, with two or
three merchants, more not being allowed, set out for the Emperor’s
Court, to deliver the customary presents; during which journey, a
guard constantly attends them, and they are not permitted to take a
single step out of the high-road. On their arrival at Jeddo, a still
stricter watch is kept over them, and they are closely immured till the
day of audience, when the presents are delivered to the Emperor, who
is behind a gauze curtain, screened from their view, though he can see
them well enough, and the presents which are displayed before him.
And according to the humour which his Majesty happens to be in, so
is the treatment which the Dutch experience, who are obliged to com-
ply with his injunctions, let them be ever so ridiculous and inconsistent
with the gravity of their ciiaiacteiv-When the exhibition is termi-
nated, the Europeans are immediately hurried back with great celerity,
to their residence in Desima.
The principal, and most lucrative article of exportation from Japan,
is copper, which is very plentiful, and richly impregnated with gold.
Besides this very fine and most excellent metal, Japan abounds in
gold, silver, and other valuable ores; but no mine can be opened with-
out the Emperor’s permission. The scymetars manufactured here
are said to be the finest-edged tools in the world. A great variety of
other articles and Japan-ware are exported, which sell very high, in
exchange for sugar, chiefly of the coarsest kind, imported from Java;
and a variety of European and Indian goods. The fur trade with


Japan, which is exceedingly profitable, has been carried on exclu-
sively by the Chinese merchants, who being obliged to transport them
from Kamschatka over-land, by the way of Okotsk and Kiackta, to
Pekin, a distance of more than two thousand miles, and thence to
Japan, shews how advantageous this trade would prove in the hands
of an English merchant, if a direct importation of the furs could be
made from Kamschatka, which is not above three weeks sail from
hence ; and from the islands between that part and America, where
the sea-otters are caught in abundance, and the most valuable skins
can be easily procured.
The population of Japan, like that of China, is immense. Jeddo,
the capital, is said to be sixty miles in circumference, and well built;
but the houses never exceed two stories, with numerous steps towards
the streets. The military force is reckoned at more than half a million
of regulars, of which number 50,U00 are cavalry ; and, unlike their
neighbours the Chinese, the Japanese bear a character of great bravery
and resolution.
The Government resembles the ancient old feudal system of Europe,
The head is the Kubo, or Emperor, who is the sole Monarch of the
country, and his residence or court is at Jeddo, while at Miaco, the
second city of the empire, is held the court of the Dairi, or principal
ecclesiastical dignitary of the empire. Their temples are free from any
idols; and they make strict search on the arrival of the Dutch vessels
after all sorts of images, paintings, and books, which are on no account
suffered to be landed, but are instantly burned. Nor are any foreign
women suffered to approach the Japanese shore; and though they do
not prohibit their females from having intercourse with strangers ; they


will neither permit them nor their offspring to leave the country. The
salutary law of making parents and relations answerable for the
conduct of their children and dependents, whose morals they ought
to have superintended, has a powerful effect in the prevention of
crimes.
In a similar spirit of justice, neighbours are made responsible for one
another’s property ; which tends, by one of the strongest of all
obligations, to the security of individuals, and the preservation of
public tranquillity ; since the temptation to robbery is repressed by the
general resentment which is excited against offenders of that descrip-
tion, fromqheHujriry which their depredations bring upon the com-
munity. But the manners, the laws, and the religious institutions of
this extraordinary and insulated people, would require a voluminous
detail, even were that empire more open to observation, and the means
of exploring the country as free ahcTanrpkras they have hitherto been
few and contracted. The possession of Java by the British might
possibly, in time, have contributed somewhat to extend our intercourse
with these people, as well as with others in their vicinity; for a liberal
and an enlightened policy, w ith the superiority of arts and arms,
could hardly fail to produce favourable sentiments on the minds of
an intelligent race, especially when they should have been enabled
to discern the contrast between the new T government settled in their
neighbourhood, and that which it superseded.


A more sublime and instructive spectacle could hardly be exhibited
to the moral contemplation, than that which presented itself to the
observer of the British Empire in the oriental world at the close of the
operations which have been detailed in thepreceding sheets. From
the gulph of Persia the dominion of our flag extended over the vast
and populous plains of the Indian continent, while stretching from
the Indus to the mountains of Napaul, and from Cape Comorin to
the banks of the Sutledge, the ancient Hydraotes, but the modern
boundary of the territory of the Seiks; then again our authority
was acknowledged among the numerous Asiatic isles, comprizing
the most valuable and aneient settlements in the east, the whole
comprizing a population, certainly not less than one hundred mil-
lions of active and intelligent beings. Rome, in her proudest state,
could not boast of such an accession of power, or equal means for
promoting the general interests of mankind. Proportionate, there-
fore, to the immensity of our influence in those interesting and pro-
ductive regions, must be the duties which that commanding position
imposes upon us for the benefit of the nations and tribes who have
been thus providentially placed within the sphere of our exer-
tions. No man, indeed, that feels any concern for the improvement
of the degraded part of the human species, or who wishes for the re-
moval of those obstacles which have hitherto impeded the progress of
civilization, can be indifferent to the chaiacter and condition of the


numerous classes of our fellow-creatures, scattered over those vast re-
gions where our arms have established a dominion, and our commerce
has opened new sources of industry. Much beyond all question is re-
quired in a moral and political view, to render the authority which
we have obtained beneficial to those over whom it is exercised. Many
are the evils which call for vigorous but judicious remedies, and enor-
mous are the superstitions which, while they depress those who are
blinded by them, cannot but operate to the disadvantage of an enligh-
tened government, and the prevention of a liberal legislation. Still,
with the impression of these truths on his mind, every well-informed
and rational philanthropist will perceive the extreme danger of adopt-
ing crude plans of reform, and visionary projects for the improvement
of British India. Whatever system may be judged best calculated to
maintain the sway which we at present enjoy, and at the same time
to ameliorate the situation uf the in our eastern possessions ;
it seems most reasonable that the whole of it should be digested, and
deliberately arranged in that part of the world to which it is intended
to be applied ; for extensive and minute as the information is which
the people of this country have on the subject of their foreign settle-
ments, still it cannot be denied that for the internal management and
security of our dependencies, local observation and personal enquiry
must be indispensably necessary.
Beform, therefore, to be effectual among a people who are naturally
attached to the very corruptions which oppress them, must be progres-
sive, and the light of religious truth, from the salutary influence of
which so many permanent blessings are justly to be expected, should
be diffused with all the wisdom and prudence becoming its divine


origin and immense importance. But if, on the contrary, intemperate
zeal should presume to subvert institutions, and to attack prejudices,
which have for ages been regarded with the profoundest veneration ;
and if, instead of illuminating men's minds by a friendly intercourse,
the encouragement of science, and the benefit of education, fanaticism
is entrusted with a power of assailing the taith of millions, the bene-
volence of our Legislature will be frustrated, humanity will be out-
raged, and torrents of human blood will be mingled with the waters
of the Ganges.
An energetic and comprehensive administration, centrically situated,
and furnished with ample powers to aid the intentions of the Govern-
ment at home, and to restrain any dangerous innovations that might
be occasionally attempted by honest but ill-directed minds, would be of
inestimable advantage to the natives of India, and the European
residents.
But there are now strong grounds to believe, that the policy of Gr ea
Britain towards her colonial settlements and remote connexions, will
be productive of mutual confidence, and the most salutary conse-
quences, in enriching the stock of knowledge, improving the morals
of various tribes who have now no law but their appetite, and, above
all, in spreading over the dark and ignorant divisions of the globe,
the benefit of legislative protection, and the blessing of Christian
revelation.
FINIS.
PRINTED BY R. WILKS, 89, CHANCERY-LANE,






