

Memorable Gold Discovery.
THE HAPPY VALLEY FIELD.
Some Interesting Reminiscences.




Memorable Gold Discovery.
THE HAPPY VALLEY FIELD.
Some Interesting Reminiscences.
In compliance with a request by Miss Thomas, the Bal-
larat secretary of the Happy Valley Old Girls’ and Boys’
Society, Mr J. S. Hew, one of the pioneers, has furnished
the following interesting reminiscences of the discovery of gold
in that locality:—
620 Doveton street north,
Ballarat.
Mr Raw writes of the discovery as one of the party who
made it, as one of the most remarkable gold mining districts
in Australia, if not in the world.
Remarkable it was, he continues, in the first place, oy
reason, of the discovery by the North American party or 36
men of a rich alluvia] gold channel in a valley on a hill under
170 feet of basaltic rock, and 10 feet of clay and gravelly wash
dirt, and gold equal to 70 ounces to a small puddling machine.
The second remarkable find was a giant she oak log, 30 feet in
length and 3 feet in diameter, without roots or branch, as per-
fect in every way as when on the surface, in all probability
millions of years previously. In my time, 1858, the shaft
was sunk in the midst of a dense forest of messmate and stringy
bark, similar, with no sign of a she oak tree within miles of
the valley on the surface. My party started with a company
of 36 shareholders, 18 contributing and 18 working, expecting
to bottom within 60 feet, as the reef, soft slate and sandstone
outcropped on either side, showing a width of less than 100
yards, and yet there was a rich gutter 180 feet below the sur-
face, without any apparent head or beginning, after a distance
of 500 yards from the shaft. As the country dipped away to
the Western Plains, fully 500 feet below the surface of .the
shaft, and the dip of the gutter woxild be another 500 fleet
towards Piggoreet.


The first shaft was sunk in basaltic rock to a depth of 100
feet, and the water being too heavy for our lOin cylinder
winding engine, we decided to sink on the reef 40 feet south
of the shaft. We sank in reef to 150 feet, put a drive towards
the old shaft, and pricked the rock. In this drive we sank a
blind shaft 30 feet deep, and started a drive at 180 feet, exactly
deep enough to cross the gutter without pricking the overhead
water. We found it about 70 feet wide, giving us 16oz 17dwt
of gold. This was most encouraging, and justified sinking the
shaft the necessary 40ft, but, the water increasing, we decided
to buy and erect a 16in pumping engine, set of pumps, and
puddling machine. That meant a first call for machinery of
£25 a share, and I did not possess' a £5 note; but 1 met an
angel in disguise in a poor looking working man, to whom I,
as secretary of the party, gave employment a few weeks before,
and permission to put up a sleeping stretcher in my tent. On
the night after the call was made, while at tea, my friend
said, “This is a pretty stiff call; what are you going to do’.'
I replied, “I do not know; lam beaten, or must sell.” After-
wards he said, “I came here without clothes for a change;
can Igo to Smythes to get tnem?’’ I replied, “ Certainly, you
want them.” He returned two days later, and after supper
handed me £25 in notes, saying, “ I won’t see you without
money to pay your call. I want no interest. You may be in
a position to pay in a few months, and then if I want it 1 will
ask you to get it within a fortnight afterwards. Three months
after I paid him, as he was leaving the district. That man,
apparently a hard-up man, came into my life at a critical time,
saved me from losing my share, and went as he came, unknown
to me other than a>s “Irish Tom.” God bless him. He was
my saving angel as regards my share in the mine. Our daily
yield of gold was from 60 to 75 ounces in the first shaft, but
as the gutter dipped fast towards the creek we were compelled,
to sink a second shaft about 600 yards from No. 1; and before
this shaft bottomed we had to remove our smith’s shop, and
for this purpose we obtained the services of 30 men to carry
it to its new position. We found it impossible to carry it more
than 50 yards. One of our party was a, splendid broad axe
timber squarer, from North America. He at once selected a
tree 2ft in diameter, squared up one side, cut the two ends
into 4in axles, and cut two blocks from another. The tree
made two wheels 2ft 6in in diameter and Ift tyre surface, with
4^in diameter axle holes. We fastened this axle to the centre
of the building, placed two men at each corner to keep the
balance equal, got our wood contractor, the MeLennon Bros.’
team of one bullock in the dray shafts, and one horse in the
lead, and in half an hour from starting we had the building in
its new position at No. 2 shaft site. This work gave the Mc-
Lennon Bros, the first start of house removing ’ with better


appliances, and within 12 months they undertook the removal
of large buildings, requiring 12 and 14 horses. It became such
a profitable business that the McGregor Bros, also started
house removing. I believe jmiMi McLennon is still living in
Melbourne, but McLennon Bros, were the first house removers
on this principle in Australia. Before the No. 2 shaft bottomed
I sold my l-36th share for £230, intending to go to the first
London Exhibition, but was persuaded to join another company
named the Fairy Glen. One of the North American share-
holders sold out for over £4OO after the No. 2 shaft was lairly
at work. He, J. Forshaw, put his money into the Ballarat
Gas Works, and must have been a director for over 35 years,
but he sold his share in the mine too soon, for the North
American Company’s l-36th share was quoted at £9OO without
a seller, but within a week fell back to £4OO, and wuthin its
last few months to less than £2OO. It was rumored abroad
that a large parcel of gold was kept back from No. 1 shaft to
fatten the yields from No. 2, hence the great rise, but no buyers,
as the fattening process could not be kept up, the price quota-
tion of shares naturally fell. The adjoining min© on the
eastern continuation of the North American gutter was very
rich in places, but very narrow (not more than 30ft wide) be-
fore picking up the Fairy Glen tributary. I was on a visit
down the British mine one day, and took out a shovelful of
wa 'sh, held it under a stream of water, and handed to the shift
boss 6oz of coarse gold. This prospect encouraged me to join
the Fairy Glen Company o) 36 shareholders. We a shaft
and erected a plant at a cost of £25 a share, besides calls of
20s per week for six months, but all our efforts were fruitless,
as the gutter was not rich enough to pay expenses. In this
mine I lent to two men £25 each for their machinery calls. At
last we could not pay our two wages men engine drivers, so
they left the mine to go to another, and while our treasurer
went to Smythes to try and get other drivers, I stood at the
engine baling water for five eight-hour shifts without a, break;
one-third of the time with my feet in a dish of cold water, to
keep me awake; in fact, I know I slept dozens of times from
the time the tank full of water left the well to its arrival at the
discharge point, but all to no purpose, and we had to give up.
My loss was quite £2OO, and yet it was afterwards proved by
the Lucky Company that the junction was rich wrtlfm 50ft of
our last set of timber.
The only men now alive, as far as I can find out, of the
North American and the Fairy Glen Companies are Mr W.
Ling, now of Sebastopol, and myself.
M> next venture was in the Waver ley Gold Mining Com-
pany, south of the North American Company and the Fairy
Glen Company, on a high hill, on which the Church of Eng-
land nnd the Government school stand in splendid condition


to this day, and for -the old boys and girls I have been requested
to write these notes.
On referring to rny old journal, I find that the North
American Company was started in 1858, and on December
6th, 1862, I paid £3O for l-100th share to join the Waverley
Company, under the management of Mr A. Robertson. This
company was formed to find an outlet to Linton gutters, such
as the Royal Standard, an extremely rich alluvial gutter, the
Black Lead Nuggetty Gully, and a lot of other smaller finds,
as these gutters all trended to one point, near the Linton
Estate,* and were here covered with basaltic rock. The genet a I
opinion was that their several courses must, after junctiomng
with oner main channel, pass through the mam valley north of
the Church Hill. We obtained the services of Dr Rose, a
clever geologist. He traversed the locality, took in the bound-
arv of the basalt, and selected a site for our main shaft, which
was sunk to a depth of 330 ft, and proved to be within 20ft of
the deepest part of the main gutter, which was at that time
four miles distant from the nearest shaft on Linton, and an-
other four miles from the line of mines from Smytlies to the
Grand Trunk, Piggoreet. With the many bends in the gutter
there must have been a total of 10 miles of underground work-
ings, nearly the whole of it highly auriferous, giving employ-
ment in one way and another to 30,000 persons. The most
remarkable thing is that in all this line of workings the reef
washes have never been exploited, and with an alluvial channel
10 miles. 1 W there-oug’ i to be s.'nb higher benches of gold-
bearing wash. Another singular thing is thM the quartz veins
found have not yielded gold, excepting the lode in the lowest
workings of the Grand Trunk mine, Piggoreet, and that lode
.below the Devil’s Kitchen; and amongst all the hundreds of
men on this long stretch of country, I only know of three now
living. One is the now Inspector Fitches, then an inquisitive
boy; the others being Mr W. Longton, late manager of the
Victoria United mine, Ballarat, and myself, L S. Rew, one
of the original discoverers of the deep alluvial of Happy
Yalley. The latter days, or rather years, of the life of the
Waverley may be classified as unprecedented in many respects.
First, was the act-of the then manager of the Linton Bank of
New South Wales, after the mine had been worked by Mr A.
Robertson, Mr A. Martin, and the third manager, Mr G.
Wyatt, all with varying success, but poverty in the yields over-
took them all, and with the chance of more lucrative employ-
ment elsewhere, they left behind them a fairly good plant ymd
32 workmen, the majority of whom could not raise blow
amongst them. So we held a meeting and appointed tnree
.men to interview the banker. Wei offered to take over the
mine and plant on terms, and pay the £750 out of the gold
rather than close the mine down. Mr Lewers asked for a


deposit of £lOO, the balance of £750 to be paid after deducting
a living wage; but, said he, “ How will you make it pay when
three managers could not? You will have to buy new rails, feed
three horses, etc.” But we -showed him that the drive towards
Linton had two large and long curves in a distance of 2000
feet of drive. Our proposal was to rise up 30 feet in the shaft,
run a straight drive a distance of 1100 feet, and thus -save 900
feet of travelling, and allow us to use the 900 feet of double
rails for future use, and save our horses travelling 5400 feet a
day by running six trips a day. The manager was so much
taken with our sensible proposition that he, without hesitation,
told us to go to work without a deposit, and arranging that
after a living wage a certain percentage should be paid towards
purchase. After we started Peter McKean offered us his pad-
dock for £B5O. As we knew our workings would be in a few
hundred feet inside his fence, we decided to- consult our banker,
who, without much hesitation, arranged to buy the paddock.
Just before the last purchase I was appointed surveyor and
engine driver, and some times secretary. We made a good
start with as fine a body of workmen as could be produced, all
of them having worked under Mr Andrew Martin, and he only
kept the best. Our plant consisted of an 18-inch cylinder pump-
ing and puddling engine and a 14-inch winding engine, with
two flat chains for haulage; and 12-inch pumps and two pudd-
ling machines, all in good working order. Most of the first 500
feet was through wash with a small percentage of gold. Then
we cut through the roof Vf Mr Martin’s first curve; then 200
feet of schist without wash; then 100 feet of Arrows' gutter
workings, being the return curve of his lower drives. Then
*3OO feet of solid ground, much of it wash dirt That accounts
for 1100 feet of straight drive, and so exact was Mr Martin s
survey and plan that our straight drive rails connected up with
his rails with only a slight movement of two sleepers. W'e then
got into a good, payable face of wash dirt. For the next 400
feet we were cutting extra water, and at this point a belly in
the rock gave us the flood that swept through our drives down
the 30 feet of shaft, and in less than a week drowned no
fewer than eight mines in our gutter, down through the- Devil’s
Kitchen to the Grand Trunk mine below Piggoreet, and before
it ran out of the top of that mine, which is 100 feet below the
adjacent country we swamped out many of the mines back
up the Scarsdale gutter, and must have put 2000 men or more
out of mining employment.
A large body of men came to our mine, and threatened
to destroy our property. Of course it meant a great loss to
the men, but no fault of ours. However, the various com-
panies paid us £l7 a week to keep our pumps going, but after
a few weeks’ pay they accepted our version that 50 pumps Of
12-ineh diameter were useless. That is now close on 60 years
ago, and when I last saw the Grand Trunk Company's shaft


the Water was running at the surface as strong as ever. The
mystery is, where does it come from ? W e took out ail the
wash from under the rock, thereby proving that the water does
not come from a greater depth, and at the widest place on the
surface the rock is not more than three-quarters of a mile.
Besides, the mines between us and Linton did not get any
portion of water. It all came from an area not more than 500
feet in length. The rush of water through Mr Martin's old
workings cleared the airway so effectually that it left our first
500 feet always full of foul air, so much so that it was im-
possible for the men or the horses to have a light in all that
distance. The men had to ride in the trucks without lights for
over 400 feet, shone like a star; but, bright as it was, it did
splendid condition. Our air-pipes had to pass through this
dark place, as we could not afford to cause a leakage for inter-
mediate ventilation. But near the Extreme end of this badly
ventilated part there was a fungoid growth on one leg of a set
of timber, and for nearly two years that gave a light that, for
over 400 feet, it shone like a star; but, bright as it was, it did
not illumine the drive beyond a few feet, and yet it was so
bright for such a distance. At last a visitor put his hand on it,
and that put the light out for ever. At any rate, it was one
of the marvels of the Waverley mine.
The greatest novelty in mining the world over was the use
of three boats for working a tributary—viz., travelling rn boats
a distance of 500 feet from the shaft at a depth of 330 feet
below the surface, and then walkings another 500 feel over the
top of fallen basalt at an average of 25 feet above the water
.'landing. Then down nearly 30 feet into the old workings of
the No. 1 “ Old Lucky” mine; then up 100 feet in a tributary,
narrow, but rich, continuing the work of this gutter for over
500 feet, when we found it advisable to sink a new' shaft to a
depth of nearly 200 feet, and with all the obstacles of this sur-
vey, the shaft was not 16 inches out of its required position.
The first boat was made of 3 x 9 inch diameter g. iron
pipes, 9 feet long, with conical ends, soldered airtight. This
would carry two men and tools. But we got J. H. Marshall to
build three flat-bottomed boats, 9 feet long. They would each
carry three men kneeling, and all tools. We always kept one
boat at each end, as the water was about 3ft bin to 4ft deep,
through a drive with 7ft legs, sft wide at the bottom, and 3ft
bin wide at the top.
I Have a model of the boats made lin to a foot scale, it
is in use by my family as a receptacle for their sewing material,
etc., a very useful article, and highly prized.
The boats were first used by two men, who for 12 months
were engaged at the far end of the fallen rock, making
an opening under the rock, with a view of draining
off the water from the first 500 feet, as this con


tained a large area of wash, that hais never yet been worked out,
and probably will never be taken out. But the basalt had
fallen in such large blocks ais to make it too dangerous tor the
two men to work so far away from all assistance, if a run of
the material had taken place. One day, as the surveyor of the
party was exploring the sides of drive containing water, 1
discovered a drive put out west into a field of wash, and in
the drain side of the drive an oxide sediment had formed,
which crackled under the pressure of the foot. I put the lighted
candle down to see the reason of the peculiar sound, when, to
my astonishment, the broken portion blazed up, and burnt for
at least one minute. I ran my finger, breaking the crust of
the oxidised slime, and with each stroke of the finger, the candle
being near, a sheet of flame shot up. Our men naturally
made many inspections, all with the same result, and further
exploration- disclosed the source in a pyriteis body, which
yielded the sediment. This block of ground, 500 by' 800 feet,
remains unworked, as the drives put through it were too poor
in gold for working, seeing that we had such a large extent of
ground to work in the tributary, which, after the Wo. 2 she
was sunk, gave the party work for over seven years.
This tributary was discovered by two men after the .Lucky
Company had worked out the main gutter, leaving plenty of
open spaces under the rock, heading for a complete washing
flat, and stowage room for all headings and washed stones, it
was the drinking of one of these men that induced us to inspect
the locality of their yields It took our party about four days
to get to them, through slush and water, in places s) deep that
we had to walk on our toes to keep our mouths above the water.
For two days they heard our efforts to get to them, and when
we got there they had completely hidden the entrance of their
small drive. So that after all our efforts we had to give up
fhe search. However, at the hotel that night they became so
jovial at our disappointment that, we thought it advisable to
make another search the next day, and although they had taken
such pains to hide the entrance, they left four inches of a
wooden tram rail without a cover. I tripped over this, and
nearly when one of my mates, in releasing my foot, said,
Here is The key, boys; hand me a shovel,” and within 10
minutes w© were into a nice drive about 60 feet long, with
half an ounce to the tub-wash. I made a survey, and found
all their workings in our lease. However, we decided to get
John Lynch, sen., to make a survey. To get him there we had
to make a roundabout way through the old workings of the
Old Lucky Company, which proved that they had been getting
all their gold within our boundary, and the publican lost at
least one customer worth about £lO a week to him. But the
fossickers had plenty of good, payable gold in the thin wash
all through most of the worked out mines. The Lucky, British,


Robin Hood, Junction, and Volunteer companies gave splendid
returns for years to the fo&sickers, as they were called, two
and four men partners. Two of my particular chums made
£6OO a man fossicking. I know another family who made
£lOOO a man fossicking and cleaning up the crevices in the old
bottoms. Their methods were to secure one of the worked-out
shafts, nail Sin x lin battens across the shaft on to the old
skids of Jin x Sin, thus making a perpendicular ladder, SOOtt
in length. There were few men who would take the risk, even
knowing that there were good values below, and the speed at
which some of these men would travel down and up these
ladders was surprising. At the invitation of H. Crosier and
Bellingham, I went down the Lucky shaft SOO feet. Belling-
ham went first, and when down 200 feet he called out to me
to start Crosier, a stout man, of 13 stone, allowed me ro go
down to within 50 feet of the bottom before he started, and
now, after nearly 50 years, I can hear that man's beat of nand
and foot at the speed he travelled, and caught me before 1
reached the bottom. It was the risk to be incurred in travel-
ling these ladders that kept others from working, because other-
wise there were years of work left in the mines. From Linton
to Piggoreet not a particle of this area has been explored for
reef washes, except one in the Waverley, which rose rapidly,
and was left for future exploration, which never took place.
I spent 12 years in these and adjoining mines, and five of
my 16 children were born there, and when I started to explore
the district I did not own more than in five pound note.
BAXTER A. STUBBS. PRINT., BALLARAT.


