

MEMORANDUM
AND
ARTICLES OF ASSOCIATION
or
THE MELBOURNE
Woollen Mill Company, Limited
Registered under the “ Companies' Statute 1861,”
Limiting the Liability of the Members.
OFFICE, 46 COLLINS STLEET EAST,
MELBOURNE.
FACTORY, FOOTSCRAY,
1872.
GEELONG:
ROBERT BELLIN, PRINTER, 81 MOORABOOL STREET.
MDCCCLXXII




TABLE or CONTENTS.
No. OF
Clause.
1. Tabic A not to apply to this Company.
2. Registered Office of the Company.
3. Cheques, Hills of Exchange, and Promissory Notes, how drawn and signed.
4. Common Seal to be in the custody of the Chairman.
5. How the Capital may be increased
6. New Shares, (unless otherwise determined) on the creation thereof, to be treated as
original Shares.
7. How new Shares may be issued and disposed of.
8. Shares of two classes Paid-up and Progressive
9. Definition of Paid-up and Progressive Shares.
10. Conversion of Progressive into Paid-up Shares.
11. Acceptance of Shares to be signified iu writing or by paying the deposit.
12. Allotment of Shares.
13. Joint-holder may give Receipt for Interest or Dividend.
14. Certificate of Shares
15. Certificate to be given up on Transfer, and fresh Certificate issued.
16. Renewal of Certificate.
17. Certificate on conversion of Progressive Share.
18. Deposit and Subscriptions on Progressive Shares.
19. When Monthly Subscriptions Payable.
20. Shares Allotted alter the Monthly Pay-day.
21. Table of Fines.
22. Directors may alter pay-day.
23. Payments to be appropriated first to Fines.
24. Register of Transfers.
25. When to be Closed,
26. When the Company may decline to Transfer.
27. Executors or Administrators of Deceased Member only recognized.
28. Registration of Transmittee.
29. Transmittee may have Nominee Registered.
30. Instrument of Transfer.
31. Form of Transfer.
32. Registration of Transferrec.
33. Notice requiring Payment.
34. Notice of Forfeiture.
35. Forfeiture by Resolution of Directors.
36. Share Forfeited, Property of the Company.
37. Members to Continue Liable,
38. Certificate of Forfeiture to be Evidence.
39. Scale of Votes.
40. How Lunatics and Infants may Vote.
41. How Joint-holders may Vote.
42. When Member shall not be Entitled to Vote.
43. How Votes may be Given.
44. Instrument of Proxy.
45. Instrument to be Deposited.
46. Form of Proxy.
47. Absent Members may Appoint an Attorney,
Mode of Appointment.
48. Directors may Prescribe Forms.
49. What Attorney may do.
60. First Ordinary General Meeting.
Subsequent Ordinary General Meeting.
61. Extraordinary Meetings.
62. When Extraordinary General Meetings may be Convened,
63. Requisition by Members.
64. Directors, or in their default the Requisitionists, may Convene.
65. Notice of General Meeting and of special business*
66. What business special.
57 Quorum.
dissolution or adjourmneut for want of quorum.


69. Chairman at general meeting's.
60. When Chairman of Directors not present member to be chose n.
61. Adjournment of meetings.
62. When no poll is demanded and specified majority of votes not required questions to be
decided by show of hands.
63. When poll is to be taken and how.
6*. Chairman to have casting vote.
65. Number of Directors.
66. Continuing Directors may act.
6?. Qualification of Directors.
68. Remuneration of Directors.
69. Vacation of office by Director.
70. Retirement of Directors.
71. Order of retirement.
72. Retiring Director not re-eligible.
73. Company to fill vacancies.
74. Notice by candidate for office of Director.
75. When vacancies not filled up at general meeting.
76. Casual vacancies.
77. Company may remove Directors.
78. Meeting of Directors.
79. Votes of Directors.
80. Chairman of Directors.
81. Committees.
82. Chairman of Committee.
83. Committee Meetings.
84. Directors’ acts to be valid.
85. Resolution where quorum present to be resolution of all.
86. Directors to manage the business.
87. Deed requiring Common Seal how to be signed.
88. Appointment, duties, and remuneration of Officers and Servants of the Company
89. Agencies. J
9U. Delegation powers to Agents and Local Managers.
91. Purchase and Lease of Lands and Offices.
92. Power of Borrowing.
93. By-laws.
94. Declaration of dividend.
95. Allotment of dividend.
96. Dividends only to be paid out of profits.
97. Reserve Fund.
98. Sums payable by member to be deducted from dividend.
99. Notice of dividends.
100. Dividends not to bear interest.
101. What accounts to be kept.
102. Books of account to be kept at Registered Office.
103. Directors to submit half-yearly statements.
104. What such statements to contain.
105. Balance Sheet.
Report of Directors.
106. Printed copy to be delivered to members on application,
107. Accounts to be audited.
108. Appointment of Auditors.
109. Who eligible as Auditors.
110. Election.
111. Remuneration of Auditors.
112. Casual vacancy in office of Auditor.
113. If Auditors not elected Governor in Council may appoint.
114. Auditor to examine balance sheet.
116. Auditors to have list of and access to documents.
116. Auditors’ Report.
117. Notices how to be served.
118. Notices to joint holders.
119. Notices by post.


NAMES, ADDRESSES, AND DESCBIPTIONS OP SUBSCRIBERS.
NUMBER OF SHARES
TAKEN BY EACH
SUBSCRIBER.
John M. Dayies, 35 Queen-street, Melbourne,
20
Solicitor...
John Bellin, 2 Collins-street west, Melbourne,
20
Auctioneer
James Fergus son, 59 Collins-street west, Melbourne,
20
.Engraver
James Munro, 46 Collins-street east, Melbourne,
Accountant
20
Robert S. Inglis, 26 Little Collins-street east, Melbourne,
Plumber ...
20
“THE COMPANIES STATUTE, 1861.”
(company limited by shades.)
MEMORANDUM OF ASSOCIATION
OF
THE MELBOURNE
Woollen Mill Company, Limited
Ist. The name of the company is “ The Melbourne Woollen Mill
Company, Limited.
2nd. The objects for which the company is established are—
To carry on the business of Manufacturers of Woollen Goods, and
also to deal in all articles required to carry on such business.
To enter into contracts usually undertaken in connection with any
such business as aforesaid.
To purchase lease or hire either in the Colony of Victoria or else-
where any land buildings or machinery which may be necessary or
useful for the business of the company.
To do all such other things as are incidental or conducive to the
attainment of the above objects.
3rd. The liability of the members is limited.
4th. The capital of the company is thirty thousand pounds divided
into six thousand shares of five pounds each.
We the several persons whose names and addresses are subscribed
are desirous of being formed into a company in pursuance of this
Memorandum of Association and we respectively agree to take the
number of shares in the capital of the company set opposite our
respective names.
Dated the Twenty-eighth day of December, One thousand eight
hundred and seventy-one.
Witness to the signatures of the said:—John Mark Davies, John
Beilin, James Eergusson, James Munro, and Eobert Scott Inglis.
Jno. Campbell, Solicitor, Melbourne.


Board of Directors
the Year 1872;
JAMES MUNRO ... ... Retires 1875.
thomas McPherson
JAMES EERGUSSON
ROBERT LORMER ... ... Retires 1874.
J. E. DROOP
WILLIAM ROBERTSON ...
ROBERT SCOTT INGLIS ... Retires 1873.
JOHN B. CREWS
EDMUND ASHLEY
FOI\ 1872 1
W. E. A. RUCKER ... ... Retires 1874.
W. H. TUCKETT „ 1873.


“THE COMPANIES STATUTE 1864.”
ARTICLES OF ASSOCIATION
OF
THE MELBOURNE
Woollen Mill Company, Limited.
Miscellaneous Provisions.
1. The Regulations contained in the table marked A in the
Second Schedule of “ The Companies Statute 1864 ” shall not
save so far as the same are embodied in these Articles apply to
this Company.
2. The Registered Office of the Company shall be at No.
46 Collins Street east in the City of Melbourne or at such
other place in Melbourne as the Directors may from time to
time appoint.
3. Whenever any payment on account of the Company has
to be made by cheque drawn on the bankers of the Company
such cheque shall be signed by at least two of the Directors and
countersigned by the Secretary and all bills of exchange and all
promissory notes which shall be drawn accepted made or endorsed
in the name or on account or on behalf of the Company shall be
drawn accepted made or endorsed in like manner.
4. The common seal of the Company shall be in the custody
of the Chairman or in his absence the Vice-Chairman (if any)
of the Directors but shall not be affixed to any document except
by an order of a meeting of the Directors or of any Committee
of Directors duly authorised in that behalf of which order having
been duly given a minute to that effect in the Directors’ Minute-
book shall be sufficient evidence between all parties and for all
purposes unless the contrary is proved.
Table A not to
apply
Registered
Office
Cheques Bills of
Exchange and
Promissory
Notes how
drawn and
signed
Common Seal
to be in the
custody of
the Chair,
man.


How the Capital
may be in-
creased
New Shares un-
less otherwise
determined on
the creation
thereof to be
treated as
original shares
How new shares
may be issued
and disposed of
Shares of two
classes paid-up
or progressive
Definition of
paid up and
progressive
shares.
Conversion of
progress ive
into paid-up
shares
Increase of Capital,
5. The Directors may at any time with the sanction of a special
resolution of the Company increase the capital by the issue of new
shares whether the whole of the shares then issued shall have
been fully paid up or not and whether the whole of the shares
then existing shall have been issued or not and each increase
of capital shall be in the aggregate of such amount and divided
into shares of such respective amounts as may be determined by
the resolution authorising the increase or by any similar resolution
of the Company or if no direction on the subject shall be so given
then as the Directors may think expedient.
6. All capital raised by new shares shall (except so far as the
Company shall by the special resolution authorising the increase
of capital or by any similar resolution otherwise determine) be
considered as part of the original capital and be subject to the
same provisions in all respects as if it had been part of the
original capital.
7. Subject to any directions contained in the special resolution
authorising the increase of capital or any similar resolution of the
Company the Directors may regulate the issue of the new shares
authorised to be created and dispose thereof in such manner as
they may think best for the Company’s interest.
Shares.
8. The shares in the capital of the Company shall be divided
into and respectively described as “ paid-up shares ” and “ pro-
gressive shares.”
9. Paid-up shares shall consist of those shares upon which the
the full sum of five pounds per share shall have been paid to the
Company and progressive shares shall consist of all shares other
than paid-up shares Ihe holder of any share who shall pay up
the full sum of five pounds on such share on or before the first
Monday in January One thousand eight hundred and seventy-
two shall be entitled to a rebate of eight per cent, upon the
amount of such share.
10. The holder of any progressive share may at any time
convert the same into a paid-up share by payment of such
further sum in respect of such share as shall together with the
moneys which shall have been already paid thereon (exclusively
of any moneys paid for fines) make up the full sum of five


pounds And the Directors may if they think fit allow a rebate
on such payment.
11. No person other than the persons having signed the
Memorandum aud Articles of Association shall be deemed to have
accepted any share in the Company unless he shall have applied
for or accepted the same by writing under his hand or paid the
deposit thereon.
12. The first issue of shares shall not exceed three thousand Of
the remaining three thousand five hundred shall be issued from
time to time to such of the employees of the Company as shall
apply for the same and two thousand five hundred shall be issued
by the Directors at such times as they may from time to time
think fit.
13. If several persons are registered as joint holders of any
share any one of such persons may give an effectual receipt for
any dividend payable in respect of such share.
14. Every member shall on payment of one shilling be entitled
to a certificate under the common seal of the Company in such
form as the Directors may prescribe specifying the share or shares
held by him and the amount paid thereon.
15. On every application to register the transfer of any shares
or to register any person as a member in respect of any shares
which may have been transmitted to such person by operation
of law the certificate specifying the share or shares in respect of
which such registration is required shall be delivered up to the
Company and anew certificate in similar form specifying the
share or shares transferred or transmitted shall on payment of
one shilling be delivered to the transferree or transmittee and if
the registration of any transfer is required in respect of some
only of the shares specified in the certificate delivered up to the
Company anew certificate specifying the share or shares remain-
ing untransferred shall without any payment being demanded
therefor be delivered to the transferror.
16. If any certificate as aforesaid is worn out destroyed or lost
it may be renewed on payment of such sum not exceeding two
shillings and sixpence as the Directors may from time to time
prescribe on such proof being adduced to the Directors as shall
satisfy them of such wearing out destruction or loss and on such
indemnity being given if the Directors require any as they may
think sufficient,
Acceptance of
shares to be
signified in
writing or by
paying of
the deposit.
Allotment of
shares
Joint-holder
may give
receipt for
interest or
dividend
Certificate of
shares
Certificate to be
given up on
transfer and
fresh certificate
issued
Renewal of
certificate


Certificate on
conversion of
progressive
share
Deposit and
subscriptions
on progressive
shares
When monthly
subscriptions
payable.
Shares allotted
after the
monthly pay
clay
17. Tn case of the conversion of a progressive share into a
paid-up share such fresh certificate as may be requisite shall be
issued without charge.
Subscriptions on Shares and Fines.
18. A deposit of four shillings shall be paid to the Company
upon every progressive share within at least seven days after the
allotment thereof and thereafter there shall be payable upon
every such share a monthly subscription of four shillings until
the full amount of five pounds (including the amount of such
deposit) shall he paid up thereon and such monthly subscriptions
shall be regarded as calls and (subject to the following regula-
tions) the same provisions as nearly as may be shall apply thereto
and to all fines that may be due in respect thereof as regards the
recovery of the same and the consequences of non-payment as
are or shall be by law provided in regard to ordinary calls made
upon shares in companies formed under the said statute and
limited by shares.
19. The first monthly subscription upon the progressive shares
shall be payable upon the first Monday in the month of January
One thousand eight hundred and seventy-two and the succeeding
monthly subscriptions on the first Monday in every succeeding
month and such payments shall be made at the registered office
of the Company between the hours of ten o’clock in the forenoon
and four o’clock in the afternoon of the day upon which the
subscription shall be payable.
20. In case any progressive share of the first issue of three
thousand shares shall be allotted after the said first Monday in the
month of January One thousand eight hundred and seventy-two
there shall be paid thereon within at least seven days after allot-
ment a sum equal to the amount of deposit and monthly subscrip-
tion or subscriptions which would have been paid or become
payable thereon had the same been allotted before such day and
Avhenever any progressive share of the remaining three thousand
shall be allotted the subscriptions shall commence from such time
as the Directors may direct at the time of allotting the same.
21. Each member neglecting to pay the monthly subscription
upon the shares held by him as and when the same shall become
payable shall he fined for each share according to the following
scale: —


Table of Pines
Incurred by neglect in payment of monthly subscriptions for a
period of from one to six months on each share: —
Additional. Total,
s. and. s. and.
First month ... 0 3 ... 0 3
Second month ... 0 6 ... 0 9
Third month ... 0 9 ... 1
Fourth month ... 10 ... - 6
Fifth month ... 13 ... 3 9
Sixth month ... 16 ... 33
(And so on in the like proportion for each succeeding month.)
22. Should any day upon which any monthly subscription
would be ordinarily payable be a general or public holiday or
should a change to another than the ordinary day be in the
opinion of the Directors from any other cause desirable they may
appoint some subsequent day in the same month for payment of
such monthly subscription and shall notify such change by ad-
vertisement to be published seven days at the least before the said
subscription shall be made payable in not less than two news-
papers published and circulating in Melbourne and a like notice
shall be posted in a conspicuous place in the registered office of
the Company and such substituted day shall for all purposes be
regarded as the ordinary day for payment of such monthly sub-
scription.
23. Moneys received from any member after any fines shall
have become payable by him shall be appropriated in the first
place in or toward payment of such fines.
Transfer and Transmission of Shares.
24. The Company shall keep a book to be called the Register
of Transfers ” and therein shall be fairly and distinctly entered
the particulars of every transfer or transmission of any share.
25. The transfer books shall be closed during the fourteen
days immediately preceding each of the ordinary general meetings
in each year.
26. The Company may decline to register any transfer ot
shares or to enter the name of the transferree in the register of
members in respect thereof so long as the member making the
transfer is either alone or jointly with any other person indebted
Table of Fines
Directors may
alter pay day
Payments to be
appropriated
first to fines
Register of
transfer
When to be
closed
When the com-
pany may de-
cline to transfer


Executors or
administrators
of deceased
member only
l ecognized
Registration
of transmittee
Transmittee
may have
Nominee
registered
Instrument of
transfer
Form of
transfer
to the Company on any account whatever whether for subscript
tions fines or otherwise and also if the Directors shall for any
cause resolve that it is inexpedient to allow the transferee to
become a member.
27. The executors or administrators of a deceased member shall
be the only persons recognised by the Company as having any
title to his shares.
28. Any person becoming interested in a share in consequence
of the death insolvency or bankruptcy of any member or the
marriage of any female member may be registered as a member
upon producing such evidence as may from time to time be
required by the Directors provided that such evidence shall be
so produced and if so requirad by the Directors deposited with
the Secretary to be inspected or retained by the Company at
least fourteen days before such person shall be entitled to be so
registered.
29. Any person becoming entitled to a share in consequence
of the death insolvency or bankruptcy of a member or in conse-
quence of the marriage of any female member may instead of
being himself registered elect to have some person nominated by
him and approved by the Directors registered as transferree of
such share provided nevertheless that if he shall elect to have his
nominee registered he. shall testify his election by executing to
his nominee an instrument of transfer of the share and such
instrument of transfer shall be presented to the Company accom-
panied with the evidence required by the Directors to prove the
title of the transferror.
30. The instrument of transfer of any share in the Company
shall be executed both by the transferror and transferree and
attested by one witness at the least and the transferror shall be
deemed the holder of such shares until the transfer is registered
and the name of the transferree is entered in the Register of
Members in respect of the shares transferred.
31. Shares in the Company shall be transferred in the following
form—
“ TANARUS, A. B. of
“ in consideration of the sum of
“ paid to me by C. D. of
“do hereby transfer to the said C. D. the share (or shares) num-
“ bered standing in my name in the books of


“ ‘ The Melbourne Woollen Mill Company limited ’ To hold
“ unto the said C. D. his executors administrators and assigns sub-
ject to the several conditions on which I held the same at the
“ time of the execution hereof. And I the said C. D. do hereby
“ agree to take the said share (or shares) subject to the same con-
“ ditions.
“ As witness our hands the day of
“ one thousand eight hundred and seventy-
“ S 4 ‘S ned b 3' the said /- B - { Transferror’s signature.
“ in the presence ot )
Signed by the said C. D. | Transferree’s signature.”
“in the presence ot ) °
or in such other form as the Directors may from time to time
prescribe and the instrument of transfer shall when duly executed
be deposited with the Secretary of the Company.
32. When any instrument of transfer in the proper form and
duly executed and attested and in cases where evidence of th ;
transferror’s title is required accompanied by such evidence shall
be deposited with the Secretary as aforesaid and the Directors
shall not refuse under any regulation of the Company to register
such transfer a memorial of the same shall within fourteen days
after such instrument is deposited unless when the transfer books
are closed and then within fourteen days after they are reopened be
entered in the register of transfers and the name of the transferree
shall be entered in the register of members in respect of the share
or shares transferred.
Forfeiture of Shares.
33. if any member fails to pay the deposit paj'able on allotment
of shares within the time hereinbefore limited for that purpose or
any monthly subscription or any such fine as aforesaid for a
period of six months the Directors may at any time thereafter
during such time as such deposit subscription or fine or any part
thereof remains unpaid serve a notice on him requiring him to pay
any deposit subscriptions or fines then owing by him together
with such expenses as may have accrued by reason of their non-
payment.
34. The notice shall name a further day not being less than :
fourteen days from the date of such notice on or before which de- 1
posit subscriptions fines and expenses are to be paid and eball also
Registration of
transferree
Notice requir-
ing payment
Notice of forfei-
ture


Forfeiture by
resolution ol
Directors
Share forfeited
property of the
company
Members to
continue
liable
Certificate of
forfeiture to be
evidence
Scale of' votes
state that in case of nonpayment the shares in respect of which
such notice shall be given will be liable to be forfeited.
35. If the requisitions of any such notice as aforesaid are not
complied with any share in respect of which such notice has been
given may at any time thereafter before payment of all moneys due
in respect thereof has been made be forfeited by a resolution of the
Directors to that effect.
3G. Any share so forfeited shall be deemed the property of
the Company and may be disposed of in such manner as the
Directors may think fit.
37. Any member whose shares shall have been forfeited shall
notwithstanding be liable to pay the Company all moneys owing
and payable to the Company in respect of such shares at the
time of the forfeiture.
, 38. A certificate in writing signed by the Secretary that the
former holder of any forfeited share or shares made default in
payment of the deposit payable on allotment or of the subscrip-
tions or fines payable thereon and that the forfeiture of the shares
was declared at a meeting of the Directors after due notice and
the receipt of any two Directors and the Secretary of the Com-
pany for the price or purchase money of such share shall consti-
tute a good title to the purchaser and he shall be discharged from
liability to any subscriptions or fines which may have become
payable before such purchase (uuless otherwise expressly agreed)
and his title to the shares shall not be affected by any irregularity
in the proceedings in reference to such forfeiture or sale.
Votes of Members.
39. Each member who has been duly registered shall where a
poll is taken at any general meeting as hereinafter mentioned be
entitled to vote according to the following scale (that is to
say :—)
For nine shares or less he shall have one vote
For more than nine and not more than nineteen shares two
votes
For more than nineteen and not more than thirty-nine shares
three votes
For every additional twenty shares after the first thirty-nine
shares up to ninety-nine shares one vote and no additional
votes beyond that number.


40. If any member is a lunatic or idiot be may vote by his
committee And if any member is an infant be may vote by his
guardian or by any one of his guardians if there be more than
one.
41. If two or more persons are jointly entitled to a share or
shares the member whose name stands first in the Register of
Members as one of the holders of such shares and no other shall
be entitled to vote in respect of the same.
42. No member shall be entitled to vote at any general meeting
if he be more than one mouth in arrears in payment of any sub-
scriptions or fines due in respect of any shares held by him and
after six months from the incorporation of the Company no
member shall be entitled to vote in respect of any share which lie
has acquired by transfer unless he has been registered iu respect
of the shares in respect of which he claims to vote for at least
one month previously to the time of holding the meeting at
which he proposes to vote.
43. Votes may be given cither personally or by proxy or by
attorney as hereinafter mentioned.
44. The instrument appointing a proxy shall be iu writing
under the hand of the appointor or if the appointor is a Corpora-
tion under its Commom Seal and no person shall be appointed a
proxy who is not a member of the Company.
45. The instrument appointing a proxy shall be deposited at
the registered office of the Company at least twenty-four hours
before the time for holding the meeting at which the person
named in such instrument proposes to vote but no instrument
appointing a proxy shall be valid after the expiration of three
months from the date thereof unless in case of adjournment of
any meeting held previously to that time.
4(5. Any instrument appointing a proxy shall be Id the follow-
ing form: —
“The Melbourne Woollen Mill Company Limited.”
“I being a
“ member of ‘ The Woollen Mill Company Limited ’
“ and entitled to vote (or votes) hereby appoint
“ of as my
“ proxy to vote for me and on my behalf at the ordinary (or ex*
“ traordinary) general meeting of the Company to be held on
How lunatics
and infants may
vote
How joint-
holders
may vote
AVlien member
shall not be en-
titled to vote
How votes may
be given
Instrument of
proxy
Instrument to
be deposited
Form of proxy


Absent mem-
bers may ap-
point an
attorney
Mode of ap-
pointment
Directors may
prescribe forms
What attorney
may do
First ordinary
general meet-
ing
Subsequent or-
dinary general
meeting
Exfraordinary
meetings
When extraor*
dlnary general
meetings may
be convened
“ the day of and at any
“ adjournment thereof
“ As witness my hand this day of
(Signature)
Attorney of Member.
47. Any member being absent or about to absent himself from
the colony of Victoria may appoint an attorney to act on his
behalf at all meetings of the Company held during his absence but
any such appointment shall be made by power of attorney duly
executed by the constituent and attested by one witness at the
least and shall at least forty-eight hours before the attorney shall
be entitled to act thereunder be deposited with the Secretary at
the registered office of the Company accompanied by such evidence
of the due execution thereof as the Directors may require.
48. The Directors may if they think fit prescribe a form of
' power for authorising an attorney to act for an absent member
and may vary such form from time to time and any such appoint-
ment as in the last preceding article mentioned shall follow the
form if any for the time being prescribed by the Directors but no
then existing valid power of attorney shall be rendered invalid by
any form of power being prescribed or varied.
49. The attorney so appointed as aforesaid may during the
absence of such member attend at and take part in the proceedings
of and vote at all meetings of the Company in the same manner as
the constituent himself could do if personally present.
General Meetings.
dO. The first ordinary general meeting of the Company shall
be held during the mouth of February One thousand eight hundred
and seventy-two upon such day and at such hour and at such place
as the Directors may determine and subsequent ordinary general
meetings shall be held in the months of August and February
respectively in every year upon such clay and at such hour and
place as maybe determined by the Directors.
51. All other meetings shall be called extraordinary general
meetings.
52. The Directors may whenever they think fit and they shall
upon a requisition made in writing by not less than twenty-five
members holding in the aggregate not less than two hundred and
fifty shares convene an extraordinary general meeting.


sd. Every requisition so made by the members shall express the
objects of the meeting proposed to be called and shall be left at the
registered office of the Company.
54. Upon the receipt of such requisition the Directors shall
forthwith proceed to convene an extraordinary general meeting
If they do not proceed to convene the same within twenty-one
daj r s from the day of the delivery of such requisition at the re-
gistered office of the Company the requisitionists or any other
members amounting to the required number and holding the re-
quisite number of shares may themselves convene an extraordi-
nary general meeting.
55. Seven days’ notice at the least and not more that twenty-one
days’ notice of every General Meeting specifying the place the day
and the hour of meeting and in case of special business the general
nature of such business shall be given to the members by adver-
tisement to be published at least twice in two newspapers published
and circulating in Melbourne.
56. All business shall be deemed special that is transacted at an
extraordinary meeting as well as all business transacted at an
ordinary meeting with the exception of sanctioning a dividend
electiug Directors and Auditors upon their retirement in
ordinary course and the consideration of the accounts and
balance sheets and the ordinary report of the Directors and the
report of the Auditors.
57. Xo business shall he transacted at any General Meeting
except the declaration of a dividend unless a quorum of members
is present at the time when the meeting proceeds to business and
such quorum shall cousist of not less than fifteen members holding
in the aggregate not less than two hundred and fifty shares present
personally or by proxy or Attorney.
58. If within one hour from the time appointed by the meet-
ing a quorum is not present the meeting if convened upon the
requisition of members shall be dissolved but in any other case it
shall stand adjourned to the same day in the next week at the
same hour and place or to such other day not being more that
fourteen days afterwards or to such other hour or place as a
majority in number of the members personally present may then
appoint and if at such adjourned meeting a quorum is not present
it may be adjourned “ sine die,”
Requisition by
members
Direclors or in
their default
the requisition-
ists may con-
vene
Notice of Gene-
ral Meeting
and of special
business
What business
special
Quorum
Dissolution or
adjournment
for want ot
quorum


Chairman at
general meet-
ings.
When Chair-
man of Direc-
tors not present
member to be
cliosep
Adjournment
of meetings
When no poll is
demanded and
specified ma-
jority of votes
not required
questions to be
decided by
show of hands
When poll is to
he taken and
how
Chairman to
have casting'
vote
Number of
Directors
Continuing Di-
rectors way act
59. The Chairman (if any) of the Directors shall preside as
Chairman at every General Meeting of the Company.
60. If there is no Chairman or if at any meeting the Chairman
of the Directors is not present within fifteen minutes after the
time appointed for holding the meeting the members present
shall choose someone of their number to be Chairman.
61. The Chairman may with the consent of the meeting adjourn
any meeting from time to time and from place to place but no
business shall be transacted at any adjourned meeting other than
the business left unfinished at the meeting from which the adjourn-
ment took place.
62. At any general meeting unless a poll is demanded by at
least five members or unless a specified proportion of the votes of
the members is required by the regulations of the Company or by
the Companies Statute 1864 for the determination of any question
the same shall be decided by a majority of the members personally
present on a show of hands each member being considered for that
purpose to have one vote and a declaration by the Chairman that
a resolution has been carried and an entry to that effect in the book
of proceedings of the Company shall be sufficient evidence of the
fact.
63. If a poll is demanded by five or more members or a specified
proportion of the votes of the members is required as aforesaid a
poll shall be taken in such manner as the Chairman directs and the
result of such poll shall be deemed to be the resolution of the
Company in general meeting.
64. In the case of an equal number of hands being held up for
or against any resolution or of any equality of votes when a poll is
taken the Chairman of the meeting shall be entitled to have a
second or casting vote.
Directors.
65. The number of Directors shall be nine and the several per-
sons hereinafter named shall be the first Directors of the Company
(that is to say) : — James Munro, Thomas McPherson, James
Fergusson, Robert Lormer, J. F. Droop J-Vieeiam Robertson,
Robert Scott Tnglis, John Branscomb# Crews, and Edmund
Ashley.
66. Continuing Directors may act notwithstanding any vacancy
in their body.


G 7. Every Director of the Company shall at the time of his
appointment and thenceforth during his continuance in office
hold at least twenty shares in his own right No person in
the employment of the company shall be eligible for appointment
as a Director.
68. The Fees of the Directors shall be decided by the Company
in General Meeting. But no fees shall be paid to the Directors
until the Company shall have made and declared a profit of not
less than Six per Centum on its Paid-up Capital.
69. The office of Director shall be vacated
If he ceases to hold the number of shares requisite to qualify
him for the office
If he holds any other office or place of profit under the
Company
If he becomes bankrupt or has his estate sequestrated for the
benefit of his creditors or suspends payment or compounds
with his creditors or makes any assignment for the benefit of
all his creditors
Tf he resigns his office
If he is absent from six consecutive meetings of the Directors
without reasonable excuse for such absence allowed by the
Directors
If he is declared lunatic or confined in a lunatic asylum or in
gaol as a lunatic or if he is convicted of any misdemeanour
punishable by law.
Rotation of Directors.
70. The first Directors shall continue in office until the
ordinary general meeting of the Company to be held in the month
of February in the year One thousand eight hundred and
seventy-three and at that meeting three of the Directors shall
retire from office and at the ordinary general meeting correspond-
ing thereto in every subsequent year three of the Directors for
the time being shall retire from office.
71. The three Directors to retire in One thousand eight
and seventy-three shall be those who obtained the least number
of votes at the time of their election and those three who
obtained the next least number of votes shall retire in One
thousand eight hundred and seventy-four and in every subsequent
year those Directors who have been longest in office shall retire.
Qualification
of Directors
Remuneration
of Directors
Vacation of of-
fice by Direc-
tor
Retirement of
Directors
Order of retire-
ment


Retiring Direc-
tor not to be re-
eligible
Vacancies 10
Notice by can-
didate for office
of Director
When vacancies
not filled up at
general meet-
ing
Casual vacan-
Company may
remove Di-
rector
Meeting of Di-
rectors
72. The retiring Directors shall not be eligible for re-election
for the space of one year.
73. The Company at any general meeting at which any
Directors retire in manner aforesaid shall fill np the vacated
offices by electing a like number of members.
74. Previously to an ordinary or extraordinary general meeting
for the election of Directors every member intending to propose
either himself or any other person as a candidate for such office
shall give to the Directors five clear days notice in writing under
his hand signifying his intention to become or nominate such
other person as a candidate and in default of such notice any such
candidate as atoresaid shall not be eligible.
75. If at any general meeting at which an election of Directors
ought to take place the places of the vacating Directors are not
filled up the meeting shall stand adjourned to the same day in the
next week at the same hour and place or to such other day not
being more than fourteen days afterwards or to such other hour or
place as a majority in number of the members personally present
may then appoint and if at such adjourned meeting the places of the
vacating Directors are not filled up the vacating Directors or such
of them as have not had their places filled up shall continue in
office until the corresponding ordinary general meeting in the next
year and so on from time to time until their places are filled up.
76. Any casual vacancy occurring amongst the Directors may be
filled up by tbe Company but any person so chosen shall retain his
office so long only as the vacating Director would have retained
the same if no vacancy had occurred.
77. The Company in general meeting may by a special resolu-
tion remove any Director before the expiration of his period of
office and may by an ordinary resolution appoint another person in
his stead The person so appointed shall hold office during such
time only as the Director in whose place he is appointed would
have held the same if he had not been removed.
Proceedings of Directors.
78. The Directors may meet together for the despatch of
business adjourn and otherwise regulate their meetings as they
think fit provided that three Directors shall constitute a quorum
at any meeting of Directors and that a meeting of Directors shall
be held not less than once in each month and that the Chairman


of Directors or two Directors may at any time summon a meeting
of the Directors.
79. Questions arising at any meeting of the Directors shall be
decided by a majority of votes each Director present having one
vote but in case of an equality of votes the Chairman shall have a
second or casting vote But no Director shall vote upon any
question iu which he is personally interested.
80. The Directors may elect a Chairman and determine the
period for which he is to hold office but if no such Chairman is
elected or if at any meeting the Chairman is not present at the
time appointed for holding the same the Directors present shall
choose someone of their number to be Chairman of such meeting
provided that the Directors may if they think fit elect a A ice-
Chairman to act generally as Chairman in the Chairmans
absence.
81. The Directors may delegate any of their powers to a
Committee consisting of such members of their body as they think
fit and any Committee so formed shall in the exercise of the
powers so delegated conform to any regulations that may be
imposed on them by the Directors.
82. A Committee may elect a Chairman of their meetings but
if no such Chairman is elected or if he is not present at any
meeting at the time appointed for holding the same the members
present shall choose one of their number to be Chairman of such
meeting.
83. A Committee may meet and adjourn as they think proper
and all questions arising at any meeting shall be determined by a
majority of the members present each member having one vote
but in case of an equality of votes the Chairman shall have a
second or casting vote.
84. All acts done by any meeting of the Directors or of a
Committee of Directors or by any person acting as a Director
shall notwithstanding it be afterwards discovered that there was
some defect in the appointment of any such Directors or persons
acting as aforesaid or that they or any of them were disqualified be
as valid as if every such person had been duly appointed and was
qualified to be a Director.
85. Every resolution and order of a meeting of Directors or a
Committee of Directors at which a quorum is present shall be
Votes of Di-
ChaUman ot
Committees
Chairman of
Committee
Committee
Meeting's
Directors’ acts
to be valid
Resolution
where quorum
present to be
resolution of ftl)


Directors to
manage the
business
Deed requiring
Common Seal
how to be
signed
Appointment
duties and re-
muneration of
Officers and
Servants of the
Company
Agencies
deemed the resolution or order of all the Directors or of the
Committee as the case iny be.
Powers of the Directors.
86. The business of the Company shall be managed by the
Directors who may pay out of the funds of the Company all ex-
penses incurred in getting up and registering the Company and
may in addition to the particular powers herein conferred upon
them exercise all such powers of the Company as are not by “ The
Companies Statute 1864 ”or by the regulations for the time being
of the Company required to be exercised by the Company in
general meeting subject ne\ertheless to the regulations of the
Company for the time being and to the provisions of the said
statute but no new regulation of the Company shall invalidate any
prior act of the Directors which would have been valid if such
regulation had not been made.
87. Every deed or other instrument to which the Common Seal
of the Company is required to be affixed shall be signed by two
Directors and countersigned by the Secretary
88. The Directors may from time to time appoint a Secretary
and all such other officers clerks and servants of the Company as
they may think necessary and may determine the duties powers
salaries and wages of such Secretary and of all such other officers
clerks and servants and may at any time suspend or dismiss any
such Secretary or other officer clerk or servant and the Directors
shall also have the appointment of the Bankers and Solicitors of
the Company But it shall be lawful for the Directors to delegate
to any officer of the Company the power of appointing suspending
or removing and of determining the duties and fixing the wages of
any employee of the Company and such other powers as may
enable the said officer properly to superintend and conduct the
business operations and works of the Company placed under his
charge by the Directors.
89. The Directors may from time to time establish any agencies
at such place or places in the Australasian Colonies or in any other
part of the world and make such regulations for their management
as the Directors may think proper and may from time to time
appoint such agents and local managers with such officers clerks
and servants as they may think necessary for carrying on the
business of any such agency and may from time to time revoke


such appointments and may discontinue any agency and dismiss
all or any individuals connected with the management and con •
duct thereof and all agents officers clerks and servants whether in
the colony of Victoria or elsewhere shall at all times be under the
control and government of the Directors.
90. The Directors may by resolution at any meeting of the
Directors delegate to any agents or local managers appointed for
carrying on the business of the Company either in the colony of
Victoria or elsewhere any such powers necessary or expedient for
the purpose as the Directors may themselves exercise and may
from time to time revoke all or any of the p-avers so delegated but
all such agents and local managers shall in the exercise of the
powers so delegated to them conform to any regulations which
may be imposed on them by the Directors.
91. The Directors may in the name of the Company or in the
names or name of any trustees or trustee to be appointed on
behalf of the Company purchase or take on lease or hire in the
colony of Victoria or elsewhere any lands houses offices workshops
or other buildings which they may from time to time think
requisite or suitable for carrying on the business of the Company
and upon any land so purchased or leased may erect any houses
offices workshops and other buildings which they may think
requisite and the same premises may respectively sell again assign
let underlet exchange or otherwise dispose of for the benefit of
the Company.
92. The Directors may from time to time borrow in the name
or on behalf of the Company such sums of money as they may
from time to time think expedient either by way of mortgage of
the whole or any part of the property of the Company or by
bonds or debentures notes or in such other manner as they deem
best.
93. The Directors may from time to time make any such by-
laws and rules for the conduct and management of the business of
the Company and vary or rescind the same as they shall think fit
Provided that no such by-laws or rules shall be inconsistent with or
repugnant to “ The Companies Statute 1864” or to the regula-
tions for the time being of the Company or otherwise contrary to
law,
Delegation
powers to
Agents and
Local Mana-
gers
Purchase and
Lease of Lands
and Offices
Power of bor-
rowing
By-Laws


Declaration of
dividend
Allotment of
Dividends only
to be paid out
of proiits
Deserved fund.
Rums payable
by member to
be deducted
from dividend.
Notice of divi-
dends
Dividends not
to bear interest
tVhat accouuts
to be kept
Hooks of lie-
count- to be
kept at Reg-
istered Office
Direc tors to
submit half*
yearly etatg*
meats
Dividends and Reserve Fund.
94. The Directors may with the sanction of the Company in
general meeting declare a dividend to be paid to the members.
9-5. All shares of the first issue of three thousand shall be
entitled to an equal dividend whether fully paid up or not and all
shares forming part of the remaining three thousand shall be
entitled to a proportionate dividend according to the amount paid
up and the time the shares shall have been in force.
96. No dividend shall be payable except out of the profits
arising from the business of the Company.
97. The Directors may before recommending any dividend set
aside out of the profits of the Company such sum as they think
proper as a reserve fund to meet contingencies or for equalising
dividends or for repairing or maintaining the works connected
with the business of the Company cr any part thereof and the
Directors may invest the sum so set apart as a reserve fund upon
such securities as they may select.
98. The Directors may deduct from the dividends payable to
any member all such sums of money as may be due from him to
the Company on account of subscriptions fines or otherwise.
99. Notice of any dividend that may have been declared shall
be given by advertisement published in at least two newspapers
published and circulating in Melbourne and stating upon what
day and at what place such dividend will be payable.
100. No dividend shall bear interest as against the Company.
Accounts.
101. The Directors shall cause true accounts to be kept of the
stock-in-trade of the Company of all sums of money received
and expended by the Company and the matters in respect of which
such receipt and expenditure takes pla',e and of the credits and
liabilities of the Company.
102. Proper books of account shall be kept at the registered
office of the Company and subject to any reasonable restrictions
as to the time and manner of inspecting the same that may be
imposed by the Directors shall be open to the inspection of the
members during the hours of business.
106. At the ordinary general meeting in each half-year the
Directors shall lay before the Company a statement of the


income and expenditure for the six months ending the thirtieth
day of June and the thirty-first day of December in each year
respectively.
104. The statements so made shall show arranged under the
most convenient heads the amount of gross income distinguishing
the several sources from which it has been derived and the amount
of gross expenditure distinguishing the expense of the establish-
ment salaries and other like matters.
105. A balance sheet shall be made out every year and
laid before the Company at the ordinary general meeting at
which the election of Directors takes place and such balance
sheet shall contain a summary of the assets and securities capital
and liabilities of the (Company arranged under suitable heads and
together therewith shall be laid before the Company a report of
the Directors on the state and prospects of the Company.
106. Copies of such balance sheet and report shall be printed at
least seven days previously to such meeting and every member
applying for the same shall be entitled to have one of such printed
copies delivered to him.
Audit.
107. Once at the least in every year the accounts of the Com-
pany shall be examined and the correctness of the balance sheet
ascertained by two Auditors.
108. The Auditors shall be appointed by the Company in
general meeting. And the first Auditors are W. F. A. Rucker
and W. 11. Tucketit.
109. The Auditors may be members of the Company but no
person shall be eligible as an Auditor who is interested otherwise
than as a member in any transaction of the Company and no
Director or other officer of the Company shall be eligible during
his continuance in office.
110. The election of Auditors shall be made by the Company at
their ordinary meeting for election of Directors in each year.
The two Auditors shall retire annually and one only shall be
eligible for re-election at that meeting. When the retiring
Auditors have been elected at a contested election the one who
shall have obtained the least number of votes shall not be eligible
for re-election but when there has been no contest the matter
shall be decided by lot.
Wlmt such
statements to
contain
}sa,ance Sheet
Report 0 f di-
rectors
Printed copy to
be delivered to
members on
application
Accounts to be
audited
Appointment of
Auditors
Who eligible as
Auditors
Election


Remuneration
of Auditors
Casual vacancy
in office of Au-
ditor
If Auditors not
elected Govern-
or in Council
may appoint
Auditor to ex-
amine balance
sheet
Auditors to
have list of and
access to docu-
ments
Auditors’ re-
polt
Notices how to
he served
Notices to joint
holders
111. The remuneration of the Auditors shall be iixed by the
Company in general meeting.
112. if any casual vacancy occurs in the office of any Auditor
appointed by the Company the Directors shall forthwith call an
extraordinary general meeting for the purpose of supplying the
same.
113. If no election of Auditors is made in manner aforesaid the
Governor in Council may on the application of not less than live
members of the Company appoint an Auditor for the current year
and fix the remuneration to be paid to him by the Company for
his services.
1 f 4. Every Auditor shall be supplied with a copy of the balance
sheet and it shall be his duty to examine the same with the accounts
and vouchers relating thereto.
115. Every Auditor shall have a list delivered to him of all
books kept by the Company and shall at all reasonable times have
access to the books and accounts deeds vouchers papers and other
documents of the Company and he may at the expense of the
Company employ accountants or other persons to assist him in
investigating such accounts and he may in relation to such accounts
examine the Directors or any other officer of the Company.
116. The Auditors shall make a report to the members upon
the balance sheet and accounts and in every such report they
shall state whether in their opinion the balance sheet is a full and
fair balance sheet containing the particulars required by regula-
tions of the Company and properly drawn up so as to exhibit a
true and correct view of the state of the Company's affairs and in
case they have called for information or explanations from the
Directors whether such information or explanations have been
given by the Directors and whether they have been satisfactory
and such report shall be ready together with the report of the
Directors at the ordinary meeting.
Notices other than Notices by Advertisement.
117. A notice may be served by the Company upon any mem-
ber either personally or by sending it through the post in a
prepaid letter addressed to such member at his address as entered
in the register of members.
118. All nqtices directed to be served on the members shall with
respect to any share to which persons are jointly entitled be


SIGNATURES OF SUBSCRIBERS.
WITNESS.
JOHN M. DAVIES.
JOHN CAMPBELL.
JOHN BELLIN.
JOHN CAMPBELL.
JAMES EERGTJSSON.
JOHN CAMPBELL.
JAMES MUNRO.
JOHN CAMPBELL.
ROBERT S. ING-LIS.
JOHN CAMPBELL.
served on whichever of such persons is named first in the register
of members and notice so given shall be sufficient notice to all the
holders of such shares.
119. Any notice if served by post shall in case of any member
whose registered address is in Melbourne or within teu miles of
the Melbourne Post Office be deemed to have been served at ten
of the clock in the morning of the day after that on which the
letter containing the notice was posted and in the case of any other
member at ten of the clock in the morning of the second day
after that on which the letter containing the notice was posted
and in proving such service it shall be sufficient to prove that
the letter containing the notice Avas properly addressed and
put into the Post Office provided that any member having
appointed an attorney to act for him in the manner hereinbefore
mentioned may by a statement in writing signed by such
member and left with the Secretary at the registered office
of the Company require that notices instead of being served upon
himself shall be served upon his attorney at an address in Mel-
bourne to be named in such statement and service upon the
attorney shall in such case be deemed good service upon the
member.
Dated the 28th day of December, in the year One thousand
eight hundred and seventy one.
Notices by post


