









Ipmonds
ALEXANDER LEARMONTH, ESQ.,
OF YASMAR.
THE REV. ROBERT STEEL, D.D.,
AND
THE REV. JAMES COSH, M.A.
SYDNEY:
JOHN LUTTON, 316, CASTLEREAGH-STREET.
1877.




lEcmorial Shctcb
BY THE BEY. DE. STEEL.
From the Australian Witness.
The Presbyterian Church of New South Wales, as well
as the mercantile community of Sydney, and his own
family, have sustained a great loss by the sudden and
unexpected death of Mr. Alexander Learmonth. This
lamented gentleman was at business as usual in Sydney
on Saturday, the 28th July, 1877, and went home early.
Before the evening closed, and while moving about the
grounds around his residence, he fell down dead, from
disease of the heart, which thus suddenly carries off its
victims.
Some five years ago, though possessing a noble and
well-built physique, his health caused him some uneasi-
ness, and, by the advice of his physician, he took a long
holiday from the cares of business in a visit to Europe
and America. He greatly enjoyed the change, and
returned considerably invigorated. Since that time he
gave unremitting attention to his commercial duties, and
was apparently in tolerable health, though the keen eye
of affection saw occasional reason for anxiety.
Mr. Learmonth was born at Linlithgow, Scotland, in
1820. He was of good family, and received the educa-


tion and upbringing of a gentleman. He came to this
colony about thirty-five years ago, and followed commer-
cial pursuits with fidelity and perseverance, and, notwith-
standing some vicissitudes, with eventual success. For
sixteen years he was chief partner in the firm of Lear-
month, Dickinson, and Co., —a firm possessing a large
connection both in the colony and elsewhere, and dis-
tinguished for integrity, and honesty, and influence in
the mercantile community. Mr. Learmonth was also a
Director of the Australian Joint Stock Bank, and of the
United Insurance Company, and had a large share of
public confidence.
He was married in 1850 to Mary Louisa, eldest
daughter of the late David Ramsay, Esq., a medical man
of high reputation, and whose family sustain among us a
high'social rank. Mrs. Learmonth, and three sons and
three daughters, survive to mourn their loss. One of the
daughters was married a few months ago. All the other
members of the family reside at home. The two eldest
sons are in business, one in the office of the firm, and
the other in a bank.
Mr. Learmonth was a Christian. He had an intelli-
gent and hearty faith in the Divine Redeemer. He felt
that he owed much to the mercy of God in Christ, and
could say, “ By the grace of God I am what I am. ’
Grace had enabled him to gain a great victory over
himself even before the world, and it enabled him to
exercise self-control, to live consistent with his profes-
sion, and to adorn his character with Christian virtues.


He was a man of strong family affections, and sought
to enshrine these tenderest ties in the love of God.
According to the good old custom of his ancestors, he
regularly maintained domestic worship. Though obliged
to leave home early every morning for business in
Sydney, he never failed to perform this sacred exercise
before breakfast; and again at the close of the day by a
similar service he sought to consecrate his home.
He was a faithful, and zealous Sabbath School teacher
for many years. The family into which he married had
set up a Sunday School in 1840, for the benefit of the
children of the neighbourhood, which the young ladies
taught. Some seventeen years ago, this school was taken
up by Mr. Learmonth and his wife as leaders, and they
were ably assisted by others, chiefly by members of the
family of Mrs. Ramsay, who had manifested much con-
cern for the spiritual welfare of the district. Dr. Ram-
say before his death had devised liberal things for
planting a church and school there. The school was
built by Mrs. Ramsay in iB6O. Many children were
gathered into the Yasmar School. When the writer first
made Mr. Learmonth’s acquaintance some fifteen years
ago—an acquaintance which ripened into an unbroken
friendship—he was greatly gratified to observe what
influence for good a Christian family could exercise in a
district of this new land. It was a pleasing spectacle to
see the half-yearly festivals when so many scholars and
their relations and the friends of the family were
assembled in the school and the neighbouring grounds,


and were liberally entertained by Mr. and Mrs. Lear-
month, who also bore all the expenses of the Sabbath
School. The memory of their beloved superintendent, Mr.
Learmonth, will long live in the hearts of a large number
who succeeded each other during a series of years, who
listened to his prayers, and counsels, and instructions,
and who owed their knowledge of saving truth, their
serious impressions, and their elevating hopes of ever-
lasting life to his faithful labours and good example.
Many will recall with tenderness and tears his frequent
requests at the close of the Sabbath lesson to say in
their own evening prayer, “ God bless Yasmar Sabbath
School!”
Mr. Learmonth was warmly attached to the Church of
his fathers. He was an intelligent and zealous Presby-
terian. He identified himself with the Church in this
colony, and gave liberally of his substance to erect its
buildings and sustain its ordinances. He entered thor-
oughly into proposals for union, and at its happy con-
summation in 1865, severed his connection with a con-
gregation in Sydney which declined to enter the United
Church, and to whose costly edifice he had largely con-
tributed. It was chiefly through his efforts that the ser-
vices of the Church were commenced at A.shfield, and by
his liberality, and that of his relatives, and others who
joined them, that a settled ministry was secured, and an
elegant building erected. Mr. Learmonth became an
elder of the congregation, and took a ready part in the
Christian work.


Mr. Learmonth was one of the originators and an
active member of the Lay Association, which for some
years did much for the Presbyterian Church of New
South Wales, by circulating high class serial literature
among ministers, by entertaining the members of the
General Assembly to a breakfast once a year, and by
stimulating the congregations of the Church to provide
in a more creditable way “ a sufficient maintenance for
an efficient ministry.” In the last mentioned matter he
felt and spoke strongly, and urged the necessity of
greater liberality to secure it.
Mr, Learmonth was a warm friend and supporter
of Christian missions. As a merchant eager to promote
commerce, he sought as a Christian to extend the
Gospel of Christ by means of a missionary marine
among the islands of the sea. Plis personal services
were as freely given as his money to aid this benevolent
enterprise. He was, along with two other well known
merchants in Sydney, a lay member of the Board which
regulates the mission vessel Dayspring, that sails among
the islands of the New Hebrides. He spared no pains
in this service, and gave accommodation at his stores for
the goods of the vessel, and afforded any assistance that
his office could render. The Sabbath School which he
superintended was always a large contributor to the Fund
which keeps that missionary ship afloat.
Mr. Learmonth was identified with the public Interests
of religion and philanthropy so far as his business in the
city and residence in the country allowed. Like some


of our evergreens, that can shake the dust off their
leaves, and keep their verdure, he could go from the
Chamber of Commerce to the meeting for prayer, and
exemplify how one could be “ not slothful in business,
fervent in spirit, serving the Lord.” He was a “ lover
of good men, given to hospitality,” and gathered around
him the Christian regard of many ministers of Christ
whom he entertained and encouraged, and who esteemed
his character and enjoyed his fellowship. He was very
ready to benefit young men introduced to him on their
arrival in the colony; and not long since he received a
striking testimony to the good effect of his counsels and
prayers from a young man with whom he had travelled
from America, and whom he had taken into his cabin to
advise and pray with at a period of his career when he
needed a counsellor. He was a steady friend and a liberal
helper of the Australian Witness in the efforts made by
it for the benefit of the Church, and it is becoming that
the editor of this paper should wreathe an immortelle
around the memory of Mr. Alexander Learmonth.
He was suddenly called away, but he was not unpre-
pared. He rested on the “ Rock of Ages,” and hoped
for the immortality of life and bliss in Jesus Christ. His
body has been laid in the grave “ in the sure and certain
hope of a joyful resurrection.” His widow and family
may be comforted in his death, for he whom they loved
lives still in Christ as before, but more happily, and free
from all the failings which he felt and lamented here.
The God of the widow and the Father of the fatherless


can be their comforter. Many who sympathise with
them in their sorrow will pray for their consolation, and
that his manly sons and tender daughters may “ not be
slothful, but followers of him who by faith and patience
inherits the promises.”
This solemn and sudden providence speaks to all,
both in the ranks of business and in domestic quiet.
“ Verily there is but a step between us and death.” “ Be
ye also ready, for in such an hour as ye think not the
Son of man comefh.” “ Now is the appointed time, and
this is the day of salvation.” “ Work while it is called
to-day, for the night cometh when no man can work.’
Faith in Jesus Christ is the best preparation. “He that
believeth in the Son of God hath everlasting life.” Faith
in Christ gives strength to overcome besetting sin, grace
to character, consecration to business and to home; it
takes away the sting from death, and victory from the
grave. “Jesus said, lam the resurrection and the life,
he that believeth on me, though he were dead, yet shall
he live, and whosoever liveth and believeth in me shall
never die.” “ I heard a voice from heaven saying unto
me, Blessed are the dead that die in the Lord from
henceforth ; yea, saith the Spirit, that they may rest from
their labours and their works do follow them.”
A very large company assembled on short notice at
the funeral. There were present about twenty ministers
of religion—including most of the members of the
Presbytery of Sydney, and others of different denomina-
tions ; many of the chief bankers and merchants of the


city ; persons resident in the neighbourhood ; members
of the Presbyterian congregations, and the children of
the Yasmar Sabbath-school. The procession moved on
foot after the hearse from Yasmar to St. David’s Church,
which was filled by the mourners. The Rev. James
Cosh, M.A., of Balmain, who along with other clergymen,
officiated at the request of the family, gave out the
beautiful hymn—
“ Jesus my Redeemer lives, ”
composed long ago by Elizabeth, the Electress of
Brandenburg, which the congregation sang. Mr. Cosh
then read suitable passages of holy Scripture and offered
prayer. The Rev. Dr. Steel gave the address. The
procession then reformed and the body was borne to the
Ramsay vault near the Church. As the funeral cortege
passed, the children of the school sang a hymn with much
pathos. When the body had been placed in the vault,
the Rev. Dr. Steel read a portion of the sublime passage
on the resurrection in i Cor, xv., and the consolatory
words to the bereaved in i Thes. iv. 13-20 after which
the Rev. John Kinross, 8.A., Principal of St. Andrew’s
College, offered the concluding prayer. As the mourners
left the grave, the scholars sang in a soft and plaintive
strain, amidst their tears falling thick and fast for the
loss of their beloved teacher, that hymn which has
often of late ministered comfort to the dying and the
bereaved :
“ Safe in the arms of Jesus,
Safe on His gentle breast:
There by His love o’er shaded
Sweetly my soul shall rest. ”


CHRISTIAN COMFORT IN SORROW;
A SERMON PREACHED IN ST. DAVID’S CHURCH, ASHFEELD, ON
SABBATH, AUGUST 5, 1877, AFTER THE FUNERAL OF
MR. LEARMONTH,
BY THE REV. JAMES COSH, M.A., BALMAIN.
“ But I would not have you to be ignorant, brethren, concerning
them which are asleep, that ye sorrow not, even as others
which have no hope. For if we believe that Jesus died and
rose again, even so them also which sleep in Jesus will God
bring with Him.”—l Thess. iv. 13, 14.
It was with these words that the Apostle Paul sought to
comfort the hearts of the Christian people of Thessa-
lonica at a time when they were sorrowing the loss of
departed friends. The little company of believers in
that city seems to have been in a state of great anxiety
with reference to those who had been taken away from
amongst them by the hand of death. Their hearts were
not only troubled on account of the loss which they
themselves had sustained in the removal of beloved
friends from their side ; but they were troubled also on
account of the loss which they conceived these friends to
have sustained in having been cut off from the land of
the living previous to the coming of the Lord in the


glory of His Kingdom. They looked upon that coming
as the consummation of all their hopes in Christ, and
they seem to have been in great doubt and uncertainty
as to whether their friends who had fallen asleep would
have any part or lot with them in the honour and bless-
edness of that sublime event. And so they were dis-
posed to sorrow over them as over persons with whom
they had parted for ever, and whom there was no hope
of their ever seeing again. Under such a view of things
as that which they entertained, it was no wonder that the
survivors should have regarded the death of their friends
as an unmitigated calamity, or that they should have
mourned over them with a hopeless and uncontrollable
sorrow.
It was in some respects a fortunate thing for us that
the§e Thessalonian brethren were troubled for a season
in respect of this particular matter. For in administer-
ing to them the comfort which they required, the Apostle
was led specifically to correct the mistake on which their
sorrow was founded. And in correcting that mistake he
was led on by the Spirit of God to give us such abun-
dant information respecting the state of believers after
death, as suffices to assure us that so far as they are con-
cerned there is never any need for sorrow at all. The
dead in Christ are perfectly safe. “If we believe that
Jesus died and rose again, even so them also which
sleep in Jesus will God bring with Him.”
So far as we are concerned who are left behind, there
will always be cause for sorrow when our friends and


fellow disciples fall asleep in Jesus. Linked to us by the
closest and holiest of ties, it would be contrary both to
nature and to true Christian feeling, if we did not lament,
and lament deeply their removal from our side. It may
be that they have travelled so much of life’s pilgrimage
along with us, and that they have become enshrined
within our hearts, and so much a part of our very selves
that the blank produced by their death is a blank that
will never again be filled. The sense of loss and of
wistful unhealed 'regret may never pass away. Our
whole lives after certain bereavements may be lives of
sorrow for the dead. And in all this there may be not
only no sin, but much that is sacred and heavenly, and
pleasing in God’s sight. God means that we should feel
keenly, and continue long to feel the wounds He makes
in our affections by the removal of beloved friends. It
is only when we do so that we get the benefits of
bereavement. In no one passage of Scripture is there
even so much as a hint dropped that it is a proper thing
for us to forget departed friends, or to cease as soon as
possible from sorrowing over their removal. There is a
sorrow for the dead which is in the highest sense a
Christian sentiment; and this it is at once our privilege
and our duty to keep fresh and green through all the
years of our jfilgrimage.
But there is also a sorrow which is unchristian: and
that we must carefully avoid. If we weep for those
believing friends who have been taken away from
amongst us, as if their removal had been a loss to them


—if we fret over them as though it w’ere all uncertain
where they are or how they fare, then we do the very
thing which is here expressly and absolutely forbidden.
We sorrow as those who have no hope. And to sorrow
thus with reference to those who have fallen asleep in
Jesus is to do the greatest dishonour in our power to the
name of Jesus. It is to discredit many express utter-
ances of the Lord Himself, and is to reject the hope
which He has set before us in the Gospel.
For if the Scriptures tell us anything at all they tell us
this, that to those who believe in Jesus death is not the
end of life. It is the end of toil and care and suffering :
but it is at the same time the beginning of a higher and
better form of existence. To the Christian, death is the
summons which calls him in from his work and warfare
to the rest and the reward provided for him by God. It
is not for him a going down into gloom and forgetfulness :
but it is a going up into the very presence and into the
light of God. So far as the believer is concerned death
is not loss, nor deprivation, nor retrogression : it is
promotion to a higher place and to nobler exercises in
the Kingdom of God. Whatever it may be to others,
this is certain, that to the faithful servant of the Lord
Jesus Christ, death is (not sometimes, but always) gain.
When Christians leave this world, they depart to be with
Christ, which is far better. Their bodies return for a
time to dust, and their spirits return to God who gave
them. At death their souls are made perfect in holiness ;
all remaining sin is purged completely away; all de-


fects and shortcomings are made up. Perfected in
holiness the saints immediately pass into glory. They
go in to be for ever with the Lord. They abide safely
with Him in the place prepared for their reception in
His Father’s house. They are under the very eye of the
risen and glorified Saviour Himself: “ and their bodies
being still united to Christ do rest in their graves till the
resurrection.” Every part of their being is safely provided
for; and though it is no longer possible for us to touch
them by our solicitudes, or to soothe them by our minis-
trations, or benefit them in any way with our fellowship,
yet they are happier where they are than ever they were
or could be here. Though they have left us for the pre-
sent, they are not lost to us. They are only gone
before. They have but been transferred to another
room in the Father’s house. Though removed from our
side they still live ; and the life they are leading there is
infinitely to be preferred to that which they used to live
whilst here. Death to them has really been great gain.
And if this be so, how should we sorrow as those who
have no hope ? If God Himself has opened up for be-
lievers such a blessed prospect after death: if He has
prepared so thoroughly for their safety and their happi-
ness when they die—should not the sorrow with which
we mourn their loss be a sorrow largely mingled with
comfort and chastened with hope ? If we cannot in our
sorrow rejoice with joy for their sakes, we may surely
well be thankful that so much has been revealed to set
our hearts at rest with reference to their condition. If


anything can suffice to reconcile us to the loss we hav e
sustained in their removal, surely it must be the con-
sideration that in every respect death has been a gain to
them.
And just to bring us to dwell upon this consideration
so as fully to take it in and rest on it, is one of the great
ends designed by God in making us feel our bereave-
ments so keenly. We are all so prone to let our thoughts
and affections cluster so exclusively upon the earthly and
the present, that God, so to speak, finds it necessary to
take this means of bringing the realities and the claims
of the world to come forcibly before our minds. He
makes use of our natural affections in order to lead us to
set our hearts upon spiritual things. And we lose one
of the first and greatest blessings of bereavement, if in
our sorrow for the dead our hearts do not realise with
greater vividness, and grasp with stronger faith, the pro-
mises and the hopes of the Gospel. When death enters
into a Christian home or a Christian church, and takes
away the one for whom he was sent, he brings at the
same time a most important message for those whom he
leaves behind. It is not for nought that friendly circles
are broken and loving hearts are torn from one another’s
fellowship. In all such doings with His people, God
means the greater good of all. He takes one and
another of His saints to be with Himself; and in that
very act He brings those whom He leaves behind into
nearer fellowship with Himself, and into a fuller enjoy-
ment of the comforts of His salvation. The losses He


causes us to sustain are the very means whereby He
seeks to enrich us. The darkness He brings over our
hearts and our homes is intended by Him, and is often
actually made by Him to be but the precursor of a brighter
day in our experience. He blesses our bereavements,
and so sanctifies them to us that from them we ever
afterwards date a higher tone of Christian feeling, and a
closer and more loving walk with God.
And it is when the death of our Christian friends so
strikes us, and leaves a permanent result of good upon
our character, that the lives they led while upon the
earth prove rich and fragrant with lessons of wisdom and
warning to us. It is when we feel deeply the sorrow
of bereavement, we dwell most long and most lovingly
on the graces and virtues of those whose loss we mourn.
The more we are enabled to draw comfort from the as-
surance that they have gone to a better land and that we
shall surely meet them again, the more does the example
they have left us take hold of us and stir us to holy
emulation of their excellencies. It is the vivid realisa-
tion of the Christian’s hope that gives to the earthly
life of believers the chief value it possesses as an
example to those that come after. Take away, or
obscure that hope, and what is there left as a motive why
we should admire, or remember, or imitate the graces
of them that have led while here a truly Christian life ?
But let that hope be dwelt upon and taken in as the
great and blessed reality which it is, and then everything
in the lives and character of our departed friends which


evinced the presence of Divine grace in their hearts,
becomes to us a matter of devout and thankful recollec-
tion, and a new motive to patience and activity in the
Christian life.
And so, my dear brethren, if we would rightly improve
and benefit by the loss which we have sustained in the
removal from amongst us of that excellent and estimable
friend whose departure we are now mourning, the thing
for us to do is first to realise the truth that death to him
has been a great gain; and then with a sorrow chastened
and dignified by this recollection, let us honour his
memory by recalling the graces and virtues that adorned
his character, and by following the example he has set
us in respect of these. Those who knew him best and
loved him most know best how numerous and how varied
the good points in his character were. That he was in
every respect faultless, or free from imperfections, we do
not affirm ; though we surely believe that he is so now.
But there was much in his life, and especially I think in
his later years, to lead us to take note of the grace of
God which was working in him and gradually preparing
him for the home in which he now dwells. That he was
a man who feared the Lord and sincerely sought to serve
Him was in many ways apparent. The reverence with
which he regarded the Bible as the word of God, and the
intense satisfaction with which he delighted in the Gospel
of Christ were features in his character as noticeable as
they were praiseworthy. The care also with which
he strove to keep his natural disposition under the con-


trol of Divine grace : the earnestness with which he
longed for a closer and still closer walk with God : the
anxiety with which he sought to bring up his children in
the fear of God and the faith of the Gospel; the zeal
and perseverance with which he laboured personally in
the work of the Church and of the Sabbath School in
this place : the liberality with which he was always ready
to assist when help was needed in Christian and benevo-
lent enterprises;—these and many other traits of his
character which might be mentioned may all serve now
as we remember them to endear to us his memory, and
to Qhasten the sorrow with which we miss him to-day
from his accustomed place. Though he has been taken
away suddenly, yet it is well known to those about him
that so far as he was concerned the call was not unex-
pected. And while his sudden decease will forcibly re-
call to his intimate friends the presentiment so often
expressed by himself during the later years of his life
so ought it to impress deeply upon the hearts of all who
hear of it, the solemn words of the Lord Jesus, “ Be ye
also ready : for in such an hour as ye think not, the Son
of Man cometh.” —Matt. xxiv. 44. It is by laying to
heart the lessons taught us by his life and by his death
that we shall best honour the memory of our departed
friend. It is in this way also we shall best improve the
loss we have sustained, and the sorrow that loss has
brought. For while we grieve, and cannot but grieve,
over such losses as this, we should not forget that there
are worse things in this world than death. It is one


of those things which God makes large use of in training
and disciplining us to a higher style of character and a
nobler life. And if by the death of those we love, our
hearts are truly chastened and solemnised, and we
are brought to feel more deeply our own great need,
and to realise more fully the preciousness of the Saviour,
and to grasp more firmly the hope of the Gospel, then
who shall measure the gain to which that which seemed
our loss, has led us ? It is in ways like this that sorrow
makes us wise—that in one stroke of affliction we get
the condensed experience of years ; and over the graves
of our departed friends there spring up within us the
hopes and the desires and the impulses of a new and
never-ending life. We leam the meaning of these won-
derful words: —“ Blessed are the mourners, for they
shalFbe comforted.”
ADDRESS TO THE SCHOLARS OF THE
YASMAR SABBATH SCHOOL.
The Apostle Peter was very anxious that all whom he
taught should possess the knowledge of the Lord Jesus
Christ, and that they should get an abundant entrance
into the everlasting kingdom of our Lord and Saviour
Jesus Christ. In the first chapter of the second epistle
of St. Peter you can read what he has written.


Your beloved superintendent, Mr. Learmonth, who
was taken away so suddenly from you, was also anxious
that you should be taught this saving knowledge; and
that you should at last reach the kingdom. On that ac-
count, like the Apostle, he could say while he lived and
laboured among you, —“ Wherefore, I will not be
negligent to put you always in remembrance ol these
things.”
It was his desire that you should learn the truths of
the Gospel, that you should be often reminded of them,
that you might have them always in remembrance. He
was not a negligent teacher. He often repeated these
things, and urged you to know them. He was at pains
to prepare the lessons which he wished you to know and
remember. He urged you to have your Sabbath lessons
well learned, and accurately fixed in your memory. He
was delighted when you repeated your lessons without a
word out of its place. This was because of the im-
portance of the Scripture lessons to your welfare both in
this world and hereafter.
He could say also with the Apostle, “ Yea, I think it
meet as long as I am in this tabernacle, to stir you up by
putting you in remembrance.” He kept at his work of
Christian teaching in the School as long as he lived.
He was with you Sabbath after Sabbath, and year after
year, trying to fix the truth upon your memory regarding
Christ and salvation. It was a pleasant exercise to him.
The Apostle Peter said, and your departed teacher
might also have said —“ Moreover, I will endeavour


that >e may be able after my decease to have these
things always in remembrance.”
He knew that he would die, and that he might die
suddenly; he was therefore more anxious to do his work
in teaching, and that you should have fixed in your
memory what would be of most value to you after your
teacher was dead. You will not readily forget him ; but
it is important that you should associate with his memory
the lessons he most frequently pressed upon you.
Think of these things often. Read about them often.
Pray that the spirit of God “ may bring these things to
your remembrance.”
Mr. Learmonth’s frequent lesson was “ Believe on the
Lord Jesus Christ and thou shalt be saved.” Remember
what -he said about Jesus Christ as the Saviour of sinners.
When John Newton was a very old man, and could not
recollect things told him the day before, he said, “There
are two things I never forget: that,l am a great sinner,
and that Jesus Christ is a great Saviour.” Keep this al-
ways in remembrance. When a good man was dying
and he was no longer able to recognise his friends or
even his wife, he was asked, “Do you know Jesus
Christ.” “ Oh, yes,” he said, “ He’s my Saviour ”! If
once you know Jesus Christ as your Saviour, you will
remember Him.
Mr. Learmonth often wished you to remember this
short prayer, “ God bless Yasmar Sabbath School.”
Let his appeal lead you to repeat this prajer for the
school.


Dear children, you will cherish your teacher’s
memory best by keeping these things always in re-
membrance. “ For if these things be in you and
abound, they make you that ye shall be neither barren
nor unfruitful in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus
Christ.” “ Wherefore the rather, brethren, give diligence
to make your calling and election sure, for if ye do these
things ye shall never fall; for so an entrance shall be
ministered unto you abundantly into the everlasting
kingdom of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ.”
GOD BLESS OUR SCHOOL.
God bless our Sunday School,
Increase our Sunday School,
God bless our School.
Send down thy grace divine,
May every child be thine,
And love all hearts entwine,
God bless our School.
All our dear teachers bless,
And give them large success
In winning souls;
May they encouraged be,
And oft around them see
Their labours crowned by Thee ;
God bless our School.
So may our school increase
In knowledge, love, and peace ;
God bless our School.
And when Death’s arrows fly,
And useful teachers die,
Their places still supply,
God bless our School.


iMUo
f ((5%








