

3Vfp
61 o
I* Semolrs
uS the Hon. |.
Sir Robert Phi Ip
———l i B— —■—■
1851-£9X2 il
By
HARRY C. FERRY


W' ho sought no title ana wnu L. U L /L L/ j / LC/L CL •
<Lt4
in
O
09
o
o
IV
-si
o
>o
o
o*-


Introduction
ISTORY may be divided into two groups, the one
comprising records of natural phenomena, such as
floods, storms, earthquakes, and the changing
seasons, and the other covering the achievements
of men. Before the one we stand in reverent awe,
our minds impressed by the wonders that are
unfolded. But the really human appeal is in the
story of what mortals like ourselves have dared
and done. It is there we find true instruction and
inspiration; it is there we obtain some idea of the heights which
may be reached by the exercise of brains and energy; and the thought
comes to us that what others have done we, too, may succeed in
doing.
Such instruction and such inspiration will be found in generous
measure in the life and recollections of Sir Robert Philp, K.C.M.G.
Interwoven with the story of this man’s endeavour there is, in fact,
a comprehensive history of Queensland, and because of the personal
interest attaching to it there is no doubt that it is history in its most
attractive form. The older generation, many of whom will recall
incidents herein set forth, will live their lives again as they scan
these pages, whilst the imagination of younger folk will be fired by
the adventurous spirit that burns brightly throughout. Emerson has
said: “There is no history; only biography”; and he adds: “Man is
the whole encyclopaedia of facts.” Apart from natural events, it is
certain that every great occurrence was first a thought in some
man’s mind. There it developed, it was ultimately converted into
action, and the result is History.
The story of Queensland, its progress and its development, is
built up from the records of men of action. It is history shorn of
the glamour and the agony of war, but it is none the less glorious
because of that. The genius of our pioneers has been constructive,
not destructive. They have taken the raw material of nature and
from it they have built up a nation. And in all the list of the pioneers
there is not one whose achievements cover so wide a field as do those
of Sir Robert Philp. Born in modest circumstances, his equipment
for the battle of life consisted of a good constitution, a good home
training, habits of industry, and a courageous heart. Education was
not so easy to obtain in the days of his childhood as it is now, and
though he devoted a good deal of attention to self-improvement in
later years, he actually left school at the age of 11 years. Without
assistance or influence, he eventually won his way to the position
of a Cabinet Minister, then to that of Prime Minister of Quensland,
and when in due course the honour of Knight Commander of St.
Michael and St. George was conferred upon him by His Majesty
King George V there was a feeling amongst his fellows that no other


man in all the land had done so much to deserve the distinction. No
other had lived so full a life, no other had played the part of the
pioneer in so many directions with such conspicuous success, and
in doing so had won so many sincere friends. It was felt that the
title was most fitting for such a man. The atmosphere of adventure
and daring, of chivalry and of honour had pervaded his life, and no
plumed knight of olden days ever won his spurs more fairly than he.
The recollections of Sir Robert Philp cover the most important
happenings in Queensland for well over half a century; they range
over the whole of the State’s vast territory from north to south,
and east to west, whilst to their historic value there is added the
charm of personal impression and anecdote. In these pages he
has recalled the capital city as he saw it in 1862: a scattered settle-
ment in which bullock waggons and aboriginals were still features
of everyday life. The lads who were scholars with him at the old
National School (afterwards the Normal School) have come back to
his memory as they were in the days when they read lessons together,
and he has traced the educational system of Queensland from those
early beginnings right through to the establishment of the Queens-
land University, in which he took a prominent part. Then there
came his athletic days, when he played cricket, boxed, or ran with
his youthful companions, many of whom became famous in later
years. The days of cotton growing in Queensland, the birth of the
sugar industry, the rush of gold seekers to Gympie, the sensation
caused by the discovery of tin at Stanthorpe, all loom large in his
early memories. His removal to North Queensland, the beginnings
of the firm of Burns, Philp & Co., the building up of the Northern
Metropolis, the pioneering of the territory to the west and north,
the development of the shipping, mining, and pastoral industries, the
opening up of North Queensland ports, New Guinea, and the Pacific
Islands, are all included in the matters with which he had a close
personal association.
In the public life of the State Sir Robert Philp played a no less
prominent part. From boyish recollections of an encounter with the
first Governor, Sir George Ferguson Bowen, and other notables of
the sixties, he has passed to the time when he was elected first
member for the Musgrave in the Legislative Assembly under the
banner of Sir Thomas Mcllwraith, who was then opposing a Govern-
ment led by Sir Samuel Walker Griffith. This was in the year 1886,
and thus began his close personal association with the political giants
amongst whom he was destined to win a prominent place. In 1888
he successfully contested the Townsville electorate which then
returned two members. His colleague was the brilliant John
Murtagh Macrossan, sturdy fighter for North Queensland interests
and leader of the movement for the elevation of the North into a
distinct colony, with Townsville as the capital. Robert Philp subse-
quently became senior member for Townsville, and sat continuously
as its representative for a period of 27 years.


When his service terminated he was the “Father of the House,”
not alone in years of service but in honours. He had, in fact, held
Cabinet rank as Minister for Public Works from 1893 to 1896, as
Minister for Public Instruction from 1894 to 1895, Minister for Rail-
ways from 1895 to 1897, and Minister for Mines from 1893 to 1903.
He was Treasurer in the Governments headed successively by Sir
Hugh Nelson, the Hon. T. J. Byrnes, and Sir James Dickson. In
December, 1899, he became Premier, and in addition to his duties as
leader of the Government and chief adviser to His Excellency the
Governor, he administered the Departments of the Treasury and
Mines. The following year he exchanged the portfolio of Treasurer
for that of Chief Secretary. These positions he held until September,
1903, and during portion of the latter year he added the office of
Home Secretary, a sufficient example of hard work and adminis-
trative economy even in those days of financial stress. During an
historic crisis towards the end of 1907, Sir Robert Philp again
rendered valuable service to his country by assuming the office of
chief adviser to His Majesty’s representative for some months.
Straightforwardness, honesty of purpose, a generous apprecia-
tion of the rights and feelings of his fellows, and that “modesty
which doth become a man” coupled with a determination to win
through, were the characteristics which led to his success in
business. These qualities were again displayed on every occasion
during his career as a member of Parliament and as a Minister of
the Crown. Coupled with his probity in all things, his broad-
mindedness and his deep sense of patriotism, they led to his ultimate
appointment as leader of the Government in the land he loved so
well. That he continued to serve his country with disinterested
zeal and unselfish purpose may be gathered from the fact that when,
in the year 1900, he was asked to consent to have his name submitted
to His Majesty King Edward VII. with a recommendation that the
honour of knighthood be conferred upon him, he declined the dis-
tinction for reasons characteristic of the man. Eventually, he did
accept the honour from King George V., and it may be said that no
similar act of the Sovereign received more general approbation..
When he laid down the burdens of public life it is but l3are truth
to say that he had not one enemy on either side of the House where
he had sat so long, and the worst that had ever been said of him
was that he was really too kindly natured for the hurly burly of
politics.
As one whose privilege it was to watch Sir Robert Philp from
a seat in the Press Gallery during practically the whole of his career
in the Cabinet: as one whose duty led to interviews under all sorts
of conditions, and at what would seem to most people to be unseemly
hours, and to accompany him on several important political tours,
I can bear testimony to his unfailing good nature under all circum-
stances. Possessing unusual courage and foresight, he ever displayed
that rare strength of mind and determination which is so essential
to a leader of men, yet he was never guilty of any attempt at


bluster. To borrow a term from Essex Evans he proved himself
in all his dealings with his fellows to be a very “Prince of courtesy.”
But it is in his display of the more positive qualities that the readers
of this volume will find the most fascinating material. It is the
story of a man who saw visions; who, by dint of intelligent effort,
converted those visions into actualities, and so carved his name
deep upon the roll of the Nation builders.
In the course of conversation with intimate friends, Sir Robert
Philp had often related absorbing stories of his life. It occurred to
some of them that experiences which possessed such historic and
educational value should be published to the world. It was not easy
to induce him to agree to this, his disposition to avoid the “lime-
light” providing the barrier. He had never failed, however, to
perform any public duty that presented itself to his hand, and when
it was borne in upon him that his example and experiences would
be of great service to young men taking up the burdens of life he
agreed to the proposal. It then became necessary to secure the
assistance of someone to put the Memoirs into written form and
arrange them so far as possible in proper sequence. When the
choice fell upon me I felt that it was indeed an honour, and I can
only hope that the richness of the material placed at my disposal
by Sir Robert Philp during many delightful evenings has not
sufferings in the treatment of it.
My desire was that Sir Robert should tell the whole story in
his own words. As it developed, however, it became clear that his
innate modesty was again operating, and was leading to the com-
pilation of a history in which his own personality was being con-
stantly submerged. It was only by patient questioning that this
could be overcome, with the result that a good portion of the story
has had to be told in the third person. Whenever possible, however,
the first intention has been maintained.
The work was originally completed in 1918, the intention being
to publish it in that year. Delays occurred, however. When the
death of Sir Robert Philp took place in 1922, it was deemed advisable
to make some slight alterations in the text and to bring it up to
date by including the events narrated in the last chapter, comprising,
as they do, an important phase in the constitutional history of
Queensland.
HARRY C. PERRY.


Contents
INTRODUCTION.
CHAPTER I.
Family History—Memories of Old Glasgow—Boyhood Days—A Dreary Voyage
—Arrival in Moreton Bay—Tragic Bereavement —Loss of the Schooner “Agnes.”
CHAPTER 11.
Queensland in 1862—Beginnings of Responsible Government—Early Brisbane
Topography—Municipal Boundaries Quaintly Described —Predatory Aborigines—
Memories of the Petries—Gaol Hill—The Fire of 1864.
CHAPTER 111.
Religion and Education—First National School—Dr. Lang’s Church—United
Presbyterian Church, Creek Street —St. Paul’s Church Founded—Difficulties of
Water Supply.
CHAPTER IV.
Employment with Bright Brothers—Early Shipping—Railway Construction
Begins—the First Strike—Lessons from Brunton Stephens—The Volunteer
Movement —Gympie Gold Discovery—Tin Found at Stanthorpe.
CHAPTER V.
Romance of Sugar—Birth of the Industry—The Hon. Louis Hope—Methods of
Cultivation—Portable Crushing Mills—Northern Cane Fields—Commencement of
the C.S.R. Co.
CHAPTER VI.
Queensland Mining—History and Anecdote—Life of John Moffat—lndustry that
Yielded over £124,000,000 —How Robert Philp Missed “The Tail End of the Bank
of England.”
CHAPTER VII.
Early Friendship with James Burns—Removal to Townsville—lnfant Days of
the Northern Metropolis—Fire in Flinders Street—Discovery of Gold at Charters
Towers—Blazing the Wilderness.
CHAPTER VIII.
Gold on the Hodgkinson—Scaling the Ranges—Perils of the Scrub—-Settlement
at Cairns—Attack of Malaria—Harvest of Gold, Wool, Sugar, and Timber—
Queensland Shipping History—Early Wrecks Recalled—Burns, Philp & Co. Ltd.
Formed—Quarter Million Capital—How the A.U.S.N. Co. came into Existence.
CHAPTER IX.
The Palmer and Ravenswood Rushes—Millions in Alluvial Gold—Locating New
Townships—Drought decides Site of Winton—The Pioneer of Atherton Table-
land—Railways Replace Teams—Foundation of Hughenden.
CHAPTER X.
Robert Philp as Alderman—Townsville’s First Water Supply—The First Agricul-
tural Show—First Prize (a Son) —Memories of Dod Clarke and Charlie Ingham—
Entry into Politics—Early Electioneering Experiences—E. J. Banfield recalls
“How We Won the Musgrave.”
CHAPTER XI.
Recognition of Public Usefulness—Farewell Address from Townsville Citizens—
The Parliament of 1886 —How it was Constituted—Electoral Districts Acts—
Members Expenses Act—lmpressions of Sir Thos. Mcllwraith and Sir S. W.
Griffith.
CHAPTER XII.
John Murtagh Macrossan—Jealousies between North and South—The Separation
Movement—Petition to Her Majesty Queen Victoria—Motion by Mr. Macrossan
for Territorial Division of the Colony—An Historic Address—Robert Philp’s
Maiden Speech in Parliament.


CHAPTER XIII.
Election of 1888 —Robert Philp Returned for Townsville —The Griffith-Mellwraith
Coalition —Industrial Troubles of 1891—Labour in Politics —Failure of Communal
Settlements —Robert Philp joins the Cabinet —Appreciation of Sir Hugh Nelson.
CHAPTER XIV.
Twelfth and Thirteenth Parliaments —The Passing of the Hon. T. J. Byrnes
The Dawson Ministry—Robert Philp becomes Premier —Standards of Industry,
Self Reliance, and Fair Play—Memoir of the Hon. David Hay Dalrymple.
CHAPTER XV.
War in South Africa—Response of Queensland Bushmen —Fighting for the
Flag—Colin Philp Volunteers —Queensland’s Premier Visits the War Zone —
Impressions of The Cape, Transvaal, and Orange River —Home Again—Dark
Days of Drought—Economy the Watchv/ord —Sir Herbert Chermside’s Fine
Example.
CHAPTER XVI.
Federation—lts Origin and Accomplishment—Federal Referendum Poll Framing
the Constitution —Right of Appeal to Privy Council —Federal Portfolio offered
to Robert Philp—Death of Sir James R. Dickson —The Lessons of Experience.
CHAPTER XVII.
Robert Philp as a Traveller —Journey to New Guinea —Wisdom of Sir William
McGregor—Possibilities of the Possession —Ministerial Tours of the North and
North-West—The Pastoralists’ Troubles —Land Act of 1902.
CHAPTER XVIII.
Elections of 1902 —Policy of Economy—Manifesto to the People-—Philp Govern-
ment Retains Public Confidence —Ambitions Lead to Intrigue—Robert Philp
Declines to Buy Support—Honesty is Always the Best Policy: Even in Politics.
CHAPTER XIX.
Labour Party Holds Balance of Power —Death of Sir Hugh Nelson—Mr. Kidston
becomes Premier—Railways Guarantee Act—Government Leader Restive under
Labour’s Whip—Liberal Coalition Effected—Robert Philp’s Self-effacement —
Two-party System Restored —A Vigorous Railway Policy.
CHAPTER XX.
Prosperity Follows the Coalition —John Blair’s Tribute to Robert Philp—Jubilee
of Responsible Government —Retirement of Mr. Kidston—Mr. Denham assumes
Leadership.
CHAPTER XXL
First Federal Referendum —Robert Philp’s Jubilee—Fifty Years a Queenslander
—Trip to Scotland Decided Upon—Public Appreciation Shown —Some Handsome
Testimonials —University Scholarship Founded—General Strike of 1912—Scots-
men as Legislators.
CHAPTER XXII.
Across the World Once More —Impressions of Perth—Lord John Forrest—
Meeting with Genera! Botha —“Lost in London” —Glasgow Re-visited after Fifty
Years—Centenary of First Clyde Steamship—Old Friendships Revived.
CHAPTER XXIII.
Beauties of the South of England—Cruise to Norway and Denmark —Meeting
with Emperor of Germany—France, Belgium, and the Rhine—Oxford and
Cambridge—-Buckingham Palace—“ The Mother of Parliaments” —Homeward
Bound—Sunny Queensland Again.
CHAPTER XXIV.
Prosperity: and then Tragedy—The Great War—Politics before Humanity—
Knighthood for Robert Philp—Denham Government Defeated—Great Industries
Reviewed —Secret of Queensland’s Wealth.
CHAPTER XXV.
Fugitive Memories —Development of Electoral Laws—The Pearling Industry—
Fight for the Constitution —Grave Issues Involved—True Story of the Delegation
to London —Death of Sir Robert Philp.
