

, TA rp
' 3^
With F. F. BEGG'S COMPLIMENTS.
■l V
MP' *
BtjttwwKliti SfeKtoiice*
IN CONNECTION WITH THE
UNVEILIiNG OF A TABLET
TO THE LATE
INJiiiiani lWf.fl..
MINISTER OF
I
THE PARISH OF FALKIRK, SCOTLAND,
sulp t 1890.
Melbohene:
T. Gr. RAMSAY & CO., PRINTERS, 362 COLLINS STREET.




UNVEILING OF THE TABLET IN COMMEMORA-
TION OF DR. BEGG.
MIfHE tablet erected by the congregation of the Parish Church to the memory
f | of their late esteemed pastor, Dr. Begg, was unveiled on Saturday. A
A ALj special service in connection with the ceremony was held. There was a
moderately large assemblage present. The service was opened with the
second Paraphrase. Mr. James Wilson, of Weitlands, presided, and there were
present—the Rev. Messrs. James Mitchell, D.D., South Leith ; H. C. Begg, of
Sorn; George Anderson, Bothkennai ; John Scott, Camelon; J. Watson Leith,
8.D., Old Meldrum ; A. Ross Taylor, Grahamston ; George Carruthers, and
J. Saunders, Kingarth ; also the following members of session and other friends—
Messrs. J, R, MacLuclde, William Balloch, James Wilson (Bonnybridge),
Thomas Blackadder, John Johnston, George Borthwick, Edward Greenoak,
Morrison Callander, Thomas Binnie, Dr. Allan, and others.
Mr. Wilson, in requesting the Rev. Dr. Mitchell to undertake the duty
of unveiling the memorial, said it was just a year since a committee was appointed
to consider what steps should be taken to erect a monument in or near the church
to the memory of Dr. Begg, their late respected pastor. The holiday season
followed soon, so that it was the month of November before any measures were
taken. One of the first things they did was to appoint him convenor, which
accounted for the position he occupied that day. The duties of the committee
were light, because they were ably assisted through the kindness of their present
minister, Mr. Carruthers, who displayed the greatest anxiety that the work
fchould be worthy of the congregation. In that he had done honour to himself
in seeking to honour his predecessor. After several inquiries had been made,
several members of the committee visited the Cathedral in Glasgow to see what
monuments had been erected there to the memory of eminent deceased persons,
and then they consulted Messrs. J. & G. Mossman, sculptors in that city, with
regard to their object. The committee were shown two designs which the firm
considered suitable for a tablet. By a strange coincidence, it turned out that
Mr. John Mossman was the one who executed the monument to the Rev. John
Brown Patterson. He at first had no idea it was for the same church, but after
meeting some of the committee, he asked if there were an erection in the church
to the Rev. Mr. Patterson. Being told there was, he said that was one of his
first works. He was then a very young man, for it was upward of fifty years
ago. He said, and no doubt truly, as that was one of his first, the present one
might be one of his last. He was very pleased to be intrusted with the commis-
sion. The committee accepted one of the designs, and having got the permission
of the heritors to erect the monument, appealed to the congregation for funds to
carry out the work. Mr, Mossman’s estimate was £7O. In a short time the
collectors intimated they had got more, and the collection was stopped. Mr.
Mossman’s health had not been good, and he (Mr. Wilson) was only sorry he


could not be with them that day. A telegram had been received from him to
that effect. Apologies were also intimated from Rev. Dr. M‘Laren, Larbert;
Rev. Mr. Shepherd, of Ecclesmachan ; and Rev. Mr. Heron, Aberdeen. Mr.
Wilson then desired Dr. Mitchell to perform the ceremony.
For that purpose, accompanied by a number of the congregation, the com-
mittee, and the ministers present, Dr. Mitchell proceeded to the vestibule of the
church. He removed the cord, and the veil fell away, revealing the lineaments
of the monument to the gaze of the people. The tablet is a mural one, and of
beautiful and pleasing appearance. It is of Sicilian marble, and executed in
Gothic style of sculpture. The medallion is an excellent likeness of him whom it
represents. The tablet bears the following inscription :—“ In memory of the
Rev. William Begg, D.D., born 3rd July, 1815 ; ordained at Hew Monkland, 19th
October, 1837 ; translated to Falkirk, 24th July, 1840 ; died 10th April, 1888.”
At the base of the tablet are the words, “An eloquent man, mighty in the
Scriptures.”
Returning to the area of the church, Rev. Dr. Mitchell addressed the
audience, saying, he need scarcely say how highly he prized the honour conferred
upon him in having been asked to unveil the tablet, with its likeness so singularly
true, bringing each feature vividly before them. He took it as a singular
privilege that they should believe he would enter so heartily into their feelings,
or to be fitted to be the exponent of their sentiments on such an occasion. None
did more thoroughly enter into their feelings than he did. He had been in
various ways identified with the citizens of Falkirk, and had made many personal
friendships among the people. He had been with them on many occasions, both
of joy and sorrow. He did not desire that the present occasion should be of a
sad character. At such a time tears lay near the surface. He desired to steer
clear of any reference which would turn a day of thankfulness into a day of sad-
ness. The memorial which had been unveiled that day was a memorial of even
more than they had intended. He regarded it as a memorial by the congregation
themselves of Dr. Begg’s goodness and worth. The testimony it bore would not
have been half so touching had the monument been erected on the very occasion
of his death. They might then have shed some natural tears, but they had,
erected it after years had passed away, and under the successful ministry of a
successor. When they desired to perpetuate the memory of those who had worked
among them, it showed that those who laboured in the service of the Lord would
not labour in vain. There could be no greater encouragement to them that they
would not be forgotten, but that their memories and work would follow them
when the congregation had so cherished Dr. Begg’s memory as to do what they
had done. It was also a memorial of the-spirit which characterised their present
minister. Some might have looked with a feeling of suspicion upon the object.
It was only on a piece with his work among them, and none rejoiced more
unfeignedly than he (Dr. Mitchell) over the good the Lord had enabled him to
do. With Dr. Begg before him and God’s grace to aid him, he trusted that
though the present was bright the future would be far brighter. None rejoiced
more than him whose memory they commemorated that day. His feeling could
be expressed in the following lines :
I need not be missed since another succeeds me,
To reap down the fields which in spring I have sown,
He that ploughs and that sows is not missed by the reaper,
He is only remembered by what he has done.
2
UNVEILING OF THE TABLET IN COMMEMORATION OF HE. BEGG.


Specially was the memorial meant to commemorate their late minister.
They did well to keep his memory green, for the fact that he lived in their
memory gave a richness to their daily lives which they would not otherwise
possess. He saw on the tablet the inscription was : “An eloquent man, mighty
in Scripture.” That Scriptural quotation was no doubt thoroughly descriptive
of him. To most of them he was known only after he had passed middle life.
To those who knew him earlier he was an eloquent preacher. Latterly when his
eye was somewhat dimmed he was the impressive preacher, but mighty in
Scripture was his characteristic all through. Nothing impressed him (the
speaker) more strongly than the readiness and aptness of quotation, but better
far than being mighty in that he made the Scriptures the guide of his life. He
translated them, not from the Greek or Hebrew, but into his daily life. His
was the truest eloquence—the eloquence of a pure and spotless life. By that
tablet “ he being dead yet speaketh,” and the sight of it would lead them to
enter the sanctuary with more reverent steps, because it would remind them of
the time when they were young, and they would he more faithful because of
what he said twenty, thirty or forty years ago. Let them think why it was that
they kept Dr. Begg and such as he in such grateful remembrance. It was
worth while considering it, because most men desired a place in the memory of
their friends. It was not a man’s greatness that led men to commemorate him ;
it was not for his intellectual qualities ; it was not for a man’s wealth or even a
man’s wisdom that posterity desired to keep him in remembrance. There were
three things, vital and essential, that in such case led them to desire to com-
memorate. These were unselfishness, love and piety. Other elements might
enter in, but these were the leading. They were so in the character of their
departed friend. Unselfishness was that which would live the longest. A
selfish man who has made a good thing of life, but, however successful he might
have been, there was no desire on the part of people to commemorate his
memory. His life needed no further remembrance. He lived for himself and
♦ the things of time and sense, and why should posterity commemorate him ? It
* was true of him, “ verily I say unto you, he hath received his award.” But an
unselfish life was not complete till it was made so by the community endeavor-
ing to live the life set forth. Not only must the life be unselfish, but it must
be one of goodness. History puts into another column those who were com-
memorated as good and virtuous. It was strange that after all, notwithstand-
ing what men said, it was not greatness that kept memories alive; it was good-
ness. If they looked at the names of those who lived longest in the world, it
was the names of those who had been genuinely good. It was not simply
because he was an eloquent man or mighty in Scripture that the tablet had been
erected, but because in his own daily life he was a man of unaffected piety. His
was not that sanctimoniousness that to preserve itself secluded itself that it
might be undisturbed, but rather that sanctity which desired to promote itself
by its diffusion. He was a natural genuine Christian man who sanctified and
hallowed whatever society he entered into. It was because he was a true, un-
affected Christian man that the tablet was erected to his memory. The third
qualification of immortality on earth was that of love. This, after all, was what
they remembered most of Dr. Begg. It was not so much his familiarity with
Scripture, but the kind heart and tender sympathy, the feeling of one who
entered into their joys and sorrows. There was that in him which revealed to
them he loved much. Even when called upon to rebuke it was love that called
3
UNVEILING OF THE TABLET IN COMMEMORATION OF DR. BEGG.


it forth. The heart that was full of tender brotherly kindness towards all, it
was this that lived after they had crumbled into dust. If, then, any desired —
and not desired entirely to be forgotten—not to be forgotten, let them live
unselfish lives of Christian piety and love ; then, whether commemorated or no
upon the tablet, they would live in the hearts of those who knew them, and it
might be that this example would form the lives of those who followed. He
thought they had done well in erecting a tablet in the porch. It seemed to be
in its appropriate place, and would revivify memories that were healthful. There
were some for whom it might have closer and more touching reminiscences than
others. It would tend to soothe those who still were sorry ; it will lead them to
feel the influence of example. Let them be inspired by the example of the good
who predeceased them, and let them feel that every life that is worth while com-
memorating is the life that would have thought itself least worthy of com-
memoration. Their departed friend would have been the last to have thought
it possible that a memorial should have been placed to him in the church. His
feeling would have been—
I need not the praise of the love-written record,
The name and the epitaph carved on the stone;
The things I have lived for, let them be my story,
And I be remembered by what I have done.
In course of the services an anthem appropriate to the occasion ivas
rendered by the choir. It was pathetic in its tenor, and rendered with much
taste and expression. The music was composed by Mr. Love.
Mr. MacLuckie, in requesting a vote of thanks to I)r. Mitchell for unveil-
ing the tablet, said an appropriate tribute of respect and affection had been paid
to the memory of their late pastor. The venerable artist had perpetuated in
marble a life-like expression of the dear departed, but the memory, the living
presence, was enshrined in their hearts. Their esteemed friend Hr. Mitchell had
eloquently referred to those gifts and graces which endeared Dr. 11 egg to them,
and it seemed to him at such a meeting they could hear a still small voice gently
calling from the home above “come hither,” They were all greatly indebted to v.
Dr. Mitchell for so kindly coming to Falkirk, and for the careful manner, <<Mi|
both in word and deed, in which he had discharged the duty committed to him.
The vote of thanks was cordially responded to.
The Rev. Henry C. Begg of Sorn (son of the late Dr. Begg), proposed a
like compliment to Mr. Wilson as convenor of the Committee, saying that Mr.
Wilson was associated in the work of the parish for many years with his father.
He had been superintendent of the Sunday School for twenty-one years The eldest
member of the Kirk Session, his father ever regarded him as his righthand man.
He was sure it gave very great satisfaction to the members of his family to see
Mr. Wilson at the head of the movement. If they would allow him, he would
just thank them for the tribute of respect they had paid to his father’s memory.
It was a great source of pleasure to the family to know that the work he did in
the parish for those long years had not been in vain.
The thanks as desired having been accorded, Mr. Wilson replied, observing
he was well repaid for any little trouble he had in seeing the successful termination
of the work.
MEMORIAL SERVICES
were held in the church on the following day, Sunday. The Rev. Alexander
Falconer, of Denny, officiated at the forenoon diet of worship. There was a
4
UNVEILING OF THE TABLET IN COMMEMORATION OF DR. BEGG.


large congregation present. The hearers were attracted by two causes, which
were—the occasion of the service and the venerable preacher’s own personality.
The text was from Habakkuk, chap, ii, verse 11— *• For the stone shall cry out
of the wall, and the beam out of the timber shall answer it.” The sermon was
remarkable for its dramatic force, erudition, eloquence, and, notwithstanding Mr.
Falconer’s advanced years, for its vigour. The reverend clergyman not only did
not use a manuscript, hut did not even seem to have a single note before him.
The preacher said the word “ Habakkuk ” meant the embrace of love, and the whole
burden of the prophecy illustrated how the Lord enfolded his covenanted people
in an everlasting arm with the embrace of love. The text was a figure of speech,
and these were not unusual in the Word of God. Jacob took the stone he used
for his pillow and set it up as a commemorative pillar to record God’s goodness.
Joshua took another such stone, and set it up near the sanctuary, saying, “ It
shall be witness, for it hath heard all the words the Lord has spoken.” He would
examine the text under three heads—first, the law of the association of ideas ;
second, the law of continuity ; and lastly, the law of evolution. Under the first,
he observed that the law of the association of ideas lay at the root of all educa-
tion, and its practical value was illustrated by the memorial marble unveiled on
Saturday. It recalled the past to them, and enabled them to look upon him
whom they had commemorated. By the association of ideas they could conceive
the spirit standing, like a sentinel on duty, watching them every Lord’s day as
they entered the house of their Lord their God. Ho doubt the likeness was dumb
and silent, but speech was silvern, while silence was golden. Under the law of
continuity, nothing, even in this world, stood unconnected. When they turned
to the Word of God they learned that all things were ruled according to the law
of continuity. In reference to the law of evolution, he said that those who
studied these laws disagreed among themselves. It galled him to hear them
speculating upon the “ origin of life ” or “ the struggle for existence.” Of all
the creatures upon earth none was born so helpless as man, nor one who con-
tinued dependent so long. Was it not, then, evident that man at first must
have been created by a supernatural divine act in the full maturity of his man-
| . hood ? He was proud of his country when he recollected that the first national
Fit church, endowed by the munificence of kings and chieftains, was the Church of
Scotland. In course of time the old order changed. Their country yielded to
the bewitching advances of Rome. The Church of Scotland is not now, and
Vnever was, a Protestant Church. Their proper name was Reformers, and their
church was the Church of the Reformation. , In concluding, the Rev. Mr.
Falconer said it was five years since he was stricken down with illness. He
thought he should never see their countenances again. The last church he ever
preached in before he was laid low was the one he had now, the honour to officiate
in, and at the dawn of his convalescence it was the very first to which he returned.
He desired to acknowledge the loving kindness he experienced from many a
brother during his illness. Strange to tell, of those who visited him no fewer
than eight had been invited to receive their reward. Of these eight the minister
whom they had honoured was one, and a former assistant, who died minister of
Stair, was another. The other six were ministers too, who, he thought, had
graced their pulpit. They were—Mr. Horn, of Slamannan ; Hr. Park, Airth ;
Mr. Smeaton, of Tulliallan ; Mr. Smith, Bannockburn ; Mr. Park, Cumbernauld ;
and Mr. McHair, Edinburgh. All of them had gone, and he was left to speak
of them with the honour they deserved, however feebly he might be able to do it.
5
UNVEILING OF THE TABLET IN COMMEMORATION OP DR. BEGG.


Of all the honours that had been bestowed on Dr. Begg he thought that given
on Saturday was the crowning one. They had unveiled that marble monument,
with its speaking likeness and appropriate inscription, which should never be
veiled again so long as these sacred walls would be permitted to stand. In the
pulpit he would venture to assert the combined efforts of all the one-and-twenty
predecessors did not reach his achievements in the church. Eecollect he was the
first to start a Sabbath School—an institution which it had never entered into
their hearts to conceive. Besides that he erected parishes and planted churches,
and engaged in missionary enterprise at home and abroad. He began his career
when the great Dr. Chalmers was entering his crusade for church extension,
which the British Parliament in its jealousy refused to grant. But that church
extension was accomplished as no man hoped it would be by the disruption of
’43, until now they felt the number of churches was more than desirable, and
it would be better if many of them were closed and their ministers sent forth to
preach to the heathen. There was another church extension he had to speak
of. Not the church extension of stone and lime, but of living temples. He
looked around him and saw the noblest temple that could be raised to his (Dr.
Begg’s) memory, and time would come when they would be glad to follow the
departed, and when he whom they honoured would be remembered as one of the
great cloud of witnesses that compassed them round about. But the practical
lesson of the discourse might be given in the four lines of the poet-laureate :
“ Howe’er it be, it seems to me
’Tis only noble to be good ;
Kind hearts are more than coronets,
And simple faith than Norman blood.”
In the afternoon the Rev. George Carruthers preached to the children—
who were seated in front of the pulpit—from Joshua iv. and 6, “ What mean ye
by these stones ?” After explaining the reference of the text, he proceeded to
refer to the monuments in and around the church. One set of them told of the
brave warriors whose dust was buried in the graveyard, and another of the saintly
ministers who had served the cure of the parish for many centuries. From the
former they learned to do their duty to their country, from the latter how they %
should trust the Saviour and serve their God. Of all the ministers since the !
Reformation, Dr. Begg had been the longest pastor of the parish. His venerable %
face was now to be seen in the vestibule set in a marble tablet, which all admired. J
From his long ministry and his beautiful character, he wished the children of the t
church to learn the lesson of implicit trust and faithful, patient service.
In the evening the pulpit was occupied by the Rev. J. Watson Leith, 8.D.,
of Old Meldrum. The church was well filled. The discourse was based upon
Job, xiv. chap. 14 verse—“ If a man die shall he live again.” At the conclusion
of an excellent exposition, Mr. Leith, referring to the ceremonial of Saturday,
said he felt very much their kindness in inviting him to be present on the
occasion, and in permitting him to take part in the memorial services. He
cherished the memory of their late pastor, whom it was his priviledge to aid for a
time in the ministry. When he knew him, Dr. Begg was no longer the eloquent
young man, but was crushed and broken, not by years, but by the weight of an
arduous ministry, borne unaided for many years, and by affliction in the home
which was so dear to him. For himself and many other ministers he
iiad a remarkable fascination, and one of his oldest ministerial friends
had again and again spoken of him as one of the nicest of men, and
6
UNVEILING OF THE TABLET IN COMMEMORATION OF DR. BEGG.


wise and calm in judgment. Amid all liis bodily frailty, lie had not
been long with him till he had an opportunity of seeing how strong a man
he was in many ways, and how great a hold he had upon his people, the Kirk
Session, and on his dear and happy home. In all young people he was greatly
interested, and many could tell how ready and helpful was his counsel when it
was needed, and what a pleasure it was to him to smooth their way of life and
help them on whenever he could. A minister ail over, and through and through
a gentleman, in every thought and feeling he was fortunate in his office. How
well he supported its dignity ; it never suffered at his hands. In his ministerial
capacity, he (Mr. Leith) enjoyed much of his confidence as well as friendship.
Were he here none would rejoice more than he to see how energetically his office
was filled ; to see how well the work was upheld and magnified by his (Mr.
Leith’s) dear friend of college days, their present minister. None could fail to
see how fortunate he was in his Kirk Session —men whose work and labour for
the good of the church were familiar to the district—men who would have been
a strength and honor to any church. How fortunate he was in his choir, and in
the numerous Christian workers who were always about him. His services were
always ungrudgingly given in every good cause. It was a spirit worthy both of
them’and him that prompted them to seek to perpetuate his fifty years’ ministry.
Though gone, the spirit of the blessed, faithful dead are permitted to be about
us still. Themselves beyond pain and grief, temptation and trial, they yet know
what they are, and make allowance for us all.—“ Falkirk Herald July, 1890.
7
UNVEILING OF THE TABLET IN COMMEMORATION OP DR. BBGG.


f
8
