



THE PRINCIPAL FURNISHING WAREHOUSE,
COLLIN’S STREET EAST,
MELBOURNE.
W. H. ROCKE & GO.
THE LARGEST AND CHEAPEST STOCK
lIS' AUSTKAIAA,
FURNITURE
Newest Designs.
CARPETS
FLOORCLOTHS
BEDSTEADS
Best Makes.
BEDDING.
SUITABLE FOR THE
WORKMAN’S COTTAGE or SQUATTER’S MANSION.
Orders for the SMALLEST PARCELS carefully executed.
PRICE LISTS POST FREE.


_69, Elizabeth
Place,
7
IRON & WIRE WAREHOUSES,
190, BourkeStTand 183. Little Coluns ST
Office; 118.CANN0N STREET.
SPECIALITIES.
Patent Oval Samson Fence Wire.
Squatting Supplies.
I. & H. Sorby’s Improved Sheep Shears.
Nobel’s Genuine Dynamite.
Wanzer Sewing Machines.
Thomson’s Patent Horse Hobble.
Mantelpieces.
Grates. Gasaliers.
IMPORTERS AND IN EVERY DESCRIPTION OF
BRITISH , FOREIGN & AMERICAN HARDWARE NOVELTIES.
Note Address—69 Elizabeth Street, Melbourne.




o ->
O //■
L -
■SC
-i~ &~- <_
t. *6.
/?
/ t—^
X i
/ -x 7
/lv r /'i'S '




MEN OF THE TIME
AUSTRALIA.
VICTORIAN SERIES.
1878.
MELBOURNE:
M'CARRON, BIRD & CO., PRINTERS AND PUBLISHERS,
37 FLINDERS LANE WEST.
1878.




6809
In presenting the First Volume of the Victorian
Series of Australian “Men of the Time,” the
Editor begs to apologise for many shortcomings
and omissions, which are inseparable from the
commencement of a Work which takes up ground
not previously occupied in any portion of this
continent. It is hoped that these defects will be
remedied in future series.
Melbourne, December , 1877.




INDEX
Aarons, Joseph 1
A’Beckett, Hon. T. T. ... ... 1
Akehurst, A. P 2
Amess, Samuel ... ... ... 2
Amsinck, Commander 3
Anderson, Colonel ... ... ... 3
Anderson, Lieut.-Colonel 4
Anderson, Hon. R. S. H ... 6
Archer, W. H 243
Arnold, J. F. 6
Atkinson, T. G 7
Attenborough, Thomas ... ... 7
Balfour, Hon. James 246
Ballantine, Duncan... ... ... 8
Dr. Edward 8
Barker, John 8
Barker, William 9
Barkly, Sir Henry 40
Barry, Sir Redmond 11
Bates, Hon. William ... ... 12
Bayles, Hon. William 247
Beale, Charles 247
Beaney, J. G 12
Belcher, Hon. G. F. 13
Bell, Alexander 247
Benbow, T. W. R 14
Berry, Hon. Graham 15
Bimie, Richard ... ... ... 248
Black, Hon. Niel 16
Bleasclale, Rev. Dr. 249
Blair, Dr. Jolpi 18
» Bolton, Henry 18
Bosisto, Joseph 18
Bowen, Sir George F 19
Bromby, Rev. Dr. 21
Bromell, Hon. Thomas ... ... 250
Brophy, Daniel 250
Brownless, Dr. A, C 21
Bxxckhurst, W, P 23
Bunny, B. F 24
Butters, J. S 25
Buvelot, A. L 26
PAGE PAGE
1 Byrne, Hon. Robert 251
1 Cairns, Rev. Dr 27
2 Campbell, Colin 29
2 Canterbury, Viscount 29
3 Carter, (1. D 30
3 Casey, Hon. J. J. ... ... ... 30
4 Chapman, H. S 33
6 Childers, Right Hon. H. C. E. ... 33
243 Clark, Rev. Chas 34
6 Clark, Robert (Horsham) ... ... 34
7 Clark, Robert (Sandhurst) 252
7 Clarke, Col. Sir Andrew ... ... 35
246 Clarke, J. L 36
8 Clarke, Marcus ... ... ... 36
8 Clarke, W. J. 36
8 Cole, Hon. G. W 37
9 Commins, C. L 39
10 Connor, J. H. 40
11 Cope, T. S 41
12 Coppin, George ... 41
247 Cowderoy, Benjamin 252
247 Crane, Right Rev. Dr. ... ... 45
12 Creswick, Henry 45
13 Curr, E. M 253
247 Curtain, John 46
14 Cuthbert, Hon. Henry 254
15 Cutts, Dr. W. H 255
248 Danks, John ... ... ... ... 47
16 Davis, John 47
249 Denovan, W. D. C 256
18 Dobson, Hon, F. S 47
18 Dow, J. L 48
18 Duerdin, James 49
19 Duffett, J. G. 49
21 Duffy, Hon. Sir C. GSO
250 Duffy, J, G 54
250 Dumas, A, G 257
21 Dwyer, Jeremiah 55
23 Edwards, John 55
24 Egan, Michael 56
25 Egan, Michael, jun 57
26 Ellery, R. L. J 57


Everard, John 58
Eville, James 59
Fellows, Hon. T. H 59
Fenwick, Orlando ... ... ••• 61
Ferres, John 61
Finn, Edmund ... 61
Fiskin, Archibald 258
Fitzgerald, Hon. Nicholas ... 62
Fitzgibbon, E. G 62
Flanagan, John ... ... ... 63
Ford, Richard 64
Foy, Mark ... ... ... ••• 65
Fraser, Simon 65
Fraser, Hon. Alexander 66
Francis, Hon. J. G 67
Gatehouse, James 68
Gaunson, David 68
Gemmell, H. M, C. 69
Giles, Ernest 69
Gillbee, William 70
Gillies, Hon. Duncan 71
Goldsbrough, Richard ... ... 72
Goold, Most Rev. Dr 73
Grant, Hon. J. M.... ... ... 73
Guerard (Von), J. E 74
Gnilfoyle, W. R. A. 75
Glinst, Dr. J. W 76
Gurner, H. F. ... ... ... 76
Haddon, F. W 77
Haig, Dr. William 77
Halfey, John 259
Halford, Dr. G. 8.... ... ... 78
Ham, C. J 79
Hamilton, Hon. T. F 79
Handheld, Rev. H. H. P 80
Hanna, Patrick 80
Harker, Hon. George 81
Harriman, B. C. ... ... ••• 82
Harwood, H. R 83
Hayter, H. H. 84
Healy, T. E 85
Hearn, W. E. ... ... 86
Hennelly, James 259
Henty, Edward 86
Henty, H. J 260
Henty, Henry 88
Henty, Hon. James 260
Hepburn, Benjamin 89
Herrenschmidt, Henry 92
Highett, Hon. William 93
Higinbotham, Hon. George 93
Hogan, J. F 94
Hogan, Michael 95
Hopkins, F. R. C ... 95
James, John 96
Jenner, Hon. C. J ... 97
Jervois, Major-General Sir W. ... 261
Johnson, G. R 97
Johnston, Hon. J. S 273
Kerferd, Hon. G. B. ... ... 98
Kirk, George 99
Kissane, W. R. ...' 262
Kong Meng, Lowe 263
Knipe, J. H 261
Lalor, Hon. Peter 100
Lang, G. S 26b
Langton, Hon. Edward ... ... 101
Laurens, John 267
Lavater, G. T. A. ... ... ••• 10^
Lempriere, T. H 100
Levey, G. C— ... ... ••• 104
Levi, Nathaniel 105
Lewis, John 106
Lewis, Robert 107
Ligar, C. W.... ... _ ... ••• 107
Longmore, Hon. Francis 110
Lyefl, Andrew ••• 108
Lyster, W. S 100
M‘Coy, Fi’ederick ... ... ... H 2
M‘Coll, Hugh 269
M‘Crea, Dr. William 113
M‘Culloch, Hon. Sir James 114
M‘Cullough, W. G. HO
M‘Dougall, Donald H 7
M‘Gowan, S. W, ... ... ••• H 7
M‘Guigan, Henry 119
MTlwraith, John ... ... ... 119
M‘lntyre, James 120
M‘Kean, Hon. James 121
M‘Lachlan, Ronald 122
M'Lellan, Hon. William 123
M‘Leod, J. N 123
Macßain, James HI
Macdermott, Hon. Townsend 124
Macdonald, A. C. ... ... ... 124
Macdonald, Rev. Dr 125
Macgregor, Hon. John ... ... 127
Mackay, Hon. Angus 128
MacMahon, Sir Charles 129
Macpherson, Hon. J. A 129
Madden, Hon. John 130
Marie, Louis 267
Mark, James 130
Martin, P. J 131
Masters, Samuel ... ... ... 132
Matheson, John 268
Michie, Hon. Archibald 133
Miller, Hon. Henry 269
Mirams, James 133
Miranda, David 134
Mitchell, Hon. Sir W. H. F. ... 135
Molesworth, Hon. Robert 136
Monahan, Thomas 136
Moorhouse, Right Rev. Dr 136
Mueller (Von), Baron 138
Munro, Hon. James 138
Murphy, Sir Francis 139
Murray, Andrew 140
Napier, Thomas 140
Neild, Dr. J. E 141
Newbery, J. C 143
Nicholls, C. F 143
Nicholls, H. R 146
Nicholson, Germain 147
Nicolson, Sir Arthur 148
Noel, W. B 148


O’Brien, Patrick 149
O’Brien, Stuart 150
O’Connor, Right Rev. Dr. ... 150
O’Hea, W. J 151
O’Loghlen, Sir Bryan 153
O’Malley, Rev. Joseph 155
O’Shanassy, Hon. Sir John ... 155
Ogier, J. C. H IGO
Orr, John 161
Ranter, Captain W. H 162
Panter, J. A. ... ... ... 163
Paterson, James 164
Patterson, Hon. J. B. ... ... 165
Payne, T. B 271
Pearson, C. H. ... ... ... 165
Pearson, William 166
Perkins, Patrick ... ... ... 167
Perraton, William 168
Perrins, J. B. ... ... ... 169
Perry, Right Rev. Dr 169
Phillipson, John 171
Phipps, H. F 171
Pigdon, John ... ... ... 171
Pohlman, R. W 172
Purves, J. L. 172
Quinlan, Francis 173
Rakowski, Captain S. A 271
Ramsay, Hon. Robert 174
Rede, Lieut.-Colonel 175
Reid, Hon. R. D , 176
Rintel, Rev. Moses 176
Robertson, William 176
Rocke, W. H 177
Rosales, Henry 178
Rowlands, Evan 181
Rusden, G. M 181
Rusden, H. K. ... ... ... 182
Sargood, Major The Hon. F. T. ... 183
Scott, William 184
Service, Hon. James 185
Shann, Richard ... ... ... 186
Shillinglaw, J. J. ... 186
Sladen, Sir Charles 187
Smith, A. K 188
Smith, Hon. G. P 272
Smith, Hon. J. T 191
Smith, L. L 194
Smith, Major The Hon. W. 0. ... 195
Smith, S. W 197
Smith, W. J 197
Smyth, F. L 197
Smyth, R. B 197
Standish, Captain 198
Stawell, Sir W. F 199
Steinfeld, Emanuel 200
Stephen, J. W 201
Stevenson, George 201
Stobbs, Rev. J. G 203
Story, Joseph 203
Strickland, Robert 204
Stutt, William 206
Skene, A. J 207
Sumner, Hon. J. T 207
Syme, David 208
Symonds, E, S 210
Teague, John ... ... ... 211
Templeton, William 211
Thomson, D. R, ... ... ... 212
Thomson, William 213
Thornton, Right Rev. Dr.... ... 213
Trench, Hon. R. Le F 214
Turnbull, Phipps 215
Turner, H. G , 216
Ulrich, G. H. F. 216
Vance, Rev. G. 0 218
Verdon, Sir G. F. ... ... ... 219
Walch, Garnet 220
Wallace, Hon. J. A 221
Walsh, J. J 223
Walsh, Hon. Robert 224
Watson, G. J 224
Were, J. B 225
Weston, Frank 227
Whitelaw, John ... ... ... 227
Whiteman, John 228
Williams, Rev. Thomas 229
Willoughby, Howard 230
Wilson, Hon. William ... ... 231
Wilson, Sir Samuel 232
Winter, James ... 234
Winter, W. J 235
Wood, Hon. J. D 235
Woods, Hon. John 236
Wragge, George ... 239
Wrixon, Hon. W. J 240
Young, E. M. ... ... ... 240
Zevenboom, John 241




VICTORIAN
MEN OF THE TIME
Aarons, Joseph, J.P., of Collins-street east, Melbourne, trade
assignee and Government insurance broker, was born in London,
and brought up to the building trade. Came to the colony in 1852,
and almost immediately started in his old occupation, and was the
first to introduce plate glass into the shop fronts of Collins-street.
He followed the same line of business until 1854 and 1855, when
he met with reverses. Next opened a furniture warehouse in
Swanston-street, then imported fancy goods and other merchandise.
Became a trade assignee in iB6O. Since 1874 has been the Govern-
ment insurance broker, to which office he was appointed by the Hon.,
J. G. Francis. Mr. Aarons is a justice of the peace for Victoria and
New South Wales, and Commissioner of the Supreme Court of New
South Wales. He is councillor for Latrobe Ward, in the city
of Melbourne, and was elected alderman 9th November, 1874.
In 1876 he leased the land in Bourke-street east owned by the
Rev. Edward Jones Brewster, of the city of London, for forty
years, and erected the Victoria Arcade and the Academy of Music
at a cost in round figures of ,£44,000. These buildings have
added largely to the convenience of the public, and beauty of the
street.
A f ßeckett, The Hon. Thomas Turner, M.L.C., was born in
London, on the 13th September, 1808, and was educated at the
Westminster School. Having been admitted as a solicitor, he
practised with much success during about twenty years in England,
and being anxious to see his brother the late Sir William a’Beckett,
who was the Chief Justice of Victoria, he visited the colony, arriv-
ing in Melbourne in January, 1851. He entered the Legislative
Council in the following year, and after having successfully prac-
tised at his profession during some five or six years, became Regis-
trar of the Church of England diocese of Melbourne. He still


retains his seat for the Central Province, and may honestly boast of
having devoted a large portion of his time to public business. In
1854 he introduced the Insolvent Estates Compulsory Sequestra-
tion Bill, which lapsed in committee; and in the same year, he
brought in the Law of Evidence Amendment Bill, which was as-
sented to. He voted against a proportion of the grant in aid of
public worship being given to the Jews, and against the abolition
of state-aid to religion. He was also opposed to the export duty
on gold; he disapproved of Mr. (now Sir John) O’Shanassy’s memor-
able financial motion in 1854: and he voted against the introduc-
tion of the ballot at the parliamentary elections, as well as against
mining on private property, as far back as 1856. He accepted
office as Commissioner of Customs under Sir James McCulloch, and
on presenting himself to his constituents was returned unopposed.
Mr. a’Beckett takes an active part in all matters connected with
the Church of England. He has long acted very efficiently as
chairman of the Hobson’s Bay United Railway Company.
Akehurst, Arthur Purssell, police magistrate, warden, and
coroner, was born in London, 1835, is the son of William Vialls
Akehurst, surveyor, of Upper Eaton-street, London, was educated
privately in Somersetshire, and left England for Victoria in 1850.
First went into a solicitor’s office with the intention of obtaining
articles, but in November, 1852, was appointed by Governor La
Trobe clerk of the bench and registrar of the small debts court at
Bunninyong, and in the following year was transferred to Ballarat. In
April, 1865, he was offered and accepted the appointment of police
magistrate, warden, and coroner, at Wood’s Point. Was transfered
thence to Kilmore, December, 1866, and in 1876 was appointed
relieving police magistrate. When about leaving the district he
was entertained at a large public dinner, and presented with a
handsomely illuminated address. Was returning officer for the
electoral district of Kilmore for several years, and was one of
five officers of the Law Department directed in 1873 to visit
and report upon the different courts under the control of the
Minister of Justice throughout the colony. Is representative of
the parochial district of Kilmore and Broadford in the Church
Assembly, diocese of Melbourne. Was married in 1856 to
Charlotte Mary, fourth daughter of the Rev. J. F. Armstrong, 8.A.,
Mallow, County Cork, Ireland.
AIIICSS, Samuel, was born in Newburgh, Fifeshire, 1826. He
was educated at a private school; early in life was apprenticed to
a stone-mason, and when out of his indentures followed the trade.
He was married at Newcastle-on-Tyne, in 1849, t 0 the daughter of
Mr. Ralph Straughan, a highly respected citizen of Alnwick, and
arrived in Melbourne in 1852. Almost immediately on arrival, Mr.


Amess tned his fortune on the goldfields, where he was
so successful that early in 1853 he returned to Melbourne, and
commenced business as a building contractor, which calling he still
follows. The public buildings, in connection with which the name
of Samuel Amess will be remembered, are the Melbourne Post Office,
the new Custom House, the Kew Lunatic Asylum, the Government
Printing Office, the old Exchange Buildings in William-street; the
Ballarat Railway Station, and a number of other works on the
Government lines of railway. Mr. Amess first entered upon
public life in 1864, when he was elected to represent the Bourke
Ward in the City Council j and in 1869 he attained the position of
Mayor of Melbourne. During his term of office Mr. Amess was
called upon to dispense the hospitality of the city in its broadest
sense. In 1870, the Flying Squadron dropped anchor in Hobson’s
Bay, and the Town Hall was opened. Both the officers and men
of the Squadron were liberally entertained, and the whole of
the expenses of the concerts and fancy dress ball, with which
the opening of the present Town Hall was celebrated, were borne by
Mr. Amess. For the two concerts and the ball, 20,000 invitations
were issued. Mr. Amess is owner of Churchill Island, in Western
Port Bay, a little sea-girt retreat, which he has stocked with hares,
quail, pheasants, rabbits, and—to maintain a fond memory of the
land of his birth—a herd of imported Highland cattle, of a strain
almost identical with the famous Chillingham breed.
Amsinck, Commander Henry, Royal Navy, entered the navy
in 1811 under Admiral Sir Michael Seymour. In the Hannibal 74
in 1814, assisted in the capture of the French frigate La Saltone
44, and was subsequently engaged in the Bedford and Bonn in the
blockade on the coast of Africa. Upon retiring on half-pay as
lieutenant, he in 1844 was appointed secretary to the Railway
Commission, and for his labours received the written thanks of the
Lords of the Treasury for his “ valuable services.” Capt. Amsinck
arrived in the colony in 1853 as the representative of a railway
and dock company, which, however, was not carried out. He
represented West Bourke in one Parliament and unsuccessfully
contested Rodney and Maldon. Is one of the Board of Visitors
of the Melbourne Observatory. Captain Amsinck married a sister
of the late Sir Archdale Wilson, Bart., G.C.B. (of Delhi), and a
cousin of the late Lord Berners.
Anderson, Colonel William Acland, the present commandant
of the Victorian Land Forces, is the son of the late Lieut.-Col.
Joseph Anderson, C. 8., K.H. He early in life entered the army
as ensign in his father’s regiment, the “ Fighting Fiftieth,” or
“ Queen’s Own Regiment of Foot.” After a brief term of service
he retired by the sale of his commission, and was subsequently


appointed a Commissioner of Goldfields. He entered political
life in the old Legislative Council, prior to the new constitution, as
member for Evelyn, and was appointed to the chief command of
the Victorian Volunteer Forces, on the retirement of Colonel Pitt,
C. 8., h.p., Both Foot, the officer who in 1859 raised, organised,
and trained the Volunteer Force, for which service he (Col. Pitt)
received the thanks of Her Majesty’s Government. Since Colonel
Anderson assumed command, the Volunteer Force has almost
attained the position of a small standing army, and he commands
at present, in addition to the Volunteers, the “ Victorian Artillery
Corps,” a body of professional “gunners,” recruited and trained in
the same manner as soldiers of the “line,” but paid and main-
tained by the Victorian Government.
Anderson, Lieutenant-Colonel Joseph, C. 8., K.H., was an
old Peninsula officer, and had probably seen more service than
any military man in the colony. His acts of heroism and true
bravery were numerous, and the following deserves special
record:—At the battle of Fuentes D’Onor, while he was lieutenant
in the 24th, a brother officer, Lieutenant Edward Kelly Ireland,
the uncle of the late Attorney-General, was killed by a musket
ball, and Lieutenant Anderson, at imminent peril to his own life,
recovered the body from the French, and himself performed the
last mournful offices. He entered the army in June, 1805, as an
ensign in the 78th Highlanders, with which corps he served in the
expedition to Calabria, in Italy, in 1806, the campaign including
the landing and engagement in the Gulf of St. Euphemia, the
battle of Maida and subsequent operations, and the capture of the
fortress of Catrone. In 1807 he accompanied the expedition to
Egypt, and was present at the landing in Aboukir Bay, the subse-
quent operations, and the surrender of Alexandria. He was with
his regiment at the siege of Rosetta, from the 7th to the 21st of
April, and in the retreat that followed, in which his regiment
retired, the whole day in square, surrounded by the enemy.
Colonel Anderson was promoted to a lieutenancy in the 24th
Regiment in October, 1808, and he served with that corps in
Spain and Portugal from 18th and 19th April to January, 1812.
He was present at the battles of Talavera (where he was wounded)
and Busaco, at the retreat of the lines of Torres Vedras, and
shared the glory of the British army in the operations from the
10th October, 1810, to the 7th March, 1811, and the consequent
retreat of the invaders to Spain. He was engaged in the advance
at Espanol, Porintal, Fuentes D’Onor and many minor affairs and
skirmishes. For these services he was promoted to a company in
the York Chasseurs. He served subsequently at the capture of
Guadaloupe, in 1815, including the landing at Bailiffe and surren-
der of Basseterre. He was afterwards removed to the 50th Queen’s


Own Regiment, and when major of that corps was made Knight
of the Royal Hanoverian Guelph Order, and became lieutenant-
colonel of the regiment. He commanded a brigade in the Gwalior
campaign, in which, during an engagement, he was severely
wounded in the body by a charge of grape-shot while in the act of
charging the enemy’s guns. For this he was made a Companion
of the Most Honourable Order of the Bath, and received the
bronze star of India. Colonel Anderson also held the Peninsular
war medal, with four clasps. In 1848 he retired from active
service, having served forty years on full pay. For some time the
gallant officer held the responsible position of Military Com-
mander and Civil Superintendent of convicts at Norfolk" Island.
Colonel Anderson came to Port Phillip soon after the founda-
tion of the colony, and engaged in squatting pursuits on the
Goulburn River. He took little part in public affairs until 1852,
when he was appointed to a vacancy among the nominee members
of the old Legislative Council, caused by the death of Mr.
A. C. W, Dunlop. He supported the passing of the Convicts Act
Prevention Bill, a measure which sought to restrain the influx into
the colony from Tasmania of felons, whether as conditional pardon
men or otherwise. This measure was disallowed by the Imperial
Government, but in the following session (1853-4) it was again
adopted by the Legislative Council. On that occasion the House
agreed, on the motion of Colonel Anderson, to an address to the
Queen setting forth the reasons which induced the Legislative
Council again to pass the bill. In 1854 the gallant officer acted
upon the committee appointed to consider the subject of the
defence of the colony; and in 1855, in the course of a debate on
the immigration question, he called attention to the demoralisation
likely to result from the great inpouring of Chinese, and advocated
legislation with a view to avert the evil. He assisted at the
investiture of General Thomas Seymour Pratt as a Knight of
the Bath, which interesting ceremony was performed by Governor
Sir Henry Barkly, at the old Exhibition building, in April, 1862.
This gallant officer died at the age of eighty-eight, at his
residence, Fairlie House, South Yarra, on the 18th July, 1877.
The news of his death was received with general regret, for
he was greatly esteemed, not only for his brilliant military
career, but also for his many estimable qualities in private
life, and the invariable courtesy he showed to all with whom he
came in contact. He was buried at the St. Kilda cemetery, with
all the military honours attaching to his rank, on the 21st July, 1877.
Anderson, Robert Sterling Hore, The Hon., solicitor, Mel-
bourne, was born near Coleraine, county of Londonderry, educated
at Belfast Academy, graduated at Dublin University, and practised
in Dublin for eight years. Arrived in the colony June, 1854, and


resided at Emerald Hill, beginning the practice of his profession
in Melbourne ; was member of the first municipal council of
Emerald Hill under the Act, and was chairman alternately with the
Hon. James Service for two years. Was member of Parliament for
Emerald Hill in 1855. He offered himself for election six times
in nine years and was opposed every time but once, when he joined
the Ministry of the late Richard Heales in iB6O as Commissioner
of Customs. In 1862-3 he held a similar position in the last
O’Shanassy Administration. Succeeded Mr. W. Haines as repre-
sentative of the Eastern Province in the Legislative Council, and
on the term expiring, eight months after election, was re-elected.
Was opposed to the “Darling grant,” but concurred in the compro-
mise. Resigned after being three months in the Heales Ministry
in consequence of his considering that that Minister was taking his
policy from the Opposition, he having been directed by the House
to bring in fresh estimates on the resolution of Mr. (now Sir) John
O’Shanassy that the expenditure should be kept down to
per annum. Mr. Anderson was Commissioner of
Customs in the Francis Ministry, and held the same office under
Mr. Kerferd and Mr. (now Sir) James McCulloch.
Arnold, James Francis, councillor for Victoria Ward, Mel-
bourne, fourth son of John Francis Arnold, nurseryman, seedsman,
and florist, was born at Ingastone, Essex, England, 30th August,
1831, educated at the local schools. At the age of fifteen
went to sea for four years, three of which were in H.M. service.
Was in the brig Albatross on the coast of Africa, looking after
slavers, and a portion of his time with the Hon. Sir H. Keppel in
the Meander 44 gun frigate, and after getting back to the
Albatross took part in the expedition against the Malay pirates with
Sir James Brooke, Rajah of Sarawak, Borneo, when about 12,000
were destroyed, and prize money granted by the East
India Company was divided. Returned home in September,
1850, was paid off, and then went out to Adelaide same year. He
first turned his hand to his father’s business, and then went to the
gold mines at Forest Creek, in Victoria. A party was made up to
walk overland, which started 20th November, 1851, and arrived 15th
July, 1852. On his return after a trip to England, he joined the
troopers under Captain Dana. Was at Ballarat the day after the
burning of Bentley’s hotel, and was there under arms for three
weeks. Resigned in 1856 and settled in Melbourne, and was
salesman to several merchants in the corn trade, and the third
year after leaving the Government service went into business for
himself as corn merchant, at which occupation he remained from
1857 to iB6O. In 1863 took out an auctioneer’s license, and
became an auctioneer and estate agent at Carlton. Built the
very first house in Elgin-street, in 1858, and has continued


building ever since, and is now a large property holder in
Collingwood, Carlton, Fitzroy, and Brunswick. Retired from
business in 1877. He contested Victoria Ward several times;
and was elected to the City Council in 1873.
Atkinson, Thomas Greenhall, Clerk of the Papers and
Records, Legislative Assembly, Victoria. Born at Penrith, Cum-
berland. Left London for Victoria by the ship Panama early in
1852. For many years before leaving London was in the Foreign
Branch of the General Post Office, St. Martin’s Le Grand. He
also despatched the first regular mail to Victoria by the steamer
Australasia , which was followed by the Adelaide , the Melbourne,
and others. On arriving in this country in 1852, Mr. Atkinson
was appointed to the Melbourne Post Office, and remained there
as superintendent of ship mails for about two years and a
half. Whilst in the office, he submitted a plan by which the
Melbourne Post Office should in future be managed, as to its
general arrangement, and details of working, in conformity with the
London system; that system was in part adopted, and obtains
at the present time. In the year 1854 Mr. Atkinson resigned his
appointment in the Post-office, to follow mining pursuits, but was
unsuccessful. On the opening of the new Parliament Houses, under
the New Constitution, in 1856, Mr. Atkinson was appointed
as clerk in the Legislative Assembly. Mr. Atkinson, in his capacity
of the Clerk of the Papers for the last twenty-one years, has
had charge of all the printed papers and documents in the
Assembly, together with the original manuscripts, ballot papers,
&c., all of which have increased and accumulated to an amazing
extent during that time. He is, therefore, the first custodian
of what will be termed in after years the Victorian Archives.
Attenborough, Thomas, of Dingly Grange, Cheltenham, the
late president of the shire of Dandenong, was born at Blackesby,
Northamptonshire, 1829, arrived in Victoria August, 1853, and
settled at Dandenong, where he still resides. He was a member
of the first road board in the district; afterwards for some years
was a member of the Moorabbin board, and for one year its
chairman. During the first two years of the existence of the
Dandenong Agricultural Society he was one of its vice-presidents,
and for the following two years president. He was for some years
correspondent of a school committee under the old Act, has been
correspondent three years of the Moorabbin Board of Advice. He
has taken an active part in all matters of importance in his neigh-
bourhood. His sister, Miss Mary Attenborough, who resided with
him till her death last year, erected at her own cost one of the
prettiest country churches we possess, and left lands which must
ultimately provide for a very liberal endowment. Her name is


remembered as one who embodied in deeds of active benevolence
the religious belief she professed.
Ballantine, Duncan, J.P., Bairnsdale, North Gippsland, was
born in Tasmania, arrived in Gippsland, November, 1843, and
from that date to the present time has been chiefly engaged
in pastoral pursuits. He was sworn in a territorial magistrate
during the Nicholson administration, when the Hon. J. D. Wood
was Attorney-General, and occupied a seat on the Bairnsdale
bench, some years previous to the appointment of a police magis-
trate to the district. He was returned at the head of the poll at
the election for the first shire council, on 13th August, 1868, and
was twice elected president, in which capacity he represented the
Bairnsdale shire in the deputation which obtained from Sir
Charles Gavan Duffy, the then Chief Secretary, a promise that the
present Gippsland railway should be constructed. In 1874, whilst
president, he resigned his seat in the shire council. Mr. Ballan-
tine has always taken an active interest both in local affairs and
general political matters, and Avas one of the first to initiate hop
growing in the district. In 1869 and 1870 he was the largest
grower, having at that time planted ten acres, and thus helped to
develop a new industry which fairly competes with the imported
hops from his native country, and with the celebrated hops of
Kent and Sussex.
Barker. Edward, M.D., F.R.C.S., England, Lecturer on Sur-
gery, Melbourne University, is a native of Buckinghamshire, born
12th July, 1816. He was an articled pupil of Henry Oldknow,
Esq., Hon. Surgeon of the Nottingham Infirmary, proceeded to
London University College, and officiated as dresser and house
surgeon to Robert Liston, Esq. He became a M.R.C.S., London
in 1839, emigrated to Melbourne on the 12th August, 1840, fol-
lowed squatting pursuits till the end of 1849, when he commenced
practice as a surgeon in Melbourne. Was elected the first Hon.
surgeon of the Benevolent Asylum, in 1851 —and honorary surgeon
of the Melbourne Hospital in 1852, which appointment he held till
1875. He was appointed official visitor to the Lunatic Asylum in
1856 and was elected Fellow of the Royal College of Surgeons,
England, 1859; took the degree of M.D., Melbourne, in 1863;
was elected Lecturer on Surgery, Melbourne University, in 1864,
and still holds that chair. Married 6th January, 1845, to Madeline
Charlotte Skeene, eldest daughter of Alexander Scott, of Trinity,
Midlothian, and Madeline his wife, daughter of Col. Blair, of
Blair, Ayrshire, N.B.
Barker, John, J.P., barrister-at-law, and Clerk of the Legisla-
tive Assembly of Victoria, is the eldest son of John and Mary
Anne Barker, and was born at Aylesbury, in the county of


Buckingham. Was articled to Mr. Thomas Tindal, the clerk of
the peace for the county of Buckingham, afterwards entered him-
self at Lincoln’s Inn; emigrated to Victoria in 1840, and entered
into pastoral pursuits in the neighbourhood of Cape Schanck; in
1842 returned to England, and was called to the bar at Lincoln’s
Inn, Michaelmas Term, 1843. In 1844 he married Susanna, the
daughter of Richard Hodgkinson, Esq., of Morton Grange, in the
county of Nottingham. Arrived in Victoria again in November,
1844, was appointed magistrate for the district of Port Phillip in
1845, one of the commissioners under the Disputed Boundaries
Act on the 18th of August, 1849, an d had the district west of
Hamilton assigned to him; admitted to the bar of Vic-
toria, November, 1851; Clerk of the Legislative Council 21st
October, 1851, and Clerk of the Legislative Assembly 18th
November, 1856, which office he now holds. As Clerk of the
old Legislative Council he had to inaugurate all the proceedings
of our Legislature, and when the New Constitution Act came into
operation, he was offered by Mr. Haines, then Colonial Secretary,
the choice of the appointments of Clerk of the new Legislative
Council, or of Clerk of the Legislative Assembly, and he chose
the latter. Mr. Barker’s knowledge of parliamentary law and
practice has been of the greatest service to the country, and it is
owing to his thorough familiarity with and mastery over his duties
that the business of the Assembly has worked so smoothly.
Barker, William, J.P., surgeon, Emerald Hill, Melbourne,
born at Aylesbury, Buckinghamshire, in 1818, and is the youngest
son of John and Mary Ann Barker; was educated at Dr. Hamil-
ton’s, Hemel Hempstead, and was brought up to his present
profession at Nottingham ; matriculated at the London University,
passed his examination at the College of Surgeons, England, and
obtained his diploma. In 1844 left England for Victoria, and
arrived in November the same year. Engaged in pastoral pur-
suits till end of 1862, when Duffy’s Land Act came into force,
and the whole of his run was proclaimed as goldfields’ and farmers’
commons, and as commons for Castlemaine and Maldon; this
entirely ended his career as a squatter. His run was the centre
of a large and one of the earliest discovered goldfields, and was
called the Mount Alexander Run. Barker’s Hill and Barker-
streets in Castlemaine and Harcourt, as well as Barker’s Creek,
were named after the subject of this memoir. It is claimed that
the first gold was found on his run, or at least simultaneously with
its being found elsewhere. Worley’s party, consisting of four, all
men previously employed at the station, their engagement having
but just at that period expired, in 1851 discovered gold at Speci-
men Gully, Mount Alexander, and a grant of £lOOO was awarded
them. There is a story told that one evening, as far back as


1848, one of Mr. Barker’s shepherds brought home a piece of
something yellow, that he told his fellow shepherds he considered
to be gold, but they laughed at him for his credulousness, and he
threw the substance away, and nothing more was said about the
matter. The great mining meetings to protest against the 30s.
monthly licence were held in Mr. Barker’s wool-shed, and his
home station being the only one for some miles was kept as an
open house for nine months in the year. In 1852 he was ap-
pointed a territorial magistrate. When his run was taken up he
resumed the practice of his profession, and in 1863 accepted an
appointment as surgeon to Beechworth Hospital; he went thence
to Echuca, where he remained about eight years, and then settled
down in practice at Emerald Hill.
Barkly, Sir Henry, G.C.M.G. (1874), K.C.B. (civil, 1853),
Governor of Victoria in 1856. He was a member of the British
Parliament for Leominster in 1845 and 1849, was appointed
Governor and Commander-in-Chief of British Guiana, December,.
1848; Captain-General and Governor-in-Chief of Jamaica, August,
1853; Governor of Victoria, 1856; received the order of the Bath
after services in British Guiana; appointed Captain-General and
Governor-in-Chief of the Colony of Victoria, and Vice-Admiral of
the same, and assumed office 26th December, 1856, inaugurated
the New Constitution, and for seven years was a successful and
popular Governor, He retired from office in Victoria on the 10th
September, 1863, having received the appointment of Governor of
Mauritius in the same year, and in 1870 was appointed Governor
of the Cape of Good Hope, from which he retired in 1877.
Barry, Sir Redmond, K.C.M.G., M.A., LL.D., &c., third
son of the late Major-General Henry Green Barry, of Ballyclough,
near Glanworth, in the county of Cork, was born in the year 1818.
He is descended from William de Barry, who married Angharad,
granddaughter of Rhys Ap-Griffiths, Prince of Wales ; and the
present head of the family is Lord Barrymore. Sir Redmond
was originally intended for the profession of arms, and was at an
early age sent to a military school at Hall-place, near Bexley, Kent;
but a delay being experienced in getting his commission, he re-
turned to Ireland and entered Trinity College, Dublin, where he
graduated Bachelor of Arts in 1833. A few years later he was
called to the bar, and he almost immediately afterwards emigrated,
arriving in Sydney in the year 1839. He remained there only a
few weeks, and left for Melbourne. Mr. Latrobe was Superinten-
dent at the time, and all civil cases had to be taken to Sydney for
adjudication. In 1842, however, two new tribunals were estab-
lished, the one being a branch of the Supreme Court of Sydney,
presided over by Judge Willis, and the other a Court of Requests,,


of which Sir Redmond (who had by this time got into very good
practice) was appointed Commissioner. In the year 1850 Sir Red-
mond was appointed Solicitor-General, with a seat in the Legisla-
tive Council and in the Executive Council, and in the following
year he was created a judge of the Supreme Court. During the
first year of his judgeship he opened with telling addresses the
circuit courts at Portland and Castlemaine, and some time after-
wards the court at Ararat. During the absence of Sir William
a’Beckett he very efficiently filled the position of Acting-Chief-
Justice. In iB6O he was knighted, and in 1862 he acted as a most
able representative of Victoria at the great International Exhibition
in London, having obtained twelve months’ leave of absence. Sir
Redmond obtained from the English, and some of the Conti-
nental Governments, no less than 6000 volumes (some of them
very valuable) for our Public and Supreme Court Libraries. As
far back as 1840 he took the liveliest interest in every thing relat-
ing to the higher order of education, and in May of that year, he
delivered in the Melbourne Mechanics’ Institute a very able lecture
on architecture, sculpture, painting, music, and poetry. He may
be looked upon as the father of the Melbourne University, of which
he was appointed the first Chancellor in 1855, when he opened it
with a most eloquent address; and the Melbourne Public Library
is almost peculiarly his own. He was appointed President of the
Trustees in 1856, and ever since that time he has evinced the deep-
est interest in the institution. As has already been intimated, his
indefatigable labours were rewarded by an unusually large measure
of success. To Sir Redmond are the people of Victoria mainly
indebted for the works of art that have been got together in our
National Gallery, as well as in many of our parks and gardens. He
has always been a strong advocate of technological education, and
has been found invaluable on the occasions of our intercolonial ex-
hibitions, When a commissioner at the London Exhibition of
1812, he was made LL.D. of Trinity College, Dublin, and on his
return he received the degrees ofLL.B. and M.A. of the Melbourne
University. He is a member of the Royal Society of Dresden,
and of the Society of Northern Antiquaries at Copenhagen, as well
as a corresponding member of the Royal Dublin Society. In 1876
he was one of the Victorian commissioners at the great Centennial
Exhibition at Philadelphia, and amongst the results of his visit to
the Western Republic were large contributions to our Public Lib-
rary. During his stay in Europe he was made Knight of the
Order of St. Michael and St. George. It may be stated that in
the latter portion of 1876 and in the commencement of 1877, when
the Governor and the Chief Justice were simultaneously from the
colony, Sir Redmond was sworn in as Administrator of the Govern-
ment of Victoria. Sir Redmond is a capital speaker, being rigidly
exact without being pedantic, and a most painstaking judge, who


whilst apparently careless as to his own time never misses an oppor-
tunity of endeavouring to spare that of the jurors and witnesses
who come before him.
Bates, The Hon. William, a very old colonist, is a native of
Uxbridge, in Middlesex, and arrived in Adelaide in 1850. He
remained there about twelve months, after which he visited Vic-
toria, having been attracted thither by the recent discovery of
gold. He traded with great success in Sandhurst during about
four years, and subsequently entered into business in Melbourne.
In 1862 he was invited to stand for a large country constituency,
but he declined the honour, and it was not until the troublous
times of the Darling grant, that he appeared on the hustings.
He then opposed the Hon. James Service for Collingwood, and
was returned. When Sir James M‘Culloch resumed office he
included Mr. Bates in his Government as Commissioner of Public
Works and Vice-President of the Board of Land and Works,
and going back to his constituents he was returned without a
contest. He voted, in 1868, for the want of confidence motion
in the case of the Sladen Ministry; in 1869 for the committal to
gaol of the late Mr. Hugh Glass and Mr. Quarterman for breaches
of the privileges of the House; for the Land Bill of 1869; for
vesting sites for schools in the Board of Education; for granting
to free selectors the same right of impounding as that enjoyed by
squatters; against the renewal of squatters’ licenses until the end
of 1880; in favour of the abolition of state-aid to religion; against
Mr. Byrne’s motion of want of confidence in Sir James M‘Culloch’s
Government; against Mr. Longmore’s Bill for payment of mem-
bers; in favour of Mr. Higinbotham’s resolution protesting against
the interference of the Imperial Government in the internal affairs
of V ictoria; and against Mr. Higinbotham’s permissive clause in the
Publicans Bill. Mr. Bates has long taken an active part in
furthering the interests of the Congregational denomination.
Beaney, James George, F.R.C.S.E., Senior Surgeon to the
Melbourne Hospital, Lecturer on Clinical Surgery at the Hospital,
and Demonstrator of Operative Surgery, was born in 1831, in the
city of Canteibury, England, where he received his preliminary
education. He was articled to William James Cooper, Esq.,
surgeon, and brother to Sydney Cooper, R.A., the eminent cattle
painter. He also learnt the art of compounding and dispensing
medicines at the Canterbury Dispensary under the present surgeon
Mr. G. Rigden. He afterwards studied at the University of
Edinburgh, but his health giving way in consequence of excessive
application he accepted the opportunity offered him of a sea
voyage, and sailed from Liverpool in the Birmingham , for Victoria,
and arrived there in December, 1852. For a time he occupied


the position of chief dispenser and superintendent at Mr. J.
Hood’s, in Collins-street. In 1853 he accepted the appointment
of surgeon to the Barrackpore , bound for London. On his
return to England he went to Edinburgh and resumed his studies
under the late Professors Syme and Goodsir. In June, 1855, he
obtained his diploma of M.R.C.S. Edinburgh in the first division,
and became a Fellow of the Medical Society of Edinburgh, and
in the same month he passed the examination at the Army Medical
Board, and was immediately gazetted assistant surgeon to the
3rd Royal Lancashire Regiment of Militia, then about to embark
for active service. During the Crimean war Gibraltar was reached,
and soon after the landing from the transport Lord Raglan , the
medical charge of the regiment devolved upon him. Fearing the
war would terminate before his regiment would reach the front,
and being desirous of assisting in the operations then going on
in the Black Sea, he accepted the offer of the Commander-in-
Chief to medically superintend the transport of sick and disabled
troops to Portsmouth in the s.s. Eiiropa. Mr. Beaney was then
appointed as a “Staff Surgeon in the Turkish Contingent,” at once
left England in the transport ship Cape of Good Hope , and
landed in the Crimea during the most momentous events
of that memorable campaign. Returning to England after the
declaration of peace in the troop ship Great Britain , he sailed to
America as surgeon to the emigrant ships Webster , Henry Clay ,
and City of New York. The Messrs. Bright, of Liverpool, having
secured his services as surgeon of the clipper ship Star, he sailed
once more for Melbourne with 500 passengers, and landed early
in the year 1857. In iB6O the Fellows and Council of the Royal
College of Surgeons of Edinburgh unanimously conferred the
fellowship of the college upon him. In iB6O he was elected, after
a severe contest, to the post of surgeon to the Melbourne Hospital,
and became a member of the Royal Society. In the following
year he was gazetted surgeon to the Western Battery of Royal
Victorian Artillery. In August, 1875, the general election of
surgeons took place for the Melbourne Hospital, and he was
elected by a large majority at the head of the poll. He inaugurated
the new medical session, 1877, by an able introductory address,
and presented to the most deserving students gold and silver
medals. A few months ago Mr. Beaney sent to the
Canterbury Hospital, to the Canterbury Dispensary,
to the University of Edinburgh to found a scholarship,
to the Royal College of Surgeons to found a surgical prize, open
to members of the profession. He is the author of several
medical works.
Belcher, The Hon. George Frederick, only surviving son of
the late J. W. Belcher, solicitor, was born in Dublin, 10th January,


1 8 2 3? tind arrived in Melbourne, February 1839; in which year he
was present at Batman’s funeral, and compiled the census of
Melbourne. In 1843, he formed one of a party who drove 600
head of cattle overland to Adelaide, at a time of great monetary
depression all over the colonies. Ihe cattle were sold at 235. per
head, and the payment was made in wheat, valued at 2s. 6d. per
bushel. On this trip they met the then Governor of South Australia,
Sir George Grey, in quest ot a suitable place on the coast whereon to
form a settlement, the locality subsequently fixed on being Guichen
Bay._ In 1845, Mr - Belcher engaged in pastoral pursuits in the Wimmera
district; but in the following year received an appointment as junior
clerk in the sub-treasury, Melbourne. In 1852, obtaining leave of
absence, he accompanied his father to England, and in 1853 he
married Julia Maria, the youngest daughter of Mr. G. Pepper, solicitor,
of Portadown. Returning to the colony in 1854, he was appointed
sub-treasurer at Geelong, which position he held until March 1869,
when reductions were made in the civil service by Sir J. McCulloch,
He was then offered the paymastership at Castlemaine, which he
declined, and sent in his resignation, receiving compensation as
allowed under Civil Service Act. He then commenced business in
Geelong as financial broker, and actively identified himself with all
movements of a public character there, and was on committees of
all public institutions at Geelong, and nominated official director
(for the Government) of the Geelong and Melbourne railway; trustee
of savings bank. He was also director of gas, woollen cloth, and
other companies. In 1872, he received the appointment of vice-
consul at Geelong for Sweden and Norway, and was elected to
represent \ illamanta ward in town council. The following year
the mayoralty was conferred on him, and as mayor of in
1874, he turned the first sod of the Geelong and Colac railway.
I n was returned as one of the members for the South-Western
Province to the Legislative Council, in opposition to Air. Wynne of
Ballarat, and in 1876, on his seat being vacated by effluxion of
time, he was re-elected by a large majority over his opponent, Air.
Zeal. In 1875, he was again married to Frederica Bayle Thorne
daughter of the late Charles Nuttall Thorne of Geelong
Bcnbow, Thomas Watts Rodney, J.P., Manager Bank of
Victoria, Emerald Hill, Melbourne, was born at Birmingham in
1841, and is the eldest son of T. M. Benbow, AI.D., ERGS of
Birmingham, direct lineal descendant of the English admiral of
that name. In the early part of 1852, at eleven years of age he
started alone for Australia to seek his fortune. He had a varied
experience m Melbourne and on the goldfields till 1853, when he
returned to England by way of India, came back to Victoria in iB<;4
and resided on various goldfields, where he was engaged principally
m gold buying, melting and refining operations. In June, 1859,


accepted an appointment in the Oriental Bank at Heathcote, and in
a few months became manager of the Reedy Creek, and afterwards
of the Rushworth branch of that bank. In 1855, became manager
of the Bank of Victoria at Rushworth, until 1876. Was made a
magistrate in 1865.
Berry, Hon. Graham, M.P. for Geelong, Chief Secretary and
Treasurer of Victoria, was born at Twickenham, near London,
28th August, 1822; educated at Chelsea, was apprenticed to
a draper and silk mercer, and was in business for several years at
the same place. Left England for Victoria in 1852, and soon
after arriving went into business in Gardiner’s Creek-road as a
wine and spirit merchant, and built the first shop there. Returned
to England in 1856, and came back again to Victoria the follow-
ing year. In iB6O Mr. Berry bought the Collingwood Observer ,
and the same year became a member of Parliament for the first
time without being a candidate. Mr. Patrick O’Brien and the
late Hon. E. Cohen were candidates for a vacant seat in East
Melbourne, caused by the resignation of the sitting member, and
whilst the election was going on the Governor granted the late
Hon. Richard Heales a dissolution. The two candidates came to
an understanding that in order to save the expense of two con-
tested elections, one following the other, some person out of the
colony should be nominated; but as this did not please their sup-
porters, Mr. D’Arcy moved, and a Mr. Lee seconded, the propo-
sition that Mr. G. Berry was a fit and proper person to represent
the district. He was elected by a show of hands, and he took
his seat in the House the same night. In the general election of
1861, which immediately followed, he stood for Collingwood, and
was returned at the head of the poll, beating Mr. Langton, but
having himself previously stood for South Bourke and Geelong,
and having been beaten in the first by Mr. Hibbert Newton,
Solicitor-General, and Dr. Greeves, Minister of Public Works of
the Nicholson Administration. In 1864, Parliament having lasted
its three years, Mr. Berry was again elected for Collingwood at
the general election. The new Parliament passed the Amending
Land Act of 1865, and he took an active part in the work of the
session, especially as regards the tariff, the protectionists being an
organised party of about a dozen occupying the Opposition
corner. When the M‘Culloch Ministry tacked the Customs Bill
to the Appropriation Act, Mr. Berry backed up the Ministry, and
addressed public meetings in favour of the Ministerial policy. At
that time Mr. Berry considered Ministers made a change of front
by borrowing money from the London Chartered Bank. Mr.
Berry objected on the ground that it was an absolute giving way
on the part of the Assembly, and could only lead to discomfiture.
Public opinion was with the Ministry, and meetings at Colling-


wood went against Mr, Berry. At the subsequent dissolution he
stood for Collingwood and the Murray Boroughs, and was
beaten at both. He was out of Parliament for two or three
years, and during part of the time was legal manager of the
Collingwood Gold Mining Company. In 1866 he, with others,
purchased the Geelong Register, and went to reside at Geelong. A
vacancy occurring, he stood for South Grant, and was beaten by
Mr. Stutt, the Ministerial candidate. The member for Geelong
West, Mr. Foot, died in 1868, and Mr. Berry stood and was
elected, beating Mr. De Bruce Johnstone. In 1870 Mr. Berry
took office for the first time as Treasurer, with Mr. Macpherson as
Chief, and after a stiff contest was returned, and made his first
budget speech ; but the Government, finding itself in a minority,
soon after resigned. At the general election of 1871 was again
returned for Geelong West, and the same year took office as
Treasurer and Commissioner of Customs with Mr. (now Sir
Charles Gavan) Duffy, He passed the present protectionist
tariff, 20 per cent, ad valorem duties. In 1872 the Government
was beaten, and on advising His Excellency Viscount Canterbury
to dissolve the House the advice was not accepted, and Mr.
Berry retired from office in May, 1872. At the general election
for 1874 was again elected, after a severe contest, for same con-
stituency. On the 7th of August, 1875, when the Hon. James
Service resigned, Mr. Berry was sent for and formed his first Ad-
ministration, being Chief Secretary and Treasurer. The leading
policy of that Government was the identical land tax that became
law in October, 1877, but at that time its introduction caused the
defeat of the Ministry, and a dissolution being refused by the
Acting Governor, Sir W. F. Stawell, Sir James M‘Culloch was
sent for. Mr. Berry opposed his return for Mornington unsuc-
cessfully, and formed the “ Stonewall Brigade ” in the House with
the intention of forcing a dissolution, which he considered had
been unconstitutionally refused him as the responsible Minister
of the Crown. At this time Mr. Berry became president of the
Reform League, and addressed meetings in every district in the
colony, the organisation being actively maintained until the disso-
lution. At the general election in May, 1877, was returned as
one of the three members for Geelong under the new Electoral
Act. The resignation of Sir James M‘Culloch followed, and Mr.
Berry was again sent for, and formed a Ministry including all his
former colleagues with the exception of the Hon. Mr. Munro.
All were returned unopposed, and at the present time command
an unprecedentedly large majority in the Legislative Assembly.
Black, The Hon. Neil, M.L.C., was born in the year 1804, at
Cowal, in Argyleshire, and is the son of Mr. Archibald Black, an
extensive sheep farmer. Up to the age of thirty-three, Mr. Neil


Black lived with his elder brother Walter, and acquired a thorough
knowledge of the breeding and management of stock. He then
determined to visit Australia, and on hearing that he was about to
emigrate, several gentlemen were anxious that Mr. Neil Black
should take out money to invest for them, and an agreement was
drawn up between himself, Mr. Finlay, of Toward Castle,
Argyleshire; Mr. William Ewart Gladstone (since Premier of Eng-
land), and Mr. Stewart, of Glenormiston, each of whom entered in-
to a partnership for five years, on equal shares, and entrusted Mr.
Black with the management of the joint funds, some £BOOO , to-
gether with the selection of the territory, the sole condition being
that he should pay cash for everything he bought. In April, 1839,
Mr. Black sailed for Adelaide in the Ariadne , and Mr. Robert
Kerr, late inspector of sheep for the Western District, who
recently died at Penola, accompanied him. Land being then very
dear in South Australia (through the operation of the brokers) Mr.
Black left for Melbourne, then known as Port Phillip, and found
the prices almost as unreasonable. He next visited Sydney, but not
liking the New South Wales country, returned to Melbourne, and
purchased a station near Glenormiston. He had much trouble
with the blacks, but nothing would induce him to abandon
the magnificent ground he had secured. He paid great attention
to the breeding of sheep, and in addition bought a herd of well-
bred cattle from Messrs. Watson and Hunter. Procuring
more from England, he purchased the Sisters station from the late
Mr. Claud Farie, and this turned out a highly advantageous specu-
lation. In 1843 Mr. Black visited Scotland to see his partners,
and the result was a renewal of the partnership for a further term
of five years. He also had an interview with the late Earl of
Derby to urge the claims of the squatters to leases, and thus he
acquired the soubriquet “Lord Stanley.” Returning to Victoria
in 1845, he found that things had thriven wonderfully well during
his absence, and he soon afterwards took up additional land at
Warryenga, on the South Australian border. It proved fatal to the
sheep he sent there, but these he replaced by 3000 head of cattle
which he bought for ns. 6d. and sold two years afterwards, to feed
the gold miners, at each. Having made things comfortable
at Mr. Black revisited Scotland, spent some two years
on the continent, married Miss Grace Greenshiels Leadbetter, and
returned with her to Victoria. He was shortly afterwards elected to
the Legislative Council for the Western Province, and has ever since
retained his seat. In 1865 he sold Warryenga to the late Mr. W.
J. T. Clarke. Mr. Black has spared no amount of money in the
improvement of his herd by periodical importations of the very best
blood, and his annual sales attract buyers, not only from all parts
of Victoria and New South Wales, but even from Queensland and
New Zealand. In 1868, when the partnership above referred to


was finally dissolved, it was found that it had paid splendid divi-
dends ever since 1846.
Blair, John, M.D., F.R.C.S., of Melbourne, is the eldest son
of the late Alexander Blair, of Boness, Linlithgowshire, Scotland.
He was born in 1835 at Boness, and received his early education at
the local schools, and his medical training at Edinburgh and Glas-
gow. In 1857 he became a member of the Royal College of Sur-
geons of Edinburgh, and after a voyage to the arctic regions came
to Melbourne, and commenced the practice of his profession at
Northcote towards the end of the same year. After a short time
he settled down in Melbourne. He was early identified with the
medical progress of the city, and was elected honorary secretary to
the Medical Society of Victoria in iB6O, and retained that position
for ten years; In 1864 he matriculated under the special regulations
in medicine at the Melbourne University. In 1866 he was elected
a Fellow of the Obstetrical Society of London, and in 1872 was
elected president of the Medical Society of Victoria, and a Fellow
of the Royal College of Surgeons of Edinburgh in 1874, and M.D.
of Sydney in 1876. He is now surgeon of the Alfred Hospital,
and chairman of the medical staff. He was the originator of the
Alfred Hospital movement, and advocated the cause so well that
its erection is in a great measure due to his exertions. He has an
extensive practice, and is identified with the medical literature of
Victoria, to which he has contributed many original papers, which
have been published from time to time in the Transactions of the
Medical Society. Dr. Blair has a taste for art, and has one of the
finest private collections in Melbourne of original paintings; many
of these he exhibited at the last International Exhibition in 1875.
Bolton, Henry, J.P., of Seymour, is the son of a civil engineer
and farmer, of Galway, Ireland. He came-to Victoria in 1861, at
the age of nineteen, and engaged in brewing at Heathcote. Was
married in 1866 to Annie, second daughter of James Eagan,
of the Major’s Line station. In 1867 was elected a member of the
Heathcote Borough Council, and continued a member of that
body until 1869, when he removed to Seymour, on the Goulburn,
where he went into business as a maltster and brewer. Was
a member and president of the Seymour Shire Council, and one of
the founders of the Seymour Free Library, and laid the foundation
stone of that building on the 13th November, 1874. He was
elected first president by the library committee, and has since
been elected each year without opposition. At the general elec-
tion in May, 1877, he contested the County of Moira in the
Liberal interest, and was defeated by seven votes.
Bosisto, Joseph, M.P., was educated a pharmacist, and left
England for South Australia in the year 1848, under an engage-


ment to a wholesale and retail drug house in Adelaide. In 1851
left Adelaide for Victoria, visiting and working at its goldfields. In
1852 commenced business in Richmond as a chemist and druggist,
and retired from it in 1876. During his long residence in Rich-
mond he devoted himself to every interest which sought to benefit
both the residents and the town. Was a councillor of Richmond
for twelve years, and occupied the position of mayor for two years
consecutively; was elected chairman of the Richmond bench of
magistrates annually for five years. On his retirement from the
town council, was presented by the inhabitants with a service of
plate and diamond ring. On the resignation by the Hon. J. G.
Francis of his seat for the electorate, on account of ill health, in
1874, Mr. Bosisto was elected in his place, and at the general
election of 1877 was again returned. In the session of Parliament
for 1876 he introduced the Pharmacy Bill, and succeeded in carry-
ing it through all its stages and placing it on the statute book of
Victoria. He paid special attention to the developing of our
indigenous vegetation for economic purposes, and to his exertions
may be traced much of the present knowledge of eucalyptic vege-
tation for malarial abatement, and also its products and educts for
technical purposes. He is a life member of the Royal Society of
Victoria, and in its “1 ransactions” the following papers appear by
him:—l. On the “Hirudo Australis,” or, Medicinal Leech of
Australia. 2. On the Volatile Oils of the Native Plants of
Victoria. 3. On the Culture of the “Papaver Somnifera,” or
Opium-producing Plant, in Gippsland. 4, On the Cultivation of
the “Mentha Piperita,” or True Peppermint, in Victoria. 5. “Is
the Eucalyptus a Fever-destroying Tree?” This paper has
attracted considerable notice throughout Europe and America, and
the affirmative evidence set forth by the writer has been acknow-
ledged and acted upon in France, Spain, Algeria, and Italy. He
was one of the founders of the Pharmaceutical Society of Victoria
m 1857, and edited for a time, with Mr. Johnson, Government
analyst, The Pharmaceutical Journal , and was also president of the
society for a few years; is also a honorary member of the Medical
Society of Victoria, and has written papers of interest bearing upon
pharmacy and medicine in their several journals. He is now the
president of the Board of Pharmacy, and examiner in materia
medica and medical botany under the Pharmacy Act.
Bowen, Sir George Ferguson, G.C.M.G., Governor of Vic-
toria, eldest son of the late Rev. Edward Bowen, rector of the
united parishes of Taughboyne and All Saints, in Donegal, was
born in that county in 182 r. His Excellency was educated at the
Charterhouse, and Trinity College, Oxford, where he was elected
a scholar in 1840. In 1844 he graduated B.A. as first-class in
classics. In the same year he was elected a Fellow of Brasenose


College, and became a member of Lincoln’s Inn; and he graduated
M.A. in 1847. From that year until 1851 he presided over the
University of Corfu, and he held the office of Chief Secretary
to the Government of the lonian Islands from 1854 to 1859. In
1856 he married the Countess Diamantina, daughter of His
Highness Count Candiano Roma, G.C.M.G., President of the
Senate of the lonian Islands. In 1855 His Excellency was
nominated C.M.G.; in the following year he was promoted to
K.C.M.G., and in iB6O became G.C.M.G. In 1859 he was
appointed Governor of Queensland, where he remained until
1868. He then succeeded Sir George Grey, as Governor of New
Zealand, and on the expiration of Viscount Canterbury’s term of
office was, on the 31st March, 1873, appointed Governor ofVictoria.
In 1875, after sixteen years of continuous service, he was granted
a well-earned leave of absence for twelve months. He availed
himself of it by leaving for England, taking Italy on the way.
In London he was entertained at a grand banquet given to him in
Willis’s Rooms, on the 29th of April. Large numbers of noble-
men and gentlemen interested in colonial affairs were present, and
the chair was occupied by H.R.H. the Duke of Edinburgh. It
was remarked at the time that no member of the Royal Family of
England had previously presided over any banquet given to any
private individual, and the compliment conferred was consequently
a very high one. Returning to the seat of his government by
way of America, he was everywhere treated with the most marked
attention, and was several times entertained by leading senators in
the Great Republic. Whilst in England, he was granted the
honorary degree of D.C.L. by the University of Oxford, and
shortly after his return was admitted ad eundern by the University
of Melbourne. He has spared neither time nor trouble in making
himself acquainted with the u habits, manners, and customs” of
the Victorians, and he has seen much more of this country than
any of his predecessors. He has been well received in all direc-
tions, and his name will long be kept green by the unusual aptness
of his quotations, as well as by the generally felicitous character of
his postprandial speeches. Sir George Bowen’s high classic attain-
ments have not been allowed to remain unimproved; and he has
long since been found to figure as an author. His “Ithaca in
1850,” and his “Mount Athos, Thessaly, and Epirus,” have been
justly regarded as admirably written works; and a paper furnished
by him to the Edinburgh Review , on “Montenegro,” could scarcely
fail in proving highly acceptable to those who take an interest in
the struggle between the Sick Man and the Czar. It is not
generally known, but it is nevertheless a fact, that “Murray’s
Handbook of Greece”—which has been found so highly valuable
to the tourist, and so instructive to the stay-at-home—was written
by the subject of our notice.


Bromby, Rev. John Edward, D.D., is the son- of the Rev.
John Healey Bromby, and was born at his father’s vicarage, Hull,
Yorkshire, in the year 1809. He received his early education at
Uppingham School; went from thence to Cambridge in 1827,
entered as a member of St. John’s College, and in the first year of
residence, gained the Bell university scholarship. Mr. Bromby
graduated in 1832, was elected Fellow of St. John’s in 1834, and
shortly afterwards took holy orders, being ordained deacon, at
Bishopsthorp, by the Archbishop of York, and subsequently
received priest’s orders at the hands of Bishop Gray, father of the
Bishop of Cape Town. Soon after leaving the University, Mr.
Bromby commenced his scholastic career as acting-principal of
the Bristol College, and in the year 1836 he married the daughter
of Alderman Lilly, of Bristol. After a sojourn of some years
at the Bristol College he became principal of a private school,
“ Mortimer House,” Clifton, where he was very successful in
preparing young men for the universities, and subsequently again
entered semi-public life as principal of Elizabeth College,
Guernsey. Amongst his pupils was Hugh Culling Eardly
Childers, Commissioner of Trade and Customs in the early history
of Victoria, and afterwards First Lord of the Admiralty under the
Gladstone Administration. Dr, Bromby arrived in Melbourne in
February, 1858, to take the position of head-master of the Church
of England Grammar School, a post which he held with much
honour to himself and benefit to his pupils up to the year 1875,
when increase of years caused him to resign his trust. He took
pastoral charge of the parish of Toorak, during the absence
on leave of the resident clergyman. On the return of the incum-
bent, Dr. Bromby, at the request of the Bishop of Melbourne, be-
came the incumbent of St. Paul’s parish, Melbourne, an office he
still retains. As a theologist Dr. Bromby has obtained celebrity
through the medium of a lecture—“ Beyond the Grave,” which,
when delivered by him some years ago, attracted universal attention,
and was the cause of much controversy in clerical circles.
Brownless, Anthony Colling, M.D. and J.P., Knight of the
Order of Saint Gregory the Great, Vice-Chancellor of the Univer-
sity of Melbourne, Senior Consulting Physician to the Melbourne
Hospital, &c., son of the late Anthony Brownless, Esq., of Pay-
nett’s House, Sandhurst, Kent, England, where the subject of this
memoir was born; educated by private tutor, and at Badlesmere.
In 1832 was articled to Mr. Charles Wilks, surgeon, at
Charing,- where he continued his classical studies as well as
chemistry, pharmacy, and structure of the human skeleton.
Meeting with a severe accident to his knee-joint, he made a
voyage to Prussia, Norway, and Denmark, in 1834, and to
America in 1835, making a tour through the United States and


Upper and Lower Canada, coming back by Quebec and the river
St. Lawrence. Returned to Charing improved in health, and
took advantage of an extensive union practice to acquire a
knowledge of his profession until 1836, when he entered at St.
Bartholomew’s Hospital, and pursued his studies with great
industry and zeal, and obtained the second prize for anatomy and
physiology. His health again failing from close application to his
duties and studies, he made a voyage to Portugal and Spain,
visiting Lisbon and Gibraltar, spending the summer at Malaga,
Cadiz, and Seville. Returning in 1837 he still suffered so severely
from the injury to his knee-joint, that he gave up his studies at
the hospital, and rented a farm from his father, amused himself
with agriculture, and spent most of his time in chemical investiga-
tions connected with forensic medicine, anatomical dissection,
and pathological investigation. In 1839 returned to the hospital
and continued his lectures, studies, and practice amongst the
physicians’ patients at the Royal General Dispensary. In 1840, at
St. Bartholomew’s, he obtained honours in midwifery and the
diseases of women and children, and the first prize for forensic
medicine. In 1841 obtained the diploma of the Royal College
of Surgeons, and the same year was admitted a licentiate of the
Society of Apothecaries. In 1842 devoted himself to the study of
practical medicine and surgery. Was at the University of Liege
for some time; returning in 1846, he settled at Charterhouse-
square, London, intending to practise surgery, but afterwards
graduated as a doctor of medicine at the University of St.
Andrew’s, and was soon after elected physician to the Metro-
politan Dispensary, Fore-street, London. In 1847 was elected
physician to the Royal General Dispensary, Aldersgate, and
devoted himself to the interests of his patients and his pupils.
Was offered the position of teacher of practical midwifery at St.
Bartholomew but declined it. In 1849 he resigned his position
as physician to the Metropolitan Dispensary, on the committee
refusing to reform the apothecaries’ department, and in 1849, in
consequence of ill-health from overwork, resigned his post at the
Royal General Dispensary, and retired for a time from public
practice, when nearly tw r o thousand of his poor patients sub-
scribed for a testimonial, which was presented to him at a public
meeting of the subscribers, on the 9th October, 1849. Imme-
diately afterward a large body of the governors of both institutions,
at a public meeting, gave him another in acknowledgment of his
public services, consisting of an illuminated testimonial, and a
magnificent piece of presentation plate, weighing nearly 200 ozs.
On the 20th August, 1852, he sailed for Australia, arriving in
Melbourne same year, and pitched his tent for some weeks in
Canvass Town, and practice so poured in upon him, that he was
soon in possession of a large income, and in a fair way to realise


his expectation of obtaining a competency, and return to England
in a few years and devote himself to the scientific practice of his
profession. A few weeks after his arrival he accepted the position
of physician to the Benevolent Asylum. In 1853 he was ap-
pointed a territorial and city magistrate; and in 1854 was elected
physician to the Melbourne Hospital, after a spirited contest.
His professional reputation being firmly established, he for many
years enjoyed an immense practice as a consulting physician, a
large portion of which he sacrificed to the Melbourne University,
but his reputation stands as high as ever with his professional
brethren. In 1855, the year the University commenced academic
work, he was appointed a member of the council, and in 1858 was
elected vice-chancellor, and has been annually elected for twenty
years, and he claims for himself and Sir Redmond Barry, that to them
the success of our Alma Mater is mainly due. The advancement
of this important institution has been the great work of his mature
years, at any sacrifice of time or income. Of the flourishing
school of medicine he was the founder, and Sir George Barrows
affirmed in the Council of Medical Education, that the arrange-
ments were as complete as at any school of medicine in the
world. Dr. Brownless is a member of the senate as well as of the
council, and was the first to be admitted to the degree of doctor of
medicine in the University. In June, 1870, Pope Pius the IX.
conferred on Dr. Brownless the honour of knighthood of the
Order of Saint Gregory the Great, in testimony of his services in
the course of education.
Bucklmrst, William Parton, auctioneer and estate agent,
Emerald Hill, Melbourne, son of John Robert Buckhurst, farmer and
grazier, of “Binney,” Allhallows, near Rochester, Kent, England,
born 20th February, 1831. He was educated at the local school.
He sailed to America at an early age, landed in Quebec, and
having travelled through Lower and Upper Canada, settled down in
Illinois. He apprenticed himself to a miller, rapidly acquired a
knowledge of the business, and in less than eight months became
manager of a flour mill in the valley of the Missisippi. He took
what was termed the “California fever,” threw up his situation and
bought a team of bullocks, and fitted out what was locally known
as a “prairie schooner,” i.e., a covered waggon, and in company
with eighteen others started to cross the American continent, from
Chicago to San Francisco, in April 1852. He arrived in the Salt
Lake City in the following June, and during his stay here he was
offered an appointment to work one of Brigham Young’s flour mills
at two dollars and a half per day (equal to ten shillings), but
declined. He obtained a fresh yoke of oxen and renewed the
journey, crossed the American desert and the Sierra Nevada
mountains, arrived in California after just five months of weary travel.


Many and varied were his experiences and vicissitudes daring
his five years’ residence in California. Mr. Buckhurst was present
at most of the exciting scenes enacted at “Fort Gunnybags,” by
the vigilance committee. He sailed for Australia in the Formosa ,
and arrived in Melbourne in July, 1857, bought his first piece of
land in Napier-street, Emerald Hill, and built four small cottages,
which paid him after completion 33 per cent, on his outlay. He
shortly afterwards made a tour of the Gippsland diggings, Dargo,
Wentworth, Mitchell, &c., with a pack-horse and the present
mayor of Emerald Hill as a mate, and returning to town com-
menced business about iB6O as an auctioneer and estate agent.
His health failing, he visited, in 1870, India, Egypt, Palestine,
Italy, Switzerland, Germany, Austria, France, Belgium, England,
Scotland, Ireland, &c. &c., and on his return published a work
entitled “An Australian Abroad.” Mr. Buckhurst subsequently
took active steps towards having the Albert Park lagoon made into
an ornamental sheet of water, for sailing purposes. Mr. Buck-
hurst has never taken an active part in politics, but through the
press has done much to advocate the construction of a ship canal
from Hobson’s Bay to Melbourne. He was a candidate for the
position of Commissioner, for Emerald Hill, on the Harbour Trust,
but was beaten by one vote.
Bunny, Brice Frederick, barrister-at-law, Commissioner of
Titles, was born at Newbury, in Berkshire, where his family on
both sides had been resident for many generations. His father’s
family originally owned an estate near a village in Hampshire,
named Hurstborne Tarrant, near Lord Portsmouth’s residence
at Hurstborne Park, on which estate Mr. Bunny was born in
1820, and in 1831 proceeded to Eton, where he continued
his education till 1837. After that he went abroad for intervals of
two or three years, and subsequently entered at Lincoln’s Inn, and
was a pupil during 1840 and 1841 to Mr. Samuel Turner, a very
eminent conveyancer in Gray’s Inn. In 1848 he went as pupil to
the late Lord Romilly, Master of the Rolls. He was called
to the bar in May, 1844, an d was one of the barristers who dined
in the new hall when it was opened by Prince Albert. Mr.
Bunny, for a junior barrister, was very lucky in being engaged in
many cases during the period he remained in England; some
were important, and are duly reported, and frequently cited in
courts in England and the colony. In 1852 he heard of gold in
Australia; he thought he would make his fortune, and in October,
1852, he bade farewell to his relations and home to seek it, but a
judicious friend, now Vice-Chancellor Bacon, advised his taking his
professional tools, and Mr. Bunny, in consequence, brought
his library with him. Having determined to try the diggings, he
went to Forest Creek, and in its neighbourhood enjoyed the


liberty, freedom, and repose of a digger’s life. After six months
he returned to Melbourne, all the fresher for the total abstinence
from social and forensic strife. He joined the Victorian bar
in October, 1853, and commenced practice in the County Court,
then sitting in Russell-street. He shortly afterwards devoted him-
self to equity business, and it may fairly be said that Mr. Abraham
and he founded the Equity bar of this colony. In 1859 litigation
began between the great mining companies at Ballarat, and
Mr. Bunny was one of the first retained to argue on mining law at
Ballarat, and since then there have been few great mining cases in
which he has not been engaged. Sandhurst, Ballarat, Steiglitz,
Inglewood, and Jamieson have all been visited by him in mining
cases, and until the year 1873, when he accepted the position
of County Court judge, he always maintained a leading position at
the bar. In October, 1874, he was appointed Commissioner
of Titles, which appointment he continues to hold. Mr. Bunny
has never returned to England, and is one of the most ardent
admirers of the colony in which he has lived happily for nearly
twenty-five years. Mr. Bunny’s brothers have also distinguished
themselves away from home. A younger brother died about two
years ago, at Nelson, New Zealand, Examiner of Titles. A still
younger brother has for many years been a member of the General
Representative Assembly of New Zealand, and Provincial Secre-
tary and Treasurer of Wellington. His youngest brother, Colonel
Arthur Bunny, C. 8., of the Royal Artillery, is now commandant of
the Sangor District in India, whose head-quarters are at Tubbul-
pore.
Butters, James Stewart, manager and proprietor of the Victoria
Club, Melbourne, was born at Blairgowrie, Perthshire, 19th Feb-
ruary, 1832; educated at the local school; at sixteen, entered the
dry-goods store of Messrs. Moon, Langlands, and Co., of Dundee,
where he remained for five years, and was married to the daughter
of James Spankie, J.P., one of the baillies of the city, and imme-
diately after left for Australia, where he arrived in the Pauline ,
July, 1853. He was engaged by Mr. Wiseman to open his new
iron warehouse in Collins-street, then the finest place in the city;
was with Mr. Ross in Bourke-street, where he met Mr, Wilkie, with
whom he entered into partnership, and built a store at Warrnam-
bool. He dissolved partnership, sold off, and settled in Mel-
bourne. In July, 1856, he joined the late W. G. Baillie, and
commenced business as stock and share brokers. In 1858, and
during the great Bendigo Waterworks speculation, he started joint-
stock mining at Sandhurst, the first company being the celebrated
Hercules mine, which is still at work. He built the first pavilion
for the Collingwood cricket club, was vice-president of the
Caledonian Society, and took a leading part in the erection of the


magnificent stand in the Friendly Societies’ Gardens, when 30,000
persons witnessed the games. He served on the board of the
Benevolent Asylum; was the right-hand man with the late J. V. A.
Bruce, in “The new way to pay old debts,” by which £12,000 was
obtained for the public charities, and holds one of the silver
medals then presented to the most energetic in the cause. In
June, 1861, went to Ballarat in company with Mr. H. Creswick
and Mr, J. Purves, for the purpose of introducing Melbourne
capital there. Having inspected all the mines of any value, he wrote
the history of them, and was the cause of the investment of nearly
a million in that district. In 1865 he was elected a member of
the Melbourne City Council for the Lonsdale ward, and in Novem-
ber, 1867, Mayor of the city, fourteen days prior to the arrival of
H.R.H. the Duke of Edinburgh, and the reception and rejoicings
in honour of the visit were carried out by Mr. Butters with energy
and good taste, and his services were recognised by the citizens by
the presentation of a magnificent gold chain. In iB6O he married
Matilda, daughter of the late Daniel O’Neil, one of the oldest
settlers in the Western District. He suggested many prominent
movements for the good of the city, and chiefly through him the
Town Hall and Western Markets were built, and he wished the
corporation to purchase the Yan Yean waterworks, which would
have been equal to a revenue of a year to the city. In
1868 he was elected a member of Parliament, but having been
connected with Parliamentary agency business before his election,
a charge was made against him that he gave another member (Mr.
C. E. Jones) jQioo for his vote, and although this was not proved
the determination to get rid of Mr. Jones was so great that both
were voted out. Mr. Butters was re-elected unopposed, and sat
till 1870, when in the interests of a large number of friends and
clients he was compelled to go to Fiji to look after lands acquired
in the name of the Polynesia Company. When the new Govern-
ment was started there he joined them on condition that it should be
a representative and not a nominee one. He took the position of
speaker and chairman of committees, and prepared the standing
orders. He visited Melbourne in 1872, and returned to Fiji after
a stay of six months, but left again as soon as annexation was
determined upon. Since his return in 1874 he has established
the Victoria Club. Mr. Butters has taken a high position as a
Mason.
Buvelot, Abram Louis, born March 3rd, 1814, in the canton
Vaud, Switzerland, was educated at a public school in his own
canton, and when quite a youth, entered the academy of Lausanne,
where he became a pupil of Arloud, a landscape painter of celebrity.
On leaving the academy M. Buvelot began life as a drawing
master at a private college in the canton of Berne. Whilst thus


engaged, his skill and devotion to his art attracted the attention of
Wolmar, a landscape painter of great ability, who took him as
a private pupil. In 1834 M. Buvelot left Switzerland with the
intention of going to the Brazils, but before embarking he went to
Paris, where he made the acquaintance of the eminent landscape
painter Flirs, in whose studio he had the privilege of studying
seven or eight months. At the end of that time he proceeded to
Bahia; on his arrival, much against his will, he packed up his brushes,
and for four years devoted himself to commercial pursuits. Then
he abandoned commerce, and again took to the pallette, the result
being a view, in oils, of Bahia Bay, so beautiful, that the Bahians
had a copy of it sent to Paris, to be engraved in aqua-tint. In
1839, M. Buvelot left Bahia, and went to Rio Janeiro, where he
soon attracted the notice of the Emperor Dom Pedro 11. (himself
a great lover of art), by a picture of a view in the vicinity of Rio,
which was exhibited at one of the first yearly art exhibitions,
inaugurated by His Majesty on attaining his majority. For the
picture referred to the painter was awarded the gold medal, and
in the succeeding year he exhibited under the title “A Virgin
Forest/’ a painting which gained for him the distinguished honour
of being decorated by the Emperor with the order of “La Rose,”
a decoration which can only be conferred upon artists. After
fourteen years of constant work amidst the forests of Brazil the
artist’s health began to fail, and in 1851 he returned to Europe,
where, in the exercise of his profession, he met with a success
quite beyond his fondest hope or expectation. In Switzerland, at
the Exposition General at Berne, 1856, M. Buvelot was awarded
the silver medal for a picture of Alpine scenery, and would have
remained for a time amidst his native mountains, but for the cold-
ness of the climate, which his residence in the tropics caused him
to feel so acutely, that he sailed for Australia, and landed in
Melbourne in 1865. On arrival he at once set to work, and his
first pictures, “A Winter Morning at Heidelberg,” and “A Summer
Afternoon at Templestowe,” were exhibited at the Melbourne
Exhibition of 1867-8, and purchased by the Trustees of the Vic-
torian National Gallery. At the succeeding Exhibition, 1869, his
picture “Waterpool at Coleraine” was also purchased by the
trustees, and at the London Exhibition, 1872-3, M. Buvelot won
the gold medal for a picture catalogued “Woods Point Road.”
Our artist’s last triumph was at the Melbourne Exhibition of 1875,
where he gained a first prize for a “View of Gisborne” and “A Sea
Piece.” M. Buvelot is still actively following his profession as a
landscape painter.
CairilS, The Rev. Adam, D.D., was born on the 29th January,
1802, in the manse of Longforgan, of which parish his father was
the minister. The parish belonged to the Presbytery of Dundee,.


though situated within the bounds of Perthshire. His maternal
grandfather was minister of Lundie and Fowlis, his great-
grandfather, of Kinnaird, both in the same Presbytery; his great-
great-grandfather was minister of the parish of St. Martins, in the
Presbytery of Perth. His early education was received partly in
the parish school, under the care of Mr. Forbes, a man of great
worth, and greatly esteemed by his pupils, and partly from his father,
who took pleasure in teaching him Latin, Greek, and French. In
1814 he matriculated in the united college of St. Andrew’s, and
pursued his studies there foi four consecutive sessions. In 1818
he went to Edinburgh, and had his theological course in the Divinity
Hall of Edinburgh University. In December, 1823, he was licensed
to preach the gospel by the Presbytery of Cupar in Fife. The
moderator on that occasion was Dr. Campbell, the father of
Lord Campbell, and for this venerable clergyman he preached his
first sermon on the Sunday immediately following. In the summer
of 1825 he became assistant to the Rev. Sir Henry W. Moncrieff,
minister of St. Cuthbert’s or West Church parish, Edinburgh, and
continued in that situation until Sir Henry died, in'August, 1827,
He was ordained and inducted minister of Manor, in the county of
Tweeddale, in 1828, and after a residence there of about five years,
was translated to the parish of Dunbog in Fife. While here, he
married Miss Jessie Ballingall, of Ayton, In August or September
of 1837, he succeeded Dr. Adamson as minister of the first charge
in the parish of Cupar, the county town of Fife. He took part in
the conflict which terminated in the disruption, in May, 1843. He
then became the minister of a large and important congregation in
connection with the Free Church. In 1853, he accepted a
commission from the Colonial Committee of that church, to proceed
to the colony of Victoria, to assist the brethren there in providing
for the spiritual wants of the vast multitude of their countrymen
and of Presbyterians from other countries, who had been attracted
to that distant land by the discovery of mines of gold. With his
family, consisting of his wife, five daughters, and a son, he arrived
in Hobson’s Bay on the 10th of September, 1853. He was for
many years actively employed in the work of church and school
organisation, in collecting a congregation, and securing its perma-
nency. In addition to his pastoral duties, he acted as convener of
the Education Committee, of the Scotch College Committee, and of
the Committee on Union, with other branches of the Presbyterian
Church, and as divinity professor. Under the heavy pressure of
his official labours his health failed, and in 1865 he enjoyed a year’s
vacation. He never resumed his many responsibilities. Increasing
years have brought the usual infirmities of age. He is now an emeritus
minister, that is, he retains his standing in the church, although
he is no longer the pastor of a congregation.


Campbell, Colin, graduated at Oxford, in 1838, with second-
class honours. Arrived in Victoria in 1839, and formed a station
with his brother at Mount Cole in March, 1840. He occasionally
took part in public affairs, and assisted in resisting the trans-
portation of criminals from the old country to the colony. In
1848 he conducted a weekly newspaper at his own expense,
but though it had a good circulation it did not prove a profitable
speculation. In 1849 be edited the Australia Felix Magazine , to
which Sir William A’Beckett, Colonel Cotton, and others con-
tributed. In 1851 he retired to the country, and was married in
January of the same year. Soon after the separation of the
colony from New South Wales he succeeded Mr. Childers as
Secretary of Denominational School Board, and held that office
with the interval of twelve months till 1859, when he retired. In
1851 he was asked to stand for the four counties of Ripon,
Hampden, Polwarth, and Grenville, but refused. Became a
candidate on a vacancy occurring in 1853, taking the Liberal side
in squatting politics, and was beaten by a few votes. Was elected
for that constituency, Polwarth, Grenville, Ripon, and Hampden, in
,1854 without opposition, and again in 1857. Returned to
the country in 1859, and was a candidate for Ararat at the general
election in 1864, and was defeated by Messrs. Girdlestone
and M‘Lellan. He advocated the sale of lands by valuation
instead of a uniform price. A vacancy occuring in South Grant
during the Darling grant controversy, stood on the “ Constitu-
tional ” side, and polled well, being beaten by the Government
candidate, Mr. Stutt; Mr. Berry, and others, polling fewer votes
than Mr. Campbell. Stood for Crowlands in 1871, and was beaten
by Messrs. Blair and Byrne. Stood again in 1871, having been
induced to come forward about a fortnight before the election, and
was beaten by Messrs. Woods and Walker. Stood again in 1874,
and was elected at the head of the poll. In 1876 took part in the
organisation of the Free-trade League, and was its honorary secre-
tary for some time. In 1877 contested Brighton against its old
member, Mr. Bent, and was defeated.
Canterbury, Third Viscount (created 1835), Baron Bottes-
ford (1835), Sir J- H. T. Manners Sutton, G.C.M.G. (1873), K.C.8.,
succeeded his brother to the title in 1869. He was educated at
Eton and Trinity College, Cambridge, where he graduated M.A.;
was Under-Secretary of State of the Home Department, from Sep-
tember, 1841, to July, 1846; was registrar of the Faculty Court; was
M.P. for the borough of Cambridge, Sept., 1839, but unseated, sat for
that borough from 1841 to 1847; Lieutenant-Governor of New
Brunswick, June, 1854, until October, 1861; Governor of Trinidad,
April, 1864; and Governor of Victoria from April, 1866, until the
commencement of 1873, when he returned to England and retired
on a pension. Viscount Canterbury died 1877.


Carter, Godfrey Downes, M.P., of Flinders Lane, Melbourne,
and Punt Hill, South Yarra, son of John Adams Carter, West Indian
merchant, Leadenhall-street, London, was born at his father’s
estate, St. Ann’s, Jamaica, in 1830, came to Victoria in 1853, and
commenced business as a general merchant and importer. He was
one of the first trustees of the Church of England at Emerald Hill,
and chairman of the Gardiner’s Creek road board as well as of the
Bendigo Waterworks Company. He negotiated the sale of that
company’s works to the city of Sandhurst to the satisfaction of the
shareholders. He was also director of several mining and other
companies, president of the Licensed Victuallers’ Association for
several years, and materially assisted in securing the erection of the
association’s alms houses. He unsuccessfully opposed the
re-election of Mr. G. V. Smith for the Ovens, when his seat
was vacated by his acceptance of office as Postmaster-General in
the M‘Culloch Ministry at the time of the Constitutional con-
troversies relative to the “tack” and the “Darling grant,” and was
again defeated at Collingwood in 1876, by Mr. Mirams. At the
general election in 1877, Mr. Carter was elected a member of
Parliament for St. Kilda, by a majority of one. Mr. Carter is
a magistrate for the Central Bailiewick, and councillor for Lonsdale
ward, in the city of Melbourne. In politics, he is a Liberal and
a free-trader, but not an extreme partizan. In 1874 he published
a lecture on “The Use and Abuse of Intoxicating Liquors,” and
in 1877, “Notes on the Licensing Act of 1876.” In 1863, he was
married to the youngest daughter of Edward Khull, Esq., bullion
merchant, Melbourne.
Casey, The Hon. James Joseph, M.P., barrister-at-law, was born
at Tromroe, in the county of Clare, Ireland, on the 25 th Decem-
ber, 1831. He was educated at the Galway College. When
between eighteen and nineteen years of age he visited America,
and for some years was connected with the New Orleans press. In
1854 he paid a visit to his native country, and instead of returning
to the United States as he had intended to do, he came to Australia,
arriving in Melbourne 14th February, 1855. In May, 1855, he
joined Mr. (now the Hon.) Angus Mackay, M.P., in the purchase of
the Bendigo Advertiser , which was subsequently conducted by them
for many years. During the co-partnership they established the
MAvor Times and the Riverine Herald. In the very early days of
Bendigo Mr. Casey took aprominent position in public affairs. He
was consulted when it was proposed to call together the Land Con-
vention in 1857, and the election of delegates in Sandhurst was car-
ried through under his auspices. He established the first body which
exercised municipal functions in the district—the Campaspe road
board, was elected its first president; and shortly afterwards was
appointed a territorial magistrate. He was chosen member of the


municipal council of Sandhurst, and was the chairman of the
municipality when he became a candidate for the electoral district
of the Sandhurst Boroughs, and was elected to the Legislative As-
embly in 1861, but was unseated on petition. In 1863, on the
retirement of the late Dr. Owens, Mr. Casey became a candidate
for and was elected to represent Mandurang, which constituency he
has continuously represented ever since. At the general election
held in May, 1877, there were 3255 votes polled for Mr. Casey—
the largest number of votes that had ever been recorded for any
candidate at any election in Victoria. The result was mainly due
to his popular and vigorous administration of the Lands Depart-
ment while he was Commissioner of Crown Lands and Survey.
It was on Mr. Casey’s motion the present Victoria?i Hansard was
established, and several measures for the amendment and simplifica-
tion of the law owe their existence to his industry and zeal. In 1868
Mr. Casey was appointed a member of the Executive Council, when
he became Minister of Justice in Mr. (now Sir) James M‘Culloch’s
second Administration, and in 1869 he was also appointed Soli-
citor-General. In 1872 he was appointed President of the Board
of Land and Works in the Francis Government, which office
he continued to hold until August, 1875. In connection with
his acceptance of office upon that occasion the following remarks
appeared in the Argus newspaper:—“Mr, Casey’s acceptance of
office must give universal satisfaction, inasmuch as it indicates a
postponement at the call of duty and in the interests of the colony
of his claims to the leadership of a party. Conduct like this
demands prompt and generous recognition, more especially as
Mr. Casey is known to be indifferent to and independent of office.”
The Department of Agriculture was founded by him, and he was ap-
pointed the first Minister of Agriculture. When Mr. Berry was
commissioned to form an Administration in 1877 he sought the co-
operation of Mr. Casey, and the office of Attorney-General was
placed at his disposal. He declined it, because he thought it was
necessary that the Berry Government, that was so unjustly ejected
from office in 1875, should be re-constituted and restored to office
in 1877, and this was done. In politics Mr. Casey has always been
on the Liberal side. He was among the foremost men on the
popular side during the “ Darling grant ” controversy, and was
one of the earliest advocates of the abolition of state-aid to
religion and to denominational education. He is a warm advo-
cate of federation ; and he has delivered speeches on Intercolonial
Legislation and Intercolonial Reciprocity, that have attracted
considerable attention outside as well as inside Victoria. In
1870 Mr. Casey was appointed chairman of a Royal Commission
on Intercolonial Legislation and a Court of Appeal. In his
public utterances he urges as a preliminary to political federation,
as to which there are some difficulties, that the several colonies


should be invited to concur in reciprocal legislation upon such
questions as extradition, insolvency, probate and administration,
marriage, naturalisation, transfer of land, patents and copyrights,
«&c., &c. He is the president of the Royal Commission appointed
to provide for the adequate representation of Victoria at the Paris
Exhibition of 1878. As a lawyer Mr. Casey has been engaged in
many cases where intricate legal questions had to be solved. It
was under his advice and direction that Wekey and others were
prosecuted for a conspiracy to defraud the shareholders of a
mine of which they were directors. There was no legal precedent
exactly in point, and the facts were very complicated. The trial
lasted three days, but they were convicted. On Constitutional
questions Mr. Casey’s opinion has been received with much
respect and attention by the Legislature. When the Supreme
Court declared the warrant of the Legislative Assembly that
directed the committal of the late Hugh Glass, bad, Mr. Casey,
who was then one of the Crown Law officers, was appointed
the chairman of a select committee to consider what course should
be pursued. That committee recommended an appeal to the
Privy Council, which on Mr. Casey’s proposal, was adopted
by the Assembly. The appeal was heard, allowed, and the
decision of the Supreme Court reversed. On a recent occasion
the validity of the Speaker’s warrant, appointing the Elections and
Qualifications Committee, was called in question. Mr. Casey’s
argument in support of its sufficiency was regarded as conclusive
by the House, and pronounced by the Press of all shades of
political opinion to be able and unanswerable. He is the author
of Casey’s Justices’ Manual , a text-book so popular for its
practical utility that the first edition has been exhausted. He
published an edition of the Sandhurst Mining By-Laws with notes,
which also obtained an extensive circulation. In 1876, after
a visit to South Australia (when he was admitted to the bar
of that colony), Mr. Casey contributed an article to the Melbourne
Review , comparing the land system of South Australia with that
of Victoria. As an administrator he has shown much vigour.
While law officer he initiated the system of appointing magis-
trates to districts instead of the whole colony; the jurisdiction of
the county courts was increased from to at common
law, and an equitable jurisdiction was conferred on them up
to As Minister of Lands, he reorganised the Department
of Lands, and constituted the survey branch in its present effective
basis. He checked the system of “ dummying ” by instituting
land inquiries at Stawell, Sale, Benalla, and Echuca, and the
subsequent forfeiture of the pastoral runs of those whose com-
plicity with the system had been proved. These proceedings
were conducted with such care, and it may be said fairness, that
no attempt was made by the pastoral tenants, whose stations and


improvements were forfeited, to question his decision by any
appeal to the courts of law.
Chapman, Henry Samuel, judge of the Supreme Court of
New Zealand, and one of the Executive Council of Victoria; was
called to the bar, Middle Temple, 1817; appointed judge of the
Supreme Court of New Zealand, June, 1843; appointed Colonial
Secretary of Tasmania, then Van Diemen’s Land, in March, 1852.
In November, same year, he resigned that position and came to
Melbourne in February, 1855, practised his profession, and
became a member of the old Legislative Assembly. In March,
1857, being a member of the Legislative Assembly, he was
Attorney-General to the first O’Shanassy Administration, with
John Dennistoun Wood as Solicitor-General, and in March, 1858,
being then member of Parliament for St. Kilda, he was called
upon by the Governor, Sir Henry Barkly, to form a Ministry,
in which he succeeded, taking his former chief as head of the
Government, and the late R. D. Ireland as Solicitor-General, he
himself holding his former position of Attorney-General till
October, 1859, when the Government resigned. In 1861 he
was elected for Mornington. In 1862-3, and during the
absence of Sir Redmond Barry, Mr. Chapman filled his seat on
the judicial bench until the return of Sir Redmond in March,
1863. For several years, and during the intervals of office,
he filled the chair of law lecturer at the Melbourne University. He
was for many years a writer in the Westminster, London, and
other Quarterly Reviews, and contributed articles to the seventh
edition of the “ Encyclopaedia Britannica,” and still furnishes
articles on subjects of colonial law to the Law Magazine. In
1865, left Victoria for New Zealand, having again accepted an
appointment as judge of the Supreme Court, and has recently
retired upon a pension.
Childers, Right Hon. Hugh Culling Eardley, appointed
Privy Councillor in 1868. Educated at Trinity College, Cam-
bridge; graduated 8.A., 1850, M.A., 1857. He was a member of
the Government of Victoria in 1851, his first appointment being
that of Auditor-General. When constitutional government was
established, he was returned for Portland in the first Legislative
Assembly, in 1855, and was Commissioner of Customs in the
first constitutional Ministry, of which the late Hon. William C.
Haines was Chief Secretary, Retired from office in February, 1857,
Shortly after he left the colony for England, and was elected to
the British House of Commons in iB6O, as representative for
Pontefract; was appointed Lord of the Admiralty, 1864-5; Secre-
tary of the Treasury, 1865-6; First Lord of the Admiralty, 1868;,
Duchy of Lancaster, 1872 until 1874; served as one of the com-
missioners appointed under the Compulsory Sale of Land Act, in


Prince Edward Island, 1875, and is a director of several English
companies.
Clark, Robert, J.P., M.P. for the Wimmera, Victoria, Australia,
eldest son of Robert Clark, of Glasgow, wine and spirit merchant,
was born at Glasgow nth January, 1830, educated at the local
schools. It was intended that he should have been a minister, but
changing his mind he became a confectioner and tea merchant,
and in 1850 married Janet Simpson, also of Glasgow. In 1857 he
left Glasgow for Victoria, sailing from Liverpool in the Sultana
with the celebrated Independent minister, the Rev. Thomas Binney,
and several other clergymen. Upon reaching Port Phillip Mr.
Clark remained only ten days in Melbourne, and then went up to
Horsham,and commenced business as Robert Clark and Co., general
storekeepers. Was burned out in 1859, when he dissolved partner-
ship with his brother-in-law and continued the business himself.
In 1873 sold out and retired for about two years from business
altogether. Since then himself and two sons have carried on the
business of milling as Robert Clark and Sons. Shortly after
settling at Horsham took a lively interest in local and public affairs.
Mr. Clark contested a seat for the road board seven times and was
defeated each time, but at the eighth trial obtained a seat. When
the district was proclaimed a shire on the 4th March, 1864, Mr.
Clark was chosen president, held that position for three years in
succession, and on his retirement had an illuminated address pre-
sented to him by the council. He claims to have been the first in
1865 to point out and publish the fact that the Wimmera district
was fit for agricultural settlement. Mr. Clark sold one hundred
tons of Wimmera flour at Ballarat in 1877, and obtained ten
shillings per ton more for it than the best flour in the market. He
stood for the district at the general election in May, 1877, as an
anti-stonewaller, a moderate freetrader and supporter of a land
tax, and was returned at the head of the poll by a large majority.
Clark, The Rev. Charles, was born in London on the 19th
April, 1838, and when about twenty years of age was entered for
the ministry in the Baptist College, Nottingham. He took charge
of the North Parade Baptist Church, Halifax, in 1862, and he
was afterwards removed to Maze Pond, London. There his great
merit as a preacher was first discovered, and his next charge was
that of Broad Mead, Bristol, the church which had once re-
sounded with the eloquence of the famous Robert Hall. It was
not very numerously attended at the time when Mr. Clark became
pastor, but in a very little while his polished addresses filled
the empty benches. He was invited to take charge of the church
in Albert-street, Melbourne, on the resignation of the Rev. Isaac
New, in 1868; arrived in the colony on the Bth April, 1869, and
at once established his claim to be looked upon as one of the


best orators in Victoria. In 1873 he was invited to lecture in aid
of the Caxton Memorial Fund, and two of his addresses—one on
“Charles Dickens,” and another on “Oliver Goldsmith realised
no less than So large a measure of success not unnaturally
suggested the idea of his lecturing for other purposes. He resigned
his charge, and delivered a series of lectures for his own benefit.
Amongst his best efforts were u Ihe Tower of London,” which
he treated in a masterly manner, and “Oliver Cromwell,” which
had in it a true British ring. Having lectured with great success
throughout Victoria and the adjoining colonies, he left, in 1876,
for America, where his lectures have been well appreciated \ but
has now returned to the Australian and New Zealand colonies.
Clarke, Colonel Sir Andrew, R.E., K.C.M.G., C. 8., is the eldest
son of the late Colonel Andrew Clarke, K.H., of Belmont, County
Donegal, who died Governor of Western Australia, 1846. Born in
1824, he entered Woolwich in 1840, and in 1843, after an exami-
nation which placed him head of his year, obtained his commission
in Royal Engineers. Accompanied the late Sir William Denison to
Tasmania as private secretary, and served in that capacity till 1852.
Shortly after the Separation of Victoria from New South Wales,
Sir Andrew (then Captain) Clarke was appointed Surveyor-
General and Chief Commissioner of Crown Lands 1853-58. He
was elected member for Emerald Hill, and became a member of
the Executive Council and First Cabinet 1858. During the session
of 1855 he brought in a bill for the Establishment of Municipal
Institutions, and may be regarded as the founder of Municipal
Government in Victoria. Through his exertions the Public Re-
serves and the National Museum were permanently settled. The
first Melbourne Industrial Exhibition owes its existence to him, as
does the Gipps Land and Border Railway system. After leaving
Australia, Major Clarke was, 1862, placed in charge of the Eastern
and Midland districts of the Royal Engineers in Great Britain,
and had his head-quarters in Colchester and Birmingham. In
1862 he was selected by the British Government to confidentially
inspect the military establishments on the West Coast of Africa.
In 1864 he was appointed Director of Works to the Admiralty,
and designed and executed the great docks at Malta and Bermuda,’
the extension of the dockyards at Chatham, and successfully
carried out the works at Portsmouth, at a cost of ,£2,500,000.
In 1872 he was offered the post of High Commissioner, with
command of H.M. forces by land and sea, to settle the Ashanti
difficulty, but refused unless certain conditions, not entertained
by the Cabinet, were complied with. In 1873 he was appointed
Governor of the Straits Settlements, and in 1874 was made
Minister of Public Works for India, with a seat in the Council
C.B. 1869, K.C.M.G. 1873.


Clarke, James Langton (uncle of the above), second son
of the late George James Clarke of Belmont, Lifford, Ireland, and
Trinidad, West Indies. Born Trinidad 1802; educated at
Military College, Sandhurst, and obtained commission in 75th
Regiment. Left the army, took his M.A. degree at Cambridge, and
was called to the bar of the Inner Temple, 1842. Emigrated to
Victoria, and was made County Court Judge and Judge of Court
of Mines, Maryborough, 1857. Retired on pension list, 1871.
Clarke, Marcus (nephew of above), only son of the late
William Hislop Clarke, barrister-at-law, Middle Temple, Born
1847 at Kensington, London. Emigrated to Victoria with
intention of engaging in pastoral pursuits. Was for four years at
the Wimmera River, and abandoning his intention came to
Melbourne to join the staff of the Argus newspaper. Mr. Clarke’s
first publication, “ The Peripatetic Philosopher,” was a series of
papers in the Australasian , which attracted some attention.
In 1868 he published “Long Odds,” a novel, and the same
year married Miss Marion Dunn, the second daughter of the late
Mr. John Dunn, the well-known comedian. In 1870 he produced
at the Theatre Royal the pantomime of “ Little 80-Peep.” In
1871 he re-published a collection of short stories from the
Australasian under the title of “ Holiday Peak.” In 1872 he was
appointed secretary to the Trustees of the Public Library. In
1873 he produced at the Princess’ Theatre, “ Plot,” a drama which
had a successful run ; and an adaptation of Moliere’s “ Bourgeois
Gentilhomme,” in which Mr. John Dunn played with success the
principal role. During the same year he adapted for the Theatre
Royal the most successful pantomime, “Twinkle, Twinkle, Little
Star,” ever produced in these colonies, and published a romance
illustrating the evils of the old convict system, called “ His Natural
Life.” During this time Mr. Clarke was actively engaged on the
Press; he for some years wrote the dramatic criticisms for the
Argus, and has contributed to the leading and critical columns
of all the principal journals in Melbourne. In 1876 he was
appointed assistant-librarian to the Public Library, and since that
time has in a great measure ceased to contribute to current
literature. Mr. Marcus Clarke may rest his reputation upon “ His
Natural Life,” a very strongly written story, which has met
with high praise from English and Foreign reviews. “ His
Natural Life ” has been re-published in London by Bentley;
in New York by Harper Brothers; and in Germany by the firm of
Otto Hanke, under the title of Deportirt auf Lebenszeit.
Clarke, William John, J.P., president of the West Bourke
Agricultural Association, and president of the Victoria Coursing
Club, was born in the neighbouring colony of Tasmania, and


arrived in Victoria in the year 1850. He spent his first year in
learning sheep-farming upon the Dowling Forest Station, then the
property of his father, the late W. J. T. Clarke, one of the first
members of the Victorian Council for the Southern Province.
The following year he became manager of the Woodlands Station,
on the Wimmera, and afterwards went to Norton-Mandeville, in
Tasmania, which station, conjointly with his brother, Joseph
Clarke, Esq., he rented for the purposes of sheep-farming. Ten
years after this, Mr. Clarke returned to Victoria, and undertook
the management of his father’s business in this colony. During
Mr. W. J. Clarke’s residence in Victoria, besides the positions at
present held by him, he was for some time chairman of the Bray-
brook Road Board, and also a member of the Melton Shire
Council. Mr. Clarke was married first in iB6O to Mary, second
daughter of the Hon. John Walker, M.L.C., of Tasmania, who
died in 1871, by whom he had four children, two sons and two
daughters, and secondly in 1874 to Janet Marian, eldest daughter of
the late Peter Snodgrass, Esq., M.L.A., of Victoria, the issue by the
second marriage being four children, two sons and two daughters.
Cole, The Hon. George Ward, M.L.C., the fourth son of John
Cole, Esq., Durham, England, was born at Lumley Castle, 15th
November, 1793. At the age of fourteen he entered the Royal
Navy as a volunteer, on board H.M.S. Lark , on the Jamaica
station, and soon obtained rating as a midshipman. Was at the
taking of San Domingo, after which he was lent with a boat’s
crew to the Fleur de la Mer; and lucky for him that he was, for
after he left the Lark in August, 1809, she foundered in a hur-
ricane, the captain and all the officers perished, and only three of
the crew were saved whilst clinging to some spars, by H.M.S.
Moselle. He assisted in navigating the Fleur de la Mer to
Jamaica, and much privation was endured, the ship being short of
supplies, and crowded with invalid soldiers and French prisoners.
He next joined H.M.S. Dedalus, which was employed about Hayti
and Cuba and other ports until 1810, when it was dispatched in
sole charge of a large convoy to England, and it was young Cole’s
duty to mast-head it every day, to ascertain if his flock of some
150 vessels were all right. Transferred to H.M.S. Princess of
Orange , 74, the flag-ship of Vice-Admiral Campbell, in the
Downs, he soon after found himself in H.M.S. Cracker, a 14-gun
brig, wherein he saw much service until 1814, and on one occa-
sion they drove two French brigs ashore between Calais and
Gravelines. The Cracker having sustained some injury was
obliged to put into Dover to repair, and after some time cruising
off the Scottish coast, was ordered to form part of a convoy of
transports and merchant vessels through the Great Belt to Coburg,
in Prussian Pomerania, where a large quantity of munitions of war
was landed for the allies, as Napoleon Bonaparte was then on his


ill-starred expedition to Moscow. After a brief stay in the Baltic,,
and a winter cruise off the Naze of Norway, the Cracker returned
to Sheerness to refit, and Mr. Cole passing his examination as
lieutenant, was appointed provisionally to H.M.S. Tonnant , 80
guns, at Chatham, the flag ship of Sir A. Cochrane, then in com-
mand of the North American station. They sailed for Bermuda,
and were actively engaged during the American War. Mr. Cole
was attached to the marine artillery, was present at the battle of
Bladensburgh, and received a medal for services rendered on the
Potomac. He was in the advance to Washington, and took part
in the attack. At the bombardment of Baltimore the British
troops were repulsed, and General Ross killed. During the firing
Lieut. Cole got too near a 13-inch mortar, and lost the use of his
left ear by the concussion. He was at Halifax, Guadaloupe, and
other places; and at New Orleans was in the Tonnant's launch
with a squadron of boats when they chased and captured five
gun-boats, commanded by the American Commodore Jones.
Lieutenant Cole’s boat was hit by a round shot from the Commo-
dore’s vessel, and though filled with water was kept afloat and took
part in the boarding attack, when he was wounded. Sir A. Cochrane
appointed him acting-lieutenant of Commodore Jones’s captured
vessel, and he was thanked, and obtained another medal in recog-
nition of his services. On the termination of the expedition in
1815, and when returning from New Orleans, two of the 93rd
Highlanders fell overboard, and Lieutenant Cole jumping after
them, kept one of them over water until he was saved, but the
other was drowned. Arriving in England his lieutenancy was
confirmed; he returned to Jamaica in H.M.S. Primrose , and on
the passage one of the crew fell overboard, when the lieutenant
jumped after him, and was again instrumental in saving human
life. When rescued by the boats the two men were quite ex-
hausted. Lieutenant Cole remained unconscious for several days,
and his return to life was described by him to have been attended
with the most excruciating agony. Obtaining his first lieutenancy,
and exchanging into the Pique , a 36-gun frigate, he went to Haytq
where he again had an opportunity of saving a third man who
went overboard. Again he exchanged, and served in H.M.S.
Active until peace was re-established, and returning to England in
1817, he was placed on half-pay. For some time his thoughts
were turned to the merchant service, in consequence of expecta-
tions of a very encouraging nature. To the mercantile marine he
accordingly henceforth devoted himself, and at various times
commanded several vessels, and in some of them was part owner.
He carried opium to China, spent two or three years in the Sand-
wich Islands, engaged in speculations of divers kinds, from fur-
trading _ on the north-west coast of America, to pearl-fishing at
the Society Islands. He went to the New Hebrides with a notion
of going into the sandalwood trade, but was obliged to give it up,.


through the hostility of the natives. He fitted out whalers, which
paid him well, and continued a career of great enterprise and
activity until May 1839, when he purchased land in Sydney, suit-
able for the construction of a patent slip; and returning to England
for the requisite machinery, he there changed his mind, and
determined that Melbourne should be the field of his future
labours, and that he would settle there as a merchant. For this
purpose he (and Captain Langdon) bought the schooner Waterlily ,
and in her arrived in Melbourne from London, July 4th, 1840,
and at once commenced mercantile pursuits. In 1841 he pur-
chased at a Government land sale the site on the Yarra where he
built Cole’s Wharf, which for many years rendered great service
and convenience to the public. In 1851 he built the screw
steamer City of Melbourne, which was the first screw steamer ever
built or ever seen on this side of the equator. She traded between
Melbourne and Launceston, and was finally wrecked on King’s
Island. In 1863 he introduced sugar-beet to the colony, having
procured a supply of the best seed from Holland, which he distri-
buted freely. It is nearly a quarter of a century since he entered
into political life, for so far back as July, 1853, he was elected
member for Gipps Land in the old Legislative Council, for which
he sat until 1855, when an intended visit to England led to his
resignation. In four years after (1859) he was elected a member
of the Legislative Council for the Central Province, and in iB6O
and 1870, when his ten years’ seat was vacated by effluxion of time,
he was re-elected. In politics he has been an advocate of pro-
tection, and has written several pamphlets in support of that prin-
ciple. He has always been in favour of borrowing money for
reproductive public works, and was amongst the earliest supporters
of a harbour trust. The defences of Victoria have received
special attention from him; he has been a member of more than one
Defence Commission, and has published pamphlets advocating
the use of gunboats and the establishment of a gunpowder manu-
factory. In 1867 he was appointed an Executive Councillor; he
represented the McCulloch Government for some time in the
Legislative Council, and during the political struggle connected
with the well-known Darling dead-lock he was a staunch
M‘Cullochite. He married twice; issue, seven children, three of
whom died young, and his eldest son, a fine promising young man,
was drowned by the upsetting of a boat in Hobson’s Bay on the
Ist January, 1846.
CoiilllliliS, Charles L., was born in England, and is son of a
Church of England clergyman. In 1851 he went to the Canter-
bury settlement, as one of the original pilgrims, with Mr. F. R.
Godfrey; and formed one of the first party of white men who
crossed the Middle Island of New Zealand from sea to sea. Had
sheep for some time on a station on the Waumaroriri, and in 1853


came to Victoria. The following year was appointed to a clerk-
ship in the Old Legislative Council, and in 1856, on the introduc-
tion of responsible government, was appointed clerk-assistant of
the present Council. Twice during the absence on leave of the
head of his department, Mr. Commins performed the duties of
Clerk of the Council and Clerk of the Parliaments. In 1854 he
married —issue thirteen children.
Connor, Joseph Henry, of Colac and Geelong, was born in
the village of Stoneyford, in the North of Ireland, on the 6th
April, 1834, younger son of John Connor, a large farmer and stock-
owner in the County of Antrim, who gave his son a thorough
training in the care and management of stock and practical farm-
ing. Mr. Connor was also apprenticed to the grocery and seed
trade at Newry, and was also a short time in the drug trade with
his uncle. On the death of his eldest brother in 1851, and of his
father in 1852, he determined to emigrate to Victoria, and sailed
from Liverpool in the ship Minnesota , reaching Melbourne in
August 1852. Found profitable employment at once, but shortly
after visited Forest Creek and other goldfields, and was pretty
successful in mining. In 1853 went westward, and settled down
at Colac as a general storekeeper, where he carried on a profitable
business, and filled many important public positions*being for
nine years a member of the Colac road board and Colac shire
council. On the 12th April, 1859, he was married at Irrewarra,
Colac, to the widow of the late James M. Brock, of Bollanda Vale
Station, Gisborne. In the year 1864 was first elected a member
of the Legislative Assembly for the electorate district of Polwarth
and South Grenville, and continued to represent the district up to
the end of 1870. He was defeated at the general election in that
year by Mr. W. M. Robertson, but was again re-elected for the same
constituency at the general election of 1873, and continued to re-
present the constituency until the close of the last Parliament.
During the years he was in Parliament he gave special attention
to tlm interests of the agriculturists of the colony, and urged the
establishment of a central college of agriculture, with experimental
grounds attached, where the science of agriculture, veterinary,
forestry, and botany might be practically taught, and that Govern-
ment reserves of land should be made in each of the electoral pro-
vinces for the endowment of schools of agriculture. On the 27th
June, 1866, was honoured with a public banquet at Colac, and pre-
sented with a handsome silver tea and coffee service (value
for the efforts made by him, and the course of conduct pursued
as the representative of the district. In December, 1873, was
again honoured with a public banquet at Colac, and presented
with a gold watch and chain, for exertions in procuring a railway
to Colac. In 1872 was elected a vice-president, and in 1873
president of the Geelong and Western Agricultural Society, which


position he still occupies; for his exertions on behalf of the society
he has been presented with the society’s gold medal. In November,
1872, was elected a member of the Geelong town council, since
then has been re-elected, and was last year appointed adelrman
for the Barwon ward of the town. In Geelong has taken an active
part in assisting to establish the Geelong Free Library, and has
devoted much time and money to the acclimatisation of fish of
different kinds in Lake Colac, and other water reserves, rivers, and
streams in the Western District.
Cope, Thomas Spencer, Judge of the County Court at Mel-
bourne, was born on the 19th April, 1821, in London. He was
educated at University College, London, where he took the degree
of LL.B. Afterwards became a student at the Middle Temple
and a pupil of the eminent pleader, M. Thomas Chitty; was called
to the bar on the 22nd November, 1845. For several years he
was reporter in the Court of Exchequer for the Law Times , and at
Nisi Prius for the Times and Daily News. He emigrated
in 1851 to Port Natal, in South Africa, and thence was attracted
by the gold discoveries to Victoria. He was one of the earliest
inhabitants of Emerald Hill, then a part of Melbourne, took an
active part in the separation of the model town from the city of
Melbourne. In politics he is an advanced Liberal. Attended
the Ballarat circuit court, was a great sympathiser with the
Ballarat rioters, and was one of the counsel who defended them on
the charge of high treason. He was asked by a deputation at
Ballarat to represent that district in the first Parliament after the
New Constitution Act, but his increasing practice at the bar
compelled him to decline that honour, although a strong advocate
for many reforms. Amongst others he was in favour of the abolition
of imprisonment for debt, for reform of our penal code as being
too severe, the prevention of the accumulation of large estates, and
the resumption by the State of all sold lands. In 1856 he was
appointed Deputy Judge and Chairman of General Sessions in
place of the late Mr. Wrixon, and finally, in January, 1858, was
permanently appointed Judge of the Court of Mines, Judge of the
County Court, and Chairman of General Sessions for the District
of Beechworth, where he resided ten years, and took an active
part in all the local societies. He was then removed to Melbourne,
where he now remains.
Coppin, George, J.P., was born on the Bth April, 1819, at
Steyning, Sussex, during a visit of his parents to that town.
His grandfather officiated as a clergyman at Norwich during
upwards of forty years, and there all his family connections
resided. His father was educated as a surgeon, but, enter-
taining a distaste to the medical profession, he adopted the stage
as a means of livelihood, and became manager of a company


travelling through his native county, and occasionally visiting
Suffolk and Essex. The subject of this sketch became a violinist
when very young, and appeared at intervals on the stage with his
father’s company. At the age of seventeen he left home to seek
his fortune, with his fiddle under his arm, and in the following
year he was stage-manager, actor, and violinist, at the Woolwich
Theatre, with Mr. Saville Fawcett as proprietor, and Mr. James
Sheridan Knowles as the star. At the termination of the season,
he accepted an engagement at the Richmond Theatre, under the
management of Mr. Davenport. During that season he was taken
out of the orchestra, and elevated from the position of second low
comedian at 20s. per week to the more responsible post of first
low comedian at 255. Here he played with the celebrated
Mrs. Nesbitt, Mrs. Honey, and other leading stars. Whilst acting
in Richmond, he caught the eye of a London manager, who gave
him an engagement at the Queen’s Theatre, where he played for a
season with Elton, Johnstone, Green, George Wild, and other cele-
brated actors, whose names will be remembered by old playgoers.
He was then engaged by Mr. W. J. Hammond for Doncaster,
Sheffield, and the Strand Theatre, London. From this time
he abandoned the violin, and played as first low comedian in
York, Hull, Leeds, Manchester, Glasgow, Belfast, and Dublin,
where he sang one song 250 times in succession. After starring
throughout Ireland and a portion of England, he made up his
mind to visit Australia, and arrived in Sydney in the Templar , on
the 10th March, 1843. The manager refused to give him a
weekly salary, but agreed to divide with him the profits, which
gave him five times more than the certainty he offered to take.
Finding a very limited field for star engagements, he entered into
business as a publican, and, being inexperienced in trade, he soon
lost all his money, after which he left the colony. A star engage-
ment in Hobart Town next gave him funds to commence
management in Launceston, where he had a very successful
season. He then engaged the whole of his company, including
Mr. and Mrs. Rogers, Mr. and Mrs. Charles Young (now Mrs.
Hermann Vezin), a portion of the Howson family, and many other
well known performers, under a bond signed in Launceston on the
30th May, 1845, to appear under his management in Melbourne.
After arriving there in the schooner Swan, he arranged to take the
management of the Queen’s Theatre, and as Mr. Coppin is so
intimately connected with the progress of the drama in Australia,
we will avail ourselves of a document kindly placed at our disposal,
showing the comparative expenses of theatrical management in
1845 an d 1877, the company equal in talent, although not so
numerous. In 1845 the Queen’s Theatre was open only three
nights in the week, and the entire expenses, taking an average
of twenty weeks, were per week, the salaries varying from
15s. to 30s. per week. In 1877 the working expenses of the


Theatre Royal are per week, the salaries being propor-
tionately high. In August, 1846, Mr, Coppin left Melbourne
Felix for Adelaide, where he built a theatre in the short space
of five weeks, and had a most prosperous season. He entered
into hotel business again, and benefiting by his Sydney experience,
made a large sum of money. He built an extensive hotel,
kept some excellent racehorses, was instrumental in establishing
the British and German Hospital, took an interest in public
affairs, and was a heavy speculator in mines. On the discovery of
gold in Victoria, South Australia was deserted by its adult male
population, the mines were closed through want of labour, and all
those who were involved in this particular industry stopped
payment. Mr. Coppin, with the leave of his creditors, visited
Victoria, became an unsuccessful gold digger, and ultimately
returned to the stage. He played a very profitable engagement in
Geelong, where an advantageous offer of partnership was made
him on condition that he would free himself from his South
Australian liabilities, and he visited Adelaide, called a meeting of
creditors, and explained his position. With the general consent of
his creditors he sequestrated his estate, and in 1852 he entered on
the management of the Geelong Theatre. Fortune smiled on
him again; his partner retired from the business; Monday night
paid the week’s expenses, and in a short time Mr. Coppin was the
possessor of a small fortune. He purchased gold, remitted it to
Adelaide (making jQ 1 per ounce profit); paid all his old creditors ;
in January, 1854, retired from business with a competency, and
sailed for England. When in London he had a desire to test his
talent, and offered his gratuitous services to the leading London
managers, but could not obtain an appearance. He therefore rented
the Haymarket Theatre for one night, and on the 26th June, 1854,
played theprincipal ro/e in the “Mayorof Navarre,” and Crack in the
“ Turnpike GateT The London Press were unanimous in praising
him, and he there accepted starring engagements as “The Austra-
lian Comedian” at Birmingham, Manchester, and in other leading
theatres. Although professionally a success, the rapidity with
which he had made money in Australia, caused him to be dis-
satisfied with the result of his English engagements, and he there-
fore engaged G. V. Brooke, with other artists, built an iron theatre
in Manchester for erection in Melbourne; returned to the
colonies, and on the 18th December, 1854 (the same year that he
left), commenced a star engagement at the Queen’s Theatre,
Melbourne. Prosperous beyond his most sanguine expectations,
he erected the Olympic Theatre, took G. V. Brooke into partner-
ship, and purchased the Theatre Royal and Cremorne Gardens
(upon which a sum of 100,000 was expended). In February,
1859, Messrs. Coppin and Brooke dissolved partnership. Unsuc-
cessful speculations again brought the former to financial ruin, and
induced him to visit America with Mr. and Mrs. Charles Kean on


the termination of their Australian engagement. At a public
banquet Mr. Coppin was presented with a cheque for 00
to support his wife and family, until he could remit money
to them. After an absence of two years he returned to the
colonies, and subsequently joined the management of the Theatre
Royal, Melbourne, purchased his partner’s interest in it, and after
conducting it on his own responsibilty for twelve months a
fire broke out on the stage, and the building was gutted without
any portion of it being insured. With indomitable energy and
perseverance, Mr, Coppin accepted tenders for the erection of
a new Theatre Royal, which he afterwards put into a company,
holding a half interest in it himself. The new “Royal” was opened
in November, 1872, and has been a most prosperous undertaking.
Mr. Coppin has erected six theatres in the Australian colonies, and
introduced upwards of 200 artists to Victoria, including many of
the leading people of the day in their respective professions. He
has also devoted a considerable portion of his time to public
affairs. He was elected twice as chairman of the Richmond muni-
cipality, he acted for two years as chairman of the bench
of magistrates there, and was appointed a territorial justice
of the peace. At about this time he originated a reform of
the Municipal Act at a banquet he gave to upwards of 100 repre-
sentatives of municipalities. In September, 1858, he defeated the
sitting member, and was elected to represent the South-Western
Province in the Legislative Council, where he did good service by
introducing Torrens’ Act, to simplify the transfer of real property,
and the Post Office Savings Banks Act. After five years’ service
he resigned his seat in consequence of his leaving the colony. In
1874 he was chosen to represent East Melbourne in the
Legislative Assembly, where he was an industrious member. He
advocated confederation of the Australian colonies, a uniform
tariff with intercolonial free-trade ; and after having opposed pay-
ment of members, he distributed his Parliamentary salary of £ 300
a-year in charity. Although his return at the next general election
was considered certain, he lost his seat principally through refusing
to canvass or spend money in committees. In early life he was an
enthusiastic Odd Fellow (having joined the order when only nine-
teen), and he is still a contributing member of the Manchester Unity.
He is the founder of the “Wandering Minstrel” Lodge in Sydney.
He has also been an industrious Freemason. He resuscitated
the Scotch Lodge in Adelaide; was founder and first Master of
the United Tradesmen’s Lodge at Geelong, where he received
a hundred guinea testimonial from that body; and he called
together the Knights Templars in Victoria, which resulted in the
formation of an Encampment. He is the founder of the Victorian
Humane Society, the Dramatic and Musical Association, and the
Old Colonists’ Association; he erected the Founder’s Cot-
tages of the “ Home ” of the two last mentioned institutions ; and


many other charitable institutions are greatly indebted to his
liberality. He was the first who introduced Turkish baths
and skating rinks here; and in addition to the active attention
which he pays to his professional engagements he is a director
of the Commercial Bank, and a director of the British and
Tasmanian Iron Mines. He was the first chairman, and is
now director of the Richmond Free Dispensary; vice-chairman of
the Old Colonists’ Association; chairman of the Ocean Amphi-
theatre Company, the Continental Hotel Company, the Purveyors’
Association, the Dramatic and Musical Association, and the
Sorrento Steam Navigation Company, by which he introduced the
s.s. Golden Crown to Victorian waters to give cheap excursions
down Hobson’s Bay for the recreation of the people. He
has done good service as an acclimatiser, and not only had
the first lions born in Victoria, but introduced the first camels and
the first English thrushes.
Crane, The Right Reverend Martin, D.D., 0.5. A., Roman
Catholic Bishop of Sandhurst, was born in the county of Wexford,
Ireland, in the year 1818. He at an early age evinced a strong
desire towards the church, and particularly towards the Order of
Saint Augustine, of which he has long been a prominent member.
Having spent his year’s noviciate in the convent at Grantstown, in
his native county, he proceeded to Italy and further prosecuted his
ecclesiastical studies at Perugia. Six years later he returned to
Ireland and commenced missionary life in Dublin, where he worked
with zeal during something like a quarter of a century. He was
twice elected by his brethren to the high position of Provincial of
the Order, and to his indefatigable exertions is mainly due the
erection of the very handsome church of SS. Augustine and John
in the Irish metropolis. In fact, Dr. Crane was engaged in collect-
ing funds in America for the completion of that church at the time
when he was appointed Bishop of Sandhurst. He arrived in
Melbourne in the earlier part of 1875, and, having been duly
installed, at once commenced to take a deep interest in the con-
duct of his extensive diocese. Dr. Crane has no less than four
brothers in holy orders, whilst his only sister is a nun in the
Carmelite convent in New Ross, a place best known to Victorians
as that which was during some years represented in the House of
Commons by Sir Charles Gavan Duffy.
Creswick, Henry, J.P., of Hawthorn House, Hawthorn, Mel-
bourne, and Liewah, Murrumbidgee, N.S.W., is the youngest son
of Richard Creswick, merchant, Sheffield, England, a member of one
of the oldest Yorkshire families. He was bom in 1824, and
educated at private schools. Left England for Port Phillip, 18th
July, 1840, in the Andromache , reaching his destination at the end of
June same year. Immediately after his arrival went into the office


of Campbell and Woolley, merchants, of Melbourne, and in
December same year was placed in charge of a branch establish-
ment at Anderson’s Flat, near Ballarat. In 1842, in connection
with his brothers John and Charles, took up the country now
known as Creswick Creek, Spring Hill, Sic., as a sheep station.
The country occupied soon becoming too limited for their stock
they in 1844 occupied territory now known as Avon Plains, Banyena,
and York Plains, Wimmera District, on the Avon and Richardson
rivers, where his brother Charles, with whom he was in partnership,
died in 1847. The station was then sold, and Mr. Creswick went
into partnership with the late D. S. Campbell. In 1849, married
Jane, only daughter of Alexander Thomson, M.D., of Geelong,
one of our oldest settlers, whose name appears, with fifteen others,
attached to the minutes of a meeting held at Yarra, Port Phillip, on
the Ist June, 1836. After the discovery of gold in 1851, having
been very successful in business, he retired from the firm of D. S.
Campbell and Co. in 1858, having been appointed a territorial
magistrate about 1856. Contested the seat for South Bourke for
the Legislative Assembly in 1863, and was defeated, but was
returned as member for Emerald Hill by a large majority. When
the dissolution took place on account of the tack of the Customs
Bill to the Appropriation Bill in the time of the McCulloch and
Francis Ministry, did not seek re-election. Lost heavily by the
drought which lasted from 1864 to 1868. Mr. Creswick, after
whom is named the town and district of Creswick, has resided at
Hawthorn House for a quarter of a century, the street leading up
to his grounds being named after him. He was, during the early
part of his career, a director of the Hobson’s Bay Railway Com-
pany.
Curtain, John, J.P., of Curtain Terrace, Carlton, was born at
Grange, County of Limerick, Ireland, and was brought up as
a farmer. In 1854 he left Ireland for Victoria, and soon after his
arrival in the colony started as a teamster with several horse waggons,
making journeys to the Ovens, the Lachlan, and Murray, long before
a steamer or a barge could navigate that stream. He went into
hotel business and was married in iB6O. He built Curtain’s
Hotel, Carlton, in 1863, and soon after, Curtain Terrace and
other buildings in the same locality, proving himself one of
the most energetic inhabitants of that thriving suburb. He
was elected as councillor for Victoria Ward in the City of
Melbourne in 1869, and represented that ward for six years. In
1876 he was defeated by a small majority, but a few months after-
wards was returned at the head of the poll for Gipps Ward. In 1870
was elected by a large majority to represent North Melbourne
in the Legislative Assembly, and did so for six years. The
New Electoral Act divided the constituency into Carlton and
North Melbourne, and at the General Election in 1877 Mr.


Curtain stood for the Carlton Division, and was beaten after
a severe contest by the Hon. James Munro. Previous to this
Mr. Curtain had a contest with Mr. James Paterson for the
mayoralty, and was defeated. He is director of several com-
panies, chairman of the Licensed Victuallers’ Brewery Company,
and a part proprietor of the Melbourne Herald.
Dailks, John, J.P., engineer, brassfounder, and importer,
Melbourne. Born at Wednesbury, Staffordshire, England,
January yth, 1828, son of John Banks, gas tube manufacturer of
that town. Arrived in Victoria November, 1857, and entered into
business with Samuel and Thomas Banks, trading as Banks
Brothers, importers of gas tubes, and manufacturers of gas fittings.
In iB6O Thomas Banks retired from the firm, and in 1871 the
other brother retired, and Mr. John Banks carried on the business
to the present time entirely on his own account. In 1871 was
elected a member of the municipal council of Emerald Hill, and
re-elected in 1874 and 1877 ; was mayor in 1874-5, and 1875-6.
President of the Manufacturers’ Association in 1875, Com-
missioner of Victorian and Philadelphia Exhibition in 1875,
and in 1877 Commissioner of the Paris Exhibition for 1878.
Contested the election for Emerald Hill for Legislative Assembly
at the general election in 1877, but was unsuccessful. As a
politician, Mr. Banks is a Liberal and Protectionist,
Davies, John, J.P., Moonee Ponds, Melbourne, is a native of
Wales, and was born at Merthir Tydvil, 22nd January, 1820. He
arrived in Melbourne October, 1852, and carried on the business
of a builder and contractor for many years. In November,
1858, was elected a member of the Melbourne City Council for
Hotham Ward. When Hotham was proclaimed a municipality in
September, 1859, he was elected a member and first chairman of
the new municipality in October of the same year; resigned in
October, iB6O, and was again elected in 1864, and continued a
member till August, 1866, when he retired on leaving Hotham to
live at Moonee Ponds. In 1861 was elected to represent North
Melbourne in the Legislative Assembly; retired at the dissolution
of 1864, and the same year was appointed returning officer for the
district he had represented, and still holds that position. In
1861 was appointed justice of the peace for Victoria, and is now,
and has been for the last seven years, chairman of the Flem-
ington bench of magistrates. He commenced wine growing on
sixteen and a-half acres of land at Ngarveno, Moonee Ponds, in
July, 1862, and has produced a white and red wine that is held in
high estimation by judges of the produce of the grape.
Dobson, Hon. Frank Stanley, LL.D., is the son of the late
John Dobson, Esq., of Hobart Town, Tasmania, but formerly of


Carhill Hall, Durham, England. He was born in Tasmania
in 1835, and received his early education at the leading pri-
vate school in Hobart Town, of which the principal was Mr,
Hutchins, a name well known and honoured by Tasmanians. From
school he went to England, where he entered at Trinity College,
Cambridge, and in 1858 graduated B.A. and LL.B. He was
called to the bar (Middle Temple) in April, iB6O, and immediately
afterwards emigrated to Victoria, and engaged in the practice of
his profession at the Common Law bar. In 1863 he was ap-
pointed law lecturer at the Melbourne University, and was for
some years certifying barrister to the Victorian friendly societies,
which post he resigned on entering Parliament in 1869 as member
of Council for the Southern Province, which constituency he has
ever since represented. Dr, Dobson has more than once been
offered office, but declined the honour.. He is one of the
trustees of the Melbourne Public Library. Was for some years
the representative for Belvoir in the Church of England Assembly,
and has for years taken a great interest in the Victorian Acclima-
tisation Society. He is an M.A. University of Melbourne.
Dow, John Lamont, M.P., member of the Victorian Legislative
Assembly for Kara Kara, obtained his seat at the general election
in 1877. Kara Kara is one of the new electorates, and formerly
formed portion of old Crowlands. The sitting member at the
time of the election was Mr. Colin Campbell, who retired after
canvassing the district for the purpose of testing the state of
popular opinion. After Mr. Campbell’s retirement, Mr. Dow was
opposed by Mr. Robert Walker, one of the members for Castle-
maine, and formerly a member for Crowlands. Mr. Walker
sustained a positive defeat, his opponent obtaining a majority of
496 votes. Mr. Dow, who at the date of the election, May, 1877,
was thirty-nine years of age, was born in the town of Kilmarnock,
county of Ayrshire, Scotland. At the beginning of 1848 his
parents emigrated to Victoria, and after completing his education
in Geelong, he was brought up to his father’s business of squatting
and farming. After the publication of “ Landsborough’s Journal,”
in 1861, describing the fertility of the pastoral country in Northern
Queensland, discovered by him during his search for Burke and
Wills, Mr. Dow proceeded to the Gulf of Carpentaria in search of
a run. After undergoing the hardships and losses shared by other
of the pioneering explorers of the depressed wool period, extend-
ing from 1862 to 1866, he returned to Victoria in 1867 injured in
health by the Gulf country low fever, to which a brother, who
had been his partner in the Queensland speculation, had pre-
viously succumbed. After recruiting, Mr. Dow entered upon a press
life, and ultimately, in 1873, joined the Age staff as agricultural
editor of the Leader , which position he still holds. Having, during


his connection with the Leader , been appointed on several occa-
sions to write special articles on the operation of the Land Act, he
turned the knowledge thus acquired to account in the construction
ol a popular lecture on the land question, illustrated by a map of
the colony on a large scale, bringing out in relief the peculiar
matures pertaining to the history of Victorian land legislation.
Ibis lecture Mr. Dow delivered during 1876 in almost every
centre of population throughout the colony, and was instrumental
to a large extent in rousing the country to the necessity for the
and tax, which, as a supporter of the Berry Government, he after-
wards assisted to pass into law.
Duerdin, James, solicitor and notary public, Melbourne, was
born in London in 1838; is the son of John Duerdin, solicitor,
London, England, who emigrated to South America in 1840 with
the intention of becoming a merchant. Went thence to Tasmania on
his way to Port Phillip in the same year, and in 1841 resumed the
practice of his profession in Melbourne, from which he finally
retired in 1862, when his son James entered the firm, which then
became Bronckorst, Smale and Duerdin. The firm first estab-
lished was Hinton and Duerdin, then John Duerdin, then
Duerdin and drenchard, then Duerdin and Bronckorst, then
Duerdin, Bronckorst and Palmer, then Duerdin and Co., and
afterwards Duerdin, Bronckorst and Smale. James Duerdin was
educated at the London University, of which he is a B.A. and
LL.B. He has also been admitted as LL.B. of the Melbourne
University. In 1858 was articled to Messrs. Martin, Thomas
and Hallams, of M incing Lane, London, and in 1861 was admitted an
attorney in England. In 1864 he commenced practice on his
own account m Melbourne, he having, in 1862, received his
notarial faculty from England, and has practised in Melbourne
ever since. He was honorary secretary to the Yorick Club for
several years, and member of the council of the Royal Society of
Victoria. 7
Duffett, Joseph G., solicitor, Melbourne, was born at Bristol,
England, and commenced practice in that city in 1845, and
continued to practise till 1852, when he left Liverpool for Aus-
tralia in the Great Britain steamship, on her first voyage to
the colony. The Great Britain called at the Cape, and he
took the opportunity of visiting and recruiting there for three
months; he did notreach the colony till February, 1853. Shortly
after he was admitted an attorney of the Supreme Court, com-
menced and has continued to practise to the present time. His
intention was originally to have returned to England, but the
success he met with caused him to change Ins mind, and to deter-
mine to become a permanent colonist.


Duffy, The Hon. Sir Charles Gavan, M.P., Speaker of
the Legislative Assembly, was born in Monaghan in the north
of Ireland in 1816, and educated at the well-known school of the
Rev. John Bleckly, where Mr. Longmore was also a pupil. In
1836 he became sub-editor of the Morning Register, a Dublin daily
paper, and soon afterwards he entered King’s Inn as a law student.
In 1838 he was one of the writers of the London True Sun , and
in 1839 editor and proprietor of a journal in Belfast. In 1842 he
founded the Nation in conjunction with Thomas Davis and
John Dillon, which speedily became the most powerful journal
that ever existed in Ireland. Mr. Lecky, the eminent author
of “ The History of European Morals from Augustus to Charle-
magne,” says in one of his books, “What the Nation was
when Gavan Duffy edited it, when Davis, McCarthy and their
brilliant associates contributed to it, and when its columns
maintained with unqualified zeal the cause of liberty and natio-
nality in every land, Irishmen can never forget. Seldom has any
journal of the kind exhibited a more splendid combination of
eloquence, of poetry, and of reasoning.” The Hon. Darcy M‘Gee,
the Canadian Minister, who was one of Mr. Duffy’s political asso-
ciates, in a memoir of him published in America, says, “ Duffy
raised the Press wonderfully . . In three years Nation
made a European and American fame. The reviews and journals
of England had praised and blamed and ridiculed it in vain ;
it forced its way into the audience halls of empires. Lamartine
called his new Parisian journal after it. It was eagerly read
in Paris, Munich, Milan, and Rome. Its articles and poems were
translated into French and Italian. We can all remember its
effects on America, first with the Irish, and afterwards with
the native citizens. It was reprinted from Boston to Dubuque in
almost every journal.”—ln 1844 Mr. Gavan Duffy was tried, con-
victed, and imprisoned, along with O’Connell and other leaders of
the Repeal Party, for a conspiracy to overthrow the British
authority in Ireland. But the House of Lords reversed the
decision on writ of error, and the prisoners, who had received
deputations of sympathy from nearly every town in Ireland during
their short imprisonment, returned to their homes accompanied by
a cavalcade several miles in length. A controversy arose between
O’Connell and the Young Irelanders (as the writers of the Nation
and their friends were called) on the best means of accomplishing
their purpose, and the latter left the Repeal Association and
devoted themselves for a time to national literature. Many of the
books which they published have increased in popularity from year
to year; Mr. Duffy’s “ Ballad Poetry of Ireland ” ran through
forty-two editions, the latest of which appeared last year, and
circulated nearly a quarter of million of copies. It is mentioned
with enthusiasm in the Memoirs of Lord Jeffrey, Miss Mitford, and


other English authors of the day. In 1845 Mr. Duffy was called
to the bar, but never practised, except for a few months in
Melbourne.—ln 1848 the famine in Ireland, and the example
of the French Revolution, induced the Young Irelanders to
engage in perilous enterprises, and an Act was passed to restrain
the Press in Ireland, under which Mr, Duffy and three other
editors, Mr. John Mitchell, Mr. John Martin, and Dr. O’Doherty
(now a member of the Queensland Parliament), were imprisoned
tor a new offence named Treason-felony; and shortly after
the Habeas Corpus Ad was suspended and writs issued for
the arrest of Smith O’Brien, Thomas F. Meagher, John Dillon,
and other leaders of the party who were not journalists. Their
resistance in Tipperary and the result of it are well known. Mr.
Duffy was arraigned four times, but the juries disagreed, and it was
found impracticable to convict him. On his release from prison
he immediately revived the Nation , and became one of the
founders of the Tenant League, an organisation in which the
Presbyterians of Ulster united with the Catholics of the south,
and succeeded in sending fifty members to the Parliament elected
in 1852; among whom Mr. Duffy himself was chosen for New
Ross, beating Sir Thomas Redington, Chief Secretary of the
government which had prosecuted him. This election was the
subject of an epigram celebrated in its day—
“A year or two since I gave a great shout
When I heard that our friend Gavan Duffy was out;
I have not changed since, not the point of a pin,
But I’m twice as glad now to find that he’s in. ”
After four sessions in the House of Commons he resigned his
seat on account of large defections from the Tenant League
party, and sailed for Australia in November, 1855, Carleton, the
Irish novelist, in his “ Squanders of Castle Squander,” passes
judgment on Duffy and his associates during their Irish career.
“The Nation,” he says, “written and conducted with surpassing
spirit and ability, at once became the nucleus of what was after-
wards termed the Young Ireland party. Although we never
agreed with its politics, we admit that it was the means of eliciting
a large and eminent exhibition of intellectual vigour from the
country. Its conductors and contributors were men, not only of
great talent, but of the highest personal honour and the most
stainless integrity of private character. . . . It is due to them
to say that apart from their folly as politicians, it would be
impossible to find a more high-minded and honourable set of
men; but by far the ablest among them was Gavan Duffy.”—Mr.
Duffy met a cordial reception in Australia; he was entertained on
his arrival at public dinners at Melbourne and Geelong, and
afterwards in Sydney, where he was much pressed to take up his
residence; and as a property qualification for Parliament then


existed, his friends in both colonies purchased a freehold for
which enabled him to be chosen for either the Council or
Assembly. He was elected to the first Parliament of Victoria for
the counties of Villiers and Heytesbury, and his experience in
the House of Commons enabled him to aid effectually in fixing
the practice which has since prevailed in the Assembly, and
determining the respective powers and rights of the two Houses;
and no colonial legislature perhaps ever resembled the House
of Commons so much as this early Parliament. In the first
session he was chairman of a select committee on a Federal
Union of the colonies, whose labours gave the original impulse
to Mr. Darcy M‘Gee in Canada some years later in founding the
New Dominion; and he passed, against the determined resistance of
the Government, the first Act of the Parliament of Victoria, being
one abolishing the property qualification for the popular branch of
the Legislature. In the same session (March, 1857) he became
Commissioner of Public Works and Chairman of the Central
Road Board in the first responsible Government, Mr. O’Shanassy
being Chief Secretary. In 1859 he became Minister of Public
Lands; but after a year or so a dispute arose with Mr. O’Shanassy
and some of his colleagues on the policy and management of the
public estate, and Mr. Duffy resigned office. On the defeat of the
O’Shanassy Government, soon afterwards, Mr. Nicholson, who
succeeded him, offered Mr. Duffy and any one political friend he
thought proper to select, places in the new Administration, but he
declined to acceptthem,unless a majority of the Cabinet werechosen
from the Land Reformers. In iB6O, on the defeat of the Nicholson
Government, a new Administration was proposed by a coalition
between Mr. Heales and Mr. Verdon, with Mr. Brooke and Mr.
Aspinall, of which Mr. Duffy was chosen Premier; but as the
Governor, Sir Henry Barkly, refused to promise a dissolution
in certain contingencies, he declined to proceed, and the former
Government were recalled. He returned to office, however, in
1861, as President of the Board of Land and Works in a coalition
Ministry, of which Mr. O’Shanassy, Mr. Haines, and Mr. Nichol-
son, each of whom had been Chief Secretary, were members, and
next year he passed the well-known Land Act of 1862. He wrote
a pamphlet illustrating the new Act, entitled “Guide to the Land
Law,” of which three publishers issued separate editions in
the colony, and three others published separate editions in London,
and the leading journal in Australia, in reviewing it, pronounced
that the passing of this Act might become as memorable a fact in
the annals of the colony as the discovery of gold. But the in-
dustrious classes whom it was intended to benefit hired themselves
to the pastoral tenants to defeat it, and it was widely evaded. In a
recent speech (April, 1877) Mr. Duffy described its success in Gipps-
land as an illustration of what it was intended to have accom-


plished. “I travelled (he said)* from Briagolong to Maffra, and
thence to Cowwar, a district justly called the granary of the East;
I afterwards visited Bruthen and Lindenow Flat, at the other end
•of the electorate, which rivals the Farnham survey in fertility, and
in all these places I had the inexpressible pleasure of being
assured by legions of prosperous farmers who possess the soil that
they obtained their homesteads under what has been named the
Duffy Land Act. All the unaccustomed toil of a long journey
was repaid by the picture I had imagined long ago realised under
my eyes —the picture of happy homes possessed by a free, manly,
yeoman proprietary. And why have we not Maffras and Linde-
nows in the West as well as in the East? Because the very class
for whom we legislated sold their inheritance for some paltry
bribe.” On an attempt to amend the Act the Government
were defeated, and Sir James JVLCulloch, Mr. Higinbotham,
and Mr. Grant came into office; but Mr. Duffy, though dis-
placed, supported all the land reforms proposed by the new
Administration. In 1864 he visited Europe for two years, and on
his return speedily re-entered Parliament (in 1867) as member for
Dalhousie. The Darling grant controversy was then commencing,
and he took at the hustings the grounds which were finally
adopted by nearly all parties—that the grant ought never to have
been made, but that, having been made, it ought to be sanctioned
if sent in a separate Bill to the Council. While a private member,
Mr. Duffy was chairman of a Royal Commission which brought up
a report that led to the experiment of payment of members being
tried in Victoria, and chairman of a Royal Commission on the
subject of Federation of the Australian colonies, which recom-
mended a Permissive Act (which would enable two or more of the
•colonies to join together at their discretion), a principle which has
since been applied to the Cape of Good Hope and the South
African colonies by the Imperial Government. In 1869, the
M‘Culloch Government having been defeated on the motion of
Mr. Robert Byrne, that gentleman invited Mr. Duffy to become
Premier and form the new Administration; but the state of parties
at the moment made the time inopportune, and after a lengthy
consultation with political associates, he declined to proceed. In
1871, on the defeat of the fourth M‘Culloch Government, Mr.
Puffy at length became Premier. During his administration the
whole country was for the first time thrown open for selec-
tion by the abolition of the reserves made in favour of the
pastoral tenants, and the tariff was made more protective. A
contest took place with the Government of New South Wales
■on the Border duties, in which the Duffy Government obtained an
unprecedented victory. Mr. Duffy made certain proposals to Sir
James Martin, then at the head of affairs in New South AVales, for
the settlement of the question, which that gentleman rejected, but


the Parliament of his own colony censured him for rejecting
them; he then appealed to the constituencies, but a Parliament
was elected which immediately displaced him from office for the
same act. In 1872 Mr. Duffy was chairman of a Conference of
Cabinet Ministers from all the Australian colonies to press on the
Imperial Government the repeal of the law limiting intercolonial
legislation on fiscal subjects; an object which has since been
effected in pursuance of that remonstrance. After a year, the
Government was defeated by a narrow majority, and Lord Canter-
bury having refused him an appeal to the country, Mr. Duffy re-
signed. A few months afterwards he was offered a Companion-
ship of St. Michael and George, which he respectfully declined.
In May, 1873, he was gazetted a Knight, and in 1874 he made a
second visit to Europe, his eldest son being elected for Dalhousie
in his father’s place. On his visit to Ireland he was invited to re-
enter the House of Commons, a county member making way for
him, but he declined on the ground that he disapproved of the
programme which the present Irish members have substituted for
the policy of the Repeal party. On his return to Australia, in
1875, Sir Charles was elected for North Gippsland, one of the
largest constituencies in Victoria, without his presence at the
election being required; in returning thanks, he stated the re-
markable fact that during the twenty-four years since he first
entered Parliament he had never lost an election. On tlm assem-
bly of the present Parliament (May, 1877), he was unanimously
chosen Speaker, both parties, it is understood, having invited him
to undertake the office. In Henry Kingsley’s novel of “The Hil-
yars and Burtons” there is a graphic sketch of Mr. Duffy when first
m office. It is claimed for him that he founded our National
Gallery, and first caused the public reserves in Melbourne to be
laid out and planted for the enjoyment of the people. The same
tastes employed in his personal affairs, induced him to purchase,
while it was still a wilderness, the district now occupied by the
fashionable watering place of Sorrento, of which he is the princi-
pal proprietor. Lie was twice married, and has several children.
Duffy, John Gavan, M.P. for the county Dalhousie, solicitor,
Melbourne, is the eldest son of the Hon. Sir Charles Gavan
Duffy, Speaker of the Legislative Assembly. Born in Dublin
1844; educated at Stonyhurst College, England. Arrived in
Victoria 1859, and finished his education at the University of
Melbourne, where he carried off the vice-chancellor’s prize for the
best English essay. At the general election of 1874 he was
elected by a large majority for Dalhousie as representative in the
Legislative Assembly, previously represented by his father, who at
the time was on a visit to Europe. He was re-elected for the
same constituency at the general election in May, 1877, without


opposition, one of the only four members so returned at that
election. He brought in, and carried through the Assembly, a
Bill to enable women to take degrees at the Melbourne University,
which was rejected by the Legislative Council. He sat in opposi-
tion to the Francis and MUulloch Governments, and gave an
independent support to the Berry Administration. He is in
politics a Liberal and a moderate Free-trader.
Dwyer, Jeremiah, M.P. for Villiers and Heytesbury, barrister-
at-law, eldest son of John Butler Dwyer, Government contractor,
connected with the railways and roads and bridges departments.
Born in the county of Tipperary, Ireland, 1844, and arrived in
Australia, 1854. Educated at St. Patrick’s College and at the
University of Melbourne. Called to the bar in 1869. Stood for
Villiers and Heytesbury in 1868 against the Hon. M. A. Mac-
donnell and Hon. W. Bayles, but was unsuccessful. At the same
general election he contested the constituency of Kilmore against
Mr. Lawrence Burke, Mr. Thomas, and Mr. Orr, and was second
on the poll. At the following general election in 1871, he stood
for Williamstown, against Mr. A. T. Clark, the present member,
and two other candidates, and was again defeated. At the general
election, 1874, he stood a second time for Villiers and Heytesbury,
against the late Hon. M. O’Grady, Mr. Bayles, and Mr. Nicholson,
and was again unsuccessful. At the general election in May, 1877,
he stood a third time for the same district against the Hon. Joseph
Jones, Hon. W. Bayles, and was returned at the head of the poll,
Mr. Bayles being second. In politics Mr. Dwyer has always been
a supporter of the Liberal and popular party in Victoria. He has
always been a supporter of a progressive land tax, and of the
reform of the Upper House, by dispensing with the property
qualification, and shortening the term of office. When before the
electors in 1874, he claims to have proposed as a preventive of
deadlocks a scheme afterwards brought into the House by the
Hon. J. G. Francis, and known as the Norwegian scheme; is and
has been a supporter of free and compulsory education. Since_ his
admission to the bar has practised successfully at his profession,
and has acted as Crown prosecutor.
Edwards, John, jun., solicitor, Melbourne, born Christmas,
1836, at Launceston, Tasmania. Educated under Rev. William
Brickwood, and completed his studies under Rev. W. Trollop,
M.A., formerly head-master of Christ’s Hospital, who started the
first collegiate establishment in Victoria. Mr. Edwards came to
Port Phillip when a child. Was articled to Mr. Trenchard, and
afterwards transferred to Mr. J. B. Bennett. Was admitted in
1858, and became in August, 1859, a member of the Fitzroy
municipal council. The following year contested the chairman-


ship with Hon. W. Vaughan, and beat him by one vote. Same
year became a candidate for Collingwood to support the Heales’
Ministry, and was elected a member of the Legislative Assembly,
in conjunction with Mr. (now The Hon.) Graham Berry and
Mr. Don. Was re-elected, in 1864, at the head of the poll by a large
majority, Mr. Berry being defeated; and at the next general
election was again returned, but was rejected at the following
contest, after dissolution of the House, on refusing to vote for the
Darling grant. In conjunction with R. H. Horne, Dr. Nield, and
James Smith, founded the Melbourne Garrick Club, which soon
had about 500 members. Mr. Edwards acted at the benefit of G.
V. Brooke, Mrs. C. Young, and Mr. Rogers, and played through
the country on behalf of the Brooke Memorial Fund with the Press
Club, and proved that he possessed marked histrionic ability.
He has taken a high position in Masonry, having been Master of
the Collingwood Lodge under the English constitution, and
Provincial Grand Steward; Past Grand Bard under the Scotch
constitution; and W.M. of the Washington Lodge under the Irish
constitution, a Lodge started by Americans; and he was Deputy
Provincial Grand Master under the Irish constitution for nine
years, when he had to give it up from ill-health. In politics
he has always been a Liberal, the only split he had with that
party being on the Darling grant.
Effrtll, Michael, sen., was born in the County Clare, Ireland,
in the year 1817, his father being a farmer and land steward. In
the year 1850 Mr. Egan, with his family, emigrated to Adelaide.
Shortly after arriving there he became connected with the Kapunda
mines until, hearing of the wonders of the Victorian goldfields, he
went overland to join in the Forest Creek rush. Fortune did not
favour him, and he left for Melbourne, taking up his quarters in
that outskirt of it known as Canvas Town. In 1853116 opened
in Rowena Parade a woodyard, which gradually developed into
a very extensive timber business. He subsequently moved the
scene of his operations to the Bridge-road, having also timber
yards at the wharf. He became a member of the municipality
of Richmond in its first year, and held office almost continuously
until about three years ago, when he retired into private life. He
acted as mayor in 1870. He was always an energetic councillor,
and was mainly instrumental in having the system of voting by
ballot introduced into municipal councils. To his exertions, and
those of the late Mr. Cameron, town clerk, the residents in Rich-
mond are much indebted for a great many improvements. Mr.
Egan has often taken a very active part as a member of the com-
mittee of the Melbourne Benevolent Asylum, an institution of
which he has long been a life governor.


E«*ail, Michael, jun., architect, was born in Dublin in the year
1846, and in 1850 emigrated with his parents to Adelaide. He
accompanied them to Melbourne, where he was educated, first in
a private school, and subsequently at the Church of England
Grammar School. When only sixteen years of age he was
articled to a leading Melbourne architect, and two years later he
distinguished himself in a competition for a design for a town
hall to be erected in Wangaratta. He next spent six years in the
Mining Department of Victoria, and whilst there engaged won
second prize for a design for the West Melbourne Presbyterian
Church, and second prize for the Richmond Town Hall. Mr,
Egan, jun., left the Mining Department to set up in business
on his own account, and in the year 1870 opened a school
of design, of which he was hon. sec. at Richmond. Shortly afterwards
he assisted in opening another at Williamstown. In 1873 he won the
first prize for the new Victorian Government Offices. His estimate of
the cost of construction was and the work was
tendered for and completed at a small fraction under that amount.
The contract was the largest that had hitherto been entered into
on any single building in Australia, and Mr. Egan, when quite a
youth, received as his commission. At about the
same time (1873), Mr. Egan won the third prize offered for the
new Houses of Parliament in Adelaide, and in 1877 he won
the second prize for the University Buildings in the same city.
Public opinion having declared itself against the design which was
awarded first prize, it was decided that should be given
to Mr. Egan to furnish new drawings; this he has done, with
what result is not yet known. Mr. Egan has also built very large
stores in Melbourne, Williamstown, and Richmond.
Ellery, Robert L. J., Government astronomer of Victoria, was
born at Cranleigh, in Surrey, in the year 1827, and although
he was brought up to the medical profession, he, at an early age,
evinced a strong leaning for astronomy, a study he has followed
for about a quarter of a century. In 1851 he sailed for Melbourne
in the ship Moselle , and shortly after his arrival was asked by
Governor Latrobe to establish and take charge of an observatory
at Williamstown, for the purpose of providing increased security
against maritime disaster. He accepted the invitation, com-
menced work in 1853, and continued his labours until 1858, when
he was requested to arrange and direct the geodetic survey of
Victoria. That was begun about the end of the same year, but
still remains unfinished through circumstances over which Mr.
Ellery could exercise no control. In 1863 the observatory at
Williamstown was transferred to Melbourne, and amalgamated
with the physical observatory which had been previously con-
ducted by Professor Neumayer. Mr. Ellery then took charge of


the double establishment, and his efforts have since been rewarded
by a very large share of success. Aided by the great Melbourne
telescope (one of the best that has yet been constructed), and by
other appliances selected by him, he has done a large amount of
useful work in the southern heavens. His observations of Mars
have been found very valuable in assisting to determine the
distance of the earth from the sun. He was entrusted with
charge of the expedition to Northern Australia, to watch the
transit of Venus in December, 1874, and much was expected from
the occasion- but the weather was unpropitious for accurate
observation. During many years past Mr. Ellery has been
president of the Royal Society of Victoria, and he was elected a
Fellow of the Royal Astronomical Society in 1855. In 1873 he
was elected a Fellow of the Royal Society of Fondon. He
is a member of the Astronomische Gesellschaft of Germany,
and of the Pharmaceutical Society of Victoria. Though
fond of the peaceful arts, he has not exclusively devoted his
attention to them, as, in spite of the demands upon his time, the
Victorians are in no small degree indebted to him for the estab-
lishment of a signal and torpedo corps, the members of which
have, during several of our volunteer encampments, shown that
they maybe found very useful in time of emergency. In 1875
Mr. Ellery was allowed a well-deserved leave of absence for twelve
months for the benefit of his health, and he availed himself of it
by paying a visit to Europe, where he met with a very cordial
reception at the hands of his scientific brethren.
Everard, John, the youngest son of an old yeoman and land-
owning family in Feicestershire, arrived here in the Adelaide , s.s.,
at the commencement of 1853, and soon entered into mercantile
pursuits. He was an ardent and extreme politician, entirely sym-
pathising with the mining population in its demands for redress
and reform in most matters connected with Government and the
goldfields, and justified the resistance of the diggers to the
arbitrary collection of oppressive class taxes by the armed troopers
and police. He was elected a member of Parliament for the
district of Rodney in the second session of the first Parliament of
Victoria in the place of Mr. Baragwanath, He was the first
person returned to advocate land convention and ultra-democratic
doctrines, and was the first in the Fegislative Assembly to support
“free selection of land before survey,” and carried resolutions
affirming the desirability of such a course. He was returned to
the second Parliament by a very large majority for the same
district, but after a few months retired in favour of his friend and
associate, Mr. Wilson Gray. Mr. Everard was twice returned for
North Gipps Eand without visiting the district, and subsequently
twice for Collingwood, and whilst member for that district opposed


Mr. Grant’s Land Bill of 1869 because he was averse to a further
lease of ten years of the pastoral lands of the colony. Whilst
speaking on this subject in the House, he was the first to suggest
a progressive land tax commencing at 640 acres, and, in his own
words, “not so much for the purpose of revenue as to make it
less profitable for persons to monopolise large quantities of land.”
He helped to make and unmake Ministries, though he did not
belong to any of them, and was at one portion of his career
honoured by the Age newspaper with the title of “Warwick.”
Eville, James, born in London, 22nd May, 1826, son of a
clergyman. Was brought up to the publishing business, and was
engaged for some time with the celebrated Thomas Wakley, the
coroner, and also M.P. for Finsbury, on the Lancet. Was after-
wards publisher of London Punch , and acted as private secre-
tary to the late Mark Lemon, who was for many years editor of
that facetious periodical. In 1853 came to Victoria, and was
appointed town clerk of Emerald Hill in 1855 to the first
municipal council, established under what is known as Captain
Clarke’s Act. Has been a contributor to the colonial ephemeral
literature for years, and for some time acted as editor of Melbourne
Punch; also conducted for several months a kindred publication
called Touchstone , which, however, had only a brief existence.
Assisted Mr. J. G. Knight in compiling an interesting record of
the visit of Prince Alfred to this colony in 1867. In the same
year, in conjunction with a Melbourne journalist, adapted the story
of “Sinbad the Sailor” as a pantomime, which was performed
with success at the late Haymarket Theatre. In conjunction
with Mr. Thos. Carrington adapted the pantomime “ Humpty-
Dumpty,” which was performed at the Theatre Royal in 1874. Is
auditor to the South Melbourne Gas Company, and several
building societies; is electoral registrar of his district. Mr. Eville
is one of the promoters of the Yorick Club, of which he was hon.
treasurer for several years. He, however, has chiefly been identi-
fied with the birth, growth, and progress of municipal institutions,
his efforts as a litterateur having been only a recreation.
Fellows, Thomas Howard, Judge of the Supreme Court
of Victoria, was called to the English bar in 1852, and very
shortly afterwards emigrated to Victoria. He first entered Par-
liament in 1855, and succeeded the present Judge Molesworth as
Solicitor-General. When Sir William Stawell took office as
Chief Justice in April, 1857, Mr. Fellows was appointed Attorney-
General. In 1858 he resigned his seat in the Lower House, and
was elected to the Council, beating Mr. T. T. YBeckett. In
1859, on the defeat of the second O’Shanassy Ministry, he joined
the Nicholson Administration, representing that Government in the


Upper House without office. That Government was defeated in
iB6O, and he remained out of office till 1863, when Mr. McCul-
loch formed his first Ministry. In that Administration he accepted
the office of Postmaster-General, without salary, representing the
Government in the Upper House. In 1865 he resigned this
position, and the Ministry soon afterwards commenced the
celebrated fight with the Council on the tacking of the Tariff to the
Appropriation Bill. Mr. Fellows was the leader of the party that
opposed the measure, and he induced the Council to pass the
resolution laying the bill aside on the ground of its being an
infringement on the rights of the Council. The Tariff was subse-
quently separated from the Appropriation Bill, and was agreed to
by the Council. In 1867 another struggle began between the
McCulloch Government and the Council, this time over the
proposed grant of to Sir Charles Darling. This sum
the Government placed on the Appropriation Bill, The Council
objected to the grant, both as a violation of the principle that
colonial Governors should not receive presents from the colonies
which they had administered, and also because its inclusion in
the Appropriation Bill prevented them from exercising a free
deliberation in the matter. For these reasons the Appropriation
Bill was rejected. The consequence was an appeal to the country.
Mr. Fellows resigned his seat in the Council with the view of
leading the party in the Assembly. He was elected for St. Kilda
in conjunction with the late Mr. Aspinall. After the Assembly had
been re-elected in 1868, the MUulloch Ministry resigned, owing
to a difference with the Governor (Lord Canterbury), who, in con-
sequence of despatches from the Colonial Office, declined to give a
pledge that he would again recommend the grant of to
be placed in the Appropriation Bill. The Governor was for
two months endeavouring to form another Ministry, and at last Mr.
Sladen consented to take office. He formed an Administration,
which included Mr. Fellows as Minister of Justice and leader of
the Assembly. This Ministry was confronted by a formidable
opposition led by Mr. MUulloch and Mr. Higinbotham, and the
ability which Mr. Fellows displayed against his opponents was
favourably commented upon at the time. The difficulty in con-
nection with Sir Charles Darling was solved by the Home Govern-
ment placing Sir Charles on the pension list. Immediately afterwards
the Sladen Ministry was defeated on a vote of want of confidence,
and resigned, and was succeeded by another M‘Culloch Ministry.
Mr. Fellows continued a member of the Assembly till 1872,
but did not again fill any office in a Government. In that year Sir
Wm. Stawell, the Chief Justice, obtained leave of absence owing
to ill-health, and the Parliament resolved, instead of appointing an
acting-judge, to authorise the Government (that of which Mr. J,
G. Francis was the head), to appoint a fifth judge. This position


was, with the unanimous approval of the whole community, con-
ferred upon Mr. Fellows, who then held the leading position
at the common law bar.
Fenwick, Orlando, merchant, born at Gravesend, Kent, June,
1822, commenced life in business in conjuction with his brother
Pascoe Fenwick, in 1844. Emigrated to Australia in 1852, and
was one of the passengers by the s.s. Great Britain in August
of that year. On arrival in Melbourne he commenced busi-
ness in King-street, as importer, and is still engaged in that
branch of commerce. On the 10th of May, 1865, Mr. Fenwick
was elected for the ward of Bourke as its representative in the
municipal council, and since that date he has, up to the present,
held his position. He has been twice opposed in the contest for
a seat in the corporation, but on each occasion has been returned
by large majorities. Mr. Fenwick was elected mayor of Melbourne
9th November, 1871. On the 10th August, 1872, Mr, Fenwick
was appointed a member of the Low-lying Lands Commission,
and elected chairman.
FeiTfS, John, Government printer, Melbourne, was born in the
city of Bath, England, in the year 1818. His father, Robert
Ferres, was a printer and shorthand reporter. John, the fifth
child, was three and a-half years old when his father died, and had
at a very early age to commence bread-winning. He was appren-
ticed to Mr. S. Gibbs, printer and stationer, of Bath, and remained
with him for a period of nearly sixteen years. Resigning his
position there in 1848, he emigrated to Melbourne, and arrived the
same year, and within a week obtained permanent employment
as a compositor at the Herald office. Shortly afterwards obtained
the position of sub-overseer ; and in the course of a few months,
on the retirement of the manager, was appointed his successor.
It was while Mr. Ferres held this position, and by his advice, that
the first printing-machine in this part of the world, capable of
being worked by steam, was purchased and erected at the Herald
office, and under his superintendence was issued the first eight-
page newspaper in the colony. Much of the job-printing executed
at that period will favourably compare with the work of the pre-
sent day. His position in the Herald office frequently brought
him in communication with various members of the Government,
and he was induced by them to accept the office of Government
printer, which he has held from the 10th November, 1851, to the
present time, having been appointed in 1855, before the inaugura-
tion of responsible government.
Finn, Edmund, a native of Tipperary, Ireland, was educated
for the Roman Catholic priesthood, but instead of going to


the college of Maynooth, Port Phillip was his destination, and he
arrived in Melbourne in 1841. For a short time he was engaged
in clerical employment, and in 1845, Mr* Cavanagh, the founder of
the Herald , induced him to join his literary staff, upon which
he remained for thirteen years, officiating in every capacity,
from editor downwards. Some few years ago a fellow-journalist
thus sketched him:—“Mr. Finn, I verily believe, knew every
inhabitant of Melbourne of any importance, and knew nearly
everything that was going on. He was especially distinguished for
his intimate acquaintance with civic and social matters, and as a
gatherer of news was expert and indefatigable. He was as well
known as Johnny Fawkner. He was short and very short-sighted,
and had a remarkably big head, with plenty in it.” In 1858 Sir
J. O’Shanassy (chief secretary) offered him a clerkship in the
Legislative Council, which he accepted and still retains. Though,
perhaps, it would be incorrect to style him the “ Father of
the Melbourne Press,” in consequence of having seceded from the
“ Fourth Estate,” he is certainly the only remaining representative
of the early journalism of Melbourne. He was an active promoter of
the early building societies, and in 1842 was one of the founders of
the St. Patrick’s Society, which still flourishes. He succeeded Sir
J. O’Shanassy as its president, and on retiring after several years’
re-election, the society acknowledged his services by making him
an honorary life member, the presentation of a costly silver cup,
and qualifying him as a life governor of the Melbourne Hospital.
Fitzgerald, Hon. Nicholas, eighth son of the late Francis
Fitzgerald, a well-known brewer in the west of Ireland, was born
in Galway in 1829. He entered Trinity College, Dublin, in 1845,
where he obtained honours. He also obtained a first scholarship
in 1849 at the Queen’s College, Galway. Entered the Queen’s
Inns, Dublin, in 1848, and studied for the bar, but in 1852
adopted commercial pursuits, and after passing some years in
Ceylon and India came to Victoria in 1859. A few months after-
wards he established the famous Castlemaine ale brewery, and
now in Melbourne, New South Wales, and Queensland has large
establishments of the same kind. Mr. Fitzgerald was appointed
a territorial magistrate in 1863, and was elected, after a severe
contest, for the North-western Province to the Legislative
Council, and was again returned for the same province in 1874.
About this time he visited the old country without resigning his
seat, and after a short absence returned to Victoria to resume
both his legislative and business duties.
Fitzgibboil, Edmond Gerald, town clerk of Melbourne, is a
native of Cork, but at an early age crossed the channel and
was employed in England under the committee of the Privy


VICTORIAN MEN OF THE TIME. 63
Council on Education. He arrived in Melbourne in September,
1852, and soon afterwards started for the Mount Alexander gold
diggings, where he remained until the following year, when he
returned to Melbourne, and was appointed reader to the Legisla-
tive Council by Governor Latrobe. He retained that office until
1854, when he was appointed to assist in drafting by-laws and in
other work, with the then town clerk of Melbourne, Mr. Kerr.
When the latter resigned, in the year 1856, Mr. Fitzgibbon suc-
ceeded to him as town clerk, an office which he has held ever
since. He was called to the bar in iB6O. In 1861 he contested
South Bourke in the freetrade interest, but was unsuccessful. In
the course of his canvass he strongly advocated assisted immigra-
tion, the abolition of State-aid to religion, and a uniform system of
secular education with facilities for affording religious teaching.
Two years later he took a prominent part in a public meeting
which was called for the purpose of protesting against the transpor-
tation of criminals to Australia. A league having been formed, he
was appointed secretary, and he drafted the addresses and de-
spatches which were forwarded to England. He has often written
to the press on various subjects, and he took much interest in the
establishment of a system of night signals of distress for vessels.
Mr. Fitzgibbon also wrote a pamphlet suggesting that the Execu-
tive Government should comprise all the members of the Legisla-
ture, committees being at the head of the several departments in
lieu of individual ministers, the object being to get rid of party
warfare; and he has urged on a later occasion, that Parliamentary
business would be better conducted if transacted on principles
more like those by which municipal bodies are ordinarily actuated.
A few years ago he married a daughter of the late Mr. Michael
Dawson (a very early colonist), and, obtaining a year’s leave of
absence, he made an extensive tour through Europe.
Flanagan, John, architect, was born in Manchester in the year
1838, and was educated in Ireland. At a very early age was
-articled to Mr. Fogarty, an architect in very extensive practice in
Dublin and Limerick. Immediately upon having served out
his articles he emigrated to Australia, arriving in Melbourne
in 1854. Shortly after landing he entered the office of the late Mr.
Charles Lang, and whilst working for him his first design of
any importance was for the premises subsequently occupied by
Messrs. Brown and Stewart, at the comer of Elizabeth-street and
FHnders-lane. In about 1858 he commenced practising on his
own account, and in the following year obtained the first prize in a
competition for designs for a Church of England at Maryborough.
His design for the Melbourne abattoirs was next recommended, and
about the same time he obtained first prize in the competition for the
original town hall and courthouse at Heathcote, together with second


prize for the Bank of Victoria in Melbourne, second prize for the
City of Melbourne Bank, and for the Queen Insurance Buildings.
Won the first prize for the Kilmore Hospital, as also for St, Philip’s
Parsonage, Hoddle-street. Amongst his many other successes
may be mentioned the alterations in the Australian and European
Bank, the Colonial Mutual Life Assurance Offices, the Colos-
seum in Bourke-street, with a large number of extensive stores
in Flinders-lane. In 1871 the City Council invited designs
for the proposed Eastern Market Buildings. There were no
less than twenty-six competitors, and, by a majority of sixteen
to nine, Mr. Flanagan was awarded the first prize, jQ2OO . That
sum was paid to him, but the work was allowed to remain in
abeyance during several years, until in 1876 the council once more
dealt with the question, and decided to call for fresh designs,
embracing the prominent feature in Mr. Flanagan’s one, namely,
shops along the front. Seeing that he had previously won the
first prize, and believing that he should be allowed to have the
superintendence of the work (subject to any modifications agreed
to by the council) Mr. Flanagan declined to compete a second
time, and his action was almost unanimously endorsed by the
Institute of Architects, who petitioned the council to adopt
the usual course—to allow the successful architect to have
the supervision of the work. A numerously attended meeting was
also held in the Town Hall (Mr. George Coppin being in the
chair), and the outcome of it was the presentation to the council
of a petition signed by 3900, representing 8000 votes, advocating
Mr. Flanagan’s claims, without avail. Mr. Flanagan has largely
contributed to the embellishment of Melbourne, and amongst the
improvements peculiarly his own may be cited the handsome cast-
iron street awnings, which he erected in front of Mr. Monahan’s six
houses about a dozen years ago. They were so superior to the old
verandahs that the City Council adopted the design, which
still continues to be the one accepted by that body.
Ford. Richard, secretary to the Harbour Trust Commission,
was educated at the Collegiate Institute at Liverpool, and
afterwards served three years in the office of Messrs. Cunningham
and Co., cotton brokers, of that city. Landed in Australia in
1852, and was for two years in the office of the late George S, W.
Horne, solicitor, of Melbourne. Returned to England in 1854.
Held an appointment under the Liverpool Dock Trust. Came
out again to Australia in the Ellen Stuart in 1858. Was three
years in the office of Messrs. L. G. and T. Hardy, solicitors, of
Ballarat. Resigned, and commenced business as a share broker at
Daylesford. Returned to Ballarat, and commenced business as a
professional accountant and auditor. Was elected, by seven votes
to two, town clerk of the City of Ballarat, against seventy-three


applicants, and was soon after appointed city treasurer, which
offices he held for six years. In 1877, when the Harbour Trust
Commission was appointed, and advertised for a secretary, Mr.
Ford applied, and was successful against a host of applicants.
Upon receiving official notice of his appointment, Mr. Ford
resigned his offices at Ballarat, and before leaving was presented
with a testimonial by the City Council, and a cheque for £IOO.
The citizens of Ballarat followed suit, and the legal managers,
through Mr. R. M. Sargent, also presented him with an address,
and two handsome gold specimens.
Foy, Mark, J.P., was born at Moystown Mills in the King’s
County, Ireland, in 1830, and was educated at Bannagher, He
was originally intended for the legal profession, but the death of
his father at an early age obliged him to embark in commercial
pursuits. After having been engaged in business in Dublin during
several years, he determined on emigrating to Victoria, and arrived
in Melbourne by the Champion of the Seas in 1858. He first
proceeded to Castlemaine, where he carried on business during
four years, after which he went to Sandhurst, and opened an
establishment in Pall Mall. In 1869 went to Spring Creek, and
he took steps with a view to having the new goldfield formed into
a borough, which he was instrumental in having called Gray town,
in compliment to the late Mr. Wilson Gray, who was an old
friend of Mr. Foy’s father. Was elected a member of the first
council at Graytown, and he framed all the by-laws of the
borough. In response to a numerously-signed petition, Mr.
Foy was entrusted with the commission of the peace, by Sir
James M‘Culloch. In 1870 he left Graytown to carry on busi-
ness in the metropolis. He always took a very active part in
public matters, and his politics may best be described as those of
a Liberal Conservative. In March, 1877, he received from Captain
Standish, Chief Commissioner of Police, a very handsome letter
thanking him for the valuable assistance he had given to the
police at a time when they were far outnumbered by a crowd of
disorderly and violent roughs.
Fraser, Simon, M.P. for Rodney, Victoria. Youngest son
of William Fraser, millowner and farmer, of Nova Scotia, to
which country he emigrated from Inverness, in the Highlands of
Scotland, soon after it was taken by the English from the French.
The subject of our memoir was born at Picton, Nova Scotia, in
1834. Educated at East River Seminary, his education being
continued until he emigrated to Australia at about eighteen years
of age. On arriving, went first to Bendigo, now Sandhurst. In
1855 returned to Melbourne, and rented a store in one of the
small streets off Elizabeth-street, and traded in horses and cargoes


of potatoes from Sydney. He soon turned his attention to
contracting, chiefly in the Western district, in road work and
bridge building. Then took a contract on the Echuca railway
between Sandhurst and the river Murray, as a member of the
firm of Collier, Barry and Co. Mr. Fraser was one of the
projectors of the firm that took the contract, and prepared
the tenders with Mr. Barry. They made over out of
the contract. In 1865 purchased a station in Queensland, and is
still part owner. After spending three years in that colony
returned to Melbourne in 1869, and settled down there. Soon
after return to Melbourne, had a contract on the Coliban
waterworks. Mr. Fraser, in conjunction with two others, pur-
chased one of Mr. Hugh Glass’s stations at Echuca from the
bank; and is also the owner of a third of a fine property at
Queenscliff, consisting of 18,000 acres of freehold land. At the
general election of 1874 he stood for Rodney, in the interest of
the Francis Ministry, and was opposed by Mr. J. J. Walsh, whom
he beat by a large majority, and at the last general election in
May, 1877, was again elected for the same place in the interests
of the McCulloch Ministry. In politics, Mr. Fraser is a man
of moderate views. He is in favour of liberal institutions, and
a land, property, and income-tax. He is a director of the Denili-
quin and Moama railway, New South Wales, which is owned by
proprietors, of whom Mr. Fraser is one, formed into a company
under an Act of Parliament in 1873, of New South Wales. He
was married in 1862 to Miss Bolger, youngest daughter of the
late Martin Bolger, of Geelong.
Fraser, The Hon. Alexander, J.P. and M.L.C., was born in
Aldoura, near Inverness, north of Scotland. His father was a farmer,
and he was educated at the local schools. He left his native place
for London in 1827, and remained there for five years, marrying in
1831. In the following year he sailed in the Rubicon for Sydney
with his wife, and the ship putting into Hobart Town, he determined
to stay there. In 1852 he visited Victoria on business, and the
same year he left Tasmania with his family, and settled in Victoria.
From 1836 to 1841 he was interested in squatting properties in
Victoria. In 1852 he started a business in Bendigo (now Sand-
hurst), and in 1853 commenced business in Melbourne as an
auctioneer. In 1855 was made a territorial magistrate, and in
1857 was elected at the head of the poll to the first municipal
council of St. Kilda. In 1858 was elected a member of the
Legislative Council for the Western Province, and has represented
that province ever since; his last opponent headed the poll, but
not having the requisite property qualification, was unable to take
his seat, and Mr. Fraser was declared duly elected. He has held
various public offices, and from June 1872 to May 1874 was


Minister of the Crown, holding office as Commissioner of Public
Works, and representing the Francis Ministry in the Legislative
Council.
Francis, dhe Hon. James Goodall, ex-Chief Secretary of Vic-
toria, was born in London in 1819, and in his fifteenth year
emigrated to Tasmania, where he entered the firm of Boys and
Painter. He remained in it until 1847, when the business passed into
his own hands, and those of his partner Mr. Macpherson, with
whom he was long afterwards successfully connected in trade.
In 1853, shortly after the discovery of gold in Victoria, the firm
opened a branch establishment in Melbourne, under the manage-
ment of Mr. Francis, who henceforth resided in that city, where he
soon became one of the leading merchants. He was elected a
director of the Bank of New South Wales in 1855. He is a very
old member of the Chamber of Commerce, of which he was vice-
president in 1856, and president in 1857; and he took a promi-
nent part in the formation of the Victoria Sugar Company, and
the Australian and Tasmanian Insurance Company. Though
■frequently invited to do so, he took no part in politics in Tas-
mania, but in October 18395 he was returned to the Victorian
Legislative Assembly for Richmond. Shortly afterwards he
accepted office as Commissioner of Public Works, under the late
Mr. Nicholson; and, on the resignation of the late Mr. J. C. King,
he became Commissioner of Trade and Customs in the first
McCulloch Administration, a position which he next exchanged for
that of Treasurer in the same Government. He voted for the re-
vision of the tariff 1865-1866, in the direction of protection, and
supported its being tacked to the Appropriation Bill. He’ also
voted in favour of the proposed grant to Lady Darling. He led
the Opposition during the latter portion of the Duffy Administra-
tion, and when Sir Charles was defeated in June, 1872, he (Mr.
Francis) was sent for by the Governor. He experienced but little
difficulty in forming a Government; and, on the 19th of the fol-
lowing July he met Parliament with a strong following. During
his administration several measures found their way to the statute
book, and amongst the most important of them were those
authorising the construction of railways from Melbourne to Sale
Ararat to Stawell and Hamilton, Hamilton to Portland, Sandhurst
to Inglewood, Maryborough to Avoca, and Geelong to Colac, the
whole being estimated to cost about Most of these
have been already completed, and some are now (187 7) in course of
construction. He also passed through the Assembly an Electoral
Bill, and a Bill to legalise mining on private property; but both
were thrown out by the Council. He introduced to the Assembly
what was known as the Norwegian scheme, for the settlement of
differences between the Upper and Lower Chambers; but as it


did not meet with the amount of support which he had anticipated,
he resigned on the 28th July, 1874, after having acted for nearly
twenty-six months as Chief Secretary, and was succeeded by the
Hon. George Briscoe Kerferd. For the benefit of his health, which
had been somewhat impaired by too close attention to business,
Mr. Francis (accompanied by several members of his family) then
paid a protracted visit to Europe, where he still endeavoured to
promote the interests of Victoria with regard to improved postal
service, and in other matters. On returning, much improved in
health, he was cordially welcomed back by a large number of his
old friends, and was on the occasion of the next election pressed
to come forward once more for Richmond, but he refused to do
so, and he has since taken no part in public affairs. The honour
of knighthood was more than once offered to him, but he each
time declined it, preferring to be still called by a name sufficiently
distinguished throughout Australia. Fortune has favoured his pas-
toral ventures, which were on a large scale, and from his extensive
vineyards at Sunbury he annually turns out large quantities of high
class wines. He was one of the most popular Chief Secretaries
who ever held office in Victoria, and there was a very general ex-
pression of regret when, to the surprise of his supporters, he
determined to resign.
Gatehouse, James, alderman and ex-mayor of Melbourne, was
born in Shaftesbury, Dorsetshire, in the year 1826, and was edu-
cated in the local Blue School. Being rather delicate in his
youth, he was advised to try a warmer latitude, and he arrived in
Victoria almost immediately before the discovery of gold. Shortly
afterwards he settled down in Swanston-street as an importer of
Panama and cabbage-tree hats. Having achieved such a com-
petency as enabled him to relinquish business, he commenced de-
voting his attention to municipal affairs, and in January, 1870, he
was sent in as a member of the Melbourne City Council for
Albert ward, and was unanimously elected Mayor for 1874-5, an d
was subsequently chosen as chairman of the delegates selected for
the purpose of establishing a central metropolitan board of works.
He has always acted as a good working councillor, and has spent
much of his time in furthering the interests not only of his con-
stituents but of the citizens at large. He inaugurated his
mayoralty by most handsomely entertaining about 500 of the
leading burgesses in the Town Hall, and during the whole of his
year of office he never missed an opportunity of extending his
hospitality to visitors to Melbourne.
Gaunson, David, M.P. for Ararat, solicitor, Melbourne, was
born at Sydney, New South Wales, 19th January, 1846, and is the
fourth son of brands and Elizabeth Gaunson. He was educated


there and at Brighton in Victoria, until May, 1869, when he
entered the office of his brother-law, the Hon. James Macpherson
Grant, who, in March, 1862, gave him his articles of clerkship. In
1869 was admitted to practice as attorney in Victoria, In 1871
at the general election he unsuccessfully contested Dundas in the
first batch of elections against the then Minister of Lands, and in
the second batch he opposed the then Minister of Railways, and
was again unsuccessful. In 1872, upon the resignation of the
Duffy Government, he was selected to oppose the new Chief
Secretary, the Hon. J. G. Francis, at Richmond, and was again
defeated. A vacancy occurring in the representation of Ararat
in May, 1875, he again attempted to secure a seat in Parliament,
and was at last successful, being returned by a large majority.
During the session of 1876 the McCulloch Ministry introduced a bill
which became law that allotted only one member to Ararat, and at
the general election of May, 1877, the contest was between the two
old representatives, Mr. D. Gaunson and the Hon. W. M‘Leilan,
Minister of Mines. The Minister of Mines was defeated by
a large majority. Mr. Gaunson is a Liberal and a protectionist.
Gemmell, Hugh Mitchell Campbell, of .Gemmell, Tuckett
and Co., auctioneers and timber-brokers, Melbourne, is the second
son of Robert Gemmell, M.D., of White Hill and Bourtree Park,
near Ayr, Scotland. He was born at Ayr, Ist June, 1827,
educated at Ayr Academy, and was originally intended for
the legal profession, but instead of studying law left Scotland
for Barbadoes in 1846, and was there engaged in mercantile
pursuits for three years, at which period he left for Demerara,
where he was occupied for six or seven years in the same way. In
1852 married the eldest daughter of Euno Samburtus Christian!,
one of the judges. In 1855 left Demerara for Scotland, and after
twelve months’ sojourn in the old country, started for Victoria;
landed in November, 1856, and became connected with the
old-established firm of Ray, Dickson and Co,, general mer-
chants and soap and candle makers, now extinct. In 1861
Mr. Gemmell commenced as an auctioneer, under the style of
Gemmell, M‘Call and Co. This firm in 1867 merged into
the present firm of Gemmell, Tuckett and Co., whose specialty is, as
auctioneers, selling real property, timber, and furniture.
Giles, Ernest, F.R.G.S., explorer. This able and undaunted
traveller, who has done so much for the exploration of the interior
of Australia, and especially for the western portion of it, was born
in England, but has passed so large a portion of his life in Victoria
as to be entitled to a niche in this volume. A passion for bush
life and for exploration has led him for many years past into the
far interior in various directions, but it was not until the year 1872


that he pushed forward so far into the heart of the continent as to-
stamp his name for ever on the pages of Australian history. In
August of that year, with the assistance of his steadfast friend,
Baron Von Mueller, and his own slender resources, he managed to
equip a light party, and penetrated into some fine country about
250 miles west of the great overland telegraph line. The energy,
caution, and long trained experience shown on this expedition
brought him friends. On a second appeal by Baron Von Mueller
a fund was raised by many wealthy Victorians, and some assistance
from the South Australian Government, and Mr. Giles again set
out with a party of four white men and twenty-four horses. He
remained in the field constantly endeavouring to reach the western
coast for one year, when his provisions having given out, and the
party reduced to living on their horses, he made his way back to
the settled districts of South Australia through great hardships,
having added some 700 miles to our knowledge of the interior. In
1875 he was fitted out by that munificent patron of exploration—
the Hon. Thomas Elder, of Adelaide, with nineteen camels, and
provisions for eighteen months. Through desert after desert for a
distance of nearly 1500 miles he made his way. In one fearful
stretch of 325 miles the party found no water for seventeen days.
After a struggle of six months, during which they had traversed
some 2400 miles, they made the outlying settlements of Western
Australia. Giles departed on his return journey several hundred
miles to the north of his former route in January, 1876, and arrived
at the telegraph line in August. There have been many brilliant
things done in Australian exploration, but for courage and capacity
Mr. Giles has never been beaten.
Gillbee, William, surgeon, Melbourne, was born at Hackney,
near London, England. Went to Tasmania in 1849, and thence
to Victoria in the same year, but only remained a few months,
when he started for California, and was there in the wildest times
practising his profession in the Sierra Nevada mountains. In
1851 returned to England. Shortly after was medical officer in
charge of the emigrant ship Georgiana , with 500 emigrants, bound
for Geelong. When at anchor in the harbour the crew mutinied,
wishing to get away to the diggings. They attempted to get pos-
session of the boats, but were resisted by the captain and the
doctor, who were nearly overpowered, the captain being stabbed
and the doctor being driven down below and having a revolver
snapped at him, but the cap fortunately missed fire. One of the
mutineers was shot dead, another wounded, and the rest secured.
From Geelong Mr. Gillbee came to Melbourne, commenced
practice, and has been there ever since. In 1853 was one of the
first twenty volunteers sworn in as the Melbourne Rifles during
the time of the Crimean war, was appointed assistant-surgeon


to the corps, and has been in the volunteer force ever since. In
1854 was elected surgeon to the Melbourne Hospital, which posi-
tion he held until 1875, when he was presented with a testimonial
from the hospital corporation for his long and valuable services.
In 1858 was appointed consulting surgeon under Cornish and
Bruce, the great railway contractors, to organise a staff of surgeons
to be in attendance at the different contracts. In 1861 was ap-
pointed examiner in surgery to the University of Melbourne. In
1867 Staff-surgeon Gillbee was gazetted surgeon-major with relative
rank of lieutenant-colonel, and was afterwards gazetted chief
medical officer. The first notable operations performed by
him that established his reputation as a skilful surgeon took
place in 1855, and were “a delegation of the upper third of
the femoral artery for poplitial aneurism.” The second case
was one of “lithotomy performed on a child eight years.old;
the stone was of considerable size, and was extracted with great
rapidity and skill.” The third case was the first of its kind per-
formed in the colony, “the taking up of the external iliac artery
for aneurism of the femoral.” Mr. Gillbee was also the first to
perform “an excision of the knee joint” in the colony. In 1864
he went largely into mining at Woods Point, and was at first
successful, but ended by losing a large amount. Mr. Gillbee was
vice-president of the Royal Society, and worked on the commis-
sion for the organisation of the Burke and Wills exploring expedi-
tion, but was opposed to the course adopted, urging that the ex-
pedition should go in the Victoria s.s., and land at Blunder Bay,
Gulf of Carpentaria, and travel inland to the settled districts. He
was also president of the Christian Young Men’s Association, also
of the Mechanics’ Institute, and in 1876 was president of the
Athenaeum. In 1872 was elected by the profession to the Medical
Board. Was president of the Medical Society, and twice vice-
president, and in 1877 was vice-president of the Melbourne Hos-
pital. Mr. Gillbee has also been a constant contributor to the
Australian Medical Journal.
Gillies, The Hon. Duncan, late member of Parliament for
Rodney, and late Minister of Lands, was born in Scotland, and
came to Victoria about 1854, and first took part in public affairs
at Ballarat, where he was elected to the local (mining) court, and
helped to carry through the first recommendation of a mining
lease, for some six acres of worked and abandoned ground, which
at the time was regarded as a monstrous monopoly, but which
helped the formation of large co-operative companies, and en-
couraged the introduction of capital into mining ventures. He
was a working shareholder in the Great Republic Company; and
when he was elected a member of Parliament for Ballarat West, in
the place of the Hon. J. R, Bailey, a considerable sum of money


was subscribed by his friends and admirers in Ballarat, and
presented to him, as well as a share in the Nelson Company,
which however did not turn out worth much. He was returned
for the same constituency again at the general election in August,
1861, and again in 1864, and 1866, and 1868; and having
accepted office as Commissioner of Lands, resigned, and was
re-elected in July the same year. In 1870, his popularity having
waned in Ballarat, he sought election at the hands of the
Maryborough constituency, was elected without opposition, and
was again returned for the same place in 1871. On accepting
office as Commissioner of Railways and Roads was re-elected on
27th June, 1872. Again returned for same place 9th April, 1874,
and re-elected on accepting office as Commissioner of Crown
Lands and Survey, on 2nd November, 1875. At the general
election on May nth, 1877, he determined to contest the district
of Rodney, and was opposed by Mr. Shackell, but was elected.
His opponent petitioned against the return on the grounds of
undue influence being exercised by the Lands Department in the
issue of leases to selectors and electors of that district during the
contest, and succeeded in unseating him, the committee finding
that such influence had been used, but without the knowledge of
the then Minister and candidate for Rodney.
Goldsbrougll, Richard, wool-broker, was born in 1821, at
Shipley, a little village in the midst of the woollen manufacturing
district of the West Riding of Yorkshire, about eight miles from
Leeds. When fourteen years old he was articled for seven years
to a woolstapler at Bradford, and there he was instructed in sort-
ing, classing, valuing, buying, selling, and, in fact, in all the
branches of the wool trade. When his apprenticeship was brought
to a close he commenced business on his own account in the same
town, beginning by purchasing the clips of the farmers and graziers
in the neighbouring country. These he sorted, and packed in a
manner suitable for the manufacturers. Whilst thus engaged, his
attention was naturally directed to the superior quality of the
Australian staple, and, after having made inquiries, the answers to
which he deemed satisfactory, he embarked from Liverpool in
1847 i n the Wellington , for Australia. He first spent some time in
visiting South Australia, and, after having duly gauged the relative
advantages of Adelaide and Melbourne, which were then pretty
much about the same size, he determined upon settling down in
the latter city. In the year 1848 he commenced business in pre-
mises on the site where the Yarra Yarra Hotel, at the corner of
Flinders-lane and William-street, now stands. Mr. Goldsbrough
next purchased the premises of Messrs. Bakewell on the opposite
corner of the Market-square, and there stand those immense blue-
stone stores of his, which are about the first of the commercial


lions pointed out to the new arrival. This venture was a very
serious one, for one whose capital was not very great, and Mr.
Goldsbrough was not a little nervous about it until the clips of
1850 and 1851 set him so firmly upon his legs that he was enabled
to commence building a large store at the back of the present
warehouses in Market-street. Here he shared in a difficulty which
stared many in the face at that time, as the superior attractions of
the newly opened goldfields drew all his workmen away; and for
several months the building was at a standstill. However, a
sufficient number returned to complete the erection in time for the
season 1852-3, when the wool trade was not over brisk. In 1853
entered into partnership with Mr. E. Row and Mr. George Kirk,
under the title of E. Row and Co., afterwards changed to
Row, Kirk and Co., and the firm transacted a large and
profitable business in buying and selling stock and stations.
Mr. Goldsbrough also became largely interested in squatting
about this time, and, in partnership with Mr. Kirk, pur-
chased several extensive stations north of the Murray. In land
speculations, the subject of our notice was very successful.
Increasing competition lowering the profits derivable from sheep
and cattle, he devoted his energies solely to wool, and by 1858
his premises had largely increased. They have ever since been
growing larger and larger, until they at length attained to their pre-
sent enormous dimensions. In 1857 Mr. Goldsbrough took
his brother-in-law, Mr. Hugh Parker, into partnership, and the
business has been carried on with great success up to the present
day.
Ooold, James Alipius, D.D., 0.5. A., the Most Rev. the Arch-
bishop of Melbourne, was born 4th November, 1812 ; arrived in
Sydney February, 1838, was elected bishop of Melbourne the 9th
July, 1847, an d was consecrated 6th August, 1848; arrived in
Melbourne 4th October of same year; created Archbishop of
Melbourne 31st March, 1874.
Grant, The Hon. James Macpherson, M.P., Minister of
Justice, was born at Alvie, Invernessshire, in 1822, and was
educated at Kingducie. When only about fourteen years of
age he emigrated to Sydney, accompanied by his parents, and
he was soon afterwards articled to Messrs. Chambers and
Thurlow, who were in considerable practice as solicitors at the
time. Whilst still an articled clerk he went to New Zealand,
in 1844, and served there as a volunteer in a number of engage-
ments with the Maories. Returning to Sydney, he, in the year
1847, became a member of the above-named firm, and divided
his attention between law and politics until 1850, when he sailed
for California in a vessel, which he, in conjunction with a partner.


loaded with a general cargo; and he remained in San Francisco
until once more attracted to New South Wales by the discovery
of gold. He did not stay there long, but left for Victoria,
and shortly after the Eureka Stockade riots in Ballarat he
defended the miners, who were tried as rebels by the Government
of the day. He was returned as a representative of the Bendigo
miners in 1855, and he almost at once commenced to urge the
throwing open of the lands to the people. He also advocated vote
by ballot, together with other liberal measures which have since
been carried into law. In the following year (1856) he was elected
a member for the Sandhurst Boroughs, under the new Constitution,
and in 1859 strenuous efforts were made to get him to again come
forward for the same constituency ; but he preferred temporarily
retiring from public life. However, he was soon again called
upon, and returned for Avoca, the constituency which he at present
represents. In conjunction with Mr. J. H. Brooke, he initiated
the occupation licences —the first step towards settling the people
on the land, and on the defeat of the last O’Shanassy Administra-
tion, in June, 1863, he became Minister of Lands, a position
which he occupied most successfully during several years, or
until he retired with his chief, in consequence of the action
taken with regard to the proposed grant to the late Sir Charles
Darling. In 1871 he again took office, under Mr. (now Sir)
Charles Cavan Duffy, and held it until the Government of which
he was a member made way, in June, 1872, for the Francis
Administration. He then remained in opposition until the defeat
of the Government at the general election in 1877,
after which he accepted the office of Minister of Justice, under
Mr. Graham Berry, which he still holds. Mr. Grant will be
long remembered in connection with the Land Act, which he
introduced in 1865, and more particularly with regard to the
celebrated “ 42nd clause,” and his liberal administration of the
land laws in force during his term of office.
Guerard (Von), Jean Eugene, painter. His father—descendant
of an old Lorraine family—was court-painter to the Emperor
Francis 1., of Austria. At an early age Eugene evincing a strong
predilection for art, went to Italy with his father, under whose
supervision he studied the old masters in Florence, Milan, and
Venice. In 1832, Von Guerard proceeded to Naples, where he
remained six years, actively engaged in landscape painting. Re-
turning to Germany, he established himself at Diisseldorf, being
attracted thither, partly because it was his father’s native town, and
partly led by a desire to study at its Royal Academy of Art.
During his residence at Diisseldorf, Von Guerard made various
excursions into Belgium, Holland, and the German Principalities,
for the purpose of sketching from nature, and in the year 1852, he


emigrated to Australia in the hope of finding an unexplored field
for study. Since his arrival here, he has visited the wildest and
least-known portions of Australian territory, and his great industry
has done much to render Australian scenery familiar to European
eyes. Of this artist’s earlier works, two were purchased by Queen
Isabella of Naples, six were sent to orders from America, and one
to Port Natal. A few other pictures were purchased by the Com-
mittee of the Rhenish Art Union. The following is a list of the
most noticeable pictures painted in Melbourne by Von Guerard
since 1854; —“Tower Hill, near Warrnambool,” “Geelong and
Station Peak, from the Barrabool Hills,” “Mount Abrupt,” “Stony
Rises, near Colac,” “Fern-Tree Gully,” “Mount William, from
Mount Dryden,” “Wannon Springs,” “View on the American
Creek, Woolongong,” “North View from Daylesford,” “Hart
Creek Fall, near the Goulburn,” “'The Snowy Bluff, Gipps Fand,”
“The Weatherboard Fall, N.S.W.” Of the above works some
were painted to the order of connoisseurs in England, and others
owed their existence to Australian commissions. M, Von Guerard
is as handy with the crowquill as with the pencil and brush,
and when Sir Henry Barkly was Governor of Victoria, exe-
cuted a set of large pen-and-ink sketches to the order of His
Excellency. In 1866 the Trustees of the Public Library, Mel-
bourne, purchased for the Art Gallery, a picture of Mount
Kosciusko, by M. Von Guerard, which attracted much attention
at the time, and soon afterwards a set of twenty-four Australian
landscapes from his pencil were reproduced in tinted lithography.
In June 1870, M. Von Guerard was appointed Master and Curator
to the Public Gallery of Victoria, and in the same year received
the Cross of the “Order of Francis Joseph,” forwarded by the
Emperor of Austria to His Excellency the late Viscount Canter-
bury, then Governor of the colony. The following is a list of the
principal works produced by M. Von Gue'rard from the year 1872 up
to present date: —“Govett’s Leap, Grose River Valley, N.5.W.,”
“View of Mitre Lake,” “View of the Grampians, from Fiery
Creek,” “Great Lake, in Tasmania,” “Milford Sound,” and “Lake
Wakatipu, N.Z.” Monsieur Von Guerard is still actively following
up his profession as a landscape painter.
Guilfoyle, William Robert Alphonse, F.L.S., C.M.R.8.5.,
London, director of the Botanical Gardens, Melbourne, was.
born in Chelsea, near London, England, in the year 1843. He
was the son of Mr. M. Guilfoyle, who designed and laid out some
of the principal landscape gardens in England, and subsequently
in New South Wales. He was privately educated by his uncle
Mr. Louis Delafosse, and afterwards at Lyndhurst College, and
studied botany under the late eminent naturalists and botanists,
William Sharpe Macleay and John MUillivray, F.R.S. He made


botanical tours through many parts of Australia, and in 1868
accompanied H.M.S. Challenger to the South Sea Islands on
a botanical cruise, and found many new, rare, and valuable plants.
Shortly after published an account of the voyage, which appeared
in Australasian and European journals. In 1868 was elected
a Fellow of the Linmean Society at the age of twenty-five, for
services to botany, and was made a corresponding member of the
London Royal Botanic Society in 1874. Mr. Guilfoyle holds an
estate in Queensland, on which he was for some years engaged
in growing sugar and tobacco. Attachment to his profession
induced him, in 1873, to transfer the management of this estate to
other hands, and accept the offer of the directorship of the Melbourne
Botanical Gardens, where he immediately commenced a renova-
tion of the grounds, and is still engaged in that task.
Gunst, Johann W., homoeopathic physician, arrived in Sydney
from London in the year 1852, after an unusually protracted
voyage of 152 days. He commenced practising as an allopathist,
and was soon afterwards appointed analytical chemist to the
Government of New South Wales. In 1854 he went to New
Caledonia, and claims to have been the first European who
visited that island. His experiences there were the reverse of
pleasant, as his nine companions were eaten by the cannibal
natives, and he was obliged to remain nearly five months in
the mountains before he managed to escape to the shore, where he
was luckily rescued by the crew of a vessel in which he was taken
to Noumea. After returning to Sydney, he practised during some
time on the Clarence and Richmond Rivers, where he was a
successful grower of sugar in the year 1855. He also lectured on
the cultivation of that article. Five years later he went with
an exploration party to Madagascar, and after having spent a con-
siderable length of time there, he was, on his return through Paris,
decorated with the Cross of the Legion of Honour, as a reward for
his arduous exertions in the cause of science. The subject of
homoeopathy was often forced on his attention during the course of
his travels, but for many years he looked coldly upon it, and
it was only after a deep investigation of homoeopathy, that he was
at length led to believe in its efficacy. He commenced to practise
as a homoeopathic physician, and has followed his profession
in Melbourne for over a dozen years.
Gunier, Henry Field, second son of John Gurner, of Sydney,
New South Wales, solicitor, who arrived in that colony in
February, 1817, as chief clerk of the Supreme Court, with
Barron Field, Esq., the judge thereof. Was born at Sydney, on
31st March, 1819; was at the latter end of 1834 appointed by Sir
Francis Forbes, chief justice, a clerk in the Supreme Court office


at Sydney. Having resigned that appointment, was in March, 1841,
admitted an attorney, solicitor, and proctor of the Supreme Court of
New South Wales. Was early in 1851, upon the establishment
of the Supreme Court of New South Wales for the district of Port
Phillip, appointed to the office of deputy-registrar of that court,
and accompanied Mr. Justice John Walpole Willis, the resident
judge, to Melbourne, in the Australian Packet, Captain M‘Pherson,
which arrived on 9th March, 1841, in Hobson’s Bay. Was the
first person admitted as an attorney, solicitor, and proctor at
Melbourne on 9th May, 1841. Filled the office of deputy-registrar
until the appointment by Governor Sir George Gipps, of James
Denham Pinnock, Esq., who assumed the duties of that office on
30th November, 1841; then entered upon the practice, at
Melbourne, of his profession as an attorney, solicitor, and proctor.
Was in January, 1842, appointed to the office of Crown solicitor
and clerk of the peace at Port Philip. Was in September, 1842,
appointed by Mr. Latrobe, under the Act incorporating the
town of Melbourne, town clerk. Was on Ist July, 1851, upon the
separation of Port Phillip from New South Wales, appointed
Crown solicitor of the colony of Victoria, which office he now holds.
In 1841 he published the “Rules and Orders of the Supreme
Court of New South Wales, for the District of Port Phillipin
1871 the “Practice of the Criminal Law of the Colony of Victoria
and in 1876, “Chronicles of Port Phillip.”
Haddon, Frederick William, journalist. Born at Croydon,
Surrey, England, Bth February, 1839. Intended for the legal pro-
fession, but in consequence of the death of an uncle, who had
adopted him, abandoned that career. In 1855 entered the service
of the Statistical Society of London, and a few years later (1859)
became Assistant-Secretary to that Society, holding at the same
time the office of Assistant-Secretary to the Institute of Actuaries
of Great Britain and Ireland. Was a contributor to several
London journals on statistical subjects, and assisted in editing the
Journal of the Statistical Society. In 1863 resigned above
appointments, and sailed for Melbourne in s.s. Great Britain,
under engagement to Messrs. Wilson and Mackinnon, proprietors
of the Argus, who were passengers by the same ship. Was for
some time a contributor to, and, for a short time, sub-editor of the
Argus, and soon after the Australasian was started (in 1864), was
appointed co-editor of that journal, in conjunction with the late
Mr. J. J. Stutzer, and afterwards became sole editor. On Ist
January, 1867, became editor of the Argus, which position he
retained up to the present time (nearly eleven years).
Haiff, William, M.D., of Emerald Hill, Melbourne, was born
in London, 1823. When fourteen years of age accompanied his


father and family to the United States of America, where he
graduated, in the University of Maryland, M.D., in 1848. He
then engaged in private practice at Baltimore, which he relin-
quished upon obtaining the appointment of assistant resident
physician at the Penitentiary and Small-pox hospitals, and at
the Alms house, Blackwell’s Island, New York. He resigned
his appointment in the autumn of 1852, with the intention of
visiting Australia. In 1853 he arrived in Victoria, as surgeon
of the ship Oreco, which brought over 200 passengers direct
from New York, attracted by the reports of the recently-dis-
covered gold-fields. Dr. Haig immediately commenced practice
at Emerald Hill, which was then a village of tents, and he was
for some months the only medical man residing in the district.
He has been established there in the practice of his profession
over twenty-four years. He is a magistrate, health officer to the
town of Emerald Hill, surgeon-major in the Victorian Artillery,
and honorary physician to the Alfred Hospital. He is also
returning-ofiicer for the district in which he lives.
Halford, George Britton, second son of James Halford, Esq.,
Haverstock Hill, near London. Born in Sussex, 26th November,
1824; commenced the study of his profession 1842; entered
St. George’s Hospital, London, 1848 ; became a member of the
Royal College of Surgeons 1852, a licentiate of the Apothecaries’
Society 1854, a Doctor of Medicine of the University of St.
Andrew’s 1854, a member of the Royal College of Physicians
1859, and Fellow of the same college July, 1870. Whilst yet
a student, he attracted the attention of the principal physicians
and physiologists of London by his original experiments on
the causes of the sounds of the heart, and on the mechanism
of the heart’s action. In 1850 was appointed house surgeon
to the Westminster Hospital, and in 1856 senior house surgeon
to the Royal Infirmary, Liverpool. Here a very remarkable
accident occurred. A man having been injured in the railway,
had his windpipe broken, and was left apparently dead by the
honorary surgeon of the hospital and two other surgeons. Directly
after their departure Dr. Halford raised the man, put a tube into
the wound in the windpipe, and sucked up the blood and mucus
from the man’s lungs. After five or six mouthfuls the man
opened his eyes, and made a good recovery. In 1857 removed
to London, and married Louisa Henrietta Millar, eldest daughter
of the late Thomas Millar, Esq., of Bath. Thirteen children
have been born, nine of whom are living. In October, 1857,
was appointed lecturer on anatomy in the School of Anatomy
adjoining St. George’s Hospital, London, having for his colleagues
Spencer Wells, B. W. Richardson, Thudichum, &c., and physician
to the Royal Hospital for Diseases of the Chest, London. In


1862 the Council of the University of Melbourne requested
Sir James Paget and Professor Owen to select a gentleman to
fill the chair of anatomy, physiology, and pathology then about
to be established, and their selection fell upon Dr. Halford.
The new professor commenced his duties in May, 1863, with
a class of two students. At the present time the number of
medical students is about seventy, and the school may be said
to be established. Since his arrival in the colony Professor
Halford has contributed many papers to the Royal and Medical
Societies; those which have attracted the most attention being—
t: On the Condition of the Blood after Snake-poisoning,” and “ On
the Injection of Ammonia into the Veins as a Mode of Treat-
ment of Snake-poisoning.” A great many lives, it is asserted,
have been saved by adopting the professor’s mode of treatment;
but there is a section of the profession violently opposed to it.
His papers on the large quantities of sulphurous acid, carbolic
acid, ammonia, &c., which may be injected into the living blood,
and also his letters to the Argus on the poisoned arrows of the
South Sea Islanders, have attracted considerable attention.
Ham, C. J., member of the City Council of Melbourne,
Latrobe ward. Born in Birmingham, England, 1837, and is the
youngest son of the late Rev. John Ham, first pastor of the
Collins-street Baptist Church. Arrived in Victoria in 1842, and
was educated at private schools in Melbourne and Sydney. He
entered into business in 1855, on the site of the premises now
occupied by the firm of which he is the senior member. Mr. Ham
first took part in municipal matters when the question of the
preservation of the public parks was the leading topic of the day;
and his return by a large majority strengthened the hands of the
Council in the prosecution of subsequent legal proceedings, which
resulted in the whole of the city reserves being vested in trustees.
He has also been connected with the successful establishment of
some of the largest building societies in Melbourne, and is one of
the directors of the Collingwood Gas Company. AVas elected one
of the members for Latrobe ward in 1870, and still continues to
occupy that position.
Hamilton, The Hon. Thomas F., M.L.C., is a younger
member of an Ayrshire county family, who came to the colony in
the early days, and entered into squatting pursuits, which he has
since followed with success. He was at one time in partnership
with his brother-in-law, Mr. T. C. Riddell, and for years resided on
his large estate near Gisborne, which has, however, of late years
been greatly reduced in size, various portions having been taken
up as selections. Mr. Hamilton is an enthusiastic patron of
•cricket, and although unable for years to take an active part in the


game, has held connection with it as an office-bearer of the first
and oldest club in Victoria. Mr. Hamilton was nominated for,
and elected to a seat in the Legislative Council for the South
province, in January, 1872.
Handheld. The Rev. Henry Hewett Paulet, fifth son of
Edward Handheld, Commander R.N. Was born at Hermitage
House, near Dublin, the residence of Colonel Handheld, on 12th
December, 1828. He was educated at Uppingham School, where
Dr. Butterton was head master, and also at the Collegiate Institu-
tion, Liverpool, when the Rev. W. J. Conybeare was principal, and
Dr. Howson, now Dean of Chester, was head master of the upper
school. Came to Australia with Bishop Perry, in the Stag, in
1848. Acted for a short time as assistant-master in the Melbourne
Diocesan Grammar School, under the then head-master, R. H.
Budd, Esq., subsequently Inspector-General of Schools. Was
ordained deacon by Bishop Perry, on St. Thomas Day, 1851, and
licensed to the curacy of St. Peter’s Church, under Yen. T. Hart
Davies, then incumbent. Was ordained priest on St, Thomas’
Day 1852, and appointed incumbent of St. Peter’s on the last
Sunday of 1854. Mr. Handheld was appointed a canon of the
cathedral by Bishop Perry, in 1870. He has for many years been
a member of the council of the diocese, and has taken a share
more or less prominent in nearly all Church action, from the time
of the first sitting of the Church Assembly. He was chosen to
be one of the representatives of the Diocese of Melbourne, at the
General Synod of the Australasian Church. He was also chosen
to be one of the Board of Electors to appoint a Bishop, when the
see was vacated by Bishop Perry. Bishop Moorhouse appointed
Mr. Handheld to the office of Rural Dean of the city of
Melbourne.
Hamm, Patrick, of Melbourne, is fifth son of Patrick Hanna,
farmer, of Killmegan, county Dow, Ireland. Born 24th June,
1819, at Killmegan, and educated at the local school and at
Waterash. Left Ireland in 1835, to learn locomotive engineering
under George Stevenson and Son, Newcastle-on-Tyne, where he
remained until 1838, when the Chartist riots broke out. In
August, same year, was indented to Charles Wood, Dumbarton,
to learn the art of ship-building, and remained until Mr. Wood
retired from business. In 1842, after building the Caledonia steam-
ship, one of the first of the great Cunard line, to run between
Liverpool, Halifax, and New York; also the Tay steamship, for
the Southampton and West India mail line, Mr. Hanna was
transferred to Mr. John Wood, of Port Glasgow, who was then
building the Ackba steam frigate for the Admiralty. At the end
of 1843 he also retired from business, and Mr. Hanna then joined


Hood, Rowan, and Co., of Kelminhaugh, Glasgow, ship-builders,
and remained with them till 1846, and then joined another
engineering firm till 1848, when he was made superintendent
of buildings and repairs to the steam fleet of the Dublin, Glasgow,
and Cork Steamship Company. He sailed in the ship Abdallah r
for Victoria, 7th April, 1853, in company with the Hon. James
Service, G. G. Allan, Ebenezer Syme, John Nimmo, M.P. for
Emerald Hill, James Leggatt, and several others who have made
their mark in the colony. Soon after his arrival fitted up the
Lio?iess steamer. In August, 1853, started the City Ferry, at
the foot of King-street, and made a plank road from the ferry to
Clarendon-street, Emerald Hill. Purchased the brig Mary Taylor y
of Glasgow, and sent her to Valparaiso for a cargo of flour on his-
own account, which was delivered in Melbourne 1856 at a nett
profit of per ton. In 1859 and iB6O had the lease of all
the toll-gates on the Sydney-road. Mr. Hanna’s tender for
erecting a bridge over the Goulburn at Seymour was accepted in
September, 1862, and in May, 1863, the bridge was open for
traffic. On the defeat of the O’Shanassy Ministry was asked to
oppose the late Hon. Matthew Hervey, the Commissioner of Public
Works, but declined. In July, 1863, the Hon. James Stewart died..
Mr. Hanna contested the Eastern Province with the late Hon.
James Denham Pinnock, and was defeated by one vote. Was-
asked to oppose the then Speaker, Sir Francis Murphy, in 1864,.
but declined. In 1866 stood for the Murray Boroughs, and was
opposed by the Hon. Graham Berry, whom he defeated by a
large majority. In 1868 was opposed by Mr. George Mott,
mayor of Albury, and was returned by a still larger majority..
In 1871 was returned without opposition, and also in 1874. In
1876 the new Electoral Act divided the Murray Boroughs into
four electoral districts—the Ovens, Moira, Dalhousie, and Anglesey..
Mr. Hanna stood for Moira at the general election in May, 1877,
there being eight candidates, and he lost his seat in the House by
four votes.
Marker, The Hon. George, was born at Pateley
Midderdale, Yorkshire, in the year 1816, and went to school
there. When about thirteen years of age he was apprenticed to
a chemist at Harrogate, On the termination of his apprentice-
ship he was for some time dispensing assistant to a surgeon
in Leeds. After that began business as a chemist at Prescot,,
near Liverpool, and was treasurer of the local Anti-Corn Law
League. He married early in 1845, and left England for Victoria at
the end of that year. Arrived in February, 1846, and bought the
property on the Yarranow owned by the family of the late Dr. Mac-
Donald and the Hon. Henry Miller. He farmed on his property until
the year 1850, when he entered into partnership in Melbourne


with W. L. Lees, as grain and produce merchants. After being
in business for a few months gold was discovered, the partnership
was dissolved, and his brother, Thomas Marker, entered the firm,
which was carried on under the style of George and Thomas
Marker until the year 1856, when Mr. George Marker retired from
the business. In the same year he was elected member of the
Legislative Assembly for the electoral district of Collingwood.
Afterwards became Treasurer in the second O’Shanassy Ministry ;
but was defeated for Collingwood at the general election which
took place while that Ministry was in office. He was, however,
elected for the electoral district of Maldon. When that Par-
liament met the Ministry was defeated; shortly after he re-
signed his seat for Maldon, and paid the mother-country a
visit. Returned after an absence of two years, and was
elected for Collingwood on two or three occasions. Was also
twice defeated as a candidate for that constituency; but on each
occasion by a very small majority. Whilst in Parliament he was a
member of the Royal Commission appointed to inquire into the
working of the common school system in Victoria. Was also
chairman of the Commission appointed to inquire into the charit-
able institutions of Victoria; likewise a member of the Com-
mission appointed to inquire into the conflicting claims to work
under the public reserves, made by some of the Ballarat gold-mining
companies. He retired from political life at the general election
of 1874, and left town for a residence in the neighbourhood of
Healesville. He was for many years treasurer and chairman
of the committee of the Melbourne Benevolent Asylum, and
a member of the Melbourne Hospital committee. Mr, Marker,
in conjunction with the late Dr. Farrage, the Rev. J. Mirams, and
others, took an active part in collecting a sum of money which
formed the nucleus of the funds for the establishment of the
Victorian Asylum and School for the Blind. He was chairman
and president of the above-mentioned institution until he retired
from the toil of city life to take his rest in the country. He has
been a member of the National Board of Education; also a
member of the Board of Education under the Common Schools
Act, which latter position he held until the introduction of the
present Education Act. The subject of this brief notice retired
from public life some few years ago, and is now enjoying a period
of well-earned leisure at his country-house, Yarra Grange, Lilly-
dale.
Harriniail, Benjamin Cosway, born at Tiverton, Devon,
17th November, 1830. Was educated at the two public schools
for which Tiverton has been so long famous, viz., Chilcott’s
and Blundell’s grammar schools. Arrived in Melbourne in 1854,
and joined the public service, in which he has continued to the


present time, being now secretary to the Law Department He
took a prominent part (and was a prizeman) in the classes that
were formed more than twenty years since at the Mechanics’
Institute, and which tended materially to liberalise our University,
where he continued his studies, and took honours in law. He has
at various times held office in many of the public societies
of Victoria, and was for some years the Provincial Grand Secretary
of the P.G. Lodge, S.C.
Harwood, Henry Richard, comedian. Born in London,
19th October, 1830, and was brought up to his father’s business,
that of builder and contractor. He served his apprenticeship in
the firm of Winsland and Holland, of Bloomsbury, and rose to be
clerk of works in their employ. Left England, March 1852, and
arrived in Melbourne in the following June. After arrival in
Australia, he for three years followed his calling, but being imbued
with a strong passion for the stage, he, while on a visit to Sydney,
in 1855, made his first appearance at the Victoria Theatre, then
under the management of Mr. A. Torning, during Mr. G. V.
Brooke’s first engagement. His opening part was Flavius Corunna,
in Payne’s play, “Brutus, or, the Fall of Tarquin.” After playing
a round of “responsible utility” parts, Harwood, at the request of
of Messrs. H. T, Craven and Lambert, undertook the duties of
prompter, in which capacity he gained a practical knowledge of the
duties of stage-manager. After nine months of this experience, he
went to Auckland, New Zealand, for “juvenile business,” thence
to Tasmania, and shortly afterwards returned to Victoria, where at
the Victoria Theatre, Ballarat (Ballarat at that time supported
three theatres), he made himself favourably known as a player of
“eccentric comedy” parts, such as Blueskin, in “Jack Sheppard,”
&c., &c. From Ballarat he travelled to Geelong, and there he
went into the equestrian line, becoming leading man for Mr. G.
B. W. Lewis. He played Mazeppa without a double, Dick
Turpin, Timour the Tartar, and the like. During the circus season
at Geelong, Mr. G. V, Brooke happened to be playing a round of
characters in the town, and the attraction of the arena giving way
before the more powerful allurements of the legitimate stage,
Harwood shook the sawdust from off his feet, and stepped on to
the boards as Leonato, to Mr. Brooke’s Benedick, in “Much Ado
About Nothing.” So satisfied was Mr. Brooke with Harwood’s
acting that he offered him a Melbourne engagement, which in 1855
resulted in a first appearance at the old Theatre Royal as “the
ancient Pistol,” in “The Merry Wives of Windsor.” Since his
first appearance in the Victorian metropolis, Mr, Harwood has
played, with almost unvarying success, leading characters in every
line of theatrical business. His Macduff and Richmond
are great impersonations; his eccentricities as Mo Davis, in


Boucicault’s u Flying Scud” have made the ejaculation “Jumpin
Moses” a byeword throughout Australasia, and his acting as Cas-
sandra, in Akhurst’s burlesque “The Siege of Troy,” was quite
Robsonian. Mr. Harwood is, moreover, no mean exponent of
high comedy, his Sir Oliver Surface, in “The School for Scandal,’"
being a very polished bit of acting. His Brabantio, in “Othello,
is full of dignity, and his wonderful power to excite horror was
shown when, in 1866, he played at the old Theatre Royal, under
the Barry Sullivan management, Mike Feeny, in “Arrah na
Pogue.” At his entrance on the stage, he was received with
cheers 5 was hooted for his villainy whilst on it \ and was called to
receive the applause of a delighted audience, every time the act-
drop fell. In 1867, in combination with Mr. Lambert, Mr. Vincent,
Mr. Bellair, Mr. Stewart, and Mr. Hennings, he became manager of
the Theatre Royal, Melbourne, which has aptly been named the
“Drury Lane of Australia.” He has, as business manager, been
actively engaged ever since, and has twice visited England to
engage actors and “stars.” His engagement of English stock-
actors has immensely benefited the dramatic profession, inasmuch
as it has taught English artists that Australian audiences will not
suffer mediocrity, and induced Australian actors to respect them-
selves and stand on their mettle. Mr. Harwood is highly respected
by all who come in contact with him, as a man who, under all cir-
cumstances, keeps his word to the letter. He retired from the
management of the Theatre Royal in November, 1877.
Hayter, Henry Heylyn, Government Statist, eldest son of
the late Henry Hayter, was born at his father’s country residence,
Edenvale, Wiltshire, England, in October, 1821. He was edu-
cated at a private school and at the Charterhouse, where he
boarded in the house of the head-master, Dr. Saunders, now
Dean of Peterborough, and was a contemporary of Sir G. F. Bowen,
the present Governor of Victoria, and of Sir Charles Ducane,
the late Governor of Tasmania. Mr. Hayter came to this colony
in December, 1852, and, after embarking in various pursuits,
entered the Government service in the department of the Registrar-
General, where he was for many years at the head of the statistic
branch. When a Royal Commission was appointed, in 1870, to
inquire into the working of the public service, Mr. Hayter was
chosen as its secretary. The commission sat for upwards of
three years, and brought up an exhaustive report, in which the
commissioners expressed their high sense of the value of Mr.
Hayter’s services. Mr. Hayter’s labours on the commission did
not prevent him from attending to his ordinary official duties,
which were much increased by the census of 1871, the whole
of the details of which, both as regards the collection of the
returns and their subsequent compilation, were devised and


planned by him, and carried out under his control and manage-
ment. These labours, which at the time involved the sacrifice
of almost the whole of his private leisure, together with the
loss of children, affected Mr. Hayter’s health, and in 1872 he
was granted leave of absence for a short period, which he spent
in New Zealand, where during his stay, at the request of Mr.
(now Sir) Julius Vogel, he investigated the working of the
Registrar-General’s department of that colony, and made sug-
gestions for its improvement, and for the better taking and
compilation of the census, the whole of which were adopted.
In May, 1874, the Registrar-General of Victoria having been
transferred to the post of Secretary for Lands, the Government
determined to erect the statistic branch into a separate depart-
ment, and to appoint Mr. Hayter as its head, under the title of
Government Statist. Soon after his assumption of that office,
Mr. Hayter originated the work he is best known by—the
“Victorian Year-book.” This work, which is published officially,
is, as its name indicates, an annual publication, and has now
been published for four consecutive years. It may be fairly said
that as a book of statistical reference, giving a full account of
the events of each year, so far as they can be expressed in
figures, it is a work of a higher order than is possessed by any
other colony or country. Much of it necessarily consists of
tabular matter; but this is interspersed throughout with para-
graphs affording copious explanations and comments. The
highest possible testimony has frequently been borne to its
exhaustiveness, truthfulness, and impartiality, - as well as to its
general value and utility, by Parliament and by the press, not
only of Victoria, but of the other Australian colonies, Europe,
and America. Mr. Hayter is also the author of “Notes on the
Colony of Victoria—Historical, Geographical, Meteorological,
and Statistical,” portion of which has been reprinted for use
in the Victorian State schools; of “ Notes of a Tour of New
Zealand,” and of a great number of statistical reports and other
official documents. He represented this colony at a statistical
conference of the Australasian colonies, held in Tasmania during
the early part of 1875; is an honorary member of the Statistical
Society of London, and of the Royal Society of Tasmania. He
is nephew to Sir G. W. Hayter, Bart., who was for many years
secretary to the Treasury, and whip of the Whig party in the
British House of Commons, and whose son, Capt. A. D, Hayter,
now sits in the Imperial Parliament as member for Bath.
Healy, Thomas Eldridge, born in Melbourne, 1848; was
educated at Douai. At the general election of 1871 un-
successfully contested the representation of West Bourke in the
Catholic interest, —the education question being the test point at


the time. His pronounced free-trade opinions materially con-
tributed towards his defeat. In 1874 issued an address to the
electors of Kilmore, but withdrew in favour of Sir John
O’Shanassy. In 1875 acted as honorary secretary to the com-
mittee of management of the O’Connell centenary celebration.
He has always taken an active part in public matters of social and
political importance to the Catholic body. In 1877 established
the firm of P. B. Curtain and Co., woolbrokers, Melbourne; and
was in the same year appointed a magistrate for the Central
Bailiwick, in the colony of Victoria.
Hearn. William Edward, A.M., LL.D., University of Mel-
bourne, was born at Belturbet, in the county of Cavan, Ireland,
on the 21st of April, 1826; son of the Rev. W. E. Hearn, M.A.,
vicar of Killague, and afterwards of Kildrumferton, in the county
of Cavan, Ireland. He was educated at the Royal School of
Enniskillen, under the Rev. Dr. Graham, and subsequently at
Trinity College, Dublin. Studied law under the Right Honour-
able Mountiford Longfield, afterwards Judge of the Encumbered
Estates Court, and then professor of Feudal and English Law in
the University of Dublin, and member of the Irish bar. In
1849, at the opening of the Queen’s Colleges, Dr. Hearn was
selected by the then Lord-Lieutenant as professor of Greek in
the Queen’s College of Galway, and he afterwards held the office
of examiner to the Queen’s University of Ireland. In 1854 was
selected by a committee, of which the late Sir John Herschel was
chairman, as professor of Modern History, Modern Literature,
Logic, and Political Economy in the University of Melbourne.
Soon after this appointment a redistribution of subjects was
made, and Dr. Hearn become professor of History and Political
Economy. In 1873, when the Faculty of Law was established in
the University, he was asked to become dean of that faculty, and
did so after resigning his professorship, and has since taught the
following subjects—Jurisprudence, Roman Law, Constitutional
Law, and International Law. He is the author of t£ Plutology, a
Text-book on Political Economy,” which has become one of the
text-books of that science. He has made several attempts to
obtain a seat in the Assembly, but so far unsuccessfully. In
politics Dr. Hearn is a free-trader.
Henty, Edward, the pioneer settler of Victoria, was born at
West Tarring, Sussex, in 1810. The foundation of the Swan
River settlement in Western Australia, in the year 1829, turned
the attention of many besides Mr, Thomas Henty to these
colonies. Hundreds of thousands of acres had been granted
to one and another applicant. From the Lieutenant-Governor,
with his 100,000 acres, to the ship’s cook of the King’s surveying


ship, with his fifty, the Crown lands of the colony were lavished
on all who would go to the new settlement, where, separated by
the whole breadth of a continent from the convicts of the eastern
seaboard, a new Arcadia was to be planted. Thomas Henty had
several sons of the right stuff to make colonists, and determined
to send them to the new land. Their names were James, John,
Francis, Edward, and Stephen. Mr. Henty chartered a vessel,
and put on board labourers and their families, twelve months’
supply of provisions, and some valuable stock, in the shape of
thoroughbred blood horses, pure merino sheep, cattle, and
appliances for establishing an agricultural and pastoral settle-
ment. The three sons—James, John, and Stephen—duly arrived
at Perth, Avhere the elder purchased land, for the purpose of
locating the families, stock, &c., in his charge, until he could
obtain suitable grants from the Government. Mr. Henty was
about to follow with the rest of his family, when in 1831 he
received advices from his son James that they saw no prospect
of doing good in West Australia, and had determined to proceed
to Launceston, in Tasmania. This information entirely altered
the plans of the father, who, accordingly, instead of going with his
family to Swan River, followed them to Van Diemen's Land, in a
vessel carrying out immigrants, valuable stock, &c. They arrived
in the latter part of 1831, and settled down, A twelvemonth,
however, sufficed to dishearten Mr. Edward Henty of his prospects
in the island. He determined to cross Bass’ Strait, and seek
for suitable land on the southern shores of the continent. He
left Launceston in the barque Caernarvon , in 1832, and landed
at Memory Cove, in Spencer’s Gulf, and afterwards at Port
Lincoln—places discovered by Flinders. He remained here,
looking about for a location, until he was called for, as arranged,
by the brigantine Thistle , on her way from Swan River to
Tasmania. On the passage back he anchored in Portland Bay,
which place so took his fancy that he returned in the Elizabeth
from Launceston, and a more extended examination of the
country determined him to form a settlement there. Before
doing so he and his father again visited Portland in the Thistle ,
and on their way to Swan River, to settle about the land Mr.
Thomas Henty held there, they also called in at Kangaroo
Island, Spencer’s Gulf, &c. In October, 1834, having completed
his arrangements, Edward Henty sailed in the Thistle , Captain
Liddle, and conveyed to Portland labourers, cattle, farming
implements, fruit-trees, vines, seeds, Sec., and landed at eight
a.m. on the 19th November, 1834. He at once set about
planting, and raised a good crop of vegetables. In the first
two years of the settlement the Thistle was regularly employed
bringing over sheep, cattle, horses, and provisions, which clearly
proves that all residents in and about Launceston, including


Batman and Fawkner, were perfectly aware of the settlement
being formed in what is now known as Victoria, It was com-
monly regarded as a dangerous undertaking, and caused no
little excitement. The very fruit-trees planted by Edward Henty
at Portland were purchased from Fawkner, who at that time
kept a nursery garden on Windmill Hill, Launceston. A month
after the first arrival Edward Henty landed the first pure merino
sheep, and at the same time his brother Francis paid him a visit,
and remained a month. Shortly after the brothers joined their
fortunes, and the success which attended their gradual settlement
of the beautiful Wannon country, and the high estimation with
which the family have always been regarded in the colony,
belongs to history. Edward Henty was not twenty-five years
of age when he put together the first plough that ever broke
Victorian soil, and welded with his own hands the chains by
which it was drawn. His roof-tree was more than 500 miles
from the nearest house, and he was often put to straits in deal-
ing with the wild cannibal blacks surrounding him; but on no
occasion did he ever have need to fire on them. Two years
afterwards Stephen Henty gave up Swan River, and joined his
brother at Portland Bay. Mr. Henty for many years represented
tire county of Normanby in the Legislative Assembly.
Henty, Henry, J.P., one of the firm of James Henty and Co.,
Melbourne, eldest son of the Hon. James Henty, was born at
Launceston, Tasmania, 9th May, 1833, Visited Victoria with his
father, November, 1837; went to England in 1848, and attended
King’s College, London; returned to Victoria in 1851, Was
admitted a partner in the firm of James Henty and Co. in 1854.
Married 1859 Marion Ann, eldest daughter of W. G. M‘Kellar,
Esq., late of Highton, Geelong. Was for a short time in the
Legislative Assembly, having been returned for Grenville in 1865.
Did not again offer himself at the general election in 1867,
and has since made no attempt to enter into politics. On the
death of Sir James Palmer was appointed Commissioner of
Education, and on the death of Dr. Corrigan was elected chairman
of the board; this office he retained till the coming into operation
of the present Education Act. On the resignation of his father,
was appointed Commissioner of Savings Banks. Has been for
many years a director of the Victoria Sugar Company. Takes
a warm and active interest in the affairs of the Church of England,
belonging to what is called the Evangelical party. Has long occu-
pied a seat in the Council of the Diocese of Melbourne, holds many
important trusts, and is a member of the Cathedral Chapter. In
1875, was placed by the Church Assembly on a board consisting
of six clergymen and six laymen, to elect a successor to the See of
Melbourne in the room of Dr. Perry, which board, it will be


remembered, unanimously agreed to offer the appointment to that
distinguished scholar, the present Bishop, Dr. Moorhouse.
Hepburn, Benjamin, of the firm of Dal. Campbell, Hepburn
and Co., stock and station agents, Ballarat and Melbourne, fourth
son of Captain Thomas Hepburn, R.N., who served through
a. portion of the Peninsular campaign, and afterwards farmed
his own estate in Scotland, was born at Whitekirk, Haddington,
East Lothian, in 1827. He left school to work on his father’s
farm, and acquired a good knowledge of agriculture; afterwards
was occupied at a flour-mill, where he gained a practical insight
of the business and mill work. When twenty-one he came to
Australia, where his eldest brother, Captain Hepburn, owned the
Smeaton sheep station. He first reached Adelaide by the
ship Senator , and came on to Melbourne in 1848. Soon after, in
company with Mr. E. T. Parker, Black Protector, proceeded to
•Smeaton. At this time bush tracks were the only roads, and
in winter they were almost impassable except at some peril to
horse and man, and settlers in many parts were often cut off from
Melbourne and Geelong, then the only depots. The winter
of 1848 was well advanced, and the country so soft, that to
travel off the beaten track was almost impossible. The track
round Mount Macedon, then capped with snow, and past Mount
Franklin, to the Blacks’ Mission Station, was of the very roughest
description. Arrived at his brother’s, he soon got initiated in the
mysteries of bushcraft, and laid the foundation of that knowledge
of sheep and live stock which led to his success. His knowledge
of milling and agriculture was most useful, a large flour-mill having
been erected on Birch’s Creek under his superintendence. The
gold discoveries disturbed the quiet of pastoral pursuits, and at
first threatened ruin from want of working hands. In 1850 Mr.
Hepburn was driving from Smeaton to Melbourne, to bring back
two of his nephews to spend Christmas at the station, when about
two miles from Pyke’s station his attention was attracted by
an eagle hovering over apparently some game. Mr. Hepburn
determined to ascertain what attracted the bird, and to his
astonishment found a little girl lying either dead or asleep
in the grass. On touching the child she started up and tried to
run away. She was weak and emaciated from hunger and
exposure. Mr. Hepburn conveyed the child to the nearest station,
but the greatest difficulty was experienced in getting a little bread
and milk, and the station people would not hear of the child
being left till its parents could be found. Mr. Hepburn took the
child with him till he met a shepherd, who thought the child was
identical with one named Perry, who had been lost four or
five days, living a few miles away, and had been searched for in
vain. The child on being asked said its name was Perry; and


the shepherd took charge of it. Mr. Hepburn never heard more
of the child. On the discovery of gold, he, with Mr. Charles
Beal, went to Eurobank to release a mob of cattle impounded by
Mr. D. Cameron, and saw the pioneer diggers smashing up-
the surface quartz near the spot that has since produced a million
and a-half of gold in the hands of the Port Phillip Company, of
Clunes. On the return journey a number of the cattle were
irretrievably bogged, and had to be abandoned, dhe majority of
hands having left for the diggings, the sheep, that had been in
flocks of two or three thousand, had to be boxed up into flocks of
eight and ten thousand, and those had to be guarded day
and night against wild dogs and equally dangerous human beings.
Horse and cattle stealing was rife, not in ones and twos only, but
at times in mobs and herds, which were hidden in the ranges to
get the reward usually offered, or driven off altogether. During
the excitement of the early gold-digging days, Mr. Hepburn
encountered the full brunt of their difficulties and
Lawless desperadoes, like Captain Melville and his associate
Roberts, startled the land with their crimes, driving off mobs
of cattle and horses, “ sticking up ” travellers and homesteads,
with comparative impunity. On one occasion Mr. Hepburn,
accompanied by a stockman, armed to the teeth, bearded those
noted bushrangers in their stronghold, in the Jim Crow ranges.
Following the track of a mob of horses which they believed had
been driven off by them, and coming upon about thirty or forty
rounded up in a deep gorge, many secured with hobbles,
without waiting to make inquiries, Mr. Hepburn cut the straps and
ropes, and drove the animals back to the home station, the bush-
rangers not caring to interfere. On another occasion he was
riding to the sheepwash at about four a.m., when he encountered
Melville and his mate driving off a mob of horses. Noting their
suspicious looks he guessed who they were, and demanded
what right they had to drive the horses which he knew belonged
to the station. The answer was anything but polite, but did not
deter the young settler from his determination, at all hazards, to
prevent them taking the horses. Whilst hot words were being
exchanged he suddenly wheeled his horse, and heading the mob,
with a shout sent them at full gallop towards the station. Taken
aback with this bold and prompt action, the bushrangers did
nothing but pour out a volley of oaths, and threatened that they
would mark him some day. That same evening they stuck up
Coghill’s Glendaruel station, “bailing up” the proprietor and
family, as well as the men in the huts. After four years of station
life, Mr. Hepburn became infected with the gold fever, and made
up a party for Fryers Creek. They bottomed on washdirt,
yielding from three ounces to four ounces to the load. This
proved too much for the equilibrium of the majority, who


commenced drinking, which led to neglect and contention.
Their horse disappeared, but was recovered after a long hunt by
Mr. Hepburn, to whom it belonged, it having made its way back
to the station. Returning to Fryers Creek, he made short work
of the party on finding them still on the spree, packing up all the
property which belonged to him, and returning to Smeaton. The
next venture was travelling live stock for sale throughout the
various diggings, and purchasing gold with the proceeds. He
often travelled with or but was never robbed.
After the first excitement of the diggings wore away, Mr.
Hepburn separated from his brother, and leasing the Glendonald
station, near Creswick, from him, started on his own account.
He afterwards erected abattoirs at Creswick, supplying the
butchers throughout the district with beef and mutton. Then
purchased Forest Hill Farm, and after working it for two years,
leased it, having bought the Turf Hotel, with ten acres of
land, near Ballarat; there he erected the first stock sale-yards in the
district, and commenced as stock salesman and commission
agent with a partner, under the style of Hepburn and Van
Hemert, A dissolution took place in two years, Mr. Hepburn
retiring, but eventually repurchasing the business and taking
a second partner; and some years after, Mr. Rowe was added to
the firm, now widely known as Hepburn, Leonard and Rowe.
The business of the firm extends throughout Victoria and also
the sister colonies; and Mr. Hepburn's energetic journeyings
through a series of years are full of interesting incidents. In
1867 he journeyed to Queensland to inspect St. Ann’s cattle
station on the Suttor river, nearly 300 miles from Bowen, Port
Denison, which he and others intended purchasing if the pro-
perty was as good as represented. He found the heat fearfully
oppressive at Rockhampton, and on reaching Bowen by water,
purchased pack and saddle horses as relays during the journey,
and on the road inspected the Wyatt copper and gold mines,
where he found the majority of the miners prostrated with fever,
ague and sand blight. Reaching St. Ann’s he found it com-
pletely disorganised, and in a most unsatisfactory state, and
nothing like represented. Two or three weeks were spent
travelling over the immense area, camping out at nights, to form
an estimate of its capabilities, and of the number of cattle.
Determined to have nothing to do with it, and on the return route,
coming down the Fitzroy river, the steamer stuck on a sandbank,
Mr. Hepburn’s nerve and genial manner has carried him through
many scenes that to other men would have proved serious diffi-
culties. During the serious disturbances over the Clunes mine in
1853, he, in company with another gentleman, was passing through
Creswick, a large crowd was in the principal thoroughfare, amongst
whom was a noted political agitator connected with the local press.


They were hooted as belonging to and supporters of the landed
proprietor class, the Clunes mine having become private property
through the mistake of the Government, and were roundly
hooted, and strong personalities indulged in as they rode through
the town. Mr. Hepburn’s Celtic blood got roused; jumping off
his horse, he collared the chief agitator, and threatened to throw
him into the gutter for insulting him and his friend without cause.
The moment was somewhat critical, but Mr. Hepburn’s nerve and
presence of mind stood him in good stead. Briefly addressing the
excited crowd, some of whom threatened and some cheered, he
finished off by inviting them all, some 200 or more, to drink at his
expense. This had them, and he and his friend proceeded
on their way without molestation.
Herreusclimiclt, Henry, metallurgist and engineer, _ son of
H. Herrenschmidt, proprietor of an engineering establishment,
was born in Alsace, 1847. Studied in the Professional School
of the Arts et Metiers. In 1864 he joined his father, and in the
following year applied himself to the study of metallurgy and
assay. After three years’ hard labour he discovered a particular
■composition, by which all kinds of common steel could be made
stronger than steel of the best quality till then known. He
then visited the largest establishments in France and Germany.
Returning to his native place, he soon after determined to go to
India, but on board the mail steamer was advised by Sir
J. Fergusson to go to New Zealand. He ultimately stayed in
Sydney, married the widow of Mons. E. Ponzoby, late president
of the Tribunal of New Caledonia, and came to Melbourne.
Here he took employment in an engineering shop and gasworks.
Soon after he introduced his steel composition; had a trial made
in public with satisfactory results, and it is now used by a number
of working establishments in Melbourne. He erected works for
the Costerfield Company at a cost of which resulted
in handsome dividends to the shareholders. He then invented a
new method of extracting antimony, and also the desulphurising
cylinder, a model of which is exhibited in the Melbourne Museum.
Experiments were made to extract lead, tin, copper, and auriferous
pyrites. The legal manager of the Costerfield Company aided
him to erect experimental machinery at Yarraville, at a cost
of £ 10,000, to prove the mode of desulphurising all minerals.
He also made trials of the pyrites by the cylinder, and a new
process of after-treatment, which were so satisfactory that an
influential company was formed to enable’ him to erect works
at Yarraville to extract the gold from pyrites, and produce
sulphuric acid and all ley products. His attention being called to
the necessity for obtaining a sufficient amount of pyrites for the
works, it became necessary to improve the method of concen-


trating, which he claims to have done so successfully with a
simple apparatus that the sand is separated from the pyrites with
such little expense that it will enable the company to treat
all tailings containing a very small percentage of pyrites at a
profit.
Highett, The Hon. William, was born at Weymouth, county
Dorset, England, in 1807, and arrived in Tasmania in February,
1830. In 1832 a branch of the Bank of Van Diemen’s Land was
established at Launceston, to which he was appointed accountant,
and soon afterwards obtained the post of cashier to the Tamar
Bank, which he held until 1838. He was appointed first manager
of the Union Bank of Australia in Victoria, which commenced
business in Melbourne in October of that year. Obtaining leave of
absence in 1842 he visited Europe, and whilst in England resigned
his bank management. Returning to the colony in 1845, he
became one of its local directors, and so continued for several
years. In 1852 he took an active partin establishing the Bank of
Victoria, and was one of its first board of directors. The Vic-
toria Fire and Marine Insurance Company was inaugurated in
1849, an d Mr. Highett was one of its originators. He sat for some
time as a non-official nominee in the old Legislative Council. On the
introduction of responsible government under our present Consti-
tution, in 1856, he offered himself as a candidate for the representa-
tion of the Eastern Province in the Legislative Council, when
he was defeated. The Hon. William Kaye, one of the elected
members, having been unseated on petition, a fresh election took
place, and Mr. Highett was returned after a close contest with Dr.
Gemmell, On retiring by rotation in iB6O he was re-elected
without opposition, and after the lapse of another ten years, on his
second rotative retirement in 1870, the compliment of another
unopposed return was paid him.
Higillhotliam, The Hon. George, barrister-at-law, was born in
Dublin in the year 1827, and was educated first at the Royal
School, Dungannon, and subsequently at Trinity College, Dublin.
He then went to London, where he was a student at Lincoln’s Inn,
and became a reporter on the staff of the Morning Chronicle ,
having as one of his colleagues at the time (1849) the late Mr.
Butler Cole Aspinall—a gentleman whom he was destined, at a
later date, to meet at the Antipodes. In 1853 Mr. Higinbotham
was called to the bar, and in the following year he arrived in
Melbourne, where he contributed to the Herald , and practised at
his profession. In 1856 he succeeded to Mr. Edward Wilson as
editor of the Argus , and conducted that journal very successfully
during three years; he then severed his connection with it, and
returned to his practice at the bar, which soon began steadily to


improve. In 1861 he was returned to the Legislative Assembly,
for Brighton, and voted as an independent member. At the next
general election he was again nominated for the same place; but
as he refused to give any pledges, and declined to say whether he
would or would not support Mr. Heales, he found himself between
the fire of two enemies. The Government supported the candi-
dature of Mr. Burtt, and Mr. Brodribb was selected to do battle
for the Opposition, which was led by Mr. (now Sir John) O’Sha-
nassy. Mr. Brodribb was returned, but he resigned his seat about
nine months afterwards, being obliged to visit England, Mr.
Higinbotham again came forward for the vacant seat, and was
elected. Returning to the Assembly, he opposed the third
reading of the Land Act of 1862 and the Electoral Bill. On the
defeat of the O’Shanassy Administration, in June, 1863, Mr. Higin-
botham accepted the Attorney-Generalship under Mr. (now Sir
James) M‘Culloch, his colleagues being Messrs. Heales, Grant,
Michie, Sullivan, Francis, and Yerdon (now Sir George), with
Messrs. Hervey and Fellows (now Judge) in the Upper House.
Mr. Higinbotham soon became the most popular man in Victoria,
and was the idol of the great bulk of the people during the well-
remembered struggle between the Assembly and the Council, in
connection with the new tariff of 1865, the “tack,” the Darling
grant, and the deadlock. Mr. Higinbotham strenuously and per-
sistently opposed the action of the Upper House all through that
exciting time, and when the second M‘Culloch Administration was
formed (after the demise of the Sladen Government), he refused
to go back to the Law Offices so long as Victoria was to be
governed by instructions sent from Downing-street. However, he
consented to act as Vice-President of the Board of Land and
Works, without salary. At the general election in 1871 he was,
to the astonishment of the whole colony, defeated at Brighton by
Mr. Bent, who, though now a rather prominent member of the
Assembly, was then almost unknown. It was supposed that Mr.
Higinbotham was less alive to local interests than his consti-
tuents desired, and hence the change. Mr. Higinbotham then took
no part in politics until the next general election, when he was
returned for Brunswick; but he soon afterwards resigned his seat,
being unable to agree with the then Government, and being un-
willing to vote against it. His legal attainments are of a very high
order, and he is one of the very best speakers in Australia.
110 gall, James Francis, author and public-school teacher, is a
native of the South of Ireland, and was born in the year 1855.
His parents emigrated to Victoria when he was but two years
of age. He received his education in St. Mary’s School, Geelong;
was appointed a junior teacher in that school at the age of
fourteen; and advanced step by step until, at the early age of


twenty-two, he attained his present position, that of head-
master. Ihe school is now one of the largest in Geelong,
and has an average daily attendance of 400 pupils. Mr.
Hogan’s career as an author dates from 1873, in which year, under
the nom deplume of “Aquila,” he wrote an essay entitled “Tests
of Efficiency in Public Schools,” which attracted a considerable
amount of attention. The object of the essay was to show the
evils that resulted from the system of inspection then in operation,
and to prove that the annual examination did not afford a true and
reliable test of the efficiency of a school. In the same year
(1873) he connected with the Advocate , the Roman
Catholic organ of Victoria, to which journal he has ever since been
a constant contributor. He is also an occasional contributor to
several provincial journals. On the occasion of the O’Connell
centenary, in August, 1875, Mr - Hogan delivered a panegyric on
the “Liberator of Ireland,” before a crowded audience, in the
Geelong Mechanics’ Institute. This was afterwards published in
the form of an essay, in speaking of which one critic observes
“that the masterly style in which it is written is most creditable to
the author,” Mr. Hogan has also written and published several
songs, the best-known of which are “An Australian Christmas
Glee,” “’Tis nice to do the Block,” and “My Heart is a Captive
to Thee.”
Hogan, Michael, of Newpark Farm, Tylden, Victoria, son of
Mr. John Hogan, of county Clare, Ireland. Born 24th Novem-
ber, 1825, at Caharina Farmhouse, Ireland; was brought up
to farming pursuits with his father until he was twenty-seven years old.
He then left Ireland for Liverpool, and started for Melbourne in
the ship Marco Polo , 13th March, 1853, arriving in June the
same year. Went to Bendigo, and after trying gold digging
for six months, returned to Melbourne. Bought horses and
drays, and was engaged in carrying seven years. Gave that up in
iB6O, and took a farm of 800 acres. Built and cleared and
fenced all round the farm upon which he now resides, and
carried on dairying and grazing, and put 300 acres into cultivation,
having cleared between 500 and 600 acres. Has been a member
of the Kyneton Shire Council for the last eight years, and a
member of the Kyneton Agricultural Society for the last twelve
3'ears.
Hopkins, Francis R. C, dramatic author, was born at Colaba,
near Bombay, East India, in 1849. He is the eldest son of
Captain Hopkins, late of H.M. Indian navy, and cousin to Col.
George Chesney, author of the famous “ Battle of Dorking,” and
was named after his uncle, General Chesney, the projector of the
“ Euphrates Valley Route.” Mr. Hopkins at an early age was


sent to England, and educated at the Southampton College.
When very young he employed his spare time at writing scraps,
poetry, and Christmas stories for some of the provincial papers,
and now and then contributed competitive essays to the Boys’
Own Magazine. For a long period he studied hard, with the
object of entering the Indian Civil Service; but his father having
station property in Australia, he was induced to give up the
idea, and came out to Victoria in 1865, when sixteen years of
age. From that time to the present he has been actively engaged
in pastoral pursuits. At one time he painted a good deal in
water colours, and exhibited some landscapes at one of the
Melbourne exhibitions. An engraving from one of his pen-and-
ink drawings—“ The Rocks of Martin Vaz”—appeared in the
Illustrated Melbourne Post. He has written several plays,
one of which has been produced in Melbourne, Sydney, and
Adelaide with marked success; the title is “All for Gold,” a
drama in four acts, founded on Eugene Sue’s famous novel, “ The
Wandering Jew.” Mr, Hopkins’ first play, “Good for Evil,” was
produced in New Zealand, and at the Theatre Royal, Melbourne,
but not in its complete form there. Amongst some of the literary
trifles attributed to him is a little book pamphlet published some
two years ago, entiled “ Don Juan at the Antipodes.”
James, John, M.P. and Chairman of Committees, was born in
the year 1828, in Liskeard, county of Cornwall, England, He
came to Victoria in 1852, and early in 1854 he settled at Ballarat,
where for several years he followed mining and business pursuits.
In 1867 he was elected a member of the Ballarat East Council, and
devoted considerable time to the affairs of that municipality. He
was then elected president of the Loyal Liberal Association, and
during the political convulsion j that followed upon the proposal to
indemnify Sir Charles Darling for loss of office by a public grant
took a leading part on the popular side of that question. A
vacancy occurring in the representation of Ballarat West, he
was proposed as a candidate, was successful, and sat for that
constituency about a year. At the general election of 1871
he became a candidate for Ballarat East, and was returned at the
head of the poll, an honour which has more than once fallen to
his lot. At each successive election he has been elected by an
increased number of votes on any former occasion. He has
always resided in the electorate which he represents. At the com-
mencement of the Parliamentary session of 1877 he was proposed
as Chairman of Committees, and was elected without opposition.
He is a prominent member of the Wesleyan Church, in which body
he is not without distinction as a successful lay preacher, and
has been one of the foremost in promoting the interests of
the temperance reformation throughout the colony.


.Tenner, Hon. Caleb Joshua, M.L.C., of Melbourne, merchant,
was born at Alfriston, Sussex, England, on the 9th of December,
1830. His ancestors were large farmers in the south of England.
He came to Victoria when barely twenty years old, as a passenger
in the ship Clifton , in February, 1850, and immediately embarked
in commercial pursuits, in which he has been largely engaged
ever since. He has always taken great interest in colonial
industries, and was the president of the first Reform League,
formed for the purpose of protecting such industries. He is a
director in a number of local companies, and was an active
commissioner in the first Industrial Exhibition. He has always
advocated the settlement of the people on the lands, and had'
charge of the present Land Act when it passed through the
Legislative Council. He has always been in favour of increasing
the population by immigration, and moved resolutions in the
Legislative Council in 1864, and again in 1874, calling on the
Government to give effect to the Immigration Act, which were
fully discussed and agreed to unanimously, but were not acted
upon by the Government. He represents the South-Western
Province in the Legislative Council, and is Chairman of Com-
mittees. He was first elected on 17th March, 1863, on the
retirement of Mr. G. Coppin. His opponent was Mr. C. J.
Griffiths, whom he defeated by 234 votes. He was re-elected
29th September, 1868, for ten years. Mr. Jenner represented
the Macpherson Government of 1869 and 1870 in the Council,
and also the Duffy Government on the retirement of Mr. VBeckett,
and has taken his full share of legislative duties on committees
and royal commissions. Mr. Jenner, though a protectionist, is
one of those who think that a common platform might be
formed, upon which moderate men on both sides might work
for the benefit of the country, without abandonment of principle
by either.
Johnson, George Raymond, architect, son of William
Johnson, contractor, Derby, was born at Edmonton, near London,
in 1840, and served his articles with Mr. George Hall, architect to
the Midland Railway Company. After about three years’ practice
in London, he came to Queensland in 1862, where he was
professionally engaged upon Government works, amongst others,
the lunatic asylum and gaol. In 1867 Mr. Johnson came to
Melbourne, and for the past ten years has been practising his
profession. Amongst the public institutions upon which Mr.
fohnson has been engaged are the Hotham town hall and public
buildings, for the design of which he was awarded the first prize
at the Melbourne and Philadelphia Exhibitions, and the Eastern
Arcade, in Bourke-street. He has also designed the Prince
of Wales Opera House and the remodelling of the Princess


Theatre, in this city; the Royal Princess Theatre, Sandhurst, and
the Theatre Royal, Adelaide. Mr, Johnson, prior to his departure
from London, was married to Emma Louisa, eldest daughter
of Captain James F. L. Wood, R.N., who, it will be remembered,
commanded H.M.S. Erebus on the Arctic expedition in search of
Sir John Franklin.
Kerferd, The Hon. George Briscoe, M.P., was born in Liver-
pool, in the year 1831, and he arrived in Victoria in 1852, Four
years later he was appointed a territorial magistrate. Having
settled down in Beechworth, he was soon elected a councillor for
that borough, and occupied the position of mayor no less than
four times. He carried on a very extensive business there, and
took an active part in the foundation of nearly every useful insti-
tution in his district. He entered the Legislative Assembly in
1864; and, combining law with politics, he was called to the bar
in 1867. In 1869 he was returned a member of Parliament for
the Ovens District, and he has found very little difficulty in holding
the seat ever since, having been allowed to walk over on five
several occasions. He first accepted office under the Sladen
Government as Minister of Railways and Mines, after having
refused to act as one of the law officers. Mr. Fellows also offered
him high legal distinction, but he again declined, and did not
become Solicitor-General until Mr. Francis took the reins of
Government. Shortly afterwards, when Mr. Stephen retired from
the political arena to assume a seat on the Supreme Court bench,
Mr, Kerferd became Attorney-General. A few months later, his
chief, Mr. Francis, determining to retire, a reconstruction of the
Cabinet became unavoidable. Mr. Kerferd was appointed Chief
Secretary on the 31st July, 1874. He held this office until, his
Treasurer’s budget being disapproved of by the Assembly, he was,
in August 1875, obliged to retire in favour of Mr. Graham
Berry—a dissolution of Parliament having been refused him by
Sir W. F. Stawell, the then Acting-Governor. In the following
October Mr. Berry’s financial proposals also failed in pleasing the
Assembly, and as he, too, was refused a dissolution by the same
Acting-Governor, Mr. Kerferd once more became Attorney-
General, this time under Sir James M‘Culloch as Premier and
Mr. J. A. Macpherson as Chief Secretary. He continued to act
in that capacity until the general election in May 1877, when his
party was defeated, and the Chief Secretaryship was resumed by
Mr. Graham Berry. In conjunction with Mr. Box, Mr. Kerferd
has published a digest of all the decisions in the Supreme Court
since its foundation in 1846, to 1871. It took them three years
to complete the volume, which is now regarded as a valuable
standard work by the profession.


Kirk, George, “Avoca,” South Yarra, near Melbourne, was
born in 1820, in the county of York, England. He is the eldest
son of a family of eight. His father was a farmer, and Mr. Kink
was educated at the local school, which he left when about seven-
teen, and then assisted on the farm; he left home for Australia
when still a youth of nineteen, and landed in Port Phillip in
the middle of December, 1839. His first engagement was
as overseer on a dairy farm on the Darebin Creek, at jQ 40 a year,
where he had but assigned servants under him. The men com-
plained of their rations and would not work, and upon his way to
town to complain to his employer, he nearly lost his life in crossing
the Merri Creek during the very heavy flood of Christmas, 1839.
He and his horse parted in the stream, but both got safely to the
other side, where he found some bullock teams camped, and being
wet through, stayed with them for the night. Leaving his
first employment, and after being a second time nearly drowned in
the Darebin Creek, he started on his own account about the
middle of 1840 as bush carpenter, splitter, and fencer, and saved
about which his employer borrowed at interest, but failing
soon after, principal and interest were lost. Getting fresh employ-
ment, he had to take a box of tools in lieu of wages. In
1845 left the bush, and took a situation as bookkeeper
for a butcher; his employer failing, he took the business and
became at that time, with perhaps, one exception, the largest
butcher in Melbourne. In 1850 left the butchering business
and joined Mr. W. Smith to carry on the Victoria Tannery, on the
Yarra, nearly opposite Cremorne Gardens. The flood of 1849 had
washed away and damaged most of the stock of hides and leather
from the tannery established there by Mr. George S. Brodie,
in connection with Mr. Burchett, and they gave up and sold
to Messrs. Smith and Kirk. In 1855 he retired from the
business, having been fairly successful, and became one of the
firm of Edward Row and Co., stock and station agents and cattle
salesmen. He remained in the firm until it became Row, Kirk
and Co., and ultimately George Kirk and Co., and he finally
retired from this business in 1866. At this time he held in
connection with Mr. Richard Goldsbrough a large interest in
squatting properties in New South Wales, and paid a visit
to England with his wife and family, and returned to the colony in
1868. Mr. Kirk was married in 1847, at St. James’, Melbourne,
to Elizabeth Wippell, only daughter of John and Sophia
Wippell, of Heidelberg, but originally from Devonshire, England.
He represented East Bourke from 1861 to 1864 in the Legislative
Assembly, the only Parliament, excepting the last, that ran out by
effluxion of time. Was persuaded to stand again, and was beaten
mainly in consequence of his secular views on the education
question, he having, from the first, supported Mr. Heales’ Act.
Since his return from England he has not gone into active
business, but he owns extensive squatting properties in Queens-
land, together with some town and suburban property, and
resides on his snug estate “Avoca” on the south bank of the
t


Yarra, where he has settled down with a decent competency, and
has no intention of again facing the chances of business or the
worry of politics.
LalOF, The Hon. Peter, M.P., was born in the year 1827,
at Tennikill, in Queen’s County, Ireland. He is a younger son
of Mr. Patrick Lalor, who represented the above county in the
House of Commons during several years. He entered Trinity
College, Dublin, and subsequently became a civil engineer.
Shortly after the discovery of gold in Australia he sailed for
Melbourne, arriving there in the year 1852, and after a brief
sojourn in the metropolis he left, accompanied by some of his
shipmates, for the Ovens, and thence to Ballarat in February,
1853. He met with ordinary good luck, and deemed himself
on the point of making a fortune out of claims which he and
his party had taken up on the Eureka Lead and Gravel Pits,
when the memorable outbreak of the miners of Ballarat took
place in December, 1854. It having been determined not
to take out any more licences to mine, the miners publicly
burned those official documents, at a meeting on Bakery Hill,
on the 29th November of that year. An attempt by the authorities
to search for unlicensed miners precipitated hostilities —shots
were fired, a prisoner rescued, the troopers and police driven
back to the camp, and the signal was passed for the miners to
assemble. That the miners had determined not to attack
the authorities, and that the men would have quietly dispersed,
and the movement have died out for the time being, no one
has any doubt who was in a position to know what took place
on the Saturday before the fight. The authorities were, how-
ever, of a different opinion, and, urged on by representations
made by persons outside the camp of the determined and
dangerous character of the organisation, and of the intentions
of the leaders, resolved to strike a blow without further delay. On
the Sunday morning, 3rd December, 1854, the attack was made
by a party of troops and police, commanded by Captain (now
Colonel) Thomas the few armed miners in the so-called
stockade making a vigorous resistance, and Mr. Lalor, who
had been chosen as leader on the Friday night, and was prac-
tically dictator, received a ball near the shoulder of the left
arm, and ultimately lost the limb. After his wound some of
his companions carried him away, and placed him in a place
of safety. Although large rewards were offered for his appre-
hension, and for the other officers and leaders of the miners,
in no instance was the Government successful in capturing
any of the principal men. Subsequent to the outbreak, repre-
sentation was given to the gold-fields under the old Constitution,
and Mr. Lalor was elected one of the representatives for Ballarat,
without opposition, in the Legislative Council —the Parliament
then consisting of only one chamber, which was partially nomi-
nated by the Governor. Shortly after taking his seat the
Government appointed him Inspector of Railways, a position


which he occupied until the passage of the Officials in Parliament
Act. At the next election he was returned for South Grant,
which he continuously represented until 1871, when he suffered
a defeat by about twenty votes, and was also unsuccessful in
contesting North Melbourne at same election. When first elected
for South Grant, in 1856, was appointed Chairman of Committees
by the Legislative Assembly, and it is generally admitted that
he evinced much firmness, decision of character, and an intimate
acquaintance with constitutional law whilst he filled that position,
which he did until 1868. In 1875 he was again returned by
his old constituents in South Grant, and in August of that year
he accepted office as Commissioner of Customs in Mr. Berry’s
first Administration. In the following October he went out with
his chief, whose financial proposals did not meet with the approval
of the Assembly, and Sir James M‘Culloch’s fourth Cabinet was
formed. After the general election, in May, 1877, Mr. Berry again
became Chief Secretary, bringing back with him Mr. Lalor, in his
former position, and nearly all the rest of his colleagues. Though
he was necessarily prevented by his position of Chairman of Com-
mittees from taking any active part in politics during many years,
Mr. Lalor was always understood to be a protectionist. He was
always more or less connected with mining, and when relieved
of the chairmanship he looked more closely after his auriferous
interests in the New North Climes and the Australasian mines.
He was chairman of the Climes Water Commission, for which
he received a large salary, and a director of the New North Clunes
Mining Company. Through him, in 1870 and 1871, the bill
was introduced into Parliament, and carried through, enabling
the works to be constructed to bring water into Clunes, and
enable the money to be borrowed. These works cost about
and are said to be the best executed works of their
kind in the colony. The funds were found by the New North
Clunes Company, and the works were of sufficient importance
to induce the Government to purchase them, and they are now
in the hands and under the control of the Clunes Borough
Council. Mr. Lalor had full control of and management of
the undertaking, and has, whilst conferring a great boon upon
his own company, at the same time benefited the whole town
and district.
Lailgton, Hon. Edward, accountant and average adjuster,
Melbourne. Born 2nd January, 1828, at Gravesend, Kent, where
his father was in business. Belongs to the family of Lincolnshire
Langtons, of which, in Dr, Johnson’s time, the great lexico-
grapher’s friend Bennet Langton was the representative. Came
to Victoria in 1852. First took part in public affairs by becoming
a member of the committee for procuring the separation of what


was then Fitzroy ward from the city of Melbourne, and after the
separation, in 1858, was one of the first councillors of the borough
of Fitzroy. Was the first to resist publicly the attempt to intro-
duce protection into Victoria. His first lecture on the subject was
delivered in Fitzroy in 1859. At the general election in 1859
Mr. Langton stood for Collingwood, in the free-trade interest, but
was defeated. In 1861, at the next general election, he again stood
for the same constituency, and was again defeated, but by a very
narrow majority. A few days after this second defeat he was
nominated for East Melbourne, but was beaten by Mr. Kyte. In
1864 he contested the East Bourke Boroughs, but was again un-
successful. In 1865, on the dissolution consequent on the dispute
between the two Houses over the Tariff and Appropriation Bill,
Mr. Langton stood for Dundas, and was once more defeated; but
in the following month, January 1866, was elected for East Mel-
bourne, defeating his old antagonist, Mr. Kyte. Mr. Langton sat
for that constituency for one Parliament, but at the general election
in 1868, not wishing to divide the free-trade interest, he left East,
and contested West Melbourne, for which constituency he was
elected. He represented West Melbourne from 1868 until 1877,
when at the general election he was defeated. Mr. Langton has
been twice in office; in 1868 he was Treasurer of the short-lived
Administration of Mr. (now Sir Charles) Sladen; and in 1872 he
filled the same office in the Francis Government, retiring from it
when Mr. Francis resigned, and declining to be a member of the
succeeding Government under Mr. Kerferd. In 1874 Mr. Langton
was elected an honorary member of the Cobden Club. He was
for some time connected with the press, having been on the literary
staff of the Argus, and was proprietor and editor of a weekly
journal, the Spectatoi', which was originated in 1865 as the organ
of the free-trade party in Melbourne. He was the first secretary
of the Free-trade League of Victoria, a position which he resigned
on being elected to Parliament in 1866. By profession Mr.
Langton is an accountant and average-adjuster, and is director of
several public companies. He is also a trustee and treasurer of
the Public Library and Museums.
Lavater, George Theodore Adams, accountant, Railway De-
partment, Melbourne, son of Louis Isidore Lavater, of Zurich,
and of Maria Adams, daughter of an Independent clergyman
of Hampshire, England, was born at Lausanne, canton de Vaud,
Switzerland, 4th May, 1831. Educated in Jersey and England.
After leaving school, in 1845, chose a seafaring life, passed
his examination, and obtained certificate from Board of Trade in
June, 1857, at the age of twenty. His mother died a few
days after his birth, and his father, five years after marrying
the widow of Commander John El win of the Royal Navy,


also died, and Lavater was taken to England by his stepmother.
In 1851 he came to Victoria as second officer of the Hooghly.
He left his ship in April, 1852, in consequence of the gold
discoveries which then attracted every one. Went first to Iron-
bark and Commissioners’ Gullies, Bendigo; was at the great
rush at Eaglehawk, and on a visit to Melbourne was stuck-up
in broad daylight in Elizabeth-street and robbed of all he pos-
sessed, having just come out of the Union Bank. He soon
after took charge of a cutter trading between Geelong, Indented
Heads, and Melbourne. In September same year went to Bal-
larat, when the Eureka Lead was in full swing, worked there with
varying success till 1855. Was on the Eureka during the armed
resistance to the collection of the licence fee by armed police and
troopers, was one of those who burnt his licence on the 29th
November, 1854. Was at the Fiery Creek Rush in 1855 and
at Dunolly the following year, being engaged in mining up to
iB6O, varied by gold-buying and a commission agency, and
two trips in coasting vessels to Adelaide and Newcastle, New
South Wales, as chief officer of the Colchester and Firefly. In
iB6O and 1861 resumed mining at the Poverty Reef, Tarna-
gulla, and was part owner of the ground since included in
the celebrated Poverty Reef United Gold Mining Company. In
July, 1861, was appointed to a position in the Railway Depart-
ment, as an assistant to the professional accountant, by the Hon.
fames Macpherson Grant. Entered the acountant’s office in
1863, and in 1864 was placed permanently on the staff. The
position of accountant becoming vacant by the promotion of A. P.
Mathieson to traffic manager, Mr. Lavater received the appoint-
ment, and still retains that position*.
Lempriere, Thomas Henry, was born on the 17th June, 1825,
at Hobart Town, Tasmania, and is the eldest surviving son of the
late Assistant Commissary-General Thomas James Lempriere, an
officer who in the last war with France had after a nine years’
experience as a prisoner of war, the honour and satisfaction
of participating as lieutenant in the waggon train in the victory
at Waterloo. The subject of this sketch commenced life
as a civil clerk in the commissariat department of the Tas-
manian colonial establishment, in which he remained for twelve
years, leaving it to engage in mercantile pursuits, to which he has
also devoted himself in Victoria, since he landed in Melbourne in
1852. Latterly Mr. Lempriere has been actively engaged in develop-
ing the iron and tin mines of Tasmania, in which he holds a large
proprietory interest, being one of the originators of the British
and Tasmanian Charcoal Iron Company, situate at Port
Lempriere, on the river Tamar, and legal manager of the
Stanhope Tin Mining Company. He is also known throughout


Victoria as one of the most active members of the Masonic
Order, and has held for sixteen years the onerous position of
District Grand Secretary to the English Constitution, of which
there are now upwards of sixty Victorian Lodges in full work.
Since the pastime of coursing was introduced into Victoria, owing
to the success which attended the acclimatisation of hares,
Mr. Lempriere has been known as an enthusiastic promoter
of the sport; he was one of the founders of the Australian
Coursing Club, and won the first cup offered by it, with his
slut La Rapide. The value of the stake was and Mr.
Lempriere has since been eminently successful in the coursing
field, for he has formed one of the largest greyhound kennels in
the colony, and imported dogs of the purest breed from the
mother-country, amongst others Saucy, Le Rouge, &c., &c. Mr.
Lempriere is also honorary auditor to the Melbourne Hospital.
Levey, George Collins, journalist, son of George Levey, of
Camberwell Grove, Surrey, and Great New-street, London, was
born near London in 1835. Was educated at private schools and
at University College, London. Emigrated to Victoria; was fora
short time in the Government service as clerk to the Gold Receiver,
Castlemaine, when the weekly escorts brought 60,000 ounces of
the precious metal to the seaboard, but resigned, and embarked in
mining pursuits. Was one of the first to employ machinery in
quartz-crushing. Was subsequently employed in gold-buying
and contributing to the Melbourne Press. In 1858 returned
to England, and travelled over the Continent of Europe, visited
Russia, Germany, the Low Countries, Italy, Spain, and Portugal,
and contributed to several English newspapers. Revisited Mel-
bourne in iB6O, and became sub-editor of the Herald till 1861,
when he was returned to the Legislative Assembly for Normanby’
in opposition to Mr. Edward Henty. Introduced and carried
the Alien Bill, which allowed non-naturalised foreigners to hold
land. In 1863 became editor and proprietor of the Herald ,
which he reduced in price to a penny, and thus founded cheap
journalism in Australia. In 1864 was returned unopposed
for Normanby. In 1866 defeated Mr. David Blair for that
constituency by six votes, but in 1868 was beaten by Mr.
Thomas Cope. At the end of 1868 sold the Herald to Mr.
David Syme, and has since been connected, sometimes as editor
and at other times as contributor to the Melbourne Age. In
1870 was appointed as secretary to the Commissioners of Victoria
at the New South Wales Exhibition, and has since held similar
positions in connection with the Melbourne Exhibition of 1872, the
London and Vienna Exhibitions of 1873, the Melbourne Exhi-
bition of 1875, the Philadelphia Exhibition of 1876, and the
Paris Exhibition of 1878. Has contributed largely to the Mel-


bourne, London, Philadelphia, New York, and Paris Press, and has
written important official reports upon various subjects, the latest
being the Report of the Commissioners at the Philadelphia Exhi-
bition. Married in 1863 Euphemia Dalton, eldest daughter
of Charles Whybrow Ligar, Surveyor-General of Victoria (vide
infra ), and in 1876 Mary Elizabeth, daughter of George Parker, of
Washington, United States, and widow of the late Hon. J.
P. Bouligny, member of Congress for the city of New Orleans.
Levi, Nathaniel, of Melbourne, was born at Liverpool,
England, 20th January, 1830. He left England on the 4th
December, 1553, for Victoria. On arriving in Melbourne Mr,
Levi at once engaged in general business. Soon afterwards
commenced business as auctioneer in Queen-street; then visited
the goldfields; and in 1858 joined a firm with large business
connections in Melbourne and Maryborough, which traded under
the name of John Levy and Sons, in wines, spirits, and
groceries. In 1859 he stood for Maryborough at the general
election, and was defeated by fourteen votes. In iB6O R. D.
Ireland accepted office as Attorney-General to the first Heales
Ministry, and when he offered himself for re-election, Mr. Levi
opposed him and beat him by 166 votes, and was the first Jew
returned to the Parliament of Victoria. The election was one
of the most riotous that ever occurred in this colony; fights
innumerable took place, and three revolvers were discharged
through the hotel windows of Mr. Levi’s committee-room.
His maiden speech in the House was against payment of
members; and he advocated the abolition of the export
duty on gold. He supported Torrens’ Act, and carried a
Bill through the Lower House to facilitate the transfer of
mercantile instruments and securities, which was rejected by
the Council, but became law ten years after. He took great
interest in the establishment of the Mint, in the abolition
of pensions to responsible Ministers, in liberal land and in-
solvency laws; and he succeeded in getting a resolution passed
by the House to have the land reserved for a line of railway from
Castlemaine to Maryborough; supported the abolition of tea
and sugar duties, the obtaining increased rental from squatters,
taxing uncultivated lands, and many other liberal measures. In
January, 1866, he lost his seat for Maryborough, having held
it from December, iB6O. He contested East Melbourne in
the same month, and was placed at the top of the poll. At the
dissolution in 1868 he was beaten by a small majority, and
has not since had a seat in Parliament. Since 1859 he has made
great efforts to open up the coalfields of Cape Patterson at
considerable outlay, in conjunction with others; having raised 2000
tons of coal, most of which was brought to Melbourne. Another


of his projects was the cultivation of beetroot for the production
of sugar and spirits; and early in 1864 he started a distillery at
Footscray, having imported the best kind of machinery from
France, and produced a spirit that was pronounced unsurpassed
for purity. He obtained letters patent for this and the other
colonies; and also for manufacturing sugar from beetroot. He
had spent not less than up to 1876 in endeavouring
to initiate this industry; and with additional capital he followed up
his project at the Anakies, but found he had not sufficient money
to continue there. He was so far successful that it was recognised
by the press, and he obtained a gold medal from the Exhibition
commissioners in Melbourne, a medal from England, from Sydney
the highest encomiums, and from Vienna, the centre of the great
beetroot sugar industry, a medal of merit; 223 tons of dry and liquid
sugar were made, 93 tons of which 'were sold at an average
of £>3o per ton. The liquid sugar was used in the distillery, and
about 1400 gallons of spirits made, which sold at 4s. 6d. per
gallon, Government receiving about for duty. He com-
piled a book on “The Sugar Beet: its Adaptability for Cultivation
in the Colony, &c.” His occupation, at the present time, has
somewhat changed, he having obtained a long lease of the right
of advertising on the Government railways.
Lewis, John, consulting mining engineer, late manager of the
New North Clunes Gold-mining Company; was born at Ponty-
pool, Wales, 25th November, 1830; was appointed as mining
and mechanical engineer at Tredgar Iron Works, Monmouthshire.
After seven years left, and went to America for four years,
working as a mechanical engineer at New York and Chicago.
Left there in 1854, and came to Victoria, arriving in August
same year. First went to the Creswick goldfield, and was
working there for about two years very unsuccessfully. He went
to Clunes about iB6O, and furnished the Rose and Shamrock for
the “outsiders.” Afterwards he returned to Creswick, and was
shortly after engaged by Mr. Harvey, manager of the Clunes
Quartz-mining Company, in connection with the Port Phillip
Cold-mining Company, to erect machinery for the Clunes Com-
pany in the paddock. Then went as engineer and manager to
the St. Arnaud United Company, St. Arnaud. Left there to
return to Clunes, and act as engineer to the New North Clunes
Company, in 1863, for about twelve months. Left there, and
was foreman at the Victoria Foundry, Ballarat, for twelve
months; then engaged to go to Tasmania as manager of the
Enterprise Company for twelve months; then returned, and took
the management of the New North Clunes Company in 1866,
and was the first manager to get payable stone—about twelve
months after taking charge. Remained manager for ten years.


in which time the company paid large and steady dividends.
Resigned his appointment in July, 1876, and settled down in
Melbourne as a mining and mechanical engineer. Mr. Lewis has
not been a mere employe of the companies by whom he was
engaged, but has engaged freely in mining ventures, and won
and lost like others; but in the main has not been unsuccessful
in his endeavours to help on the development of the great gold-
mining industry of the colony.
Lewis, Robert, J.P., of Ballarat, was born at Aberystwith,
South Wales, and came to Victoria in 1853 in the Gibson Craig.
Was first with Mr. Williams and Banks Brothers, soft-goods
merchants, in Melbourne. In 1854 went to Ballarat, and joined
Mr. Rowlands in starting a soda-water manufactory at Lake
Wendouree, which soon became a great success. In 1858 was
elected councillor for Ballarat West, and has been a councillor
ever since, with the exception of a short time in 1864, when he
was away in England. At that date, and before he visited the
old country, he was elected to the Legislative Assembly to
represent Ballarat West. Mr. Lewis was chairman of the muni-
cipality when the new Act came into force, and, as a consequence,
became mayor under the Act. He was afterwards four times
elected mayor for the city; was member and chairman of the
water commission for fifteen years, and president of the Bene-
volent Asylum for seven years. He was also a member of the
Hospital Committee since 1857, and president for many years;
also president of the Early-Closing Association for about sixteen
or seventeen years, and helped to start the Mechanics’ Institute—
accepting a tender for when there was not more than
in hand, and not many others to share the responsibility;
but the faith shown in the stability of Ballarat was fully justified
by the results. The Orphan Asylum had also his time and
attention, and it may be said, without exaggeration, that no one
has worked harder or gave more of his time to the public.
Ligar, Charles Whybrow, civil and military engineer, was born
in 1809 at Ceylon, where his father was stationed with his regiment.
Educated at the Royal Military College, Sandhurst, and received a
commission in the Royal Engineers, but shortly afterwards re-
signed. Was employed on the Ordnance Survey of Ireland until
1840, when he was appointed Surveyor-General of New Zealand
by Lord John Russell. Was wrecked at the Cape of Good Hope,
and did not arrive at New Zealand until the end of 1841.
Purchased all the land from the Maoris for the European
settlers. Was apppointed Colonel and Commandant of the New
Zealand Militia, and took part in the war at the Bay of Islands.
Retired from the position of Surveyor-General of New Zealand in


1856, and after residing for a short time in the southern portion of
that colony came to Victoria in 1857 as Land Commissioner tor
the Province of Otago. Became Surveyor-General of Victoria in
1858, and retired on a pension in 1869. Returned to Europe,
and after residing for some time in England, Germany, Morocco,
Algeria, and Spain, finally settled down in Texas, where he
has embarked in stock-raising. Mr. Ligar married in 1839 Grace,
daughter of Thomas Hanyngton, Dungannon, Tyrone, and grand-
niece of the Earl of Charlemont, and in 1869 Marie, daughter of
the late Capt. Williams, of Auckland, New Zealand.
Lyell, Andrew, M.P., of Lyell and Gowan, accountants and
finance agents, Melbourne. Was born at Newburgh, Fifeshire,
Scotland, in 1836, son of the late James Lyell, linen manufac-
turer. Was educated at Abdie Grange School, near Newburgh.
Left there in 1849, and was three years in the office of Messrs.
Moon, Langlands and Co., of Dundee. He came out to Victoria
in 1852, in the ship Penola , landing there the first day of 1853,
after being 133 days at sea. Went first into the employment of
Mr. Henry Langlands, ironfounder and general commission
agent. About 1856 Mr. Lyell joined the firm of Langlands,
Buick and Co., warehousemen, at the premises now the Hall of
Commerce. This firm afterwards became Buick, Christie and
Lyell, having branches at Ballarat, Sandhurst, and other leading
goldfields. In 1866 the firm dissolved partnership, and he com-
menced business as trade assignee and accountant in Elizabeth-
street, Mr. Gowan joining him, and the present firm was estab-
lished. In 1875 Messrs. Ecroyd and Danby took over the
accountancy and trade assignee portion of their business, Mr.
Lyell’s firm devoting itself chiefly to finance, acting, however, in
large estates in which English creditors were mostly interested.
Mr. Lyell has been to Great Britain three times, in 1861, 1868,
and 1873, the last time principally for the benefit of his health.
For some years he was largely interested in squatting property, and
was a large landowner until the eve of the general election in
1877. The speciality of the firm is now essentially finance, dealing
with public loans and transactions of a similar description. They
own steamers trading between here and Tasmania, in which
colony they are largely interested in timber producing and
trading at the river Don, in developing a large slate quarry at
Slate Port on the north coast of the same colony, and also in the
Don Tin Company, at Mount Bischoff. Mr. Lyell was one of
the municipal councillors of Emerald Hill, from 1865 to 1867.
He has always taken an active interest in building societies; has
been auditor of several banks and insurance companies; was
the projector of the National Insurance Company, which he
started and organised with the assistance of Mr. Macredie. His


personal _ reputation as a practical accountant and straightforward
able business man stands high among the commercial commu-
nity. In 1877 he contested the election for Emerald Hill
under the new electoral law, which gave two members to that
district instead of one, and was elected as the free-trade can-
didate. At the time he published his political views in the
form of a pamphlet, from which we gather that Mr. Lyell is a
disciple of Jeremy Bentham and John Stuart Mill, believing that
the leading principle of democracy is the greatest happiness to
the greatest number. The pamphlet is an able and lucid state-
ment of his views, free from ambiguity and dogmatism; showing
that although a thorough free-trader he is prepared to work with
those who differ from him for the well-being of his adopted
country, neither expecting the millennium from the advent of
free-trade doctrines, nor unmitigated disaster from a moderate
amount of protection. He is opposed to selling the Crown lands,
and thinks our Government expenditure out of all proportion to
our population; does not believe in payment of members; and
objects to the Christian Sunday being turned into a Judaical
Sabbath—to that teetotal as well as spiritual despotism, that would,
if it could, limit the enjoyment and recreation of the people to
their own narrow rule of life.
Lyster, William Saurin, son of Captain Charworth Lyster, of
Grenane, in the Queen’s County, Ireland, and nephew of the late
Doctor Saurin (Lord Bishop of Dromore), was born in Dublin in
the year 1827. His first appearance in Australia was in 1842, but
he remained there only a few months ere he left for England. He
next visited India and the Cape of Good Hope, and landed
in America in 1849. He obtained a theatrical engagement in
Boston, and played several parts in what is termed the legitimate
drama. He was fairly successful, but, being fonder of music,
he subsequently gathered around him an operatic company com-
prising Madame Lucy Escott, Mdlle. Georgia Hodson, Madame
Rosalie Durand (who afterwards died in Sydney), Madame
Ada King, Messrs. Squires and Fred Lyster (his brother). Mr.
Reiff conducted for him at first, and was succeeded by Mr.
George Loder. All these he brought to Australia, and with them
achieved great success in Melbourne and the other leading centres.
He brought out Madame and Mr. Martin Simonsen, and some
years later Vitelli, Devoti, D’Antoni, and Bertolini. This company
having been disbanded, Mr. Lyster entered into partnership with
the late Mr. J. Smith, and they engaged Signora Baratti, Miss
Lucy Chambers, Signor Neri, Signor Dondi, and Signor Contini;
Herr Siede being conductor. This was in 1869, and in 1871 Mr.
Lyster, who was now joined by Signor Cagli, opened in the
Princess’ Theatre, Melbourne, with Signor and Signora Coy,


Signora Cortesi, Signor Coliva, Signora and Signor Tournerie,
Signora Rosavalle, Signor Polli, Signor Rosnati, Signor Grandi,
and Signora Zenosti, under the conduct of Signor Zelman. This
company played two seasons with great success, and after visiting
Sydney and New Zealand returned to Melbourne in March, 1873,
when it was further strengthened by Signor Susini. A brilliant
opening was made in the new Opera House, of which Mr. Lyster
was (and continues to be) a proprietor and managing director.
Next came Signora Palmieri, Signora Persiani, Signora Magi,
Signora and Signor Baldassare, who achieved much success in
the season of 1874. In the September of that year he engaged
Madame Arabella Goddard, the greatest pianiste of her time.
Mr. Lyster was subsequently very prominent in opera bouffe, in-
troducing Miss Alice May, Miss Emilie Melville, Miss Clara
Thompson, Miss Jeannie Winston, Miss Catherine Lewis, and
many other ladies who won high favour with the Melbourne public,
Mr. Armes Beaumont, who was originally an articled pupil to
Mr. Fred Lyster, sang with nearly all the companies referred
to, and has long since firmly established himself as a prime favourite
in our musical world. In 1877 Mr. Lyster engaged Mr. Levy, the
greatest cornet player in the world, and he next introduced
Signora Antonietta Link, Signora Augusta Guadagnini, Signora
Caranti Vita, Signora Emilia Pasta, Signora Margherita Venosta,
Signor Pietro Paladini, Signor Gaetano Cesari, Signor Eduardo
Camero, Signor Arturo Steffani, Signor Angelo Cisella, Signora
Leonora Fabris, Signor Giovanni Gambetta, and Signor Pietro
Favas. This company were very successful in a number of
operas, especially in Wagner’s great work “ Lohengrin” and
Verdi’s “Aida.” From the above it will be seen that the people
of Australia, and the Melbourne public in particular, are deeply
indebted to Mr. Lyster for having liberally supplied them with
first-class music, which they would not otherwise have heard.
It may be mentioned that Madame Ristori and her gifted dramatic
company also appeared at the Opera House during Mr. Lyster’s
regime. He does not exclusively confine himself to the profession
of impressario , and he successfully manages, perhaps, the prettiest
model farm in Victoria. It is situated at Narrewarran Grange,
near Fern Tree Gully. Here Mr, Lyster makes the best cheese
in Australia, and breeds shorthorns, some of which are sold at
exceedingly high prices. He was named after his relative the
Hon. William Saurin, who was Attorney-General for Ireland at the
time of his birth.
Long-more, Hon. Francis, M.P., Minister of Lands, 1877, is
the youngest son of George Longmore, farmer, Monaghan, Ireland.
Born same place in 1826; educated at Mr. Blackey’s Presbyterian
Academy, Monaghan. He was brought up as a farmer, left


home with the family in 1839, and settled in New South Wales,
following farming pursuits till 1851. He commenced business
the same year at Sydney as a commission agent; but in 1852
left that city to do business in Melbourne for several Sydney
merchants. On concluding his mercantile affairs he went to Ballarat,
where was tolerably successful. Since 1854 has been farming
in Victoiia, in the Learmonth district, and in 1856 began to take
an active part in public affairs generally. Attended the Govern-
ment auction land sales, and helped to some extent to expose
the system of agreement in buying land, by which the whole spirit
and intent of sales by auction was defeated. In 1861 stood for
the county of Ripon and Hampden, and was defeated by Mr.
J. Service. In 1864 opposed Mr. G. G. Morton for the* same
counties, and was successful. Mr. Longmore took a very active
part in passing the Land Act of 1863, brought in by the
Hon. J. Macpherson Grant. In local affairs he was connected
with the road board of his district and its agricultural society,
and was an energetic advocate for local improvements. In
politics is an ultra-Liberal and staunch protectionist, is an advo-
cate for a reform of the Legislative Council, and for the settlement
of the people on the lands of the colony. He has been twice
Commissioner of Railways, and in 1877 Minister of Lands. He
first took office as Commissioner of Railways, and Vice-President
of the Board of Land and Works, with Mr. (now Sir) Charles G.
Duffy, 19th June, 1871, and again with Mr. Graham Berry, 7th
August, 1875. He originated and is secretary of the Australasia
Coal Company, Newcastle, New South Wales, which bids fair
to be a great success after some years of probation. Mr,
Longmore has been a total abstainer for the last twenty years.
Macßain, James, M.P. for the Wimmera, director of the
Australian Mortgage Land and Finance Company (Limited),
Melbourne, is the youngest son of the late Smith Macßain’
Invergordon, Rossshire, N.B. In 1845 he was indentured for
five years to the late Andrew Smith, warehouseman, Inverness,
and during the last three years of the term he acted as bookkeeper
and cashier. As a commercial traveller he visited the principal
towns in Scotland and the North of Ireland; and in 1853 married
the youngest daughter of the late William Smith, of Forres, N.B.
Immediately afterwards he left England by s.s. Great Britain for
Melbourne, arriving on 14th October the same year. The general
depression deterred him from entering into business on his own
account, and being offered the opportunity of entering the service
of the Bank of New South Wales, he acted as bill-clerk, then
ledger-keeper and receiving-teller. In 1857 and 1858, having
relinquished his appointment, he visited England on business,
and then joined and became the Melbourne managing partner


of the mercantile and squatting agency firm, Gibbs, Ronald and
Co. Having successfully conducted that business, he became, in
1863, partner in the firm of Gibbs, Ronald and Co., Geelong,
and Richard Gibbs and Co., of London, his senior partners being
Richard Gibbs, Robert Bruce Ronald, and Byron Lord Ronald.
In 1865 the business acquired by these firms was sold to the
Australian Mortgage Land and Finance Company (Limited),
the business in Melbourne continuing under the management
of Mr. R. B. Ronald and Mr. Macßain, and in London under
that of Richard Gibbs and B. L. Ronald. From small beginnings
this business has been worked up to be one of the most important
in Australia, and is now under the management of Mr. E. M.
Young. Mr. Macßain was a director of the Colonial Bank of
Australia, the Victoria Fire and Marine Insurance Company, and
the Australasian Fire, Marine and Life Insurance Company, and
for some years he was president and member of the Board for
the Protection of the Aborigines, and takes an active interest in
the affairs of the Presbyterian Church of Victoria. In 1864 he
was elected for the Wimmera district, and has represented it in
the Legislative Assembly ever since. He has_ twice declined to
accept office, on account of business obligations. During the
Constitutional struggle over the “tack” and the Darling grant,
he voted at every stage against the M £ Culloch Ministers;
opposed the Education Bill introduced by the Francis Govern-
ment; moved a resolution condemning the contract made with
the P. and O. Company; and recommended Ministers to purchase
the Melbourne and Hobson’s Bay Railway property, when it
could have been done at £7O per share; and_ opposed the
M-'Culloch Government’s contract to purchase it, making it
possible to pay £lOO per share, with the additional cost_ of
putting the line in an efficient state of repair; and voted against
Sir James McCulloch’s scheme of taxation, in consequence of his
abandoning a portion of his all-round system of taxation without
being called upon to do so by a vote of the Assembly. Mr.
Macßain’s business engagements and private investments _in
pastoral pursuits prevented him taking a more prominent position
in public life; but as a citizen he has done everything in his
power to forward what appeared to him the best interests of his
adopted country.
M‘Coy, Frederick, professor of Natural Science in the
University of Melbourne, son of Dr. S. M £ Coy, a physician
in Dublin. Born in Dublin; educated for the medical profession,
partly in Dublin, and subsequently in Cambridge. While yet too
young to be admitted to the profession, he accepted the offer
of Sir Richard Griffith to make the palaeontological investigations
required for the geological map of Ireland for the Boundary


Survey, and published the results of his examinations in two large
quarto volumes, illustrated with numerous plates, chiefly from his
own drawings; one entitled '‘Synopsis of the Carboniferous Limestone
Fossils of Ireland,” and the other, “ Synopsis of the Silurian
Fossils of lieland, containing many hundred new discoveries.
He then was invited by the late Colonel Sir Henry James, R.E. r
and Sir Henry de la Beche, to join the British Geological Survey
then commenced; and after completing the maps of the districts
geologically surveyed by him in the field, was appointed by
Sir Robert Peel’s Government as one of the first professors of the
new Queen’s University of Ireland, the chair of Geology in
the Northern College being assigned to him. During the
vacations he undertook, in conjunction with the Rev. Professor
Sedgwick, the large work on "British Palaeozoic Rocks and
Fossils,” based on the materials in the Woodwardian’s collection
at Cambridge. Professor M'Coy’s portion of this work was
published as a thick quarto volume, just before his appoint-
ment by Sir J. Herschel to the first professorship of natural
science in the University of Melbourne, where he has since
continued to lecture on chemistry and mineralogy, botany,
zoology, comparative anatomy, and geology; besides filling the
offices of director of the National Museum of Natural Science,,
and palaeontologist to the geological survey. His original dis-
coveries in every branch of natural science form upwards of
100 essays, printed in the Annals of Natural Histoiy , and the
proceedings of various scientific societies, was elected one of the few
honorary members of the Cambridge Philosophical Society; and is
an honorary member of various other scientific bodies in different
parts of the world. He was also created a Knight or Chevalier
of the Royal Order of the Crown of Italy by King Victor
Emanuel. His "Prodromus of the Zoology and Palaeontology of
Victoria” is now in course of publication in numbers or decades of
ten plates each, issued at short intervals by the Government.
M‘Crea, William, Chief Medical Officer of Victoria, was born
in the north of Ireland in 1814, and brought up in London to the
medical profession. He is a member of the Royal College of
Surgeons of England, a Licentiate of the Apothecaries’ Company,
London, and a Bachelor of Medicine of the London University.'
Dr, M'Crea entered the Royal Navy in 1835, and served in
the capacity of assistant-surgeon and surgeon, consecutively, until
1851, when he was appointed surgeon of a ship bringing'female
convicts to Van Diemen’s Land. After landing them, he came to
Victoria, and soon after his arrival was asked to take charge of a
force of pensioners, sent to preserve order on the goldfields
in March, 1852. He temporarily accepted the appointment,
as well as that of coroner and magistrate, and performed the


duties so efficiently, that on the death of Dr. Sullivan in 1853 he was
offered and accepted the appointment of chief medical officer. In
1854 he re-organised the Quarantine Department, and had the
present establishment erected at Point Nepean. In 1855, after the
passing of the first Public Health Act, he was appointed president
of the Central Board of Health, organising its establishment, and
supplying the local boards throughout the colony as they were
called into existence, with such information on sanitary matters as
was necessary to carry on their proceedings. At this date
there are some 180 local boards throughout the colony, and
the vast improvement in sanitary matters observable is to be
largely attributed to the exertions of the board of which Dr.
M‘Crea is the head. On the passing of the Compulsory Vacci-
nation Act in 1855 he organised that branch of the medical
department of the Government, and has since conducted it,
recommending the appointment of vaccinators, keeping up a
supply of vaccine lymph, and distributing it over this and the
neighbouring colonies. He is also chairman of the Police
Medical Board, and chairman of the Police Superannuation Board.
MbCulloch, The Hon. Sir James, Knt. Bach el. (United
Kingdom, 1870), K.C.M.G. (1874), M.P. for Warrnambool, son
of the late George MUulloch, Esq., Glasgow. Born at Glasgow,
Scotland, 1819; educated at same place. He commenced his
mercantile life in a goods warehouse, and afterwards entered the
office of the well-known firm of J. and A. Dennistoun, of
his native city, with whom he remained for fourteen years;
obtaining a high character for business and general capacity.
During that time he took an active part in the “Trades House”
of Glasgow, of which he was for some time honorary treasurer.
He was admitted a partner in the firm, and came to Victoria
in April, 1853, as senior partner in the colony, and opened
the house of Dennistoun Brothers and Company, in connection
with the firm of J. and A. Dennistoun, of Glasgow, and their
other firms in Liverpool, New York, and New Orleans. The firm
of Dennistoun Brothers and Company was carried on till 1862,
when it was wound up. Sir James (then Mr.) M‘Culloch founded
a new firm under the style of M‘Culloch, Sellar and Company,
of Melbourne, in connection with the firm of Leishman, Inglis, and
Company, of London. In 1854 he became a nominee member
of the old Legislative Council, before the advent of the new
constitution under which he was elected to represent the
Wimmera district, in the Legislative Assembly, on the 24th
October, 1856. Sir Henry Barkly, then Governor, in 1857 sent
for Mr. M‘Culloch to form a Ministry, which he did, making
the late Hon. W. Haines Chief Secretary, and taking the Customs
for himself; and was again elected for the same constituency


12th May, 1857, retiring from office 10th March, 1858, when he
visited England. At the next general election he stood for East
Melbourne and was successful, taking office as Treasurer of
the Nicholson Administration 27th October, 1859, and retiring
from office 26th November, iB6O, and paying a visit to Europe.
At the next general election he was returned for Mornington,
January, 1862, and on the defeat of the O’Shanassy Administra-
tion was again sent for by Sir Henry Barkly, and became Chief
Secretary for the first time 27th June, 1863, with the Hon.
George Higinbotham as Attorney-General, Hon. Sir George
Yerdon as Treasurer, Hon. James Macpherson Grant, Minister of
Lands, Hon. Archibald Michie, Minister of Justice, Hon. J. G.
Francis, Customs, T. H. Fellows as Postmaster-General, in fact, a
Ministry of all the talents, and a combination of men of varied
characters and opinions, indicating a turning point in the career of
the head of the Ministry, and proving, as does the rest of his
career, that Sir James understood the maxim of the astute Italian
statesman —“ That he that would wish for success, must act
in unison with the times.” This Ministry, with some changes,
lasting five years all but a month, dealt with many important
measures, an amending Land Act, renewal of the squatters’
tenure, and the introduction of protection to local industries,
leading up to the Constitutional struggle which shortly after took
place, on the tacking of the Customs Bill to the Appropriation
Act, which was set aside or practically thrown out by the Legisla-
tive Council, leaving the Executive without means to pay the
civil service salaries and other current liabilities. To meet this
difficulty it was suggested that the necessary funds should be
borrowed from the banks, actions be brought by the public
creditors, judgment confessed by the Crown, and the amount and
costs paid out of the money so borrowed. The London Char-
tered Bank accepted the proposals of the Government, and
enabled Ministers to carry out their intent. In May, 1868,
Ministers resigned, and Mr. (now Sir) Charles Sladen, a member of
the Legislative Council, was sent for by His Excellency J. H.
Manners-Sutton, afterwards Viscount Canterbury, and succeeded
in forming a Ministry which only retained office for five days and
two months, and for that time mainly through the vigour, tact,
good humour, and high character of its representative in the
Legislative Assembly, as Ministers were confronted by an over-
whelming opposition in the popular chamber. On nth July,
1868, Mr. M‘Culloch was again sent for, and taking the position
of Chief Secretary and Treasurer, was again returned for
Mornington, and was at that time at the height of popularity;
those who had opposed him having in several instances been
relegated to private life. During the Constitutional crisis customs
duties had been collected for nine months upon no other


authority than a resolution of the Legislative Assembly; and
much confusion occurred, and loss accrued to the country.
Sir Charles H. Darling having been recalled in May, 1866, it was
determined to compensate him by a gift to Lady Darling of
A severe struggle followed, and eventually, at the
request of Sir Charles Darling, the vote was withdrawn. Quitting
office 20th September, 1869, Sir James was again Chief Secretary
in April, 1870, for ten months, when he was succeeded by
Mr. (now Sir Charles) Gavan Duffy, with Mr. Graham Berry as
Treasurer, who crowned the Protectionist edifice with the 20 per
cent, ad valorem duties. At this time the subject of our memoir
became Sir James M'Culloch, having been created a Knight
Bachelor of the United Kingdom. In 1872 and ’73 he visited
England, where he acted as Agent-General for a short time, and in
1874 was created Knight Commander of St. Michael and St.
George. Soon after his return to the colony he was again in
harness, defeating the Berry Ministry. After a tenure of office
of little over two months, and having been again elected for
Warrnambool, took the position of Treasurer and leader of the
House, Mr. Macpherson being Chief Secretary. The Ministry
held office till Parliament died out by effluxion of time, in spite
of the “stonewalling” of the Opposition, who maintained that
Ministers and the majority did not represent public opinion, and
the “ previous question,” christened by the Opposition “ the iron
hand,” was introduced by Sir James. The general election of
1877 left Ministers in so serious a minority that they resigned, and
Mr. Berry was sent for. Sir James has been at the head of
four Governments, and held office altogether for a longer period
than any other politician. Whatever opinion may be formed
of him as a statesman or legislator, he is admitted to be a
li manager of men ” by all sides, and to possess a vitality and
energy of purpose that lead him to success where and when
others would fail. He has been twice president of the Chamber
of Commerce, has been a director of the London Chartered
Bank for many years, is trustee of the Liverpool and London
Insurance Company, and a trustee of the Public Library and
National Gallery. He married, first, Susan, daughter of the Rev.
James Renwick, Muirton, Scotland, deceased; and secondly,
Margaret, daughter of William Inglis, Esq., of Walflat, Dumbar-
tonshire, Scotland.
MbCullongil, William George, is a native of the County
Down, was born in 1823, and at an early age was apprenticed to
Messrs.'William Armstrong and Sons, of Largan, one of the most
extensive firms in the North of Ireland. He next spent a year
and a half with Messrs. J. D. Lindsay of Belfast, after which he
went to New York and held an important position for a period of


eight years in the warehouse of Mr. Alexander T. Stewart, the
celebrated millionaire. Hearing of the discovery of gold in
Victoria, he returned to Europe, and thence embarked for Victoria
in the latter part of the year 1851, arriving in Melbourne in Feb-
ruary, 1852. Shortly afterwards he went to Eaglehawk, near
Sandhurst, and engaged in business there until enticed by auri-
ferous prospects to Tarrangower (now Maldon). He subsequently
removed to Simson’s Ranges, and erected the premises known as
the Exchange Buildings, in High-street, Maryborough. Accom-
panied by his two sons, he revisited the United States in 1876, for
the purpose of witnessing the Centennial Exhibition, at Philadel-
phia, and returned to Victoria towards the close of the same
year.
M‘l)011gall, Dugald, the senior partner of the well-known firm
of Sands and M‘Dougall, was born in 1834, at Londonderry,
Ireland, where he remained only for a few years. He then went
to Greenock, Scotland, and was apprenticed to the leading
stationer there. On completing his articles he left for Victoria,
arriving in 1852, when he at once accepted an engagement from
Mr. Williams, stationer, Melbourne. Mr. Williams shortly after-
wards sold his business to Messrs. Sands and Kenny, and Mr.
M‘Dougall had the management of the concern; and so successful
was he, that on the Ist January, iB6O, he was admitted to a part-
nership in the business then being carried on as Sands, Kenny,
and Co. On Mr. Kenny’s retirement from the firm in 1862,
the name was again altered to its present style of Sands
and M‘Dougall, he then being the only resident partner; and on
Mr. Sands’death, in 1873, he became the head of the firm, which,
by his exertions, had grown to such proportions as to necessitate
the erection, in 1872, of large workshops in Collins-street west, on
their own freehold, where they manufacture account-books, enve-
lopes, pocket-books, purses, and all varieties of manufactured sta-
tionery, besides carrying on the various businesses of engravers, prin-
ters, lithographers, paper-rulers, and stereotypers; they have also
spacious warehouses in Collins-street west and Cooper’s-alley, where
their country and export trade is carried on, employing altogether
320 hands.
WG OWan, Samuel Walker, born 4th January, 1829, eldest
son of the late Samuel M'Gowan, of Kingston, Ontario, Canada
(previously of Rathmullan, county Donegal, and of Londonderry,
Ireland), educated at the Midland District Grammar School,
Kingston, and intended for the legal profession; studied law at
Toronto, between the years 1843 and 1847, when in the latter
year, on the death of his father, he attended courses of lectures
on natural science, and eventually became a telegraphic student


under the late Professor Morse, the celebrated inventor of the
Morse system of telegraph (now almost universally adopted), from
whom Mr. M‘Gowan holds a high testimonial as to his abilities..
Was in the service of the Toronto and Buffalo Electro-magnetic
Telegraph Company, the Montreal Telegraph Company, and the
New York, Albany, and Buffalo Telegraph Company, until late in
1852, when he migrated to Australia, and landed at Melbourne,
from the ship Glance , from New York, early in 1853, with the
intention of forming a private telegraph company, for the purpose
of establishing and working lines of telegraph to Sydney, Adelaide,
Ballarat, Sandhurst, and important centres of population in the
interior. Mr. M‘Cowan brought with him an experienced tele-
graphist, together with a supply of instruments, batteries, and
other telegraphic materials, but found, after a lapse of several
months consumed in negotiations with leading capitalists, that
the Government had decided on assuming the proprietary of all
telegraph lines to be constructed within the colony, a determi-
nation which culminated in a Gazette notice inviting tenders for
the construction of a line of telegraph between Melbourne and
Williamstown, in September 1853. Mr. M‘Gowan subsequently
submitted offers for the work named, which were accepted by
the Governor of the day, His Excellency C. J. Latrobe, and the
contract was executed in due course. Communication between the
two places was established in January, 1854, but was not fully
opened to the public until the Ist of March of the same year,
about which period the original Telegraph Statute, framed by the
Attorney-General, Mr. (now Sir William) Stawell, C.J., was enacted
by the Legislature. This Act, still in force, was based on the
Telegraph Act of Canada, a copy of which Mr. M‘Gowan had
brought with him to this colony. At the period named, the short
line of telegraph between Melbourne and Williamstown, was, it is
believed, the first line of telegraphic communication south of the
equator, and the system thus originated, has not only grown to its
present proportions throughout Victoria, but has formed the basis
on which all other telegraph systems have been established and
developed in the adjoining colonies, and in Tasmania and New
Zealand, Mr. M‘Gowan’s plans and specifications having been
adopted, with few or unimportant variations, throughout the
other colonies. The Electric Telegraph Department thus origi-
nated, was placed under the charge of Mr. M‘Gowan, who was
subsequently appointed, under Her Majesty’s warrant, as Superin-
tendent-General of Telegraphs of the colony of Victoria, in
March, 1854, and during the ensuing fifteen years he established
the existing telegraphic system. In March, 1869, the Government
amalgamated the Telegraph with the Postal department, and since
the latter date Mr. M‘Gowan has held the office of Inspector of
Post and Telegraph Service, and Superintending Officer of Tele-


graph Construction, &c. Mr. M‘Gowan is at present acting as
Deputy-Postmaster-General, and General Superintendent of Tele-
graphs, pending the absence on leave of Mr. W. Turner, now in
England, and is a captain in the Torpedo Corps. On the 30th
June, 1857, Mr. M‘Gowan married Annie, eldest daughter of the
late Major Henry William Benson, C.M., of Kingston, Ontario,
Canada —by whom he has issue, two sons and two daughters.
M‘Guigail, Henry, J.P., wholesale wine and spirit merchant,
Melbourne, was born at Londonderry, Ireland, July, 1823.
Educated same place at private schools. Is the son of Michael
M‘Guigan, farmer, Londonderry, and for a time acquired some
knowledge of farming with his father. Was afterwards appren-
ticed to a grocer at same place; and after serving part of his
time left Ireland for Victoria in 1852, attracted by the news of the
gold discoveries. Went into business at Port Fairy, and from
thence came to Melbourne. Took charge of a store at Creswick,
and after several years of steady application to business went to
Clunes and started business on his own account, joining Mr.
Connell, trading as Connell and Company for some years, when
Mr. M‘Guigan became the proprietor of the whole business.
In 1861 he left Clunes and came to Melbourne, establishing
his present business in Elizabeth-street, where he has remained
ever since.
M 4 II wraith, John, proprietor of the Melbourne Lead Works
and metal merchant, city councillor for Albert Ward, eldest son of
John MTlwraith, of Ayrshire, Scotland, was born 26th May,
1828, at the town of Ayr; educated at the local schools, and
brought up to the business of a plumber. He came out to
Victoria in January, 1853, and was for a short time at the
diggings; then returned to Melbourne, and commenced business
in his own trade. In 1855 started the lead works in Little
Collins-street for the manufacture of lead and composition gas
pipes, which have been extended from time to time until the
buildings and plant are now valued at about In iB6O
went to England, and brought out rolling machinery for sheet
lead. In 1875 commenced the manufacture of block tin tubes by
hydraulic machinery. In 1876 went home to the old country,
visiting America on his way, having received the honorary appoint-
ment of commissioner for Victoria at the Philadelphia Exhibition.
Inspected the manufactures of that country, and on comparing
notes with his observations in England and Scotland, found that
the inventive genius of our American cousins had far outstripped
that of the old country in the matters in which he was specially
interested. From what he had seen in America, and from his
own experience, he had plans drafted of the machinery he


required, and had it manufactured at Ayr, his native place. He
has now a completely new rolling plant in course of erection, and
the old plant is to be made into a mill for rolling copper. Was
elected mayor of the city of Melbourne for 1874-5. In 1876 and
1877 he obtained for his manufactures a bronze medal and one of
the fifty special medals for successfully introducing lead rolling
machinery, and from the Dublin Exhibition a certificate for the
manufacture of lead and composition pipes. In 1876, at the
Intercolonial Exhibition, he received a silver medal for his
manufactures; and at Philadelphia he received a certificate of
award for block tin and composition gas tubes. The lead chiefly
used in the works is from the lead mines of Western Australia;
and although the importers now and again attempt to compete
with the colonial-made article, Mr. MTlwraith is quite able to hold
his own in the market.
M‘lntyre, James, M.P. for Sandhurst, was born 24th April, 1832,
at Glasgow, Scotland. Came to Victoria in the early part of
1852, attracted by the reports of gold discoveries. Bendigo was
the scene of his first efforts as a miner, and there he had mode-
rate success. In 1852 went to the Ovens and remained there
until the famous “ Canadian ” nugget was found at Ballarat.
Reached that goldfield in February, 1853, but after a short trial
returned to Bendigo, and made it his head-quarters. The rushes
to Korong (now Wedderburn), to Simpson’s Diggings (now Mary-
borough), and other localities were visited with varied success.
Settling down at last at Bendigo, he was amongst the first to com-
mence puddling operations at the head of Golden Gully. As giving
some idea of the expensive nature of such pursuits in those days,
a ton of hay for the horses cost In 1855 was married
and gave up active mining pursuits, and entered into partnership
with his brother-in-law Dr. Eadie as chemist and druggist, to
which he had been trained. During the license agitation was
a hearty sympathiser with the “ Red Ribbon ” movement, although
not a member of the organisation. He took an active part in the
early Land League work, and was treasurer of the local league, and
a determined advocate for “unlocking the lands.” Became a
member of the local (mining) court in 1857, and made his
mark as a public man in opposing the arbitrary powers of
the goldfields commissioners. When the mining "boards were
established he was elected a member at the head of the poll by a
large majority. Was made chairman, and helped to form the first
code of mining by-laws. Successfully opposed Mr. R. D. Ireland’s
proposed amendment of the Mining Statute, to give protection to
large areas of auriferous land. Suggested a system of lien on
mining property to encourage capitalists to invest in the mines. In
same year was created a territorial magistrate, and elected to


THE TIME.
VICTORIAN MEN
the borough council. In 1859 visited, with his family, the old
country, and returned to Victoria in iB6O. Was again elected to
the borough council in 1862, and in 1863 was chairman. The new
Act coming into force made him mayor, and he was elected to the
same position every year until 1868, when he resigned. _ As chief
magistrate for so many years he had much to do with many
important matters affecting the welfare of the city and the dignity
of his office, and sustained both when he had the honour of
dispensing the hospitalities of Sandhurst during the visit of
H.R.H. the Duke of Edinburgh in December, 1867. In 1865 Mr.
MTntyre contested an election at Mandurang against the Hon. Mr.
Sullivan and Mr. Casey. The contest turned for the first time
on Protection and Free-trade, and Mr. MTntyre was defeated. He
again tried for a seat in the Legislative Assembly, at Sandhurst, 1871,
but the Protectionists were too strong for him, and he was again
defeated. In 1874 for the same place he lost the election by
fifty-seven votes, having polled 2100. In every instance he
opposed the sitting members, one of whom was always a member
of the Government. At this time, he again with his family visited
the old country, and had the honour of being presented to
Her Majesty the Queen through the Earl of Carnarvon. Having
been appointed one of the honorary commissioners to the
Philadelphia Centennial Exhibition he went to America, and
attended to the duties of that office with his usual energy and
ability, and the ovation made to him by his fellow-citizens of
Sandhurst upon his return there in 1876, was sufficient evidence
that his public services were appreciated. At the general election,
nth May, 1877, he became a member of the Legislative
Assembly, in which he holds a thoroughly independent position.
During his career he has been actively connected with nearly
all the charitable institutions, more especially the hospital of Sand-
hurst, he having acted as its secretary and chairman, and
being one of its trustees. He took a leading part in initiating the
Coliban Water Supply Scheme, and many other matters of
importance. He always has been a believer, and is so still, in
the great mining future of Bendigo, and many of the early reef dis-
coveries were due to his energy and enterprise. Besides the many
offices he has, and still holds, he was appointed Guardian of
Minors by Sir W. Stawell, Chief Justice of Victoria.
M‘Rean, Hon. James, solicitor, Melbourne, son of the Rev.
David M'Kean, a Presbyterian clergyman, was born at Belfast,
Ireland, 24th April, 1832. Educated at Belfast at Newtownards.
His father left the ministry and went into sewed muslin and linen
manufacturing, and Mr. M‘Kean in his thirteenth year entered his
father’s business as clerk, and at sixteen was promoted to be
manager, having a thousand hands under him, embroidering and


weaving, and at twenty he had charge of thirty-two branch estab-
lishments, each employing from 500 to 1000 hands, in the counties
Armagh, Fermanagh, Tyrone and Monaghan. Two years after he
resigned, and left for Victoria in the Bona Ventura. Started for
the Devil’s River diggings (now Delatite) with T. Y. Anderson and
two others; was taken ill at Kelsell’s station, managed by Ballan-
tine, and on recovery took employment on Winter’s station during
the shearing season. Went thence to Beechworth, and was
employed as a joiner and carpenter at per week. Was store-
man, digger, builder, reporter, baker, brickmaker, and journalist,
sub-editing the Ovens and Mm ray Advertiser. In 1857 came to
Melbourne, and acted as journalistic correspondent and news
agent for a number of country papers. The turning point in his
career was an action in the County Court before Judge Pohlman,
to recover lent to a schoolmate at the Ovens. He
conducted his own case with such success against solicitor and
counsel (now Judge Bindon), that he not only gained a verdict, but
was complimented by the judge and by Mr. George Milner
Stephen on the ability displayed. This led to him thinking of
becoming a lawyer, being offered his articles by Mr. Warner, of
Muttlebury, Warner and Malleson. Whilst still a clerk, he wrote
and published a “Treatise on the Law of Divorce and Matrimonial
Causes in the Colony of Victoria,” “Law and Practice on the
Transfer of Land,” “Publican’s Guide to the Licensing Act 1876,”
“Law and Practice of the County Court,” and some others.
In was member of the first local (mining) courts. In 1864
and 1867 was member of the Fitzroy municipal council. Was
member of Parliament for Maryborough in 1865, and was
several times re-elected. In 1869 and 1870 was President of
the Board of Lands and Works under the first Macpherson
Administration, and retired from office in April, 1870, with his
chief.
M‘Lachlan, Ronald, manager of the Australian Mortgage,
Land and Finance Company, Geelong, was born in 1828, and
is the youngest of seven sons of the late Capt. Donald M‘Lachlan,
75th Regiment. Early in 1839 the family, consisting of father,
mother, five brothers, and three sisters, emigrated from Stirling,
in Scotland, and sailed from Greenock in the Ariadne , arriving
in Hobson’s Bay in October. This was the third vessel that
sailed direct from Britain to the colony. Mr. M‘Lachlan in the
course of a short time engaged in pastoral pursuits, and soon
found himself the purchaser of a station in the Wimmera district.
In 1864 he sold out, and went into a Riverina venture, in
which he still remains. He was appointed a territorial magistrate
in 1 855, and has been several years the manager of the monetary
institution named above.


91‘LelIail, Hon. William, was born at Crieff, Perthshire, Scot-
land, 12th August, 1831. Educated at the local schools, and was
brought up as a builder. Left Scotland in June, 1850, for Victoria,
then a portion of New South Wales. When gold was discovered
by Hargreaves, went to Summer Hill and Turon diggings, New
South Wales, and worked with some success. Returned to
Victoria in July, 1851, on discovery of gold there, and went
to Ballarat and Forest Creek, and was amongst the first few
who went from the creek to Bendigo (now Sandhurst) to work on
the surfacing found by Capt. Harrison. After working a patch of
surface at Golden Gully returned to Forest Creek. Then went to
Fryers Creek, at the head of Spring Gully, where enormous
quantities of gold were taken out, and his party did well. He was
an eye-witness of the scenes enacted by the rowdies and ruffians on
Murdering Flat, appropriately named after them. During
the summer of 1852 he and his party visited all the chief gold-
fields of Victoria, and were successful. In 1853 he went to
Melbourne. In 1857, the time of the Canton Lead, went to
Ararat, where 50,000 miners were collected. Was elected a
member of the Mining Board at the same time as Messrs. John
Woods and Ronald Campbell, and twelve months afterwards re-
turned to Melbourne. In 1859,theamendedConstitution Acthaving
made Ararat an electoral district returning two members, he
received a requisition signed by about 2000 electors, asking
him to become a candidate, and was elected by a large majority,
Mr. O’Hea (now member for Polwarth and South Grenville) being
second out of ten candidates who contested the election. Repre-
sented same district in the Legislative Assembly till the general
election in May, 1877, when he was beaten by Mr. W. Gaunson by
five votes. During his Parliamentary career was a member of
three Ministries, taking office first as successor to_ Mr. I. G.
Reeves as Commissioner of Public Works and Vice-President
of the Board of Land and Works, 19th January, 1870; and retiring
with his chief, Mr. Macpherson, on the 9th April same year.
Again took office as Minister of Mines with Mr. (now Sir Charles
Gavan) Duffy, and retired with his chief 10th June, 1872. Was
again Minister of Mines with Sir James M £ Culloch, 20th October,
1875, until the general election of 1877.
M‘Leod, John Norman, of Castlemaddy, landed at Indented
Heads, with sheep from Tasmania, on the 18th July, 1837, and
travelled round by Geelong thirty-five miles up the River
Moorabool, where he formed a station. In 1849 he sold out,
and purchased another station on the River Wannon. Was
made a magistrate by Sir George Gipps in 1841, and was the
only one, after the death of Dr. Watton, to attend the bench
at Hamilton—a distance of twenty miles from home. He


regularly attended once a fortnight, and often had to ride
long distances to hold inquests, until Governor Latrobe had
other magistrates appointed. In 1859, when member of Parlia-
ment for Portland, he succeeded in getting a bill brought in to
fine anyone for giving intoxicating drinks to the aboriginals,
and recommended the Government to make reserves of land for
them, that they might be induced to settle down and acquire
industrious habits. He also succeeded in getting local guardians
appointed, to receive blankets, clothes, and provisions, and distribute
amongst the natives when required—a board in Melbourne being
established to receive the grant of money to distribute propor-
tionately according to the number of aboriginals in each district
Mr, M‘Leod has always been their friend.
Macclermott, The Hon. Townsend, was born in Ireland, and
is a member of the Irish bar, a graduate of Trinity College,
Dublin, and was admitted to the Victorian bar in 1855, and
to the bar of New South Wales in 1877. In politics he has
always been an active supporter of Free-trade. He was returned
at the head of the poll as one of the members for Ballarat East
at the general election in 1874, and was appointed Solicitor-
General on the reconstruction of the Francis Government, in
July of the same year, and resigned office with the Kerferd
Ministry in August, 1875. When in Parliament he voted against
payment of members, opposed the financial scheme of Mr. Berry
in 1875; an d upon the resignation of that Government supported
the M‘Culloch Administration during the remainder of the
session, and especially in resisting the “ stonewall ” party. At the
general election in May, 1877, he again stood for Ballarat East,
but was defeated.
Macdonald, Alexander Cameron, of Melbourne, was born in
the county of Cumberland, New South Wales, in 1828, and
was educated there. Early in 1847 he brought horses over-
land from Sydney, for the then Port Phillip (now Melbourne)
market, and in the following year made two trips overland with
stock, rough journeys in those days. For a short time he resided at
the Peechelba station on the Ovens River, where he had charge
of about 600 horses. In 1849 he joined Mr. Surveyor Burnett,
and acquired practical knowledge of a profession, of which he as a
boy was an ardent student. The same year he settled in Geelong,
and became assistant to, and then partner with, Mr. Charles Rowand,
C.E., who was then practising as a surveyor, architect, and civil
engineer, under whose superintendence large warehouses for
Messrs. Thorne, Sparks and Co., and others near the present
Moorabool Wharf, were erected. On the discovery of gold, in
1851, Mr. Macdonald tried his fortune at Golden Point, Balia-


rat, and afterwards at Fryers Creek, with tolerable success, and
early in 1852 resumed the practice of his profession. About this
time his partner, Mr. Rowand, received the appointment of
Government engineer for the Western District. The discovery of
gold having enormously enhanced the value of land near the sea
port, as a consequence nearly every original Government allotment
within a radius of ten miles of the town of Geelong was sub-
divided into building lots, and sold to returned lucky diggers at
fabulous prices. The fortunate owners of the original Crown
allotments treated buyers and non-buyers at those sales to
splendid champagne lunches, and a band of music was a neces-
sary accompaniment. Several gentlemen made large fortunes in
those days of paper townships, yet, strange to say, the
Government land sales were not thronged with eager buyers.
The era of speculation in mining scrip set in, and between
1863 an d 1869 many fortunes were lost, however many
may have been made, and, like thousands of other well-to-do
colonists, Mr. Macdonald lost heavily, but it is to men of his
enterprising character that our goldfields owe much of their
development. In 1873, he became secretary of the Western
District Railway League, and was successful in engineering the
black line to a successful issue against the strong and determined
opposition of two Ministries. His thorough practical knowledge
and untiring persistence in what he felt and knew to be the
interests of the people of the Western District, resulted in the
passage of the Bill including the Geelong and Colac railway. He
was twice returned unopposed to the town council of Geelong, and
upon three occasions, in 1871 and 1874, received influential
requisitions to contest the constituencies of South Grant and
Geelong East for a seat in the Legislative Assembly, but was
unsuccessful, although receiving a large measure of support.
After twenty-five years’ residence in Geelong, he removed to
Melbourne in 1876. His experiences as an overland traveller,
and as an eye-witness of the old punt across the Yarra, near
the present site of Princes Bridge, the one-horse mail between
Geelong and Melbourne, the Vesta, Aphrasia , Thames , and the
palmy days of the Melbourne , Duncan Hoyle and Citizen steamers,
the varied phases of a digger’s life more than a quarter of a
century ago, would make an interesting volume by itself. In
politics Mr. Macdonald is a Liberal and Free-trader; a good
speaker, having large and varied experience of men and things,
and well-fitted to serve his country. In 1852 he married the
third daughter of the late Gilbert Robertson, one of the pioneer
journalists of this and the sister colony of Tasmania.
Macdonald, Rev. Donald, D.D., Presbyterian minister,
Emerald Hill, is a native of the North of Scotland, and was born


in the year 1820. He received his early education in the school
of his native parish, and at the usual age entered the University of
Aberdeen, then King’s College; passing through the usual curri-
culum, and taking his degree of M.A. in 1841. He joined the
theological classes in Aberdeen, under Dr. Mearns, in 1842,
intending to prepare himself for_ the ministry of the Church ot
Scotland; but the disruption taking place in 1843, he took the
protesting side, and went to Edinburgh to study theology under
the celebrated Dr. Chalmers, at the Free Church Hall. In 1846
he was licensed to preach the gospel by the Free Church Presby-
tery of Dingwall, and as he could preach in the Gaelic language,
he was stationed for several years in the and Islands,
spending one year in the outer Hebrides, and visiting all the
islands of the group from Lewis to Barra. This was the era of
the failure of the potato crop, and the consequent removal of large
numbers of Highlanders to the colonies. While in the Hebrides
Mr. Macdonald gave his spare time to the study of Celtic literature,
and he is still able to enjoy the more recent discussions among the
learned on the ancient language of the Gael. In 1851, on the dis-
covery of gold in Australia, multitudes of Scotchmen, Highlanders
and Lowlanders, rushed to the scene of the golden harvest, where-
upon the Free Church of Scotland resolved at once to send a
minister along with the emigrants, and Mr. Macdonald, who was
bi-lingual,—that is to say, could preach in both English and
Gaelic, —was commissioned to proceed to Victoria, where he
arrived in the ship Allison at the end of 1852. His first experience
in Australia was being put in quarantine for six weeks. He was
received by the Free Presbyterian Synod of Victoria in February,
1853, and he has been ever since an active minister. It was found
on his arrival that the Highland immigrants were scattered so
much on the goldfields and in the bush, that it was impossible
to form Gaelic congregations, and Mr. Macdonald soon ceased to
officiate in the Celtic tongue. In May, 1854, he was appointed
to Emerald Hill, a suburb of Melbourne, where he has remained
ever since, and where he has been successful in forming and
holding together an important Presbyterian congregation. In
x 855 he was chosen moderator of the synod, and was the means,
on the inauguration of the new Constitution, of securing rights to
his own section of Presbyterians equal to those which were held
by the other religious bodies in the colony. At the same time he
took an active part in the negotiations for a union of the various
branches of the Presbyterian denomination in Victoria, irrespective
of Scotch distinctions. He was present at the formation of the
General Assembly of the Presbyterian Church of Victoria in the
Scots Church, Melbourne, April, 1859. In 1862 he received the
highest honour which his church has to bestow, the moderatorship
of the assembly. During the continuance of the denominational


system of education, Mr, Macdonald was for many years convener
of the assembly’s education committee, and he gave leading
evidence to the Royal Commission on Education in 1866. In the
same year he was admitted an ad eundem Master of Arts by the
University of Melbourne, thereby acquiring a seat in the Senate
of the University; and in 1870 he received the high honour of a
doctor’s degree from the University of Aberdeen, He has been
since 1854 convener of the assembly’s widows’ and orphans’
fund committee, and he has been for several years convener of
his church’s home mission and church extension committee.
At the Presbyterian Church Assembly in 1875, the question came
up of sending commissioners to the General Presbyterian Council,
which was expected to meet in Edinburgh in July, 1876. Mr.
Macdonald was one of two ministers elected to represent the
colonial church at that great gathering. On reaching the old
country, he visited the Presbyterian churches of the United King-
dom, and was welcomed everywhere. Returning to Australia, he
came overland, visiting en route Italy, Egypt, Palestine, and Syria.
Macgreffor, Hon. John, was born in the Island of Skye,
Scotland, in 1828. Arrived with his father, the late John
Macgregor, land surveyor in this colony, in 1840. After re-
ceiving the ordinary school education, he studied for the law, and
was admitted a solicitor of the Supreme Court in 1855, and has
since practised his profession in Melbourne. At the general
election of 1868 stood unsuccessfully for East Bourke, and in the
following year was returned for Rodney on the retirement of the
late Mr. Wilson Gray, and continued to represent that district
until 1874, when, on acccount of ill-health, he did not stand at
the general election of that year, and has not since sought
re-election. In May, 1866, Mr. Macgregor was sworn a member
of the Executive Council, and appointed Minister of Mines in
the first M‘Culloch Administration on the then retirement from
office of the Hon. J. F. Sullivan, and he held it until the resigna-
tion of that Ministry in 1868. Did not again re-enter office,
although he had opportunities of doing so on the formation of
several subsequent Ministries. On the resignation of the
Macpherson Government, was invited to form a Ministry by
Viscount Canterbury, and after communicating with Sir James
M‘Culloch, recommended that that gentleman should be sent for.
When Sir James formed his third Administration, Mr. Macgregor,
both before and after his return to Parliament, took an active
part in the various efforts that were made to secure the abolition
of State-aid to religion, the establishment of a secular and com-
pulsory system of public instruction, and the passing of other
measures of a progressive character. He brought in, and for the
first time carried, a Bill for the Payment of Members.


Mackay, The Hon. Angus, M.P., was born in Aberdeen in the
year 1825, and emigrated to Australia when quite young, his father
being an early settler in Sydney. He was educated in the
Australian College, and intended for the church; but his pro-
clivities were of a literary character, and in 1847 became editor of
a newspaper called the Atlas. He held that position during two
or three years, or until the discovery of gold, whereupon he went
to the Ophir and Turon rush as special correspondent for the
Sydney Empire. In the earlier of part 1853 he arrived in Victoria,
and took an active part in the endeavour to procure the abolition
of the license fees. From his experience on the goldfields,
he was invited to give evidence before the select committee
appointed to inquire into the grievances of the diggers. He next
went to Sandhurst as special correspondent for the Argus r
and assisted the people in getting a voice in the government
of the country. Shortly afterwards he, in conjunction with Mr.
J. J. Casey and the late Mr, James Henderson, purchased the
Bendigo Advertiser , of which he is still the principal proprietor.
A little later, with Mr. Casey and Mr. R. R. Haverfield, he
founded the Riverina Herald in Echuca, and yet retains an
interest in that journal. As far back as 1856 he was looked upon
as a coming man, and was thus referred to in a list of “ likely
men,” published in that year“ Mackay, Angus, Australian.
A°e’ about forty. Editor of the Bendigo Advertiser. A man
of° considerable ability.” His friends frequently invited him
to contest one of the seats for the Sandhurst Boroughs, but
he always refused until 1868, when he defeated Mr. Halfey by a
large majority. On the 9th April, 1870, he accepted office
as & Minister of Mines under Sir James McCulloch, and he subse-
quently acted as Minister of Education. He held his seat for
Sandhurst until May, 1877, when he was defeated by Mr.
Blackham; but the election was upset on petition. Another
contest took place, and Mr. Mackay gained the seat. He voted
for the want of confidence motion in the Sladen Ministry; against
the committal of Glass and Quarterman for bribery of the members
of Parliament; against granting to shire councils fines, &c.,
imposed under local government'; for the Land Bill of 1869, for
vesting sites of schools in the Board of Education, against
granting sites for churches and ministers’ dwellings, against
granting to free selectors the same right of impounding which was
given to squatters, for the renewal of squatters’ licenses until up to
the end of 1880, for payment of members, for Mr. Higinbotham’s
famous resolutions protesting against the unlawful interference of
the Imperial Government in the domestic affairs of Victoria,
against Mr. Higinbotham’s clause in the Publicans’ Bill and for
several of Mr. Everard’s resolutions regarding the eight hours
labour system. Mr. Mackay has long been known as a good


cricketer; and he has more recently taken much interest in
yachting. The extent of his popularity in his own district
may best be gauged by the elections which he has so successfully
contested. He was many years ago appointed a justice of the
peace.
MacMahon, Sir Charles, K.M.G., was born 10th July, 1824,
and is the son of the late Rt. Hon. Sir William MacMahon, at
one time Master of the Rolls in Ireland, by his second wife
Charlotte, sister of Sir Robert Shaw, Bart. His grandfather,
on the paternal side, was John MacMahon, Esq., patentee
comptroller of the port of Limerick; and the seat of the family
is Facarry House, county Tyrone, Ireland. The subject of this
sketch commenced life as an ensign in the 71st Highland Light
Infantry, from which he exchanged into the 10th Hussars.
Shortly after retiring from the army, with the rank of captain,
he emigrated to Australia, and landed in Melbourne in 1859.
Was soon afterwards appointed assistant-commissioner of police,
under Sir W. H. F. Mitchell, and succeeded that officer as chief
commissioner. Captain MacMahon was elected M.P. for West
Bourke, 12th August, 1861, and represented that district during
the session of the third Parliament of Victoria, and held office
without a portfolio in the third O’Shanassy Ministry. In the
fourth Parliament Captain MacMahon did not hold a seat, being
beaten by Mr. M. L. King, in the contest for his first con-
stituency; but on the 29th January, 1866, he was more fortunate,
and was returned to the House as member for West Melbourne,
which electorate he still continues to represent. He was elected
by the Assembly as Speaker 25th April, 1871; re-elected on the
9th May, 1874, and vacated the chair in May, 1877, being
superseded by the present Speaker, Sir Charles Cavan Duffy, who
contested the seat. Sir Charles MacMahon was created Knight
Bachelor in 1875.
Macpliersoil, Hon. John Alexander, M.P., barrister-at-law,
Melbourne, was bom in Victoria, and was engaged for some
time in squatting pursuits; he was subsequently admitted to, but
has never practised, his profession, being a large landowner,
and having interests in pastoral pursuits. He was returned to
the Legislative Assembly for Portland on the 3rd November,
1864, to the fourth Parliament of Victoria under the new Constitu-
tion, after having been defeated at the same election for Dundas
by Mr. Fairbairn. In 1865 was returned for Dundas, and again
for the same constituency in 1868. Accepted office as Chief
Secretary, and was re-elected on the Bth October, 1869, and on
the defeat of his Ministry and the formation of an Administration
under Sir James M‘Culloch, in 1870, Mr. Macpherson became


Commissioner of Crown Lands—a proceeding that was much
commented upon at the time, but was re-elected by the same
constituency. He was again returned for Dundas in 1871 at
the general election, and again in 1874. On the 20th October,
1875, he accepted office as Chief Secretary, with Sir James
M‘Culloch as Treasurer and leader of the House, and was
again returned by the same constituency, and held office until
the general election of May, 1877, when he was again elected for
same constituency, and retired with his chief on the return
of an overwhelming majority in favour of their opponents during
the last session of Parliament. His last public appearance up to
date was at the opening of the railway to Plamilton, where he
spoke as if he considered that the times were out of joint, and
that his public career was ended.
Madden, John, 8.A., LL.D., M.P. for Sandridge, was bom
16th May, 1844, at Cork, Ireland; son of John Madden, solicitor,
of that city. Went to England in September, 1852, and was at
private school there until 1854, when he went to college at Beau-
champ, in France, and remained there until September, 1856, when
with the rest of his father’s family he came to Melbourne, where
he arrived 10th January, 1857. Matriculated at the Melbourne
University October, 1861; graduated as B.A. in 1864, as LL.B.
in 1865, for which year he was gold medalist in law, and passed
and was admitted to the degree of LL.D. in 1868, being the only
member of the University who has ever passed the course pre-
scribed for that degree. On 14th September, 1865, he was called
to the bar, and has practised at his profession since then. He was
a candidate at the general election of 1871 for the district of
West Bourke, and was defeated; but at the following general
election, in 1874, he was elected at the head of the poll for the
same district. On the 19th October, 1875, he accepted office as
Minister of Justice in the McCulloch Administration, but ongoing
to his constituency he was defeated by Mr. M. L. King. He
continued, however, a member of the Government, and on the
27th July, 1876, he was elected member for Sandridge in the
place of Mr. Thomas, who had died, and at the general election
of 1877 he was re-elected for the same seat, which he still repre-
sents in the Assembly. Immediately after that election, the
Government of which he was a member resigned. In August,
1875, he was elected Warden of the Melbourne University, and
the following year he was re-elected to that office, which he still holds.
Mark, James, ex-mayor of Hotham, was born in the year
1831, at Musselburgh, near Edinburgh, in the county of
Midlothian; was educated in the local school, and emigrated
to Victoria in 1854. He arrived in Melbourne in the earlier part


of that year, and, catching the gold fever, proceeded to the
Bendigo diggings to try his luck. Finding that not so good as he
anticipated, he returned to Melbourne and embarked in business.
After having achieved a fair success there, he invested his capital
in Hotham. In 1865 he was elected a member of the municipal
council of Hotham, and became an active and energetic member
of that body, taking a prominent part in various local improve-
ments, such as the removal of the manure depot, the annexation
of the Flemington bank to the town of Hotham, and the cutting-
down of the embankment towards the approach to the Flemington
Bridge, thereby conveying the drainage of the Royal Park into
the Moonee Ponds Creek, which previously ran through Hotham.
In 1868 he was elected mayor of Hotham, and in the following
year he retired by effluxion of time. He was re-elected at the
head of the poll, after a severe contest. He was the first to
initiate a scheme for borrowing money for the purpose of carrying
out permanent public works. After continuous agitation on his
part, the loan was agreed to by the narrow majority of five to
four, whereupon the four dissentients left the council with a bare
quorum to frame a schedule of works in accordance with the
Act. Mr. Mark then urged that a certain portion of the loan
should be devoted to the erection of a town hall, but the four
remaining councillors refusing to accede to the proposition,
he left the council chamber without a quorum. Being unable to
proceed with any business in his absence, he was called back by
his colleagues, who assented to his view of the matter. To Mr.
Mark’s firmness on that occasion, the people of Hotham are
indebted for the magnificent town hall they now enjoy. During
the term of his mayoralty he presided in such a manner as to
gain the approbation and esteem of his fellow councillors, who,
on his retiring from office, presented him with an illuminated
address, expressing their thanks for the very valuable services
rendered by him to them and the public during his official
connection with the council, particularly for the intelligence,
ability, and zeal displayed by him as chairman. In 1877 he was
a candidate in the Liberal interest for North Melbourne, at the
general election, for the Legislative Assembly; but finding
himself too late in the field, and believing his chances to be
doubtful, he retired from the contest. He has long evinced a
strong interest in outdoor sports, and has rendered valuable
aid to various local clubs, having for their object the healthy
recreation of the public. He always took a deep interest in the
charitable institutions of Melbourne and more particularly in the
Benevolent Asylum, near which he resides.
Martin, Peter John, brewer, Melbourne, was born at Oran-
more, county Galway. Is the youngest son of Peter Martin,


farmer, of that county; was educated at the local school, and
brought up to the ironmongery business. In 1852 went to
Dublin, and left for Victoria by the Larina , the first ship that left
that port direct for Australia. Arrived in February the following
year, and started for the mines with a number of young men.
On reaching Gisborne Mr. Martin ascertained that the men at
work at road-making earned good wages, and he determined to
follow their example. After working there for a short time
he took some contracts for road-making; then contracted to
collect the Government road tolls, from which he paid Govern-
ment per month. When the tolls were divided amongst
the boroughs and shires, he, in 1861, bought the brewery
and buildings in Flinders-lane east, where he is now carrying
on his business, from the trustees of John Anderson and Sons,
to which he made large additions as trade increased, which it did
rapidly. In 1871 added the malting business, and recently
the wine and spirit trade, building a large bluestone store on
the opposite side of the street to the brewery at a cost of
He is a large holder of hotel property in all parts of Melbourne
and the suburbs. As a brewer he obtained prizes at the
Industrial Exhibition at Dublin in 1865 for ales and porters, and
at London in 1873, and at Philadelphia in 1876. The report on
ales by the Centennial Commissioners on report of the judges
states that “ this ale is brewed from Victorian malt and Tas-
manian hops, is very fine, exceedingly well brewed, and of delicate
flavour. 5 ’ The Carlton Brewery and Mr. Martin were the only
prize-takers. In 1866 he stood for West Bourke in opposition
to the “ tack ” and the Darling grant, and was defeated by
about forty votes; and in 1870 stood for the Western Province, and
was again defeated by a small majority.
Masters, Samuel, chief clerk, Melbourne corporation, is
youngest son of Henry Pyne Masters, Kinsale, Ireland, principal
port officer there; was born at Kinsale, 1820; educated at the
Mercantile school, Cork. First occupied as shipping agent, Swan-
sea, South Wales, at Cameron’s Coalbrook Steam Coal Company.
Emigrated to Australia, and came to Victoria in the ship Julia , in
1852. Settled in North Melbourne, then almost uninhabited, and
built the second house there. When that portion of the city, then
a part of Bourke Ward, was constituted a separate ward, Mr.
Masters was one of the first representatives of that ward, now the
borough of Hotham, in the city council. In 1861, was appointed
chief clerk of the corporation of the city of Melbourne. In 1862
went to reside at Caulfield, where he has permanently established
his home. Was elected a member of the district road board.
In 1865, on the retirement of the then chairman (Mr. Justice
Stephen), was elected to fill the vacancy, and re-elected three con-


secutive times. When the road board was constituted a shire he
was elected a member of the council, which office he holds to this
date. On the visit of Mr. Fitzgibbon, town clerk of the city, to
Europe, on leave of absence, Mr. Masters in January 1875, was
elected by the council acting town clerk during his absence.
He is auditor of the New Third Victoria Building Society, first
and second series, and holds appointment as parliamentary agent
under the Speaker’s warrant of Legislative Assembly since 1873.
Michie, The Hon. Archibald, was born in London, and was
educated at Westminster School, and called to the bar by the
Society of Middle Temple in the year 1838. In 1839, Mr. Michie
emigrated to Sydney, and practised with success. Being of a very
active temperament, and possessor of literary ability, the rising
young barrister determined to devote his energies to journalism,
and associated himself with Mr. Robert Lowe (now the Right
Honourable Robert Lowe, member for the University of London)
in conducting The Atlas , a newspaper devoted to liberal politics.
After a visit paid to the mother country, Mr. Michie arrived in
Melbourne in 1852, immediately entered as a member of the
Victorian bar, and on 26th October of the same year was
appointed a non-elective member of the first Legislative Council;
but at the close of the second session resigned his seat, and for
some years devoted himself to the practice of his profession at the
Supreme Court. In 1854 Mr. Michie became proprietor of the
Herald newspaper, but, from various causes, the journal was at first
a failure, and involved its owner in monetary difficulties, to
extricate himself from which he had to pay strict attention to his
professional labour. After the Ballarat riots, Mr. Michie gave his
services, free and unsolicited, as counsel to defend the State
prisoners. In September, 1856, Mr. Michie re-entered Parliament
as member of the Assembly for Melbourne, and was again returned
in May, 1857, on his acceptance of the office of Attorney-General
in the reconstructed Haines Ministry. Subsequently he was
returned for St. Kilda in August, 1859. He did not stand at the
general election in 1861, but was appointed Minister of Justice in
1863, and was returned for Polwarth. In 1866 Mr. Michie was once
more returned for St. Kilda, and in 1868 for South Gipps Land.
In 1870, he again assumed office as Attorney-General, and was
elected member of the Legislative Council. In 1872 he visited
Europe to recruit his health, and shortly after his return, in 1873,
was appointed Agent-General for the colony of Victoria at London,
a position which he still holds.
Mirams, James, M.P., is the third son of the Rev. James
Mirams. He was born at Lambeth, near London, on the 2nd of
January, 1839; was educated at Chishill, Essex. At fourteen


went to his uncle, an ironmonger near London, and was after-
wards in the same business at Royston, until with the rest of the
family he left England for Melbourne, where he arrived in May,
1857. Went into agricultural pursuits; but after five years
relinquished farming. In Melbourne he obtained an appoint-
ment as assistant teacher in the National School, Fitzroy; and
about same time entered into business as a bookseller, stationer,.
&c., in Smith-street, Collingwood. Gave up this business, when
he started the Premier Permanent Building, Land and Investment
Association, of which he became secretary. He is deacon and
treasurer of the Oxford-street Congregational Church, minute-
secretary of the Congregational Union and Mission, chairman of
the College Committee, and trustee of the Ministers’ Provident
Association. He has been a total abstainer from birth, and an
active advocate of temperance. He has been twice elected
one of the representatives of Collingwood in the Legislative
Assembly, and is a commissioner for the Paris Exhibition.
Miranda, David, was born in the east end of London, on
the 9th of November, 1834, and was at the age of nine a soprano
choir boy singer of exceeding excellence. He received his first
musical instruction from the great German teacher, Julius Monbach,
to whom he was indebted for a sound elementary education, and
he afterwards became a pupil of the famous Tom Cook. In
early manhood he became a pupil of Mr. Howard Glover, the
celebrated composer and musical critic of the Morning Post; and
he made his first appearance on the stage in Glasgow, in his
seventeeth year, under Mr. Glover’s management. He was next
articled as a pupil to Mr. Frederic Shrivall, a very accomplished
tenor, taught by the same master that developed the wonderful
musical resources of Jenny Lind. After studying in Italy for a
long time under the best masters in Milan he returned to England,
and made his first appearance at Drury-lane in 1854, in the
Cossack soldier in “ L’Etoile du Nord,” where he also played
and sang as Tom Tug in “The Waterman.” Mr. Miranda
sang “Tam o’ Shanter” (Howard Glover’s version) at Exeter
Hall, London, in presence of Meyerbeer, and he was handsomely
complimented by that great musician, as well as by the London
Times and other leading journals. He was the principal tenor
at St. George’s Cathedral, Southwark, for some years, until in
1858 he accepted an engagement to appear in America, where
he sang with great success, in conjunction with Madame Lucy
Escott. He was the first who sang in Costa’s “Eli” for the
Mendelssohn Union, and in New York he was elected an
honorary member of that society. Returning to England, he
assisted, in 1863, in the opening of the great Agricultural Hall,
Islington, as a place of amusement; and also sang in Costa’s


“Eli,” in the Crystal Palace, Sydenham. In about 1866 he
made his first appearance in English opera, in Covent Garden
Theatre, where he sang as principal tenor during forty-two
consecutive nights, after which he accepted an operatic and
concert engagement to travel through South Africa, where he
performed before, and was warmly praised by, His Royal Highness
the Duke of Edinburgh. In Cape Town he was married, in 1869,
to Miss Annette Hirst.
Mitchell, The Hon. Sir William Henry Fancourt, M.L.C.,
Kt. Bach. (1875), President of the Legislative Council, son of the
Rev. George Barkley Mitchell, Vicar of St. Mary’s and All Saints,
Leicester, and Chaplain to His late Royal Highness the Duke of
York. He arrived in Tasmania at a very early age, and for a time
filled the office of Acting Colonial Secretary. Came to Victoria (then
Port Phillip) about 1840, and engaged in squatting pursuits,
taking up country in the neighbourhood of Kyneton. At the
time of the first gold discoveries, when the police was in a
very disorganised state, Lieutenant-Governor Latrobe offered him
the chief commissionership of police with almost unlimited
powers of action, and the result was that after a time a tolerably
efficient force was created. He introduced the cadet system,
by promising a number of dashing young fellows commissions
and outfits as police cadets, on their passing through a successful
probation in hunting bushrangers and doing escort duty, &c.
To a great extent bushranging was by this means stamped out.
Captain (now Sir Charles) MacMahon was appointed by the chief
commissioner as head of the city police, and on Sir William (then
Mr.) Mitchell in the course of a few years going to the old country
on leave of absence, Captain MacMahon succeeded him as acting-
chief commissioner. On Sir William’s return he entered political
life, and was elected to the Legislative Council as one of the five
original members for the North-Western Province in September,
1856, and in 1877 is still a member for the same province, having
been several times re-elected on acceptance of office and on
retirement by rotation. He was Postmaster-General from April,
1857, to March, 1858, during which time his long official training
and experience enabled him to effect an almost total reorgani-
sation of the department. He was Commissioner of Railways from
December, 1861, until June, 1863. In March, 1869, he was
elected Chairman of Committees of the Legislative Council,
and retained that office until the retirement of Sir James Palmer
from the Presidency, consequent on the vacation of his seat for the
Western Province by effluxion of time, and in October, 1870,
Sir William was elected President. In 1875 he received the honour
of knighthood.


Moles worth, The Hon. Robert, one of the Judges of the
Supreme Court of the colony of Victoria, is a son of Hickman
Blaney Molesworth, Esq., a cadet of the family of Viscount
Molesworth, of Swords, county Dublin; was born in Dublin,
3rd November, 1816; was educated there, and entered Trinity
College, Dublin, where he gained a scholarship, and was second
for the Gold Medal and other honours. Mr. Molesworth was
called to the bar at Easter Term, 1828; joined the Munster
circuit, and practised in the courts until 1852, when he emigrated
to Adelaide. He came the next year to Melbourne, and was at
once admitted to the Victorian bar. In that year he was for
a short time Acting Chief Justice, during the absence, on leave,
of Sir Wm. A’Beckett, and became Solicitor-General on 4th
January, 1854. He was created a judge on 17th June, 1856,
and has since presided over the equity side of the court.
Monahan, Thomas, was born at Dublin, Ireland, 1812. Left
Kingston in the ship North Britain , of London, 13th August,
1:839, with 360 emigrants for Australia, of whom ninety died
on the voyage. Mr. Monahan was appointed hospital attendant,
and did his duty so well that he fully justified the high character
that he had gained during seven years’ engagement at the hospital
of Kildare. His recommendation to Government was signed
by most of the first people of that neighbourhood, and on
landing at Sydney in the beginning of 1840 he was presented with
the highest testimonials by the chief medical officer of the ship. He
was married on 22nd February, 1841, to Miss Timms, of Sydney,
New South Wales, and soon after left for Melbourne, where
he arrived the same year. He first opened the Port Phillip Club
in Lonsdale-street, and remained in it till -it closed, and most
of the members went to the Melbourne Club. He then kept
on the stables for some years, and in 1845 built the Queen’s Arms
Hotel in Swanston-street. Soon after devoted himself almost
entirely to building, and has been doing so ever since, holding
large, extensive, and valuable properties in Melbourne, St. Kilda,
Emerald Hill, and Sandridge. The Evelyn Tunnel and the
Red Jacket, Buckland, were about the only mining ventures
he touched, with a loss of something like jQ 7000. He never
gave a bill or a bond, an 1.0. U. or a mortgage, but has
taken a good many. He always paid in cash for great or
small things, and no persuasion could induce him to do other-
wise. Mr. Monahan is essentially a self-made man, and at the
present day transacts all his own business, and Mrs. Monahan
keeps the books.
Moorhouse, The Right Rev. James, D.D., Anglican Bishop
of Melbourne, was born in Sheffield, Yorkshire, in the year 1826,


being the son of a highly-respected merchant in that town. He
was primarily educated by a private tutor, and afterwards entered
St. John’s College, Cambridge, where he graduated Senior Optime
in 1853, and he was ordained in the same year. He next acted
as a curate of St. Neot’s, and in 1855 returned to Sheffield as
curate to Dr. Sale, whose daughter he married in 1861. Dr.
Moorhouse soon afterwards became curate to Canon Harvey,
rector of Hornsey; and in 1862 he was appointed to the
incumbency of St. John’s, Fitzroy-square. Three years later
he was Hulsean lecturer at Cambridge, and in 1867 he was
promoted to the highly important vicarage of Paddington, where
he exercised a very unusual amount of influence, and was pro-
ductive of a very large amount of good. In the following year
he became rural dean of Paddington, and in 1874 he had the
distinguished honour of acting as Chaplain in Ordinary to Her
Majesty the Queen; he also became a prebendary of St. Paul’s.
He had previously been Warburtonian lecturer, and he several times
preached before the University of Cambridge. Early in 1875
Dr. Moorhouse was appointed to succeed Dr. Perry as Bishop
of Melbourne, on the resignation of that prelate. On the
occasion of the laying of the foundation-stone of the Sale
Memorial Church at Sheffield, in May, 1875, Hr. Moorhouse
made a remarkably effective speech, in the course of which
he narrated the circumstances under which he was about to
take charge of the diocese of Melbourne. “The honour,” he
said, “had not been sought by him; but he felt it to be his
duty to sever his connection with his old friends, and fulfil his
onerous functions in Victoria to the best of his ability.” He
was most cordially received in Melbourne, where his undoubted
talent was at once recognised, and he has become a great
favourite all over the colony. In a recent series of lectures
delivered by him in Melbourne, on “ Messianic Prophecies,” he
evinced deep biblical reading and very thoughtful study. He is
an excellent preacher, and his sermons are attended by members
of various religious denominations. He has several times appeared
in print, and amongst the more important of his publications may
be mentioned “ Nature and Revelation,” “ Four Sermons preached
before the University of Cambridge,” 1861; “Our Lord Jesus
Christ, the Subject of Growth in Wisdom;” “ Hulsean Lectures,”
1865; “Three Lectures delivered before the Cambridge Uni-
versity,” 1870. Finding that no religious instruction could be
given during school hours, or by the school teachers, to the
children attending the State schools of Victoria, Dr. Moorhouse
recently delivered several stirring addresses, urging on the less
busy members of his flock to give such instruction outside
school hours, and many volunteers have since responded in a
manner that must be very gratifying to him.


Mueller (Von), Baron Ferdinand, C.M.G., M.D., Ph.D.,
F.R.S. Born in Rostock in 1825, and was educated at Schleswig
and Kiel. He emigrated to Australia in 1847, and from 1848 to
1852 devoted his time to the practical study of botany, whilst on a
scientific tour through the territory of South Australia. In
*852 Dr. Mueller was appointed Government botanist of
Victoria, a position which he still holds. From 1852 to 1855
he was busily engaged in exploring the colony of Victoria, and in
the latter year he joined, as phytographic naturalist, the expedition
sent out under Augustus Gregory by the Duke of Newcastle to
explore the River Victoria, and other portions of the north division of
the Australian continent. He was one of the four who reached
Termination Lake in 1856, and accompanied Gregory’s expedition
overland to Moreton Bay. In 1857 Herr Von Mueller accepted
the directorship of the Botanical Gardens, Melbourne, but resigned
the position in 1873. He is the author of many valuable works on
botany; eight volumes of his “ Fragmenta Phytographise,” and two
volumes of “ Plants of Victoria,” have already appeared, and
he has also contributed to “ Flora Australiensis,” of which six
volumes are completed. He was one of the commissioners for the
Melbourne Industrial Exhibitions of 1854, 1862, and 1867; was
elected Fellow of the Royal Society of London in 1861, was
created as hereditary baron by the King of Wurtemberg in 1871,
received from Her Majesty the Order of St. Michael and St.
George, and is a Commander of the Order of St. Jago of Portugal
and that of Isabella of Spain, and has the Danish Order of
the Dannebrog. He is also a Fellow of the Royal Society.
Mllliro, Hon. James, M.P., was born in 1832, in the county of
Sutherlandshire, Scotland. Was educated at the local school at
Armadale village. Went to Edinburgh at sixteen years old, to
Messrs. T. Constable and Co., printers and publishers, and left
Edinburgh for Victoria in 1858 in the ship Champion of the Seas.
Immediately after reaching the colony was employed by the firm
of Fergusson and Moore, and remained with them till 1865, when
he started the Victorian Permanent Property Investment and Build-
ing Society, on the model of the Scottish Property Investment Com-
pany, established in Edinburgh in 1849, the pioneer of the perman-
ent building societies. Mr. Munro also started the Melbourne
Woollen Mill Company, and is still chairman of directors.
He also started the Victorian Permanent Fire Insurance Company
in 1875, with a capital of 100,000, of which 10,000 was paid
up, all of which was subscribed in one afternoon. This company
now pays 10 per cent. In 1871 he was elected for North Mel-
bourne, defeating Mr. J. J. Burtt, the former member. In August,
1875, joined the Berry Ministry as Minister of Public Instruction.
On the new Electoral Act coming into force, Carlton and North


Melbourne were divided into two separate electorates. Mr.
Munro at the general election in May, 1877, determined to stand
for Carlton against Mr. Curtain, and had to build a hall which
cost him before he could hold a meeting in the new
electoral district, his opponent having secured all the suitable
places. He was elected, and soon after asked to join Mr, Berry’s
Cabinet, but declined, partially on business grounds, but chiefly
because he thought the Ministry ought to be represented in the
Legislative Council by a member of the Cabinet. The Austral-
asian Templar of 1874 describes Mr. Munro as “liberal and
discriminating protectionist,” and he has been a total abstainer all
his life.
Murphy, Sir Francis, born in Cork, where his father was for
upwards of thirty years head of the South of Ireland Department
for the Transport of Convicts. He received his early education
in his native town, where he also studied privately for the medical
profession. Subsequently he entered as a medical student at
Trinity College, Dublin, from whence he proceeded to the Royal
College of Surgeons, London; passed his examination, and became
a member of that body. In June, 1836, Dr. Murphy emigrated to
Sydney, New South Wales, and was immediately appointed by the
Governor of the colony (Sir R. Bourke) to a position on the staff
of colonial surgeons. On appointment he proceeded to take
charge of a portion of the southern district, in the county of
Argyle, but soon afterwards, being led into agricultural
pursuits, resigned his appointment as colonial surgeon, and
finally discontinued practice as a medical man. After leav-
ing the Government service, Dr. Murphy purchased a con-
siderable quantity of land; soon became the largest grain-grower
in the county of Argyle; married in 1840 the eldest daughter
of Lieutenant Reid, R.N.; and in 1847 came to Victoria,
where he purchased a station on the Ovens River, in the Beech-
worth district. Dr. Murphy occupied the position of justice of the
peace in New South Wales for eight years, with great credit to
himself and satisfaction to the public; but it was in Victoria that
he in 1851 first became a legislator, on the occasion of his being
returned for the Murray Boroughs at the first election which took
place after the separation of Victoria from New South Wales.
Very shortly after his election, the subject of this notice was
elected Chairman of Committees to the first House of Legislature.
In 1852 he sold his pastoral property, and came to reside per-
manently in Melbourne. In 1853 he was re-elected as member of
Parliament for the Murray Boroughs, and resigned the chairmanship
of committees to take post as president of the central road board,
during the tenure of which office he, for a space, held the position
of Speaker in the Assembly during the absence—on account of


illness—of Dr. Palmer in March, 1855, Resigned the presidency
of the road board in November, 1856, and on the inauguration of
the new Constitution was again elected for the Murray Boroughs,
and appointed Speaker to the House by the unanimous concurrence
of all parties. He was again elected, on the appeal to the country
in 1859; and on the occasion of the general elections in 1861 and
1864, his old constituents returned him to Parliament, once more
to be reinstated as Speaker, which position he held until the
dissolution of Parliament on the 25th January, 1871. In iB6O
Dr. Murphy was created a knight bachelor, and was in 1866 and in
1868 returned to Parliament as M.P. for Grenville, which district
he represented until 1871, when, being defeated in the electoral
contest, he retired for a short time from political life. In 1872 he
returned to Parliament as representative in the Council for the
Eastern Province, which position he held until 1876, when he
resigned his seat and returned to England.
Murray, Andrew, journalist, Melbourne, son of the Rev.
W. Murray, of the Church of Scotland; born 1813, at Kirkdean,
on the Solway, near Dumfries, Scotland. Educated at Glasgow,
where in 1835 and 1836 he obtained at the Andersonian
University a gold medal, and in 1837 obtained the prize of
fifteen guineas for essay from the Glasgow Peel Club, awarded
by Professors Fleming, Buchanan, and Sir D. K. Sandford, of the
Glasgow University. In 1839 left Scotland for South Australia,
and arrived in Adelaide same year. Visited Melbourne and
Sydney at that time, and in 1843 was editor, and afterwards
proprietor, of the South Australian and of the Daily Chronicle;
also Government printer and publisher of the Government
Gazette; editor and publisher of book almanacs up to 1852,
when he joined the Argus staff as commercial editor and political
writer. Editor and proprietor of Murray's Prices Current.
Edited first Victorian book almanac in 1855, and editor of the Argus
in 1855 and 1856; subsequently editor and proprietor of the
Pcofiomist. During his well-occupied literary career, he found
time to plant vineyards near Adelaide arid near Melbourne.
Napier, Thomas, of Essendon, came to Victoria from Tas-
mania in March, 1837. He was a partner in a building firm in
Hobart Town for three or four years, but as soon as Port Phillip
was discovered he chartered a vessel with timber to establish a
business there. When he landed there were about 300 inhabitants,
including a staff of officials, and a few prisoners from Sydney as
servants. Melbourne consisted of two weatherboarded stores,
tents, and sod huts. Those who brought over stock, which was
exclusively from Van Diemen’s Land (now Tasmania), went up
the country and chose a spot for themselves. Their flocks were


small, from two to five hundred, and ewes were then worth about
£3 each. When Mr. Napier landed there was great excitement
about Gellibrand and Hesse, two eminent lawyers, who left Geelong
for an exploring tour in the Western District, and were never after
heard of alive. Nor were their remains, nor those of their
horses discovered, although several search parties went out to
look for them, accompanied by Buckley, the white man who had
been for years with the blacks. The first land sale took place on
the Ist June, 1837. Mr. J. Pascoe Fawkner bought the first
allotment at the corner of Spencer and Flinders streets, and Mr.
Napier bought the land upon which the Commercial bank now
stands, upon which to erect a house for himself and wife, who had
remained at Hobart Town, After being about eighteen months in
business, he took a cattle station and left Melbourne for a time.
Mr. Napier steadily prospered, and has now been settled down a
good many years at his residence at Essendon, Mr. Napier
remembers the first brick house being erected in Bourke-street,
which then was the residence of the first Presbyterian minister,
Mr. Forbes; and the first brick store, which belonged to the late
Mr. Strachan, of Geelong, and is situated on the north-west corner
of William and Little Flinders streets. During Mr. Napier’s
second summer in Port Phillip, at a time when a Mr. Campbell
(who is now living at St. Kilda), the first teacher in the colony,
had just entered his house about midday, Mrs. Napier standing
at the door saw a peculiar cloud north-west—she had hardly time
to shut the door, the wind being so sudden and strong. The
singularity of the storm was the denseness of the dust; they could
scarcely distinguish each other’s features —“it was a darkness that
might be felt;” and as there were no roads, but only tracks, no one
could account for the dust.
Neild, James Edward, M.D., was bom at Doncaster, in York-
shire, in 1824, and is descended from an Irish family who emigrated
into England in 1642. They settled in Lancashire, and subse-
quently a member of it crossed the range of hills known as the
Blackstone Edge, and settled in the West Riding of Yorkshire,
near to the historical town of Pontefract. At the age of eleven,
his father removed to the neighbourhood of Leeds, and it was in
Leeds he principally received his early education. In 1843 he
went to Sheffield to his uncle, a surgeon in extensive practice there,
to whom he was apprenticed for five years, according to the plan
then customary. He attended the lectures of the Sheffield medical
school and the hospital practice of the infirmary, and subsequently
he completed his medical studies at University College, London.
He passed his examination in 1848, and for two years was engaged
in private practice at Oulton, near Leeds. Growing tired of the
quiet of a country life, he accepted the appointment of house-


surgeon of the Rochdale General Dispensary, where he continued
three years. In 1853 he came to this colony, not intending to
make a prolonged stay. He was offered a Government appoint-
ment in New South Wales, on the Clarence River, but declined it
on account of its remoteness, and returned to Melbourne. Here
he determined to abandon his profession, and entered into business
as a chemist and druggist, becoming after a while the partner
of Mr. Henry James Long, of Bourke-street east. In 1855,
having always had a desire for newspaper work, he became a
reporter on the Age, then only just started, and it was in this way
he commenced his connection with the press of this colony, a
connection he still retains. After ceasing regular connection with
the Age, he contributed a good many occasional theatrical notices
to that paper. In 1856, the late Mr. T. L. Bright started My
Note Book, and engaged Dr. Neild to write the theatrical notices.
The proprietors of the Argus started the Examiner in 1857; Mr.
T. L. Bright was its first editor, and for upwards of two years Dr.
Neild wrote the theatrical criticisms under the signature of
“Christopher Sly.” The fresh, trenchant style of writing adopted by
him caused the Examiner to be very popular, but its scathing
criticisms brought upon the author occasionally a good deal of
unpleasant animadversion. Shortly after the Examiner , the
Yeoman , and the Weekly Argus were blended into one, under the
title of the Australasian, Dr. Neild was engaged to write the
theatrical notices of that paper. He adopted the signature of
“ Jaques,” and very soon gained for himself a celebrity similar to
that he had acquired as “Christopher Sly” in the Examiner. His
connection with the Australasian has continued with slight inter-
missions up to this time, but his present nom de plume is “ Tahite.”
His connection with the Argus commenced in 1858, and, with
certain breaks, it also has continued to this date. He is best
known as its theatrical critic, but his contributions have by no
means been limited to this kind of writing. He has contributed
to a great many other newspapers in Melbourne, and for some
time wrote a good deal for the Herald and Bell's Life. To
Melbourne Punch, during the editorship of the late Mr, Aspinall,
and of others who followed him, he contributed for several years.
In 186 1, he retired from the partnership with Mr. Long, and resumed
the practice of his profession. Almost coincidently he accepted the
editorship of the Australian Medical Journal, which he still holds,
and began to take an active part as a member of the Medical
Society of Victoria, of which in 1868 he was elected president, and
of which at the present time he is the honorary secretary. In
1864 he took the degree of M.D. in the University of Melbourne,
and the following year was appointed lecturer on forensic medicine,
a position he still holds. He was one of the physicians of the
Benevolent Asylum from 1865 to 1871, and honorary assistant-


physician to the Melbourne Hospital from IS7I to 1876. He has
for some years been honorary librarian of the Royal Society of
Victoria. He is a Fellow of the Royal Medical and Chirurgical
Society of London and of the Obstetrical Society of London, and
an honorary member of the Pharmaceutical Society of Victoria.
For twelve years he has been largely concerned in conducting post-
mortem examinations for medico-legal purposes, and the extensive
experience thus gained has given him a specialty in this direction.
Few men, therefore, in the colony have a more varied occupation,
more especially as he holds several semi-public appointments
which, in addition, engage a good deal of his time. Finally, he is
the author of several novelettes, and has had two comediettas
successfully placed upon the stage. He married in 1857 the eldest
daughter of Mr. D. R. Long, a very old and respected colonist
and has a large family of children.
IVewbery, James Cosmo, analytical chemist, born 1844, near
Leghorn, Italy, is the son of the late William Boxer Newbery.
When quite young he went to America, and entered as a student
the Harvard University, where he took his degree as Bachelor of
Science. From Harvard he went to the Royal School of Mines,
London, and was in 1865 appointed analyst to the Geological
Survey of Victoria, In June, 1865, Mr. Newbery arrived in
Melbourne, and held the office to which he had been appointed
until 1868, when the Geological Survey Department was abolished.
For two years Mr. Newbery devoted himself to private practice,
and in 1870 was appointed scientific superintendent to the
Melbourne Industrial and Technological Museum, and analyst to
the Department of Mines. He still retains both offices, and is
moreover Instructor in chemistry and metallurgy in the museum
laboratories. He is a member of the Royal Society of Victoria,
and has written several valuable papers and reports on chemistry
and chemical geology.
Mcholls, Charles Frederick, consulting miner, Melbourne,
second son of Henry Nicholls, of Pall Mall, London; born May’
1826, at Somer’s Town. Educated at Coldbath Fields, Clerken-
well; at Lady Byron’s School, Acton, and Mr. Collins’ academy,
Binfield, Berkshire. Was intended for an architect and civil
engineer, and for a time with Mr. Woods, of Brompton. Was
an active member of the Chartist Union, with Thomas Cooper,
Thornton Hunt, and other leaders of that section of the demo-
cratic party opposed to the leadership of Fergus O’Connor. Was
also a member of the council of the Parliamentary Reform
League, under the presidency of Sir Joshua Walmsley, and of the
Association for the Removal of “ Taxes on Knowledge” (the tax on
paper and the newspaper stamp). Was one of the committee


elected at a great public meeting to organise the demonstration on
the arrival of the great Hungarian constitutional leader,
Kossuth, at the time of the reaction after the revolution of
1848. Was appointed by the committee, with the late Thornton
Hunt and Mr. De Laforce, as delegates to wait on Kossuth
at Southampton, and arrange for his visit to London. In March,
1853, Mr. Nicholls was proprietor and editor of the Weekly
Examiner , a weekly democratic journal, published at a penny, as a
protest and defiance of the “ taxes on knowledge.” He was aided
by Thornton Hunt, G. Hooper, George Meredith, Gerald Massey,
Holyoake, J. R. Young, and others. The paper lasted about two
years, and had a circulation of about 5000. At the beginning
of the Crimean war, was with De Laforce appointed to represent
the Chartist Unionists at the Greek committee formed for the
ostensible purpose of founding the “ Hellenic Republic,” but
discovered that the Greeks were the tools and paid agents of
Russia, and that the Empire newspaper, to be started, was to
be subsidised from the same source. Reported to that effect, and
had nothing more to do with them. Wrote a series of articles on
co-operation in the Leader , and contributed to the Christian
Socialist and other papers. Business having been to some extent
neglected for literature and politics, he determined to follow
his brother Henry to Australia. Arrived in Victoria by the
Clasmerden in November, 1854. After a week or two in Mel-
bourne went to Ballarat, arriving three or four days before the
armed resistance to the collection of the license fee. Visited the
Eureka Stockade at Ballarat. Was in the stockade on the
Saturday, and took command of Captain Nelson’s Rifle Brigade
for several hours at the request of Colonel Vern, Captain
James M‘Gill, and Mr. Alfred Black. Left the stockade with
his brother and Capt. Nelson, and after discussing a bottle of
sherry reached home on the Main-road between one and two on
the Sunday morning, and was roused by “ Sailor Bob,” who
had escaped from the fight, and gave such a terrible account that,
not having heard the firing, they would hardly believe him.
Spoke for the first time at the public meeting held to put a stop to
martial law, and was appointed with the Hon. J. B. Humffray to
present the petition for the amnesty to Sir Charles Hotham.
Whilst in Melbourne, delivered a lecture on “ How to get liberty,
and how to keep it ?” and on returning to Ballarat helped to
start the Leader newspaper with inadequate capital. Only a few
numbers were published. Was elected a member of the second
local court, and with Mr. (now the Hon. Duncan) Gillies and the
late Mr. Stodart, and the chairman (the late Mr. Warden Daly),
carried the first recommendation for a mining lease, in spite
of a strenuous opposition, and led the way to the great companies
that developed the leads under the western township. Was


one of the arbitrators in arranging terms with the landowners
to mine under their property, and with others made the arrange-
ments under which the miners sank in Mr. Webb’s paddock In
1857 organised the so-called “People’s League” to obtain a
settlement of the mining on private property question. Was
elected vice-president with Mr. B. C. Aspinall, and drew up
the statement ot the law and the practice, and suggested a
scheme for the consideration of Parliament, which was adopted at
all the committees and at public meetings at Creswick, Ballarat,
Castlemaine, and Sandhurst and other places, chiefly by the
exertions of the acting vice-president. Obtained a lease of Com-
missioner’s Flat, Creswick, but, hampered with impossible con-
ditions and want of title, had to give the lease up to the miners.
Was prospecting for several months under the Jim Crow Ranges
(Daylesford), then went to Chines and started a prospecting party
to the north of the Port Phillip Company, and in 1858 was
given a share in one of the outside claims. Was appointed on the
committee of the outsiders, and organised the legal and moral
attack upon the company for the purpose of obtaining the right to
work the alluvial lead discovered by the miners. About this
time, with Mr. James Stevenson, mining surveyor of Creswick,
surveyed and secured the ground through which the present
water supply is brought to Clunes. Contested the county of
Talbot in 1856 at request of electors at Creswick, and was
beaten by B. C. Aspinall and David Blair; and in 1864
contested North Gipps Land with Mr. William Pearson, of
Kilmany Park, and was beaten by twelve votes. Received
his training in mining chiefly from Capt. Penberthy, of Cornwall,
and was nine years occupied as a working miner. In iB6O was
captain of a Government prospecting party subsidised for three
months; left Clunes, and kept the party together for nearly
eighteen months, getting a little gold and opening a likely quartz
lode. On returning, conducted and won the Creswick election for
Mr. Robert Macdonald, of Clunes, in conjunction with his brother
William, and was one of the first parliamentary agents appointed
under the Speaker’s warrant. Then came to Melbourne, and
in 1862, soon after the opening of the Ballarat railway, became
correspondent of the Ballarat Star, and was so for nine or ten
years, having previously written a series of articles for that paper
on “Popular Politics and their Advocacy;” also a series on
“Democracy and Representation;” a review of Mr. Thomas
Hare’s book on “Representation,” which in 1871 was published in
a separate form; also on “Quartz-tailings and Pyrites,” and
several other subjects. In 1862 organised, as the Melbourne
partner, the telegraphic agency of Greville and Bird. In 1864
led a small party on a tour through Gipps Land, returning
by way of Mount Useful, Woods Point, and the Black River, back


through Collingwood, camping out nearly the whole of the tinre. In
1862 delivered a lecture at Richmond on the probabilities of
a deep lead in the Yarra Valley. In 1868 became part proprietor
and editor of the Evening Star, and afterwards the sole proprietor.
In 1869 a series of special reports on the “Rise and progress
of Quartz-mining ” at Clunes, written by him, were published in a
separate form. Having retired from the Star correspondence he
became occupied entirely in mining business. In 1873, having
secured leases for fifty years of 6000 acres of freehold land north of
the Clunes Quartz Reefs, he went to London, in conjunction with Sir
Julius Vogel and Hon. Howard Spensley, to place them on the
market, but was unable to succeed. Since his return to Melbourne,
Mr. Nicholls has been devoted to literature, agriculture, and poultry
breeding; upon the latter subject having written a series of articles
for the Ballarat Star, He claims to have been the author
of the “no liability ” clauses of the Mining Statute. During the
great mining depression before the last Sandhurst rush published
a “ Mining Circular,” showing that, for the capital invested, mining
had paid a higher per centage than either banks or insurance com-
panies, and provided a larger wage fund than any other dozen
industries put together, an opinion which he still holds, believing
that the existing depression in mining matters is only temporary.
In politics is thoroughly democratic, believing the land to be the
patrimony of the people, and in the consolidation and develop-
ment of our liberal institutions as the only guarantee of peaceful
progress. Was married a second time in 1870, at St. Kilda. In
1877 drew up a report for the Minister of Mines, on auriferous
country covered by basalt, suggesting basis for prospecting, &c.
Nicholls, Henry Richard, journalist, Ballarat, third son of
Henry Nicholls, of Pall Mall, London, born 1830 same place;
educated at Binfield, Berkshire. Was early engaged in the
Chartist agitation for manhood suffrage, and identified with those
who struggled for a free and untaxed press, and a free platform.
Was a member of the Westminster Mechanics’ Institute, where
he studied and formed to some extent his taste for literature, and
developed his capacity as a debater, pending the determination
of the occupation to which he was to be brought up. As that
continued to remain in doubt, he took the opportunity offered
him of going to Australia at the time of the gold diggings, taking
merchandise on account of his two elder brothers. He left
London in the good ship Nonvay in 1853; called at the Cape,
and after a five months’ voyage found himself in Melbourne.
After disposing of the goods he brought with him he went to
Ballarat; but as further consignments were sent, he had to return
to Melbourne, and turned his hand to many things, amongst
others, joining a friend in putting up iron houses. In 1853-4


he edited the Digger's Advocate, a newspaper started by Mr.
George Black, printed in Melbourne for circulation on the
goldfields. In 1853 he was joined by his brother Charles in
Melbourne. Left with him for Geelong, and in March they
started for Ballarat, where they arrived three days before the
Eureka stockade fight. It was the intention of the brothers,
with a Mr. Hartly from Bendigo, to put up a puddling machine;
but this fell through, much time being lost by the disturbances.
Mr. Nicholls visited Eureka on the Friday, and on Saturday was
in the stockade, and had for a time to join Nelson’s Brigade
of Rifles, and left when the men were dismissed between twelve
and one o’clock, three hours before the attack. Spoke at the
meeting held to protest against the proclamation of martial law,
and was one of the committee appointed to procure an amnesty
for the prisoners; also of the committee elected some time after
to aid the police, and patrol the Main-road. Was a member
of the first local (mining) court, and was the only member,
besides the chairman, who maintained the right of litigants to be
heard by counsel and to appear by their attorney, which, after a
stm ggle, was admitted. He was, with others, one of the first
applicants for a mining lease, and, in conjunction with Mr.
Charles Kinnear, organised the White Flat Company, the first
large co-operative mining company ever formed on the diggings,
and the beginning of the great companies that soon followed.
The lease not being issued, the diggers under their miners’ rights got
possession, and ultimately bought him out pretty much on their
own terms, having previously offered to take him in with them if
he would desert his partners. After this, went prospecting under
the Jim Crow Ranges and at Creswick, sank a shaft through
the basalt at the Red Streak, and after a time settled down as a
newspaper correspondent, and was soon invited to Ballarat on the
staff of the Ballarat Times , of which he afterwards became
sub-editor. He then accepted a position on the Ballarat Star,
and was actual editor for many years before it was generally
known. This position he still holds, and he has since become
a proprietor. In politics he has always been Democratic and
Free Trade, a believer in secular education, liberal land laws, and
the administration of them for the benefit of the whole people.
He has been an extensive contributor to the Argus and Austral-
asian, mostly upon subjects outside the region of politics.
Married Ellen, daughter of the late Rev. W. Minchin, of
Tipperary, Ireland, and of New Zealand.
Nicholson, Germain, born in Cumberland, England, in
October, 1814. His father was a manufacturer of edged tools,
and owner of a factory at Lamplough, near Whithaven. He was
educated at a private school, and when a youth was apprenticed


to the grocery business, which he followed in England for twelve
years, the latter half of the time being occupied by him whilst
in the employ (as house manager) of Cornthwaite and Company,
merchants, of Byrom-street, Liverpool. Mr. Nicholson sailed for
Port Phillip in 1841, in the ship Arkwright , of Liverpool,
Captain Dambrel, commander, and arrived in Hobson s Bay on
7th January, 1842, after the quickest passage that had been made
up to that time. Landed on Australian soil, Mr. Nicholson
at once set to work in his own line of business, he having brought
a large assortment of merchandise with him, and soon established
himself as an importing grocer and provision merchant. In 1845
settled down in the business premises which he still occupies, at
the corner of Swanston and Collins-streets. Before he had been
many years in Melbourne, Mr. Nicholson s foresight prompted
him to purchase land on town sites. A portion of one piece of
ground in the city, bought in 1848 for was sold about ten
years afterwards for 2,000; and the unsold which
carries on it buildings valued at is worth now twice that
amount in the land market. In 1853 Mr. Nicholson, in con-
junction with the Hon. Henry Miller, the Hon. W. Highett, W.
Nicholson, Dr. Thomas Black, and others, originated the Bank of
Victoria. Of this bank Mr. Nicholson has for many years been,
and still is, a director. He was one of the originators of the
Melbourne and Hobson's Bay Railway Company, of which he is
a director, which position he also holds in the Victoria Life and
General Insurance Company. In the early days of gold-digging,
Mr. Nicholson tried his hand at buying gold; bought^and
shipped great quantities of the precious metal. He was appointed
magistrate for Melbourne and St. Kilda in 1858.
Nicolson, Sir Arthur Bolt, ninth Baronet of Nicolson and
Lasswade (created 1629), eldest son of the late Captain James
Nicolson, Royal Navy. Born in Lerwick, Shetland, in 1811;
served in New South Wales, as ensign in the 4th or King’s Own
Regiment, from 1831 to 1836. Sold out and returned to England,
and married the eldest daughter of the late Rev. George Bissett.
Sailed for South Australia, and arrived there in 1838. Engaged
in agricultural pursuits. He came to Victoria in 1853, and was
appointed sub-commissioner of goldfields, and held other appoint-
ments under Government. Sir Arthur is heir to large estates in
Shetland, from which he now receives an annuity. Sir Arthur
Nicolson has issue—his eldest son being Arthur Thomas Bennett
Robert Nicolson, of Melbourne.
Noel, Wriothesley Baptist, judge of the Court of Insolvency,
Melbourne, eldest son of the Hon. and Rev. Baptist Noel and
Baroness Barham. Born at Thorpe Hall, Walthormstowe, Essex,


August, 1827. Educated at private schools. Entered as a
commoner at Trinity College, Cambridge. Left without taking a
degree, in consequence of a severe accident while rowing, which
brought on partial paralysis for many months. Called to the bar
by the society of the Middle Temple in November, 1850. Not
liking to face the long road to success at the English bar, he
determined to try his fortunes in Victoria. He arrived here in
November, 1852, and was shortly afterwards appointed police
magistrate at Kilmore. In January, 1855, was removed to
Melbourne, as police magistrate for the county of Bourke.
Narrowly escaped being sent by Sir Charles Hotham to Ballarat,
at the time of the Eureka stockade. In October following
became Crown Prosecutor for the North-east District, which,
including, as it did, Castlemaine, Maryborough, Sandhurst, Kyne-
ton, Kilmore, Beechworth, and Port Albert, was a tolerably large
and laborious circuit. In July, 1857, he was appointed Deputy-
Chairman of General Sessions, and on the day he attained that
position he tried the rioters at Beechworth, for having violently
driven a crowd of Chinamen from their camp. Those were digni-
fied by the local papers with the name of State trials. Mr.
Townsend MacDermott acted as Crown Prosecutor. Mr. Noel
remained in that office, with a short interval, until in March, 1859,
he was appointed Chief Commissioner of Insolvent Estates. In
February, 1871, under the provision of the new Statute, he became
Judge of the Court of Insolvency.
O’Brien, Patrick, J.P., of Kincora, Hawthorn, was born at
Shannagolden, county Limerick, Ireland, in the year 1817.
Deprived at a very early age of the protection of his parents,
and having been brought up to the trade of a builder, he
determined to push his fortunes in a distant land; and accord-
ingly, in 1838, he emigrated to New South Wales. Here he
remained for a short time; but the then infant settlement of
Port Phillip (Victoria) presenting a more congenial field for a
man of his energy and perseverance, he proceeded thither in
1840. For some time he applied himself successfully to the
avocation of a builder, and after a few years devoted himself
to other pursuits, acquiring an independence. In the early
struggles of the colony to obtain separation from New South
Wales, and to avert the evils of convictism, Mr. O’Brien bore his
part, and in 1853 he was elected to the old Legislative Council
as one of the members for the united boroughs of Kilmore,
Kyneton, and Seymour. On the introduction of responsible
government, in 1856, he was returned as one of the members for
South Bourke, which he represented for about three years. He
was one of the founders of the St. Patrick’s Society of Australia
Felix, and held the office of trustee from 1842 to 1875, when


he resigned, in consequence of a visit to Europe. Though
unsuccessful in obtaining a seat in Parliament for several years,
he has, nevertheless, always taken a lively interest in the welfare
of the colony, and applied a fair share of his time to the
management and encouragement of several of our principal
charitable institutions. He has been a resident of Hawthorn
for the last twenty years, and holds a considerable quantity of
property there and in Melbourne. He was married to Sarah
O'Brien, of the same county as himself, in 1839, at Sydney, New
South Wales.
O’Brien, Stuart, was born in the county of Tipperary, Ireland,
in 1834, and left for England at a very early age. He resided
there until 1851, when he emigrated to America, where he joined
the stage, and played for a short time with the great James
W. Wallace as utility actor. He next accepted an engagement in
John Sloman’s company, and played during about three months in
Charleston. He arrived in Victoria at the close of 1854, and
embarked in commercial pursuits; but, whilst occupying a
good position in his new line, he was again attracted to the
footlights, and joined Watson’s troupe in 1855. From that time
until the present he has been almost continuously engaged as
actor or manager. At the time of the Lachlan’s rush in 1862 his
company achieved great success. He next tried his fortune
in New Zealand, but was unsuccessful. He returned to Victoria,
and sought an engagement from Clarence Holt, but could not get
one. Seeing no immediate hope of procuring employment in
his own line, Mr. O’Brien temporarily bade adieu to his old habits
and associations, to fill the rather laborious position of “ lumper ”
on board ship. At last Tom Faucett met him, and, recognising the
juvenile tragedian, was instrumental in procuring him a most
desirable engagement. Since then Mr. O’Brien has been widely
and most favourably known throughout all parts of the Australian
colonies as a highly capable interpreter of the legitimate drama,
and in his present position of stage manager of the Theatre
Royal, Melbourne, he has justly merited the warm approval of the
playgoing public. Amongst the most conspicuous of his many
successes may be mentioned Richelieu, Rip Van Winkle, Sir Peter
Teazle, Othello, Master Walter, Fagin, Long Tom Coffin, William
(in “Black-eyed Susan”), Job Armroyd, and Deacon Skinner (in
“ Struck Oil ”). In the last-named part his success was most
remarkable, and he played it (with the Williamsons) during an
uninterrupted run of eighty-seven nights.
O’Coilllor, The Right Rev. Michael, D.D., Roman Catholic
Bishop of Ballarat, was born in Dublin, in the year 1827, and
entered the Royal College of St. Patrick, Maynooth, in 1845, for


rhetoric. He soon achieved high distinction in that course, and
in 1847 gained the position of first prizeman for logic, against
seventy competitors. He next entered on a four years’ divinity
course, and having completed it, was promoted to the Dunboyne
establishment, where he studied in a high class during a further
term of three years. In the capacity of what is known as a
“ Dunboyne’s man,” it was one of his duties to deliver lectures
in the place of any of the professors who might be absent through
illness, or from any other cause, and whenever called upon he was
found more than equal to the emergency. He afterwards entered
holy orders; he was soon afterwards appointed by Cardinal
Cullen to the charge of Rathfarnham—a populous and important
suburb of Dublin. Whilst there, his arduous discharge of his
multifarious duties commended him to further preferment, and
in 1875 he was appointed first Bishop of Ballarat. He arrived
in Melbourne at the close of that year, and was formally installed
in the cathedral, Sturt-street, Ballarat, on the 20th November, by
the Right Rev. Dr. Goold, Archbishop of Melbourne, an excellent
sermon being preached by the Rev. W, Kelly, S.J., on the
occasion. Dr. O’Connor, who is a very eloquent preacher, at
once became most popular in his diocese, and steps were almost
immediately taken to have a handsome and commodious palace
erected for him.
O’Hea, William Joseph, M.P. for the united counties of
Polwarth and South Grenville, is a native of Meath, Ireland. He
was educated at the diocesan academy of Navan, and pursued
his studies there with such success that during two successive
years, he was appointed prefect of studies. In that capacity he
taught for twelve months the preparatory class for university
matriculation in Greek and history. This entitled him, at the
end of that period, to a free course, or exhibition, in an ecclesias-
tical college either in Ireland, Paris, or Rome. Ecclesiastical
studies, however, had no attraction for him, and after passing
some short time in studying for the sizarship examination in
Trinity College, Dublin, he went to London and joined the corps
of parliamentary reporters engaged in the Houses of Lords and
Commons. He was there contemporary with the late Mr. Aspinall
and Hon. George Higinbotham, the present well-known Melbourne
barrister. He passed the parliamentary recess during each of the
four or five following years in France, where he applied himself to
master the art and mystery of vine-culture and wine-making, and
those other special rural industries, which are such a source of pros-
perity to the agricultural classes in that country. In 1848 he was
engaged foreign newspaper correspondent during the revolutionary
insurrection of that year in France. He subsequently became
one of the editorial staff of the Illustrated London News , and


brought out the well-known double number of Rome Illustrated
on 4th May, 1850, which was the first newspaper publication that
achieved the feat of the sale of one hundred thousand copies in
one day. It was the joint production of Mr. O’Hea and the late
Mr. Thomas, the artist, who had just returned from Rome, and was
one of the best descriptions of the Eternal City that has ever been
penned. Failing health from overwork, and a long-cherished
desire to visit Australia, brought Mr. O’Hea to Victoria, early in
1853, in the very midst of the great goldfields migration. In the
following year the then Colonial Premier, Mr. V. F. L. Foster,
whom he had known in London, appointed him secretary to the
commissariat. In 1855, on that department being reduced, he
quitted the civil service, and after visiting the goldfields, he
reverted to his profession as a journalist, and in 1856 joined the
late Mr. Ebenezer Syme in editing the Age newspaper which had
been recently established in Melbourne. At the beginning of
1857, in conjunction with the late lamented Mr. Wilson Gray and
Messrs. Thomas Loader, J. J. Walsh, and a few others, he assisted
in founding the Victorian Land League, which, some months later,
summoned into existence the famous Land Convention, which met
in Melbourne on the 15th July, 1857, numbering 88 delegates,
chosen from all parts of the country. Mr, O’Hea was one of
those delegates, and took an active part in the work of the Con-
vention, and in the subsequent proceedings of the agitation on
the land question, which followed. In 1859, when an increase of
members was given to the Assembly, he stood for the goldfields
constituency of Ararat, and was returned, together with Mr.
M‘Lellan, by an overwhelming majority over some five or six other
candidates. In the Legislative Assembly he formed one of the
small band of land reformers of that day, who, from the place
they occupied on the Opposition benches, were called by the
collective name of the “Convention Corner.” At the general
election in 1861, he again stood for Ararat; but as his supporters
(the miners) had by this time all left for other goldfields, Mr.
O’Hea lost the election by four or five votes. He was afterwards
pressed by a deputation from the constituency to stand at a subse-
quent election; but he declined, preferring for the time to devote
himself to journalism. At the general election in 1874 he was
asked to contest the constituency of Polwarth and South Grenville
against Mr. Connor. Mr. O’Hea responded to the call, and was
beaten by one hundred and eighty votes. He again stood at
the general election this year (1877), when he was opposed by the
late member, Mr. Connor, and Mr. Ower, of Camperdown. He
succeeded, however, in winning the seat, the polling on the day of
election (May n) showing the following result: —O’Hea, 395;
Connor, 328; Ower, 237. Mr. O’Hea has always been identified
with advanced liberal opinions in politics. He has accordingly


taken his seat in the Assembly on the benches immediately behind
the Berry Ministry, with whom he has invariably voted. Politics,
however, only partially engage his attention. He takes occa-
sion at times to revert to his old industrial studies. He pub-
lished a treatise in 1871 on “The Introduction of New Rural
Industries into Victoria,” with observations on the best means
towards the attainment of that end; and he contributed to the
Official Record of the Melbourne Exhibition of 1872, which was
held preparatory to the London International Exposition of 1863,
an essay on “The Climate of Victoria in reference to Vegetable
Production.” He has also been a frequent contributor on kindred
subjects to the newspapers; and in everything relating to the vine
and wine he ranks as an expert. He has constantly laboured to
inculcate the view, which has now begun to be shared by others,
that there will be no true prosperity for the agricultural settlers in
the warmer districts of Victoria until the cultivation of the fig, the
prune, the orange and the lemon, tobacco, the opium poppy, the
vine, the mulberry (for silk), the olive, and other similar pro-
ducts, are domesticated amongst the rural industries of this country.
O’Logllleil, Sir Bryan, Bart, of Drumcunora, Ennis, Ireland,
M.P. in the House of Commons for the county of Clare, bar-
rister-at-law, now residing at St. Kilda, Victoria, was born 27th
June, 1828, is the fourth and now the eldest surviving son of the
late Right Hon. Sir Michael O’Loghlen, Bart., Privy Councillor
for Ireland, sometime in the House of Commons as member
for Dungarvan, and the first Catholic Queen’s Counsel, Queen’s
Serjeant, Solicitor, and Attorney-General, Baron of the Exchequer,
and Master of the Rolls since William the Third’s time. Sir
Bryan succeeded to the baronetcy on the death of his eldest
brother, the late Right Hon. Sir Colraan O’Loghlen, Bart., on the
22nd July, 1877. Sir Colman, like his father, was an able lawyer,
and was a Queen’s Counsel, Queen’s Serjeant, Judge, Advocate-
General in the Gladstone Administration, and a Privy Councillor
of England. He sat for Clare in the House of Commons for
fourteen years. Sir Bryan, on the death of his brother, also succeeded
as senior lineal representative to the representation of the O’Logh-
len’s, Princes of Burren, a territory in the north-west of Clare and on
the Bay of Galway, which, with its twenty-one castles, they held until
Uaitne O’Loghlen, Prince of Burren, who had represented Clare
in the Confederate Parliament of Kilkenny in 1641, was dis-
possessed by General Ireton in 1650. This family has been
famous for fighting, both at sea and on land, during the wars with
the Danes and on down to the Battle of Aughrim, in which, under
the banner of Marshal St. Ruth, it was nearly annihilated in
1670. Their arms and crest of an anchor, a ducal crown, and
a man in armour ready to draw, are historically true. Sir Bryan


was sent to St. Clement’s school, Oxford, at an early age, and
thence to Oscot College, Birmingham, remaining three years at
each. After visiting the continent he entered at Trinity College,
Dublin, in 1846, where at many examinations he was recom-
mended for honours in classics and mathematics. Though a
young man, he took a part on the National side in the stirring
times of ’47-8. In the latter year he was articled to T. Flanagan,
one of Brunei’s pupils, and then the engineer of the Bolton,
Blackburn, and Clitheroe line, with a view of becoming a railway
engineer. The works were very heavy on this line, including a
two-mile tunnel, so that he acquired considerable experience
in railway construction and surveying. The railway panic of
’49 induced him to abandon this profession, and he took to
farming some family lands in Clare. The year 1851 he passed
in London with a mercantile house in the Mediterranean trade,
where he acquired a general knowledge of London business, and
of the mysteries of Garraway’s. In 1852, having determined
to read for the bar, he returned to Trinity College, Dublin,
and took up the ethical honour course, under the tutorship
of the Rev. Mr. Stitt, and carried off first honours in ethics
in several examinations, and at the degree examination was
classed as junior moderator, and got a silver medal. He kept
his terms at King’s Inn and Lincoln’s Inn, and after studying in
his brother’s chambers, he was called to the Irish bar in Easter,
1856. He then joined the Munster circuit, which he followed for five
years. He came to Victoria in January, 1862, and was admitted
to the Victorian bar in the following February. In April, 1863,
he was appointed Crown Prosecutor, and in 1871 took charge of
the Melbourne district, which post he resigned in January, 1877.
Of late years he has had the conduct of some of the heaviest
criminal prosecutions in the colony, amongst which may be
mentioned the Mount and Morris case, the Queen-street, Talla-
rook and Hastings murders, the O’Farrell and the Carroll frauds,,
the Oppenheimer insolvency case, and the Custom-house versus
Stevenson trials. In May, 1877, at the last general election, Sir
Bryan unsuccessfully contested North Melbourne, polling 1470
votes, being within sixteen and twenty-six of the present sitting
members respectively. His politics were of the most advanced
Liberal type —being in favour of annual elections, payment of
members, reform of the Upper House by abolition of the statutable
power of rejection of money bills, a free university, and of a free and
compulsory but religious educational system. In August, 1877,
his friends in Clare, Ireland, nominated him as a successor to
his late brother for the representation of the county, and after a
contest with the O’Gorman Mahon and Mr. Reeves, he was
returned at the head of the poll, beating his opponents by some
700 and 1200 votes respectively. In October, 1877, Sir Bryan


was appointed one of the land-tax commissioners for Victoria,
under the new Act, but continues to practise at the bar. In
September, 1863, Sir Bryan was married to Ella, third daughter
of James Mackay Seward, of Somerset, Preston, near Melbourne,
by whom he has a large family, who, as well as their mother, are
all Victorian born.
O’Malley, The Rev. Joseph, S.J., was born in Dublin, in
October, 1832, and at a very early age evinced a strong vocation
for the church. When only about fourteen years old he applied
to be admitted a member of the Society of Jesus; but his request
was refused, in consequence of his youth. Four years later he
renewed his application; but was again unsuccessful, this time
(1848) through the disturbed state of Europe. He then entered
the Missionary College at All Hallows, near Dublin, and in two
years more he was received into the society. He next went
to France, and passed his novitiate at Issenheim, in Alsace.
Towards the close of the year 1853 he returned to Ireland,
and spent some eight years in teaching in the various colleges
there. In 1861 he was ordained a priest; he then spent a
year in England, half-a-dozen in Rome, and twelve months in
Germany. In 1869 he revisited his native country; but remained
there only a short time, being sent to this colony by his superiors.
He has since been engaged in teaching in St. Patrick’s College,
East Melbourne, and he often preaches eloquently and learnedly
in St. Patrick’s Cathedral, his subjects being generally of a
controversial character. He is also esteemed a good writer
by his co-religionists, and his pamphlet denouncing secular
education was warmly approved of by many of them. Amongst
his other accomplishments may be mentioned a profound know-
ledge of music.
O’Sliaiiassy, The Hon. Sir John, K.C.M.G., was born in the
year 1818, almost under the shadow of the famed Cistertian ruin,
Holycross Abbey, near Thurles, a town in the county Tipperary,
Ireland, and arrived in the colony in 1839. He soon settled
down to commercial pursuits, and being a young man of great
strength of character, and great powers of application, very
speedily began to be regarded as one of the coming men of the
colony. An uncompromising Roman Catholic, no cleric or laic
rendered more service to Catholicity in those times; and as
an ardent Irishman, he was one of the founders of the St.
Patrick’s Society, for which he worked hard as president for
several years, laying the foundation-stone of the St. Patrick’s Hall,
and receiving a valuable presentation of silver plate on his
retirement from the presidency in 1851. In a few years after, the
society procured a life-size oil painting of him as a further


souvenir. In 1846 he represented Gipps ward in the city council
for a few months, and then gave evidence of the great ability as a
representative, for which he was afterwards remarkable. In the
early agitations against convictism and for the Separation of Port
Philip from New South Wales, of which colony it was only
a neglected adjunct, Mr. O’Shanassy always fought in the first
rank. He was an active promoter of the early building and land
societies; every project started for the benefit of the community
had his support, and he was a trustee of various public and
private institutions. For many years he represented the Roman
Catholic body on the Denominational Board of Education, and
on its inauguration was appointed one of the trustees off the
Public Library. He was always in favour of a combined mode of
secular and religious instruction in primary schools in reference to
all. In 1856 he was one of the chief projectors of the Colonial
Bank, and acted as chairman of its board of directors for
fourteen years. When Port Phillip was proclaimed an indepen-
dent colony under ‘‘the style and title” of Victoria, its first Legisla-
tive Council consisted of thirty members, ten Government
nominees, and twenty elective; Mr. O’Shanassy was returned
as one of the members for Melbourne, and as such took his seat
in St. Patrick’s Hall (where the Council held its meetings) on
the nth November, 1851. Here he came to the front, and
was during its existence practically the Opposition leader,
displaying great aptitude for public business and generally
opposing the nominee and extreme squatting elements. In
all matters of finance, immigration, the goldfields, and the anti-
transportation question, he was an untiring and valuable member,
and rendered good service to the State. Gold was discovered in
the colony in the same year as it obtained representative institu-
tions; and the few years that followed were troublesome and
harassing years for both Executive and Legislature. In 1854,
under the regime of Sir Charles Hotham, the mining troubles
at Ballarat culminated, and the emeute of the Eureka stockade
forced things to a crisis, which led to the appointment of the oft-
quoted Royal Commission to inquire into the condition of the
goldfields of Victoria. Of the six commissioners, Mr. O’Shanassy
was one, and their report presented in March, 1855, ls a masterly
and exhaustive State paper; and the speedy adoption of many of
its recommendations soon led to a better state of things. Mr.
O’Shanassy was also one of the members of the committee
appointed by the Council to report upon the best form of a
constitution for the colony; and it is stated that many of the chief
features of our bicameral system originated with him, and were em-
bodied in the Bill afterwards drafted from the resolutions of the com-
mittee by the then Attorney-General (now Chief Justice) Stawell.
One motion of Mr. O’Shanassy’s, vesting the entire management


and control of the waste lands of the Crown, the proceeds
and sale of such, and all other proceeds and revenues including
royalties, mines, and minerals in the Legislature, is almost in ioto
preserved in the Constitution Statute as it passed the Imperial
Parliament. Two Houses of Parliament were substituted for one;
and at the first election of members for the Legislative Assembly
Mr. O’Shanassy was re-elected for Melbourne on 23rd September,
1856, and on 3rd October for Kilmore, thus receiving the
compliment of a double return. The first session of the new
Parliament was an important one, and it was during it that
he succeeded in inducing the then Government to pass an Act to
assimilate and simplify the oaths of qualification for office, and to
recognise and establish in Victoria the rights of absolute civil
equality of all of Her Majesty’s subjects, irrespective of religious
belief. The object of this was to substitute one uniform oath for
several forms of official oaths which gave offence to a large
portion of the community; and ten years after, when in England,
Mr. O’Shanassy prevailed on an eminent Irish member of
Parliament (Sir C. O’Loghlen) to include in a Bill dealing with
oaths which he was about to introduce into the House of
Commons, a clause to meet the case of Governors of colonies,
with whose form of oaths colonial Legislatures could not interfere.
This became law, and thus Governors of colonies were enabled to
subscribe a form of oath common to members of the Legislature,
and others accepting office. Early in 1857 the Haines Govern-
ment resigned, in consequence of the Assembly affirming a motion
disapproving of a vote for immigration, exceeding by
the sum they proposed to spend on that service; and on the nth
March, Mr, O’Shanassy accepted office as Chief Secretary, and was
re-elected for Kilmore. On meeting Parliament, however, a vote
of want of confidence was carried, and he resigned on 29th
April. He regained office as Chief Secretary 10th March, 1858,
on the break-up of the Haines Government, through the rejection
of the schedule of their Increase of Members Bill, and was
re-elected for Kilmore. In consequence of the country being,
by railway Acts recently passed, pledged to the making
of certain lines of railway, and the procuring of means for that
purpose, it became the duty of the O’Shanassy Government
to negotiate a loan of eight millions, and this, the first of
our public loans, was successfully floated through the agency
of six of the Melbourne banks. He was returned to the second Par-
liament, for Kilmore, in August, 1859, and retired from office 27th
October following, through a vote of want of confidence. He
entered the third Parliament also as member for Kilmore in
August, 1861, and when the session commenced obtained
a vote of disapproval of the budget of the Heales Government,
and as a consequence appeared once more as Chief Secretary,


(14th November). During this session his Administration carried
several valuable measures, including the Crown Lands Act of 1862.
One of its clauses made an annual appropriation of one-fourth of
the proceeds of the land revenues (equivalent to about
for the promotion of assisted immigration from Great Britain and
Ireland; but effect was not given to this purpose, as a subsequent
Government by enactment transferred this item (at present date
amounting to about two and a quarter millions) to the railway
construction account. The session of 1862-3 passed some very
important Acts, amongst which stands out the Local Government
Act, which engrossed much of Mr. O’Shanassy’s attention, and
is a piece of legislation that has conferred enduring benefits
on the country. He vacated office 27th June, 1863, and has not
since returned to it. This year he became entitled under part 7
of schedule D of the Constitution Act to a pension of
per annum, payable upon certain conditions to any person
holding for two years certain political offices, and who retires or is
released therefrom on political grounds, but he has never applied
for it. For the fourth Parliament he was again returned by
Kilmore in November, 1864; but was missed from the next
Parliament which met in the beginning of 1866, as failing
health warned him that it was time for him to take a rest, and his
medical advisers prescribed a trip to the old country. Before
leaving the land of his adoption he was entertained on the
10th May at a splendid farewell banquet in St. George’s Hall, was
presented with an illuminated address; and the net
proceeds of a public subscription, was transmitted to a committee
of old colonists in London, to be invested in any manner
according with his wishes. This sum was applied to the purchase
of a service of plate and an assortment of books, and the
testimonial was presented to him at an entertainment at Willis’s
Rooms, London, in an assembly of over 200 persons, including
members of the then and late British Administrations. On
revisiting Tipperary, the town of his boyhood and youth, he ob-
tained quite an ovation, and the local gentry for miles all round
welcomed him at such a public dinner as is rarely witnessed in
Irish provincial towns. He delivered a very interesting lecture
on Victoria in Clonmel, the county town. Whilst at home
he visited Rome, and was received with much kindness by Pope
Pius IX., who seemed to be well posted up in Victorian matters.
He received the pontifical benediction, and special privileges of a
religious character were conferred upon him and his family. It
should also be mentioned that the Pope sent him a brief,
enumerating the services he had rendered in furthering the
interests of education and religion, and created him a Knight of
the Order of St. Gregory the Great. He returned to the colony
in August, 1867, an d though he was away during the greater part


of the political complications of the Darling conflict between the
Assembly and the Legislative Council, he was opposed to the so-called
dead-lock, and was one of the Executive Councillors who signed
the well-known remonstrance against the action of the Governor, —
one of the strongest elements which led to Sir Charles Darling’s
recall. After his return he was not suffered to be idle, for
the Government of the day requested him to act as the
commissioner of Victoria in deciding upon the locus in quo of
Pental Island, in the river Murray, which New South Wales
claimed as a part and parcel of her territory. Sir E. Deas
Thompson, of Sydney, was the other commissioner. Evidence
was taken both in Melbourne and in Sydney, but the commis-
sioners agreed to differ, the consequence being a reference to the
Privy Council, which concurred in Mr. O’Shanassy’s view, and
adjudged the disputed region to belong to Victoria, the first
decision of the kind given as regards British colonies. He also
acted on an important commission appointed to inquire into and
report upon the vexed question of our Defences, It should be also
mentioned that he has, with one exception, been a member of
every Industrial Exhibition gazetted in the colony. His health
not being quite sufficiently restored to induce him to risk the
excitement of the Assembly, he yielded to the urgent solici-
ations of his friends so far as to try the Legislative Council,
and accordingly, in February, 1868, when Mr. (now Justice)
Fellows abandoned the Upper for the Lower House, he was elected
without opposition for the Central Province, and on retiring by
rotation in August, 1872, was re-elected also without opposition,
for ten years. Here he was quite out of his element, and found
what he had to do very slow work —still he attended regularly,
worked hard, and carried several important amendments in the
Railway Bill, and the Land Bill of 1869, especially one enabling
selectors to turn their selections into freeholds upon easy terms.
He opposed the Education, State-aid Abolition, and the Payment
of Members Bills, but unsuccessfully. At length, in April, 1874,
he resigned his seat with the intention of returning to the
more popular and congenial branch of the Legislature, but was
defeated at Kilmore in consequence of his lateness in the field.
In January, 1876, he was again defeated for Villiers and Heytes-
bury, by Mr. Jones, Commissioner of Public Works. In May,
1877, he was elected for Belfast at the commencement of the ninth
Parliament. He and Mr. Justice Fellows are the only individuals
who ever left the Assembly for the Council, and were not
content until they got back again. In connection with Australian
exploration and the first crossing of the continent by Burke and
Wills, it was he as Chief Secretary who ordered a consignment of
camels from India; he was a member of the Exploration Committee
by which the expedition was sent out, and as a member of the


Assembly moved resolutions in connection with the Burke and
Wills monument. Though uncompromising in the maintenance
of the rights and immunities of his own faith, he was always
tolerant of others, and when the Constitution Act was being dis-
cussed he moved the omission of the word “ Christian ” from the
53rd or State-aid clause, to enable the Jews to share in the
annual bonus devoted to religious advancement; and
failing, he was instrumental in obtaining special grants for the same
body until State-aid was discontinued. He has always been an
unwavering Free-trader, a pro-immigrationist, and favours a united
form of government for the Australias, rather than the Federal
system. In 1870 his public services were rewarded with a mark of
Royal favour, for he was created Companion of the Order of Saints
Michael and George, and in 1874 he obtained full knighthood, the
dignity being enhanced by the receipt of two warrants, i.e., as
Knight Commander and Knight Bachelor, dispensing with the
usual installation ceremony in consequence of the distance, and
saving the payment of fees He was now Sir John
O’Shanassy, and he has few (if any) equals for ability, industry, and
general political consistency. His characterictics may be aptly
summarised in the language once applied to a great countryman of
his, for he may assuredly be written down as “an able-bodied,
able-minded, hard-thinking, hard-working man.”
Ogier, John Creuze Kingston, barrister, warden, and police
magistrate, is the only son of Pierre Ogier, barrister of Lincoln’s
Inn, London, England, whose father, also Pierre Ogier, emigrated
to America, and settled on the Ashley River, near Charleston,
South Carolina, previous to the second American War. The sub-
ject of this memoir was born at Woodbridge House, near Stoke,
Surrey, England, and was educated at Eton and at Trinity Col-
lege, Cambridge, where he was elected president of the Union
Debating Society, after a contest in which his opponent was the
Hon. Albury Spring Rice. Soon after this he took part in Sir
Fitzroy Kelly’s election for Cambridge. He also took an active
part in the election of Admiral Rouse for Westminster. Having
read in the chambers of Samuel Kingston and Richard (now Sir
Richard) Malins, he was called to the English bar, at Lincoln’s
Inn. He left England in September, 1852, and arrived in
Victoria at the commencement of 1853, and first went into
mining at Ballarat. Then came to Melbourne and practised his
profession, and used to attend the Ballarat and Western District
sessions. He was the first barrister to hold a brief in the local
(mining) court at Ballarat. That court having determined not to
hear counsel or attorney in the cases that came before it, the chair-
man, the late Mr. Warden Daly, ordered a constable to take Mr.
Ogier in charge. He maintained the right of plaintiff and defend-


ant to appear by counsel, and denounced the attempt to prevent it
as an infringement of the common law rights of every British
subject. This was afterwards conceded by the court. Mr. Ogier
was Crown Prosecutor at Ballarat with Mr. Chapman (afterwards
Attorney-General to the O Shanassy Government, and now Judge
in New Zealand). He also attended the Gipps Land circuit, and
held briefs at Sale. He was an applicant in Sir Charles Hotham’s
time for the position of Crown Prosecutor, which was given to
Mr. McCreight; the bar entered a protest against the appoint-
ment being given to so young a barrister, and Mr. Ogier was one
of those sent up with it to the Governor. In 1874 was appointed
police magistrate for Woods Point, and has since held the same
position at St. Arnaud. Mr. Ogier was the first free selector in
the Ovens district, and first selector of a residence area on a
mining claim, which was contested by the corporation of Ballarat,
who wished to build the present Mechanics’ Institute on the land
so held, and succeeded in ousting the occupant. Mr. Ogier
claims to have given the gold commission, of which Mr. Warburton
Carr was secretary, and Sir John (then Mr.) O’Shanassy chairman,
the data upon which the first Mining Act for regulating mining
companies under the so-called cost-book system was introduced.
He was interested in the applications made to mine under the
Government reserves at Ballarat, and claims to have been equitably
entitled to the cricket reserve, his interest in which, had he
obtained it, was considered worth at least sixty thousand pounds.
Oil 5 John, M.P. for Moira, was born at Kilbirnie, Ayrshire, in
rß3i. His family moved to Glasgow in 1839, and thence to
Rothesay in 1845. He was educated at the local school and at a
piivate school in Glasgow. In 1832 he left the old country for
Victoria, arriving in Melbourne on the nth October, same year.
After two years of varied experience, he went to the Ovens in 1854,
and has been connected with that and the Murray district ever
since. In 1859, started business at Chiltern, and on the foundation
of Rutherglen, at the Wahgunyah rush, moved to that township,
and was appointed postmaster. The electoral district of the
Murray had been a purely pastoral district before the rush, and
had invariably elected a squatters’ candidate. On the dissolution
of 1861, the residents of Rutherglen asked Mr. Orr to stand for
the district. He consented, and was elected by a majority of eight
votes over Mr. Reid, the former member. The returning officer
decided that a number of Mr. Orr’s ballot papers could not be
admitted, and declared Mr. Reid duly elected by a majority of ten
votes. Mr. Orr petitioned, and in May, 1862, obtained his seat.
Mr. Orr took part in passing several Amending Land Bills, and
the Heales’ Common Schools Act, having always been an advocate
of unsectarian education. As a member of Mr. Loader’s committee,


and as a member of a Royal Commission, Mr. Orr was mainly
instrumental in opening up the navigation of the Murray and its
tributaries. As a general rule he voted against the O’Shanassy
Government, and on the accession to office of the M‘Culloch-«m-
Heales Government, took his seat on the second Ministerial bench
until the first tariff having a protective tendency was introduced;
he then went into opposition, and so far as Mr. (now Sir James)
M‘Culloch is concerned, he has remained ever since. Mr. Orr
was re-elected without opposition in 1864, and again at the next
election, after a fierce contest with Mr. Robert Woods, J. P. Oxley,
and P. Perkins, mayor of Woods Point. In 1868 and 1871, Mr.
Orr was defeated by Mr. Witt, who retired in 1872, when Mr. Orr
again represented the district till 1874, when he was again defeated
by Mr. Witt. In the readjustment of the electoral boundaries in
1876, a portion of the Murray district was amalgamated with the
old Murray Boroughs of Wangaratta, Benalla, Euroa, and Avenel,
and was named the electoral district of Moira, returning two
members. Mr. Orr was returned as one of them at the general
election of May, 1877. Whilst supporting the Berry Government,
Mr. Orr maintains an independent position, he having announced
at the hustings that he was as much opposed to the stonewall policy
as to the M‘Culloch Government.
Pa liter, Capt. William Henry, late commander of the cupola
ship Cerberus , and captain commanding the naval forces of
Victoria, had been in constant employment in the British naval
service at sea for sixteen years, when in 1871 he brought out the
ironclad Cerberus to Victoria for the defence of Port Phillip. He
first went into active service in 1855, with Admiral Keppel to
China, and was through the whole of the China war, having
taken part in three general engagements, of which he volunteered
for two, and served with storming parties. He was mentioned
in the despatches referring to each of these engagements, and
received the China medal and two clasps. He was also in several
boat actions, and at the age of twenty years was appointed by
Admiral Hope to be acting lieutenant, and to the command
of a gun-boat. When paid off he was complimented by the senior
naval officer at Hong Kong for having brought his vessel out of
one of the worst typhoons ever known on that coast. On arriving
in England he was appointed sub-lieutenant of the Marlborough
in the Mediterranean, and was given the command of a gun-boat
of three guns. Being promoted to the grade of navigating
lieutenant, and having passed his examinations in gunnery and
other branches of naval study, he was appointed to the command
of H.M.V.S. Nelson , and came to Melbourne to join her, retaining
the command until sent home to bring out the Cerberus , which he
did in 1871. Since then he has been senior naval officer of the


Victorian service until very recently, when some misunderstanding
on matters of naval discipline caused him to resign.
Pailton, Joseph Anderson, police magistrate. A Northern
Scotchman, born in Aberdeenshire, and educated in Edinburgh at
the Scottish Naval and Military Academy, and at the university. He
arrived in the colonies in 1851, attracted by the glowing accounts of
the prospects of sheep-farming; but whilst acquiring a practical know-
ledge of the business gold was discovered in Victoria, and his idea
of squatting was abandoned. He entered the Government service
in May, 1852, as Assistant-Commissioner of Crown Lands, and was
stationed at Bendigo. In 1853 he was appointed Senior-Commis-
sioner in charge of Bendigo, once a population estimated at 60,000
diggers. In 1854 he was appointed Resident-Commissioner of the
district, which embraced the present counties of Bendigo, Gunbower,
Rodney, Dalhousie and Anglesey. Mr. Panton’s services during
the trying times of 1853 and 1854 met with special recognition by
the Royal Commission appointed to inquire into the administration
of the goldfields. He was commissioned by His Excellency Sir
Charles Hotham to inquire into the complaint against the Chinese,
to report Upon their condition, to devise means to control them,
and to check the wave of Mongolian immigration that then
threatened to inundate Victoria. Upon Mr. Panton’s suggestion,
a capitation tax was levied upon the Chinese immigrants, a
Chinese protectorate was established to watch over their interests
on the goldfields, and a revenue was collected from amongst them
to defray the expenses of the department. The system was
initiated on Bendigo under Mr. Panton’s supervision, one of his
officers (Captain Standish) being appointed protector, and it was
afterwards extended to the other districts. In 1858, he obtained a
year’s leave without pay, and visited Europe. During his absence
the office of Resident-Commissioner was abolished, as the estab-
lishment of municipalities throughout the colony rendered such an
appointment no longer necessary. On his return he was appointed
a police magistrate, and has officiated in various districts, Woods
Point, Heidelberg, Melbourne, Stawell, and Geelong, where he is
now stationed. Mr. Panton was a commissioner for the Melbourne
and Paris Exhibition, 1854 and 1855, in connection with which he
established an exhibition on Bendigo in 1853, which was opened
by Sir Charles Hotham. This, we believe, was the first Industrial
Exhibition held in the Australian colonies. Gold and silver
medals- were awarded, as well as certificates bearing the signature
of J. A. Panton as president. In 1856 he was appointed on a
Royal Commission, with Professor M‘Coy and Mr. Selwyn, to
collect accurate information regarding physical features of the
colony, its geological and mineral characteristics, and to examine
into the mode of occurrence of gold, &c. To Mr. Panton was


allotted the supervision of the drawing of the tools, appliances,,
and machinery then in use on the goldfields —the result being
about fifty sheets drawings, never yet published. He has always
taken an interest in the promotion and culture of fine arts. He
presided at the first meeting held in Melbourne to establish the
Victorian Academy of Art, and he has ever since held office in
the council of that institution.
Paterson, James, late Mayor of the city of Melbourne, 1876-7,
ship and steam-tug proprietor, Melbourne, eldest son of Robert
Paterson, of Ayrshire, Scotland, was born 17th July, 1826, at
Middlethird Farm, Galston, Ayrshire. Educated at the local
schools, and remained at school until he left home for Australia.
Was brought up to farming, and in 1845 took the prize for
agricultural chemistry from the Highland Agricultural Society
of Scotland, presented to him by its president, the Duke of Queens-
berry, and had previously won several ploughing matches against
the best local competitors. Sailed from Liverpool by the ship
Julia on 17th June, 1852, and arrived in Melbourne same year.
Went first to the diggings at Castlemaine, was pretty successful,
and left them in March, 1853, returning to Melbourne, where
he started in business with his brother-in-law. In the palmy days
of Ballarat in August same year went up to that great goldfield,
and commenced carrying between there and Melbourne, buying
several teams on his own account. Took colonial fever and gave
up teaming, and in March, 1854, started as a shipowner, and
in May started business in Flinders-street, and has been there
ever since; is now the largest registered shipowner in the port
of Melbourne, and has the largest business in coal trade, and
is owner of the steam tugs Albatross and Rescue , employing
over 300 sailors, labourers, and lumpers. He was the first to
employ steam screw colliers in the coal trade between Melbourne
and Newcastle, and was the first to class ships at the Australian
Lloyd’s. He is owner of a stud of thoroughbred horses,
as well as a score of brood mares, as well bred as any in the
colony, and has the entire Hercules as his stud horse. In
1874 won the St. Leger with Blue Peter. Has pulled off a good
many weight-for-age races with the same horse. Won the Oaks
with Gaslight in 1875, a filly of his own breeding; and has
now Meteor, Herschel, and Gas, in training, all of his
own breeding. Mr. Paterson visited Europe in March, 1868,
proceeding overland, and returned in October, 1869, and was
shortly after elected to the city council for Lonsdale ward,
two years afterwards elected again without opposition, and was
elected the Right Worshipful Mayor of the City of Melbourne for
the years 1876-7. His term as councillor having expired, he was
opposed by Mr. Bent, M.P., whom he defeated by a large


majority. On the 28th August, 1877, he gave a grand fancy dress
h»all to the citizens, and was honoured by having three Governors
as his guests, Sir G. F. Bowen, Sir W. Robinson, and Sir
Anthony Musgrave; and entertained Sir Governor of
Ceylon; Sir W. Robinson, for Western Australia; and Sir
W. Jervois, sent out by the Imperial Government to report
and advise on the defences, and afterwards Governor of South
Australia. A return ball was given by the citizens, which was
attended by between three and four hundred subscribers. Mr.
Paterson has been a member of the Shipowners’ Association
for every year since it started, and its chairman. Is also chairman
of the Low-lying Lands Commission, and was elected in 1877
by the shipowners to represent them on the Harbour Trust
Commission, and is one of the Commissioners of the Paris Ex-
hibition.
Patterson, Hon. James Brown, M.P., Commissioner of Public
Works and Vice-President of the Board of Land and Works,
member of the Assembly for Castlemaine; was born at Link
Hall, Northumberland, 18th November, 1853, and was educated
at Alnwick. Came out to Victoria in 1852, and went to the
Castlemaine goldfield, and was engaged in mining for several
years. He became identified with the local governing bodies,
and was one of the first members of the Chewton borough
council and subsequently mayor for four consecutive years.
During that time he took an active part in politics, and at
the time of the Darling grant controversy contested an election
for Castlemaine, in opposition to the then McCulloch Government,
but was unsuccessful; and again at the next general election, and
was again defeated. On the departure of the sitting member,
Mr. Baillie, for Fiji, without resigning, and the seat being
declared vacant by Parliament, Mr. Patterson offered himself,
and after a contest was elected. He has since been elected
four times by the same constituency by large majorities. He
was in the first Berry Government as Minister of Public Works,
and in the second Berry Administration of 1877 accepted the
same position, and in addition the Vice-Presidency of the Board
of Land and Works. Mr. Patterson is a Free-trader; but is
content to accept the dictum of public opinion on the question
of Protection, and work with those in whose opinions he otherwise
concurs. He is regarded as a shrewd and able politician, and
takes an active part in all the leading debates.
Pearson, Charles Henry, M.A.; born 7th September, 1830,
at Islington, near London; received his early education at Rugby
School and King’s College, London. Went to the University
of Oxford, and became a student at Oriel and Exeter Colleges.


Was elected a Fellow of Oriel in 1854, and was appointed a
Professor of Modern History at King’s College, London, in
1 855, which post he relinquished in 1865. From 1869 to
1871 Professor Pearson lectured at Trinity College, Cambridge,
on Modern History, and in 1874 he arrived in Victoria from
South Australia, in which colony he had for a few years been
a resident. Immediately on arrival he took position as lecturer
on History at the Melbourne University. At the end of the
year 1874 he accepted the head-mastership of the Ladies’
Presbyterian College, which charge he relinquished in July. He
stood for Boroondara at the general election of 1877, and was
defeated. He was appointed by the Berry Government subse-
quently a commissioner to examine into the present state of
education. Professor Pearson has published the following
works: —“A History of England during the Early and Middle
Ages,” vol I. in 1861, and vol. 11. in 1868; “Historical Maps
of England during the First Thirteen Christian Centuries,” in
1869. He edited the National Review , in 1862-3, Mr.
Pearson has published two works in Australia— “ History of
England in the Fourteenth Century,” and an “ English Grammar,”
written in conjunction with Professor Strong.
Pearson, William, J.P., of Kilmany Park, North Gipps Land,
eldest son of Captain Hugh Pearson, R.N. of Hilton, Scotland;
born 1818, at Hilton, Parish of Kilmany, Fifeshire. Educated at
Polmont and Edinburgh High School. Brought up to the sea,
and was sent by his father on board an American timber ship, to
disgust him with the vocation. He ran away from his ship, but
the desired effect not having been produced his father sent him to
sea in an East Indiaman, in which service he became third officer.
When he relinquished the sea as a profession, and on the death of
his father, in 1839, attracted by the accounts of pastoral success at
Port Phillip, which had been colonised from Tasmania tw r o or three
years before, he started for Australia, and arrived in Hobson’s Bay
in 1841. Gipps Land had been recently discovered, and he deter-
mined to occupy some of the new country. Started for Omeo,
going up the north side of the ranges instead of the direct Gipps
Land route, which at that time was hardly practicable for either
man or beast. Bought cattle and drove them dow r n to Gipps Land,
and took up what is now the Lindondon station, which he shortly
abandoned, and went dowrn on the plains and took up the Kilmany
Park station, wFere he has been ever since, and has converted it
into a freehold estate, nearly the whole of it having been bought
at auction. During the first few years he had many difficulties to
contend with. The blacks speared his cattle, and necessitated
constant watchfulness, and at the time of the gold-diggings he w r as
deserted by nearly all the shepherds and station hands, lost a large


number of sheep, but soon began to get things in order again after
the first rush to the diggings, when the shepherds began to return
to their usual and easier vocation. In 1868 he contested North
Gipps Land, beating Mr. C. F. Nicholls, the miners’ candidate, by
twelve votes. Was elected a second time, but soon abandoned the
political arena, so far as the Assembly was concerned, and re-
turned to his pastoral work at Kilmany Park, where he keeps a
pack of hounds, and a mount for any chance visitor who is not too
nervous to discuss the stiff fences of the district. Mr. Pearson is
an owner and breeder of racehorses, and has made a name for
himself as a keen and honourable sportsman.
Perkins, Patrick, J.P., of Victoria and Queensland, M.P.
for D’Aubigny, is the second son of Thomas Perkins, farmer,
Tipperary; was born at Cashel, same county, Ireland, 14th
October, 1838; educated at the local schools, and brought up
on his father’s farm. He came to Victoria with his brothers
and father in 1855. His father would not stay in the colony, and
his two brothers have since died. After a few months’ employ-
ment in Melbourne the brothers went to Forest Creek diggings in
1851, thence to the Blackwood rush, and back again to Forest
Creek. Getting tired of working old ground, determined to
seek new fields. Mr. Perkins stayed at the Kyneton Hotel,
and took charge of it, the stables, and the farm, for a few
weeks for the proprietor, who, on his return, made him a handsome
offer to remain in charge of the business. He left with a few
pounds, and settled on Reedy Creek with Mr. John Hayes,
a Woolshed miner, with whom he cut a water-race three and a half
miles long, but when the rain came they found there was a
rise instead of a fall of about three feet to the mile in the
race. Nothing daunted, they set to work with all the labour
that could be procured and dug another race, and sluiced many
acres, realising several hundred pounds from the operation.
Whilst he was working on the tail-race his cook left, and for
ten days Mr. Perkins cooked for thirty-nine men, and never
deserted his post at the tail-race. After this he commenced, with
his late brother Thomas, a store at Kilmore, he being then barely
twenty and his brother seventeen. Bought shares in a quartz-reef at
Reedy Creek for £2300, £2500 and Made money
out of the first, and erected a battery of eighteen stamps and
a 2 5-horse power engine. The speculation ultimately proved
unfortunate; the reef ran out, and the money with it. The
discovery of gold at the Jamieson caused him to visit the place,
and he determined to commence business there. In 1864 he
sold his Jamieson store and stock for retaining the Jordan
and some other branch stores. The extent of business done may
be appreciated by the facts that the bad debts at time of sale


amounted to In 1862-3 he owned more than 250
pack-horses, and employed 450 more, as everything had to
be packed in the Jamieson district at that time. The immense
expense of packing beer to Woods Point caused him to start
a brewery there. After an expenditure of his brother sent
for him to work the brewery, as the money was being all lost. In
his hands it proved a great success, the firm getting a hogs-
head for nearly as much as they could brew, and, in the end,
getting the field entirely to themselves. They cut a track to
a road on their own account, a distance of sixteen or seventeen
miles, at a cost of In the crisis of 1866, having invested
largely in mining, the brothers suffered heavy losses. They
then became largely interested in the Stringer’s Creek mines, now
known as Walhalla; refusing to buy Long Tunnel shares at
ultimately bought at and sold at Mr. Perkins
went to the rush at Gympie, but arrived too late, and bought into
the claim next to where the 1000-ounce nugget was found ; had a
crushing which yielded thirty-five ounces to the ton, but soon after
the second crushing the quartz and the gold ran out together. On
his way back, visited Toowoomba, and bought land and built
a brewery, which was worked by his brother till he died in
August, 1876. His brother had taken up the Blackall copper
mine, of which Mr. Perkins sold half in Sydney for ,£28,000, and
at his brother’s desire refused ,£31,000 for the other half. Built
another brewery at Brisbane at a cost of ,£12,000. Always
a resident of Victoria, he used to visit the various properties two
or three times a year, but, on the death of his brother, went
to reside in Queensland. In 1876 he contested D’Aubigny
with Angus Mackay, editor of the Queenslander and late
Commissioner to Philadelphia, and beat him by 180 votes.
He has a private residence at Hawthorn on sixteen acres of
freehold land, and owns property and land at Jamieson, Brisbane,
and other places. In politics he is a thorough Liberal, and
although a member of the Queensland Legislature, regards Vic-
toria as his home and the birthplace of his fortune.
Perraton, William, born at Liverpool, 1836, was educated at
the Mechanics’ Institute of that city. Arrived in Melbourne 1850 •
accompanied his father to the goldfields, which were at that time
the principal attraction in the southern hemisphere, and for a
short space was at Ballarat and Bendigo, meeting with little
success. In 1852 William Perraton joined the choir of the Wes-
leyan church in Collins-street, Melbourne, and was a member of
various church chorals up to 1869. In May, 1869, he successfully
passed a Government examination, and won a certificate as
“ Master of singing of the first class” in connection with the State
schools, and still fills that position. He first came prominently


before the public as conductor of several monster concerts given
in the Melbourne Town Hall, on the occasion of the inauguration
of the magnificent organ. At the inauguration concert in 1872
over 500 voices, mostly lady and gentleman amateurs, formed the
choir. Mr. Perraton was also conductor of the chorus of the
Intercolonial Festival Concerts in December, 1872, 500 voices
being employed. He held for some years the position of secretary
to the Musical Association of Victoria, which tenure he resigned
in 1876. Mr. Perraton conducted the musical and choral portion
of the entertainment at the opening of the present Theatre Royal,
and also when the foundation-stone was first laid and the curtain
first raised at the Academy of Music. He has been for some years
piaster of the singing class of the Melbourne Athenaeum, and was
in 1876 presented by his pupils with a handsome baton as a
testimonial of regard. He married in 1862 Mary Ann, third
daughter of John Griffith, Esq., of Melbourne, a lady well and
favourably known as a vocalist.
Perrins, James Bishop, of Fitzgerald and Perrins, Castlemaine
Brewery, Melbourne, the second son of James Perrins, M.D., of
Cheltenham, England, was born there in 1832. Educated at
Stourbridge, Worcestershire. Was apprenticed to a draper for
three years, but in 1852 was attracted by the news of the goldfield
discoveries in Australia, and left London in May of that year by
the ship Zemindar, and after a long passage arrived at Sydney.
There made up a party to proceed to the Victorian goldfields,
starting November, 1852. After eight or nine months at gold-
mining, not meeting with sufficient success to encourage them to
persevere, the party broke up and Mr. Perrins took a situation.
After saving some money he joined another friend, and wentjnto
the wine and spirit business in Castlemaine, in 1854. Thence he
went to Maryborough at the time of the first rush in the same year,
and commencing the business there was fairly successful. Relations
with his partner not being satisfactory he separated from him, re-
turned to Castlemaine in 1856, and travelled for Fitzgerald’s Castle-
maine Brewery, continuing with that firm in the same capacity till
1863, when he was admitted as a partner and went to Daylesford
during the excitement of the rush, and conducted the" branch
business established there. Was elected a member of the borough
-council about 1867. After remaining there for some years he
came to Melbourne, and helped to initiate the Melbourne Castle-
maine Brewery at Emerald Hill, and establish and extend the
business in Melbourne in 1871, and since that time it has gone on
to the satisfaction of all concerned.
Perry, The Right Rev. Charles, D.D., who about three years
ago resigned the Anglican bishopric of Melbourne, is a son of the


late Mr. John Perry, the once well-known shipbuilder of Blackwall,
and the originator of the East India Docks \ and of Mary, sister of
Mr. George Green, also of Blackwall. Dr. Perry was born at
Hackney, in Middlesex, on the 17th February, 1807, and was
educated first at Dr. Heathcote’s school, Hackney, and afterwards
at Harrow, under Dr. Butler. He next entered Trinity College,
Cambridge, graduated B.A. in 1828, became Senior Wrangler,
first Smith’s Prizeman, bracketed equally with another scholar as
seventh in the first class of classical tripos, and was elected Fellow
in 1829. He studied for the bar from 1828 until 1831, when he
returned to college, where he remained as tutor and assistant
tutor until 1841, having in the meantime (in 1837) taken the de-
gree of D.D. He was ordained deacon by the Lord Bishop of
Gloucester on the 16th June, 1833, and priest by the Lord Bishop
of Ely on the 27th November, 1836. In 1841 he married Miss
Fanny Cooper, daughter of Mr. Samuel Cooper, of Tranby, near
Hull, and in the following year he became minister of St. Paul’s,
Cambridge. In 1847 he was consecrated first Bishop of Mel-
bourne, in Westminster Abbey, on St. Peter’s Day, and on the
23rd January, 1848, he arrived in Melbourne, accompanied by Dr.
Macartney, the Rev. Mr. Hales, the Rev. Mr. Newenham, and Dr.
Learmonth. On the 28th of the same month Dr. Perry preached
his first sermon in Australia, in St. James’s Church, appropriately
selecting as his text “Now then we are ambassadors for Christ
as though God did beseech you for us, we pray to you in Christ’s
stead, be ye reconciled to God.” On his landing in Geelong, he
found only a few very modest Anglican churches, with a mere
handful of ministers, and he left behind him in 1874 numerous
stately edifices, with innumerable clergymen of his denomination,
scattered broadcast over the colony. In 1872 the twenty-fifth
anniversary of his arrival was celebrated by'special services in St.
James’s Church, which was filled on the occasion by a congregation
including leading members of almost every Protestant denomina-
tion. Increasing years and arduous exertions in the past having at
length begun to tell upon his health, he soon afterwards intimated
his intention of resigning in favour of a younger man, and the
announcement was received with deep regret by his very many
friends in Victoria. On the 26th of April, 1874, he left Melbourne
for London, accompanied by Mrs. Perry, and early in the following
year he was succeeded by the Right Rev. Dr. Moorhouse. ( Vide
supra.) Since his departure from Victoria most gratifying accounts
of the great improvement in Dr. Perry’s health have found their
way through various sources to this colony. It is unnecessary to
speak of the scholarly attainments of one who bore away such
high honours at Cambridge; and the people of Victoria do not
need to be reminded of the many sterling qualities of “C.
Melbourne.”


Phillipson, John, of Emerald Hill, is the second son of Ralph
Phillipson, of East Black Dean, Weardale, County Durham,
England. His family have been in the building trade for many
generations, and leading men in their own district. Mr. Phillipson
was educated at the local schools, and brought up to his father’s
business. He started for Victoria in 1857, and began business in
his own trade at North Melbourne, and soon became connected
in building matters with Emerald Hill. When the Port Curtis
rush took place Mr. Phillipson started for it, but only reached
Sydney, as he met there returned and disheartened miners. He
took a turn up to Mudgee and other places in New South Wales.
Returned to Victoria in 1859, and for the last eighteen years he
has been a resident of Emerald Hill, as architect and builder.
Having received a good education, and being endowed with a
natural aptitude for designing and drawing, he set to work to per-
fect himself in the higher branches of the building trade and
architecture, and is now regarded as an authority in those matters,
and has often been consulted as to designs for local public
buildings. Was elected as councillor for Emerald Hill in 1871,
and mayor for the year 1877.
Phipps, Henry Francis, J.P., was born in Dublin in the year
1837, and educated at Bucklow Hill, near Knutsford, Cheshire.
Mr, Phipps was articled to the well-known firm of Messrs. Napier
and Co., engineers and shipbuilders, to learn engineering. He
went to Rio de Janeiro in the beginning of the year 1851. In
consequence of the yellow fever breaking out in Brazil and the
wonderful accounts of the discovery of gold in this colony, he
resigned an appointment there, and left for Victoria in 1853.
Having tried with but little success digging, surveying, &c., he
commenced to study for the legal profession, and attended the Mel-
bourne University. In the year 1864 he was duly admitted as
an attorney. Mr. Phipps took an active part in fostering dramatic
art, and was a prominent member of the Histrionic and Garrick
Clubs, and was ever ready and willing to give his services in
aid of the charitable institutions of the colony. He also took part
in the volunteer movement, and was one of the first to join
the Melbourne Rifles. In 1869 he was elected a member of
the Kew Borough Council, and was twice elected mayor during
1876-7, and, upon his retirement, was presented with handsome
illuminated addresses from the bench of magistrates and council,
expressive of the efficient manner in which he had discharged his
duty as chairman of the bench and mayor.
Pigdoily John, J.P., contractor, councillor for Smith ward, city
of Melbourne, and Right Worshipful Mayor of Melbourne for the
year 1877-8; only son of James Pigdon, of Rothbury, was born


3rd April, 1832, at Long Horsely, Northumberland, England.
Educated at Jarrow on the Tyne, where the oldest church in
England is said to be situated, and has underground communica-
tion with Tynemouth Abbey, a distance of four or five miles.
He was apprenticed to a joiner, with whom he served over
six years. He left England by the Ottilia , from Liverpool,
on nth July, 1852, for Melbourne. On arrival here he went into
his own trade. Soon started in business for himself, and went to
Geelong in 1853, and was at the turning of the first sod, by
Governor Latrobe, of the Geelong railway. On his return
to Melbourne he built three or four cottages at North Melbourne,
and commenced contracting. Built the Wesleyan schools and
minister’s house in Lonsdale-street in 1857. On the death of
councillor Macßain in 1869, Mr. Pigdon was brought out at the
last moment as a candidate for Smith ward, and beat his opponent
by over 100 votes. Was elected again without opposition; and
when the ward was divided into Smith and Victoria wards, Mr.
Pigdon was again elected, and three times without opposition.
On 9th October, 1877, was elected the Right Worshipful Mayor of the
city of Melbourne, and was sworn in on the 25th of same month,
prior to his installation on the 9th November same year. Was
made a territorial magistrate in 1872.
Polllmail, Robert Williams, County Court judge, born in
London, 1811; was educated for the legal profession, and in due
time was called to the bar. Mr. Pohlman arrived in Melbourne,
or rather the Port Phillip settlement of those days, in 1840, and
was admitted a member of the colonial bar in 1841. He held a
seat in the first nominee Legislative Council of Victoria, under
the Government of Sir Charles Hotham. Is the first County
Court judge that ever sat on the bench in Victoria, and has held
office as Master in Equity, Commissioner of Insolvent Estates,
and chairman of the Board of Education. On the introduction
of parliamentary government Mr. Pohlman retired from political
life, and has since that time devoted himself to the exercise of his
judicial duties at the County Court. Judge Pohlman, in his
leisure moments, takes an active part in all that pertains to
the public charities of Melbourne.
Purves, James Liddell, M.P., barrister-at-law, eldest son
of James Purves, of Melbourne, one of the earliest settlers
and pioneers of the colony. Born 23rd August, 1843, in
Swanston-street, Melbourne. Educated prior to 1851 at
Mr. Budd’s private school, and afterwards under the
same head-master at the Melbourne Uiocescan Grammar
School, now the common school at the rear of Parliament
Buildings. He went to England with his family in 1851 —the


Exhibition year. Returned to Victoria in 1852, on the news of the
gold discovery reaching England, and remained in Melbourne
until 1855, when he again left for England in the Pacific , s.s., one
of the pioneer steamers of the Cape route. After his arrival
in Europe, he was educated at Brighton (England), Brunswick,
Inden (Rhenish Prussia), Berlin, King’s College (London), Brussels,
and eventually went up to Trinity College, Cambridge, in 1859..
He kept his terms at Lincoln’s Inn, and was called to the
bar on the 9th of June, 1865, and soon afterwards returned
to Victoria, where he commenced to practise his profession. He
has also been associated with the press; and is a member of the
New South Wales and Tasmanian bars, having occasionally been
retained specially to visit those colonies. The more important
cases in which he has been engaged were in Learmonth v. Bailey
and others, for the defendant Williamson; the Stevenson cases,
for alleged fraud on the Customs; the defence of Hastings, the
Frankston murderer; and of Phoebe Park, for shooting with
intent. The latter case was tried at the circuit court at Albury,
New South Wales, and created intense excitement at the time,
Mr. Purves first entered Parliament on the 26th March, 1872'
when he succeeded Sir James M £ Culloch in the representation of
Mornington. He was opposed by Mr. John Everard, supported
by the whole force and influence of the Duffy Administration, and
Mr. John Keys. After a severe struggle, Mr. Purves was returned
by a substantial majority. At the next general election he
enjoyed a walkover, and at the, last (1877) election he defeated
Mr. Downward by an overwhelming majority. He has been
offered office (the Attorney-Generalship) by the first Berry
Administration ; and by the last McCulloch Administration he was
asked to accept a position as one of the law officers—both of
which offers he declined. He belongs to the Free-trade, Consti-
tutional, and Young Australian party.
Quinlan, Francis, barrister-at-law, Melbourne; eldest son of
Matthew James Quinlan, M.D., of Thurles, County Tipperary,
Ireland. Was born at Clonmel, in October, 1834. Educated at
Thurles College, and intended for the law as a profession. Came
to Victoria in 1853, and went to the goldfields, but after a few
years’ experience of a gold-digger’s vocation went into business.
In 1857 was chairman of the “Progress Committee,” organised for
the purpose of securing local self-government for the people, and
on the establishment of municipal institutions was the first chair-
man of the Dunolly council. In 1858 was made a territorial
magistrate by the first O’Shanassy Administration, and returning
officer for the Avoca electoral district. Mr. Quinlan resumed his
legal studies, and was called to the bar in 1863. At the general
election, 1859, he stood for Crowlands, against Mr. Houston and


Mr. Woods; for Dalhousie, against Mr. Sands; and again at the
general election of 1864, and was each time defeated. Was a
member of the local branch of the “Land Convention,” and was
sent with Mr. Wingfield, of Dunolly, as delegate to the Land
Convention in Melbourne, by a public meeting. In politics is a
Liberal Free-trade candidate. Has been connected with the press,
and edited the Victoria newspaper for about twelve months.
Settled in Melbourne in 1861, and began practice immediately
after being called to the bar. In August, f 866, married eldest
daughter of Michael Lynch, Grace Park, Hawthorn.
Ramsay, The Hon. Robert, M.P., was born in February, 1842,
at Hawick, Roxburghshire, Scotland, and is a son of the late Rev.
Andrew Mitchel Ramsay. He arrived in Melbourne in 1847,
and was educated, first, at the principal private seminary of
the time, of which the proprietors were Messrs. Campbell and
M*'Gregor, and afterwards at the Scotch College, under the
mastership of Mr. Lawson. On leaving school, Mr, Ramsay
entered at the Melbourne University as a law student, and
was admitted as a solicitor in 1864. He married, in 1868, Isabella
Catherine, second daughter of Roderick Urquhart. Mr. Ramsay
entered public life in October, 1870, as member of the Assembly
for East Bourke under the M £ Culloch Administration, and on
taking his seat, moved the address in reply to the Governor’s
speech. It was also Mr. Ramsay, who moved the amendment,
which on the 21st May, 1872, led to the defeat of the Duffy
Government, after a stormy debate, which lasted eleven nights.
When Mr. Francis took up the reins of government, Mr. Ramsay
accepted a portfolio, without office, and was sworn in as a member
of the Executive Council. In 1874, when the Government
was reorganised under the leadership of Mr. Kerferd, the subject
of this notice took office as Postmaster-General, with charge of all
departments under the Chief Secretary, which position held until
Sir James McCulloch became Prime Minister, when he accepted
the portfolios of Minister of Education and Postmaster-General.
In 1877, on the Berry Government coming into power, Mr.
Ramsay had to relinquish office, but had previously, for the
sixth consecutive time, been returned as a member for the
division of East Bourke, which electorate he still represents.
Mr. Ramsay has for many years taken an active part in the
management of the Law Institute of Victoria, and was at one
time its president. He was also, together with the Hon. R. S.
Anderson, a representative for Victoria at the Telegraph Conference
held at Sydney, New South Wales, February, 1877.
Rede, Lieut.-Col. Robert William, is a member of a very old
Suffolk family, and was born in 1819, at “Ashman’s,” the country


seat of the family. His father was the late Thos. William Rede,
Esq., and he is a grandson of the late Thos. Rede, of Beccles.
He received a private education in England and in France,
studying with a view to qualify himself for the medical profession,
which idea, however, he subsequently abandoned, electing instead
to occupy his time for a space in making a tour through a large
portion of Europe, Greece, Turkey, Bulgaria, &c. After some
years of travel, the subject of this memoir, wishing to extend his
sphere of action, determined to visit Australia, and in 1851 set
sail for Port Phillip, being quite unaware at the time that the land
he was bound for had suddenly become an El-Dorado ! On
landing in November, 1851, Mr. Rede at once caught the “gold
fever,” and started off to try his luck on the goldfields, where
for some months he dug with fair success. In October, 1852,
Mr. Rede entered the service of the Government, being appointed
Assistant-Commissioner of Goldfields, at Korong; and in the
following year he was promoted to the rank of Commissioner,
with charge of the surrounding gold district, * He was appointed
Resident-Commissioner at the Ballarat goldfields in 1854, and
took an active part in the political troubles during which so many
valuable lives were lost. The Commissioner’s conduct on the
above occasion met with the entire approval of the Governor, Sir
Charles Hotham and his ministerial advisers, but it was deemed
expedient to relieve Mr. Rede from his duties as Commissioner,
and recall him from Ballarat for a while. Although relieved from
duty, Mr. Rede retained his rank, and drew full pay as a Commis-
sioner of goldfields, until appointed sheriff of the Geelong
circuit district, and Commissioner of Crown lands for the
county of Grant in 1855. In November, 1855, he was, at the
request of Sir Charles Hotham, placed in command of the Geelong
rifle corps, and in 1866 he performed the duties of Brigade
Major to the Victorian volunteer force, in addition to his official
work as sheriff. In 1868 Col. Rede was promoted to the military
command of the North-Western District of Victoria, which posi-
tion he still holds. He was also, in the year last mentioned,
made sheriff of the Ballarat, Ararat, and Belfast circuits, and
retained the position for about two years, when a re-distribution
of sheriff’s duties placed him in charge of the Southern Bailiewick,
his head-quarters still being Ballarat. On the death, in February,
1877, of Mr. Wright, sheriff for the Central Bailiewick, Col. Rede
was appointed to succeed him, and now holds that office. As an
officer in the Victorian volunteer forces, Lieut.-Col. Rede ranks
next in seniority to Col. W. A. D. Anderson, the Commandant.
He was married in 1859, to Isabella, second daughter of the
Hon. J. F. Strachan, of “Lunan,” Geelong, by whom he has
issue one son; and secondly, in 1872, to Margaret Geraldine
Clendinning, daughter of Dr. Clendinning, formerly of Westport,
Ireland.


Reid, The Hon. Robert Dyce, M.L.C., is the third son of
David Reid, a surgeon in the Royal Navy, and was born in
New South Wales, 3rd August, 1828, Coming to Victoria
in 1845, he settled in the Ovens district, and was the first
discoverer of gold there. In November, 1876, he was elected
a member of the Legislative Council for the Eastern Province, vice
Sir Francis Murphy, resigned.
Rilltel, The Rev. Moses, S.J.M., was born in Edinburgh,
Scotland, in 1824, during the time that his father, the late Rev.
Rabbi Myer Rintel, was minister of the Hebrew congregation.
(His father was a famed Hebrew and Talmudical scholar, and
published several works.) The subject of this biography, holding
a Semeecha from the late Chief Rabbi in London, Dr. Solomon
Herschel, was the first duly authorised Jewish clergyman to come
out to the colony. He arrived in Sydney in 1844, where he
established the Sydney Hebrew Academy, of which he became
the principal. In 1849 be accepted the office of minister of the
newly established Jewish congregation of Melbourne, subject to
the approval of the Rev. Chief Rabbi Dr. Adler, which was soon
after obtained. He married, the same year, a Miss Hart, and has
had a family of nine children. Circumstances compelled him to
resign his charge, but he was invited by a large and influential
number residing in the eastern part of the city to assist in the
formation of a new synagogue in Melbourne. In the year 1864,
mainly through his exertions, a duly constituted Beth Din, the
only one out of London, was established, of which he acted
as the chairman; and in 1868 the Chief Rabbi of Great Britain
and its dependencies assigned to him the position and title of
Senior Minister of the Melbourne Hebrew community. He has
for years past taken a deep interest in the Melbourne Jewish
Philanthropic Society, in which he has not only held all the
various offices, but has on more than one occasion been elected
its president. Through his efforts this society was allowed to
participate in the Government grant in aid of charitable institu-
tions, and for which the members voted him a very handsome
testimonial. He, with a few others, founded the United Friends’
Jewish Benefit Society in 1856, of which he became the
first president. His sphere of usefulness was not limited to
matters in connection with his own faith; he has been for many
years past and still continues to be connected with various
societies and institutions. He was one of the founders of the
Benevolent Asylum, and acted as Grand Chaplain on the occasion
of the laying of the foundation-stone in 1850.
Robertson, William, barrister-at-law, Melbourne and Middle
Temple, England, the second, and eldest surviving son of the late


William Robertson of Tasmania, who, in 1842, purchased the
Colac property in Victoria, and the now famous brand, from
Captain Foster Fyans, and by importations of pure-bred stock
improved and extended the herd until in the hands of himself
and his sons it has become one of the most celebrated, extensive,
and valuable herds in Australia. Mr. Robertson was born in Tas-
mania in 1839. Educated at the High School, Hobart Town, and
took his degree at Oxford in England, in 1862, and was called to
the bar of the Middle Temple the following year. He rowed in
the Oxford and Cambridge annual boat race on the Thames in
1861, and was in the winning crew of that year, being the first
Australian youngster associated with the victors in these world-
renowned struggles for supremacy between the two universities.
He returned to Victoria in 1863, and practised at the bar, with
fair success, for eight or nine years, when he was elected the
representative for Polwarth and South Grenville, in the Legislative
Assembly, by a very large majority over his opponent, and shortly
after gave up the practice of his profession. At his father’s death
he went to reside at the Colac estate, and retired for a time from
public life to devote himself more closely to the duties connected
with the Colac and other properties and the herd, which at that time
devolved upon himself and brothers. In 1876 visited Europe, and
went to the Philadelphia Exhibition, and returned to Victoria in
1877. Shortly after his return he was elected a member of the
shire council of Colac at the annual elections in October, 1877.
As a politician, Mr, Robertson may be described as a Liberal
Conservative, and intends when the opportunity offers to again take
part in the public affairs of the colony. In 1862 Mr. Robertson
was married to the second daughter of Mr, J. R. Murphy, of
Melbourne.
Rocke, William Henry, Ivanhoe, Heidelberg, the senior
member and founder of the firm of W. H. Rocke and Co., Mel-
bourne, was born in the year 1836, at the principal town in North
Wales, Wrexham, where his parents carried on business. He was
educated at the grammar school of the town, and soon after leaving-
school, started for Melbourne, arriving there in 1852. Was
married in iB6O at the Wesleyan Church, Lonsdale-street, to
Annie Salisbury, only daughter of W. Buchanan, city missionary,
late of Armagh, North of Ireland. Mr. Rocke was for many years
manager for Hyde and De Carle, wholesale grocers, Elizabeth-
street, Melbourne. In 1857 he visited England for a short time,
and on his return opened a furniture warehouse in Great Lonsdale-
street. Joined Mr. Beauchamp in Collins-street in 1863, and dis-
solved partnership with him in 1868, and has carried the business on
ever since in his own name and on his own account. Resided up
to 1870 at Emerald Hill, and generally took an active part


in politics on the Liberal side. Since that date has resided at
Ivanhoe, near Heidelberg, and taken no further part in politics,
but is one of the most earnest supporters of coursing in Victoria,
always keeping a large kennel of the best blood to be had either
here or in England.
Rosales, Henry, mining engineer, Walhalla, is a pupil of
Fellemberg’s College, of Hofwyl, near Berne, in Switzerland, and
was there from the end of 1831 until 1836. From there he went
to Leipzig to prepare himself to enter the Royal Academy of
Mines, of Freyberg, in Saxony, in 1837, being then seventeen years
of age. Under Professors Lampadius, Reich, Breithaupt, Weissbach,
Gatzschman, Plattner, &c., he passed through the required curri-
culum in four years. In June, 1839, during the vacations, he
walked with a friend the greater part of the way from Freyberg,
through Bohemia, Austria, and Hungary, to Transylvania, visiting
on his way the principal silver, lead, and copper mines and smelting
works of those countries, and in Transylvania the gold mines of
Nagyag, Abrobanya, &c., and the smelting works of Zalathna. In
1841 Mr. Rosales went to Berlin, where as a pupil of Professor
Henry Rose he devoted himself during the year 1842 almost
exclusively to the study of inorganic chemistry, especially quanti-
tative analysis, but at the university he followed the lectures of
Gustav Rose, Mitcherlich, Magnus, &c. Whilst in Berlin it was
his privilege as a young geological student to be introduced to the
eminent geologist, Leopold von Buch. Returning to Freyberg
towards the end of 1842, Mr. Rosales went through the “practical
course,” working in the mines as a miner, and before the furnaces
as a smelter in the smelting works of Halsbriicke, near Freyberg,
after which, in March, 1843, he passed the examination as mining
engineer and metallurgist, the examiners complimenting him on
the manner in which he passed. In 1543 Mr, Rosales travelled
through the Hartz to Mansfeld, noting especially Augustin’s and
Ziervogel’s methods of extracting silver from copper or other ores;
then through Weissenburg and Switzerland to the south of
France, on a visit to the coal mines of St, Etienne and the
extensive iron smelting and forging works in its vicinity. Returning
to the borders of the Rhine, he inspected on his way to England
the iron works and coal mines of Saarbruck. In England the deep
mines of Cornwall were first visited. Kindly received by the
Messrs. Williams, of Redruth, he went down several mines, the
deepest of which was the fine old Tresevayn mine, and he always
has retained a vivid recollection that it took him three hours to
go down the engine-shaft to the deep levels, whilst twenty minutes
were sufficient for him to get up to the surface by the man-engine.
On leaving Cornwall he went via Exeter and Bristol, where the
Great Britain steamship was still in dock, to Swansea. There he


met Mr. H. Bath and Mr. Baton, his old friends and Freyberg
schoolfellows, who introduced him to the Messrs. Vivian. These
gentlemen very courteously and kindly gave him free entry to their
extensive copper-smelting works. After residing for several months
at Swansea, he left for Liverpool, with the intention of visiting
the iron-smelting works and coal-mines of Scotland and the north
of England, but from Manchester he was called to Belgium.
Meeting in London Mr. W. W. Smythe, who had also been a
schoolfellow of his at Freyberg, he obtained through him an intro-
duction to Professor Percy, of the School of Mines, Jermyn-street.
Making a short stay in Liege, he went to Paris, intending to visit
Italy, but the sudden death of Mr. de Villalba, his godfather, then
Ambassador of Spain at the Court of Rome, prevented him from
accomplishing a tour to which he had looked forward with great
pleasure. Whilst in Paris he was fortunate in making the acquaint-
ance of Don R. de la Sagra, A. D’Orbigny, Dumas, &c. Before
leaving Paris he became a member of the Geological Society of
h ranee. In 1844, shortly after his arrival at Madrid, he was
entrusted by the Marquis of Remisa and Mr. Fagoago with the
superintendence and management of several mines; and was
appointed to report on the coal-basins north of Madrid and to the
west of Cordova, on the lead and copper mines of Linares, Rio
I into, &c. In 1847, an overdose of arsenic having been adminis-
tered to him in La Mancha by mistake, he was confined to his
bed and room in Madrid for four months, and did not recover his
health until removed to Andalusia in 1848. The time of this acci-
dent Avas also a turning point in his career, for during his illness
occurred the death of the Marquis of Remisa, and subsequently
the liquidation of both firms. However, before leaving Madrid
for Andalusia, he was engaged as manager of the gold-mines of
Culera, a small port in Catalonia, on the south side of the
Pyrenees; and in 1848 he took charge of those mines. In 1853
Mr. Rosales left Spain for this country, arriving here with his
friend on the 28th October, 1853, by the Royal Mail s.s. Sydney.
Having brought out with them four miners and a smelter, tents,
&c., Mr. Rosales put up his tent on Canvas Town. Very great was
their disappointment to find that no mining leases but only small
area claims could be obtained, but with the expectation that an
alteration would soon be effected in that respect, Mr. Rosales set
off via Ballarat for Creswick. He took up a claim on the Flour-
bag for the men, and devoted his time to the study of the
surrounding geological formations, more especially those of
Creswick and Ballarat. It was whilst thus engaged that in March,
1854, he observed at Clarke’s Diggings the important fact that
the auriferous drift was covered by partly decomposed basaltic
rock. Following up this observation, he concluded that the gold-
bearing beds and gravels of the alluvial deposits in the Creswick


and Ballarat districts were older than the eruption and flow of the
basalt, and in a letter pointed out to his friend, W. Warrington
Smythe, that the Gravel Pits Lead at Ballarat would be found
proceeding further west under the basalt. An abstract from his
letter was published in the quarterly Journal of the Geological
Society of London, of the 7th March, 1855. Subsequent events
have proved the correctness of his observations throughout the
district. Mr. Rosales for several years dedicated his leisure time
to the further study of the quartz veins of Creswick, Ballarat,
Blackwood, Maldon, Sandhurst, &c., and in 1861 carried off the
Victorian Government prize for the best essay “ On the origin and
distribution of gold in quartz veins in Victoria,” in which he advo-
cated the theory that in this colony auriferous lodes and quartz
veins would be found at various depths, at as great a depth as the
quartz miner can ever penetrate. As neither mining nor quartz-
crushing had proved profitable to him, Mr. Rosales took to his
profession, and was for some time manager of the New North
Climes Company, at Climes, in 1862, before the re-organisation of
that company. In his last report he pointed out that the whim
shaft should be sunk deeper, as the trend of the lodes was in the
direction of that shaft, and not of the main shaft. Subsequently
this was proved to be the case. In 1864 Mr. Rosales was manager
of the Victoria Company, Clunes, and reported correctly on the
probable course of the leads (gutters) in the Chryseis and Hand
and Band Companies, Ballarat. In the early part of 1865 he was
offered and accepted the management of the Walhalla Company’s
mine, which had just been opened, situated on the now famous
Cohen’s line of reef at Walhalla (then Stringer’s Creek), in Gipps-
land. The dividends declared by the Walhalla Company to the
9th of July, 1877, amount to 9s. 9b., the number of
tons of stone reduced being 109,281, and the gold obtained
therefrom 185,297 oz. o dwts. iogrs., value is. 6d. In
1867, when the famous Long Tunnel Company at Walhalla com-
menced work, he was appointed consulting engineer to the
company for a time, and was several times one of its directors. In
August, 1875, on the occasion of the declaration of the 100th
dividend, the shareholders of the Walhalla Company presented
him with an illuminated address and a valuable service of plate, in
recognition of his services. Whilst residing in Walhalla he took
an interest in public affairs, in school matters principally. For a
number of years he was a member, and at one time, in 1870,
chairman of the Mining Board for the Gippsland district. In
January, 1870, he was gazetted a justice of the peace. In August,
1873, the council of the School of Mines, Ballarat, appointed him
an examiner. Although opposed for some time to Walhalla being
proclaimed a municipality, he was nevertheless elected a councillor,
and was the first mayor of the township of Walhalla. A few years


since, however, he retired from the borough council, partly on
account of pressure of business, devoting since then much of his
leisure time and capital to the development of several mining
ventures in the district. In the month of May in the present year
he was elected a Fellow of the Geological Society of London. Mr.
Rosales is still general manager of the Walhalla Company.
Rowlands, Evan, of Ballarat, and Collins-street, Melbourne,
was born in North Wales, and was brought up at the slate works,
Merionethshire, North Wales, and is thoroughly acquainted with
the production of slate from the quarries to the workshop. Came
here in 1852, and for a time settled in North Melbourne. In 1854
went to Ballarat, and soon after started the sodawater business,
taking Mr. Robert Lewis in as a partner, Mr. Rowlands devoted
all his time and energy to business, his ambition being to make the
best article that money and skill could produce. The manufactory
was established on the edge of Lake Wendouree (or swamp as it
then was), at Ballarat, for the sake of the water. Shortly after the
works were started a fine spring was found at Warrenheip, and the
firm continued to go there for their water until a better track
was made to Buninyong, but returned to Warrenheip as soon as
a good road was made to the Mount, as the water there was
superior, and they now have a spring on their own property there.
The purity and perfection of the soda, seltzer, potass, and lithia
waters soon gave them a monopoly of the trade on Ballarat. The
importance of this industry is shown by the fact that the firm in
one year on Ballarat alone used 11,708 gross of corks, and that
including the Melbourne business Mr. Rowlands pays £5OO per
annum duty on corks alone. In July, 1873, a branch of the busi-
ness was started in Melbourne, and the growth of the manufacture
may be guessed by the fact that from July 1876 to July 1877, in
Melbourne alone, Mr. Rowlands used 6702 gross of corks, and
21,441 gross of bottles, upon which there is a duty of 20 per cent.,
and 2 per cent, expenses. The water used in Melbourne is passed
through five filters, four of charcoal and one dripping or grit stone,
but all the sodawater is made at Ballarat. A first prize medal in
1870 was obtained from the Agricultural Society of New South
Wales, and a first-class medal in 1875, at the Melbourne Exhibi-
tion of the products and manufactures for Philadelphia. On the
22nd July, 1876, Mr. Lewis went out of the firm, and Mr. Row-
lands has since been its sole representative.
Rlisdeil, George William, J.P., third son of the Rev. G. K,
Rusden, M.A., Pembroke College, Cambridge, who emigrated to
New South Wales in 1834, and held a cure as chaplain in
the Church of England until his death in 1859. Mr, G. W.
Rusden was in his youth engaged in country pursuits, taking


part occasionally in public matters, and in discussions in the
press. In 1849 he was appointed agent for the establishment of
national schools, for which money had been provided in 1848,
but which had not been established in 1849. His tour was
successful. His sphere of action was at first in the Port Phillip
district, now Victoria; but he was afterwards, both as agent and as
inspector of schools, in New South AVales, his duties leading him
to Brisbane. When Victoria was separated from New South
Wales in 1851, he was offered by Mr. La Trobe, through
the Government in Sydney, the post of Under-Secretary or Chief
Clerk in the Colonial Secretary’s office, and accepted it. In 1852
he became Clerk of the Executive Council, and in 1856, on the
establishment of a new Constitution in the two Houses of Legis-
lature, was appointed Clerk of the Legislative Council and Clerk
of the Parliaments. Administered the Immigration Department
for some time without pay, during the government of Sir Charles
Hotham, and was member of various boards of inquiry for a long
period. As member of the municipal council of Brighton
officiated as chairman, and afterwards as mayor when the latter
title was conferred by law. Has been a magistrate since 1853.
Was for some time a member of the National Education Board in
Victoria. Has been a member of the council of the Melbourne
University since its foundation. Originated a movement in iB6O
for the erection of a Shakspeare statue and the foundation of
Shakspeare Scholarships in the Melbourne University. Governor
Sir Henry Barkly took the chair on the occasion at a public
meeting, which for respectability and intelligence is without a
precedent in the colony. The scholarships were founded in 1864.
Was invited to take high office in connection with education
in New South Wales after responsible government was introduced
there in 1856, but declined. Author of “National Education,”
one volume octavo; “Mozarra: an Australian Legend;” a transla-
tion of “ Les Propos de Labienus;” “Discovery, Survey, and
Settlement of Port Phillip;” “Curiosities of Colonisation,” and
various pamphlets. Is Fellow of the Royal Geographical Society,
and member of the corporation of the Royal Literary Fund, in
England.
Rusden, Henry Keylock, fourth son of the Rev. G. K. Rus-
den, of Maitland, New South Wales, was born in 1826, at Leith
Hill Place, near Dorking, Surrey, and came with his parents to
Australia in 1834. His youth was passed in desultory bush life,
and in working on the gold-diggings until 1853, when he came to
Melbourne and obtained an appointment in the Civil Service, in
which he still remains. He was the founder of the Eclectic Asso-
ciation in 1867, and mainly also of the Sunday Free Discussion
Society in 1870, Both institutions still flourish, and are based


upon the principle that by discussion, next to experiment, the
intellect is best exercised, and truth detected. Accordingly these
societies—'the first privately, the second publicly—discuss freely
subjects elsewhere tabooed. Mr. Rusden is a frequent lecturer
before both, and several of his papers have been published. He
is an atheist in theology, a determinist in philosophy, a Malthusian
and radical in sociology, and an ultra-free-trader in political
economy. His motto is “Thorough.” He has been secretary to
the Royal Society for several years, and has contributed several
papers to its transactions and proceedings, viz.:—“On the Ethics
of Opinion,” “Moral Responsibility,” “The Treatment of Criminals
in Relation to Science,” and “On the Week.” His essay on John
Howard appeared in the Journal of Mental Science , of London,
for July 1876, and was noticed in the Academy for 15th July, p. 66.
Mr. Rusden is also secretary to the Yorick Club, Melbourne. He
married in 1858, and has a large family.
Sargoort, Major, The Hon. Frederick Thomas, M.L.C., of the
firm of Sargood, Son and Co., warehousemen, Melbourne, and
member of the Legislative Council for the Central Province, is
the son of the late Frederick James Sargood, who was one of the
members for Melbourne in the old Legislative Council, and with
His Honor Judge (then Mr.) Fellows was elected a member of
the Legislative Assembly for St. Kilda at the first election, in
1856, under the new Constitution. His mother was the daughter
of Mr. Rippon, for several years chief cashier in the Bank of
England. He was born at Walworth (London), 30th May, 1834.
Was educated at private schools in England, and arrived in Vic-
toria (then Port Phillip) 12th February, 1850, in the ship Clifton ,
one of several chartered at the time by Dr. Lang, of Sydney. He
was for some short time in the Government service, as a clerk in
the Office of Public Works, then under the control of Mr. Henry
Chinn, but soon after joined his father in the drapery business in
Collins-street. On the opening of the Mount Alexander gold-
fields in 1852, he was off there, was successful in his digging
ventures, and then took charge of his father’s country business in
Castlemaine, Sandhurst, and surrounding districts. Returning to
Melbourne in 1854, he remained connected with his father’s busi-
ness, which, expanding with the times, soon grew into an extensive
establishment, and from 1858, when his father visited Europe, he
bad the entire financial charge of their business, and of the branches
opened at Dunedin and Auckland. In 1858, he married Marian
Australia, only daughter of the late Honourable George Rolfe,
M.L.C. Mr. Sargood took a great interest in the question of
Colonial defences, and not only initiated the formation of No. 2
St. Kilda Rifle Corps in 1859, but became its secretary, and
carried off the first prize at the first meeting for rifle-shooting


held in Victoria, under the auspices of the Caledonian Society.
He soon became one of the best rifle shots in Victoria. Going to
England in 1861, he took part successfully in many rifle contests,
and was present at Wimbledon in 1862. That year he returned
to the colony, and in 1864, became lieutenant; in 1866, captain
in command of the St. Kilda battery; and major in February,
1872. He resigned his command in January, 1877, but continues
on the general staff. Was a member of the original Free Trade
Feague, and is the virtual resuscitator, and a member of the
present Free Trade League. Is a member of the Chamber of
Commerce, and as such for many years took an active interest in
questions affecting the mercantile community, more especially the
creation of a Harbour Trust, and the amendment of the Insol-
vency Laws. Was elected one of the members of the Legislative
Council for the Central Province, in May, 1874. Was also elected
a Harbour Trust Commissioner at the first election of that body,
and is a Commissioner of Savings Banks.
Scott, William, mining agent, Melbourne, eldest son of William
Scott, architect, London, was born 19th September, 1835. Edu-
cated at King’s College, London, when between sixteen and
seventeen years old, and in 1849 he started for California. After
travelling the country and doing some digging for gold without
much success, he returned in 1851 and left again in 1852 for
Australia. On reaching Melbourne, he was engaged in trade for
three or four years, and then devoted himself to gold mining, and
became identified with the Maldon district, then known as Tarren-
gower. In 1861 and 1862, at which time the mining interest was
generally in a state of collapse, more especially at Maldon, having
then no support either from outside capital or the traders of the
neighbourhood, Mr. Scott became manager of five or six of the
principal mines of that district, and introduced the tribute system,
then litttle known and hardly understood, and nowhere practised
in the colony. During the period the companies with which he
was connected were under the tribute system, they paid
in dividends in about four years. When reverses again came, the
faith of shareholders had been so well established that they did
not part with their shares. From iB6O to the present time, Mr.
Scott has identified himself with mining pursuits, and has been
connected with Bendigo (Sandhurst), Inglewood, Castlemaine, and
Fryers Creek. He is agent for the Australian Miners’ Investment
Company, of which Mr. Dicker, now of London, is secretary, and
which holds considerable interests in the colony, some of which
have collapsed altogether, but out of the others" the shareholders
have received sufficient in dividends to pay them a moderate
interest on the total capital subscribed of about


Service, The Hon. James, M.P., was born at Kilwinning, Ayr-
shire, in November, 1823, and received a liberal education in
the principal local school, as well as from a private tutor. He
engaged in mercantile pursuits in Glasgow in 1846, and remained
there until 1853, when, in August of that year, he emigrated
for Melbourne in the same vessel with Mr. Patrick Hanna,
M.L.A. Almost immediately after his arrival, Mr. Service com-
menced business as a merchant in Bourke-street west. Shortly
afterwards the Emerald Hill agitation for separation began, and
the bill separating that suburb from Melbourne having been
passed, not without a severe struggle, Mr. Service was elected the
first chairman of the new municipality. He was appointed a
territorial magistrate during the same year, and in the fol-
lowing one he was again elected chairman. About the same time
the action of the Hobson’s Railway Company in proposing to cut
up the streets at wrong levels, was opposed by Mr. Service
and other gentlemen, who ultimately succeeded in defeating
it. In 1857, when Mr. (now Sir) William Stawell was appointed
Chief Justice of Victoria, his elevation to that position created
a vacancy in the representation of Melbourne in the Legislative
Assembly, and Mr. Service was invited to stand for the seat. He
was opposed by Mr. James Murphy, who came forward in
the interest of Mr. O’Shanassy, but was defeated by the subject of
our sketch. Mr. Service next seconded the vote of confidence in
the O’Shanassy Ministry, which was carried. The new Electoral
Bill shortly afterwards divided Melbourne into three electorates,
East, West, and North, and at the following general election Mr.
Service contested Emerald Hill against Mr. Anderson, who
defeated his opponent by sixty votes. Mr. Service was simul-
taneously invited to stand for Avoca and for Ripon and Hampden.
He selected the latter district, was returned for it, and continued
to represent it until he left for England in 1862. In October,
1859, he accepted office in the Nicholson Administration as
Minister of Lands and President of the Board of Land and
Works, and introduced the first Land Bill providing for selection.
Then ensued the contest with the Upper House about the Order-
in-Council, which was to give the Government of the day power to
lease for not more than one year. Mr. Nicholson leant towards
the pastoral tenants, and the consequence was that Mr. Service
and Mr. J. G. Francis resigned office, having held it during
about ten months. On retiring from the Government, they were
each presented with handsome testimonials by their constituents,
who appeared to thoroughly approve of their action. The Nicholson
Administration soon afterwards made way for that of Mr. Heales.
Mr. Service and Mr. Francis were invited to join it, but they
refused. To Mr. Service is due the credit of taking charge of and
passing through the Victorian Parliament Torrens’ Transfer of


Real Property Act (which service he performed whilst a private
member). When he was about to leave for England in 1862, Mr.
Service’s constituents in Ripon and Hampden, wished to give him
nine or twelve months’ leave of absence in order that he might
not sever his connection with them even for a time, but he
preferred to resign. On his return to the colony in March, 1865,
he found politics at boiling point, owing to the introduction
of the new protective tariff, and the proposal to “ tack ” it to the
Appropriation Bill. He opposed both the tariff and the “ tack,”
when he soon afterwards contested Ballarat East with Mr. Yale,
by whom he was defeated. Mr. Service sustained a second
defeat at Collingwood, and a third at West Melbourne, but at the
general election in 1874 he was returned for Maldon, and took
office as Treasurer during Mr. Kerferd’s Administration. On
going back to his constituents he was returned unopposed, and
held office until the formation of Mr. Berry’s first Government in
August, 1875. At the general election in May, 1877, Mr.
Service was again returned for Maldon without a contest. He is
a free-trader without being a bigot to his opinions, and is one
of the best speakers in the Assembly. He holds a very high
position in the mercantile world. Has always taken a deep
interest in the welfare of our charitable institutions, and is chair-
man of the Alfred Hospital.
Sliailll, Richard, J.P., accountant and assistant manager of the
Bank of Victoria, Melbourne, born at Leeds, Yorkshire, England,
4th January, 1827, son of— Shann, wool merchant and cloth
manufacturer. Educated at Orton College, Bradford. Left
England for Adelaide September, 1848, and was occupied in
building. Left there for Victoria, and was engaged in mining at
Forest Creek, Bendigo, and Eaglehawk during 1851-23 then went
to Melbourne, and took a situation in Tennant’s auction-mart.
Obtained appointment in the Bank of Victoria, Melbourne, 20th
December, 1852, and in a short time became accountant to the
bank, and has held that position for fourteen years. Was made a
justice of the peace for the colony of Victoria some years back,
and in September, 1877, was made a justice of the peace and
coroner for South Australia. In the same year, on the absence of
Mr. Matheson on leave, Mr. Shann was appointed acting general
manager of the Bank of Victoria.
Sllillinglaw, John Joseph, is descended from a Border family,,
who since 1689 have been settled at Birkhillside. Born in London,
1830. As a boy, was for eight years with Admiral Washington,
the hydrographer to the Navy, and resigned his appointment at
the Admiralty to emigrate with his father and family, seven in
number, to Victoria, where they arrived October, 1852. He is


the eldest son of the well-known geographer, who
years librarian to the Royal Geographical
in the colony in 1862. Mr. Shillinglaw was soon
appointed chief clerk of the bench at Williamstown, where at that
time a vast number of important cases affecting passengers, crews, and
commerce generally, were dealt with. In 1854 he relieved Lieutenant
Pasco, R.N., of the charge of the Water Police of the colony, and
was acting superintendent until the appointment of Lieutenant
Crawford, R.N. The Hobson’s Bay of those days was a forest of
masts. As many as 600 ships lay at their anchors at one time,
and thousands of people were arriving daily. To many an old
colonist the sight of the police boat or the health officer alongside
was the first incident of life in the new land. The duty was hard
and incessant, and Mr. Shillinglaw’s published sketches of scenes
and characters in those exciting times have been read with
interest. In February, 1856, he was selected as Government
shipping-master to administer certain of the Imperial laws relating
to seamen, then just adopted in Victoria, and in this position he
remained until, on a general reduction of the departments in
1869, he retired from the Civil Service with compensation. For
some years he also acted as secretary to the Government Steam
Navigation Board, and has served on the committees of several
local institutions. In 1853 he first brought before Governor
Latrobe the necessity of a sailors’ home for the port, and in 1869,
on quitting office, the seamen of Melbourne testified that he was
known in every sea as “the sailors’ friend.” In 1870 he became
proprietor and editor of the Colonial Monthly magazine. His literary
work consists of contributions to various home and colonial news-
papers and magazines, Household Words, the Australasian , &c.,
and the London Quarterly and Edinburgh Review have spoken
well of his book on “Arctic Discovery,” the first edition of which
was published in 1850. He edited (1865) “Castaway on the
Aucklands,” a book which the Times said was as interesting as
“Robinson Crusoe;” and in 1858 wrote a “Shipmaster’s Guide”
for Victorian mariners. Mr. Shillinglaw is a Fellow of the Royal
Geographical Society of London, and is known to be engaged for
some years past on a work of permanent historical and geographical
interest—the life of the illustrious Australian navigator, Matthew
Flinders.
Sladen, Sir Charles, K.C.M.G., member of the Legislative
Council of Victoria for the Western Province ; second son of
John Baker Sladen, of Ripple Court, county' of Kent, Esquire,
Deputy-Lieutenant of that county; born in 1816; educated at
Shrewsbury and Trinity Hall, Cambridge; graduated in Law in
1837 as S.C.L., in 1840 LL.B., and in 1867 LL.D. (although
at the time in Victoria). Married in 1840, but has no issue. He


arrived in Port Phillip in February, 1842, and practised as an
attorney in Geelong until 1854, when he retired from business. In
December of the same year he was offered by Sir Charles Hotham
(then Governor) the post of acting Colonial Treasurer, in the
place of Captain Lonsdale, then absent on leave. Was Treasurer
in the first Ministry under the new Constitution, formed by the
late Mr. Haines, in 1855, when he was elected one of the
members for Geelong. At the first general election under the
new Constitution in 1857, he again sought election for Geelong, but
was defeated, and was not in Parliament again till 1864, when he
was elected to a vacant seat in the Legislative Council for the
Western Province. In May, 1868, during a protracted political
crisis (arising out of the tack of a Customs Duties Bill to the
Annual Appropriation Bill in 1865, and at last culminating in
the inclusion in the Annual Appropriation Bill for 1867 of a
grant of to Lady Darling, the wife of the then late
Governor, Sir Charles Darling, who had been recalled by the
Secretary of State), he accepted office as Chief Secretary, with Mr.
Fellows (now Judge), as Minister of Justice and leader in the
Legislative Assembly. His Ministry only retained office till nth
July of the same year. In August of that year, the term for
which he had been elected member for the Western Province
expired, and he did not seek re-election. In 1876 he was again
elected, without a contest, for the same province. He has always
taken an active part in the debates and business of the Council.
He is regarded by both friends and opponents as a high-minded
and able politician, with strong Conservative tendencies.
Smith, Alexander Kennedy, M.P.,was born at Cauldmill, in the
parish of Cavers, Roxburghshire, Scotland, on the 7th July, 1824.
He is one of a family of eight sons and four daughters; six of
the former (including the subject of this notice) were bred
engineers, and all of them have held responsible positions both at
home and abroad. Mr. Smith served a part of his apprenticeship
with his father and brother, James and William Smith, engineers,
Hawick. At the age of fifteen he received an appointment from
the directors of the Clarence Railway Company, Stockton-on-Tees,
but preferring to follow out the profession of an engineer, he left
that railway in j 840, and completed his indentures with a provincial
firm in Galashiels, where, during a period of five years, he attained
proficiency in the several branches of his profession. In 1846 he
entered the employment of the Great Western Railway Company,
at their extensive Locomotive Works, New Swindon, Wiltshire’
where he was engaged both in the works and in the drawing office!
In 1847, he married Isabel Cochrane, the sixth daughter of the
late Alexander Brockie, of Rachelfield, Berwickshire, and had
issue four daughters, two of whom survive. In 1848, on the


application of the county magistrates of Devonshire, the cele-
brated Isambard Kingdom Brunei selected and recommended
Mr. Smith, who was appointed their engineer, and held that office
with credit, until he commenced business as a civil and practical
engineer, in Exeter. In Devonshire, Mr. Smith erected gas works
at Topsham; he was also engineer to the extensive paper makers,
Charles Harris, of Countess and Trews Wear Mills, and John
Dewdney, of Hele, and erected gasworks for both these gentlemen;
he also designed and carried out extensive improvements at the
ropeworks of Follett and Co., of Exeter and Topsham. Mr.
Smith was also engaged by the Royal Agricultural Society of
England, to assist their consulting engineer in testing with the
dynamometer, the steam-engines and machinery at their exhibi-
tions, held at Exeter, Plymouth, Lewes and Gloucester; and
he also held the position of engineer to the Bath and West of
England Agricultural Society. In 1852-3, he designed and laid
out a model farm for John Daw, Esq., solicitor, at St. George’s
Clist, where, by utilising a small stream of water upon an overshot
wheel, he could at will irrigate with water, or discharge liquid
manure through pipes laid for the purpose (all over the farm) at
the rate of sixty tons per hour, and which more than doubled its
produce at a comparatively small outlay. In 1853, Mr. Westgarth
visited Britain, and publicly advertised for a duly qualified engineer
to go out to Melbourne to erect and manage the proposed gas-
works. The liberal salary offered held out great inducements at
that period, and no less than sixty-four applications were sent in
from Britain and the Continent; out of that number Mr. Smith
was chosen with a five years’ engagement, and to the regret of
many friends, whose esteem he had won, left England on the 10th
January, 1854, and arrived at Melbourne on the Bth of April
following, when he commenced his onerous duties, and after sur-
mounting many difficulties, carried them to a most successful
issue. In the month succeeding Mr. Smith’s arrival in the colony,
the City Council offered a premium of fifty pounds for the best
practical plan for disposing of the refuse of the city. He com-
peted, and was awarded the prize. In his essay Mr. Smith
anticipated by many years what is now known as Captain Liernur’s
system, as well as the hermetically sealed carts now used by the
corporation. Mr. Smith, in 1848, was a member of the first volun-
teer rifle corps raised in England at a time when there was some
threatened aggression on the part of France ; and in August, 1854,
was, with the present commandant, and Captain John Scott, and
others, one of the first promoters of the volunteer movement in
this colony. He was gazetted as captain to the first rifle corps,
and subsequently, in 1863, received his commission as major, in
the V. V. Artillery Regiment, and is now one of the oldest field
officers in the colony. Mr. Smith has always taken an interest in


scientific matters, and is a member of several learned societies.
In 1853, he was elected a Fellow of the Royal Scottish Society of
Arts, and in this colony, was one of the promoters and a member
of the Victorian Institute, the Mining Institute, the Philosophical
Society, the Humane Society, the Royal Society of Victoria, the
Architects and Engineers’ Society, &c. &c., and has contributed
many articles to the Transactions of these societies. He projected
the Suburban Railway, and was consulting and locomotive engineer
to the company. He predicted the abandonment of the loop line
at St. Kilda, and used his best efforts to prevent the useless
expenditure upon its construction. He has successfully carried out
many other works—notably the Ballarat, Castlemaine, Sandhurst,
and Newcastle (N.S.W.) Gasworks —and has designed, made, and
erected mining machinery, waterwheels, saw mills, &c, &c., in this
and the adjoining colonies, and has also been professionally and
otherwise engaged in preparing plans and specifications, and
reporting upon the Coliban and Sydney water supply, the supply
of gas to Melbourne and its suburbs, to the cities of Sydney,
Bathurst and Goulburn, Shanghai, Yokohama, Auckland, Dunedin,
Hokitika, Nelson, Hobart Town, Maryborough, Creswick, Kilmore,
Portland, Warrnambool, Stawell, &c. He has represented Latrobe
ward in the City Council for upwards of twelve years, having
been just re-elected for a further term of three years, Mr.
Smith occupied the position of mayor of Melbourne during
1875-6. On his leaving office the Chinese residents in the
city presented the Council with a full-length portrait of Mr.
Smith, in his robes of office, painted by one of their number,
and it now hangs in the council-room amongst the other
city fathers, Mr. Smith has taken high degrees as a Freemason,
and at one and the same time held a position, possibly without
precedent in the craft, viz:—Worshipful Master of the Lodge of
St. Clair, Eminent Commander of the Pembroke Encampment of
Knight Templars, and M.W. Sovereign of the Metropolitan
Chapter of the Sovereign Prince Rose Croix. He is now the
Right Worshipful Provincial Grand Master of the Scottish Consti-
tution in Victoria. Mr. Smith has twice contested the electorate
of Carlton, but without success. He also twice contested a
seat in the Legislative Council for the Central Province, but was
defeated by Messrs. Sumner and Sargood. During the present
year he was returned by the important electorate of East Mel-
luourne, as a member of the Legislative Assembly. Since taking
his seat he has identified himself with the leading questions of the
day, and has taken an active part in the debates, especially regard-
ing those subjects that come more immediately under the scope of
his observation and professional experience. Is a magistrate for
the Central Bailiwick; a member of the Royal Commissison for
Victoria for the Paris International Exhibition of 1878; chairman


of local Land Board, Polynesia Company, Plate-glass Insurance
Company, Masonic Hall Company, &c. &c.
Smith, Hon. John Thomas, M.P., born at Sydney, New South
Males, in 1816, and educated at Cape’s School there. Com-
menced life as a clerk in the Bank of Australasia; this he left for
the Colonial Store Department. Having accepted the appoint-
ment of assistant-teacher at the Church of England Aboriginal
Mission Station, then established on the site of the present
Botanical Gardens, he left Sydney for Melbourne by the James
Wait steamer near the close of 1837. On leaving the Mission
Station, Mr. Smith, by the advice of Captain Lonsdale, then com-
mandant of the settlement, turned his attention to business, first
as manager for the late Hon. John Hodgson, and afterwards on
his own account. In the years 1838, 1839, and 1840, he carried
on a considerable business in Melbourne, and thereby laid the
foundations of a future competency. The following years were
occupied with pursuits due to the force of circumstances arising
out of pecuniary responsibilities incurred to aid a friend. The
Queen’s Theatre was built by him—the first real house of the
kind in Melbourne. Mr. Coppin, Mr. M. L. King, and Mr. Chas.
Young were among the early lessees and managers. On the incor-
poration of Melbourne, in 1842, Mr. Smith was elected to the City
Council, and has continued therein during the thirty-five years that
have elapsed. Seven times he has been elected mayor, a position,
especially in the earlier years, 1852, 1853, 1855, of great difficultv
and expense, and requiring almost the whole time of the chief
magistrate. When the Ballarat riots occurred, rumours reached
Melbourne that an attack upon the Treasury and banks was
meditated. In response to the mayor’s appeal, between two and
three thousand citizens volunteered as special constables, and by
a very judicious arrangement half the number in each ward had to
be on duty, and the other half to be ready to turn out at a
moment’s warning. The Governor, Sir Charles Hotham, felt
deeply the obligation he and the city were consequently under to
Mr. Smith, and took the opportunity of saying so in a characteristic
reply to an address on the occasion. Interrupting the address the
Governor said—“ Say no more; there is no person in this country
to whom I am more indebted than to you, Mr. Mayor.” Mr.
Smith's conduct as a magistrate, particularly in the city police
court, was remarkable for promptness, justice, and sound common
sense, and he had the good fortune to secure the esteem of the
legal profession, whose members presented him with an address
and a massive gold chain. He fully recognised the duty of a
mayor of Melbourne to be hospitable to citizen or foreigner on a
scale suitable to the occasion. In 1853, the first fancy-dress ball
in Victoria was given by him in the Queen’s Theatre. Old colonists


say it has never been surpassed. It cost something to do things well
in those days. One item will suffice to show this. The building had
to be enlarged for the event, and some 40,000 English bricks, at
per 1000, were used. A second, on a similar scale, was
during the governorship of Sir Charles Hotham, given by him in
the old Exhibition Building, where the Mint now stands. On the
close of the war in New Zealand he gave a public dinner to
officers and others who had taken part therein. As mayor of
Melbourne, in 1858, he was delegated by the City Council to
present an address of congratulation to Her Majesty on the mar-
riage of the Princess Royal. Previous to his departure he was
presented with an address signed by the Bishop of Melbourne
(Dr. Perry) and many others, expressing their high sense of the
services rendered by him to the city and the colony, and was also
entertained at a farewell dinner by his fellow citizens. It is due
to Mr. Smith to say, that from the earliest hour, when need of
help presented itself to the colonists, he has been among the
foremost, not only to consider how it should be met, but to work in
order to meet it. Other charities might be mentioned. The
Benevolent Asylum and Orphan Asylum inmates are mainly
indebted to Mr. Smith for the home they enjoy. The Melbourne
Hospital, which will bear comparison with any similar institution
in the world, has been largely benefited by Mr. Smith and his
family. The Lunatic Asylum has occupied a good deal of Mr.
Smith’s attention. It was by his effort Divine service was estab-
lished for the inmates and attendants. Nor has he limited his
efforts to local charities. On the occasion of a former subscription
for India he collected nearly and obtained a parliamentary
vote of An illuminated address was sent out to him by
the London Indian Relief Board, in acknowledgment of this
service. It was sent in duplicate; the other being in the Parlia-
ment Library. He also took an active part in collecting a con-
siderable sum for the English and French soldiers wounded in the
Crimean war. The late Hon. Major H. L. Powis has been heard
to say, that but for the timely aid of Mr. Smith “the Soldiers’
Orphan Daughters’ Home at Hampstead would not have been
built;” 13s. pd. was contributed and collected by Mr.
Smith in aid of the fund, for which he was specially thanked, and
appointed a vice-president of the institution. Mr. Smith has
shared in the political toils and triumphs of the colony from the
first. In 1851 he was elected for North Bourke. In 1853, he
resigned his seat in order to contest an election for a vacancy in
the representation of the city of Melbourne, caused by the resig-
nation of Mr. Westgarth, who was leaving the colony. It was the
coming forward of Mr. L. Mackinnon of the Argus which led
Mr. Smith into the contest. The paper had taken a position
of decided and bitter hostility against the Governor of the colony,


and as the return of one of the proprietors as a member for
the city would have been a kind of approbation of the policy of
the paper, Mr. Smith determined, if possible, to prevent it. He
was successful. In 1859 he was elected for Creswick, and
has been seven times elected for West Bourke. He does
not address the House often, but when he does it is
m plain and practical language. An extract from his
speech in opposing the Norwegian Constitution scheme of
the Francis Government in 1874 is worth quoting:—“ls it
not,” he said, “marvellous that there are living men who, since
their early manhood, have seen a wilderness, where the ‘ noble
savage’ once held undisputed sway, transformed into a city second
almost to none, and surpassing all whose existence dates from
only thirty-six years ago? Most of those I see before me, came to
this country to find here all the comforts and amenities of life in
rich abundance; and now, with institutions which have enabled
us to progress at a rate unexampled in modern times throughout
all God’s earthly creation, and with a Constitution as free and as
sound as any the world has known, they would fain substitute for
both a Norwegian image and superscription as the political god of
our worship, and abandon all that we have inherited from a people
whose Constitution, like their flag, wherever unfurled, proclaims
true liberty.”—(See Victorian Hansard, 1874.) As Mr. Smith
is the “father” of the Melbourne City Council, so he is the
“ father ” of the Legislative Assembly, for he is the only member
of it who, since its inception in 1856, never left it, and is still
a member. On every election the seat has been a contested one.
He was Minister of Mines in the Macpherson Government in
1869. Fully aware of the value of friendly societies in a youno-
community, Mr. Smith has been active in promoting their estab-
lishment, and holds a high position among them. He is the first
Freemason initiated in Victoria, and was appointed by the Duke
of Leinster, Provincial Grand Master under the Irish Consti-
tution. The Duke of Abercorn renewed the appointment in
1875, He is also an affiliated member of the St. Clair and
Robert Burns Lodges, Edinburgh. He is also a member of
the Manchester Unity Odd Fellows. The No. 1 Lodge in 1849
presented him with an illuminated address expressive of gratitude
for kind aid to their widows and orphans’ fund. The interests of
religion and education have had many practical expressions of
sympathy at his hands. A trustee of St. John’s Church and schools,
St. Matthew’s Church and school lands, Melbourne; St. Thomas’s
Church and schools, Essendon —he finds plenty of opportunities
for usefulness and liberality. Mr. Smith has never concealed his
preference for education on a religious basis, at the same time it is
a fact that, whilst himself a member of the Church of England, his
helping hand has been extended to the schools of other bodies of


Christians. More than one “ old boy ” at the Scotch College
as well as the Church of England Grammar School, obtained
a gold or silver medal supplied by him. It may be said with per-
fect truth, that whilst himself and his family have shared in the
prosperity of the colony, few have so long or so constantly laid
themselves out for the general welfare. Some years ago Mr.
Smith offered the reward of a silver cup for the best essay on
“ Reducing the Working Man’s Hours of Labour.” It was gained
by Mr. A. T. Best, of Fitzroy. The eight hours’ system has been
since adopted. He is a justice of the peace for the colonies of New
South Wales and Victoria, trustee of the Victorian Savings Bank,
a member of the Central Board of Health, chairman of the Board of
Visitors to the Metropolitan Lunatic Asylums, and the Retreats
at Cremorne and Northcote. There are few among us who have
more opportunity for promoting the welfare of the community, and
few so disposed thereto.
Smith, Louis Lawrence, M.P. for Richmond, son of Mr. E. T,
Smith, of London, one of the most enterprising men of the day—
according to the “English Men of the Time”—was born 1830, in
London, was educated at St. Saviour’s Grammar School, and
studied at the Ecole de Medecine at Paris. He comes of a
fighting race, both on the mother’s and father’s side, his ancestors
having distinguished themselves in the naval history of Great
Britain, and held high positions in the British navy. Mr. Smith
was at the French revolution of 1848, and was mentioned in the
Times “as the young Englishman who was carried on the shoulders
of the people at the time Louis Philippe escaped from France.” He
was twice caught by the garde municipale , and twice rescued by the
republicans, during the fighting in the streets. Leaving Paris, Mr.
Smith studied in London, at the Westminster Hospital, where he
distinguished himself by gaining the first prize, the prizes for
chemistry, botany, midwifery and medical jurisprudence, besides
many honorary certificates. Having obtained his diploma he
commenced practice in London, but hearing of the goldfields
discovered in Australia, he accepted the appointment as surgeon
to the ship Oriental , and came to Victoria, where he first tried
“ the diggings,” but after a few months returned to Melbourne
and practised his profession in Bourke street. He was, about
1859, asked to stand for South Bourke in the “Liberal interest,”
consented, and was five times re-elected at the head of the poll.
In Parliament he resented what he considered an intentional
insult from a Minister of the Crown by boxing the Minister’s ears,
and notwithstanding the repeated requests of the leader of the
Opposition (Mr. R. Heales), resigned his seat, but was again
nominated and returned to the House without any personal solici-
tations on his part. On the occasion of the Darling grant contro-


versy he opposed the M‘Culloch Ministry on that point, although
urged by his constituents to vote for the grant, saying that he
valued his independence more than his seat in the House. At
the next election he was rejected on that account. Mr. Smith
then offered himself to the Richmond constituency, and was
elected with Mr. J. G. Francis, but again rejected at the following
election, as he would not support the Norwegian scheme of Par-
liamentary reform, and prophesied it would never become law.
At the general election of 1877 he was returned for the same con-
stituency at the head of the poll. He attempted to get the Assem-
bly to consent to a scheme to borrow money to entirely irrigate
the lands of the colony, for the benefit of the agricultural, pastoral,
and manufacturing interests. He succeeded in carrying a Bill for
the regulation and preservation of the fisheries, and caused the
fishermen’s license to be reduced, introduced the Game Amendment
Act, the amended postal system, which reduced the rate from four
pence to two pence, and initiated the penny postal cards. He re-
ceived the thanks of the corporation of Melbourne for his advocacy
of a fish market. He built the Polytechnic Institute in Bourke-
street, and hoped to make it rival its London prototype —a hope
not realised. He has been the author of a large number of works,
proprietor and part proprietor of several newspapers advocating
Liberal principles, for many years proprietor of the Australian
Journal , and he was the first to edit and publish a medical journal
in Victoria. Mr. Smith has also been identified with sporting
matters for the last fifteen years, and his horses have won several
considerable prizes. He has been and still is a large speculator,
several large enterprises having been initiated by him. He pos-
sesses three large model farms, on which he rears pure bred sheep,
pigs, and thoroughbred horses, and is an extensive advertiser
over all the colonies at an annual expenditure said to exceed
£3°°°-
Smith, Major, The Hon. William Collard, M.P. for Ballarat
West, Minister of Mines, and Minister of Public Instruction.
Born at Ballington, Cheshire, England, 1830, youngest son of
Mr. W. Smith, manager of a large cotton manufactory at Bal-
lington. Left Liverpool in the Birmingham for Victoria in 1852,
and on arrival went first to Sandhurst, back to Melbourne, thence
to Creswick, and, in 1855, to Ballarat, where he settled down and
has been ever since. At Ballarat he soon identified himself with
the great mining interest of the district, and helped to promote
many of the great enterprises of those and after times. In 1856
was first elected a member of the council of the city of Ballarat,
and was chairman in iB6O, retired in 1864, was re-elected in
1870, and was mayor of the city in 1875. He first entered Par-
liament with Mr. Duncan Gillies for Ballarat West, retiring eight


months before that Parliament expired. Stood again for same
constituency in 1871, and was elected at the top of the poll, the
Hon. Joseph Jones being the second member, and beating C. E.
Jones and John Gray. About that time obtained select committee
to inquire into the working of the Local Government Act, with a
view to amend it. In 1869 was chairman of municipal conference
held at the Town Hall, Melbourne. At the end of conference a
public meeting was called to consider the water supply and the
goldfields, Major Smith occupying the chair. This may be con-
sidered the first step to the inauguration of the existing water
supply, and Major Smith fairly claims to have first brought the
subject forward. The select committee previously referred to was
converted into a Royal Commission, with Mr. E. P. S. Sturt as
chairman, to inquire into and report upon municipal and charitable
institutions; a report was brought up within three months, and
the Local Government Act afterwards passed was founded there-
upon. In 1871 Major Smith moved for a select committee, of
which he was chairman, to inquire into the working of local
governing bodies, with a view to extending their power. The
committee not having finished its labours by the end of session,
was converted into a Royal Commission, and it reported within
three months, after travelling all over the country. Upon that
report the present Local Government Act was founded. At this
time, 1872, he became mayor of Ballarat, and succeeded in float-
ing a loan which freed the city from all its financial difficulties.
In 1874 was elected again to the Legislative Assembly for Ballarat
West, and in 1875 took office as Minister of Mines in the first
Berry Administration, being re-elected unopposed. At the general
election, in May, 1877, was again elected for same constituency,
and, on the advent of Mr. Berry a second time to the Treasury
benches, took his old place of Minister of Mines, and also be-
came Minister of Public Instruction. During the amending of
the Electoral Act by the M‘Culloch Ministry, he succeeded in
getting an additional member for Ballarat, as did also his chief for
Geelong. He has been a member of the Volunteer Force for
sixteen years, entering in 1861 as a private, then passing examina-
tion as sergeant, and soon reached his present rank of major, and
is now in command of the Green Rifles or Ballarat Rangers. In
1868 he visited England as representative of the Winter’s Free-
hold Gold Mining Company, which gave ,£50,000 cash for about
1300 acres of freehold land, which cost the proprietor about
succeeded in getting of English capital in-
vested. He has been a large speculator in mining ventures,
having made some considerable successes and some great losses,
but has, on the whole, earned for himself the character of a
judicious investor, and is considered a great authority on mining-
subjects and mining affairs.


Smith, Sydney William, Town Surveyor of Emerald Hill and
Shire Engineer for Caulfield, was born at Godaiming, Surrey,
England, in 1823. He is an Associate of the Civil Engineers of
London, and Surveyor under the Local Government Act, and
Fellow of the Victorian Institute of Architects.
Smith, William Jardine, journalist, Melbourne, was born at
Stockwell, near London. Came to Victoria towards the end of
1852, and was for many years connected with a commercial house
in Melbourne. Was for a long time a contributor to Melbourne
Punch , and subsequently became editor. Was a contributor to
the Spectator from an early period of its existence, and editor during
the last six months of its existence. Was assistant editor and
contributor to Touchstone. Is now a contributor to the Argus and
other journals. Papers from his pen have appeared in Frazer's
Magazine and other English periodicals.
Smyth, Frederick Leopold, M.P. for North Gipps Land,
barrister-at-law, Melbourne, is a Bachelor of Arts of I rinity
College, Dublin, and Master of Arts of the Melbourne
University, a member of the Irish and Victorian bars, and
was admitted in Dublin in Hilary Term, 1843, and in
Melbourne, shortly after he arrived in the colony, in De-
cember, 1863. In 1866 he entered political life, standing for
election to the Legislative Assembly for the district of Villiers and
Heytesbury, on Protectionist principles, in opposition to John
Dennistoun Wood, whom he beat by a considerable majority.
Upon the dissolution of the then Parliament, he contested the
district of North Gipps Land against the late Richard Davies
Ireland, whom he also defeated, and has since continued to
represent that district except during the years 1875-6, when he
resigned, and was appointed to the position of Judge of the
County Courts of the Central Bailiewick, in the place of Judge
Cope, transferred to Melbourne during the absence of Judge
Pohlman, who was doing duty for the Master of Equity on leave
of absence. He was elected by the Legislative Assembly Chairman
of Committees, August, 1868, and continued to fill that position
until the dissolution of the House in 18 7 1. At the general election
in May, 1877, he was again elected for North Gipps- Land. He
is the author of “Orders and Rules of the Legislative Assembly,
with Notes,” a work which has run through two editions. In
politics Mr. Smyth is a Protectionist and thorough Liberal.
Smyth, Robert Brough, geologist and mineralogist, born
at Carville, near Newcastle, Northumberland, 1830. Mr. Smyth is
the son of the late Edward Smyth, a mining engineer of repute, and
grandson on the maternal side of the late Barnabas Brough,
O


who with his brother William Brough, were the most eminent
engineers of the day. He received his early education in a school
at Whickam, in the county of Durham. After leaving school
lie turned his attention to the study of natural science, chemistry,
and geology. Mr. Smyth commenced his working life as an
assistant at the Derwent Iron Works, where he remained over
five years, during which period he actively studied the business of
practical mining and iron making. He emigrated to Victoria
in 1852; went to the goldfields, stayed on them for a short time,
and then entered the Survey Department as draughtsman, under
Captain Clarke, R.E., an officer now known as Sir Andrew Clarke,
K.C.M.G., Minister of Public Works in India. Subsequently, Mr.
Smyth acted for a brief period as chief draughtsman, and soon after-
wards (1854) was appointed to take charge of the meteorological
observations. Whilst holding this position, Mr. Smyth furnished
weekly reports to the newspapers, monthly and quarterly reports to
the Government Gazette , and annual reports to Parliament.
Whilst acting as director of observatories, Mr. Smyth was appointed
in 1858 secretary to the Board of Science, which position required
him to take charge of the mining surveys of the colony. He was
in iB6O appointed Secretary for Mines, and held office until
the beginning of 1876, when he resigned the several offices
he held under Government. Whilst in the Government service,
Air. Brough Smyth acted for some time as Chief Inspector of
Mines, and about seven years ago he reorganised the Geological
Survey, and was its director until his retirement from official life.
Air. Smyth has for many years been a prominent man in literature
and science; he was for a long time hon. sec. to the Philosophical
Society of Victoria, and subsequently to the Royal Society. He is
a Fellow of the Linnean Society; of the Geological Society
of London ; of the Geological Society of France; Associate of
the Institute of Civil Engineers, England; Hon. Corresponding
Member of the Society of Arts and Sciences, of Utrecht; the Isis
Society, Dresden; the Royal Society, Tasmania, &c., &c. His
contributions to scientific literature are —“The Prospector’s Hand-
book ;” “ Goldfields and Mineral Districts of Victoria.” Papers in
literary and scientific journals in Victoria and in Europe, including
the Quarterly Journal of the Geological Society, of
and the “ Geological Magazine.” He has also written numerous
Reports on Aleteorology and Geology for the Victorian Govern-
ment, and has just completed a large work, now nearly ready for issue,
on “The Manners and Customs of the Aboriginal Natives of Aus-
tralia,” in 2 vols. imperial Bvo.
Ntandisli, Captain Frederick Charles, Chief Commissioner
of Police, Alelbourne, is the son of the late Charles Standish, of
Standish Hall, Wigan, Lancashire, England, and was born there


in 1824. Was educated at Prior Park College, then entered the
Royal Military Academy, Woolwich, and obtained his commission
in the Royal Artillery, in which he served for nine years, and retired
with the rank of captain. During that term of service, he was for
three years in Dublin on the staff of the Lords Lieutenant of
Ireland. He left England and came to Victoria in 1852, and was
appointed to the Government service in April, 1854, as Assistant
Commissioner of Goldfields at Sandhurst, and was afterwards
Chinese protector till September, 1858. He was then made Chief
Commissioner of Police, after the resignation of that position by
Captain (now Sir Charles) Macmahon. Captain Standish is the
District Grand Master of the Freemasons under the English
Constitution in Victoria, and was installed on the 12th June, iß6r,
at Hockin’s Hotel.
Stawell, Sir William Foster, Knight, Chief Justice of Vic-
toria, second son of Mr. Jonas Stawell, of Old Court in the
county of Cork, was born in June, 1815. Entering Trinity Col-
lege, Dublin, in the 18th year of his age, he won classical honours
during his undergraduate course, and took the degree of Bachelor
of Arts in 1837. He next became a student of King’s Inn,
Dublin, and of Lincoln’s Inn, London, and was called to the bar
in 1839. Practised in Ireland until 1842, when he resolved upon
emigrating, and he arrived in Melbourne early in 1843. He almost
immediately gained a prominent position—the only other lawyers of
note at the time being Mr. (now Sir) Redmond Barry, and Mr.
Williams, who recently retired from a seat on the Supreme Court
bench. Sir William also held large squatting interests near Avoca,
and between Lake Wallace and Glenelg; and he was noted for the
excellence of his horsemanship. When the colony was separated
from New South Wales, in 1851, Sir William was appointed
Attorney-General by Mr. Latrobe, and was found highly valuable
in remodelling the various departments. He was, in fact, the real
head of the Government, and, as such, found a worthy opponent
in Mr. (now Sir John) O’Shanassy, Lie was indefatigable in the
discharge of his duties, and many well authenticated stories of his
wonderful journeys on horseback are related. At the general
election in October, 1856, after the formation of the New Consti-
tution, he was returned to the Assembly for Melbourne, in com-
pany with Sir John O’Shanassy and Mr, David Moore, and in the
following February, on the resignation of Sir William a’Beckett,
who was the Chief Justice, he was appointed to the vacant post.
It is certain that he must have lost heavily in a pecuniary sense by
accepting the chief-justiceship, as at that time the fee-book of one
of his colleagues at the bar showed an income of nearly
per annum. In 1857 he was created a Knight Bachelor, by letters
patent. Ever since his elevation to the Bench, Sir William has, if


possible, worked harder than before, having gone through his arduous
functions without a single break from the date of his appointment as
Attorney-General until the year 1872, when he visited the neighbour-
ing Australian colonies and New Zealand, and in 1873 he visited
England on two years’ leave of absence. During his residence in
Europe he was admitted to the degree of LL.D. of the University
of Dublin. Returning at the commencement of 1875, he held
the position of Acting Governor during the visit to Europe of Sir
George Bowen. In January, 1856, he married the only daughter
of the late Mr. William Pomeroy Greene, R.N., and has a
numerous family. Sir William has long taken, and continues to
take, a very deep interest in the proceedings of the Assembly of
the Church of England. He wears his years admirably, and ap-
pears to enjoy excellent health, notwithstanding the double work
which he transacted during the absence from the Bench of Sir
Redmond Barry during 1876 and 1877, and Mr. Justice Stephen
in the latter year.
Steinfeld, Emanuel, J.P., of Ballarat and Elizabeth Street,
Melbourne, was born Ist November, 1828, son of Steinfeld,
a retired wholesale draper. Was educated at the College of Brieg,
Silesia. Was sent in 1847 to Krohn Brothers, importers, London,
England. Came out to the colony in the ship Ballarat , and
represented the same firm in Victoria, of which he was junior
partner, a branch having been established here. When the firm
gave up business, Mr. Steinfeld started a furniture warehouse on
Ballarat in 1856. Was elected councillor for Ballarat East in
1861, and was annually elected for ten years. From 1866 to 1869,
was mayor of Ballarat East, and had the honour to receive H.R.H.
the Duke of Edinburgh. Was, with Mr. P. C. Fitzpatrick, one of
the originators of the Ballarat Water Scheme; was the originator of
the Orphan Asylum and of the Freehold Market, of the Fete
Champetre in Botanical Gardens, which gave a profit to
the Orphan Asylum, and the Ballarat East fair on Easter Monday
and Tuesday, 1865, which gave to the Public Library. He
also floated a loan of £2 0,000 for Ballarat East, more advantage-
ously than Ballarat West could borrow, and negotiated with Bun-
garee and Buninyong shire councils to construct roads under the
financial control of the town council of Ballarat East, which con-
nected the town with Bullarook Forest, and was the basis of future
prosperity. Although so energetic a worker of Ballarat East, Mr.
Steinfeld was always an earnest advocate that the East and West
municipalities should be one. He was a candidate to represent
Ballarat East in the Legislative Assembly in 1870, as a Free-trader,
and was beaten by thirty-five votes, the defeat chiefly caused from
being a staunch advocate for secular and compulsory education.
Went to Europe in 1872, and visited the Vienna Exhibition and the


celebrated mining academy at Freiberg, in Saxony, collected in
both places valuable books and documents, which he presented to
the library and school of mines, Ballarat. In 1869 was gazetted a
magistrate, at the request of the citizens. On resigning position
as mayor, he was presented with a life-sized portrait of Mrs.
Steinfeld, by Frith, and at a public banquet he was presented with
a silver epergne and tea service. On his return to the colony in
1873, he again stood for Ballarat East in the Free-trade interest,
and was again defeated; and at the last general election in 1877,
was pressed very hard to again stand, but declined, thinking his
time had not yet come, but will again take his chance if he thinks
Free-trade principles have a reasonable opportunity of being repre-
sented. Mr. Steinfeld was appointed with the late William Muir
and Judge Cope to investigate the credentials of a French Masonic
Lodge entitled, “Rameau d’Or de L’Euscius,” established in
Ballarat, under the mastership of M. Balogner, which held charters
under the Grand Lodge of Mizrain and Memphis, which charters
had been suspended by the Grand Lodge L’Orient of France.
Finding there was some shadow of justification, Mr. Steinfeld and
his colleagues reinstated the members, and formed them into an
English lodge, under the Grand Lodge of England, and called the
Ballarat Lodge, the first lodge established on Ballarat. Mr.
Steinfeld has been generally successful in business, and is so still,
but is of too active a temperament to retire into private life.
Stephen, James Wilberforce, Judge of the Supreme Court of
Victoria, was born in London in 1822, and is the son of Sir George
Stephen, Knt. of the Guelphic Order, Q.C., and at one time
Deputy-Lieutenant for the county of Bucks. The subject of this
notice was educated at a private school, from whence he went
to the University of Cambridge, entered at St. John’s College, and
graduated Fourth Wrangler, in 1846. He shortly afterwards attained
the degree of M.A., and was made Fellow of his college. After
leaving the university, Mr. Stephen went to London, where he read
for two years with Mr. Goodie, then a leader of eminence at
the Equity bar, to which he himself was shortly afterwards called,
and practised until the year 1854, when he emigrated to Australia.
On arrival in Melbourne, Mr. Stephen entered upon the active
practice of his profession, and in the year 1871 turned his
attention to politics, and was elected as member of the Assembly
for St. Kilda, and was quickly raised to the position of Attorney-
General under the Francis Administration. Mr, Stephen was
appointed Judge of the Supreme Court in 1872, and is now
on leave of absence from the colony.
Stevenson, George, merchant, a native of Clapham, near
London, was born in the year 1831, and was educated at Mill Hill,


a school in which he had as a fellow-pupil no less a personage than
one our best and most popular Governors, Sir Henry Barkly. His
father was a Manchester warehouseman, who did an extensive
business in the shipping trade between the old country and
Tasmania, and in 1846 he sent his eldest son, Mr. Leander
Cox Stevenson, to look after his Australian interests. At about the
same time Mr. George Stevenson completed his scholastic studies,
took a stool in his father’s office, and soon after became intimately
acquainted with the business of the firm, which was in the mean-
time extending itself in a very remarkable degree in Tasmania and
New South Wales. Tempted by the discovery of gold in Victoria
in 1851, Mr. George Stevenson left for Sydney in the Roman
E7npero7 ', arrived there in 1852, remained there a few weeks,
and then went to Hobart Town, where he relieved his elder
brother, who returned to England. In the following year a branch
of the firm, under the management of Mr. John Morris, was
opened in Melbourne, and it from that time commenced to share
fairly in the business, which had hitherto been almost exclusively
transacted by the Messrs. Sargood, Banks Brothers and Henderson,
together with other firms, whose names are now unfrequently
heard of. Mr. George Stevenson remained in Hobart Town,
where he married, until 1859, when he visited England; and
on his return to Australia he fixed upon Melbourne as his
permanent place of abode. He had not been long in the
Victorian metropolis ere he began the erection of the splendid
premises in which the business of the firm is at present conducted,
and, amongst other things, he may safely lay claim to having
initiated a new and very handsome style of commercial archi-
tecture in Flinders-lane. In 1864 he entered into a new line,
the manufacture of clothing, and was, with other merchants, not
only the means of giving employment to large numbers of males
and females, but of forwarding a highly important branch of
technical education. At the same time he was a staunch Free-
trader, and was appointed vice-president of the Free-trade League.
He took up a strong stand against the tacking of the tariff to the
Appropriation Bill in Sir Charles Darling’s time, and after that
measure had been carried in the Legislative Assembly, to be
rejected by the Legislative Council, he paid certain duties under
protest, and subsequently got a verdict against the Crown for
£6OOO with costs. He was a member of the Constitutional
Association, and took an active part in having Sir Charles Darling
recalled. Since the recall of Sir Charles Darling, Mr. Stevenson
took no very prominent part in public matters, but in 1876 an
assistant of his named Trowell, being either properly or improperly
discarded, either properly or improperly charged his late employer
with having had forwarded to him from the old country one set of
invoices to indicate the true value of the goods sent to him, and


another set to get them passed at the Customs at a lower duty
than they should carry according to the law of the land. In con-
sequence of this procedure the collector of Customs at Melbourne
attempted to seize certain articles at Stevenson’s warehouse, in
Flinders-lane. The entrance of the collector was opposed, violence
was resorted to on both sides, and the matter occupied the atten-
tion of our law courts for some time. The Crown had no case
sufficiently strong to bring home against Mr. Stevenson. He was
unsuccessful in his action against the collector of Customs for
alleged unlawful action in effecting forcible entry, and was at
one time supposed to be about to proceed against the Crown for
immense damages. It would appear as if both parties were glad
to let the matter drop. The Crown survives, and Mr. George
Stevenson is still regarded by his numerous friends as one of the
most thoroughly irreproachable merchants in Melbourne.
Stobbs, Rev. John Garrow, M.A., minister of Scots’ Church,
Collins-street, is a son of the Rev. William Stobbs, of Stromness,
where he was born. After receiving the rudimentary part of his
education at home , he was sent to the Glasgow University, where
he carried off several of the highest prizes in classics and philo-
sophy, and at the age of twenty-one took the degree of M.A. He
then left college and entered at Divinity Hall, Glasgow University,
studying under Dr. Caird, one of the most eminent professors of
theology in Scotland. Mr. Stobbs took the Henderson prize of
twenty guineas in the University for his essay on the Sabbath
question in 1868, and was soon after appointed as assistant to the
Rev. Dr. M‘Culloch, at Greenock. While there he was offered
an appointment in connection with the Scots’ Church, Melbourne,
and came out by the March mail of 1874 to supply the pulpit of
the Rev. Peter Menzies, whence he was afterwards transferred to
the Church at West Melbourne. As a preacher he at once made
his mark, and is much beloved by his congregation, and admired
by the members of other Protestant churches. He belongs to
the Broad Church division of the Church of Scotland, between
the antique form of the Presbyterian faith and the modern
interpretation.
Story, Joseph, M.P., councillor for Smith ward, Melbourne,
second 1 son of the late Joseph Story, farmer, was born 7th July,
1816, in the parish of Holm Cultram, Cumberland, England. His
father died when Mr. Story was three or four years old, and
his mother soon after removed to Seaton, where she kept an inn.
He was educated at the local schools, and at an early age
was employed at farm work, and when about twenty years of age
commenced contracting for tile-draining lands, fencing, and other
farm work. In 1840 married his present wife, Jane, fourth


daughter of William Bairn, a freehold farmer, of Seaton, near
Workington. Shortly after, he went to Liverpool and joined
the police force, and was made sergeant, having under him a few
men as detectives. He was very successful in bringing to justice
thieves, base coin makers, receivers of stolen property, and other
bad characters, made a reputation for himself, and was several
times rewarded. Took an active part in establishing a police-
fund, by deducting a trifle from the men’s pay, to assist the
members of the force in sickness, doing away with the necessity for
those charitable collections, which were at that time frequent at the
pay-table. He resigned on the 2nd of April, 1852, the news
of the gold discoveries in Australia having determined him to
emigrate to Port Phillip. He was then rewarded by the Watch
Committee and by the insurance companies of Liverpool, and
paying the passage-money for himself, wife, and children, sailed in
the Anna on the same month with three or four hundred
other passengers, and, after calling at Adelaide, reached Hobson’s
Bay 24th July, 1852. Went first to the goldfields at Forest Creek
and neighbourhood, but not being very lucky returned to
Melbourne, joined a carpenter, and helped him to build wooden
houses for some time, and then joined the police force, and
was made sergeant after a few days and placed in the detective
force under James Ashley, receiving several rewards for active
conduct. Resigned in February, 1853, having with three others
bought a piece of land in Carlton, erected stabling, and bought
horses and drays to start contracting. From profits realised,
bought several blocks of land and houses, selling out of the
contracting business in 1858, and soon after was elected
a member of the City Council for Smith ward, which includes the
whole of Carlton. That suburb had at that time only about
twenty chains of streets formed, and now there are many miles
formed, metalled, kerbed, and channelled, and it has many miles of
footwalks flagged or otherwise paved. Mr. Story, with some other
councillors representing the outlying wards, successfully opposed
the building of the new Town Hall for several years, on the
ground that the money was required for the streets and roads,
which were far more necessary for the convenience and health
of the public in the outlying wards, but when that necessary work
was done, he and his fellow-councillors cheerfully agreed to
the erection of a hall worthy of the city. He was last elected for
Smith ward in November, 1876, and does not retire till 1879;
and was returned as one of the members for North Melbourne at
the general election in 1877.
Strickland, Robert, J.P., barrister-at-law and coroner, Sand-
hurst, born at Bristol, England, on the 3rd October, 1833; sailed
from thence per ship Velore, on 26th August, 1852, arriving in


Hobson’s Bay early in January, 1853. Son of Robert Strickland,
of Clifton, Bristol, who for thirty years occupied a responsible
position in the old-established firm of John Hare and Co., floor-
cloth manufacturers of that city. The subject of this notice was
educated at the well-known West of England Boarding School,
conducted by Dr. Stone, LL.D,, at Summer Hill, St. George’s, and
then placed in the counting-house of the firm above-mentioned,
where he remained for about two years. Evincing an early apti-
tude for the law, he was sent into an attorney’s office for the
purpose of studying that profession. At the age of nearly nineteen
years, in company with his brother William, two years his senior,
he sailed for Port Phillip. On reaching Melbourne Mr. Strickland
with some of his shipmates took employment at roadmaking, at
Merri Creek (now Northcote), and from that he joined some cattle-
dealers in driving stock to and from the Murray River, above
Albury, N.S.W., to the Melbourne markets. This occupation was
followed for about nine months, when he entered a solicitor’s office
in Melbourne as a clerk, but soon gave up this employment to
follow that of digging. In February, 1855, he and a friend started
a, butchering establishment in Bridge-street, Sandhurst, this business
being jointly conducted until 1862. In the meantime Mr. Strickland
took part in the establishment of municipal institutions, and a lively
interest in the elections to the council. Was twice elected a coun-
cillor, and attained the dignity of chairman or mayor (the Hon. J. J.
Casey, M.P., being then a councillor). In 1861 the Government
of the day appointed him a territorial magistrate. He was selected
by his colleagues as a delegate to a conference of municipal coun-
cils held in Melbourne, of which the Hon. W. C. Smith, M.P.,was
chairman, and the Hon, Edward Langton a member. Both the
local institutions —Hospital and Benevolent Asylum —received the
benefit of Mr. Strickland’s aid and experience as a committee-man,
and he took a most active part in Parliamentary elections. Mr.
Strickland was elected in 1862, and occupied the position of
member of Parliament for Sandhurst for two years, until the next
general election, when he declined to be nominated. During his
Parliamentary career, he embarked in business with his brother as
a brewer at Sandhurst, but was unsuccessful, and then at the age
of thirty-two he determined to read for the bar. In 1865 the Hon.
James Forrester Sullivan, Minister of Mines (another Bendigonian),
appointed him to a subordinate position in the Mining Department,
which enabled him to obtain the means of livelihood, and after
office-hours to attend the Melbourne University. In July, 1869,
having passed all the necessary examinations, Mr. Strickland was
called to the bar. He at once resigned his clerkship in the office
of Mines, and returned to Sandhurst, where he successfully
practised his profession as a barrister. In May, 1874, appointed
by the Governor-in-Council to the honorary position of official


visitor to the lunacy wards of the Bendigo Hospital, and about the
same time was permanently retained by the Crown to conduct all
prosecutions in the Sandhurst district under the Regulation of Mines
Statute, 1873. Took a prominent part at the inauguration of the
Education Act, as a staunch supporter of a free, secular, and com-
pulsory system, and was elected a member of the first board of
advice, and acted as correspondent. Is a Liberal and Free-trader in
politics, and was for many years president of the Liberal
Association, a well-known political organisation at Sandhurst. On
the 22nd December, 1876, was appointed coroner for the Sand-
hurst district.
Stlltt, William, was born at Claudangh Mills, near Florence
Court, in the county of Fermanagh, Ireland, about the year 1827,
and was educated in the leading local schools. He was brought up
to his father’s business, milling, but when at the age of eighteen
years he entered the Irish constabulary at Armagh, and was one of
the first constables who took charge of the depot in the Phoenix
Park, Dublin. He remained in the force about three years, after
which, accompanied by his parents and several other members of
his family, he emigrated to Canada, arriving at Toronto about the
year 1842. There he became connected with a paper-mill, and
after he had been at that business some three years, he, by his
previous acquaintance with machinery, made such progress that he
was appointed to an important position in the factory. He acted
as foreman during about six years, and then left for Victoria,
in consequence of the illness of some members of his family. He
arrived at Melbourne in 1853, and, finding that his trade was
of no use to him in this colony, he went to the Goulburn diggings,
where his luck was so indifferent that in three days he abandoned
the search for gold. He returned to Melbourne, and next went to
Geelong, where he went into the produce business, having at
the same time a couple of drays on the road to the Ballarat
diggings. He made some money, and bought a farm at Swan
Bay, Indented Heads, paying per acre for the land. He was
five times elected a member of the road board of Bellarine. The
land speculation was not a success, and he gave up farming
to become agent for Captain Cole’s line of steamers at St.
Leonard’s. There he purchased produce to such an extent, that
he was frequently enabled to load two vessels in one day. The
Melbourne City Buffet being in the market, Mr. Stutt became the
purchaser in 1862, and has ever since remained a boniface. In 1867
he was elected to the Legislative Assembly for South Grant, polling
about 400 votes more than any of the other candidates, and
beating no less a personage than the present Chief Secretary (Mr.
Graham Berry). At the next election he was again returned
in company with the Hon. Peter Lalor; but he was defeated


m 1871. In 1877 he received a requisition inviting him to stand
01 Grant, but, being guided by what were considered to be
the interests of the Liberal party, of which he was always a
staunch supporter, he declined to contest the seat. He was
afterwards invited to stand for Sandridge, but again declined,
as another Liberal candidate was in the field. Mr. Stutt at
present keeps the hotel in Bourke-street to which he has given his
name. &
Skene, Alexander John, the present Surveyor-General of the
colony of Victoria, was born at Aberdeen in 1820, and is the son
of an old Peninsular officer, the late Major Alexander Skene, 24th
Regiment. He was educated first at private schools, and after-
wards at the University and King’s College, Aberdeen, where he
graduated M.A, in 1838. During the college recesses he studied
surveying, and on his arrival in Victoria in 1839 commenced
private practice as a surveyor. In 1843, Mr. Skene was appointed
surveyor to the district council of Grant, the first provincial
municipal body established in the colony. He entered the Civil
Service m 1848 as a Government surveyor, and from 1848 to
1853 was actively employed in the field, mapping the natural
features, and laying off main lines of road in the districts lying
between Geelong and Portland. As a proof of the discrimination
and care with which these roads were laid, it may be mentioned
tliat they run almost parallel with the lines of railroad that have
since been adopted. About the end of 1853, Mr. Skene was placed
in charge of the district survey office at Geelong, his duty beim--
to superintend extensive surveys then being carried on in the
Western District to meet a demand caused by the influx of popu-
lation consequent on the discovery of gold. He was appointed
surveyor to the colony of Victoria under patent in 1854, and in
1857 was specially appointed to make a tour of inspection
throughout the entire colony to report on the nature and
capability of the land, also on all surveys then being carried out.
All this duty was performed on foot and in the saddle, and occu-
pied nearly a year. In 1862, Mr. Skene classified the whole of
the land held under pastoral license, and in the following year
was transferred to Melbourne. He was appointed acting Surveyor-
General in 1868, and on the retirement of Surveyor-General Ligar,
m 1869, was promoted to the Surveyor-Generalship, which office
he still holds.
Sumner, The Hon. John Theodotus, M.L.C., is an old
colonist of over forty years’ standing. On leaving the old country
he first went out to Tasmania, where for a time he followed mer-
cantile pursuits, until, coming over to Victoria, he entered into
partnership with Mr. Richard Grice. In addition to commerce


Mr. Sumner has for many years taken great interest in agricultural
pursuits, and for some time was president of the Agricultural
Society of Victoria, and maintained a model farm at considerable
cost, on his estate, near Schnapper Point. It was not until the
retirement of Mr. Michie from the representation of the Central
Province in the Legislative Council, that Mr. Sumner took an
active part in politics. On that occasion he appealed to the
constituency, and defeated Mr. A. K. Smith, being elected 31st
March, 1873. Mr. Sumner, while he gives all credit to the
Government which introduced the Education Bill for courage in
bringing forward the measure, looks upon that act as the inevitable
sequel to abolition of State-aid to religion; and while, as a member
of the Upper House, he cannot consistently advocate its abolition,
still he does not object to a reform in that Chamber. Mr. Sumner
is a leading member of the Wesleyan body.
Syme, David, editor and managing proprietor of the Age, was
born at North Berwick, Scotland, in 1827, and was the youngest
of four brothers. The eldest was educated for the medical pro-
fession, the second and third for the church, and the fourth is said
to have escaped the clerical profession by having early imbibed
Broad Church views while a student at a German University.
Having got out of the professional groove, Mr. Syme soon after-
wards joined the press as a reporter; but ill-health compelled him
to make a change, and in 1850 he went to California. Here he
remained some eighteen months, when he left for Victoria, arriving
here in 1852. After a year or two spent on the goldfields, Mr. Syme
came to Melbourne. In conjunction with his brother Ebenezer, he
purchased the Age newspaper, which had then been in existence
some three years. On his brother’s death in 1859, Mr. Syme was
left sole manager, and in that capacity he has remained ever since.
Mr. Syme has conducted the Age during the most critical periods
of the colony’s history. To say that the Age has during that time
been identified with Liberal politics, is to state only half the truth,
for that journal has not only been identified with, but has been
the head and front of almost every Liberal movement in Victoria
during that period. The role taken up by the Age has been a some-
what peculiar one for a journal to play, for it has all along been
not so much the organ, as the organiser, of a party. It has led,
rather than followed public opinion. It does not wait till its views
become popular before advocating them, but it first makes them
popular by its advocacy. The policy of the Age in this respect was
explained in a speech made by Mr. Syme recently, when he was
publicly presented with a purse containing being the
amount of the damages awarded to the plaintiff in the case of
Langton v. Syme. Referring to the political success of the Age,
Mr. Syme said —“If you ask me to what this success is due, I


will let you into the secret. Many people think that for a journal
to be popular it must follow public opinion. This is a grand
mistake. A journal that waits for public opinion to be formed
before it expresses its own opinion, will infallibly incur, not the
support, but the contempt of the public, and deservedly so. A
newspaper, to be read, must have opinions of its own, and it must
be capable of promptly, clearly, and vigorously expressing them.
But it must not only have opinions, but they must be of the right
sort —opinions which carry conviction on the face of them.” The
Age has undoubtedly been a great success. When that paper
came into the hands of the present proprietary the circulation was
under 2000, and at the time of Mr. E. Syme’s death it was much
less; but it has steadily increased since iB6O. In 1868 the size
of the Age was reduced from an eight to a four-paged paper, and
the price from 3d. to id. This was a bold venture at the time,
taking into account the high price of labour and materials, but
it proved an immense success. In a few weeks the circulation
rose from 3000 to 13,000, and now (in 1877) it stands at over
30,000. There can be no doubt that the Age is an exceedingly
well-conducted paper. Its leading articles are models of
perspicuous and trenchant criticism; its news columns are well
filled and concisely written, and no expense is spared in obtaining
the best and latest information on the events of the day. The
enormous political influence that it wields is due to the fact that
no one doubts its sincerity and its loyalty to the cause which it
advocates. Ministries may come and go, the leaders of the Liberal
party of to-day may be the leaders of an obstructionist party to-
morrow, but the Age is always the same. No one need ever have
any difficulty in determining on which side it will throw in its
advocacy. Mr. Syme, though a politician of the most pronounced
type, has never entered Parliament. He has been often asked,
but has steadfastly refused to enter political life. We believe it is
his opinion that his presence in Parliament would interfere with
his usefulness as a journalist. Apart from journalism, Mr. Syme
has made his mark in the literary world. He has contributed
several papers on social and economic subjects to the Westminster
and Fortnightly Reviews (one of which has been twice reprinted
in America), and is the author of an essay, published in December,
1876, entitled “Outlines of an Industrial Science.” In this work
Mr. Syme has taken a new departure in political economy, as he
differs from Mill and the economists generally, not only as to the
method but also as to the matter and form of the science. He
regards the method as inductive; the subject matter as mental,
not physical, phenomena ; and the object of the book is to show
the operation of purely mental causes in producing human industry.
The book has been favourably received by economic students both
in England and on the Continent. It has already passed through


a second edition in England, been reprinted in America, and been
translated into German.
Symonds, Edmund Stage, Under-Treasurer, third son of Dr.
Samuel Symonds, R.N., of Hampshire, England, born at Gosport,
1816 ; educated at the Royal Naval school, Greenwich, entering at
nine and leaving it at fifteen years of age. Being intended for the
Naval Service, he entered on a seafaring career in the year 1831,
followed it as a profession till the year 1837, when finding it
not congenial to his wishes or views, he relinquished the sea and
commenced the study of law in Sydney, where he entered an
attorney’s office. In 1840 he joined the old Commercial Bank of
Sydney, in which establishment he remained till it wound-up in
1847, when an opportunity offering, he applied for and obtained
an appointment in the Pay Department of the British Commis-
sariat, which he held till the latter part of 1851, when on the
invitation of the then Auditor-General of this colony (the Hon. C.
H. Ebden), he left New South Wales and came to Melbourne.
Arriving in January, 1852, was employed for a short time in
arranging the accounts of the Government Printing Department.
Appointed Assistant-Commissioner of Crown Lands for the gold-
fields, and commenced duty at Castlemaine on the Ist May, 1852.
The particular duties entrusted to his charge at this period were the
receipt and despatch of gold and cash per escort, supplying for issue
to other commissioners gold licences, business licences, auditing
their accounts, &c. In these primitive days of the goldfields there
were many difficulties to contend against in conducting official
business. The office work was for several months performed in a
large canvas tent, without any lining, and with the bare ground for
a floor, and this, too, during a very severe winter. Mr. Symonds
had for assistants two clerks, Mr. George Collins Levey and
Mr. Margrave, and the character of the duties discharged was such
as to demand the constant and unwearying attention of himself
and the official staff at all hours, occasionally till midnight, com-
mencing at five and six in the morning. The amount of treasure
received and despatched was enormous, and at the present day
seems almost fabulous. The gold, instead of being calculated
by the ounce, was counted in pounds, and even in tons. It
was no uncommon occurrence to have eight and ten tons of gold
in this tent. Under any circumstances, the custody of so large
an amount of treasure would be attended with some anxiety; but
in this case, with only a tent for a covering, a deficiency of strong
boxes —and not one of those on hand thief-proof—the responsibility
of the officer in charge must have been considerably enhanced.
The assistance of the military pensioners, who were stationed
at Castlemaine as guards, was invaluable; and, it is satisfactory to
know that, notwithstanding the disadvantages of the position, the


duties of the office were carried on with precision and accuracy.
Early in 1853 certain changes were made in the disposition of the
goldfields staff ; the Chief Commissioner was stationed in Mel-
bourne—Mr. Symonds being attached to his staff and appointed
senior-assistant commissioner, his duty being the management and
control (subject to Chief Commissioner) of all financial operations
at the goldfields. In March, 1855, he was appointed to the
charge of the Gold Office in Melbourne, but continued to act
also as finance officer for the goldfields, and exercised control over
all the other gold receivers in the colony. It was during the time
that he held this office the celebrated nugget named “ Blanche
Barkly,” and weighing upwards of 2000 ounces, was received per
escort at the gold office. The total amount of treasure received
and despatched during the two years and a-half that Mr. Symonds
was in charge of the gold office was valued at upwards of thirty-five
millions sterling. In October, 1857,116 was offered and accepted the
situation of Under-Treasurer—succeeding in that office Mr. A,
J- Agg, w h° was appointed one of the Commissioners of Audit.
This was at the time of the passing of the Audit Act, which involved
a complete change in the method of keeping the finance of the
country. The new system was initiated under Mr. Symonds’ super-
vision, and has continued in operation till the present time. It will
be seen that Mr. Symonds has been in the service of the Govern-
ment of Victoria for nearly twenty-six years, and has served under
the following Treasurers, viz.:—The Hons. C. H. Ebden, Geo.
Harker, Sir James M‘Culloch, Sir George Verdon, W. C. Haines,
Edward Langton, Robert Byrne, Graham Berry, J. G. Francis, and
James Service.
Teague, John, civil engineer, Red Hill, Chewton, was born in
Blackwater, Cornwall, in 1816, and educated at Penzance. In
1828 he was articled to Mr. Arthur Woolf, a celebrated mining
engineer, and he graduated with a number of men who subse-
quently achieved much distinction in their profession. He was
sent to the Kingsbridge Ironworks, in Dublin, in 1834; and he
practised successfully in Cornwall from 1835 to 1848, developing
slate, china, copper, tin, lead, silver, cobalt, and gold. He also
paid much attention to the working of ships, and rounded the Cape
of Good Hope for the purpose of making observations. In 1859
he assisted in forming a Mining Institute of Victoria, and delivered
a number of lectures. In 1859 he irrigated a farm at Heidelberg,
and was very successful in growing vegetables thereon. Since then
he has closely devoted himself to the scientific development of
gold-mining.
Templeton, William, P.M., was born 1827, at Glasgow, in
which city his father had a banking establishment. He left the


mother-country with his parents when quite an infant, and arrived
in New South Wales in 1831. After a sojourn of about a dozen
years in the parent colony, he came to Victoria, engaged in
squatting and kindred pursuits for a short time, and in 1851 joined
the gold escort corps. Shortly after joining, Mr. Templeton had
the honour of serving on the escorts which guarded the first gold
carts from Castlemaine, and afterwards Beechworth —a somewhat
hazardous duty in those lawless days. In January, 1853, Mr.
Templeton was appointed goldfield commissioner to the Mary-
borough district, from whence in the following year he was
transferred to Ballarat—the Eureka Stockade riots having rendered
a general change of officers necessary on those diggings. He
remained for six months at Ballarat, and was then appointed
resident warden of the Maryborough mining district, which position
he held until the office was abolished about seven years afterwards.
In July, 1862, Mr. Templeton was appointed police magistrate to
the suburban districts, and is still engaged in the duties of his
office. Mr. Templeton is the author and compiler of “A Guide for
Petty Sessions,” a law book of reference, which has met with high
commendation from many eminent members of the legal profession.
Thomson. David Ramsay, manager of the Long Tunnel Gold
Mining Company, Walhalla, North Gippsland. Born at Edinburgh,
where he was educated. Was brought up as an engineer, and in
1839 was placed in the establishment of Mr, R. Napier, of
Glasgow, the celebrated marine engineeer. There he was trained
as a mechanical engineer, studying his profession in its different
branches until 1844, when a favourable opportunity offered by an
appointment to the works of the Netherlands Steamboat Com-
pany at Rotterdam, Holland, who were then constructing extensive
machinery for the Russian navy. On its completion he was sent by
the company to superintend its erection at Cronstadt, and finished
there in 1846. An offer being made to him to remain in Russia by
Mr. T. Baird, of St. Petersburg, to take charge of the engine depart-
ment of his extensive works, he accepted the offer, and remained
until 1851, when he returned to Glasgow, and entered into business
as an engineer. In 1854 he left Glasgow for Victoria, where he
arrived in July, 1854, and has been ever since engaged in
engineering and mining pursuits in different parts of the colony,
and devoting his attention to the improvement of mining and gold-
saving machinery, and mining engineering in its different branches.
In 1867 was appointed manager of the Long Tunnel Company,
Walhalla, which was at that time making arrangements to develop
that valuable mine, for which purpose extensive machinery was
required to carry on the mining operations on a large scale, and
the returns from the mine have fully justified the outlay, it having
proved one of the most successful of the colony. The amount


of gold produced from the mine since January, 1868, to Septem-
ber, 1877, has been 238,962 oz. 14 dwts. 6 grs., valued at
Thomson, William, J.P., of “Prospect,” Kyneton, Victoria,
was born at Chigh Farm, near Wilsontown, Carnaruth, Lanarkshire,
Scotland, 24th March, 1831. When about seven years of age,
with his parents and four brothers and two sisters, he left Scotland
for Australia, arriving at Sydney, New South Wales, in 1838. At
the time of arrival the district of Port Phillip, now Victoria, was
being settled by immigrants from Tasmania, and “overlanders”
from New South Wales. In 1839 he, with the family, left Sydney
by ship for Port Phillip, and they began their career by taking
service with Mr. Alexander Fullerton Mollison, who had taken up
what was afterwards known as the Coliban station, now Malms-
bury. After staying five years with Mr. Mollison, the family moved
to Anderson’s Creek, on the Upper Yarra River, to occupy a small
squatting station purchased by Mr. Thomson’s father. They
remained there till 1850, when the Thomson brothers purchased
at the first sale of land at Kyneton the farm known as “Prospect,”
now owned by William Thomson. The family then removed to
Kyneton, and gradually became possessed of the several landed
properties still owned, and in most instances occupied, by them-
selves. In 1858 Thomson Brothers dissolved partnership; and in
that year William Thomson was elected a member of the Lauriston
and Edgecombe district road board, and remained a member until
it became a part of the Kyneton shire in 1865. He was chairman
of the district road board for two years, and has been a member of
the Kyneton shire council since its formation to the present time;
was president of the shire council when H.R.H. the Duke of
Edinburgh passed through Kyneton, and has been elected to that
position three times. Mr. Thomson is president of the district
hospital, and has been a member of the committee since 1861
(having been president seven times), and has been a member of the
Kyneton agricultural committee for twenty years, and president
three. Was elected a member of the Kyneton State-school
board of advice when the Education Act came into operation, and
has been chairman of the board ever since. He has taken an
active part in politics since the advent of Constitutional govern-
ment, and contested the seat for the Legislative Assembly in the
electoral district of Dalhousie, but was unsuccessful. In 1868 he
was appointed a territorial magistrate, and has taken an active part
in nearly everything that has helped the advancement and pros-
perity of Kyneton since its foundation.
Thornton, The Right Rev. Samuel, D.D., first Anglican Bishop
of the diocese of Ballarat, was born in the year 1835, and was


educated at Queen’s College, Oxford, where he took a degree in
Arts and Sciences, and was subsequently elected a Fellow. He
was ordained a deacon by the Lord Bishop of Oxford in 1858, and
a priest by the Lord Bishop of London in He acted as a
curate in Whitechapel during some time, and whilst in that capa-
city displayed unusual ability as a preacher and popular speaker at
tea meetings. He became a very great favourite, and he was
much missed by his flock when in 1864 he was made Rector of
St. George’s, Birmingham. Mainly at the desire of the Right
Rev. Dr. Perry, U.D. (who recently resigned the bishopric of
Melbourne), Dr. Thornton was selected to fill the position of first
Bishop of Ballarat, after the severance of that district from Mel-
bourne, and he was consecrated in Westminster Abbey on the
1 st. May, 1875, by His Grace the Archbishop of Canterbury,
assisted by the Bishops of London, Ely, Melbourne, and Goulbourn.’
He arrived in Melbourne shortly afterwards, and, after having
created a very favourable impression during his brief stay theng
left for Ballarat, where he at once entered upon the active discharge
of his sacred functions. His first experiences of travelling in the
bush were rather the reverse of pleasant, as they were gained
during a wet winter, and his humorous recital of the agony he and
Mrs. Thornton endured on the execrable road leading to Hamilton
was widely read throughout the colony. One of the first things
that struck him was the wretched manner in which several of the
clergymen in his diocese were paid, and he soundly rated those
who were responsible. He also took immediate steps with a view
to extend church accommodation, and his efforts have already
been attended by a very tair share of success. He speaks and
preaches eloquently and fervently.
Trench, The Hon. Robert Le Poer, Attorney-General of
Victoria, is a barrister of very long standing, both in this colony
and in the old country. He is a member of the noble family of
his name, whose principal seat is in the county of Galway,
in Ireland. He was articled to the celebrated pleader and
conveyancer Mr. Coventry, and was called to the bar (Inner
I emple) on the 10th of June, 1842. After having spent several
years travelling in various parts of the world, he found his way to
Victoria, and was, in a little while, appointed clerk of petty
sessions in Kilmore; and shortly afterwards he was promoted to
the office of clerk of petty sessions in Ballarat. In 1855 he was
admitted to the Victorian bar, in the same year with Sir George
Stephen, His Honor Judge Bindon, and the Hon. Robert
Walsh. He soon became a leading member of his profession,
and he has long been looked upon as a high authority on mining-
law. In the case of Learmonth v. Bailey and others—perhaps
the most important that ever was tried in Australia—he was


retained for the defence, and he had the satisfaction of gaining his
client’s case. On the formation of Mr. Berry’s first Government
in August, 1875, M r - Trench was appointed Attorney-General;
and when Mr. Berry again became Chief Secretary in May, 1877,
Mr. french resumed his position in the Crown Law Offices, and
has subsequently been appointed one of the Land Tax Commis-
sioners.
Turnbull, Phipps, of Phipps Turnbull and Co., general mer-
chants, of 122 Collins-street west, is the only survivor of six
brothers, all of whom emigrated to Victoria, but at three different
periods— two as early as 1838. The Hon. Robert Turnbull, the
partner of the subject of this memoir, represented the Eastern
Province for twelve or thirteen years in the Legislative Council.
1 he rest of the brothers were wine and spirit merchants, of the
old-fashioned type, like the leading firms of the City of London,
who have followed the same business for many generations. Mr.
Phipps Turnbull came to Victoria in 1844, and began life as an
office-boy with W. H. Barnes, and stayed there till he succeeded
to the business, and with his brother Robert, founded the firm of
Robert and Phipps Turnbull and Co., general merchants and com-
mission agents. During the commercial crisis of 1854 they made
heavy losses, but ultimately closed the year’s accounts with a small
balance of profit, which few others did. From this period the
career of the firm was successful, but uneventful. The only strong
temptation to go into mining ventures was at the time when the
shares of the “ Sir William Don ” Company, of Ballarat, could
hardly be given away. Half the mine was offered for and
was declined, shortly after which the same interest was worth at
least in the open market. In 1867, Mr. Turnbull
retired from the firm, and went home to England, not intending to
come back; but on the death of his brother Robert (November,
1872) he returned to take charge of the business. During the time
he was away, R, Murray Smith was a partner in the firm, but
retired from it on the return of Mr. Phipps Turnbull, who is now
settled in Victoria, and a large landed proprietor, having one
of the prettiest places in the colony near Warrnambool, situated on
what is generally called Black’s River, otherwise Emu Creek,
which originally belonged to the St. Quintin’s, as well as another
estate about twenty miles north of Warrnambool, the land being of
splendid quality and near the township of Hawksdale, which became
somewhat celebrated in the railway discussion of 1877. The firm
still carry on the same business; but as indicating the changes
that have taken place it may be as well to note that what was
once essentially a commission agency is now a merchant’s
business, as the firm imports at its own risk nearly everything it
trades in.


'Punier, Henry Giles, manager of the Commercial Bank ot
Australia (Limited), was born at Kensington, London, in 1831.
His mother was possessed of a moderate fortune, which his
father lost. The subject of this memoir was apprenticed to
William Pickering, the celebrated Aldine publisher and book-
seller. In 1851 he resigned his connection with the book trade,
and accepted an appointment in the London Joint Stock Bank,
In September, 1854, he differed with his managers respecting
some office promotion, and he was requested to resign, which he
did. The following month he received an appointment in the
Bank of Australasia, Melbourne, and sailed by s.s. Argo for
Victoria, entering upon his duties in Melbourne, December, 1854.
In 1865 he became accountant, and received two offers of
management in New Zealand which he declined, and was asked to
take the management of the branch bank at Brisbane; but just at
this time the directors of the Commercial Bank of Australia
(Limited) offered him the management of that bank, which
he accepted, and took charge in July, 1870. He had an arduous
task before him, and had to get rid of a large number of
branch managers, and bring the goldfield branches more under
the control of the head office. That he eventually overcame the
difficulties he had to deal with, and brought the bank into a
highly profitable condition, reflects the greatest credit upon him,
and has established his character as a successful banker, and
justifies his well-earned holiday, which, in 1877, he took advantage
of for a trip to Europe. His earlier difficulties in the manage-
ment are said to have toughened a character naturally amiable
and considerate, and he has gained the esteem of his officers as
well as the respect and confidence of the shareholders and the
public. As a writer, Mr. Turner is well known to be a con-
tributor to the daily and weekly press, and to all the magazines
that have been published in Victoria. He projected the
Melbourne Review , and is one of the editors as well as a con-
tributor. On the 23rd February, 1877, Mr. Turner, before leaving
for Europe, was presented by Mr, Arthur Nichols, the accountant
of the bank, as senior officer, in the presence of fifty or sixty
gentlemen, with a testimonial of respect and esteem in the form
of a handsome silver epergne and beautifully illuminated address,
to which Mr. Turner suitably replied, referring to his sixteen
years’ connection with the banking interest, and the kindly
relations that had always existed between himself and the officers
of the institution.
Ulrich, George Henry Frederick, born at Zellerfeld, one
of the seven mining towns of the Upper Hartz, Germany. He was
educated at the Royal Gymnasium, Clausthal, and afterwards at
the Royal School of Mines in the same town, where, after four


years’ study, he took the second degree of the first class “with
distinction.” Whilst studying at the School of Mines, he practised
in the ore-dressing establishments, the smelting works, and the
mines. He also gave part of his time to geological surveying..
To qualify himself as a mining officer he had to work as a common
miner for nearly four years, learning all the practical part of his
business. In 1853, Mr. Ulrich was offered by General Braun —
the proprietor of some very valuable silver mines in Bolivia—the
post of mining superintendent. The offer was accepted, but
before the new superintendent had time to pack up his trunks, the
Boliveans indulged in one of their periodical revolutions. General
Braun lost all his mines; and the subject of this biography turned
his attention to Australia, and landed at Melbourne in August,
1853. He went first to a fellow-countryman, Mr. Bohmer, a brick-
maker of Richmond, who at once gave him employment in the
brickyard. After three months’ labour as a maker of bricks, he
commenced gold-digging, and for three or four years he lived the
life of a digger, with varying success, travelling from rush to rush,
as is the wont of miners. On his return to Melbourne, he was
soon introduced by the late Dr. Becker to Professor M‘Coy, then
chairman of the Mining Commission, This introduction resulted
in the appointment of Mr. Ulrich to the office of assistant-secretary
and draughtsman to the mining commission, in which capacity he
worked for about a year, when on the increase of the staff of the
geological survey he was offered the position of field geologist by
Mr. Selwyn, director of the geological survey department. The
offer was accepted, and Mr. Ulrich carried on the duties of his
new office partly in association with the late Mr. D’Oyly Aplin
and Mr. Henry Y. L. Brown. He held this position until iB68 r
when the Geological Survey Department was abolished. He has
since 1869 up to the present time practised as a consulting miner
and geologist, and amongst his more important engagements may
be mentioned the inspection of and reports on mining country
up to 250 miles north of Port Augusta, which work was under-
taken to the order of the South Australian Government. He also
made tours of inspection to the gold-bearing country in Northern
Queensland, the tin mines of Tasmania, and the goldfields of
Otago, New Zealand. He has been for several years past
Lecturer to the Melbourne University on mining and practical
mineralogy, also curator of the mineral collections at the Techno-
logical Museum. In 1867, Mr. Ulrich went on leave of absence
to Europe, visited the French Exhibition, and took part in collect-
ing a great number of mineralogical specimens, mineral pigments,
products, &c., for the Melbourne Museum. He also travelled
through the various mining districts of Germany, and paid a visit
to the Hungarian gold-mine at Schemnitz. The result ol this
tour was a pamphlet on methods of gold extraction, illustrated by


designs of machinery. I his work was published by the Victorian
Government, which has also sent from its press Mr. Ulrich’s
descriptive catalogue of the rock collection in the Technological
Museum and a description of Victorian minerals, first arranged
for the French Exhibition, but afterwards enlarged by a supple-
ment published by the Victorian Mining Department. As a
geological chart-maker, Mr. Ulrich has assisted in the preparation
of maps of the districts of Kyneton, Malmsbury, Taradale,
Elphinstone, Castlemaine, Guildford, Mount Franklyn, and
Mount Tarrangower goldfields. Mr. Ulrich is a Fellow of the
Geological Society of London, a member of the Royal Society of
Victoria, and a corresponding member of the Royal Society of
Tasmania.
lance, The Rev. G. 0., was born in London in the year 1828.
He entered at King’s College, London, where he became senior
classical scholar and prizeman, also prizeman in Divinity, Latin,
and English verse. Next proceeding to Lincoln College, Oxford!
he won the first of six open scholarships, and subsequently gra-
duated second class in classical honours. Shortly after his arrival
in Victoria, he was, on the 25th December, 1853, ordained to the
curacy of St. James’s, Melbourne, by the Right Rev. Dr. Perry.
In the following year he was appointed to the curacy of St. Paul’s,
Geelong; and on the opening of the Church of England Grammar
School m that town in 1857, he was appointed head-master of the
institution. On the school having been temporarily closed, he
was entrusted with the charge of the parish of Chewton; and in
the year 1862 he was nominated by the board of advowson to the
cure ol Kyneton, which was then vacant. He retained that charge
during seven years, and in the absence of the Rev. C. Perks, he
was given temporary charge of the parish of Richmond. Whilst
in the last-named place, he was presented with the incumbency of
Kew, which he still holds. He was nominated by the Bishop as
a member of his council, and was one of the three clergymen
elected to represent, with the Bishop, the diocese of Melbourne
m the general synod of the Church of England, held in Sydney in
1872, the other two being the Very Rev. the Dean of Melbourne
and the Ven. Archdeacon Stretch. He took a very prominent
part m the Eight Days’ Mission, and afterwards, in 1875, he went,
by invitation, to conduct a mission in one of the churches in
Sydney. In 1874 he was nominated by the clergy for the vacant
see at Brisbane, but was not elected to that office. He is a
member of the chapter of the diocese in Melbourne, one of the
Bishop s council, one of the representatives of the general synod, a
member of the board of nominators in case of a vacancy to the
see of Melbourne, one of the panel of triers, and one of the editors
of the Church of England Messenger.


Verdon, Sir George Frederic, C. 8., K.C.M.G., F.R.S., was
born at Tottington in Lancashire, in 1834. He is a son of
the Rev. Edward Verdon, M.A., and his grandfather was at the
time of his death engaged in prosecuting a claim to the Barony of
Verdon. Sir George was educated at Rossall College, and
emigrated from Plymouth in 1851. Fie arrived in Victoria
the same year, and tried his luck at Campbell’s Creek gold
diggings; but fortune did not favour his efforts, and he returned to
Melbourne after a few weeks. Having been provided with a letter
of introduction by Sir James Palmer to Mr. (now Judge) Pohlman,
he obtained an engagement in the firm of Heape and Grice.
Twelve months afterwards he went to New Zealand as supercargo
of one of their vessels, and during some time managed their business
in that colony. In 1856 he became a member of the Williams-
town municipal council, and he was chairman of the conference
held at Melbourne to consider the amendment of the laws relating
to municipal institutions. He was one of the earliest of the Vic-
torian volunteers, and assisted at the head of his company
in suppressing an outbreak of convicts in 1857, In 1858 he was
appointed honorary assistant in the Melbourne Observatory, and
was engaged in the geodetic and magnetic surveys of this colony
under Messrs. Ellery and Neumayer. In 1859 he was elected to
represent Williamstown in the Legislative Assembly, and in iB6O
he accepted office as Treasurer in the Heales Ministry. He
occupied that position until the close of the following year, when
the third O’Shanassy Administration was formed. When that
Government was defeated in June, 1863, Sir George, who had in
the interim been called to the bar, was again made Treasurer—this
time under Mr. McCulloch (now Sir James) —and he held
office until 1868. In 1866 he proceeded to London for the pur-
pose of bringing the subject of the defences of Victoria under the
consideration of the Imperial Government, and succeeded in
getting a contribution of towards the construction of
the ironclad Cerberus , as well as a present of the A r elsou. He also
negotiated a loan for public works, and was instrumental in
establishing the Melbourne Mint. He was feted at Willis’s Rooms,
and created C.B. of the civil division on the 23rd November,
1866, and K.C.M.G. in 1872. On his return to Victoria, he was
elected for Emerald Hill, a seat which he soon after resigned in
order to become Agent-General for Victoria—a position which he
filled with much credit until 1872, when, hearing that there was
some doubt as to the permanency of the office, he voluntarily
vacated it and became colonial inspector and general manager of the
English, Scottish and Australian Chartered Bank, a position which
he continues to occupy. In 1870 he was elected a Fellow of the
Royal Society, and he is an Associate of the Institute of Civil
Engineers. He is remembered as having delivered a lecture


entitled “Australia; Past, Present, and Future,” and it may be
observed that he is a relative of the late Governor Latrobe.
Though he now takes no active part in politics he is essentially a
public man, and one who spares no trouble in furthering what he
believes to be the interests of the land of his adoption. He is
a fluent speaker, and makes an excellent chairman at public
meetings.
Walcll, Garnet, born 1843, Tasmania, author and dramatist,
is the youngest son of the late Major Walch, H.M. 54th regiment,
and brother of the well-known publishers, Messrs. Walch, of Tas-
mania. Mr. Walch is a Tasmanian by birth, but passed many of
his earlier years in England and on the Continent. On the com-
pletion of his education he returned to Australia, where he was
at first engaged in commercial pursuits, but later on developed a
taste for press work, and was employed as a writer on several of
the leading papers of New South Wales. He also started a jour-
nal of his own, known as the Cumberland Times , but his first
entirely independent literary venture dates as recently as 1870,
when he published a series of Christmas stories, under the title of
“Fireflash.” In Christmas, 1871, he produced his original extrava-
ganza “Trookulentos,” which achieved great success, and laid the
foundation of its author’s reputation in this branch of his profes-
sion. Removing to Victoria, towards the close of 1872, he
produced “True Blue Beard,” at the Prince of Wales Theatre
(now the Opera House), and early next year a burlesque entitled
“Pygmalion and his Gal a dear;” followed by his extravaganzas
“Australia Felix” and “Adamanta,” both played at the Opera
House. In 1874, he published a volume of humorous verse and
prose, “ Head over Heels,” and next year a grotesquely-illustrated
work, styed “On the Cards.” His next Melbourne pantomime
was an adaptation of “Froggee would a-wooing go,” while in
Sydney was played his original version of “Beauty and the Beast,”
the Theatre Royal of each city being the locale of production. In
1876, besides a variety of dramiettes written to introduce Dr. Sil-
vester’s ghost effects, Mr. Walch wrote his pantomime, “Hey Diddle
Diddle,” for the Melbourne Theatre Royal, a fresh version of his
“Trookulentos” being also played in New Zealand. During the
present year Mr. Walch has produced a dramatisation of “Helen’s
Babies,” and a comedy styled “Humble Pie.” In addition to the
books and plays above enumerated, Mr. Walch has written several
localised versions of popular burlesques and opera bouffes, anumber
of descriptive lectures, entertainments, &c., and is understood to be
at work upon dramas for more than one leading actor. Shortly
after his arrival in Melbourne, Mr. Walch was chosen out of 115
applicants to fill the post of secretary to the Melbourne Athenaeum,
the leading literary institute of Australia, which has no less than


trebled its members and revenue during the four years Mr. Walch
has held office.
Wallace, Hon. John Alston, was born at Rutherglen, near
Glasgow, in 1828, and was educated in the local school. His
father was a draper, and the son was brought up to the same
business. At eighteen he was in the employment of a wholesale
and retail soft goods house in Glasgow, and after a twelve months’
experience returned home to aid in his father’s business. Shortly
after this he rented 300 acres of land at Glentour, near Airdice,
Renfrewshire, thus early showing an energy of character, and a
disposition to break out of the circumscribed area of a retail
business. On this estate there were indications sufficient to lead
to the supposition that coal, known to exist in the neighbourhood,
might be found. The mine proved a moderate success; but the
death of his wife, to whom he had only been married for a few
months, and the news of the gold discoveries in Australia coming
at the same time, induced him to make up his mind and follow his
brother to the colony, who had been there for three years superin-
tending a station in the Western District. He sailed from Liver-
pool in the Southampton at the beginning of 1852, and after a fair
average voyage landed at Cole’s Wharf, with little money in his
pockets, but large expectations, and plenty of energy to devote
to the fortune-making he was bent on. The newest rush at the
time, the Australian spring of 1852, was that to the Ovens, which
was said to transcend the golden glories of Ballarat and Bendigo.
Mr. Wallace joined about fourteen others, and purchased the
necessary outfit for the 200 miles of bush road, and the mining
operations they intended to devote themselves to. After many
difficulties and delays, but no serious disasters, they reached
Avenel. There they were met by Mr. Hargraves, who was
returning to Melbourne, after visiting the Ovens rush. His
account of the prospects of the new goldfield was not favourable,
and many of those who had started with great hopes gave up their
chance of fortunes, and returned to whence they came. Mr.
Wallace and his mates showed more sense and pluck; and sending
a portion of the party forward to the diggings, the rest camped
upon Lloyd Jones’ Run, until hearing from their mates that the
prospects at Spring Creek, Beechworth, were good, they joined
them there ; and, after three months’ labour, found themselves
exhausted in means, nearly disheartened, and ready to return
to Melbourne. The license for those days was 30s. for the
quarter, and was collected by an armed police, as if they were
dealing with a foreign, a conquered, or a criminal population. A
mining friend, named Chandler, persuaded him not to give up,
and lent him funds to supply pressing wants. Recommended by
his friend, he was taken into a party sinking a paddock at Spring


Creek, and sufficient gold was obtained to give each man of
the party between four and five hundred pounds. He now deter-
mined to start a store, and bring into play the business aptitude
and general trading knowledge he had acquired at home; but
as the wet weather had set in, and carriage to Spring Creek
had risen to and per ton, he determined to open
a store at Robinson Crusoe Gully, Bendigo, which he did,
and with excellent results. In the spring he sold off, carried out
his original idea, and made a start in business at the Ovens, with
a large and valuable stock, in 1854; and he has continued to
be identified with the district up to the present time. Business
prospered with him, and his energy and enterprise did good to his
neighbours as well as to himself by improving the supply of neces-
sities, and lowering the price of nearly all commodities in general
use. In the year 1854-5 he built an hotel of slabs and sawn
timber at a total cost of The architect was paid an ounce
of gold a day, and mechanics thirty shillings. He opened another
store at Bright before the township was named, another at
Buckland, and a fourth at the crossing place of the Ovens River,
but the last was shortly abandoned. About the end of 1854
he opened a store and hotel at Three-mile Creek, and did a good
and profitable business. Mr. Wallace was always ready to give a
helping hand to any man willing to help himself, and never
refused credit to any miner on tools and necessaries to go
to work; he helped to develop the resources of the district by
paying men to prospect likely ground and helping the co-operative
companies that were started to carry on large sluicing operations,
and he also assisted to a considerable extent to bring water into
the goldfield from the neighbouring ranges. In 1855 Mr. Wallace
purchased Newber’s Hotel, at Beech worth, and the adjoining
assembly-room, and built large additions. These premises were
afterwards known as the Star Hotel and Theatre, and were sold to
Messrs. Robertson and Quirk for In 1855 Mr. Wallace
opened a store and hotel at the Lower Nine-mile, and shortly after-
wards went into wholesale slaughtering, which he extended to his
other places of business, and facilitated and cheapened the supply
of meat to the mining population. In 1857 the Indigo diggings
were discovered, and a rush took place, and here again Mr.
Wallace set up a store, hotel, and slaughtering establishment.
About this time he began to find machinery for mining parties in-
stead of lending money for them to get it. His first venture was
with the prospectors of the Indigo, and he was to get a twelfth
sleeping share instead of interest for the money value of the
machinery. Gold was found at a depth of 180 feet, many claims
were taken up, and Mr. Wallace extended his new line of business
both to his own profit and advantage of the miners, for without
him they could not have obtained the necessary machinery to


work the wet ground. As indicating the magnitude of his trans-
actions in one place, and in mining machinery alone, it may be
mentioned that before twenty ounces of gold had been raised he
had advanced ;£i 3,000 at Indigo alone. This investment is re-
ported to have given him a profit of This period
(1:857-8) marks the advance of Mr, Wallace into mining pursuits,
and selling his various establishments and places of business, he
devoted his energies and capital to mining ventures. The closing
of so many places, all doing more or less a credit business, neces-
sarily left some amount of bad debts, and when all was settled
they were set down at not less than As a miner and
furnisher he was known hereafter, and his interests have always
been identified with the original district where his first efforts
were nearly failing, and probably would have failed, but for the
helping hand of Chandler, and that help Mr. Wallace has often
extended to others. The numerous mining enterprises, in which
he was mostly successful, would make an interesting book in
themselves, and until very recently he personally superintended
the working of the mines in which he was interested. In 1875
Mr. Wallace married the second daughter of Mr. Thomas
Monaghan, of Elsternwick. Mr. Wallace’s fortunes have no
doubt varied to some considerable extent over the twenty-five
years he has been engaged in business, and more especially in
mining, but in the main he has been essentially a successful man.
Went to England in 1872, and on his return in November, 1873,
was elected for the Eastern Province, in the place of the Hon.
H. M. Murphy, for the end of that gentleman’s term, and was
again elected for the same Province for the Legislative Council in
September, 1874.
Walsh, John Joseph, barrister-at-law, Melbourne, was born in
county Galway, Ireland, about the year 1822. Arrived in Mel-
bourne 1852, and soon began to take a lively interest in the
politics of the colony. Was in business for several years, and
afterwards studied for the bar, to which he was called in 1873.
Upon several occasions he has endeavoured to obtain a seat in
Parliament, but unsuccessfully. He was an active member of the
first Protection League in Melbourne, and in 1875 established the
Land Tax League, of which he was chairman, advocating a pro-
gressive tax upon all alienated lands in excess of 640 acres
held by any one individual. He was one of the first members of
the Reform and Protection League established in 1858, of which
he was for some time one of the vice-presidents. Mr. Walsh is
the compiler and editor of the “Black and White List, or
Electors’ Hansard,” of which four series have been published. In
1859 he edited “The Convention and True Coloniser,” devoted to
the dissemination of his views and principles in regard to the
settlement of the people upon the public lands.


Walsh, The Hon. Robert, barrister-at-law, Melbourne, son of
Michael Walsh, of Dublin, merchant, who was a member of the
first reformed Corporation of that city (when Catholics were first
eligible for election), and director of the Hibernia Bank, was born
at his father’s country-house, near Rathfarnham, county Dublin ;
educated at Dr. Chain’s Blackrock school, near Dublin, and
afterwards at Trinity College, where he took his degree in 1846,
and a moderatorship in logic and ethics. Was called to the Irish
bar in November, 1847, and left Ireland for Australia, arriving in
Victoria in 1853. Went to Ballarat in 1855, and began the
practice of his profession, and was there engaged in nearly all the
great mining cases, on one side or the other. Contested the
election for Ballarat East in 1871, and was elected as one of the
members for that district in the Legislative Assembly. Accepted
office as Attorney-General, sth July, 1871, in the Duffy Ministry,
being again elected without opposition. Mr. Walsh retired from
office with his chief on the 10th June, 1872. At the next general
election he did not stand, and has since that time kept aloof from
politics and settled down in Melbourne to the practice of his
profession ever since.
WatSOll, George John, the popular master of the Melbourne
Hunt, was born at Ballydearton, county of Carlow, Ireland, in
1831, and is the son of Mr. John Watson, who in his day earned
an enviable reputation in his county as a country gentleman and
M.F.H. Mr. Watson was educated at the Kilkenny College, and
after enjoying a few years of a yeoman’s life, he emigrated to
Australia, landing in Melbourne in 1851. In 1852 Mr. Watson
became proprietor of Kirk’s Bazaar—the Victorian Tattersall’s—
and shortly afterwards entered into partnership with Mr. Cyrus
Hewitt, head of the world-renowned mail coach proprietary firm
of Cobb and Co. It was a Cobb’s coach that first set the
example of quick travelling in Victoria by carrying Her Majesty’s
mail from Melbourne to Beechworth in twenty-four hours. Prior
to this feat the time occupied in transit between the two places
had been three days! When in 1853 Messrs. Pike and Ferrers,
respectively masters of the Werribee and Geelong packs, left the
colony, he took over the ‘‘pick” of their kennels, and established
the Melbourne Hunt Club. Since the establishment of the
Victoria Racing Club, George Watson has been an energetic
member of its committee. The first Queen’s Plate and the first
Geelong Produce Stakes ever run for in the colony were carried
off by the subject of this notice, whose horses have also won
numerous Derbys, Ledgers, and steeplechase stakes. The names
of the horses that have especially helped to give fame to Mr.
Watson’s “cerise and black” are “Emerald,” “The Doctor,”
“Blackboy,” “Rocket,” “Modesty,” “Ballarat,” and “Banker.”
As a “gentleman rider,” “cross country,” over “hurdles” or “on


the flat” the master of the M.H.C. has had few equals, and as a
master of hounds he has gained the cordial esteem and sincere
respect of all true sportsmen. On the “box” Mr. Watson is
almost as good as he is in the “pigskin,”and it is on authentic record
that he once drove from Wangaratta to his residence at St. Kilda
between sunrise and sunset over a “bush road.” To any colonist
of standing, a glance at the map and passing remembrance of any
once-travelled “bush road” will convey an idea of the magnitude
of the feat. Mr. Watson is a large landed proprietor, and owns
the Tupall station in Riverina, and the Tintinallaga station on the
Darling.
Were, Jonathan Binns, J.P., of J. B. Were and Son, share,
finance, and exchange brokers, Melbourne, is the third son of
Nicholas Were, Esq., of Somersetshire, England, owner of entailed
and other landed estates in that county. Was born at Wellington,
same county, 25th April, 1809. He received his commercial
education of ten years in the house of Messrs. Collins and Co.,
merchants, Plymouth, Devonshire. Left England for Port Phillip,
25th July, 1839, and arrived 15th November, same year. He
commenced business immediately on his arrival, as merchant, and
commission and ship agent, having brought a considerable quantity
of merchandise, a dwellinghouse, marquees, tents, &c. He pur-
chased the land at the east end of Collins-street, to Spring-street,
where the Hon. W. Campbell has since erected his mansion, at
1 os. per foot. Mr. Were was joined by his brother George Were,
and brother-in-law Robert Stevenson Dunsford, under the firm of
Were Brothers and Co., and took the lead in shipments of wool,
&c., to London. In 1847, Mr. Were opened branch houses in
Adelaide under the style of Were, Crane and Todd, and in Sydney
as J. B. and G. Were. During his long residence in the colony Mr.
Were has held considerable interest in ships, sheep and cattle
stations, and selected and purchased half-interest in Henry
Dendy’s first special survey, now known as the Brighton Estate.
Mr. Were’s enterprises and continued energies did not, however,
result in his realising an independence. Since iB6O, with some
members of his family, he has been acting as a stock and share
broker, and financial agent, his own personal engagements being
principally given to that of exchange and bullion broker between
our banking institutions. The following is a sketch of his career
in Victoria:—lß39. — 15th November, arrived by ship William
Metcalf Captain Phillipson, in Hobson’s Bay, from Plymouth,
26th July, with wife, daughter Sophia, and son Jonathan, as cabin
passengers, and two servants. Daughter since married Sherbourne
Sheppard, J.P., of Tallagaroopna Station, Shepparton, Goulburn
River, and son married Mary, eldest daughter of Major Robert
Wallace, late sheriff of Ballarat. 1840.—Appointed a magistrate


of the colony of New South Wales, for the Port Phillip district,
by Sir George Gipps, Governor —sworn in sth October, 1840.
From this circumstance we understand Mr. Were claims to be the
first appointed J.P. for Port Phillip, and the senior magistrate of
this colony. Appointed director of Melbourne Auction Company
and for Melbourne Bridge Company. Elected president of the Mel-
bourne Bible Society. 1841. —Appointeddirectorof the Union Bank
of Australia. Elected president of the first Melbourne Chamber of
Commerce. Appointedmemberof Committee of Botanical Gardens.
Elected with A. M. M‘Crae and R. H. Browne as a standing sub-
committee of ways and means, and to promote separation from
New South Wales. Elected member of committee of Melbourne
Hospital. Elected member of the Philosophical Society, which
merged into the Royal Society; member of council for several
years, and now a life member. Elected foundation and life mem-
ber of the Royal Society of Antiquaries of Copenhagen, and
corresponding agent of the Society. 1842. —Appointed agent to
Lloyd’s Association of London; appointed a magistrate for Mel-
bourne. 1843. —Appointed member of the board for passing
Government immigrants. Appointed member of the board of
Melbourne steam navigation. Appointed agent for Alliance Fire
and Life Assurance Co. of London. 1851. —Appointed Portuguese
Consul-General for Australia and Van Diemen’s Land; Consul for
Chilian Republic. 1852. —Elected president Melbourne Chamber
of Commerce. Appointed first agent to the Peninsular and
Oriental Steam Navigation Company. 1853. —Appointed Consul
for Sweden and Norway; Vice-Consul for Spain; Consul for Den-
mark; Vice-Consul for Brazil; Consul for Hamburg; and Consul
for Lubeck. 1854. —Appointed agent for the Imperial Royal
Austrian Lloyd’s Steam Navigation Company, Trieste. Appointed
agent for the Underwriters at Hamburg and Lubeck. 1856. —
Elected first member for Brighton in the Legislative Assembly,
under new Constitution, opposed by J. D. Wood, barrister. Ap-
pointed returning officer for Southern Province, and returning
officer for district of Brighton. 1867. —Appointed commissioner
for Western Australia, at the Intercolonial Exhibition held in
Melbourne, and commissioner for taking affidavits and acknow-
ledgments of deeds of married women by the Chief Justice of
and for Western Australia. Appointed agent for the following insu-
rance companies:—German Lloyd, Berlin; General Insurance
Company, Vienna; General Society for Insurance, Dresden; Swiss
Transport Insurance Company, Zurich. 1870. —Appointed Consul
for the Republic of Peru. 1873. —Created, under letters patent,
by His Majesty, Christian IX. of Denmark, Chevalier of the 3rd
class of the order of Dannebrog (Standard of Denmark) which
confers the rank and title of Knight Commander. 1874. —Created
by King Oscar of Sweden and Norway, Knight of the Order of Wasa.


WestOll, Frank, eldest and only son of the late T. A. Weston,
M.D., of New Orleans, United States; born same place, 1838.
Educated at Poughkeepsie, on the Hudson River. Brought up to
the medical profession, but did not finish his training in that
direction, having taken a fancy to the dramatic and show business
at a very early age. About 1852 he left college and joined a small
dramatic company in St. Louis. After a varied experience of four
or five years he started on his own account in the patent medicine
business, which was entirely confined to the “Wizard Oil,” the
receipt of which he inherited from his father. Travelled over the
whole of the Western States and also the Southern States, even-
tually reaching California. In 1864 left San Francisco by the
Alice schooner, calling at Honolulu and Tahiti, and reaching
Sydney in the early part of 1865, where he at once proceeded to
manufacture his “Wizard Oil,” but finding Sydney rather slow,
after a few months started for Victoria and settled down in
Melbourne, making that city his head-quarters. He associated
himself with the house of F. and J. Hemmons, wholesale
druggists, with whom he has been connected ever since. In 1869
he opened St. George’s Hall with a minstrel band, under the name
of Weston and Hussey’s Minstrels. In 1870 took the Haymarket
Theatre for three months, his being the last company that
appeared before it was burnt down. Went to New Zealand about
the end of the year, and after a successful tour, and establishing
agents there, he returned to Melbourne, having established manu-
factories for his “Wizard Oil” in Melbourne, and more recently in
Sydney. He has been a lecturer, using that as a medium for pub-
licity in all the towns of all the colonies with considerable success,
having penetrated to the remotest hamlets and villages of the
colonies. In 1874 he published the first and only Sunday news-
paper in the colonies at Sydney, called the Sunday Newsman ,
successfully for four months, and sold out when he left for Victoria.
Under a change of title the enterprise is still carried on. Married
in 1869, at Melbourne, Matilda, only daughter of John Crimp,
Esq., of Adelaide.
Whitelaw, John, J.P., of Alexandra, Victoria, third son ot
George Whitelaw, of Glasgow, shipbuilder, born 17th August,
1819, at Kelvingrove, Scotland, educated University of Glasgow,
and brought up as a Presbyterian minister. Before completing
his collegiate course he was induced to start for New South Wales
in 1837, having received an appointment through Dr. Lang from
Lord Glenelg, the then Secretary for the Colonies. At the age of
eighteen Mr. Whitelaw was installed as one of the teachers or
professors of the Australian College in Sydney. From this period
to the breaking out of the gold discoveries he was mainly engaged
in teaching. He was amongst one of the first on the Turon


River diggings, and was instrumental in procuring a reduction of
the license fee of 30s. per month. At this time (1851) he was a
special correspondent for the Sydney Empire and a contributor to
the Bathurst Free Press , in which papers he set forth the interests
of the miners. In 1853 he with a party started overland for the
Ovens goldfield, in Victoria, where he was moderately successful.
The hunting for licenses and the hard treatment of miners roused
his indignation, and he, with the assistance of the Hon. Angus
Mackay, called a public meeting, which was attended by over
4000 miners, when resolutions were carried condemnatory of the
license and its mode of collection. Mr. Whitelaw then began
business in Melbourne as an auctioneer. Mr. Whitelaw next
occupied a position of trust in connection with Cornish and
Bruce’s first railway contracts, which he held for three years. On
resigning, he engaged for a short time at Gisborne in farming pur-
suits. He stood as a candidate for the Legislative Assembly for
West Bourke when the late Mr. Richard Heales appealed to the
country, and was defeated, J. C. Riddell, J. T. Smith, and Capt.
(now Sir Charles) M‘Mahon being elected. He then started for
the new Eldorado at Woods Point, where he started the
Woods Point Mountaineer , a bi-weekly newspaper, in conjunction
with Mr. Goulding. Six years afterwards, in 1868, he removed his
plant to Alexandra, and issued a newspaper called the Alexandra
Times , which he has conducted for the last nine years. During
this period he became a candidate for Dalhousie, but withdrew in
consequence of another candidate of the same principles coming
forward. At the last general election in May, 1877, he was again
a candidate for Kilmore and Anglesey in the Liberal interest, but
was unsuccessful. Mr. Whitelaw was made a territorial magistrate
by the present Administration, having previously occupied the
positions of chairman of the Gisborne Road Board, mayor of
Woods Point, president of the shire of Alexandra, and president
of the pastoral and agricultural society of Alexandra, and
numerous other local and charitable institutions. On 9th
November, 1877, he was presented with a handsome silver tea
and coffee service and a gold watch and chain for his numerous
public services as journalist and president of the shire of Alexan-
dra. Mr. Whitelaw claims to be the lineal descendant of old
John Whitelaw, the martyr, and is at present engaged in a law
suit for the recovery of ;£ 1,500,000, the present estimated value
of the confiscated properties and estates. He married Elizabeth,
eldest daughter of John Simpson, Esq., of Liverpool, and aider-
man of that city, in September, 1842.
Whiteman, John, J.P., Melbourne, eldest son of the late John
Whiteman, of Dunchurch, Warwickshire, blacksmith and farrier.
Born at same place about 1823; educated at local schools, and


brought up to the same business. In 1844 he left his native place
for London, and was engaged at William Field’s, the celebrated
veterinary surgeon of Oxford-street. He proceeded to Australia
by the Thomas Arbuthnot in 1850, having as shipmates Mr.
Spowers, of Ross and Spowers, Mr. Panton, P.M., and several
other now old colonists. Reached Sydney March, 1851. Mr.
Whiteman made up a party, and in August went to the
Turon, and after getting a little gold, returned to Sydney,
and recommenced his own business. In 1852 he left Sydney
for Port Phillip, and first went to work for the late Alderman
Fitzgerald. After trying his hand at several goldfields, the
weather and other causes induced him to turn back, and he
did not get to the goldfields till the following month. After a
short time went to the Ovens rush. He started in business in
Melbourne at the Royal Exchange, where the present Bank of
New South Wales now stands. He opened subsequently a
business in Geelong, but in 1856 returned to Melbourne, and
carried on his own business at Kirk’s Bazaar, having sold out at
Geelong. Went to reside at Emerald Hill in 1857. Helped to
found the Emerald Hill Dramatic Society, and in 1862 was elected
councillor to the municipality, and was so for about twelve years.
He was elected mayor in 1864, and in 1865 was presented with an
illuminated address by the councillors. In 1866 was asked to
stand for Emerald Hill at the general election for the Legislative
Assembly, and was successful. Was defeated in 1868 by Sir
George (then Mr.) Verdon by eight votes, and on his retirement
upon accepting the appointment of Agent-General three months
after, Mr. Whiteman was again elected after a severe contest.
Again elected in 1871, ’73, and ’75, and on the new Electoral Bill
becoming law, giving two members to the district, Mr. W hiteman
was defeated by Messrs. Nimmo and Lyell. Was “whip to the
M‘Culloch and Macpherson Ministries. In politics Mr. Whiteman
is a moderate Free-trader and Liberal Conservative. In literature
he has been a contributor to Punch , the Australasian , Leader , and
Bell's Life. In 1873 “Sparks and Sounds from a Colonial
Anvil,” by John Whiteman, was published by George Robertson,
of Melbourne, and received very favourable notice from the
colonial and English Press. In 1875 married Alice Anne, eldest
daughter of Mir. George Cornwell, contractor, Albert Park, his
first wife, to whom he was married in 1854, having died in 1874.
Williams, Reverend Thomas, Wesleyan minister, superin-
tendent of Emerald Hill circuit, Melbourne, was born at Horn-
castle, Lincolnshire, England, in 1815. Educated there and
at High Hill seminary, London. Joined the Wesleyan Church
when about nineteen or twenty years old. Went through the
process of trial as local preacher and a probationer as a candi-


date for the ministry. Ordained in August, 1839. Was one
of the first seven elected to commence the Fiji Mission, and
on reaching the South Seas divided his time between Lakemba
and Somosomo, and then opened the mission at Mbua and
had considerable sucess. In 1854 left Fiji and went to Adelaide,
where he stayed until he left for Victoria in 1857. In 1858
he published an illustrated book on “ Fiji and Fijians,” from which
Sir John Lubbock has largely quoted in his great work on “The
Origin of Civilisation and Primitive Condition of Man.” The
illustrations of Mr. Williams’ book as well as the letter-press have
been largely appropriated without acknowledgment of any kind,
except in the instance given, and in the “Sunday at Home.”
After having acted as superintendent of several of the principal
colonial circuits, he was elected chairman of the Geelong and
Ballarat districts in 1871. In 1872 elected chairman of the dis-
tricts of Castlemaine and Sandhurst. At the Australian Wesleyan
Conference held in Melbourne, January, 1872, he was nominated
to the highest official position in the church as president of
the conference for 1873. His nomination was confirmed by the
British Conference, and that over which he presided was a
remarkable one, being the last of its kind, embracing the whole
of the colonies, New Zealand, and the South Sea Islands,
provision having since been made for holding four annual con-
ferences in New South Wales and Queensland, Victoria and
Tasmania, New Zealand and Western Australia, and one triennial
conference including all. Mr. Williams has now settled down at
Emerald Hill, after long and arduous labours amongst savage
tribes in strange lands, and, still active and energetic, labours at his
vocation.
Willoughby, Howard, journalist, joined the reporting staff of
the Age soon after arrival in the colony in iB6O, and subsequently
joined the Argus reporting staff. Was special correspondent for
the Argus in New Zealand during the last Maori war, and
was with the head-quarters of General Cameron during the
campaign, which resulted, after severe fighting, in the conquest
of the Waikato, and the retreat of the King tribes to the interior.
Soon after his return to Victoria, Mr. Willoughby was despatched
by the Argus to Western Australia to investigate the convict
system there. His letters—showing the inordinate expense of the
system to Great Britain and its injustice to the free colonies,
to whose shoies the convicts steadily find their way—were of
gteat service to the cause, and the result of the agitation was the
abolition of the last remnant of transportation to Australia. In
1866 the Government commenced the publication of the Victoria?i
Hansard\ and Mr. Willoughby became one of the official staff.
Tiom this post he letired in 1869, subsequent upon the establish-


ment of the Daily Telegraph newspaper, of which he was editor.
Mr. Willoughby remained in charge of this journal until 1877,
when his services were again secured by the Argus as a contributor,
and to take charge of the reporting staff of that journal. Many of
Mr. Willoughby’s papers—such as “ The British Convict in Wes-
tern Australia“ Critiques on Spiritualism“ The Critic in
Church,” &c,—have attracted public attention, and have been re-
published with success.
Wilson, Hon. William, M.L.C., after a five months’ voyage
from the Clyde, arrived in Hobson’s Bay early in 1853. In little
more than twelve months he commenced business in the timber
trade at Geelong as a member of the firm of Tate, Wilson and
Wright, not being quite twenty years old at the time. After
pulling through the commercial crisis of 1854, the partnership was
dissolved, and he chartered the clipper schooner Sybil, and sailed
for Dunedin, New Zealand, in search of produce. At Port
Chalmers he loaded up with wheat, oats, and potatoes, and such
was the primitive state of affairs there at that time that everything
was drawn on sledges, there not being a single vehicle in the town
or port, and the Otago Daily Times was a single sheet not larger
than letter paper. There were no banks, and sovereigns had to
be taken to pay for everything. Postal communication was very
rare, and the arrival of the Sybil with files of Melbourne papers
was quite an event. On his return there was a difficulty in dis-
posing of the cargo, in consequence of the arrival of two or three
vessels from Glasgow, with oats. The Fiery Creek rush just at this
time took place, and Mr. Wilson chartered teams and got there
within a fortnight of the beginning of the rush, and sold his oats
at 1 a bushel. Afterwards bought a business there, and on the
discovery of the Canton Lead at Ararat devoted himself to his
wholesale store, which he opened there opposite the Camp. After
the passage of the Municipal Bill he was one of the first town
councillors, and about the end of the third year sold out and
went into pastoral pursuits, first on the Lower Goulburn and then
on Lower Wimmera, and was fairly successful. Again went into
business as a partner of the firm of Boyd, M‘Naught and Boyd.
On these three retiring, Mr. Wilson became the head of the
present firm of Wilson, Crosbie and Co. About this time he re-
presented Ararat in the Legislative Assembly, defeating Mr.
Girdlestone, and heading the poll by 150 votes. He was returned
five times, representing Ararat for eight years, and was twice re-
turned without opposition as a Minister of the Crown. Was
Commissioner of Railways in the M‘Culloch Government of 1869,
but had hardly time to get sworn in when the Government was
defeated on a motion by Mr. Byrne, based on the appointment of
Mr. Rolfe to office without having a seat in the House. On Sir


James M‘Culloch taking office after defeat of Mr. Macpherson s
first Government, Mr. Wilson joined him as Commissioner of
Railways, and remained in fifteen months. At the following
general election he was defeated by Mr. Carroll, and soon after
offered himself for the Eastern Province, vacant by the death of
Mr. Williams, and was returned after a show of opposition.
About 1873 he became director of National Bank of Australasia
after an exciting contest, and was chairman of the Board in 1876.
He is still largely interested in pastoral pursuits both in Victoria
and New South Wales.
Wilson, Sir Samuel, Knt. Bac. (1875), of Ercildoune, Vic-
toria, is the sixth son of the late Samuel Wilson, farmer and
landowner, of county Antrim, Ireland. He was born at Bally-
cloughan in 1832, and educated at Ballymena academy. He
showed a special aptitude for mathematical studies, his desire being
to become a civil engineer, and he distanced his class in mathe-
matics, passing, in fact, beyond his teacher’s abilities. At one
examination he took thirteen prizes, ten of which were first prizes,
and won the silver medal for mathematics. On leaving school he
had three years’ experience with his brother-in-law, a large manu-
facturer of linen, at that time an important industry in the north of
Ireland, and then commenced business on his own account, rent-
ing from his brother the Knowhead estate, containing machinery
for finishing linen, bleaching greens, and a corn mill, together
with an excellent farm. An elder brother, who had returned from
Australia on a visit, advising him to go out to Victoria, he deter-
mined to cast in his lot with his brothers, who had been in
Australia about thirteen years. He arrived in Melbourne in May,
1852, when everyone was in a fever of excitement about the
goldfields, and carried away by the wonderful tales of success,
Mr. Wilson joined a party with his brother-in-law, Dr. Hammill,
and at Ballarat, Fryers Creek, the Ovens, and Bendigo goldfields,
worked as a miner with some degree of success. A few months
of this laborious and uncongenial life convinced him that better
things could be done in pastoral pursuits, and leaving Bendigo, he
rode across country to his brothers’ stations on the Wimmera.
At that time all the best station hands had gone off to the diggings,
and it was with the greatest difficulty that the necessary labour
could be obtained for the care of the stock. Mr. Wilson was
given the management of Kewell station with some 20,000 sheep,
and his energies for a time were taxed to the utmost. Having in
the practical work of station management obtained a knowledge of
sheep-farming, he decided to sell a small estate in Ireland that had
been bequeathed to him, and to invest his money in a sheep-sta-
tion. He joined his brothers in the purchase of Longerenong,
one of the best stations, if not the best, on the Wimmera, for


and the purchase was so successful, that in about four
years the profits paid for the station. His engineering tastes were
of great service in developing the large tract of unwatered country
on this station, and the dams and water-channels made by him
were of great value in opening up that rich pastoral district. After
this several small stations were bought, and an investment was
made in the Yanko station, Murrumbidgee, New South Wales,
which was purchased without stock for In a few years
this run was so improved by judicious expenditure in fencing, dams,
wells, &c., and by bringing the waters of the Murrumbidgee River
in a cutting, to the cost of which some his neighbours contributed,
that the run, which when purchased had only one waterhole on
its whole area, was so well supplied with water that in a few years
it was rendered capable of carrying a full stock of sheep, and the
clip of a single year has exceeded the original purchase-money.
It is unnecessary to recount his further purchases, but after a
time circumstances made it desirable that the old firm of Wilson
Brothers, which had had been so successful, should be dissolved,
and at a meeting of the partners it was agreed that the properties
should be divided into two groups, and that each brother should
put in a sealed envelope an offer to buy or sell, and Mr. Samuel
Wilson became the purchaser of the whole of the property belong-
ing to the firm. This was at the end of the great drought of
1868-9, when pastoral property was in a very depressed state. In
a few days after the purchase the drought broke up, in about
three years the liabilities undertaken in these purchases were liqui-
dated, and for six years the seasons were most favourable. It
was at this time becoming evident that sheep-farming (squatting)
was becoming, from the increase of selection, too hazardous,
and, by way of consolidating his capital, Mr. Wilson decided
to sell out of a portion of his sheep stations and invest partly
in freehold estate and partly beyond risk of loss by selec-
tion for a time, and he sold “ Longerenong,” “Coree,” and
“ Goolgumbla,” and invested in “ Mount Bute,” “ Marathon,” and
“ Corangamite ” estates, and being tempted by the offer of Ercil-
doune, he bought that beautiful property, celebrated for its breed of
merinos. Being from 1500 to 2300 feet above the sea level, Ercil-
doune has a cool and equable climate, and it has become his
favourite residence during the summer heats. His energies were
not yet slackened, for he extended his operations to the Darling
district, New South Wales, and Peak Downs, Queensland, and
still further west in that colony, where he holds a large cattle
station on the Diamantina river. Whilst thus busied in pursuits
profitable to himself and advantageous to the colonies, Mr.
Wilson was not unmindful of other duties. He was twice elected
a member of the Legislative Assembly for the Wimmera, and
since 1875 has represented the Western Province in the Upper


House of Legislature. He has always shown great interest, and
has spent much time and money, in the cause of acclimatisation.
He has devoted £ 1000 to the introduction of salmon to Victorian
waters, and believes that he has succeeded in placing live English
salmon from Tasmanian ova in the Gellibrand River, a beautiful
stream, flowing from fern-tree glens near the base of Mount Sabine,
one of the highest peaks of the Cape Otway ranges. He has
also been successful in introducing the Californian salmon. The
introduction by him of sea fish into the salt waters of Lake Coran-
gamite, which is the largest sheet of inland water in the colony, is
also said to be successful. In the interests of acclimatisation he
has written an interesting and valuable work on the Angora goat,
and a paper on ostrich farming. In 1874 Mr. Wilson presented
the University of Melbourne with a munificent donation, which
with accumulated interest now amounts to about and
lies to the credit of the Melbourne University to build a hall for
grand academical ceremonies. In 1861 he married a daughter of
the Hon. W, Campbell, and has four sons and three daughters
living. The Queen in 1875 conferred upon Mr. Wilson the honour
of knighthood as an acknowledgment of services rendered to the
colonies.
Winter, James, J.P., of the firm of Winter Brothers, of Turrin-
gili, Toolamba Estate, Murchison, is the second son of the late
John Winter, Lauderdale, Ballarat; born at Edinburgh, 1834, and
came out to Victoria in 1841 as a child with his parents. Educated
in Melbourne, and brought up to pastoral pursuits. In 1850 his
father purchased the Junction Station, near the Devil’s River,
Merton, of Lockhart and Mackenzie. Struggled through the
gold-fever period, acting as their own shepherds for a year
and a-half, until things began to right themselves in 1853-4.
In 1857 Colbinabbin Station was bought, and several others
in the Rodney district, at a cost of about jQ 200,000, by Mr. Winter
and his brothers. They shortly after sold the Junction Station for
After these runs had for the most part been improved,
and a supply of water obtained, that country was cut up under the
Land Act of 1865, and in 1866 200,000 acres were selected in
six months. The firm was obliged to secure a large tract of land
on their various runs to preserve their flocks from annihilation,
and this land ultimately became freehold. In 1868 the brothers
dissolved partnership, in consequence of the properties becoming
so detached, and their father, the late Mr. John Winter, arbitrated
in the division of the property. The Toolamba Estate became the
portion of Mr. James Winter. In 1870 he was elected president
of the shire council of Waranga, of which he had been a member
from 1864, and he was made a territorial magistrate by the
Kerferd Government. In 1873 the rush for the Goulburn


Valley lands took place, and in about one year the whole of the
Toolamba Run was selected. Mr. Winter claims to have supplied
the selectors with water from his tanks, without which they would
have had to abandon their selections. At the latter end of 1873
a railway league was formed —of which he was elected president
to bring a railway down the valley of the Goulburn. His property
is all securely fenced and subdivided into fifty paddocks, with
reservoirs in each. The land held by him was adjudged by arbi-
tration under Duffy’s Act to carry one sheep to five acres; by
improvements he has made the land carry nearly one sheep to one
acre, and if, as the proverb has it—“ The man who makes
two blades of grass grow where only one grew before
is a benefactor to mankind,” Mr. Winter claims to have
done something in that direction to earn the title. In 1871
he married the daughter of the Hon. W. H. Pettitt.
Winter, William Irving, J.P., of Stanhope, county of Rodney,
came to the colony with his friends in 1841, is third son of the
late John Winter, of Lauder, Berwickshire, Scotland, and Lauder-
dale, Ballarat, and Janet Margaret Irving, of Bonshaw,
Scotland. He was educated at the Scotch College and brought
up to pastoral pursuits, having been first intended for a military
career. The gold discoveries determined that, and he assisted
his father in carrying on the Bonshaw Estate, near Ballarat, under
the difficulties of want of labour at that time. Having abandoned
the idea of entering the army, his father purchased the Colbinabbin
Station with others, which with his brother, the late John Winter
he took delivery of in 1857. At the time of the friendly disso-
lution of partnership between the brothers in 1868, the Stanhope
Estate fell to his share. It is now a freehold of 31,000 acres, upon
which he has spent some in improvements, and built
extensively, and is now (1877) building a commodious mansion.
He was a member of the shire council of Waranga for nine years,
two of which he was president. Was made a territorial magistrate
by the Minister of Justice of the Sladen Administration (now
Judge Fellows). Mr. J. Winter personally superintended the
Privy Council appeals in 1875, the Government claiming a
penalty of ss. per acre on 24,000 acres, and on that account
he went to England in 1874. He stood for the Eastern Province
against Sir Francis Murphy—Mr. Patrick O’Brien coming for-
ward at the eleventh hour, Mr. Winter retired in favour of
Sir Francis, who was elected. In 1868 Mr. Winter married the
only daughter of Mr. William Drayton Taylor, J.P., of Noorilien,
Goulburn.
Wood, The Hon. John Dennistoun, M.P. John Dennistoun
Wood was born in 1831; is a native of Tasmania, and was


christened Dennistoun, after the place of his birth. His father,
Captain Wood, was a retired officer of the Honourable East
India Company’s service. When about eleven years of age young
Wood was sent to England to finish his education; subsequently
he studied at one of the Scottish universities, and in 1859 was
admitted to the English bar at the Middle Temple. In 1853
Mr. Wood arrived in Melbourne, and was at once admitted as a
member of the Victorian bar, where he soon took a creditable
position, and rapidly distinguished himself as an able lawyer,
reaping the reward in a highly remunerative practice. In 1857
Mr. Wood entered the arena of politics as M.P. of the Ovens
district, under the O’Shanassy Administration, when he took
office as Solicitor-General. In a very brief space of time the
youthful legislator distinguished himself in debate as an ardent
advocate for the extension of the franchise. On the dissolution
of the Parliament of which he was a member, Mr. Wood
again appealed to his constituency, but was unsuccessful. After
his defeat as candidate for the Ovens, he stood for Gipps Land,
but was again beaten by a large number of votes. For some
time subsequent to these failures Mr. Wood was relegated to
private life, but at the next election he was returned to the
Legislative Assembly as member for Warrnambool, and accepted
the portfolio of Minister of Justice. He retired from office
in 1863. As a lawyer and legislator Mr. Wood has gained a
solid reputation; whilst as a speaker he made himself distin-
guished for the combative and impressive style of his speeches.
Shortly after his retirement from public life, John Dennistoun
Wood returned to the mother country, where he now resides;
practises before the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council, and
takes an active interest in Victorian affairs.
Woods, Hon. John, M.P. for Stawell, Commissioner of Railways
and Roads, and Vice-President of Board of Land and Works,
1877, is the second son of Richard Woods, of Liverpool, England,
freeman of that city, as is also his son, who was born there, sth
November, 1822. Educated there, and brought up as a locomotive
engineer under Thomas Milling and John Grey, of the Liverpool
and Manchester Railway. When about half out of his apprentice-
ship, his father and Thomas Worsdell accepted and entered into
an engagement with the Leipzig and Dresden Railway Company,
and Mr. Woods finished his training in Germany with them. He
returned to England, went thence to the United States of America,
and after visiting Upper and Lower Canada, revisited England
about 1844-5. Then worked for a short time at Crewe, Cheshire,
at the railway works. Way afterwards foreman at Old Park Iron
Works, Staffordshire, Lloyd, Foster & Co., emplowing about 3000
hands. Then got an offer of entire management of the Dallam


Forge, Warrington, Lancashire, steam rolling mills and steam
hammer foundry, chiefly occupied in fitting and doing railway
work. Took first prize at Exhibition of 1851 for hammer scrap
railway axles. Came out to Victoria 17th November, 1852, and
went to the Ovens, paying a ton for loading. Had been
offered a Government appointment to superintend erection of
machinery, but declined. Was not very successful at the Ovens,
and left for the M‘lvor rush, and was within hearing of the shots
fired at the time the private escort was “stuck up,” but no one
knew what the firing was about until the news was brought in by
one of the troopers. Went thence to the Goulburn rush; cartage
at first 5 per cwt.; the road was strewn with all kinds of goods,
tools and household fixings, abandoned by their owners as too
cumbersome to get along with. The 4-lb. loaf was eleven shillings.
Was one of the miners appointed to wait upon Mr. Commissioner
Willoughby to get the license reduced from 30s. per month to 10s.
There was talk of armed resistance, but Mr. Woods advised peace-
able measures, and in 1854 addressed his first public meeting and
advised the men to divide themselves into squads of a hundred,
and appoint one man as spokesman, and deputationise the commis-
sioner. About this time bought a third share in a saw mill
at Green’s Point, eight miles from Kilmore. Subsequently went
to Broadrneadows and thence to Blackwood, at the time twelve
persons were killed by falling trees during a great storm. Thence
to the rush at Mount Ararat, and thence to Fiery Creek, being
one of 30,000 persons collected there in ten days. Went thence
to the Canton Lead, which indicates the turning-point in his
career; saw the Chinese tents burned down to get at the rich wash-
dirt concealed in them, and the Chinese flying for their lives. The
representation of the goldfields in the Legislature, mining on
private property, and settlement of people on the land, were
questions at this time advocated by Mr. Woods. The Convention
was started in Melbourne, and a branch at Ararat, of which he
was president. At the time of the inauguration of the new
Constitution, there were registration forms for the electors to fill
up. Government on being asked what provision was made for
registration, sent word that forms could be got from the Post-office.
For a population of 25,000 the authorities had provided 250 forms.
The committee of the Convention printed 10,000 forms and
organised a regular canvass for registration, charging sixpence to
pay expenses, and in this way registered about 8000, and after-
paying all expenses, handed to the local charities. Mr.
Woods was member of the first local (mining) court and of the
mining board that took its place. He was connected with a deep
and wet mining claim which left him penniless, when he left Ararat
for Pleasant Creek, and erected machinery at Stawell for the St.
George’s G. M. Company. He took a leading part in carrying out


the old Convention ticket, and was one of the delegates to the
Mining Board Conference in Melbourne. Whilst putting up the
machinery at Stawell, a deputation waited upon him to ask him
to stand for the Legislative Assembly, and in 1859 he stood for
Crowlands, being opposed by Messrs. Jennings, Chirnside, and
Macredie, and came off victorious. Has stood seven times, and
been beaten once; and at the general election in May, 1877, stood
for Stawell, and had the largest majority over his opponent of any
one in the colony. In 1859, immediately after his first election,
established himself in Melbourne, and soon began to take an
active part in debate in the House, especially in relation to the
Occupation Licenses and the Land Bills. In 1861, he proposed a
land tax on all land not improved by cultivation. Was present
when the attack was made on the House during the debate on
Nicholson’s Land Bill. He and Mr. Wilson Grey spoke to the
crowd, some 10,000, in Paddy’s Market, urging them to disperse,
and not give any excuse to the authorities to attack them. Mr.
Woods claims to have saved the House when the outer and inner
doors were burst open; he was just in time to block the doors
leading to the old lavatory with a short plank that happened to be
handy. At the general election for 1864-5, he was beaten at
Crowlands, and afterwards went into the Government service as
engineer in charge of works at the Malmsbury reservoir. Was
summarily dismissed with Messrs. Shakespear and Christopherson,
without a chance of saying a word, by Messrs. M‘Culloch,
Macpherson, and Mackay. Applied over and over again for an
investigation without effect. In 1870, was again elected for Crow-
lands against David Blair, Ronald Campbell, and W. O’Calligan
and others. In August, 1875, became Minister of Railways for
first time, and had not been in office a fortnight when he found
the goods tariff in confusion. For instance, goods from Woodend
to Melbourne were charged £2, from Woodend to Sandhurst
though both about same distance, and both down hill. A truck
of wine from Geelong to Melbourne, 305., from Melbourne an
equal distance, j£ 6. The tariff was crammed full of such anomalies,
and produce was rotting because the railway could not bring it.
Mr. Woods claims to have swept these anomalies away, and that
the result was an excess of revenue over the estimate of the
department of The next year the department was
enabled to make an estimate of over over previous
estimates of revenue, and now in 1877, it averages over per
week more than last year. He regards it as poetical justice that
having left office after two years he should come back to be present
and preside over the triumph of the reforms he instituted, and
he affirms that these results are not in any way due to new lines,
which at present rather act as suckers than as feeders to the old
lines.


Wragge, George, J.P., of Melbourne, eldest son of George
Wragge, of Chaddesden, near Derby, born 20th January, 1825, at
Alton Hall, near Wirkworth. Educated at Mr. Goodacre’s
Academy, Standard Hill, Nottingham. Was apprenticed to Mr.
C. Wilcockson, chemist and druggist, of same place. Arrived in
Melbourne in 1852, and went into business as chemist and
druggist, in Collins-street, joining Mr. Hood, and afterwards
Mr. F. Cade, in the premises he still resides in. In April, iB6O,
was elected unopposed to City Council for Latrobe ward. Was
re-elected three times, and three times as alderman. In 1862 was
elected president of the Pharmaceutical Society of Victoria,
and in October, 1864, was elected mayor of Melbourne, and
installed on the 9th November following. On the 9th May,
1865, he gave a public dinner in the old Town Hall, the only one
given in the old council chamber, His Excellency Sir Charles
Darling, Major-General Chute, and Sir Redmond Barry being
among the guests. A beautifully bound illuminated address was
presented to him on 9th November, 1865, upon his retiring from
office. In an address to the Governor from the council in 1870,
it is stated that Mr. Wragge, when councillor in 1862-3 and 1870,
alluded to the fact that a fragment of a building had for ten
years served the purpose of a town hall, and that a town hall
worthy of the city was an absolute want. He claims to have
been the originator and chief mover, with the aid of Mr. J. S.
Butters financially, in the erection of the hall that now graces the
city, of which the foundation-stone was laid by the Duke of
Edinburgh. Mr. Wragge was chairman of the health committee,
and helped to do away with cesspits, &c. Aided in the introduc-
tion of the great organ, steam rollers, and tarred roads. Was
chairman of the festival committee on the marriage of H.R.EI.
the Prince of Wales in 1863. He claims to have succeeded
in reducing the cost of lighting the city, and doubled the amount
of lights without increasing the cost to the citizens. The con-
tract that had been per light was reduced to by a clause
in specification, allowing the Collingwood Gas Company to
compete. He was also appointed by the Government a member
of a board to report upon the survey of the metropolis for
sewerage purposes. In 1870 he was presented with a handsome and
costly claret jug on the opening of the new Town Hall, that being the
first business transacted in the new chamber. On the occasion of his
leaving the council and retiring altogether from municipal life, he
was presented with an illuminated address on the 16th March,
1874, headed to George Wragge, alderman, ex-mayor, and J.P.,
and signed by John MTlwraith, mayor, and the town clerk. Mr.
Wragge was a second time married 14th July, 1863, to Adelaide,
third daughter of the late J. C. Fades, of Melbourne.


Wrixoil, Hon. Henry J., son of the late Judge Wrixon, was
born in Dublin, 1839, and arrived in Australia in 1850. Went
home in 1858, and was educated at the University of Dublin,
where he obtained two gold medals from the historical society
branch of the University. Was called to the Irish bar in iB6O.
At this time Mr. Wrixon was connected with the press, and lived
by it until he came out to Victoria again in 1863, and was admitted
to the bar here towards the end of that year. In 1864 he stood
for Dundas against Mr. Fairbairn and Mr. Macpherson, but was
at the bottom of the poll. From this time he practised his pro-
fession with success until 1868. Was junior counsel in the
celebrated cases of the Queen v. Beaney, and Cornish and Bruce
v. The Queen, with Mr. Dawson and Mr. Aspinall—the only trial
at bar that has taken place in the colony—and a verdict was
recorded for In 1868 he contested Belfast with Mr.
Gordon Evans, and was returned by a considerable majority. In
1870 he took office as Solicitor-General in the M‘Culloch Ministry,
was re-elected without opposition, and was in office about twenty
months. He brought in and carried “The Criminal Law Amend-
ment Bill,” 1871, which introduced flogging as a punishment in
the case of criminal attacks on women and children. When the
Hon. Mr. Francis brought his Electoral Bill before the House,
Mr. Wrixon moved a series of resolutions embodying what he
described as “proportional representation,” based upon Mr.
Thomas Hare’s propositions to reform the English mode of election
by giving or “restoring unfettered action to the electors, and
discarding altogether the argument for what has been called the
representation of minorities.” Although supported by the Hon.
George Higinbotham, the resolutions were shelved by a large
majority. The Electoral Act of 1876 abolished Mr. Wrixon’s old
constituency, and he determined by the advice of his friends not
to offer himself for election, but to bide his time.
Young’, Edmond Mackenzie, manager of the Australian
Mortgage, Land and Finance Company (Limited), Melbourne,
fifth son of Mr. William Young, merchant, Coleraine, county
Derry, Ireland, born same place 1838. Educated at the local
academy, and in 1853 entered the service of the Belfast Banking
Company at its Coleraine branch, and was appointed accountant
in 1856. In the following year he resigned, having determined
to emigrate to Australia. Leaving Ireland in 1857, he arrived in
Melbourne in June of the same year, and a few days afterwards
entered the service of the Union Bank of Australia. In
February, 1859, he was offered the post of assistant accountant in
the National Bank of Australasia. On the retirement of Mr,
Gillies the manager, and Mr. Greville the accountant, Mr. Young
was placed in charge of the bank pending the appointment of a new


manager. The late Mr. Alex. Cunningham became manager, and
Mr. Young was appointed accountant. In 1863 Mr. Young was
promoted to the position of manager to the bank in South
Australia, and held that position for nearly seven years. In 1870
he was appointed general manager of the bank in Melbourne,
succeeding Mr. Frederick Wright. Before departing from
Adelaide Mr. Young was entertained at a public banquet by the
leading colonists of South Australia, and presented with compli-
mentary addresses, and a testimonial in plate. In 1872 he
severed his connection with the National Bank of Australasia.
In 1873 proceeded to Europe; on his return, in 1874,
accepted the management of the Australian Mortgage, Land and
Finance Company, a position he still maintains. He is largely
interested in pastoral pursuits. In 1864 Mr. Young married the
eldest daughter of the late Richard Bowen Colley, of Adelaide,
one of the earliest colonists of South Australia.
Zevenboom, John, J.P., native of Holland, arrived by the
ship Janies Baines in June, 1856. For the first five years of Ins
residence in the colony he was engaged in mining pursuits with
varying success. Early in 1862 Mr. Zevenboom started in trade
as brush manufacturer; at first he met with little success, but
ultimately made it one of the industries of Victoria. Mr.
Zevenboom was a member of the shire council of Berwick
for some years; he was also a director of the Australian and
European Bank, of which he still remains on the extra board;
and held office in various public institutions for several years, and
has been an active member of the Masonic body since 1849.
He was made a territorial magistrate during the Kerferd Adminis-
tration in 1875. He is now vice-president of the Victorian
Manufacturers’ Association, and holds the same position in
the Mendelssohn Oratorical Society of Melbourne. He is a
member of the committee of the Benevolent Institution, and one
of the commissioners of the Paris Exhibition for the colony.




SUPPLEMENTARY LIST
Archer, William Henry, Knight of the Order of St. Gregory
the Great, barrister-at-law, justice of the peace, Fellow of the
Linnaean Society, Fellow of the Institute of Actuaries (London),
honorary member of the Medical Society of Victoria, honorary
corresponding member of the Statistical Society of London • and
Secretary for Lands, Victoria. Born in London in the year 1825.
Placed under Mr. F. G. P. Neison, the eminent actuary, in a life
assurance company, which was the first to employ tables for
diseased as well as healthy lives. Dr. William Farr, the celebrated
medical statist, also held an appointment in the same office.
During the seven years Mr. Archer was working with Mr, Neison,
he moved in a circle of scientific and literary men, and hence
Tooke speaks of him in his “History of Prices” (6th vol.), as
“reared in the ranks of the Statistical Society.” Mr. Neison
employed him privately to aid in carrying out his great work,
“ Contributions to Vital Statistics,” and to secure data from the
friendly societies of England and Scotland. Mr. Archer was
enthusiastically assiduous in regard to the latter institutions, and
was largely instrumental in bringing about a reform in the great
societies of Oddfellows (Manchester Unity) and Ancient Order of
Foresters. He also came prominently forward, both by speech
and pen, on behalf of the reform of the Catholic guilds. His
knowledge of the latter institutions was consequent upon his
becoming a Catholic in 1848, he having been received into the
church by Cardinal (then Bishop) Wiseman, at Saint Edmund’s
College, Hertfordshire. He then practised as an actuary in London,
where, as Arthur Scratchley, the Sadlerian lecturer of Queen’s Col-
lege, Cambridge, testifies (“History of Savings Banks”), his abilities
were well known. He twice visited the Continent in his actuarial
capacity, with the view of developing a novel scheme of assurance
in France, Belgium, and Holland. He also was engaged on the


Press, both as editor and contributor, till the latter end of 1852,
when he followed his parents and brother, who had settled in
Australia. In the early part of 1853 he was, at the invitation of
the Colonial Secretary, Captain Lonsdale, afforded an opportunity
of drafting a comprehensive system of legal and statistical regis-
tration, with the view of carrying out a recently passed enactment
tor the registration of births, deaths, and marriages; and Mr.
Archer’s plan, minute and comprehensive as it was, met with the
cordial approval of Lieutenant-Governor Latrobe, who gave Mr.
Archer carte blanche to carry out the measure in his own way.
Thus the Registrar-General’s Department came to be founded by
Mr. Archer, and during the remainder of the year 1853 he, as
acting registrar-general, was engaged in laying the foundations of a
superstructure which is admitted by the highest authorities as
having placed Victoria in the front rank of statistical states. When
Mr. Latrobe left the colony, he appointed his private secretary,
Major Norman Campbell, registrar-general, and Mr. Archer, his
assistant. This created at the time great indignation both with
the press and with the public, but Mr. Archer, having put his hand
to his work, determined to persevere on his own lines to the end,
and he was rewarded in the hearty co-operation of his new chief.
In 1854 he published the “ Statistical Register of Victoria,” in
which he collected together a vast amount of facts from old
Government records and private manuscript memoranda furnished
to him by Captain Lonsdale. Lieutenant-Governor Latrobe took
great interest in this work, and aided in correcting proofs. Mr,
Archer then travelled on horseback nearly all over the colony, to
smooth the course of the new registration system by instructing
deputy-registrars and by aiding the clergy of all denominations to
appreciate the public utility of the scheme, and was fortunate
enough to secure their hearty goodwill. In 1855 he was married
at St. Francis s, by the Catholic Bishop of Melbourne, to Miss
Mary Charnley Nind, daughter of Captain Philip Pitt Nind, R.N.
In 1857 he started a statistical paper called “Facts and Figures,”
which had considerable success, until he was compelled to
relinquish it from the sheer impossibility of editing it and dis-
charging his public duties at the same time. He also delivered
the first of a proposed series of lectures, to be entitled “ Noctes
Catholicse, which series was not continued, through the pressure
of Government work. The first lecture was on “ Catholic
Education and Civilisation, Past and Present,” and went through
four editions. In 185 7 also he was appointed a member of the Board
of Education, in the room of Sir John (then Mr.) O’Shanassy, who
became Chief Secretary. In May, 1858, he was entrusted with a
mission from the Victorian Government to that of New South
Wales, for the purpose of discovering records in relation to Vic-
toria, and he was successful in securing a large mass of law


documents affecting private property, as well as a great quantity
of hitherto missing and unpublished official statistics. In 1859
Major Campbell died, and Mr. Archer received the appointment
of registrar-general. In 1859 he was also appointed a Royal com-
missioner to inquire into the Civil Service of the colony. In iB6O
he produced a report in quarto, entitled “Statistical Notes on the
Progress of Victoria from 1835 to i 860,” in which many new facts
came to light, and certain interesting problems were brought under
discussion. In 1861 he commenced his essays on the “Progress
of Victoria.” In 1862 the Real Property Act came into force, and
upon Mr. Archer, as registrar-general, devolved the duty of de-
partmentally carrying out the measure. This he commenced in
the spirit which actuated Mr. Torrens, the author of a similar law
in South Australia. Mr. Archer and Mr. Torrens had for a con-
siderable time previous held intimate correspondence on the
subject, and both gentlemen were moved by an earnest desire to
see the principles of the Act carried out as a lay rather than as a
legal measure. This was, however, not approved of by the
Attorney-General of the day, and after a year or more of somewhat
disheartening labour, Mr. Archer suggested that he should be
relieved of all responsibility in connection with the measure. His
suggestion was approved by the Government, and as soon as
possible the registration of real property was relegated to
another department. Four years later (in 1868), through
defect in management and other causes, the Titles Office had
got out of gear, and the Government offered Mr. Archer
again the administration of the measure, which in the interim
had been changed into the Transfer of Land Statute. Mr.
Archer accepted the very onerous and unthankful task of setting
this department to rights, and was happily rewarded with speedy
success. The year before, Mr. Archer, after the usual
examinations at the University and the Supreme Court, had been
called to the bar. In 1866 he was examined at great length as a
commissioner of education of nearly ten years’ standing, by Mr.
George Higinbotham, chairman of the Royal Commission of
Public Education, and the result was interesting, as embodying a
practical Catholic view of the most momentous subject of the day.
In 1870 Mr. Archer received the order of knighthood from His
Holiness Pope Pius IX.,[and the imposing ceremonial of investiture
at the hands of the Bishop took place in St. Patrick’s Cathedral.
In the same year he was appointed one of the Royal commissioners
for the second time to inquire into the Civil Service of Victoria,
In 1873 he was elected, as a working microscopist, first president
of the Microscopical Society, and delivered an inaugural address,
which was republished in Europe. In 1874 Mr. Archer was
invited by the Government to assume the post of Secretary for
Lands and Survey, which office he now fills.


Balfour, Hon. James, M.L.C., youngest son of the late
John Balfour, merchant, of Leith, Scotland. Born at Edinburgh,
May 1830. Educated at Edinburgh Academy, of which his father
was one of the projectors and shareholders, and which became a
powerful rival of the High School. After leaving school he
entered an office in Edinburgh, and in 1849 went to London, and
commenced his business career in the office of his brother’s firm,
then the agent for the General Screw Steam Shipping Company.
In 1852, left London for Melbourne, having received an appoint-
ment from Messrs. Matheson and Company, of London, to their
corresponding house, in which, on the Ist July, 1856, he became
a partner, and the firm became James Henty and Co. In 1855,
Mr. Balfour went to Geelong to open a branch establishment,
which was only closed when in 1863, the extension of the railway
system made it more profitable to transact business from one centre.
Whilst in Geelong he was director of the London Chartered
Bank, and once the chairman of the Chamber of Commerce, and
trustee of the Savings Bank, and was appointed a Territorial
magistrate by the Nicholson Administration. In 1857, he visited
England, and the next year the United States and Canada, return-
ing to Victoria early in 1859. In April of that year married
Frances Charlotte, eldest daughter of the Hon. James Henty. In
Geelong joined the volunteer force and rose to the rank of captain,
and on returning to Melbourne commanded the St. Kilda battery
of artillery. He was appointed a member of the Board of Edu-
cation to represent the Presbyterians, and that position he resigned
on his second visit to England. In 1866 he contested the
electoral district of East Bourke in conjunction with the late Mr.
M‘Caw, and was returned by a large majority. At the next
general election he again stood for the same constituency, and was
again returned at the head of the poll. Soon after this he took a
voyage to England, leaving in 1867, and returning in 1869.
Whilst at home as one of the commissioners of Chalmers’ Church,
he secured the services of the Rev. D. Cameron as colleague to
the Rev. Dr. Cairns. On the retirement of the Hon. W. Degraves
from the Legislative Council, Mr. Balfour stood for the South
Province, and was opposed by Mr. W. Taylor, who had once
represented it. Mr. Balfour was elected by a large majority. As
a politician he has always been on the Liberal side, and voted for
the Mining on Private Property Bills; has been always opposed to
payment of members. Mr. Balfour has taken an active part in
the Presbyterian Church in Victoria, being usually a member of
the General Assembly, but has not confined his action in religious
matters to his own denomination. In mercantile matters he has
occupied an important position as partner in the firm of Messrs.
Henty and Co., as chairman of directors of the Australian Deposit
and Mortgage Bank, ever since its establishment in 1874.


Bayles, Hon. William, M.P. for Villiers and Heytesbury,
is the second son of William Bayles, of Hundertlivvaite, North
Riding of Yorkshire; was born in 1820 at same place. He
emigrated to Tasmania, arriving June, 1846, and was in business
in Launceston, In 1852 he left for Victoria, and commenced
business in Melbourne as merchant, shipowner, and agent,
under the style of William Bayles and Co., and continued in
business until the year 1865. Mr. Bayles was part owner and
agent for the Launceston Steam Company. He took an active
part in procuring funds to send a steamer to take off the
passengers and crew from the wreck of the steamer Admella , and
helped, to a considerable extent, to establish the Sailors' Home in
Spencer-street. In November, 1861, was elected as councillor of
the city for Lonsdale ward by a large majority, and was seven
times re-elected without opposition. In November, 1865, was
chosen as mayor, and welcomed the arrival of Viscount
Canterbury, then Sir J. T. M. Sutton, and presented him with an
address on behalf of the corporation in 1866. Mr. Bayles has
taken an active part in civic politics, and has been chairman
of the finance committee for many years. In 1864 he was first
elected a member of the Legislative Assembly for the counties of
Villiers and Heytesbury, and has been eight times re-elected, and
took office in Sir Charles Sladen’s Government as Commissioner
of Trades and Customs. In 1865 retired from active mercantile
pursuits, and invested in land at Moyne Falls, Coomete, as well
as in pastoral pursuits. In 1854 married Isabel, third daughter
of the late Arthur Buist, Esq., of Macquarie River, Tasmania.
Beale, Charles, J.P., Bleak House, Mount Gellibrand, second
son of Mr, Thomas Beale, corn and hop merchant, Kent. Born
at Sandwich, England, 4th May, 1821. Arrived in Victoria in
March, 1839. He is a territorial magistrate, and has been a
councillor of the shire of Winchelsea. He is now one of the
representatives of the Beeac Riding, in the shire council of Colac,
of which he has been twice president.
Bell, Alexander, born at Nemphlas, in the parish of Lanark,
Scotland, on the 3rd April, 1831. On the female side he is
doubly connected with the Carmichael family, the representatives
of the earls of Hyneford, a title now extinct through default
of male issue. Mr. Bell came to this colony in iB6O, and
in 1862 commenced business at Donnelly’s Creek, in Gipps
Land. In 1866 he removed to Walhalla, in the same district, and
took an active interest in public affairs. In 1867 he was
appointed to the commission of the peace, and acted as chairman
of the bench for a long period. On the formation of a munici-
pality at Walhalla Mr. Bell was elected a member, and subsequently


appointed mayor, both of which offices he resigned on leaving the
district in 1874. In May, 1875, he commenced business at
Creswick, and in the August of the following year he was elected
by a large vote one of the members of the Creswick borough
council, an active part in whose proceedings he has taken
ever since. Mr. Bell is a member and correspondent of the local
board of advice for the borough of Creswick, and continues
to take great interest in the promotion of the cause of education.
Birnie, Richard, barrister, was born in London 1808, and is-
the second son of the late Sir Richard Birnie, who was appointed
chief magistrate of the Bow-street Police Court, London, in 1821,
and whose name is well known in connection with the legal
proceedings taken against the Cato-street conspirators in 1820.
Richard Birnie received his early tuition under the celebrated
Dr. Crombie, author of the “Gymnasium;” and afterwards
the Rev. Bathurst Greenlaw. In 1826 he went to Trinity
College, Cambridge, where he studied under Julius Charles Hall
(author of “Guesses at Truth”), and Dr. Whewell, afterwards
Master of Trinity. He graduated B.A. in 1830, was called
to the bar, Inner Temple, May, 1833, and got his degree as
M.A. in 1837; also took an ad eundem at Oxford in 1848. At
the last mentioned university he made his debut as a public
lecturer under the auspices of Froude and Charles Kingsley.
From Oxford Mr. Birnie went to London, where he for a space
actively followed his profession in the Central Criminal Court, and
in 1853 was appointed by the Duke of Newcastle to fill the
position of Advocate-General of Western Australia, He arrived
at Perth, Western Australia, in January, 1854, held office for
six years, and on the retirement of Mr. Mackie, the only judge at
the settlement, occupied the bench for a year. He arrived
in Melbourne in 1859, and settled down to the practice of
his profession as a barrister. Mr. Birnie has twice officiated
as Crown Prosecutor, —at Sandhurst, in 1861, and at Portland, in
1862. As a public lecturer on historical and literary subjects
Mr. Birnie is well and favourably known; and he has by means of
his lectures, delivered in most of the principal towns of Victoria,
augmented the funds of many charities, schools, and churches.
He was among the earliest promoters of the early closing
movement, both in the press and on the platform. In 1870 Mr.
Birnie commenced a series of miscellaneous essays, which have
since appeared bi-weekly in the Australasian , and are still
issuing, great interest being taken in them. Mr. Birnie is at
present occupied in the preparation of a volume of personal
reminiscences of past and present celebrities, amongst whom will
figure the names of J. M. Kemble, Lord Houghton, Thackeray,
W. Maginn, Dr. Kitchener, Lord Campbell, Charles Phillips,


Samuel Warren, and the two Tennysons. He has never taken
any very active part in politics. He is a Broad Church Anglican
of very liberal inclinations, a warm friend to the general diffusion
of knowledge, a staunch anti-Sabbatarian, and has written many
strong articles in favour of throwing open the Library and Picture
Gallery on Sundays. He has written some critical reviews,
which have been admired; indeed, he gained the friendship
of the late Lyndsay Gordon, by his review of “ Ashtaroth,” of
which the impulsive poet was wont to say, “ Birnie has found out
beauties of which I myself was unconscious.” As a theatrical
critic he is thought to excel, his general knowledge enabling him
to dispense with vulgar carpings and personalities.
Bleasdale, Rev. John Ignatius, D.D., F.G.S., born in the
parish of Firkham, in the Fylde of Lancashire, in 1822. Edu-
cated in private schools at Preston, and when little more than
fourteen years of age entered the English College at Lisbon
in 1836, and successfully prosecuted his studies of languages,
belles lettres , philosophy, and theology, there for eight years,
when compelled by ill-health to return to England, where he com-
pleted his studies at St. Mary’s College, Oscott, under his late
Eminence Cardinal Wiseman, by whom he was ordained priest.
For five years he was employed as garrison chaplain at Weedon, in
Northamptonshire, and at Aylesbury, In 1851 he arrived in
Melbourne, where he has mainly resided ever since. When
in college at Lisbon, circumstances were so ordered that he
had for four years to take charge of the economic and administra-
tive department of the institution, when he laid the foundation
of that knowledge of wines, and generally of all the rural
industries of Southern Europe, for aiding in the advancement
of which in Australia he has long been well known. It was
customary for the directors of the Lisbon College to advise
students to select some branch of science or literature as a
recreation in after-life, and his tastes led him to optics and
chemistry, sciences which he prosecuted successfully ever since.
In 1855 he became vice-president of St. Patrick’s College, where
he taught a course of experimental physics, similar to that of the
University; and also held a lecturership on natural science
under the Denominational Board of Education. At this time, he,
in conjunction with another gentleman, originated the Microscopic
Society, of which he was a chairman for many years. Early
in 1855 he began to evince a lively interest in the subject of
forming a public museum of natural history in the city, but with
a special view to displaying specimens of all the various resources of
Victoria. When appointed on the Royal Commission for the
first Intercolonial Exhibition in 1865, he succeeded in obtaining
the expenditure of granted by the Government for


Exhibition buildings on the site at the rear of the Public Library,
which now forms the hall of the Technological and Industrial
Museum. Taking always a lively interest in his favourite
scientific pursuit, he directed his energies to the establishment of
a school of chemistry, assaying, mineralogy, &c., in connection
with the Museum; and in 1875, when a further grant by the
Government of was made for increased accommodation
for the second Intercolonial Exhibition, he induced the trustees
to spend that sum in the erection of a separate building, to
be afterwards devoted to the purposes of the proposed school.
Dr. Bleasdale took a lively interest in the Royal Society, and after
being a vice-president for some years, was elected president
in 1865. Successive Governments placed him on various royal
commissions and public trusts, such as the Public Library,
Museums, &c., the commission for technological education, the
central board of health, and others. He is, perhaps, best known
to the public by his writings on special mineralogy, such as the
gem stones and allied minerals of Australia; and on colonial
wines, to the development of which industry he has spared
no effort, believing it to be for the health and sobriety of the
people. As a clergyman he is known as private secretary of his
bishop, sometime chancellor of the archdiocese, secretary of the
Roman Catholic education committee, and inspector-general
of Roman Catholic schools and orphanages, &c.
Bromell, The Hon. Thomas, of Hamilton, M.L.C. for the
South-Western Province, was born in Devonshire, England, in the
year 1834, and arrived in Victoria in 1853. Devoted himself suc-
cessfully to mining pursuits at Ballarat, and subsequently entered
upon farming operations on the Barrabool Hills (Geelong) and at
North Hamilton, in the course of which he secured the Hensley
Park Estate, where he resides. In 1851, he married Miss Walter,
a Devonshire lady, and has issue one son and eight daughters.
Mr. Bromell always took a warm interest in the local government;
was elected a member of the old Dundas road board in 1861, and
president of the Dundas shire in 1871, which he resigned shortly
after his election to the Legislative Council as one of the members
for the Western Province, in 1874.
Bropliy, Daniel, M.P. for Ballarat East, youngest son of
William Brophy and Margaret Purcel of Castlecomar, Kilkenny,
Ireland, farmer. The estate of the family was confiscated by
the Crown for action taken in the Irish rebellion of 1798, by
his grandfather, who escaped in a small schooner with several
others, and reached Newfoundland, He established himself there.
The late Mr. Brophy, after an absence of fourteen years, returned
to his native land and regained a portion of the family property,


and carried on business between Newfoundland and Ireland, in fish
and oil, taking those commodities in place of rent. Mr. Daniel
Brophy was born 13th Nov. 1832, at Castlecomar. Educated at
the local schools, and in 1847 emigrated with the family to
Canada. He was on one of those ships alluded to by Mr. (now
Sir Charles) Duffy as floating coffins—out of 300 passengers only
a third reached their destination alive—his mother died on board,
and his father shortly after landing also died from the effects of
the same fever. He was thus left almost to his own recources.
He started to serve his time at ship carpentering, but did not like
it, and went into the grocery business. In 1852, attracted by the
gold discoveries, he left for Australia, and arrived in Melbourne in
April, 1853. Went to Bendigo (now Sandhurst). For several years
he was engaged in mining, being the first sluice man of the United
Extended Band of Hope Company, now known as the Band of
Hope and Albion Consols, of which company he has been director
for a number of years, and chairman at the present time. In
1864, he commenced hotelkeeping at Ballarat, and in 1868 built
large additions to what is now well-known as Brophy’s Hotel. In
1864, purchased some land at Bungaree, and went into farming,
which he carried on for some years. The same year was elected
to the road board (now the Bungaree shire council), of which
he was afterwards elected chairman. Took an active part in the
management of all the local charities of Ballarat; was president
of the Orphan Asylum, and is at the present time president of the
Ballarat Hospital. He took an active interest in the establishment
of local industries; is director of the Phoenix Foundry Company,
and of the Ballarat Woollen Mills. In 1863, was elected to
represent the central ward of the city of Ballarat, and was elected
mayor in 1866; and at the termination of his year of office the
council presented him with a testimonial, and the citizens with a
costly silver tea and coffee service. He still represents the central
ward of the city of Ballarat, and is a member of the Water Com-
mission. At the general election, in May, 1877, he contested
Ballarat East for a seat in the Legislative Assembly, as an inde-
pendent candidate, and was returned at the head of die poll with
Mr. James as a colleague. In politics he is a Liberal, and a
moderate Free-trader, and is a hearty believer in the democratic
institutions of the colony.
Byrne, Hon. Robert, J.P., land and estate agent, Melbourne,
eldest son of Michael Byrne, of Dublin, Ireland, was born same
place, 12th November, 1822. He left Ireland for New York in
1848,' and settled there, carrying on the business of general
auctioneer, as well as in Boston, towards the end ol 1852, he
left America for Victoria, and arrived in Melbourne February,
1853. He purchased town land at Sandridge, where he built a


large auction-room. For many years he carried on the general
auction business at Sandridge, and acted as house and land agent.
He represented Sandridge in the Melbourne corporation, when
Sandridge was a part of Lonsdale ward, afterwards Macarthur
ward, and then a separate borough. He carried a vote for
for the improvement of Sandridge, shortly after he took
his seat at the council-table of the city of Melbourne. At the
general election of 1864, he contested the seat for the borough of
Sandridge in the Legislative Assembly, in the Liberal interest, with
the Hon. David Moore, which resulted in his defeat by only three
votes. Mr. Byrne petitioned the Elections and Qualifications
Committee against Mr. Moore’s return, when one vote was taken
from his majority, and the decision of the committee was that the
petition was not frivolous or vexatious, and left each party to pay
their own costs. Shortly after he represented Crowlands, being
returned by a very large majority. In 1869, when Sir James
M‘Culloch went outside the House for a Commissioner of Customs,
Mr. Byrne carried a motion against the Government, which was
taken as a vote of want of confidence, and the Ministers resigned.
A new Ministry was formed, with the Hon. J. A. Macpherson as
Chief Secretary, and Mr. Byrne as Treasurer, on 20th September,
1869. When he sought re-election at the hands of his constituents,
he was defeated by Mr. Rolfe, and retired from office on 21st
January, 1870, being succeeded by the Hon. Graham Berry. Mr.
Byrne has since then devoted himself to business, and has not
again sought for political honours.
Clark, Robert, M.P., was appointed a J.P. in 1873, and was
elected president of the “Amalgamated Miners’ Association of
Victoria” in 1874, a position to which he has been unanimously
elected every year since 1874. Was president of the Sandhurst
Mechanics’ Institute last year, and is now president of various
other local societies, and has always taken an active part in local
matters. He was re-elected to the City Council without opposition
in 1874, a position he now holds, and was elected mayor of
Sandhurst in 1875; was elected a member of Parliament for
Sandhurst (the second city in the colony) at the head of the poll,
and polled the second highest number of any other candidate in
the whole colony, Mr. Casey being the highest—he polled 2662
votes, the miners voting for him almost to a man.
Cowderoy, Benjamin, J.P., born at Reading, in Berkshire, in
1812 j educated chiefly at Christ’s Hospital. Engaged in business
pursuits for the most part in native town, but to a small extent in
London, from time of leaving school till sailing for Melbourne at
the end of 1852. For some years previously was active in
public affairs, social and political. On arriving here was induced


to initiate the Victoria Freehold Land Society, in co-operation
with the late F. J. Sargood and Thomas Fulton, Lachlan
Mackinnon, and others. Was elected to the first council of St.
Kilda, on its being constituted a municipality, in the early part of
1857. Was also elected its first chairman, and re-elected in the
subsequent year. Then retired on account of the large amount
of time which the office required in getting everything into shape.
On the occasion of the next election a year afterwards, was urged
to re-enter the council, and was again elected to the chair. In the
following year elected to the chair again. After that remained
in the council until business matters necessitated removal for
a time to Melbourne, and was then presented with a handsome
testimonial and purse of sovereigns, subscribed by the St. Kilda
public. Was one of the original committee of the Suburban
Railway Company, and was afterwards engaged in purchasing
the whole of the properties required for the railway. Was also
appointed by the Government to value and arrange compensations
for lands and properties for the Victorian railways, and has
performed that duty from the latter part of 1859 to the present
time. During the interval between the completion of the two
main lines of railway and the commencement of the North-
Eastern, was connected with the country press as managing
partner in the business of Greville and Co., Hall of Commerce,
supplying telegraphic news, and reporting to several papers
in the provinces and in the neighbouring colonies. Has been
a magistrate of this colony since March, 1857, and of South
Australia for the past eight or nine years. Has been secretary to
the Melbourne Chamber of Commerce since 1864.
CuiT, Edward Micklethwaite, the eldest son of Edward Curr,
of St. Heliers, Melbourne, who was known in the early days of the
colony as the “ Father of Separation,” was born in Hobart Town,
Van Diemen’s Land, in the year 1820. Having been educated in
England and France, he came to reside permanently in Port
Phillip in February, 1841. Starting at that time with three small
flocks of sheep, which his father had purchased in the neighbour-
hood of where Heathcote now stands, Mr. Curr proceeded to
the Goulburn River, near its confluence with the Murray, taking
up, from time to time, as squatting runs, Tongola, Moira, Namerong,
Gargarro, Coragorag, Colbinabbin, &c. In 1851 he left the
colony for about three years, and visited Spain, France, Italy, Syria,
Egypt and other countries, paying considerable attention to their
breeds of horses and other domestic animals. On his return he
passed some time in New Zealand, and subsequently purchased
cattle stations in the Burnett district, Queensland, and in the
Lachlan district, New South Wales. In 1862 Mr. Curr was
appointed inspector of sheep, in 1864 chief inspector of sheep,


and in 1873 chief inspector of stock. In 1863 Mr. Curr
published in Melbourne a work entitled “ Pure Saddle Horses,"
which was well received by the public and the press. In 1865 he
received the prize of offered by Parliament for a com-
petitive essay on the subject of the “Scab in Sheep,” which
was published by the Government of Victoria, and reprinted
subsequently by the Government of 1 asmama. Mr. Gurr has
since been an occasional writer on subjects connected with
the live stock of the colony. In 1874 he represented Victoria in
a conference of chief inspectors held in Sydney, _on which
occasion he maintained the advisability of prohibiting for all
time the introduction of stock from outside of the Australian
colonies, as he held that a contrary course meant in the long run
the introduction of the diseases of stock. In 1877 he read
before the National Agricultural Society papers on the_ same
subject, which obtained an extensive circulation in Victoria and
the neighbouring colonies. For several years Mr. Curr has
interested himself in the aboriginal languages of the Australian
continent, of which a large collection of vocabularies is m his
hands.
Cutllbert, Hon. Henry, solicitor, Ballarat, Postmaster-General
and M.L.C. for the South-Western Province, was born at Ros-
common, Ireland, 29th July, 1829, is the eldest son of John
Cuthbert, of the same place. Mr. Cuthbert was educated at the
Drogheda Grammar School, one of the schools founded by
Erasmus Smith, and carried off the classical medal. He received
his articles from the Crown Solicitor of King’s County and County
West Meath, and there acquired an intimate knowledge of criminal
law, and was admitted a solicitor of the High Court of Chancery,
Ireland, in 1854, in which year he left for Victoria. On arriving
at Melbourne in the same year, he was immediately engaged in
his profession in the office of Mr. J ohn Armstrong for a short
period, until admitted a solicitor of the Supreme Court of Victoria.
In 1855, went to Ballarat, commenced practice, and in 1877, Mr.
Wynne joined him as a partner. Mr. Cuthbert was one of the
first who took up a large mining claim on private land, when the
claims allowed under the mining by-laws were not more than
forty feet square. In 1857, Mr. Learmonth, of Ercildoun, offered
hi m the right to mine on 140 acres at Buninyong per acre
per annual for five years, and a royalty of five per cent, out of the
°ross yield of gold. Mr. Cuthbert accepted the offer, and formed a
company to work the ground, which afterwards became the “Bunin-
yong Gold Mining Company,” and lasted for ten years. He was
always largely interested in mining, and is so still; and was one of
the pioneers in forming Masonic lodges at Ballarat, and is P.M.
of the “Victoria” Lodge of that district. He has been held in


considerable estimation by his brethren of the craft, and was asked
to lay the foundation-stones of the Ballarat Hospital, Mechanics’
Institute, and Masonic Hall. He also took great interest in the
charitable institutions of the district, and was president of the
Ballarat District Hospital. In his professional capacity, he was
engaged in the great triangular suit between the Koh-i-Noor, Band
of Hope, and Great Extended Companies, and the late celebrated
case of Learmonth v. Bailey. He married on the 28th May,
1863, the second daughter of Mr, Kirby, of Melbourne, but is now
a widower with two surviving children. In 1874, was elected for
the South-Western Province unopposed, in the room of Dr. Hope,
who retired by rotation at that time. Since Mr. Cuthbert has been
in the Legislative Council, he has taken an active part in the
debates in the House, and was offered the office of Postmaster-
General in the Berry Administration, which he represents in the
Council. His acceptance of office proved agreeable to the electors,
and he was re-elected without opposition. Since being a Minister,
he has had to deal with several important measures, and has
piloted through the Upper House the Land Tax Bill. He
introduced the Railway Construction Bill, and cross-examined the
witnesses called before the bar of the House by the Council. He
has since introduced the Mining on Private Property Bill.
Cutts, William Henry, M.D. of Edinburgh and Melbourne,
and L.A.S.L., youngest son of John Cutts, solicitor, of Chester-
field, Derbyshire. Was born 25th December, 1828, at same place;
educated at Wesley College, Sheffield, and received his professional
training at Paris and Edinburgh. Graduated at the latter city in
1851. Left London for Victoria by the ship Kent in 1852, arriving
September the same year, and immediately went into practice on
the Ovens goldfields, and afterwards at Bendigo (now Sandhurst).
In 1853 settled in Melbourne and commenced practice there, and
has continued in the same place for the last twenty-three years. Is
one of the trustees of the Government Savings Bank, also of the
Melbourne Cemetery, and a member of the council and of the
senate of the Melbourne University. He was for seventeen years
physician to the Melbourne Hospital, as well as of the Benevolent
Asylum, and was a commissioner of education at the time of the
dissolution of the board, when the new Education Act came into
force. In 1868 was made a territorial magistrate by the Sladen
Administration. In 1866 was president of the Medical Society of
Victoria, and founder of the Medical Benevolent Association, and
its treasurer, and is so still. He the same year went to England
round Cape Horn, chiefly for the benefit of his health, and after
visiting France, Switzerland, Italy, and Germany, returned to Mel-
bourne by the overland route, via the Suez Canal, landing in the
colony in January, 1877, and immediately resumed practice. Dr.


Cutts has always taken great interest in the educational institu-
tions, and in the general progress and development of the resources
of the colony.
Denovan, William Dixon Campbell, was born in Edinburgh
in 1832. His early education was conducted in the first instance
at the parish school of Inverarity, under the Rev. David Lindsay;
and subsequently under Mr. Gilbert, of Dundee, and of Mr.
Clyde. With the intention of preparing himself for entering the
University of Edinburgh as a student of divinity, with an
ultimate view to the ministry of the Church of Scotland, young
Denovan opened an adventure school in Cupar of Fife, an
undertaking which the founder was compelled to abandon in
consequence of his health. About this time he resolved to
emigrate to Australia, and reached Melbourne in 1852. He at
once went to Bendigo, arriving there in February, 1853. At this
time there was great excitement upon the goldfields about
the license question, and he took a leading part in the agitation
of that time against the diggers’ license, and with many other
men, then well known, helped to found a league for its abolition.
Was elected a deputy to represent the diggers on the commission
of inquiry appointed by Sir Charles Hotham, Mr. Denovan
subsequently became a member of the first local court established
on Bendigo. His early leaning towards literary pursuits led him
to accept the position of correspondent to the Melbourne Age
and the Ballarat Times , of which latter paper he, in 1855,
became sub-editor. He next wrote for the Ballarat Star , and
subsequently started a weekly paper called the Nation and
Ballarat Advertiser. He here opened an office as gold buyer to
the Bank of Victoria, but shortly afterwards again devoted his
energies to mining. In all public movements of a liberal
character he again took an active part. As the honorary secretary
of the local Land League, of which the late Hon. J. F. Sullivan
was president, he was instrumental in getting up a petition against
a Land Bill, then under the consideration of the Legislative
Council, which bore the signatures of 13,000 persons. At the
general election, which took place in August, 1861, Mr. Denovan
was chosen to represent Sandhurst in the Legislative Assembly,
and was returned at the head of the poll. As evidence of the
general esteem in which Mr. Denovan was held, it may be
mentioned that his supporters not only paid his election expenses,
but without public notice, subscribed for him an annual hono-
rarium. For the two sessions he retained his seat he was
instrumental in forwarding the interests of the goldfield com-
munities. Of these there may be mentioned his success in
inducing the House to vote a sum of jQ6OOO for prospecting
purposes; and in obtaining the appointment of a committee, of


which he was chairman, to take evidence as to the practicability
of supplying Castlemaine and Sandhurst with water from the
river Shortly after resigning his seat, became the editor
of the Bendigo Evening News , which position he occupied
for about two years. Of the Bendigo Liberal Association Mr.
Denovan was the honorary secretary, and his services were
acknowledged by making him a valuable presentation; his public
worth being also acknowledged by the Government of the day
appointing him a magistrate of the county, which, however, private
scruples led him to decline. In January, 1877, he was elected
councillor for the Sutton ward of the city of Sandhurst.
Dumas, Alexander George, was born in Sicily 3rd February,
1812, and is son of the late Captain John Craig Dumas, a
distinguished officer who served in India in the beginning of the
present century under Lord Lake and the great Duke of Welling-
ton, then Sir Arthur Wellesley. This officer while there led two
forlorn hopes on the occasion of the storming of Seringapatam
and, Budpore, on both of which occasions he was severely
wounded, once dangerously. The subject of this notice received
his* early education in Scotland; and while his father’s regiment
was stationed in Dublin, entered as a student in Trinity
College. In 1829 he went with his father (who had ex-
changed into the 63rd Regiment) to Tasmania. Shortly after
arrival in Tasmania, Mr. Dumas entered a solicitor’s office
with the intention of following the law, but was induced to
give up the profession and take a situation in the Government
service in Sydney, where he was appointed a clerk in the office
of the principal superintendent of convicts and secretary to the
classification (of prisoners) board. In 1849 and 1850 Mr.
Dumas addressed some letters to the Secretary of State for the
Colonies (Earl Grey) on the subject of prison discipline, sketching
out a system for the amelioration of the convicts, and their
employment at Moreton Bay. These letters, which were for-
warded to Earl Grey by the Governor, Sir C. Fitzroy, were so well
thought of that they were presented to Parliament by command
of Her Majesty, and were published; but as they were opposed
to the views of a large proportion of the people of New South
Wales gave great offence, and in consequence the Secretary
of State, at Mr. Dumas’ request, wrote to the Governors of
the colonies of Tasmania and Victoria, directing that employ-
ment should be found for Mr. Dumas in one of these places.
In 1854 Mr. Dumas was transferred by authority of the
Governor-General to Victoria, and was placed in the Chief
Secretary’s office. It may be mentioned that during the struggle
against transportation, and at the time Victoria (then Port Phillip)
refused to receive the Pentonville exiles sent there, Mr. Dumas


was called upon to make a report on the subject, and to make
suggestions as to the best mode of dealing with them; and
so satisfactory was that considered that his suggestions were
carried out, and no more Pentonville exiles were removed to
Port Phillip, but sent as ticket-of-leave men to Moreton Bay.
Mr. Dumas received the thanks of the British Government for his
letters. In 1856, upon the new Constitution coming into force, he
was appointed Clerk to the Legislative Council, but at the request
of the Chief Secretary (Mr. Haines), exchanged his position
for that of Clerk-assistant to the Legislative Assembly, at the
salary he would have received as Clerk of the Council; and Mr.
Dumas still holds that position. Mr. Dumas, in 1872, compiled
an alphabetical table of the Victorian Statutes from 1866 to 1871
inclusive; he also lately prepared an index and chronological
table of Statutes passed in 1874, 1875, an d 1876. Both these
works have been very favourably reviewed by the press, and have
received the approbation of the judges and many leading mem-
bers of the bar.
Fiskill, Archibald, J.P., of Lai Lai and Melbourne, the only
surviving son of the late Archibald Fiskin, of Both well, Scotland,
and of Ingliston, Ballan, Victoria, was born at Glasgow, August,
1829. He was educated partly at Bothwell and in Melbourne,
having come to Port Phillip with his parents and family in 1840,
accompanied by his uncle, the late Peter Inglis, of Ingliston. In
1841 attended the Scots’ school in Melbourne, and at end of year
went up to the Ingliston station with his uncle, who had
purchased it at that time from the late Mr. Campbell, where Mr.
Fiskin continued his education with a private tutor, and finished
under the Rev. Alex. Morrison, of Melbourne. In 1846 Mr.
Inglis purchased Lai Lai station, and put Mr. Fiskin in charge of
it and the station at Warrenheip, which had been purchased
in 1842 or 1843 —these stations under his management afterwards
mustered 6000 head of cattle. In 1852 the gold diggings broke
out, and a great rush took place to the neighbourhood, and
to a portion of the Warrenheip run, now a part of Ballarat East.
All the old station hands went to the diggings, and Mr. Fiskin
was left with none but young gentlemen to help him. At
that time Mr. Fiskin purchased the stations from his uncle,
and after several years of hard work, most of these runs were
selected, excepting about 10,000 acres, which he secured at
auction and now forms his freehold property of Lai Lai, upon
which he has built a very pretty summer residence. Was appointed
a justice of the peace by Governor Latrobe. He was one of the
first returning officers for North Grant, and is still returning officer
for Ballarat East. In 1859 when the Buninyong road board was
formed he was elected a member and chairman, during his


absence in Sydney, and has been connected with it as a shire
councillor ever since, having been president for a long time. Has
always been connected with the Ballarat Agricultural Society, and
was president for one year; also is president of the National
Agricultural Society of Victoria, and a member of the Farmers’
Club, having been one of its promoters. In 1877 was appointed
one of the commissioners of the Land Tax by the Berry Adminis-
tration. Was married in July, 1859, to Charlotte Emily,
second daughter of John Macnamara, late of Sydney, New South
Wales.
Halfey, John, J.P. official assignee, Melbourne, and of
Ordsall, Kew, was born at South Port, Lancashire, in 1825.
Came to Victoria in the middle of 1852. In the latter part of
1853, settled down in Melbourne, and engaged in commercial
pursuits. Represented'Sandhurst in the Legislative Assembly in
three Parliaments. He is largely interested in mining, and is
chairman of Johnson’s Reef Gold Mining Company, Sandhurst,
chairman of the Board of Directors of the Australian Alliance
Insurance Company, chairman of the Investment Company
(Limited), director of the Colonial Bank of Australasia,
director of the Australasian Insurance Company, director of
the Opera House Company, one of the proprietors of the Herald
newspaper, and assignee of the Court of Insolvency, and was made
a territorial magistrate at the time the Heales Administration was
in office.
Hennelly, James, of St. Kilda and Melbourne, is the fifth
surviving son of John Hennelly, a large farmer of Killafin,
County Galway, Ireland; born same place, 16th March, 1821.
Left Ireland, in 1857, for Victoria, and on arrival went
first to Bendigo to engage in mining. In 1861, went to New
Zealand at the time of the great rush there, and was mode-
rately successful. Gave up mining and went into business
on the West Coast as general storekeeper and wine and spirit
merchant, and continued there till 1868. He purchased the Nile
Steam Saw Mills at Charleston, New Zealand, and was very
successful. In 1867, he was elected a member for a goldfields
constituency to the Nelson Provincial Council. At the general
election of 1869, stood again for the same constituency, and was
defeated. Sold out of the saw mills and returned to Melbourne,
and commenced business first in Carlton, and then started brewing
at Richmond; at the Melbourne Exhibition of 1875, he
obtained the first prize for bulk ale brewed from colonial malt and
hops. At the general election in May, 1877, stood for Emerald
Hill, but was defeated by Messrs. Nimmo and Lyell.


Henty, Herbert James, second son of the Hon. James Henty,
M.L.C., born sth October, 1834, in Sussex, England. He accom-
panied his parents to Tasmania in 1835; returned with them
to England in 1848, and was educated at King’s College, London,
He returned to Australia, and landed in Victoria in 1851.
On arrival in Australia, he joined the firm of James Henty and
Co., and was subsequently admitted as partner. Mr. Herbert
Henty has served as councillor in the City Council for the Lons-
dale ward, to represent which, he was returned after a contested
election; he has also held office as mayor of Kew. He was
for some time a resident in Geelong, where he acted as Vice-
Consul for the kingdom of Denmark. In April, 1861, he married
Frances, the eldest daughter of Sir Francis Murphy, first Speaker
of the Legislative Assembly, by whom he has issue, two sons and
two daughters. He left the colony and went to England in 1876.
Henty, The Hon. James, M.L.C., is the eldest son of the late
Thomas Henty, Esq., and was born at West Tarring, in the county
of Sussex, 24th September, 1800. Mr. Thomas Henty was a con-
siderable landed proprietor, and celebrated for his breed of
merino sheep, a brief account of which appears in “ Horsfield’s
History of Sussex,” vol. 2. During the early part of his life Mr.
James Henty engaged in farming pursuits on his father’s property,
but subsequently joined the family banking firm of Henty and Co.,
at Arundel, Worthing, and Steyning, in which Mr. Thomas Henty
had a considerable interest. This business, under the same
name, is still successfully carried on by members of the family. In
1828 Mr. Thomas Henty, who had already established a con-
nection with Australia and its people by the consignment of
his merinos thereto, determined to seek for his large family a wider
and more promising field. Tasmania was originally fixed upon as
the future home of the family, but the Government of the day, to
frustrate some designs of the French, being anxious to form a
settlement on the west coast of Australia, from whence Captain
Stirling had just returned with glowing accounts, gave encourage-
ment (by offering large grants of land) to parties of enterprise and
capital willing to emigrate. The barque Caroline was accordingly
chartered, and in her, Mr. James Henty, together with two
younger brothers, about 100 of his father’s best sheep, some
thoroughbred and draught horses, and about forty servants, set
sail for Western Australia. The expedition set sail in June, 1829,,
and after a passage of five months arrived at Swan River, Western
Australia. Amongst the horses imported by Mr. Henty, should
be recorded the well-known thoroughbred Wanderer and Little
John, purchased with many more from the Earl of Egremont.
The blood of these sires has left a permanent improvement in the


stock of Tasmania and Victoria. After much exploration, in-
volving considerable hardship, adventures with the natives, &c.,
the search for land was abandoned. Mr. Henty proceeded to
Tasmania, and after a visit to Europe in 1834, finally settled
iu Launceston (Tasmania) as a merchant. In 1842 he was
offered by Sir John Franklin (of Arctic renown) a seat in the
Legislative Council, which he declined. After another visit
to England in 1848 Mr. Henty determined to settle in Australia,
and arrived in Melbourne, June, 1851, when he at once com-
menced business as a merchant, and established the firm of which
he is still the head. In 1852, after separation from New South
Wales, Mr. James Henty was elected for Portland, for which
town he sat till the inauguration of the New Constitution, when he
was elected to the Legislative Council as one of the representa-
tives of the South-Western Province; which constituency has
since twice returned him to Parliament. Mr. Henty was one of
the early promoters of the Melbourne and Hobson’s Bay Railway,
as director, and afterwards chairman. He has also been chairman
to the commissioners of Savings’ Banks, and chairman to the
Liverpool and London Insurance Company. It is worthy of
record, that the Henty family were the first British-born subjects
who attempted to form a permanent settlement in Victoria, for in
1834, a year before either Batman or Fawkner attempted a landing,
the Messrs. Henty had started a whaling establishment at Portland
Bay, and taken possession of Australian ground.
Jervols, Major-General Sir William Francis Drummond,
K.C.M.G. (1874), C. 8., R.E., Governor of South Australia. Served
at the Cape of Good Hope from April, 1841, until September, 1848,
of which time he was six years on the frontier and in Kaffraria.
In 1842 he was appointed to the staff as brigade-major to a force
of all arms sent on an expedition against the Dutch Boers;
arrived during the Kaffir war of 1846-7, accompanying Sir Henry
Pottinger and Lieut.-General Sir George Berkeley to the scene of
hostilities. Was engaged during the war in active operations, and
in making a military map of Kaffraria. In 1845-6 visited Natal,
and returning overland to the Cape Colony, laid down a map
of the country between the two colonies. From 1852 to 1855
was specially employed at Alderney in designing and executing
the fortifications of that island. From 1856 to 1875 was
on the staff of the War Office as assistant-inspector of forti-
fications, and afterwards as deputy director of the same. From
x 857 t 0 1875 was secretary of the committee on the defence
of the Empire, and in 1859 he was secretary of the Royal
Commission on national defences. During the time he was in the
War Office he was employed in the design and execution of the
extensive works of fortifications now nearly completed in England,


and in the British foreign possessions. In 1863 he was nomi-
nated a civil C.B. In 1863 was sent to Canada, New Brunswick,
Nova Scotia, and Bermuda, to report upon the defences of those
colonies, and again in 1864, to confer with the Canadian Govern-
ment as to the defence of the Dominion. In 1865 he was sent to
Malta, and in 1866 to Gibraltar, to prepare projects for the
improvement of the defences. He again visited Halifax and
Bermuda in 1869, and made further reports on the defences.
In 1871-2 was employed by the Government of India to report
upon the defences of Aden, Perim, Bombay, and the Hooghly.
By the desire of the Viceroy of India, and with the approval
of the Secretary of State for India, he also visited British
Burmah, and submitted reports with regard to the defences of
Rangoon and Moulamein, He was appointed to the Order of St.
Michael and St. George for his colonial services, and in April,
1875, was appointed Governor of the Straits Settlements.
In 1877 was sent to Australia, arriving first in Victoria, to advise
on the defence of that and the other colonies; and whilst
occupied in that duty was appointed Governor of South Australia
same year.
Kissane, William Rogers, consulting miner, Melbourne, was
born at sea about 1838, and first saw land at Cork, on the south
coast of Ireland. Followed the sea as a profession for about
twelve years. After serving his time before the mast, worked his
way up to chief officer, and in that capacity sailed to many parts
of the world. Traded to the West Indies, south and east coast of
Africa, India and China, and the Spanish Phillippine Islands in
the China seas. In 1848 sailed to New Zealand just after the
first Maori war, when the English troops were beaten by the
Chief Heke, who was afterwards presented to the Queen. Sailed
thence to Adelaide, and shortly after to Sydney, and thence to
Port Phillip. During the voyage from China picked up two
shipwrecked crews, and became short of provisions and water.
Tried to run into Adelaide, but was becalmed in Spencer’s Gulf,
and had to broach cargo; lived on raw rice and sugar. In
1849 sailed from England for Batavia, but left the ship at the
Cape of Good Hope, and for a time coasted out from there
to St. Helena under Government contracts, supplying sheep,
bullocks, and wine, for the troops quartered there. At that time
Sir Charles Hotham commanded H.M. frigate Penelope , and
many fine slave ships were captured, sold, and by the terms
of sale, broken up, a ready market for the material being found in
Table Bay. Went to the United States in 1849, and thence back
to Africa; and the same year to Sydney. Went to sea again, and
was chief officer to Captain Allen, present harbour-master
of Newcastle. On the discovery of gold in 1851, gave up the


sea and went to Louisa Creek diggings, Braidwood, Ophir, and
other goldfields in New South Wales. In 1853 visited Ballarat,
and was successful at Pennyweight Flat, Sailors’ Gully, Eureka,
Golden Point, and Canadian, close to the junction of the Prince
Regent Lead, known as the “Jewellers’ Shops” before the lead
trended into Sinclair’s Hill. Discovered the Bald Hill diggings
at Sulky Gully, between Ballarat and Creswick, Warden Sherrard
giving him a prospecting claim of forty feet by forty. Went
to Creswick Creek during the great rush and the Black Lead
excitement. Was at Long Point, and took out fifty pounds’ weight
of gold. Thence to Mount Egerton, where he jumped a claim from
Mr. Syme, the present proprietor of the Age newspaper, and his
partner, Mr. Jesse Timmins, and secured a portion of the
ground, and did well out of the quartz before any machinery was
there, and a battery was unknown, paying £8 10s. per ton
for crushing. Thence to Ballarat, starting the first shaft on
the frontage system at Sebastopol, with twenty-three others.
The shaft took two years to bottom, there being a large quantity
of water; and the party divided per man. Then spent
seven years at Dunolly, MTntyre’s, Mount Moliagul, Kingower,
Inglewood, Tarnagulla, Ararat, and a dozen other places; and then
again to New Zealand, in the great rush of 1862, making on
the Shotover River. Back to Victoria in 1864, and thence to
Queensland, Rockhampton, Peak Downs, to within 125 miles of the
Gulf. Back again to Rockhampton, thence to the Gladstone, re-
turning to Victoria, settling down, after getting married, on Emerald
Hill. All his colonial career has been devoted to mining, in
which he has had a long and varied experience, both as working
miner and manager, having been in the latter capacity three
years in Gipps Land, and afterwards at Alexandra, Jamieson, and
Woods Point goldfields.
Koilg* Meilg*, Lowe. —Kong Meng, the leading Chinese mer-
chant in Melbourne, is a British subject by birth. His father,
Lowe a Quee, was a merchant of Penang, Prince of Wales
Island, and the subject of this sketch was born there in 1831.
When quite a lad, young Lowe went to the High School, Penang;
and on attaining the age of sixteen he was sent to the Mauritius,
where he devoted his time to the study of the English and
French languages, under the tuition of private masters. His
education finished, Kong Meng commenced mercantile life as an
importing merchant; his ventures being between the Mauritius,
Calcutta, and Singapore, he himself generally travelling as super-
cargo. The firm with which he was connected at this time was that of
A. Goone Freres. In 1853 Mr. Kong Meng arrived at the port
of Melbourne, bringing with him a cargo from the Mauritius; he


proceeded thence to Calcutta, and in 1854 returned with fresh mer-
chandise from India, to commence business in Melbourne as a mer-
chant under the title of Kong Mengand Co. In 185 5, at the commence-
ment of his mercantile career in Australia, Mr. Kong Meng was
owner of several vessels sailing between Australia and China, and
in 1864 he first tried to establish communication by trading
vessels between Melbourne and the settlement at the Gulf of
Carpentaria. In private life he takes an interest in all that
concerns his countrymen, and exercises a supervision of the
Chinese club-house in Little Bourke-street, an establishment
arranged for the reception of such Chinese immigrants as may
land on Victorian soil armed with no better passport than a
certificate of good character from the “ Celestial Land.” In
iB6O Mr. Kong Meng married the daughter of the late William
Prussia, Esq., of Tasmania; and in 1863 he received at the hand
of His Imperial Majesty Ham Foon, Emperor of the Chinese,
the honour of being elevated to the rank of Mandarin of the Blue
Button, Civil Order.
Rllipe, John Hanlon, bom in London, 4th August, 1828, and
is the last living male representative of the Knipes, to whom
monuments are erected in Westminster Abbey. He served his
apprenticeship to a manufacturing silversmith, and is a freeman of
the Goldsmith Company, and also of the City of London. He fol-
lowed the occupation of a silversmith until May, 1853, when he
came to Australia, arriving in Adelaide in August of same year, in
the Magdalena , of which ship he was purser. He first became
acquainted with the auctioneering business with the firm of Samp-
son and Wickstead of that city. The excitement of the goldfields
of Victoria induced him to leave Adelaide, and he arrived on
Bendigo, January, 1854, where for a short time he followed the
occupation of a gold-digger, but fortune not favouring him, he
opened a general store in Old Camp-street, near what is now
known as Pall Mall. Shortly after, nearly the whole population
deserted Bendigo for a new rush known as Simpson’s Ranges (now
Maryborough), Mr. Knipe amongst the number. He there com-
menced business as an auctioneer, with the late Mr. Henry Joseph
Smith, who was for many years connected with the Melbourne press.
Mr. Knipe took an active part in advocating the abolition of the
diggers’ license fees, and was appointed a delegate to attend a
conference at Ballarat, where he was present at the riots, and
taken a state prisoner to the camp. He subsequently commenced
business as an auctioneer and extensive land speculator at
that goldfield, opening branch establishments at Creswiok
and Fiery Creek. The sudden and severe reaction in the
value of landed properties in 1855-6 compelled him to relin-


quish business, which he recommenced on his return to Bendigo,
in 1857. In 1859, he formed the first quartz-mining company
on the joint-stock principle in Victoria, and which is still
in existence, viz.;—The Johnson’s Reef Gold Mines Com-
pany, capital ; also, the Hustler’s Reef Gold Mining
Company; and about the same time commenced business as a
sharebroker, being the first at Bendigo. In iB6O, built the cele-
brated landmark known as Knipe’s Castle, or more generally
called, at Sandhurst, Knipe’s Folly, which, from its extent and
elevated position, will be a prominent feature of that city for
generations. In 1861, a large proportion of the able-bodied
miners deserted Sandhurst for a rush to New Zealand, Mr. Knipe
following suit, but he returned to Victoria in 1862, and settled in
Melbourne, commencing business as auctioneer and land agent,
since which time he has subdivided, christened, and sold all the
important large freehold estates in the suburbs, including Cljtton
Hill, College Lawn, Mount Grand View, St. James’s Park, Vice-
Regal Estate at Toorak, Grace Park, Hawthorn, Sorrento and
Portsea. In 1864, he filled the position of Senior-Warden,
Masonic Lodge of Judah, 388, but declined to accept the position
of Right Worshipful Master. He has always been foremost in
taking an active part in public affairs, being twice elected as
borough-councillor of Prahran, also twice as borough-councillor
of Hawthorn, for which latter borough he has twice declined
the honour of being nominated mayor. He is the originator of
the Victorian Humane Society; also, of the movement for
the establishment of a Government Labour Exchange. In the
general election of 1877 he was chosen by the Liberal con-
stituents of Booroondara to contest that constituency, but he
subsequently requested Professor Pearson to take his place, and
resigned in that gentleman’s favour. Mr. Knipe then determined
to contest the constituency of East Melbourne, in the Liberal
interest, and polled 970 votes, and in returning thanks to the
electors stated that number of votes had been polled without
his asking for one, as he considered it subversive of the privilege
of the ballot to make a personal canvass. He then announced his
determination of being successful at the next Parliamentary
election.. In September, 1877, Mr. Knipe declined the honorary
position of Vice-President to the Manufacturers and Exhibitors’
Association, but was elected at the head of the poll of twenty-
four directors of same institution. Mr. Knipe was appointed
managing-agent by the Hon. Howard Spensley of the Royal
Arcade, at its commencement, in 1870, which institution, under
his judicious afcd energetic supervision, has proved one of the
greatest arcade successes in the world. This position he still retains.
Mr. Knipe presented to the Albert Park Yacht Club a massive hand-
some silver cup, of his own manufacture during his apprenticeship.


to be sailed for according to the rules of the club. This is the first
presentation cup to that institution, and is not yet won; although
it has been competed for on three occasions by seven first-class
yachts. Councillor Knipe has been twice married—the first time
in London, in 1848; the second time in Ballarat, in 1855, and has
a family of thirteen, Mr. Knipe has purchased the patent for the
Australian colonies for Syme’s gas apparatus, several of which are
now in operation in various Government and public institutions,
and have proved an unprecedented success. Mr. Knipe is,
in the true sense of the expression—a thoroughly self-taught man,
both in business and other respects.
Lang, Gideon Scott, was born in 1819, in Selkirk, in the
South of Scotland, his father, Andrew Lang, being the head of an
old-standing law firm. The subject of this sketch was educated
first at the local grammar school, and then at Edinburgh. After
devoting a few years to the manufacturing business, banking, and
sheep-farming, in the Lowlands, Mr. Lang left for Australia, and
arrived in Melbourne in 1841. His two brothers, Thomas and
William, who had arrived here in 1839, possessed a sheep station
on the Saltwater River, and with them Mr. Gideon Lang entered
into partnership. At the same time Mr. Lang tried to establish a
deep-sea fishing company, as he hoped the fish caught could be
exchanged with China or Batavia, for tea and sugar. A commence-
ment was made, but the speculation had to be abandoned. He
next joined his brothers in a station at Buninyong, and then took
up some country on the Glenelg. Mr. G. Lang made the journey
overland to Sydney for sheep. He returned to the Glenelg in
1 847, when the blacks of the district proved most troublesome,
having been taught that they were not to be shot for stealing
sheep. The blacks assembled in numbers round Mr. Lang’s sta-
tion, but that the proprietors were prepared to fight, they
after three days listened to terms and decamped. In 1850, Mr, Lang
took up country on the Darling Downs, in the colony now called
Queensland, after spending some time in exploring the country.
The finding of gold in New South Wales in 1851 put an end for a
time to all squatting pursuits, but in 1853 the brothers Lang fitted
out a large cattle expedition, and after a terrible journey of 700
miles got the cattle on the stations they had taken up on the
Murrumbidgee. In 1856 he was returned as a member of the first
elective Assembly of New South Wales, and in 1857 he identified
himself strongly in the matter of exporting horses to India. In
rßs9, Mr. Lang visited Europe, and there made the acquaintance
of Garibaldi, which ripened into a firm friendship. Mr. Lang
took a prominent part in arousing the sympathies of Great Britain
on behalf of Garibaldi; and his demands for “fair play” to the
Italians were published in the Times of Ist June, iB6O. On his


return to Australia, in 1862, Mr. Lang bought the Wangaratta
station, and took up 1750 square miles of new country on the
Lachlan and Darling. He took an active part in the establishment
of the Commercial Bank of Victoria, and has lectured and written
upon the prominent topics of his time. In 1854, he married
Elizabeth Jane, daughter of Mr. William Cope, formerly master of
Sydney College, and had issue three boys and a girl. Mrs. Lang
died in 1871.
Laurens, John, M.P, for North Melbourne, born at St.
Heliers, principal town of the Island of Jersey, one of the English
Channel Islands, on the 23rd April, 1821. Left Jersey for Canada
in 1840, where he resided till 1853. In August of that year he
left Canada, via Nova Scotia, for Melbourne, arriving on the 16th
December same year. He at once went into business as a retail
grocer in West Melbourne, from which he retired in 1864, and
has since resided at Hotham. In 1870, he was elected a member
of the Hotham Council, a position which he still occupies, after
having been elected twice mayor of that town. At the general
election in May, 1877, he was a candidate for the representation
of North Melbourne in the Legislative Assembly, and was returned,
defeating numerous opponents.
Marie, Louis, of Melbourne, was born in Burgundy, France, in
1832. Was educated at Auxerres, and came out to Victoria at the
age of twenty-two from London. Brought out goods, intending to
start a business in Melbourne, in 1854. Visited most of the gold-
fields —Ballarat, Castlemaine, MTvor, and others, and decided
upon settling on the Goulburn River, and in the expectation of a
great rush opened an hotel and store at the time the first hotel
licenses were issued for the goldfields, Ist July, 1854. He then
visited the Black Protectorate, now called Murchison, and found a
convenient spot to cross the Goulburn in a straight line for the
Ovens. Here he established a punt, hotel, and store. In 1859 he
went to the Indigo Rush (now Chiltern), and was the first to bring
steam machinery into it. Returning to the Goulburn, he started
the first vineyard of any extent in Victoria at Tabilk, About
this period he wrote a great deal about wine and wine-growing in
the daily papers, and helped to incite others. He published
several pamphlets on the same subject, and translated Dr. Guyet
on the vine. In 1862 left Tabilk, and started the Goulburn
Valley vineyard, and was manager. In 1861 passed examination
as surveyor, and became a Government contract surveyor for
twelve months under the occupation licenses issued by Mr. Brooke.
Visited the old country three times; notwithstanding which his
activity was insatiable. He managed a vineyard on the Murray,
and in 1866 came to Melbourne and commenced the Hall of


Commerce Tavern, introducing colonial wine to the public and
helping to make it a popular beverage. In 1870 he founded the
township of Nagambie. In 1870 he took a lease of ground from
Government on the banks of the Yarra River for a distillery, and
went to h ranee to bring out the necessary machinery and the
workmen to attend it.
Matheson, John, general manager of the Bank of Victoria,
Melbourne, was born in Sutherlandshire, Scotland, in 1821; was
educated at the local schools, and made his first start in life at the
early age of fourteen. His uncles had been engaged for many
years as indigo planters in India, and suffering in health from
long residence in that climate, they made a voyage to Tasmania,
then Van Diemen’s Land, in 1835, and coming from a stock-
breeding family and district, they soon saw that the country round
them was admirably adapted for similar pursuits. They invited
their nephew John to join them. As there were neither coasting
steamers nor railways in those days, even in Great Britain,
the youthful emigrant sailed from Cromarty to London in a
fishing smack, and soon started thence for Hobart Town, which he
reached after a tedious voyage of many months. He first went
into a merchant’s office, and continued there till 1838. At this
time the Union Bank of Australia opened its Hobart Town
branch, and Mr. Matheson joined the staff. He served the bank
both in Hobart Town and Launceston, and was appointed
accountant. In 1845 he was appointed manager at Geelong, and
in 1851 he was promoted to the management of the Union
Bank, being the second best colonial appointment in the gift
of the directors. In January, 1853, he resigned his connection
with the Union Bank, having accepted the general management of
the then newly-formed Bank of Victoria, an appointment he has
held with honour to himself and advantage to the institution for
twenty-four years. In 1859 Mr. Matheson visited England, and
established the bank’s London office, rejoining the head office in
Melbourne in 1861. Mr. Matheson has never taken any
prominent part in public affairs j but in every charitable move-
ment he can be relied upon. He has been considerably
interested in station property in Victoria and New South Wales
Upon the retirement of Mr. D. C. M'Arthur he was elected
chairman of the contracting banks. In 1877 he again left for
England. Before his departure, was presented by the Hon. Henry
Miller, chairman of the board of directors, with an address
signed by every officer in the service of the bank in the colony.
A movement was initiated to present him with a substantial
testimonial, but Mr. Matheson expressed an opinion that as
his absence would only be temporary it should not be done
and the matter was dropped.


M‘Coll, Hugh, secretary to the Grand Victorian North-Western
Canal, Melbourne, eldest son of James M‘Coll and Agnes Cowan,
of Appin and Benderloch, Argyleshire, born at Spring Bank,
Glasgow, 22nd January, 1819. Served his apprenticeship as a
bookseller and stationer. In 1836, went to North Shields,
Northumberland, to take charge of a bookselling business.
Removed to Newcastle-on-Tyne in 1838, and commenced busi-
ness for himself in South Shields in 1840. Took an active
part in public affairs, and in educational work in connection
with the Presbyterian Church, especially the sessional and
Sabbath schools of St. John’s Church, South Shields, of which he
was secretary for many years. Was secretary of the Tyne
Conservancy Committee, which wrested from the Corporation of
Newcastle-on-Tyne the conservatorship of the river Tyne, which it
had held for seven hundred years, and placed the river under the
management of a commission, which has so improved the navi-
gation that, with its docks and piers, it is now one of the safest
harbours on the east coast of England. In 1852, Mr. M‘Coll
sailed from Sunderland in the ship Emigrant for Melbourne,
arriving same year. His wife Jane, youngest daughter of Joshua
and Mary Hiers, of South Shields, died on board in Hobson’s
Bay. He commenced business as a printer, and published the
Banner and Digger's Advocate newspapers. In 1856, he married
Mary, eldest daughter of Adam Guthrie, from Ayrshire, and
removed to Bendigo (now Sandhurst) in the same year. Was
appointed secretary of the Coliban water supply committee
of Sandhurst in 1865, and acted for several years, until the
Corporation took it into its own hands. He became connected
with the North-Western Canal project in 1874, and has since
devoted himself to the project, having succeeded in getting from
Government a proclamation of reservation and protection to the
survey pegs of the proposed canal. He is now forming a com-
pany of projectors, with a capital of in 150,000
shares, and has obtained about 800 shareholders, holding 10,000
shares. Mr. M‘Coll collected the proofs in the Western District
and South Australia, and was the first to publish the existence of
subterranean watercourses from Riverina to where, in one place,
the fresh water runs to waste in the ocean, between Capes Sir
William Grant and Bridgewater. He believes that this fresh water
will be the source of the future wealth and prosperity of Victoria.
Miller, Hon. Henry, chairman of the Bank of Victoria, bom
in Londonderry, north of Ireland, December 31st, 1809. His
father was the late Captain Henry Miller, 40th Regiment of Foot,
and he with his mother and family were amongst the many
who flocked to join their fathers in the “Army of Occupation,”
after the victory of the allies at Waterloo. Dr. Joseph Miller,


late uncle to the subject of this memoir, was five times elected
mayor of Londonderry, and his cousin Sir William Miller, is the
present mayor of that old historical city. Henry Miller received
a private education, and after the peace of 1815 accompanied his
father’s regiment to Glasgow, where he sojourned for a time. In
1823 he sailed with his father and a detachment of the 40th,
en route to Moreton Bay. On arrival, Captain Miller became the
first commandant of a settlement which has spread and spread
until it has grown into the great colony of Queensland. In 1825
the 40th was ordered to Van Diemen’s Land (Tasmania), Sir
George Arthur, at the time, being Governor. Shortly after
arrival Mr. Henry Miller received a Government appointment as
accountant in the audit office. This position he held until 1839,
when, on the successful establishment of a settlement at Port
Phillip, he resigned, and emigrated to Victoria with his wife
and family. Being possessed of capital, Mr. Miller on arriving at
Port Phillip commenced business as a financier, and from that
time to the present his speculations have turned out so wonder-
fully successful that years ago he acquired the soubriquet of
“Money Miller.” He frankly owns “that whatever enterprise he
has touched seems to have turned into gold.” He founded
the Bank of Victoria, was elected its first chairman, and still
retains his seat. He formed the Victoria Fire and Marine
Insurance Company, the Victorian Life and General Insurance
Company, and both institutions have met with a remarkable
success. In conjunction with Mr. William Nicholson, Mr.
Miller was the originator of our building societies. The first
he helped to start was the Melbourne; and he is now president of
the Fourth, Fifth, and Sixth Union Building Societies. He
was first mayor of Richmond, was elected for South Bourke in the
first Victorian Parliament, and was one of the committee that
drafted the Victorian Constitution Act. Upon the proclamation
of the new Constitution Mr. Miller was elected member for
the city of Melbourne, together with John Pascoe Fawkner and
Major Hodgson, and took office in the first O’Shanassy Ministry
as Commissioner of Customs, which office he held for two
years. He was afterwards re-elected several times to the Legis-
lative Council, and once took office in the MUulloch Ministry as
Commissioner of Railways; but failing to be returned on the
necessary appeal to his constituency—the Western district—•
he retired from public life, the vastness of his business occupa-
tions being more than sufficient to tax all his energies. Mr.
Miller married, in Tasmania, Eliza Mattinson, second daughter of
the late Captain Mattinson, of the mercantile marine, and has
issue nine children, of whom eight are living, five sons and three
daughters. The sons are well known citizens, holding responsible
positions; and of the daughters, one is married to Colonel


Bancroft, 16th Foot, now stationed at Secunderabad, India,
another to the Hon. Mr. Wrixon, and the third to Dr. Bowen,
oculist of this city.
Payne, Thomas Budds, J.P., of Melbourne, eldest son of
John Payne, Esq., late of Giltown Lodge, county of Kildare,
Ireland, born in the County Carlow, 1819. Arrived in Melbourne
on the 24th day of December, 1839, and is amongst some of the
successful pioneers of the colony. After investing a considerable
capital in the erection of houses in Melbourne, he embarked for
some time in pastoral pursuits; relinquishing them, he turned his
attention to the legal profession, and was the first conveyancer
under the nth Victoria, No. 33, admitted by the Supreme
Court to practise in the colony. He was engaged in this branch
of the law for several years, having a very extensive conveyancing
practice. During the time he was in practice he was instrumental
in having several valuable measures passed through the Legis-
lature of New South Wales before this colony obtained separation,
amongst others, that very useful Act “enabling landlords
to recover possession of their property by summary proceedings
before justices of the peace.” He also gave valuable evidence
before a Parliamentary committee for simplifying the transfer ot
landed estates, which ended eventually in the passing of the
Transfer of Land Statute at present in force in the colony. He
retired from practice in 1854* an d visited Europe. After two
years of travel he returned to the colony, and again visited
Europe in 1859, returning in 1861. He has since resided on his
property, known as “ Maritime,” in South Yarra., one of the first
houses erected in that locality, and upon the embellishment
of which he has expended a very considerable amount of money.
He has been for many years a justice of the peace, but has never-
taken any active part in politics. He married on the 3 r d of
July, 1855, Rosa M. Hemphill, eldest daughter of the late
Curtis Hemphill, Esq., of Aghadowey, in the county of London-
derry, Ireland.
Rakowski, Captain Severin Apolinair, youngest son of Paul
Rakowski, family name Kosciesz, province of Grand Poland, born
7th January, 1810. Educated in the Palatinate of Ploex. Sent
afterwards into the Military School of Warsaw, and drafted into the
Bth Regiment of the line of the National Polish army, look part
in the insurrection of 29th November, 1830. Went through the
campaign and saw his regiment destroyed. After the fall of
Warsaw, he went to his friends at Cracow, discovered
and arrested by order of aide-de-camp to Emperor Nicholas, As
soon as arrested, jumped from first floor into the gaiden, and
ultimately got away into Austria, where he was denounced again


and arrested by the Austrians, sent to Olmutz, and thence to Bonn
and thence to Trieste. He again escaped, and got to Liverpool.
From thence made his way to London, and found employment
with Bickford and Co., the great carriers. He returned to Liverpool,
and thence to Manchester, where Joseph Ewart placed him in a
house of business. In 1853 emigrated to Australia by the
John Knox, intending to go into farming. On arrival he found it
difficult to get land; he bought some at Morang, near Melbourne,
and found it worthless for cultivation. In 1855 he started in
business for himself, getting consignments from England, Ger-
many, Mexico, &c., through the influence of his Manchester
friends. Owing to reverses he was compelled to relinquish
business, and took a situation as bookkeeper and accountant.
Captain Rakowski was a naturalised subject of Great Britain
in 1853, but not having obtained a certificate had to be naturalised
here, and obtained it in 1854. When Captain Rakowski had been
in business as a merchant for some years, on the arrival of the
Russian corvette Bogatyr in 1862, he found his nephew, Lieu-
tenant Zlyszuvski, who introduced him to Admiral Popoff in
command, who, after carefully surveying Western Port, left for the
China seas. In the absence of Admiral Popoff dispatches were
received, when the lieutenant, as officer in command, opened them,
and as agent of the Polish revolutionary committees, communicated
the fact to his uncle that an attack was intended upon the port
of Melbourne, and then immediately left the service, taking
the dispatches with him. Captain Rakowski communicated,
in confidence, to those in authority at the time this important
news, and was requited by his information appearing in the
London Times , the result being that he was cut off from all com-
munications from his friends in Russian Poland, as he had been
made to appear to betray the confidence of his compatriots in his
anxiety to secure the safety of his adopted country.
Smith, Hon. George Paton, M.P., was born at Berwick-on-
Tweed in 1829, and was therefore in his forty-eighth year. He
was trained to business pursuits in England, and when he came
out to Victoria in 1855 he went to Sandhurst, and established
himself there as a draper. Finding, however, that he did not
succeed as well as he desired, Mr. Smith relinquished that
occupation in 1858, and came down to Melbourne, where he
obtained an engagement as a reporter on the Argus. In 1859, he
resigned that position, and became a contributor to the Leader ,
and subsequently became editor of that journal. Mr. Smith’s
services were afterwards transferred to the Age, of which he
became sub-editor, and for a short time editor. While engaged
in journalistic work, Mr, Smith employed his leisure time in the
study of law, and he was called to the bar on the 14th September,


1861. In 1865, he became a candidate for the representation of
South Bourke, and was elected one of the members of the Legis-
lative Assembly for that district. When the second McCulloch
Ministry was formed, on the nth July, 1868, Mr. Smith was
appointed Attorney-General, and he held office until the 20th
September, 1869, when the Ministry resigned. He retained his
seat in the Legislative Assembly until the dissolution of the
Chamber in January, 1871; but he did not seek to be re-elected
at the ensuing general election. In 1874, he again offered himself
to the electors of South Bourke, and was returned unopposed.
When by the amendment of the Electoral Act the district of
Boroondara was dissevered from South Bourke, Mr. Smith solicited
the suffrages of the newly formed constituency, and was elected in
opposition to Professor Pearson at the general election in May,
1877, an d has since sat as the representative of that district.
Johnston, Hon. James Stewart, St. Kilda, Melbourne, only
son of James Johnston, of the paper mills, Midcalder, near Edin-
burgh, was born at that city, February, 1811. Educated at
same place, and studied for the medical profession at the Univer-
sity; but after four years, not liking the profession, accepted an
offer to go to the West Indies. Two years’ residence there broke
down his health, and he returned to Scotland and in 1838 went to
Tasmania. Soon after arrival received a Government appointment
in the office of the superintendent of convicts. In 1840, left for
Port Phillip, Victoria, and became book-keeper to the Hon.
J. F. Strachan. Seeing the want at that time of good hotels in
Melbourne, he started one at the west end, near the old court-house,
where Bishop Perry resided for some time, and many other colonial
notabilities. In 1843-4, he was elected member for Bourke ward
in the city council, and then alderman. Gave up the hotel about
1846, and went to live on his own property at St. Kilda, where
he still resides. Was elected one of the first representatives of
the city of Melbourne in the Legislative Council, then the only
chamber, Mr. (now Sir John) O’Shanassy and Mr. Westgarth
being his colleagues. The unsuccessful candidates were Mr.
(afterwards the Hon. W.) Nicholson, Dr. Greaves, John Hodgson,
and Capt, Cole. About this time, in conjunction with Mr. Edward
Wilson, he took a cattle station on the Eumemering Creek, near
Dandenong, and worked it for several years. This venture not
turning out a great success he dissolved partnership, and about
same time persuaded Mr. Wilson to take to literary pursuits. The
Argus newspaper was then the property of Mr. W. Kerr, and Mr.
Wilson used to write letters for the paper under the signature of
“ lota.” About 1848 or 1849, Mr. E. Wilson became proprietor
of the Argus, buying Mr. Kerr out, and Mr. Johnston joined in
the venture and became equal proprietor with Mr. Wilson. The


paper was conducted with considerable success, doing good work
for the public; but at that time the important question of profits
to the proprietary was a somewhat doubtful one, and in 1852, Mr.
Johnston sold out to Mr. James Gill, and he was afterwards
bought out by Mr. Lachlan Mackinnon, one of the present pro-
prietors, whom Mr. Johnston represents during his absence in
Europe. In 1853, Mr. Johnston resigned his seat in the Legisla-
tive Council, and visited the old country. He remained in
England for about five years for the purpose of educating his
family, returning to Victoria in July, 1858. About twelve months
after he was elected member of the Legislative Assembly under
the new Constitution for the electoral district of St. Kilda, and
was again elected upon taking office 26th November, iB6O, in
the Heales Administration, as Vice-President of the Board of
Land and Works and Commissioner of Public Works, Mr. John-
ston and R. S. Anderson, then Commissioner of Customs, resigned,
and both of them joined the O’Shanassy Administration in the
same capacities, on the 14th November, 1861. When Mr.
Lachlan Mackinnon went home to the old country, Mr. Johnston
agreed to be his representative in the Argus office, and lie has
been so ever since. He is also director of the Alliance Assurance
Company since it was first started by the late Mr. O’Grady. The
property owned by Mr. Johnston in St. Kilda was bought at six
shillings and sixpence a foot frontage, about 1845. After being
cut up, land was sold next to his in 1876, for per foot, in
politics Mr, Johnston may be regarded as a moderate Conserva-
tive with liberal tendencies.
m'cARRON, BIRD AND CO., PRINTERS, FLINDERS LANE WEST, MELBOURNE.








The First House in the Colonies for Pianofortes.
NICHOLSON & ASCHERBERG,
irinitnfortes,
PIANOS
Ronisch
Bechstein
ScMedmayer
Schwechten
Westermayer
Neumeyer
Hagspiel
Kaps
&c.
MUSIC PUBLISHERS,
IMPORTERS OF
Cahml (O“roiti(s, ami
l|aniioiiiitms
SOLE AGENTS FOR
GEO. WOODS & CO.’S WORLD-RENOWNED CABINET ORGANS
THE FINEST CABINET ORGAN IMPORTED
ALL THE NEWEST MUSIC AT HALF-PRICE,
The Grandest Stock in all Australia.
THE TIME-PAYMENT SYSTEM EXTENDED TO EVERY CLASS OF INSTRUMENT
PIANOFORTE GALLERY:
(THE FINEST AND LARGEST OUT OF EUROPE)
45 & 47 COLLINS STREET EAST,
MELBOURNE.


£105
6
0
55
9
4
38 11
4
30
6
8
25,
11
4
22
2
0
19 18
8
18
4
0
16
18
0
16
0
8
15
3
4
14
6
0
THE VICTORIAN PERMANENT
piojurth Inbcstment tb §mltTmg Soxictn.
Instituted August, 1865.
Incorporated under the Building Societies Act, 1874.
The Largest, Most Successful, and Most Equitable Building Society in the
Australian Colonies.
THE LOANS ON FREEHOLDS EXCEED £1,000,000.
Special Advantages to Borrowers.
1. Borrowing Members may enter the Society and obtain an advance without
making any previous payment beyond the Entrance and Survey Fees.
2. X o premiums charged on Loans.
3. The Repayments may be spread over any number of years, from One to
Twelve, as the Member selects.
4. All future payments may be redeemed at any time on payment of principal
only.
5. V\ hen the loan is for the erection of New Buildings, the money is advanced
in instalments as the buildings progress.
The following Repayments include Principal and Interest for a Loan of £100:
No, of Years for which
Loan is effected,
Fortnightly Total Amount
Repayments, per annum.
Total Amount
Interest for whole
Term.
Kepaid.;
£4 10
2 2 8
19 8
13 4
0 19 8
0 17 0
0 15 4
0 14 0
0 13 0
0 12 4
0 11 8
0 11 0
£lO5 6 0
110 18 8
115 14 0
121' 6 8
127 16 8
132 12 0
139 10 8
145 12 0
152 2 0
160 6 8
166 16 8
171 12 0
£5 6 0
10 18 8
Three
Four
Five
15 14 0
21 6 8
27 16 8
32 12 0
Seven
Eight
Nine
Ten
39 10 8
45 12 0
52 2 0
60 6 8
Eleven
Twelve
6G 16 8
71 12 0
The Repayments may be made fortnightly, Quarterly, Half-Yearly, or Yearly.
To Depositors.
Sums of Money received on Fixed Deposit on the following terms
Repayable 3 Months from date of Deposit - 4 per cent, per annum,
”®””- 5 ~ „
” 12 „ „ 6 „ „
The Office is open daily for receiving and paying Deposits. All Cheques and
Post-office Orders are payable to the Secretary.
Prospectuses, Rules, Annual Report, and every information, can he obtained
at the Society's Offices,
46 COLLINS STREET EAST, MELBOURNE.
JAMES MUNRO, Secretary.


