

FIRST EDITIC
|& HOW TO
MANAGE THEM
IM* for Australian ftlibes anb Hb%rs,
AN OLD HOUSEKEEPER.
AUTHOR OP
w
■P 1 The Australian Housewives’ Manual,” “ Comfortable Cookery,”
'* ETC., ETC., ETC. I:'^
' > )
PRICE ONE SHILLING.
MASSI3MT.A. <Sc CC
PUBLISHERS, MELBOURNE.
fsi Iki
JPb m gg v H an
* *R/ O B jlj W S
. T> W
i |i j-/ n,


AMERICAN WALTHAM WATCHES.
International Exhibitions —Philadelphia, 1876, Four Prize Medals; Paris,
1878, The Gold Medal; Sydney, 1880, Gold Medal, with Two Special and Four
First Prizes; Melbourne, 1881, Two Gold Medals. The Highest Awards ever
obtained by any Exhibitors in Horology.
£lOOO CHALLENGE, open to the Whole World.
The above Reward of £lOOO will be paid by H. NEWMAN, on behalf of the
American Watch Company, of Waltham, Mass., to any firm of Watch
Manufacturers or Watch Dealers in the world who can produce the same amount
of genuine testimony and unsolicited testimonials in proof of the qualities of their
watches as can the Waltham Watch Company. Let those who have a repu-
tation to maintain accept this Challenge. Recognising the importance of the
Victorian trade, the American Watch Company have made special arrange-
ments with H. NEWMAN, which enable him to sell their Celebrated Watches
at Manufacturers’ Prices. Watches Forwarded to any part of the colony on
receipt of P.O. Order or Bank Draft for amount, Post Free (Registered).
Gent’s Sterling Silver Waltham Levers, from £3 to £7 ss. In special
made Extra Heavy Cases. The Strongest Watches in the World.
The “ Riverside Adjusted” Waltham—Sterling Silver Riverside, keyless,
adjusted to heat and cold, f plate, fine movement, compensation balance, three
-airs extra jewels, exposed ruby pallets and patent micrometrical regulator,
Kit 9s. A Marvellous Timekeeper. _
•ivies’ Silver Walthams—ln Hunting or Open Face, Plam or Engraved
Cases, from £4 10s. to £6. _ ~ ~ -c .
Ladies’ Silver Keyless Walthams—Hunting or Open Face, Plain or
Engraved Cases, from £5 10s. to £7 10s. .
Ladies’ Gold Walthams—ln every description of Case, Hunting, Halt-
hunting, and Open Face ] Plain, Engraved, Enamelled, &c., Beautiful Designs,
from £8 to £25. _ „
Gent’s Gold Keyless Walthams—ln all grades, Hunting and Open Face
Cases, from £lO 10s. to £35.
The Famous “Waltham” Keyless Chronographs—The Most Accurate
and Reliable Timers Obtainable. All medical men and sportsmen who have used
them admit that they are the best independent fly-back Watches made. Each
Watch is a Model of Perfection. . „ , „ ..... .. , .... ,
The Waltham Watches are Unrivalled for Durability, Reliability, and
Accuracy. , , __ , ,
— -m ——— r . i. . 1 11. _ TTT A 1 i.l. TIT rt 4- V» n4- 4-V. r\ 1/1 AT On
Mr. H. NEWMAN represented the Waltham Watches at the Victorian
Juhiiee Exhibition, and for the Exhibit, which was the Largest Collection
since that of the Company at the Melbourne Exhibition, was awarded the highest
honour —a Gold Medal. .
Read!—H. NEWMAN guarantees every Watch for one year— that is, warrants
the proper performance of the Watch, and undertakes to do all necessary repairs
free of charge. And, in addition, issues the Company’s Special Certificate.
Beware of the Imitation Walthams which are being advertised. Do
not be misled! Buy only the Genuine Waltham Watches, as sold by H.
NEWMAN, the Direct Agent and Importer.
THE CHEAPEST HOUSE IN MELBOURNE for First-class WATCHES,
CLOCKS, and JEWELLERY.
IRY. GARNET NOVELTIES, &C.
DIAMOND JEWELLERY.
AMBER JEWELLERY.
WEDDING PRESENTS.
SILVER GOODS.
CHRISTENING PRESENTS, &c.
THE WALTHAM WATCH DEPOT,
123 ELIZABETH STREET, Opposite Post Office.


t Depressed
in Spirits ?
TRY
Are
You Weak
in Body?
Atkin’s Quinine Wine.
Awarded Gold and Silver Medals and
First-class Certificates;
expert' tM ® in » e has st ° od the test of some of the most
J ud ? e s m Victoria. It is frequently recommended by the medical
Debflity* taking that invaluable tonfcQuinine, for
Smkmg FeehnffS at the Sfcomach > Ne ™us
The following Testimonials are selected from many received by the Proprietor .
Wine' forget™S Sir> r l have Prescribed your Quinine
recommend ft fn tomc to patients, and can strongly
recommend itto ladies and children recovering from fever or other illness
SSEffiK" 1 MOOEEI M ' D - Senfor Surgeon to tteM&e
de^fromtxtrPTr^'itl^^“ D | a T r Sir ’“ S ° me years since I suffered a great
ofappetite lll *, y a Larig ° ur dnrin §‘ the hot weather, with loss
or appetite. 1 commenced taking a wineglassful of your Quinine Wine na «
tonic every morning, which set me up for the day. I reoommendert it to
several of my friends, who have found it equally beneficial in every respect
sjth“m. yom ' S faith£ull y> EICHAED HEATH. M.D., nSS&SSSfc
rhiiSfo 1 ? eople f i orive great benefit Horn it.
Children thrive on it. Neuralgia Cured by it.
BOTTLES, 2/6.
CHYMISTS AND GROCERS,
CHARLES ACER ATKIN.
41 & 43 ERROL STREET, NORTH MELBOURNE.


W. CHIPPERFIELD,
WHOLESALE & RETAIL
IRONMONGER
POST OFFICE PLACE,
MELBOURNE
SWAN STREET, RICHMOND.


MEN,
HOW TO MANAGE THEM.
A BOOK FOR
Australian Mines antr Ulotbfrs.
AN OLD HOUSEKEEPER,
Author of “ The Australian Housewives' Manual,"
“ Comfortable Cookerydw., d'C., d‘c.
HUlbownrc:
A. H. MASSINA & CO., PEINTEES & PUBLISHEES
26 Little Colliks Street East.
1 OQX
JAMES DALLY


,.G
F
******* E
fcr '***“ ■ * * 0
MRS. ATKINSON
Begs to intimate to her friends in general that she has opened a more
Extensive Establishment at
102 COLLINS STREET EAST,
NEAR “ARGUS” OFFICE.
(Late Eotal Arcade and Swanston Street.)
Maker of
Surgical
Appliances,
Elastic
Stockings.
ALSO
General Stay
Corset Maker.
Maker of
Belts,
Shoulder
Braces,
Trusses, &c.
First-class Awards from Intercolonial Exhibition, also Two Highest
Awards given to Australia, Melbourne International Exhibition, 1881.
Country Orders Executed on receipt of Remittance.
Instructions for Self-Measurement fonvarded on receipt of
Stamped Envelope.


CONTENTS.
Chapter I.
BEEAKFAST TIME.
Ine Object of the 800k —Man a Manageable Animal
—To be reached through his Stomach—Don’t
show the Eeins—Begin Early—A Pleasant Job
- Why the Little Boy was Allowed to Escape the
Duty of Drinking Senna Tea—Pet Dishes—How
to Find Them Out—Kitchen Clocks and their
Value—The Thermometer —Frying and Boiling—
Bush Tea and Coffee—Their Excellence—Why
they are Good and how to Make Them—
Broiling, and the Way to Broil Well—The Gas
Stove—The Table—The Time to get What you
Want —When to ask for Money ... ... t<< 17
THE GREAT DINNER QUESTION.
Domestic Bliss and how to Achieve It—Sauces
and their Yalue TV hen to put in the Pepper—
The Lesson in the Soup-Plate—Why he should
Smoke in the Dining-Eoom—What to keep to
Yourself, and Why The Proper Cost of a
Dinner for Three Persons Soup-making:
When to Have It and When to Omit It—Dainty
Dishes A Hundred Ways of Cooking a


Chicken—The Best of Them All—The Australian
Mushroom —The Influence of the Vine Leaf ... 33
MORE ABOUT THE GREAT DINNER QUESTION.
The Lady who won’t let her Husband Smoke— ***
The Servant Question —The Necessity of Silence
—The Test of the Question of Cost —The Res-
taurant Dinner and what it Costs Where the
Profit is Made—The Way to Make Oyster Soup
—How to Beat the Restaurant on Its Own
Ground —The Gas Stove and its Value —Olives
—Oysters and Mushrooms —The Value of Wine * *
—Victorian Wines the Best for Cookery, and the
Cheapest —Salads: How to Make Them Salad
Dressing —A Spanish Receipt for Cooking a
Rabbit... ... ... ... ... • • • • • •28
■
THE CHILDREN’S HOUR.
When the Children should be Brought Out—Why
they should not be Always with their Father —
A Well-managed Family Men who are
Nuisances —The Man and his First Child —
Have the Children Fed Before he Gets Up —
Bed Time and Breakfast Time —Children’s Meals m m
and Meal Hours —Have a Separate Table for
Them Value of Porridge —Proper Food for
Youngsters —Time for their Association with their
Elders —Don’t make a Domestic Ogre —How to


Win the Confidence of Children and to keep it
* —The Cruellest Severity of All The Evening
Re-Union and its Value The Most Precious
Portion... .. ... ... ... ... ...
Chapter Y.
. • FRIENDLY LITTLE DINNERS.
Dinner Parties in Cottage Homes How to give
them Cheaply and Comfortably —Charm of Simple
Dishes —Their Popularity—Origin of the Beef-
steak Club —Whom to Invite —How to manage
the Invitations —Description of a Chowder Party
—A Six-Roomed Cottage with Six People to
Dinner —The Bill of Fare —The Drawing-room
and its Decorations —The Wines —The Service —
The Waiting at Table —The Recipe for Chowder
—lts Charm for Catholic Servants —The Lemon
Pudding that is made with One Lemon, and is yet
• * the Most Fragrant Pudding in the World —What
Mr. and Mrs. Croesus thought of the Dinner —
The Way to Manage the Table —What to Make
the Day Before —How to make People ask for
Invitations —The Wav to Reconcile the Servant
%/
DRESS, AND THE CARE OF IT.
Men of the Peacock kind —Men of the Donkey kind—
** * Married Men and their Clothes, and their Wives’
Clothes —A Husband’s Wardrobe, and the care of
it —Boots and Boot-trees —To Keep Clothes in
Good Order —Sponge the Clothes, and save the


Tailor’s Charges—How to fold a Man’s Clothes —
To Press them—How to tell a Married Man from *
a Single One anywhere ... 46
DRINKS AND DISHES FOR HOT WEATHER.
On the Importance of Keeping a Husband Cool — m
Also a House —How to manage Cheap Outside
Blinds —Icy Cold Water —Cheap Refrigerators—
Cold Drinks —Six Recipes for “Cup” —Three for
Temperance Drinks —How to get through a Hot-
wind Day—Cold Dinners that are Worth Eating
—To Glaze a Fish—To Make a Potato Salad —
Dressings ... ... ... ... ... ... 52
Chaptee VIII.
A MAN’S DEN.
Privacy Necessary for Everybody—Aden’s Hobbies
—Need of a Den —Cost of It —How to keep up
its Seclusion —Its Furniture—lts Special Charm
—The Very Good Woman’s Blunder —Trying to
Work at Home—The Failure, and the Reason
Why —Use of a Large Sofa —Description of a
Good Den 60
Chaptee IX.
CONCERNING PIES.
Why Men say they do not like Pies—What Authors
have said about them: Scott, Dickens, m “
Thackeray, and Tennyson—How to Make them
and Bake them, and what to Put into them—The
Gas-stove and its Uses 66


Chatter X.
** * FURNITURE AND DECORATIONS.
Two Qualifications for a Home —How not to Fur-
nish a Room —£250 Thrown Away—The “ Luxu-
rious Little Nest” —How to Furnish a Small
•* m Room —To give Apparent Height—Lace and Its
Uses—Ornaments—Pictures—Fiowers—Place for
the Couch —Tables —Chairs —Wall Paper—Car-
pets —Extravagance and Good Taste Inconsistent
with Each Other ... ... ... ... ... 72
Chaptee XI.
. _ POOR MARY ANN.
The Management of Men includes the Management
of All They Have —Servants and their Work and
their Ways —The False Pretence that they
Degenerate—The Necessity of Managing their
Work for them—The Importance of Homework
Servants not Slaves Should have Proper
Leisure—How to Plan Out a Servant’s Day—
Sunday Work —Going to Church —Why should
a Servant’s Work be never Hone —Wages and
Value 78
- a POOR MARY ANN AGAIN.
Sixty-eight Hours a Week —A Minimum Possible—
Is not that Enough—Eight Hours Labour Enough
for a Man —Why not Enough for a Woman—


P. E
A Clever “Leading Article” Mrs. Gamp’s
Method—The Proper time o£ the Day for Work # #
—The Washing Day—All Work for the Whole
Week to be Over by Saturday Afternoon—Time
for Rest —When to Cook Dinner —How to give
Directions for it—The Faults that are Curable
and those that are Hot—Folly of Long-time
Engagements—Victorian Servants as Good and
as Cheap as English Ones —Wages in Different
Places ... ... ... ••• ••• •••
Chapter XIII.
STOCKINGS AND SUPPERS.
Under the Lime Light—Stockings not Legs—Sup-
per after the Play—What to Prepare before you
go —"Where to Buy It —Twelve Suppers in Ten
Minutes Each The Little Gas-stove The
Kerosene-stove —The Omelette Pan ... ... 91 • •
Chapter XIV.
MORE STOCKINGS AND MORE SUPPERS.
Why you should Get your Supper yourself—Why
you should have it in the Parlour—Keep Poor
Mary Ann Out of It—The Charm of the Supper
you get yourself —Its trifling Cost —The Dozen
Recipes—The Price of it all and the Saving—
The Effect of a Good Supper on the Masculine
Temper —The Way to get at a Secret —The After-
supper Pipe —The thoughts it brings with it —
The Money that comes from it 97


Chapter XV.
BOYS AND THEIR WAYS.
The Critical Time of Life —Division to be Avoided —
The Victorian Schoolboy —Keep your Boys at
Home if you can Good Day-schools Best
* * Schoolboy Friendships —How to see their Value
—How to Cure those which are Hot Desirable —
Boyhood Distinct from Childhood ... ... 105
BOYS AND THEIR WORK.
The Hobbies of Yhjuth—Natural History Plagues —
**■ m How to Deal with them —How to Encourage
Perseverance —Boys with a Mechanical Turn —
Value of Small Payments —Don’t Interfere —
Keep Servants Careful —Give a Boy a Place for
„ „ his Work —How to Spoil a Boy —How to make
a Man of Him .. ... ... ... ... 109
THE POWER OF THE PURSE.
Importance of a Clear Understanding in Money
Matters The Division of Expenditure Care-
lessnes of Men in Small Money Matters —How
to Apportion the Income Purchases and
u * Discounts ... ... ... ... ... ... 115


Advert Yemenis.
TEMPERANCE LAND & BUILDING SOCIETY.
SHARES, £5 each, payable in Contributions of Is. per week, Is. per
fortnight, or Is. per month, at the option of the Contributor.
INTEREST payable on all Investments 8 per cent, per annum.
Interest payable on Fixed Deposits up to 7 per cent, per annum. Deposits
from Is. upwards received at any time.
SHARES are issued, and Contributions received, daily. No Entrance
Fees are charged, nor any premiums on advances or repayments.
ADVANCES may be paid off at any time without prospective interest;
or time of repayment may be extended, if desired, to any number of years
not exceeding twelve.
FINES, both as to Contributions and Repayments, are remitted in
case of illness or other misfortune, for such time as may be necessary.
FORTNIGHTLY REPAYMENTS TO COVER £lOO,
WITH PARTICIPATION IN THE PROFITS OF THE SOCIETY.
No. of
Amount
of each.
Total increment
Payments.
Rate per
Year.
Payments.
In 4 Years.
>» 6 „
£1 3 5
£l2l 15 4
133 5 0
146 9 4
161 8 4
175 10 0
£2l 15 4
£5 8 10
017 1
33 5 0
46 9 4
61 8 4
75 10 0
5 10 10
5 16 2
>» 8 „
.. 10
j» 12 „
0 14 1
0 12 5
0 11 3
6 2 10
6 5 10
NOTE.—If a man pay £1 per week rent during eight years, he will
have paid in the whole of that time £416. If he pay this Society £1 Is. 2d.
per week during eight years he will have pdd in the whole time £l4O ss. 4d.
The difference in the two cases is, that in the former he has paid £416 for
the mere shelter of four walls, and at the end of the time has not the value
of a shilling to show for all the money, nor of course would have if he paid
rent for ever. In the latter, for an additional Is. 2d per week, amounting
to £24 ss. 4d. in eight years, he has the whole of the money for his own,
with such profits in addition as may have accrued on his investment—and
which profits, »t may fairly be hoped, will more than cover the additional
weekly payment.
Suppose a man pay 12s. weekly rent—£3l 4s. a year—he will have paid
in 10 years £312. The whole cost of a house letting for about that rent
in any of the Melbourne suburbs will not usually exceed £303 to £350.
The latter sum would be paid under the tables of this Society in weekly
instalments of 11s. 3d. within 12 years. That is to say, with £1 19s. per
year less outlay, and continuing the reduced payment only two years
longer, every shilling of the money would be saved, besides such profits as
In this Society the investment might gain during that time. Or, to
equalise times, 12s. per week paid for 12 years amounts in that time to
£374 Bs.; the whole of which would be paid under the tables of this
Society, and apart from profits, at 11s. 3d. per week in 12 years and 10
months. The 9d. per week less payment implies an actual saving of
£llls. 3d. in the whole time.
The Directors are prepared to make Advances on Shares without
delay, and on advantageous terms.
Full information at the Office—
110 RUSSELL STREET, MELBOURNE.
J. W. M‘CUTCHAN, Secretary.


INTRODUCTORY.
The title and scope of this little book may seem to be
out of proportion to its size, but the objection will
disappear in some degree when it is remembered that
the unhappinesses of home life usually turn upon the
points of domestic management which are discussed in
these pages.
There are millions of good women who would make
any possible sacrifices for their husbands, brothers, and
sons—women who do, indeed, subordinate themselves
in every way to the interests of their families—who yet
fail to secure the happiness of those they love because
they do not put in practice these minor morals of daily
life. They try to benefit people rather than to please
them—some from sheer ignorance, some from perversity.
I want to show the first class how much comfort they
may secure with a little study. I want to remind the
second class how their self-sacrifice is nullified by the
want of tact and good management.
In this book, as in the Australian Housewives’
Manual published last year, I have devoted myself to
the consideration of the circumstances of people with
small means. Every direction herein set down will be
found entirely within the power of persons whose incomes
range between two hundred and three hundred pounds
per annum ; and every hint, precept, or piece of advice
in it has been practically tested and proved trustworthy
again and again, not only in my own personal experience,
but in the households of a large circle of friends in
Australia and in England.


In this respect I may claim fearlessly that I occupy
entirely new ground. There are plenty of excellent
books which tell rich people how to spend large sums of
money. There are some few which attempt, with more
or less success, to direct the poorest of the poor in the
disposal of their scanty means; but my aim is to show
the women of the great Australian middle-classes how,
by an elegant thrift more effective than the most
niggardly economy, people of moderate incomes may
live a wholesome, refined, and comfortable life, free
from sordid surroundings, and without straining for false
appearances.
The greater portion of these articles appeared at irre-
gular intervals in the Melbourne Herald , where they
attracted much attention and obtained great favour.
During their publication numerous letters of inquiry,
commendation, and criticism were received, which
were dealt with at the time. I have entirely revised
and in part re-written the articles, but I have not
thought it advisable to eliminate the references to my
various correspondents, as the replies to their letters
generally throw light upon the directions I desired
to impress upon my readers. For the same reason I
have retained the cross references to preceding chapters,
rendered necessary by the original form of publication.
Finally, in order to make the work as useful as I possibly
could, I have added a large proportion of entirely new
matter, which, I trust, will find the same favour as that
part which has been already published.
My last book was so well received, and its aim was so
generously recognised, that I should be wanting in
courtesy if I did not gladly seize this opportunity of
expressing thankfulness to the Press and the public for
their kindly treatment of
An Old Housekeepeb.


BOTANIC MEDICINES.
NATURE’S REMEDIES !
W. H. TERRY,
84 BUSSELL ST., MELBOURNE,
HAS THE MOST COMPLETE STOCK OF
Medicinal Herbs, Barks, Roots, Flowers, Seeds,
Extracts, Tinctures, Balsams, Oils, and
Preparations in the City, together with
BOOKS OF INSTRUCTION
for their use.
ADVANCED LITERATURE.
BOOKS on ,
Spiritualism, Mesmerism, Occultism, Psychology,
Clairvoyance, Psychopathy, Psyohemetry, Physiology,
Phrenology, Moral Philosophy, Mental and Social
Science, Preethonglit, etc.,
IMPORTED AND ON SALE BY
f 84 RUSSELL STREET, MELBOURNE^
*1
Siam ft frit' TTm i /"y/i tS) (~^n in 1 r\nr%i s> Q nr\r*r*sie\ tp
Send for “ Unique ” Catalogue , 57 pages. Free.


THE AUSTRALASIAN
TEMPERANCE
AND GENERAL MUTUAL
I Ht# JAsswrmtc*
LIMITED.
HEAD OFFICE :
46 COLLINS STREET EAST, MELBOURNE,
HENRY MEEKS, Esq. (Morris, Roberts & Meeks), Chairman.
South Australian Branch :
J. W. PARSONS, lies. Sec., Watmouth Street, Adelaide.
New South Wales Branch :
F. A. MORGAN, Res. Sec., 122 Market Street, Sydney.
PROFITS DIVIDED AMONG- POLICY-HOLDERS.
ECONOMICAL MANAGEMENT.
INDUSTRIAL LIFE ASSURANCE,
Weekly Premiums, One Penny and upwards.
Local Agents Wanted.
H. G. RUDD, Secretary.


MEN,
AND
How to Manage Them
Chaptee I.
BREAKFAST TIME.
I beg to inform my readers that I am not going to
write a cookery book, although I may have a good deal
to say about creature comforts, and may, indeed, occa-
sionally give a hint as to their preparation. My aim is at
a higher mark. I propose to regard man as a plastic,
invertebrate, manageable animal, indocile and intractable
undoubtedly, seldom to be led, driven, or persuaded,
but usually to be cajoled and circumvented, and always
from his cradle to his grave, to be reached through hi*
stomach. &
Ladies who are, unfortunately, married to brutes need
not read my lectures, because I do not profess to be a
brute-tamer. Ine masculine animal of the human species
is, however, not often an absolute brute, and when he is
he is not worth managing at all. In the generality of
cases the task of managing him is difficult and intricate
but by no means unpleasant. Indeed, there is no animal
which pays so well for good management or affords so
much harmless and genuine amusement during the
process. In no case should the reins be shown, and, no
matter how great the success the lady may achieve, she
must be content to chuckle over it in secret. One look
ot triumph may undo the work of months


In tlie management of men you cannot begin too early,
and you need not have any compunctions of conscionc ,
because the more they are managed the better they are
Like hothouse pines and grapes, one oarefuily managed
and cultivated specimen is worth a hundred of those that
are left to nature and the caterpillars.
I had a little boy who would not drink senna tea; and it
is indeed very nasty stuff. He wondered during his whole
childhood why it was that it was so constant y pn®P a s e
for him when he was invariably successful in refusing
swallow it. One day, after he had children ot lusom,
he sought an explanation of the practice. It did not
matter then, and he was told the simple secret i'ou
never would drink the senna tea, it is true, said ,
you always greedily ate the prunes that had been boiled
m it to flavour the decoction, and the purpose " as served
iust as well.” It is, perhaps, pardonable mme to feel
proud of the fact that my management had been so
successful that when he found out how he had been
cheated he blushed before he laughed. 111-managed
men can’t blush, and their laughter is unpleasant.
The breakfast-table is the place at which the manage-
ment of the man for the day begins ; and here the wife
must first find out quietly what her husband s pet dishes
are without ashing him, and then take care that ey
are prepared to his liking. It is of no use to ask him
what he likes. He never can remember, and is almost
sure to say, “ Oh, anything;” or else to name at random
some dish he had declared he was sick ot two or three
days before.
You can only see that they are made to suit him by
getting up before he does in the morning, so that every
preparation may be made before he comes down; and
you must keep a sharp look-out over the kitchen arrange-
ments, so that every dish is begun just at that period
of his toilette which will ensure its being completed
as soon as he is ready. I have seen these points so
neglected in a rich man’s house that the owner has had
to eat half-cold dishes, and to drink halt-drawn tea; and
I have seen such tempting breakfast-tables in straitened


households, where there were no servants at all, or
perhaps only one untrained “slavey,” that I have been
inclined to think poverty the best of all conditions for
housekeeping.
As a matter of fact, money has little to do with it. In
Victoria the humblest people can aiford meat, lish, eggs,
fruit, poultry, butter, cream, vegetables, sugar, tea,
coffee, and flowers. The great thing is to prepare them
skilfully, and serve them attractively. If you have
unbounded means, and large households, you don’t want
my advice. It you belong to the poorer majority, you
will do wisely to see to these points yourself. Servants,
however little they may like ladies in the kitchen,
always give in when it is a question of the master s
comfort. They regard him as a domestic ogre, whom it
is advisable to feed well; and they will excuse your
anxiety to see that his breakfast is made to his liking. If
you are not too grand to rule your kitchen, all the rest is
plain sailing.
For kitchen utensils have what your means admit,
but be sure and have—first, a good kitchen clock, a
sound, strong thermometer marking up to 400 degrees,
with a metal frame, and a pair of well-adjusted scales.
Then you can defy accidents. Set the clock by his
watch, and the breakfast will be ready at his time.
Notice the exact heat at which things suit him best, and
stick to it, testing it whenever you are in doubt; and
use your scales whenever there is the least possibility
that too much or too little of a particular ingredient may
spoil a dish.
The use of the thermometer is the one secret of suc-
cessful cookery, which depends upon the application of
the right amount of heat, and upon nothing else what-
ever. Here are the rules for its use :
1. For frying meat or fish never let the fat be below
360 degrees when the meat or fish is put into it. A very
gentle heat will keep it up to this mark to complete the
process. As this is nearly twice the temperature of
boiling water, a proportionate time must be allowed for


whatever fat you use to get hot. If it he hot enough, it
don’t matter what the fat is so that it he clean.
2. For boiling meat never let the water rise above 180
degrees, at which point it does not really boil at all, an
so much the better.
Simple enough these two rules sound ; but there are
not ten people in a thousand outside an hotel or a club-
Souse who cin boil or fry properly, because they do not
attend to them.
Tea and coffee should always be made in the fashion
of the Australian bush. _ Any man who has camped out
will tell you that there is no tea like billy tea, and no
will be unite right. It is the most economical as well as
method. Have flu. right
water boiling in a perfectly clean vessel, you are
ready to use it take the vessel from the fire, and
instantly throw the proper quantity of tea or coffee into
the bubbling water. Stir it round, place it near tne
side of the fire, cover it up, and let it stand five minutes
and no more. Then strain it into a warm tea or coffee
pot, and yon have either decoction perfect.
Broiled meats must be turned every minute without
intermission over a perfectly clear fire. Chops will be
done althe of the fourth turn-steaks at the
completion of the eighth. Bacon must be fried on a cold
pan, or toasted gently.
Most men declare that they hate flavourings and
“ messes ” as they call gravies. As a matter of fact, it is
no“ true. Use those flavourings and gravies which
experience shows you they like, but never tell t
what you use, and the result will be that they w
swear that your plain dishes, which, of course, are not
plain, exactly suit them, and other people si do not. Yo
have only to give a man a really plain gril ,
Hs use o y f the cruet-stand, to see that when he say she
does not like flavourings he is talking nonsense. Above
all! never give him the same dish twice running, unless
he absolutely asks for it.


Use a good gas stove wherever you can, because you
can regulate the heat and get what you like ; but if you
are obliged to go near an open fire before breakfast,
never go to table with the smell of the smoke about you.
Everything meant to be hot should be quite hot.
Everything meant to be cold should be trimmed and
garnished before it is put on the table. All the trim-
mings can be used, some in the stock-pot and some in
made dishes ; but even if they have to be given to the
dogs it is more polite than to give them to your hus-
band.
All tablecloths, napkins, and other table ware must be
always brilliant and fresh. It is better to have the
washing bill heavy than the husband cross, but a little
care will avoid much of that expense.
With these points attended to, and your husband’s
taste consulted, breakfast should give you no diffi-
culty. It is highly desirable not to choose breakfast
time for discussions of any kind, and certainly not for
petitions for money. Let these go, and him start for his
occupation, whatever it may be, with the consciousness
that he has been remarkably well fed. You may depend
upon it that, however grumpy he may appear, he won’t
be easy till he gets home to dinner. Then if you have
been fortunate enough to hit the mark a second time, he
is vanquished. No man grumbles after a good dinner,
and, provided that he does not suspect that his pet
dishes have been furnished to further some design upon
him —a suspicion to be avoided by making his dinners
always charming—he can be moulded like wet putty
when dinner is over, and he begins to want to expand
himself. Then is the time to let him go, and if you are
wise he will go your way. I knew a woman well who
used to get all she wanted out of her husband by merely
sitting near him after dinner and peeling walnuts for
him, a feat she performed very neatly, and with much
patience, finding herself, as she used to say, very well
paid for it.


Chapter 11.
THE GREAT DINNER QUESTION.
A thoroughly well managed man sliould always be
eager to get home to his dinner, and reluctant to leave
the house after it. Indeed, the height of a wife s good
management is reached when nothing but absolute neces-
sity will get him out in the evening except to take her to
the theatre. But this jntch of domestic perfection is not
to be realised without a good deal of thought and trouble
upon her part, and she must be prepared to bear her
triumph in secret when she has succeeded. No word or
look of hers should betray her knowledge of the fact,
and even the encomiums which her success will inevitably
call forth must be received with the demure gravity with
which a cat surveys the cream dish while the mistress
is at hand —as a thing not to be enjoyed at the moment,
but to be gloated over by-and-bye. Any attempt to
extort praise will defeat your object, and any great
expression of satisfaction when you get it will betray
you. Just look a little pleased and say nothing—if you
can.
In preparing a man’s dinner there are a number of
considerations to be attended to besides the mere ques-
tion of what you will give him to eat, and these questions
are almost certain to be complicated with some particular
whim of his own. Almost all men, in their ante-nuptial
lives, learn some stupidity which mars their enjoyment of
a good dinner, and increases the difficulty of providing
for them. Many of them get into the habit of believing
that they cannot eat anything without some particular
sauce they have found at a club or restaurant in their
salad days —some trumpery combination of walnut
liquor, cayenne, and allspice, with which they w ill coolly
proceed to “ improve” a delicate ragout or salmi before
your very eyes. Others, who are more difficult still to
deal with, vow that they cannot bear flavourings of any
kind whatever. One domestic ogre that I know carries


tliis last whim to such an extent that his wretched wife
actually has to sit at her own breakfast-table and see her
guests’ look of wonderment when they taste galantines,
brawn, collared head, and other things of the kind
carefully prepared without one single atom of salt or
spice or condiment. It is not easy to describe their
extreme insipidity, or her misery, or the triumph with
which he tells you “how he hates spices and peppers and
poisons and rubbish, and likes his food plain. Those
that want to destroy their stomachs may do it for them-
selves : he wont help them!” Justus if anything in
the world could be properly flavoured after it was
cooked I
In all these matters patience is the only remedy —
aided, of course, with a little dexterous and perfectly
innocent deceit, without which domestic happiness is a
dead impossibility. The noodle who pretends he cannot
bear flavourings is usually far too ignorant of their real
use to suspect their presence if you do not tell him ;
and, indeed, in good cookery no single flavouring
predominates. On the other hand, the whim of the
lover of a pet sauce can generally be conquered by
putting a really sufficient allowance of it into every dish,
that will bear it. Then, whatever he adds himself
will, of course, be superfluous, and presently become
unbearable.
I once cured a man of the habit of constantly dashing
large quantities of pepper into his soup by ascertaining
what the concoction was like when he had fixed it to his
taste, and taking care the next day the soup appeared to
have it exactly as hot as he made it. He went through
his gymnastic performance with the pepper-box as usual,
and then —swore at his soup, and well he might. “Try
this,” I said, handing him another plate and looking to
the servant to remove the one he had. “Ah,” he said,
“ this is just right.” It wasn’t, nor anvthing like it.
It was fit fcr the palate of a salamander or a retired
East Indian. But my aim was achieved. In a few
lessons of this kind I silently taught him to depend


upon me for the pepper, and then I gradually converted
the dishes into something like the semblance of Christian
food.
Moral: If your husband is to enjoy himself in his
own house, let him have to depend upon you for the
pepper, and give him &s little of it as possible.
Your dining-room should be the most comfortable
roomy, and attractive apartment in the house. Men of
the middle ranks of life, in their own houses, like to
lounge after dinner, and they are more comfortable if
they do not have to go into another room to do it.
Therefore, if your home be ever so humble, let your
biggest room be your dining-room, and let there be room
enough for your husband to lounge at his free will some-
where between the table and the fire in the winter, and
somewhere in the shade in the summer.
The entrance into a strange atmosphere directly after
dinner is uncomfortable to most men. Watch them
in their bachelor dens, and you will see them sprawling
on a sofa, with a pipe, lazily blinking at the servant as
she clears the table ; and that is the time when, if she
is a wise girl, she lays the foundation of a savings-bank
account, being ready with slippers, matches, a dressing-
gown or smoking-jacket, or whatever my lord the Sultan
may require. This is the time, too, when the scapegrace
finds out that “ Mary has quite a neat figure, by Jove ! ”
What Mary can do in the way of making him cosy, on
the chance of a spare half-crown now and then, you
ought to be able to do for peace and comfort.
By all means let your husband smoke in the dining-room
after dinner, if he smoke at all. Never drive him away
to get his pipe. If you are wise you will never use your
dining-room before dinner, and the smell of the evening
smoke is easily got rid of during the day. Indeed, if
the windows are left open at night, and kept open
during the day as much as possible, there will be no
odour worth noticing. Of course, if you have a house
of thirty or forty rooms, and have a smoking-room or a
billiard-room, you can keep your dining-room sacred.
Even then it is not desirable to do so when you are by


yourselves. What in the name of heaven is the good
of driving a man away from you to enjoy himself ?
Give him his pipe gladly, give him his paper, put his
dessert at his elbow, and anything he chooses to drink,
and sit down quietly yourself with any little work you
have to do that is not awful to look at. Don’t save your
stocking darning to entertain your husband with of an
evening, but do some of the pretty things you like to be
found doing when afternoon callers come. If your
hands are white and plump, the most fetching thing
you can do is to knit something that requires plenty of
purple or crimson silk or wool.
To have gone so far on the great dinner question without
touching upon the subject of what you shall eat only
shows how many more things have to be thought of.
However, I have not mentioned half of them now —and
so much the better. All I want to do is to set you
thinking. lam not a stage-coach to carry you on your
journey—only a finger-post to indicate the road. Your
own brains must plan, and your own hands work for
your own particular husband. The one thing you have
to do, however, is to treat him as the most honoured
guest that comes to the house, and never to let him see
the seamy side of anything. He will have quite bother
enough to furuish you with the money you want, and after
this he ought to have no bothers —excepting, of course,
the real family troubles, which it is not my business
to talk about.
For dinner you must have, of course, just what you
can afford. Price is a very great object. As a rule,
whatever is cheapest in the market at any given time is
also in the very best condition. Consequently, if you do
not strain your means by buying things that are out of
season, and therefore dear, you will be able to produce
them as novelties when they are in their prime. Put
you may take this as an infallible guide to what you
ought to spend on an average: Whatever a man in
your husband’s position would naturally and properly
spend on his own dinner in a restaurant, if he were
forced to dine in one, will, if properly managed, procure


an equally good dinner for yourself, for him, and for one
other. That is to say, the cost of your family dinner,
for yourself, husband, and servant, will not exceed the
amount he would have to pay for his dinner at a restau-
rant alone. I say this with a perfect knowledge of the
cheapness and excellence of the Melbourne restaurants,
of course excepting the humblest haunts of the very
poor, for whom lam not at present writing. But I
know that I once saw a husband bring two friends to
dinner, and the lady of the house gave them a very good
dinner, too, though she had not expected him to be at
home at all; and she laughingly proved to tt e afterwards
that the four of them had dined for one shilling. It is
not the food you eat that costs the money ; it is that
which you waste or give away.
Excepting in fly time I would always have soups on
the poorest dinner-table, but at that unpleasant season
I never would have them at all. I am not now going
to give instructions for soup making, except in a general
way.
First, then, remember that soup should never once
rise in temperature during the process of making beyond
the 180 th degree of the thermometer. Next, that the
meats for soup-making should altogether not exceed the
proportion of a pound of meat to a quart of soup.
Thirdly, that the vegetables and herbs to be used in
making the stock should not, in the aggregate, when
chopped up, fill more than a breakfast cup for each
quart of soup ; and fourthly, that very fair and good
soup stock will not cost more than sixpence per quart to
make. In practice one quart of stock will be found
enough for two days for three persons. Consequently,
when there are only your husband, yourself, and one
other to provide for, the actual cost of your soup at your
dinner will be very little more than a penny each. The
stock may be, of course, turned into any soup you
require in a short time by the addition of the proper
flavourings.
Large joints of meat are very good things in their way,
but their way is not the way of the young housekeeper.


Dainty dishes are best made of small ones, and of
poultry and game, both of which are plentiful and cheap,
if yon buy the kind that happens to be in season. But
if you serve up a chicken boiled to-day and a chicken
roasted to-morrow your home will not be attractive.
Therefore, you must remember that a chicken can be
cooked in a hundred ways, and may set yourself to work
to find them out. Look in the “Australian Plain
Cookery” and you will find quite as many as you can
use. One thing I have noted, by-the-way, concerning
our daily cookery, and that is the very small use we
make of the magnificent mushrooms which can be had
here nearly all through the autumn, winter, and spring.
Now, the mushroom lends itself to almost every dish
of a savoury character you can think of, and our mush-
rooms are the best in the world. I don’t mean to give
many receipts, but I will conclude this division of the
dinner question, on which, of course, I have more to say,
by giving a hint upon an easy combination of chicken
and mushrooms.
Take a nice, short-legged, plump hen, and after she
has been carefully blanched and trussed fill her quite
full of nicely peeled mushrooms, which have been just
dusted with pepper and salt, and place among the mush-
rooms a few small lumps of butter, say an ounce. Tie a
couple of vine upon her breast, and over those a
slice of fat bacon. Put her into a deep dish, and
roast her in a moderately hot oven —a gas-oven
if you have it. Ten minutes before you want to
eat her pour away the gravy you will find in the
dish, take off the bacon and the vine leaves, and put
her back in the oven to brown. Add to the gravy a full
glass of any common colonial wine, thicken it with a
little arrowroot, and giv e it a boil up while the hen is.
acquiring her complexion. Then you may put the gravy
in a tureen and the fowl on a dish, and eat them both
with a thankful heart, which brings a good digestion.
Should you find this dish a failure, blame yourself, for
* Vine leaves and their use.


it will be your own fault; and in that case do not trouble
yourself to read my next chapter.
But whether you read my next chapter or not, let me
pray you never to forget the delightful influence of the
vine leaf on the roasting bird. The fat bacon bastes the
bird; the vine leaf gives it an incomparable aroma. If
one leaf is big enough to cover the breast, use only one;
but, whatever you do, cover it. Vine leaves are plentiful,
and nearly always to be had. You ought to have a vine
of your own, of course; but if you have not, any neigh-
bour who has one will let you pluck all the leaves you
require if you propitiate him by explaining what they
are for. Should he follow your example, and try them,
he will hold you gratefully in his inmost heart for ever
and for ever. If your nearest neighbour is a she instead
of a he, the result will be just the same. Women like
nice things to eat quite as much as men do, and more,
because they like to talk about them, and show them off,
and explain them, and give them away at times, which
men never think of doing. Who ever saw a man going
about with a jar of beef-tea or a mould of jelly for a
sick neighbour, and who ever saw a woman that had not
in her time made a light-porter of herself for this kind
of commodity?
Chaptee 111.
MORE ABOUT THE GREAT DINNER
QUESTION.
Quite a large number of ladies have favoured me
with their opinions upon the subject of these papers
since the last of them appeared, and candour compels
me to state that in several instances the writers express
themselves as strongly opposed to my views. One lady
says that “ if her husband cannot do without his nasty,
beastly tobacco, he shall not smoke it where she is ;**
and she opines “ that a man can have very little love for


a woman jf he will not give np a trifling gratification for
her sake.” I wonder what my correspondent would say
if her husband insisted upon her proving her affection
for him by giving up some habit of her own, such as the
use of any pet powder or perfume. A second lady
insists that “men ought to take their share of the
burdens that women have to bear in the way of house-
keeping troublesand, further, “ supposes I would not
even have her talk to him about the terrible misconduct
of servants.” I think I can discern in that last query
the fact that her husband has objected to be continually
entertained with long accounts of the wickedness of
Mary and the criminality of Bridget, and so I feel that
lam avenged in anticipation. However, I will answer
one question with another, Scotch fashion, and say,
“ How would you like your husband to proceed on the
same plan, and tell you when he came home of all the
misdeeds of his porters and errand boys—how one of
them was two hours gone with a letter he wished his
solicitor, a quarter of a mile off, to get in ten minutes,
and another had forgotten to dust his desk or bring the
coals in ?” You would rebel, and say that you did not
want to know anything about such matters : that he
ought to forget them when he comes home. Can’t you
forget your troubles of a similar kind when he comes
home also? Of course you can worry your husband if
you like. But if you do so, as years go on you will find
that he will let business draw him more and more away
from home, that you will get a fixed allowance for
housekeeping, with probably quite a little scene when-
ever you want extra money, and that numberless
interests will grow up in his mind with which you will
have nothing to do.
On the other hand, if you choose to take your own
share in life’s burdens on your own shoulders, and make
up your mind that the utmost skill you can bring to
bear upon whatever means you may have shall be
exerted to make your husband’s home a place where
there will be less demand upon him than there is any-
where else, your reward will be that, as the years pass


away, each one will find him more and more attached to
his fireside. His extravagances will all be turned into
expenditure for its adornment, his friends will be bidden
to share his comfort, he will look upon it as his own
place of rest and repose, and will melt into wax in your
hands, so that you can really direct him as you please,
and be at the bottom of everything —a triumph you never
will achieve in any other manner. All men can shut
themselves up against inquisitiveness and upbraidings,
but none of them are proof against the insidious effects
of real comfort, quiet, and cosiness.
A more fatal objection was raised by a correspondent
who wrote to complain of my estimate of cost. “ The
assertion that a dinner for three persons at home would
not cost more than a similar dinner for one at a
restaurant was,” she said, “ preposterous.” How, if
this were so, of course I was a very false guide, and I
determined to test the question directly. I suggested
to a gentleman of my acquaintance, whom I happened to
meet about dinner time, that we should dine somewhere
together, and he led the way to a handsome restaurant,
full of young clerks and pretty waiter-girls, where there
was a bill of fare of an attractive order, and certainly
at very moderate prices. His dinner was a bowl of
stewed oysters, a dish of mutton cutlets, and a sweet
omelette. I followed his example exactly, in order to
make sure of my point, and we had a bottle of white
colonial wine, which was very good. The bill was —
oyster stews, 3s. ; cutlets, 2s. fid.; omelettes, 2s. ; wine,
4s. How this was in a restaurant where hundreds —if
not thousands —of business men and professional men
dine every day. The prices were very low, as they are
in all Melbourne restaurants where a large business
is done, and I wonder how the enormous expenses of
rent, furniture, and attendance are met. At the same
time the dinner proved my point, as you will see. The
oyster stews charged at Is. fid. each did not contain a
dozen oysters each —my bowl had eight in it. How, I
can get —and so can you —as many oysters as I like
sent to the door by the fishmonger for fid. per
dozen, and consequently the oysters for three such


Lewis of stew would only cost Is. The dishes each
contained only two cutlets, the price of which was Is.
3d. Any butcher will send them ready cut and
trimmed to your house for eightpence per pound,
and to a pound of such cutlets as those we had you
will get six or seven. The omelettes charged at a
shilling each would be made with one egg each, a little
butter and sugar, and a couple of teaspoonfuls of
preserve. Three such omelettes at home would not cost
more than Is., even with eggs at their highest rate; the
outside cost of the two dishes of cutlets would not be more
than 6d.; and I have the same wine in my house at a
cost of £T per dozen, and very good it is. The
home cost of three such dinners as we had would be—
oyster stews, Is. 3d. ; cutlets, Bd.; omelettes, Is. ; wine
(allowing the half-bottle extra for the third person), 2s.
6d. —total, ss. sd. Our restaurant bill of ss. 6d. each
was not by any means an extortion, because we had the
use of plate, linen, glass, china, servants, furniture, gas,
a handsome building, and a capital supply of news-
papers. But it is ridiculous to think that all these
things can be supplied for nothing; and, as I have said,
the housewife will not have the least difficulty in
providing the dinner for herself, her husband, and one
other person for whatever sum a man in her husband’s
position would naturally spend on his own dinner at a
restaurant.
The young housekeeper will find no very great
difficulty in beating the restaurant on its own ground if
she will plan as carefully as the restaurant managers do
to make everything attractive. They do not give you
soiled napkins, dingy glass and silver, frayed tablecloths,
and battered, untidy salt-cellars at a restaurant ; and yet
many women in well-provided households think these
quite good enough for their husbands, and only bring
out their best things when they expect company. By all
means have a company dinner-service if you can aiford
it, but not unless you can keep a really nice one for
yourselves as well. let yourself get into the
habit of neglecting to provide for your own comfort and
your husband’s, because if you do he will know at once


that if he desires to entertain a friend he will have to
put yon to extra trouble —a thing he will not wish to do.
Properly, you should always dine in such neat order that
you would not feel abashed if all the friends yon have in
the world entered the room in a body.
The fight with the restaurant must not be on the score
of neatness only, but on the variety and quality of the
dishes. And here again you may beat it very easily.
The cooks at these establishments are necessarily guided
by certain rules, which ensure that they will be able to
give moderate satisfaction to a large number of people
rather than entire satisfaction to one. Consequently,
many of their dishes are comparatively flavourless, and
hence the gymnastic use of the cruets with which men
who habitually dine in restaurants become familiar.
The same dishes prepared by yourself, or by a smart
servant under your supervision, will be twice as good
if you take proper pains with them ; and a good cookery
book (such as previously mentioned) will give you the
necessary instructions.
Put you must make up your mind to get into the habit
of using certain viands they use. Yery few private
housekeepers, for instance, make as much use of oysters
as they do in a good restaurant; yet a few slices of cold
meat, or two or three joints of a cold fowl or turkey,
may be turned, by the aid of a teacupful of stock, a glass
of white wine, and a dozen of oysters, into a ragout
quite good enough for any gourmand. Again, these very
oyster stews which you may note men gobbling in
hundreds after the theatre are very easily prepared at
home, and are very much better so prepared. The best
oyster soup, by-the-way, is a savoury mutton or veal
broth, strained and thickened, with the oysters just
plumped in it, and a very few trials will show you that
the stodgy stews of the shops will have no chance
against you. You can make an oyster stew in five or six
minutes if you have a gas-stove, and you need not soil
your fingers in doing it either.
Olives, again, are not so much used in private houses
as they might be; yet every haunter of a restaurant will


tell you that the dishes containing them are always
snapped up greedily. With a large addition of oysters
olives, and mushrooms to your dishes, with a fair and
reasonable allowance of wine in your gravies and soups,
and with a determination not to be afraid of trying your
hand at an entree or a dish you have not previously
seen, you need not be afraid of the attractions of the
restaurant, nor imagine that your husband will cast
longing eyes behind him at the haunts of his bachelor
days. If he do so it is your own fault, and not his. He
married because he cared more for you than for his
bachelor comforts, and if you prove to him that he made
a mistake, why, you will be an extremely silly woman.
Colonial white wines, of the dryer order, bought from
good manufacturers, may be safely put upon your table
before any company whatever. Indeed, you will not
hnd any imported white wines that you can buy at a
reasonable price equal to the White Hermitage, the
Chasselas, and the JNgarveno of the leading Victorian
vineyards. I can safely recommend St. Hubert’s
wines can all be had in bottle, and in capital
condition, for from 15s. to £1 per dozen. The red wines
are more risky. They are very sound and good, but
have not yet attained the perfection of the white, except
in rare instances. For cooking you can get a wine quite
good enough for all purposes for 12s. per dozen.
In furnishing a dinner comfortably a salad is a very
attractive feature. A perfectly fresh salad, carefully
dried after washing by swinging it in a cloth, nicely
arranged, with anchovies hidden in it, and a good
dressing poured over it, will very often turn the scale in
favour of good temper after dinner. A salad dressing
should always be piquant, and for this purpose, after
mixing it to a smooth and creamy softness, a little
anchovy sauce or shrimp sauce may be added to it with
eftect. It will improve the appearance and the flavour,
too, and, if carefully managed, need not be detected. In
this relation I may as well advise you not, under any
circumstances, to attempt to use those recipes for salad
dressing which contain oil, because the imported oil does


not and cannot arrive in a really fresh condition, and
there is very little of onr own on the market. In all
yonr salad dressings substitute cream for oil if you wish
to succeed. But the oil may be used with moderate
success for certain Spanish dishes, which are not at all
bad things for a change. Here, by way of conclusion, is
a Spanish recipe.
Take a breakfast cup full of olive oil, and let it get
slowly hot in a skillet over a small fire. A gas-stove is
better. When it is hot put into it a large Spanish onion
cut into thin rings and chopped small, and, as soon as
this turns a fine gold colour, put in a fowl cut into neat
joints. Shake it all well together, and let it remain till
the fowl begins to brown nicely. Then add a breakfast
cup full of white or red wine, whichever you prefer, and
as much salt and pounded mace as you like. Also, put
in chopped green and red peppers ad libitum, taking
care not to make it too hot for your taste. Spaniards
put in so many that it tastes —as Budge says in “ Helen’s
Babies ” —“ like a piece of the warm playsh but you
will do wisely to use them with a moderate hand.
Spaniards also put in garlic, which, to English palates,
is abominable. Let all stew together for half an hour
after the wine is added, and take off any superfluous oil
you may find at the top when you dish it. You will find
it very savoury and good, and it is no trouble. You can
manage a rabbit in the same fashion, and you may add
any flavouring herbs you please without doing any harm.
But do not add any other vegetables than Spanish onions
and fresh peppers, and take care that the oil is really hot
when the fowl and onions are put into it.


Chapter IV.
THE CHILDREN'S HOUR.
A thoroughly healthy and properly managed child
ought to be as merry, as good humoured, as frolicsome,
and, therefore, as entertaining as a puppy or a kitten.
If your children happen, happily, to come under this
category, you can safely let your husband have a
large share of their society, provided he likes it. If,
unfortunately for you, your children inherit from their
parents some physical or mental trouble which makes
them peevish and fretful, the less you bother your
husband with them the better.
“ What! ” says a friend, indignantly. “Is a poor
woman to have not only all the bother of the house to
herself, but all the bother of the children also? Is a
man not to share her troubles in any way? ” “My dear
madam, I reply, “do you think that the interference of
a man, when a child is delicate or fractious, is likely to
be beneficial to it, or helpful to you?” If you want
your children to grow up afraid of their father, and if
you want him to regard them as unavoidable nuisances,
by all means keep them always together—if you can.
You will find it best, however, only to produce them as
you do your tablecloths, spotlessly clean, perfectly
smooth, well aired, and—when wanted.
The happiest family I know is one where the father takes
his luncheon with the children at their dinner during the
week, and, faithful to the Australian habit of an early
dinner on Sunday, has them at his tea-table upon that day.
Afterwards he has them to himself in the library for an
hour or two, and they go away well contented, after
a frolic or a story, to their governess or nurse. I am
perfectly aware that a large proportion of my readers
have neither governesses nor nursemaids; but even then,
by careful management, the children may be kept always
on the best terms with their father, and always suffi-


ciently out of his way. There are men, of course, who
like to have children about with them at all times and
seasons, just as there are men who like to help their
wives with the cookery and to buy their bonnets tor
them. Men of that sort are dreadful nuisances, and it
is a comfort to think that they usually die at least I
suppose so, since you hardly ever meet with tnem in real
life, but very often hear about them from their widows—
especially after the said widows have married again.
The average man makes an enormous fuss over his
first child, and clucks about it like a hen that has
just laid an egg. But he soon rubs the gilt off his
enthusiasm, and, by the time the bill
becomes a feature in the family expenditure, there is not
much pride of that sort left in him. It comes back at a
later day, if you manage the children so that they are a
gratification *to him—not otherwise. And it entirely
depends upon you as to whether it ever comes back at
all. However, lam not going to attempt to lecture you
upon the management of children, excepting in so far as
their intercourse with their father is concerned, and my
decided advice is to keep them apart as much as possible,
excepting when they are all in their best humour. The
best thing you can do with them is to have them
thoroughly fed before he comes down to breakfast, and
this will not be difficult it they are sent to bed early in
the evening.
Ho child under seven years of age should ever bo
out of bed one minute after six in the winter, and
seven in the summer. If you stick to these hours they
will be ready for a hearty breakfast by seven in the
morning, and there ought to be no difficulty about giving
it to them by that time. If your means be ever so small
you must set aside one room for a nursery, and let
your olive branches be stuffed as full as they can hold
early in the morning. Then they will be good-tempered,
since repletion and good temper are synonymous term&
with children, and they will also be ready to romp in
the garden, or troop off to school before you and your
husband sit down to breakfast. By this system of


management they will have their tea at four o’clock,
and be off to bed by the time your evening dinner is
ready, or, at any rate, soon after it is over at the latest.
Nothing is more important than this practice of having
a separate table for children. The food which is best
for them is not that which, in our artificial state of
society, grown people care about. You cannot give
children too much oatmeal porridge; but you will not
find one man in a hundred, unless he is a Scotchman,
who can get it down. The children who have porridge
twice a day, with a fair allowance of milk and sugar,
are fat, sturdj 7 ", good-tempered, with bright eyes, clear
skins, sound teeth, and strong bones. But if they get
into the habit of seeing elder people have their meals
they naturally crave for what they see, and lose their
taste for the simple food fit for them. Two meals of
porridge, with bread and butter, milk, sugar, and
preserves now and then, with a midday dinner at twelve
or one o’clock of plain roast or boiled meat, with stewed
fruit, rice pudding, and such things, will keep your
children in admirable order, and the preparation of their
separate meals will give you very little trouble.
Whether it does so or not, it will, at any rate, lead to
less bother than the attempt to have them always under
your husband’s nose. Let him have them in for an
hour or two after their dinner or tea, by all means,
according to his engagements and desires, but divide
your house into separate kingdoms, in one of which he is
free from all their exactions.
One more warning and I have done with that part of
the subject. Don’t, under any temptation whatever,
allow yourself to hold up your husband to his children
in the light of a domestic ogre by threatening them that
he shall be told of this or that daily peccadillo. It is a
gross injustice to him, and an abandonment of your own
supreme position. What harm can your children do
that you should be incompetent to punish ? Besides,
sooner or later you are safe, if you make such a threat,
to abandon your purpose or to be coaxed out of it. How
does it look then for you to be a conspirator with your


children against your husband ? Let the poor httie
things have a fair chance of making their own terms
with their own father on their merits I declare I feel
disgusted sometimes to hear am° ,2, +i,; s on
daughters, “ I would not have your father know this on
any account ” Why not ? Because you have failed in
vour duty by making a bugbear of him, in the farst place,
to frighten y his children with, and. in the second, have
suffered yourself to enter into plots to deceive him.
On the other hand, if the children’s hour is to he a
time of pleasure to them and to him: it they are to look
forward to it as the crowning time of the day, as they
should do, and he is to feel that self-sacrificing devotion
to them which is at the very root of paternal affection,
ac custonTthem to prepare fir rimple
for his examination, and induce him, if it be necessa y,
to reward their pains with attention and praise.
Children are very sensitive to slights and l^stl^ e >
and their confidence is very easily lost Your oto
obedient docile, well-bebaved child will learn to hold its
tongue in your presence, and to reserve its confidences
forborne child confidant if you do not take care not to
frighten away its natural tendency to tell you eye y-
thing. The era of severity with children is gone, thank
heaven, and can never be restored. But there is a
crueller severity than blows, and that is the severity of
ridicule and sarcasm which some women pour out upon
their children, and upon their husband in their children s
presence, with the natural result that the children learn
to satirise each other. I know a gifted singer who never
dared to sing before his own mother until after he was a
married man, and she was a good mother, too, d 6
generous, and self-sacrificing, but bitterly sat i
“He sing!” said she, scornfully, when she heard him
asked to do so in his own house, and she could not
believe her ears when he did sing, nor even then realise
that there was anything unnatural in her being, the las
to hear and appreciate an accomplishment which had
enabled him to help scores of worthy objects and give
pleasure to thousands of people.


Let your children, then, practice every little attainment
they acquire in readiness for the children’s hour, for the
time when the house-father gets the one reward of his
day, in seeing their progress toward maturity. Induce
him to bear with their little stammering efforts to sing
or recite, their hesitating fingering at the last little tune
on the piano, the bashful production of the first effort at
needlework or boat carving. You need not overdo it,
and if you get them all to join in some round game it
will be the better for them and for him too. Get him
into the habit of bringing them little presents, and don’t
worry yourself and him even if the presents take the
form of candies. It would indeed be better if people
would give their children more sweets themselves, and
there would be less expenditure upon rubbish in the
cheap confectioners’ by and by.
By the time that one child has spoken its little piece,
and another one has played its little tune, and they have
all displayed any little work they may have accom-
plished, it will be nearly time for them to get away to
bed. If, before they leave the room, you can get them
all to sing some little hymn or song together, to your
own accompaniment if possible, they will retire in per-
fect temper and serenity, and your husband will be well
contented, for, if the man be well managed, the children’s
hour is one of the most precious portions of the day.
Chapter Y.
FRIENDLY LITTLE DINNERS.
I am seriously afraid that what I have to say just
now will be utterly uninteresting to those well-to-do
people to whom a dinner party is an everyday common-
place affair, involving no more trouble than the decision
as to “ whom shall we invite P” together with a little
consultation with the cook and butler, and the drawing
of rather larger cheques than usual for the tradesmen.


I will ask all tliose highly genteel persons to excuse me
if, upon this occasion, I address myself to that very large
and respectable class of people who live in neat little
cottage homes of six or eight rooms, and whose income
reaches perhaps a modest five pounds a week, or there-
abouts. Some of these good folk will one day join the
rank of the richer classes, and some will, of course,sstar} r
as they are. Man for man, and woman for woman, they
are just as well educated, just as refined in their tastes,
and just as presentable socially as their wealthier
neighbours, Now, if fate have cast your lot in a cottage,
and have given you a husband who cannot make more
than the income I have mentioned, you must, if you
want to be happy and keep him contented, so order your
affairs that you can entertain his friends and yours, and
make his home a source of pride to him upon a very
trifling expenditure.
You cannot give dinner parties of any kind, and it is
of no use to try. Your dining-room will, in a cottage of
the ordinary kind, probably be divided only by a partition
from your kitchen, which may possibly possess no very
wonderful amount of conveniences, and on the other side
it may be equally close to your sitting-room. It is not
possible to conquer difficulties of this kind, even by an
extravagant outlay upon any particular occasion. But
you may very easily entertain, at small cost, and pretty
frequently too, a handful of people, four or six say, and
may make your little dinners so enjoyable that they will
be talked about and admired.
Consider for one moment how fallacious is the idea
that even the wealthiest people cannot enjoy themselves
without all the delicacies in and out of season. Think of
the number of places that have become fashionable b} T
the careful preparation of some simple single dish, and
in that thought you will find the key to your difficulties.
The Beefsteak Club was founded by the greatest
dandies of London, simply because they found the grilled
steaks fresh from the gridiron which they tasted in
a scene-painter’s workroom irresistibly appetising.
Thirty years ago noblemen and gentlemen used to troop


into a court in Clare Market to eat tripe suppers. Tire
whitebait, which originally made the fortunes of the
Greenwich and Blackwall hotels, was at first the only
thing to be had, and was the one dainty that took men
down to those resorts. Londoners used to go all the way
to Twickennam to eat eel pies ; and, in short, fame and
fortune have again and again come from the clever
preparation of some cheap and ordinary dish. Give your
mind to the concoction of two or three dishes, and make
yourself quite perfect in them. Produce one of them
every time you invite three or four friends to dinner,
and renown will follow your exertions as certainly as
sunrise follows day-dawn.
If you are placed as I have indicated you must not
issue cards of invitation to dinner, nor is it wise to invite
people to dine with 3 7 0u who have not previously visited
your house, excepting, of course, in a purely informal
way. The best thing to do is to select your visitors from
those of your husband’s friends and your own who call
upon you. It is quite easy to give a friendly invitation
to a friend at the close of a call, verbally, in a few
simple words. The visitor who is in the house when the
invitation is given will know exactly the sort of enter-
tainment possible, and will be perfectly satisfied if it be
up to the mark of the surroundings of the moment. If
you like to write a little note of invitation do so, but
let it be always in the first person, and in a friendly,
easy tone. A little while ago I received the following
epistle, which may give you an example, as the dinner to
which it led certainly would :
“ Dear ,If you have nothing better to do on Tues-
day, come and eat chowder with us at 7. —Yours, .”
Now, to “ eat chowder,” as my friend bluntly put it,
meant to have a very cosy, comfortable little dinner, and
I did not fail to accept the invitation. The house was
only a six-roomed cottage, of the plainest form, having
on one side of a central passage a sitting-room, a dining-
room, and a kitchen ; on the other side, three bedrooms ;
and that was all. My friend and her husband, myself,
and three more formed the company. The little sitting-


room was gay and pretty with prints, photographs,
flowers, and those nick nacks that provoke conversation.
When we went into the dining-room, the dining-tab 1 e
was perfectly brilliant, so white was the drapery, so bright
the cutlery, plate, and glassware, and so tastefully
arranged the shaded lamps and tiny flower-holders.
Nothing was costly. The contents of the two rooms
would not have brought a hundred pounds in an auction
room, but they were attractive simply because they were
meant to be so. Everything that could be beautified
had been beautified. There were brackets in the corners
and here and there on the walls between the pictures;
and every bracket held a statuette, a vase of flowers, or
a little ornament of some kind. The dinner was simple.
It consisted of the aforesaid chowder, which is a simple
and easily made fish soup, followed by a ragout of ducks
and mushrooms and a piece of roast mutton, succeeded
by a lemon pudding hot, and a creamed apple tart cold.
The dessert was necessarily small, as the time was the
depth of winter. Everything was admirably cooked,
and there was literally a run upon the ducks and the
lemon pudding, which vanished. The mutton and apple
tart were not touched, and had evidently been wisely
provided by the hostess in case her highly seasoned
ragout and fragrant lemon pudding were not to the
palate of any guest caring for plainer fare. The wines
were inexpensive. There was a decanter of really good
sherry —of which, by-the-way, only one glass was taken —
one bottle of a colonial hock disappeared, and so did one
of a second colonial white wine. I had some of the
hock, which was very good, and one of the gentlemen had
some ale, which was brilliant and clear. The cost of the
whole entertainment above and beyond the usual family
expenditure could not have exceeded five or six shillings.
Coffee were served in the sitting-room directly after we
rose from table, and we spent a very pleasant hour or
two afterwards, leaving soon after ten. There was a
peculiarity in the service of the dinner, which made it
convenient as the room was but a small one. The soup
tureen was on the table when we entered the dining-
room, and the servant, a neat and tidy girl, disappeared


as soon as she had handed the soup, replacing it on her
return with the whole of the second course, which was
so disposed that the host and hostess, by simply serving
the guests to right and left of them, could dispense with
her attendance, all accessories being close to everybody.
This was effected by duplicating the dishes for the
entree and the vegetables. Any housekeeper who has
only one or two servants will find this a capital plan at
friendly little dinners. Waiting at table is a special art
not always perfectly learned by ordinary servants. But
the most awkward of girls can bring in and set down
dishes on places previously indicated to her, especially if
you give her a rehearsal in the course of the day, a pre-
caution you will find a wise one.
Before I go any further I must give you a receipt for
chowder, a dish you will find very popular with all people,
and one which will do more to help you to retain Catholic
servants —generally a warm-hearted and conscientious,
though irritable class of women—than anything else you
can think of, as it provides them with a hot and pleasant
dish for a Friday : —Cut up a large onion, rather finely,
place it in a saucepan, with a piece of butter the size of
a walnut, and let it stand by the side of a fire till it looks
transparent —not brown, but a pale gold colour. Add then
a breakfast cup full of thinly sliced raw patatoes, and
a breakfast cup full of boiling water. Let all simmer
beside the fire till the potatoes are soft. Then add a full
pint of milk and half a dozen crushed arrowroot biscuits ;
any plain small biscuits will do. Let all simmer for ten
minutes, and then finally put in the contents of a one
pound tin of oysters or salmon or any fish you like, with
a small teaspoonful of salt and a small saltspoonful of
white pepper. Give all one boil up, stir well, and serve*
This dish is best made over a slow fire or gas-stove*
It can be made easily in twenty minutes, but it won’t hurt
if it be kept simmering two or three hours. The total
cost of the above is not more than Is. 6d., and it will be
ample for six people at a dinner-table. It can be made
thinner if required by putting more milk. You may
serve it more plentifully than ordinary soup, and you had


better do so, for you will see wistful eyes following the
tureen as it is removed, and your second course should
be specially savoury to efface the memory of this simple
dish. Americans make chowder of dozens of things in
dozens of ways, but this is the best.
Another receipt from the same dinner for lemon
pudding will not be amiss. I daresay it is in print, but
I have never seen it exactly in this shape : —Pare and
core as many apples as will fill your pudding-basin
before they are cooked. Put them in a saucepan with a
glass of white wine, as much sugar as you like, and the
juice and peel of a lemon. The peel should be cut off
lightly with a sharp knife, and none of the pith or seeds
should be put in. Stew them gently till you can beat
them to a pulp, take out the lemon peel, and set the pulp
aside to cool. When it is cool enough, take three, four,
or six eggs, according to the size of your basin, beat
them up with the pulp, add a tablespoonful of rose-
water, put the whole into a buttered basin, tie it down
with a floured cloth, and boil it as you would a boiled
batter pudding, for an hour and a quarter. Use just
as many eggs as you would for a boiled batter pudding
of the same size, about four to each pint, and do not let
anything induce you to omit the rose-water. When this
pudding comes to the table it is so fresh, so fragrant and
good, that you cannot find one human being of any age
who w ill refuse it. It should be served entirely plain,
or with a plain wine sauce. It tastes of nothing but
roses and lemons, and the consistency is always delight-
ful. Mr. and Mrs. Croesus, who were both at my
friend’s little dinner, were very loud in their praises
after we left. “I delight in dining at Mrs. Tinypurse’s,”
says Croesus. “ She never makes a fuss, and she gives
you a monstrous good dinner. By Jove! I could have
■eaten all that chowder.” “ And left no room for the
ducks,” said his wife, who pays her cook, kitchenmaid,
and scullion, between them, pretty nearly as much as
Mrs. Tinypurse spends on the whole of her year’s house-
keeping. “Well, my dear,” replies Croesus, “I can
only say I’ve not had such a good pudding since you used


to make ’em yourself, and, by Jove! I wish you had to do
it now ; whereat the lady changed the subject.
IE you want a friendly little dinner to go off well von
must get the table laid under your own eyes a couple of
hours before it is wanted. You will then see that every.
thing is m its place exactly, and you can point out to
your servant at your leisure exactly how and where to
place everything when she brings it into the room See
that your decanters are bright and filled, and that
everything is done ready for your guests to sit down
Have all the flowers you can get in the room, but not too
many bunched together and nothing on the table that
will crowd it. Half-a-dozen specimen glasses, each with
iTn Z . thre e sprigs of flowers and fern,
w 1 do beautifully it you have nothing better, and their
cost is but a trifle. Lamps are better than gas in a
inmg-room that is, if they are tall enough to be above
people s eyes. They should always have the globes
shaded with tinted lamp paper, which relieves tlmeyes
The light should be plentiful, whatever it may be
-Nothing is so miserable as a dim room. J
Even for a small dinner like the above you find it
convenient to make two or three things the day before
I have no doubt that my friend had made her chowder
and her apple tart the day before, and had probably
stewed the apple pulp for her lemon pud.lin ff and
tle dUCkS L f i°- r llGr ragolAlt tlle da J also.
j^ ere 7 aS not^m S to be done on the day of the
inrl e d n n( n but to I warm the chowder, cut up the ducks
and add the mushrooms and stock, boil the lemon
pudding and roast the mutton. You can easily devise a
dozen little dinners on this plan, and trust me you will
find your friends ready to come and eat them. Indeed
you Mill find quite rich people, whom you would hardly
like to ask, telling you that they want to come, if you
manage well. * J u
Always have one perfectly plain joint and one very
savoury made-dish. Ihen, anyone who does not wish for
savoury dishes at the moment will find plain food to suit
him. Always preface them with a soup which is not too


highly flavoured, so that your made-dish, whatever it
maybe, stands out in good relief. If you have a servant
who can turn out an omelette, why, nothing can be
better as an addition to your third course. But as there
are very few servants who possess the accomplishment,
it does not do to depend upon it.
One thing more and I have done this part of my
subject. If you want your servants to take an interest
in making your guests comfortable always tell them in
advance. Don’t let them make their own plans for
enjoyment, and then, at the moment when, perhaps, they
are about to ask for a few hours’ leave, come down upon
them for extra exertion. What trouble can it be to you
to say, “ I shall have some people to dinner the day after
to-morrow, Susan, so please see you have everything
ready.” You will find a great deal better service, too, if
you couple your little dinner to your friends with a
small indulgence to your servants afterwards, and the
indulgence they prize most is extra leave. “I } can
manage for you to go out on Thursday, if you like,” will
make a girl ready to put herself a good deal out of the
way to make your little dinner go off well on the
Tuesday before or after. Servants feel the want of time
to call their own more than any other class of the
community, and if you want to live comfortably on a
small income and in a small house you must study their
happiness as well as that of your family.
Chapter VI.
DEESS, AND THE CAEE OF IT.
Unless you have been so unlucky as to marry a man
of the donkey kind, or a man of the peacock kind, you
will soon discover two peculiarities about your husband
which will be very astounding to you, albeit that they
are the peculiarities of ninety-nine men out of every
hundred. Those are that he does not like to look as if


all liis own clothes had never been worn before, but that
he always likes you to look the best-dressed woman in
the room. Women are said to enjoy themselves most of
all when they outshine everybody else within sight of
them. It is not worth while to repudiate the calumny,
but it is perfectly safe to say that every man who has a
spark of pride about him likes his wife to outshine all
other women, and —knows how to be precious snappish
if she does not manage to do it.
The extraordinary part of the matter is that this state
of feeling does not develop itself until after marriage.
While you are courting, your lover makes himself as
resplendent as he possibly can —wears tight boots,
closely-cut coats, and brilliant neckties —all for your
sake, my dear. He knows nothing about what you
wear, although he goes crazy over the droop of your
eye-lashes and the turn of your nose ; could write a
poem about the tip of your ear, and disconcerts you by
comparing your complexion to that of the downy cheek
of the peach, and so making you fear you have forgotten
to dust off the last touch of veloutine. After you are
married all this changes. He does not like his elbows
to be shiny and his knees to be baggy; but if he keeps
from these disasters, and his hats, boots, and linen are
nice, he takes little thought for his own clothes. But
for yours he is very particular —that is, if you go out
with him, which, of course, as a wise woman, you do as
often as he will let you. You simply cannot look too
nice for him, and if you can succeed in giving him the
idea that you really get fair intrinsic value for your
outlay, you may spend all you can afford upon dress
without hearing a murmur.
I have taken occasion to remark several times that I
am not writing for people with forty thousand a year,
but for that great body of my fellow-subjects who have
to look out for the best methods of making both ends
meet. Not but what the nicest people find it requisite
to save money. Her Majesty saved for her younger
children during the whole of her married life, and so did
the Prince Consort, who left half a million for the same


purpose, that he had accumulated out of his twenty-one
years’ income, which was, in the aggregate, a little less
than £700,000. Ido not deal with such sums as these,
however, but with people whose incomes lie for the most
part within the compass of three modest figures. Neces-
sarily, in these conditions of life it is essential to mate
the best of everything, and if, by a little extra trouble
and care, you can save five-and-tvventy pounds a year on
your husband’s dress—which you very easily may—you
will have that much extra to spend upon your own, and
he will be all the jollier and better dressed into the
bargain.
Here I can see you shrug your shoulders, and ask
how much more work I mean to lay upon you. AYell,
I am only counselling you to take some trouble in order
to save much more. lam about to recommend that in
an unobtrusive way you take entire charge of your
husband’s wardrobe, and I am going, as well as I can, to
show you how far you had better go, and where you had
better stop. I will not insult you by advising about the
care of his linen and under-wear, because I do not
address women who are so foolish as to allow a single
article of attire to be put away in drawers or wardrobe
while it wants a button, or a darn, or a repair of any
kind. But I am going to ask you to take his outer
clothes in hand, for the best of men are but careless
about them, and a woman can improve her husband’s
appearance and save a lot of moue’ , if she will, by
keeping them in order.
To begin at the basis of the structure—with his boots.
You will find that, if you let him, he will, after you have
been married a year or two, get very careless about
their shape and make. This you can avoid by having
one or two pairs of boot-trees made, and having at least
two pairs always on the trees, clean and bright, ready for
him to put on. The boots will tiius keep in shape, will
keei) level, and will always look new. The moment they
show real signs of wear in any direction, send them to
the maker who originally made them for repair, and not
to any other man. The maker will not cut slits in his.


own boots, but the mender very often will. You need
not bother your husband by talking about the matter.
The onl} 7 - tiling you ever need say to him is to hint
that lie wants new ones. The proof of your good
management will be in the fact that he will never find it
out until you tell him. Here, however, I may interject
a hint, and that is—never let any success in management
induce you to order anything your husband is to wear,
not even if he asks you to do so, excepting strictly as
his messenger.
The great pantaloon question seems a difficult one for
a lady to deal with, but it is a necessary one, and here
again married men are usually very careless. They will
wear the same garments day after day, like noodles, and
the most you can do is to hint a wish that they would
make frequent changes. With pantaloons, as with boots,
three or four pairs regularly alternated will outlast six
pairs worn right on. If you can manage it, always
induce your husband to make a point of dressing for
dinner, not in evening dress when you are alone,
but in some loose, easy, becoming suit. You will
thus get an opportunity of so disposing his things as
to make him wear different suits every day without
noticing it. In dining quietly with their families now
many men wear loose jackets—sometimes made of velvet
or of any fancy stuffs they like —only putting on evening
dress when they cannot help it. In such cases as these
your task is tolerably easy. It is but to see that the
clothes they take off are folded and put properly away,
and the next morning they are pretty sure to wear those
which first come to hand, which will be those you place
at the top.
Men s clothes keep best when folded and laid down,
not when hanging in a wardrobe, therefore you will do
well to have a wardrobe with shelves in it for your
husband’s cloth clothes; and if you cannot afford a
wardrobe, have a recess or cupboard shelved, so that
when he opens it in a pet, or in a hurry—much the
same tiling he sees his stock before him. It must
depend ujion his taste whether you lay the clothes in


suits or in separate garments, but in any case they
ought not to be put away until they are fit to wear.
To keep pantaloons in good order, or, for that matter,
any other garments, they should now and then, about
once for every six or seven times they are worn, be
lightly sponged with spirit and water. The best thing
you can use is a teaspoonful of florida water to ha t a
tumbler of cold water. Then, with a small sponge,
about as big as an orange, dipped in the mixture and
squeezed nearly dry, the pantaloons, first carefully
brushed inside and out, should be sponged all over on
the outside. Half a tumbler of water will be ample tor
a whole suit of clothes, but the coat will not want doing
nearly as often as the trousers. A pair of trousers
treated in this way, hung over a chair for half-an-hour
and then folded and put away, will come out without a
crease in a day or two afterwards. The same treatment
will remove the shiny appearance from the sleeves of a
coat, and will revive the silk facings and linings of an
overcoat or dress coat.
But there is an art in the folding of a man’s clothes,
and if you will not take the trouble to learn this all
your pains will be thrown away. A coat to be folded
properly must be laid open, and face downwards, on
anything big enough to let it lie perfectly flat with the
collar extended. " Then the sleeves must be brought
down into their proper position so that they lie without
a wrinkle, half way between the front of the coat and
the middle of the back. Next, the fronts of the coat
must be turned quite back over the sleeves all the way
down in one even fold, and finally the coat must be
doubled along the back seam. It will thus be doubled
lengthwise in four, with the extended sleeves occupying
the^middle of each half. A drawer in a three-foot six
chest of drawers, or, far better still, a shelf in a four-
foot wardrobe, will receive it, as a rule, because, unless
the man is very tall, his coat will seldom measure more
than thirty-nine or forty inches in length.
The pantaloons of a moderate-sized man will measure
forty-five to forty-eight inches along the outer seam, and


they are best kept perfectly flat. To fold them, you had
best take them by the heels, bring the two seams of each
leg together, and the two legs together, so that you have
the four seams under each other in your hand ; give them
a shake, and they will fall into the exact position in which
they will be best laid so as to keep them in perfect
shape. This performance has also the advantage that if
your husband has left any money or valuables in
the pockets they are sure to tumble out, and you can
then use your discretion as to the toll you will take.
Waistcoats only require folding lengthways, inside-
out, in two folds. Never, if you can possibly avoid it,
double or fold any garment across its length.
Actual cleaning must be done by a tailor, and should
be left to him. But coat collars may be cleaned by
sponging with a little ammonia (sal volatile) and water.
(One teaspoonful of ammonia to half a tea-cupful of
water.) The sponge should be rubbed smartly on the
greasy collar until the grease turns to a lather, and then
it should be sponged clean, re-wetted with the mixture,
and rubbed until the lather disappears. The collar
when dry should be lightly sponged with a little
perfumed spirit and water to restore the colour.
I have recommended florida water for sponging clothes
because it is handy for other purposes, and is cheap and
very pleasant. But lavender water would answer, and so,
for that matter, would gin, only that the last would not
smell mce. Any ordinary perfume will do, in fact, and
so little of it is wanted that the cost does not count,
especially as no tailor would sponge a suit of clothes
under five or six shillings, and you can do it yourself in
a quarter of an hour for next to nothing.
If you undertake to press your husband’s clothes now
and then, or to see your servant do it, buy a sleeve-
board and also a trouser-board. They will cost you a
mere nothing, and will save you the cost the first time.
A sieeve-board ought not to cost more than Is. 6d., and
a trouser-board 2s. 6d. No tailor will press a coat
under 3s. or 45., or a pair of trousers for less than Is.


6d. Tliese sums, therefore, will pay the expense of the
hoards the first time. The iron should not be hot, but
only very moderately warm, and it should not be heavy
either. You don’t want to polish your husband’s clothes,
but only to take out creases. The clothes should be
almost dry, and trousers should be ironed on the wrong
side. Where it is impossible to iron the stuff on the
wron" side, as it is with coats or vests, a handkerchief or
similar piece of very thin linen should be placed between
the surface of the cloth and the iron. Never let your
wifely affection induce you to brush your husband s hat,
nor yet to tie his necktie, if he wear one. No woman
can brush a hat for physical reasons, and when she has
done her best with it she has made it so odd that anyone
who has paid the least attention to the subject could
pick out all the married men from all the single ones by
this sign alone. Neither can any woman tie a man s
necktie, but this is by reason of a moral deficiency; and
here again the benedict is very easily distinguished by
those who know the way in which the average woman
ties a bow. You can do plenty for your husband
without setting his friends’ teeth on edge, and it you
will pay the amount of attention I have advised to the
major points, you may safely leave men to look after
these trifling gratifications for themselves.
Chapter YII.
DEINKS AND DISHES EOE HOT WEATHEE.
At some time or another the Australian summei
generally turns out to be a blazer, and in such a case
you cannot keep your husband too cool. A man s
temper generally rises with the temperature, and women
are not quite free from the influence of the weather
either. The first thing, therefore, that you have to
think of is the best means of keeping your house cool,


and tlie second of providing cool and refreshing tilings
for jour men-folk to eat and drink. Tlie men who can
sit down contentedly in a room like an oven to eat hot
roast meat, and drink tepid Yan Yean or lukewarm
beer, are few and far between, and are not worth
knowing when you find them.
Now, there is a very simple method of cooling your
rooms, or rather of preventing them from getting hot,
and that is to have outside blinds made for every
window upon which the sun shines. These may be
cheaply made of green holland, which can be bought
about forty-five to forty-eight inches wide for fifteen-
pence per yard. The outside frames of the largest
windows in cottage homes and small houses rarely
measure more than this width, and two yards will make
a long blind. The selvage on each side of the stuff
makes it only necessary to hem them top and bottom.
The hems should both be broad enough for laths to run
in, and, when a hot day is likely, these blinds should be
hung outside the windows so that the sun never strikes
on the glass. The hanging is easily managed. Get a
couple or three stout brass hooks about an inch or an
inch and a half clear, screw them into the wall above the
window frame if the house be a wooden one, or just on
the top of the frame itself if the house be of brick, and
have two or three short loops of tape, which will just
pass over the hooks, sewn to the top hem. Have corres-
ponding hooks below, and short tapes whereby you may
tie the blinds down. These will keep your rooms
wonderfully cool—always supposing that you put them
up before the sun attains its chief power in the morning.
Tou can buy Chinese lath blinds, if you like, for this
purpose, but they are not so cheap or convenient as
those made of holland. You are thus independent of
your landlord, and are better off than if you were paying
him an extra rent for outer Venetian blinds. The great
thing is to have the blinds outside the windows, and
never to let the sunshine into the rooms on a hot day.
Keep all doors fast and all windows closed on a hot-wind
•day, and, when you are compelled to go out, do so, if
possible, by a door facing south or west.


In order to get icy cold water in the summer time
the best plan is to get one of the ordinary canvas bags
with taps in them, snch as the tent-makers sell. The
bag should be big enough to hold a pail of water, and
should have two bottoms, with the tap strongly fixed
between them. It should then have an inch layer of
clean sharp sand laid smoothly in it, and above that an
inch of small pebbles, such as you can sift out of gravel
or pick up on the beach. The sand should be carefully
washed in several waters and boiled before it is used.
The bag, when prepared, should be filled with water,
and hung under a verandah. Hot winds will only make
the water cooler, by causing more evaporation, and on a
hot day water which has been exposed in such a bag
will be so cold that it will set your teeth on edge, while
the sand and pebbles will filter it from any ordinary
impurities. The only thing needful is to keep the bag
always full and hung level.
But men will not drink cold water always, and the
inhabitants of cottage homes are very often without
cellarage where drinks may be kept moderately cool.
However, there must be a shady side to every house,
and if there be no shed on that side you must contrive
some means of keeping beer, wine, or mineral water cool.
A box placed inside another, a little larger than itself,
with the space between crammed with sawdust, will
keep its contents cool. The outer box may be a zinc-
lined packing-case, such as you can buy for two or three
shillings from the drapers, who receive European stuffs
in them. Such a case, with a smaller box inside it, and
the space between filled with sawdust tightly packed, will
answer admirably as a refrigerator for drinks. It only
wants covering with an old rug or blanket, which in
very hot weather may be wetted. N.B. —A contrivance
of this kind will not do for animal substances, which
require ventilated safes.
Ice is now easily and cheaply procured, and in such a
case as I have described it will last a good while if it be
wrapped in a blanket. With ice you are safe —you
can cool the hottest-tempered husband by its means that


ever was seen. Without it jou mnst do the best yon can
with such contrivances as I have indicated, and others
that will occur to you. Try your hand at making cool
drinks, and it your husband prefers those that have a
little wine or spirit in them don’t make a fuss. He
would drink far more wine without them.
Here are several recipes for cool drinks with wines
and toi temperance drinks, which will be found useful
during the hot weather:—
1. Cider Cup.— One quart bottle of good English
cider, two bottles of soda water, 11b. of pounded ice,
two heaped tablespoon!uls of white pounded sugar, a
sprig of green borage, or a sprig of mint, or a thin slice
ot cucumber rind, and a small glass of brandy, or
or maraschino—the last for choice.
2. Claret Cup. —This is made exactly in the same
way, but with half the quantity of ice and twice the
quantity of sugar. Colonial claret at 255. per dozen will
do for this.
. 3. A capital cup may be made with the same
ingredients, substituting any white colonial wine for the
claret. It may be called after the wine used.
4. Take one large bottle of good ale, two lemons,
one large glass of sherry, a handful of mint, half a pint
ot water, half a pound of ice, and four tablespoonfuls of
sugar. Put the juice of both lemons, the water, sherry,
sugar, mint, the minced peal of one lemon, and a little
grated nutmeg into a covered jug; stand it aside for a
quarter of an hour in a cool place ; then take out the
mint, stir it all up well, add the ale and ice, and serve.
5. One large bottle of good ale, one pint of white
wine, one pound of crushed ice, four tablespoonfuls of
sugar one sprig of mint or borage, and half a small tea-
spoonful of grated nutmeg. Put them all together and
stir well.
6. Cobbler.-—Cut a fine lemon into slices about a
quarter of an inch put it into a glass jug with
halt a pound of crushed ice and two tablespoonfuls of


sugar ; pour on it a bottle of sherry or white wine, let
it stand a few minutes in a cool place, and serve.
Nothing should be allowed to mar the simplicity of this
delicious drink, which is, however, very insidious.
Temperance Drinks.
1. Peel a large pineapple, slice it, and pound it to a
pulp; when well mashed put it into a basin, and pour
upon it one pint of boiling syrup, made by boiling three-
quarters of a pound of sugar in a pint of water for
fifteen minutes, skimming it well while boiling. Add
the juice of a lemon, stir all together, and cover over.
Let it stand for two hours, filter it through a piece of
silk or muslin, and add a quart of iced water.
2. Orangeade. —Put the peels of three oranges and
the strained juice of twelve into a jug, pour over a pint
of boiling syrup, let it get cold, add three pints of iced
water, and stir well.
8. Lemonade. —Take three large lemons and half a
pound of loaf sugar, rub the lumps of sugar on the
lemon rind until they have imbibed the oil and look
yellow, put the sugar into a jug, add the juice of the
lemons strained, pour a quart of boiling water over it
all, and let it get cold. Strain it through a piece of
fine muslin, beat up the white of an egg and add to it,
stirring well.
Providence has taken care to send plenty of fruits and
vegetables in the summer time, and milk, butter, fish,
and eggs are also to be procured cheaply and in great
plenty. Now these are the exact things necessary to
Keep the family in good health and in good humour, and
by the use of them you may saA T e yourself and your
servant or servants a very great deal of trouble and
discomfort. The first thing to do is to make up your
mind that there shall be as little cooking as possible,
and that what cooking there is shall be done in the cool
part of the day. This will necessitate cold dinners, but
there is nothing to be afraid of in those if they be nice.
The hot weather generally comes in spasms. Sometimes


in the middle of summer the weather will be almost
arctic in its severity, and probably in ten days, after a
week of hot winds, it will be in the same condition.
When you can tell that a hot-wind day is coming rise
extra early, get your cooking over early in the morning,
put away everything till evening, and take matters as
coolly as possible in your darkened rooms, remembering
that one outside blind is better than fifty inside. Then,
when the sun is going down, and dinner must be
thought of, and a dusty, heated, tired man walks up to
his own street-door in a state of irritation, see how
comfortable you can make him in a little time. Have a
perfectly fresh suit of clothes laid oat ready for him
in his room, complete to the very smallest article of
underwear. By the time he has had his bath and put
on his cool, clean things, you will have dinner on table.
A loose, light tweed jacket, a pair of white or any
light-coloured pantaloons, a white vest, and a shirt with
a lay-down collar will always look comfortable, and he
will not be bothered with a hot scarf and extra neck-
bands. The great thing is to have them all ready when
he comes home, and the bathroom prepared for his
reception, so that he may have no excuse for flinging
himself down in a heap first and growling at the
weather. Supposing that he reaches home between five
and six, and you go to bed between eleven and twelve,
you have six hours to spend together, and they may just
as well be spent in peace and comfort. If he gets his
bath directly he will be in a famous frame of mind for
dinner, after a glass of sherry cobbler, and here is a
little dinner which will be tolerably certain to please
him :
A cold fish —for which see recipe presently—a cold
duck or chicken, a salad, a dish of stewed fruit, and a
custard. If you have a gas-stove you will find that the
jets necessary to furnish hot new potatoes, peas, or
asparagus will not make the house particularly warm;
but if you have no gas-stove I would not on a really hot
day cook even these. But if you don’t have hot
vegetables, instead of an ordinary salad have a salad of
cold vegetables, which, properly treated, are delicious.


Now for your cold fish. Any fish will do that is good
for boiling, no matter what it may be. Say that it
weighs two or three pounds. In this case it will look
very nice when it comes to table. But if it be bigger it
will not be wasted. Take a couple of shallots or small
onions minced, a good bunch of parsley, a bunch of
savoury herbs, two bay leaves, a blade of mace, a good
teaspoonful of salt, and a saltspoonful of white pepper ;
put these in a stewpan with a pint of water and a half-
pint of colonial white wine, and let it all simmer gently
for half an hour. Then strain it, put it into a small fish
kettle, lay the fish in it, and let it simmer very gently
until it is done. This you will know by the starting of
the eyes, but a fish of three pounds weight will rarely
take more than a quarter of an hour. The liquor should
not be boiling when the fish is put into it. When the
fish is taken out the liquor it has been boiled in may be
boiled rapidly down, and will serve to glaze it. This is,
of course, unimportant. A fish cooked in this way, set
aside until it is cold, and served nicely garnished, is a
very good beginning to a dinner on a hot day. Any that
is left may be flaked and added to a salad the next day.
For salad, take lettuces, endive, and small salad, have
them carefully washed and dried by swinging in a cloth,
cut them in pieces, and use the following dressing, which
will be found the best The yolks of two hard boiled
eggs, one teaspoonful of mixed mustard, half a salt-
spoonful of pepper, as much cayenne as will lie on a
threepenny piece. Bub all these together in a basin with
a tablespoon, a wooden one if you have it. When they
are smooth,'add a teacupful of cream, beat them quite
smooth again, and add by slow degrees a teacupful of
vinegar, constantly stirring it all the time. Lastly, put a
a large teaspoonful of anchovy sauce (essence of
anchovies) or essence of shrimps, and your dressing will
be perfect. Never attempt to use oil, because it is
scarcely ever good in this country.
Another excellent dressing may be made by taking
three raw eggs, and beating them up with a cupful of
cream, three tablespoonfuls of melted butter, a teaspoon-
ful of salt, half a teaspoonful of pepper, a teaspoonful of
mustard, and a teacupful of vinegar. These ingredients


must be stirred constantly over a fire or gas jet, just as
you would do in making melted butter; but they must
not be allowed to boil Then the mixture must stand
until it is quite cold before it is used.
If you are not going to begin your dinner with a fish
you can make a splendid mayonnaise by taking any cold
fish you may have, or half a dozen cleanly washed
anchovies and placing them among your salad, and using
either of these dressings. This mayonnaise of fish will
chickens ° apital P re P aration for your cold ducks or
Potato salad is simply made of cold boiled potatoes
cut into neat slices, dusted with plenty of pepper and
salt, sprinkled with chopped parsley, and covered with
a plain dressing made of equal quantities of cream and
megar. This dressing should be poured on the salad
ours before it is wanted. Cold peas may be added to
tins, and will be very good. In that case a very little
chopped mint may be put with the parsley. Almost any
co d yegetables may be cut into slices, and added to a
salad of this kind. Cold beans or cold cauliflowers are
both excellent after they have lain in the salad dressing
for two or three hours. 8
I am not going to tell you how to cook ducks or to
garnish your salad. The cookery books will tell you the
hrst, and your own good taste should guide you to the
second. All I want to do is to advise you what to have
m hot weather so as to save trouble and bother. For
is reason I recommend stewed fruit in glass dishes
instead of fruit tarts. Yery few men eat pastry, but
very few will refuse stewed gooseberries, or stewed
raspberries and currants, or stewed fruit of any kind
These are no trouble at all. Put the fruit, cleanly
picked, in an ordinary basin, with about a quarter of a
pound of sugar to each pound of fruit, more or less
according to taste. Cover the basin with a plate, and
set it in a slow oven until it is done. That is all
uonhrv m n g T . cha s es 011 cold fish, salads, cold
i d C ° ld 3 ° lnts ’ st ewed fruits, custards, and
cold drinks you may manage to make the hot days pass
over enjoy ably until the westerly winds bring rain and
the need for hot dinners again.


Chapter VIII.
A MAN’S DEN.
If you can manage it in any reasonable manner, set
aside a room in your house that shall be sacred to your
husband’s use, and never interfere with him when he has
once crossed the threshold. It need not be fine on the
contrary, he will like it best if there be nothing in it
that can by any possibility be spoiled. He will never
perhaps do anything important in it, but it will give him
that inestimable boon of privacy which every human
being, man, woman, or child, finds now and then indis-
pensable. If he cannot get privacy at home when he is
worried or out of sorts, he will go abroad for it, and in
seeking it will spend more money than would pay the
rent of such a room. For the outside cost of an extra
room in a house will rarely be more than eight or ten
pounds a year on your rent, say three or four shillings a,
week ; and if there be, as there very often is in a man’s
life, a time when he must get away from everybody for
a few hours, those few shillings will soon go, and a few
more behind them.
Even if he only wants a quiet nap he may very likely
choose to take it in his den, and if he wants to look over
old letters, to polish up a gun, mend his fishing-tackle,
or have an interview with his tailor or bootmaker, he
will be all the better out of your way. But he may
have, and as a matter of fact most men do have, some
pursuit or another highly productive of what you call
litter. Maybe he has a lathe, or goes in for a little
painting, or drawing, or carving, or for anyone of the
score of hobbies which the best of men are prone to. In
any or all of these cases a den is absolutely necessary,
both for his comfort and for yours. In it he will make
litter for weeks, and in it he will now and then have a
grand fit of order, and clear up everything furiously.
In it he will keep his pipes, his old books, his old


sporting implements of all kinds (every Australian
worth a rap is a sportsman in some sort), and all the rest
of the impedimenta of his bachelor days. Whatever he
does there, whatever he keeps there, and whomsoever ho
sees there, are each of them out of your jurisdiction,
lliat is the one thing you must keep constantly in mind.
T icre is no reason that you should not go into his den
occasionally—but you will never do so unasked if you
TeT and f? IS -T reaSOn wl 'y y° u should pretend
any jealousy of its existence. Look upon all the rest of
the house as your particular kingdom, but reserve that
entirely to him, and teach your children of all ages by
your example, to respect their father’s privacy and to
leave him to himself whenever he bolts off to be alone
And here I may pause to say that with children in a
matter of this kind it is of no use to reason. It is
simply best to say quietly and kindly, “ My dear, you
must not go into papa’s den unless he calls you,” and to
the inevitable “Why not, mamma?” merely respond
Because Ido not wish you to do so.” If your children
are well brought up your wish will be a law where your
arguments would not hold water for a moment.
The result of the plan will be that your husband will
always have his belongings in one place, will generally
yo f u i iave a yisit ° r d ° es n °t wi S i t 0 se e,
and v ill be out of your way at various times when his
presence would be inconvenient. It is wise to have a
workroom for yourself, if it be ever so small, where the
ewing-maehine, and the stocking-darning, and the
mending of clothes and household linen can be carried
on. liy this plan you will save yourself the trouble of
putting away work every time you lay it down, and you
11 bo able to keep your sitting-room and dining-
room free from any work but that of the ornamental
character, which will not offend the eye of the most
fastidious visitor, nor of the most fidgety husband,
lour workroom need not be as large as his den.
because in it you will not lounge, nor will you go to it
tor peace and quietness. Your workroom” will be a
place of utility and activity; his den is a place of


The furniture of a man’s den should be plain and
strong and simple. It need not be hideous, but it will
not please him if it be fragile or too ornamental. It
should have one or two cupboards, with sound, useful
locks on them, but the locks should not be so large that
the keys are too cumbersome for him to carry. It
should have a firm, large table, at which he may write or
work, two or three easy chairs, and, above all, a large,
old-fashioned, double-armed sofa —not a modern couch
or a settee, but a big, roomy affair that he can stretch
out at full length upon and have a nap. You will find
second-hand furniture, such as you buy at a good
dealer’s, much fitter for it than new things, of which
most men have an instinctive horror. The curtains and
carpets should be rather dull than bright, and if they
are as old as the hills they will be all the better for the
purpose. The great charm of a man’s den to a man is
that if he upsets his ink when he is writing, or the oil
when he is cleaning a gun, or the glue-pot when he is
mending his fishing-tackle, no harm of any importance
is done.
When you have been keeping house for some time
you will find that he will be very well contented to get
the old carpets, old bureaux, cabinets, and other goods
which increasing means enables you to replace in your
part of the house for his den, and you will be surprised
at the number of things he will accumulate to fill it
with. If you show by your quiet reserve that you know
how to leave him alone you will find that everything he
gets will be shown to you and to the children too, if not
directly, yet at some time or another; and from the den
will come at intervals many additions to your comfort
and to theirs. It is a great mistake to imagine that the
possession of a den and its contents makes a man selfish.
On the contrary, it stimulates his generosity and keeps
it alive by leaving him something still of his own to give
away. This he can never have if he is always under
your feet, and if every new possession, whether trifling
or important, is instantly common to the whole house-
hold.


But the setting apart of a den for a man will be of no
use whatever if you are to affect a jealousy of it or a
never-ceasing curiosity about it. Treat it as a matter of
course. Don’t be afraid to summon him from it if he be
wanted. Don’t speak of it as a “blue chamber,” and
reduse to enter it because it is his only. Do into it
when you particularly want him, or when he particularlv
wants you, just as you would go to his office; but do so
without any interference.
I know a very, very good woman who took it into her
ead that her husband could easily do his work at
home, and, indeed, it would have been quite possible
it her goodness had lain in any manageable direction,
fehe persuaded him to adopt her view, which he did with
some misgivings. A room was set apart for his work
and on a bright spring morning, soon after breakfast, he
sat aown with his books and j3apers and began.
He had been at work about twenty minutes when
there was a gentle little tap at the door-a quiet, almost
inaudible tap, such as the servant girl’s lover gives on
the kitchen window of a house where no followers are
allowed to let the faithful Bridget know he is outside.
At the second “Come in” his wife’s head appeared
round the door which she only opened a very little
way, and she said : J
I m very sorry to disturb you, dear, but I want to
get something out of the left-hand back corner of the
top shelf of the cupboard.” So saying, she went on tip-
e across the room, tried to get what she wanted, could
not reach it, accepted his assistance, set his wits wool-
gathering, and went away.
Five times in three hours she went to the room on one
* She had thought of a question she
must ask him; she was quite sure that he wanted some
beer ; she wanted to borrow a pen ; she wanted change
oi half-a-crown ; she wanted him to come down and
t?nW" a^ awke f. who , was “ Oh, so rude ; almost quite
violent. Every time she came she spoke in a blood-
curdling whisper, and moved as if his life depended on
hearing the boards creak instead of hearing her footstep.


She was so anxious not to interrupt him or disturb
him, you see. At last he called a passing cab, put his
books and papers into it in a heap, and fled. She
declared she heard him say something with a big D
in it, for the first time in their married life, as he
slammed the door of the vehicle, and I think it served
her right.
She insists now that she is an ill-used woman because
he will not repeat the experiment. She asks “ whom a
wife should go to with her little troubles if not to her
husband?” and she is quite sure that he would have got
so used to her presence that it would have been an
assistance to him. He does not think so, and never will.
She is a demoted wife and he is a good husband. But
she will never learn how to manage him, and there will
always be two sides to his life whereof she will never
see but one.
A little while ago, in the shop of a country furniture
dealer, I came across a sofa of an old-fashioned build,
but perfectly new. Along the top of the squab it
measured nearly seven feet, and it was close upon two
feet broad. It put into my mind the recollection of a
den in which a man used to be very comfortable in
bygone days, and I stood looking at it with so much
interest that my companion, a lady on a furnishing
expedition, wondered at and inquired the use of it.
I told her of its household value, and she very wisely
bought it. The price was only £1 125., and her husband
was ready to add a £lO note to her next subsidy simply
because it was so great a comfort to him. Men like to
sprawl, and lounge, and stretch themselves, and you can
only keep them comfortable by giving them full liberty
to indulge in those habits, or any others they like.
The den in which I had last seen such a sofa may
serve as a very fair model of the kind of room you
should aim at. It was a good-sized room, low-ceilinged,
but light by reason of its having two large windows in
it. Yet, as the windows were both on one side, it was
not difficult to get out of the sunshine, and, indeed, tho


occupant, when he lay upon the sofa, which stood at one
end of the room behind the door, with his head toward
the windows, found the light come comfortably over his
shoulder on to his book. Just above the end of the sofa
a small folding gas bracket was screwed to the wall, with
a good burner, well shaded, so that the double opera-
tions of sprawling and reading might go on comfortably
alter daylight was over. The room was covered with a
well-worn Brussels carpet, which had once been, I think,
ol a rich chocolate colour, with gold fleurs de Us upon it.
But no one could be sure of anything now, save that the
room was carpeted. Between the windows there was a
little piano, and opposite to that a heavy sideboard per-
verted from its original use into a cabinet. A large, old-
ashioned book-case, with a double cupboard below it
occupied a recess on the side of the fire-place farthest
trom the windows, and the corresponding recess nearest
to the windows held a writing-table with three or four
shelves over it. A heavy, solid table stood in the exact
centre of the room, but ran easily out of the way on its
castors without trouble when it was necessary. Each of
the deeply-recessed windows had a seat in it, and each
seat was in reality a locker. There were three or four
library chairs in it, and a couple of easy chairs also.
Over the chimney was a large coloured picture, one of
hose issued by the Arundel Society, representing the
interior of some great Continental cathedral, and the
wails were covered with a medley of architectural
prints, sketches, photographs, landscapes, and drawings
I counted upwards of ninety. There was no central
chandelier, for the ceiling was too low to allow head
space under one ; but there was a gas bracket on either
Side the mantel-piece, and one on each side of the piano,
nd a fifth oyer the sideboard, making six in all with
the one oyer the sofa. Around the room, wherever they
could be hung or stood, were foils, and clubs, and single-
sticks and guns, some of them in a sadly disabled
ndition, for this was the den of a young fellow whose
play-room it had been when he was a boy. Almost
everything in it had been picked up from time to time
y himself in strolling about, and there was not an


article that had not some memory of innocent fun
attached to it.
Here the children counted it a great treat to come at
rare intervals, and sit in the window seats, and watch
with wide expanding eyes the treasures of old medals,
coins, and curiosities of all kinds which their father had
amassed in his boyhood. The first boat he had carved
was there, and so were the mounted hoofs of the first
pony he had ever had, and the skin of ps g
(long dead of old age), the birds he had stuffed with his
own hands, and many of his old toys and spoiling imp e
ments. Everyone had a story of its own, and everyone
was in their eyes a treasure. A clever housewife might
have turned the room into a lumber-room, and have
swept the curiosities out of doors without incurring any
great pecuniary loss, for the whole lot would no ave
brought a fifty pound note from the most liberal dealer.
But the room was a sacred shelter, where a busy and
thriving man might sometimes lounge an hour or two to
dream of the past, and to gather new strength tor the
present; and, to my mind, the wisest action of the young
wife’s life was when she determind that it should never
be interfered with. “He can go up there and dream he
is a bachelor again,” she used to say with a laugh ; and
I do not think the dreams ever did any harm to their
married happiness.
Chapter IX.
CONCEEXIXG PIES.
When a man tells you he does not care for pies, you
may set him down as a poor unfortunate fellow who
really does not know what he does like. For a pie,
properly made, is one of the best of good things, and the
cleverest cooks are always proud of their achievements
with a paste-board and rolling-pin. A good pie pre-


serves all those ethereal essences of the contents which
andTt has r COokin S- , ar , e lost b 7 evaporation!
and it has, in addition, a subtle charm of its own
indescribable, but certainly recognisable. The noblest
are° U put lS into pl6S ’ and the best of our viands
things at Jll A h ' Y ° U ? annot . make of mean
and fr, f 1 1L - f Ve ? 1 l 0I J P ast - a Pgw» Pi®, a game pie,
and an eel pie!—what have you better, pray, in earth
aTd theTelT ‘7 tbe
ana the eel? And where are any of them so good as
wTon are Then P 7 P A | f ° r , fruit pieS > name is
and ™rr rfUme of , a cherry pie, or of a raspberry
and currant pie, is enough to set a man thinking of home
as long as he has any good left in him; and if he thinks
nie ho the ■ a sbudd ® r , wllell ho is reminded of it by
pie, the fact is a proof that you do not know how to
manage your man—and your kitchen.
abmit disb tbe P oets and novelists rave
wwl’ , a d f 7 ma 7 take m 7 word for it that the poet
I 7„!' S ,r’ r reading is always a vivant.
1 don t, as a matter of fact, want you to take my word.
Appeal to your memory, if you have one, and remember
W Scott describes a venison pasty in
the “aunle° W Dl ® kens makes Barkis dwell on
ConnerX P ld •’ p d 6S % “ ade by Peggotty, in “David
“ \w7 p ' .. Bnd how regretfully Thackeray, in
Vanity Pair, mourns over the most abominable pie
of 7l h toktV aUe made f ? r ? ltt Crawle y- Last, and best
ot all, take Tennyson s glorious description of a pie
And, halt cut down, a pasty costly made.
Where lark and leveret, quail and pigeon lay
With golden yolks embedded and enjellied. 7
Of course you cannot make a pie like this without
taking a little trouble and spending a little money, nor
an you in Australia get the larks for your pie. But
leverets are not scarce, and though quails can only be
had as a favour, they are not indispensable. A chicken
thefr nf, ~ ° hlckeQ : not a four-year-old hen—will take
heir place, or yon may put a plover or two in with a


clear conscience if yon can get them ; and snipe yon can
safely use, the only danger being that if once yon give a
game pie with snipe in it to a gnest he will never be ont
of the honse.
Some people pretend that the art of making pastry is
a gift. As a matter of fact, it is the easiest thing in the
world if yon will only take the pains to do it properly.
Try my recipe, doing exactly as yon are told, and yon
will have a capital paste without any trouble, and with-
out even flouring the tips of your fingers. Take a
pound of flour, put it into a large bowl or basin, so that
yon have room to stir it up well, add to it half a salt-
spoonful of salt, and a breakfast cup full of water, in
which a yolk of an egg has been beaten up. all
these well together with a knife or strong spoon until a
lump of stiffish paste is formed in your bowl. Then
lightly dredge a paste board with flour, turn the paste
out on to it, flour a rolling pin and roll the paste out
quickly, not pressing heavily on it, but only enough to
squeeze it down into about an inch thick. A single roll
of the rolling-pin ought to do this. Then take four
ounces of butter and spread it lightly over the paste.
Turn each end over into the middle with a knife so that
the paste is folded in three, just as you fold a letter to
go into an envelope, and roll it out again breadthwise so
as to make it about as broad as it is long. Spread on
another four ounces of butter, and repeat the process of
folding and rolling. Then do it a third time, with the
same amount of butter. You will thus have used a
pound of flour and three-quarters of a pound of butter.
If you want the paste very rich you can use a pound of
butter, making each layer of butter larger. Every time
you roll the paste you must dredge it lightly with flour,
and also the board and the rolling pin, to prevent their
sticking. If you are careful, your rolling-pin will only
have gone four times over it in all. Each time you turn
up the ends of the paste use a knife to do it, as the
paste will be lighter for never being handled. But
when you roll it for the last time, after doubling it over
the third allowance of butter, roll it a little harder, so as


to bring it to about half an inch thick, or a little more.
IN ow take the dish you mean to use. Turn it upside-
down on the paste, and pass your knife all round' it, so
that you nave a piece of the crust the right size for the
top of your pie. Take the dish off again, roll the pieces
that you trim off into a ball, roll them out to a little
more than a quarter of an inch in thickness, and cut
them into strips to line the edges of your dish with,
this pie crust will be light and excellent.
The butter you use must be the very best, and unless
you can afford to use good butter, and plenty of it, do
not make pies at all—well, don’t try at a swell pie, at
any rate. The white of the egg of which you used the
l6 be brushed over the crust. It
will then come out with a pleasant glaze upon it, just as
the best pies do at the pastrycooks’.
But a pie must have an inside, as well as an outside,
and. tor the inside of a pie you cannot have too much
variety. you can never go wrong by putting a layer of
steak, cut into small pieces, at the bottom of a pie-dish,
putting birds of any kind, cut up small, in the centre,
sprinkling plentifully with salt, pepper, minced savoury
ler bs, and a little grated nutmeg, packing tightly with
torcemeat or sausage meat, and covering all with small,
thm piece B of ham. Line the border of your dish with
the thin crust, wet the edges with cold water, lay the
upper crust on it, and press it down all round with a fork
or the handle of a spoon, trim the edges, make a little
note in the top with a skewer, lay a small ornament of
paste over the hole, brush the top crust over with the
white of the egg of which you used the yolk in the crust,
and bake it in a moderate oven for an hour and a half if
it be a small pie, or for two hours if it be a large one. A
pie containing less than three pounds of meat will take
an hour and a half; over three pounds and not more than
tour pounds, two hours.
If you want a pie to contain more than four pounds
ot meat, it will be useless to attempt to cook the meat in
a pie ot which the crust is to be really enjoyed. The
only thing to be done is to pack the meat in a pie-dish,


cover it over with anotlier dish, to fit closely, bake in a
very slow oven for a couple of hours, and set it aside to
cool, never taking the upper dish off. When quite cold
remove the upper dish, border the pie-dish containing
the meat with a thin crust, put your upper crust over it,
and bake for a full hour. Thus the solid meat will have
had three hours 1 cooking and the paste one, which, if
the oven be quick when the paste is put in, ought to be
enough. If you cannot depend upon your oven you can
pack all the meats for your pie into a jar such as a hare
is jugged in. Cover the jar tightly, set it up to its neck
in boiling water, and let it boil for a couple of Lours; set
it aside to cool, not taking the lid off, and when cold
turn the contents into your pie-dish, and complete your
pie as just directed.
Always remember that you can make a pie of any-
thing that is good. A chicken cut up small, with the
bones taken out, makes an excellent pie, especially if
you have a steak at the bottom of the dish, and thin
slices of ham at the top of it. The steak should always
be cut into small pieces, and seasoned with plenty of
pepper and salt. The chicken should be packed in
tightly, with plenty of forcemeat or sausage meat in all
the crevices, and the ham laid over all. Nothing should
be put into a pie that is too large to be taken out in a
tablespoon. Hard-boiled eggs, cut in thick slices, may
be put in, and will enrich the pie immensely; so will
oysters, which, in a pie, mix capitally with either steak
or chicken, and mushrooms are specially good for pie-
making. Indeed, you cannot go wrong in pie-making by
putting in anything and everything. The greater the
mixture, the better the pie will be.
As I am not writing a cookery book I do not pretend
to give you recipes for making all kinds of pies. You
will find them described in the book I have already
referred to, and I have no doubt they are all excellent.
But if you will learn just what I have told you, you will
never find any difficulty in pie-making thereafter, and
you can vary the contents of your pies according to your
means and your fancy.


Unless yon live in little country towns where gas is
unknown I strongly recommend you to have a gas-stove.
Your fire is thus always ready, and can always be
turned out whenever you have done with it, so as to
keep your place cool. All your cookery will then be
clean and easy to manage, and whatever labour in any
part of it you may choose to take upon your own
shoiilders will be a mere trifle. Note the difference,
for instance, in such a matter as making a pie. It is
essential that your pie should be put into the oven
directly it is ready, otherwise the paste will be heavy
or chippy. But with a colonial oven, heated by a wood
or a coal fire, you will have no end of difficulty in
getting the oven and the pie fit for each other at the
same time. You have no means of regulating the heat,
and you are in a constant state of terror until the opera-
tion is completed. But with a gas-stove, one turn of the
finger sets it ready, and in two minutes it is as hot as it
will be in two hours. Consequently, your pastry comes
out that lovely even golden straw colour which makes
the success of your dinner certain. So with a soup or a
stew. You set it over a moderate gas jet until it begins
to simmer. Then you turn the gas jet down until a
mere blue spot of light remains, and your stewpan goes
on gently simmering until everything is done without
the least chance of burning anything. Nobody wants to
see ladies, whether they are poor or rich, roasting them-
selves over a roaring fire ; but the operation of cooking
by gas is divested of all the unpleasantnesses which the
last generation of women had to endure before they
could essay to manage men through their stomachs.


Chapter X.
FURNITURE AND DECORATIONS.
Very much of a man’s comfort in his home will
depend upon its appearance, and in this matter you have
to combine two differing qualifications, which require no
little tact to prevent them from clashing with each
other. A man wants his home to look neat and spotless,
airy and attractive; and at the same time he wishes to
be able to take his ease in it without doing it any
damage, or being constantly worried and pulled up. The
great reason why taverns of the higher class and clubs
have such a hold upon a man is because their finery is
unbreakable, or practically so--that is, all their orna-
ments are out of the way, where they can be seen without
being in danger of breakage; and all their useful articles
are really fit for wear and tear. Now, in this you must
take a lesson from them, without attempting a close
imitation. The rooms of a first-class tavern or of a club
are larger and loftier than you can afford, unless your
purse is a very long one. You will be very fortunate if
you find the ceilings of a cottags home more than twelve
feet high, and in many pretentious houses they are not
higher. Necessarily, in a small room, with a low ceiling,
ornaments of any kind must be very carefully disposed,
to prevent them from being in the way; and furniture
must be very tastefully chosen, to avoid its looking
either garish or heavy.
A very large proportion of what are called best
parlours or drawing-rooms are hopelessly miserable
places to coop a man up in—mere monuments of ill-spent
money and costly discomfort.
How not to Furnish a Room.
If I wanted to tell you how not to furnish a room
I could hardly do better than describe the drawing-
rooms of some very nice people I know. For instance,
take the following room, which I have no doubt you can


match among your friends. It is fifteen feet by twelve,
and, indeed, if you could measure right into the centre
of the little bay window at one end it would be sixteen
feet six inches long; but as the fireplace, which faces
this window, takes off twenty inches, the result is that
the fifteen feet of length are encroached upon by a
handsome bright steel fender, with an ormolu bar, which
supports a set of fire-irons to match. A large snow-white
sheepskin rug lies in front of this arrangement, and, as
it measures seven feet by two feet six, it has a very
splendid appearance. Indeed, it fills up all the space
between the fender and a valuable 100-table, with a
diameter of nearly four feet one way and nearly five
feet another, which occupies the central position. One
recess beside the chimney is occupied by a chiffonier
—or cabinet, as it is called —and a very nice one, too, in
the latest combination of black and gold and silvered
glass. The corresponding recess on the other side is
filled with a bookcase, which has another cabinet below
it. On one side of the room there is a second
window, and in this there is a jardiniere. In the bay
window there is a small occasional-table, with some-
thing very splendid under glass upon it, which I never
dare to approach for fear of knocking it over. The
carpet is a capital Brussels, for which my friend gave
nine-and-sixpence a yard, and she has a suite of furni-
ture, of course, all very delightful and pretty —six chairs,
lady’s easy-chair, gentleman’s easy-chair, and lounge,
which last convenience faces the side window, behind the
door, in the opposite wall of the room. Between the
bay window and the side window there is a very good
piano; over the fireplace there is the inevitable over-
mantel, which is intended to remind you that Queen
Anne is dead. There are some pretty nick-nacks on the
over-mantel, there are a couple of good vases on the
chiffonier, there are two pairs of long and handsome
curtains at each window, carefully festooned, and each
pair showing at least a foot of the exquisite border upon
the carpet. There are fairly chosen pictures on the walls,
good books in the bookcase, flowers in the vases, pretty
albums and presentation volumes on the centre-table,


and there are various graceful odds and ends of feminine
work about the place. Your first thought if you looked
through the window at it would be, “ YThat a pretty
little room !” and your second would be, “ How horribly
unfit for a human being to live in !”
How, I ask you confidently, whoever you may be that
read these lines —Is this a caricature P You know that it is
not. You go into such rooms frequently. You see them
every week, and you know also that they are not of the
smallest use to any man, woman, or child who lives an
every-day work-a-day life. Take the 15 feet of length,
and what have you ? One foot of fender, 2 feet 6 inches
of rug, 5 feet of centre-table, 16 inches of occasional-
table, and 1 foot of window curtain —in all, 10 feet 10
inches. You have thus 4 feet 2 inches to live in. Take
the 12 feet of breadth, and where are you then ? Couch
2 feet, table 4 feet, chairs from wall to extreme front of
seat, 21 inches. This way you have 4 feet 3 inches in
all. You can just walk round the table when there is
no one in the room, if you are very careful not to trip
over the rug. You can lie down on the couch with your
head to the door and the light of the opposite window in
your eyes, providing nobody wants to go to the cabinet,
which must be opened with great care, lest its doors
come to grief against the end of the settee. You can sit
in one of the easy chairs if you do not mind being in the
corner between the door and the bay window ; and you
can play the piano if you do not object to the thorough
draught between the aforesaid bay window and the fire-
place. The furniture of this room without the pictures,
piano, and ornaments cost £132 9s. The piano is worth
£75, and the pictures and ornaments probably £5O more.
There is over £250 spent in a space of 5 yards by 4,
and the man who found the money would not spend half
a day in it for £5 down. His wife says “It is a
luxurious little nest,” and her bosom friend says “ It s
quite a boudoir.” He says nothing, but I expect he
thinks a lot.
He has a thriving business, which may possibly bring
him in six or seven hundred per annum in a good year,


and they have now three children, not one of whom has
as yet set its foot inside “ the luxurious little nest,” in
which, to tell the truth, the mother has latterly spent
but little of her time. By-and-bye, despite all pains,
moths will get into that carpet, and the dry rot into that
suite of furniture. The piano already jangles horribly
to my ears when the poor woman opens it to practise
for an hour, or to thrum some ditty to a caller. For all
practical purposes the £250 might just as well have been
thrown away, and I know there are times when he
wishes that he had it in his business. But he consoles
himself with the reflection that it pleases her—that she
is “ a real good wife, bless her,” which is quite true ; and
then, with the curious inconsistency of man, he winds
up with, “ And it is a pretty little room, after all.” I
don’t think he quite knows why he would not upon any
account lie down to have a nap in it, or try to read in it,
or think of sitting in it; I only know that he avoids it
religiously, and that a shade comes over his face if she
proposes an adjournment to it at any time.
How to Furnish a Boom.
As I have taken a certain very common size for the
room which, I think, was unwisely furnished, I take the
same size for the one which I want you to furnish
sensibly. Of course your taste must be consulted in
shape and colour, and not mine, but there are certain
cardinal points to be attended to notwithstanding. A
room fifteen feet by twelve, with a fireplace at the end
opposite the bay window, and a second window on one
side, will want careful management not only in the
distribution of the furniture, but also of the light. The
side window should be heavily curtained, so that all
glare may be excluded, and the paper should be light, so
that the side of the room opposite to the window looks
bright and cheery. The curtains, both for the bay
window and the side window, should just touch the
ground, but not rest upon it, nor should they be long
enough to festoon. To give extra height to the room the
cornice from which the curtains hang may be placed
quite close to the ceiling, say six inches below it, albeit


the top of the window may be eighteen inches or two feet
lower. The curtains for a room twelve feet high may be
three and a half to three and three-quarter yards long,
but, whatever length they are, they should only just
touch the carpet. The bauds that confine them should
draw them back, and not loop them up. Thus they
will hang in graceful folds, and the pattern at the
bottom will show in its proper position —vertically. For
a room of this size the cornices should not be heavy, but
as light as possible, while a fall of lace or fringe from
the cornice will hide that portion of the wall above the
window if there should be a necessity for pulling the
curtains entirely aside. Lace has a richer aspect than
fringe, and, if it be well chosen, it need not have a
bedroom air about it. For a room of this size an over-
mantel should be very small, and it would be better not
to have any. It is far better to have five or seven small
pictures, prints, or photographs neatty arranged over the
mantel-piece, the central one being not more than 2d
inches by 18, and the others smaller. Carefully hung,
these will give size and variety also, and a few small
nick-nacks, with tiny flower vases and similar ornaments
on the mantel-shelf itself, will make your room always
look pretty. Don’t have lustres, and don’t stick a big
heavy picture over your mantel-piece, not even if it is the
portrait of your rich uncle. Carte de visite likenesses,
if they are pretty and in pretty frames, are admissible
on a mantel-piece, provided they are alternated with
plenty of other ornaments, and you cannot go wrong
with any quaint or pretty chinaware or glassware that is
not large. Single flowers in specimen glasses are
always in good taste anywhere, and half-a-dozen of them
among your other chimney ornaments will brighten up the
dullest room. Don’t have a suite of furniture for a small
room; buy j T our chairs of different shapes, materials,
and size«. A couch you must have, if your husband is
ever to enjoy his ease in the room, because a man must
be able to or he won’t feel happy. But don’t let
it be so grand in appearance that lying down on it seems
like a sacrilege. The best place for such a couch will be
under the window at the side of the room, with the foot


of it pointing toward, or rather projecting into the recess
beside the chimney, which will not, remember, be more
than four feet broad by twenty inches deep. In this
recess, but fastened to the wall, at a convenient height
from the ground, you can have a small open cabinet
without doors if you can afford it, with any ornaments
you like upon it, or a nest of bookshelves, or brackets
in the corners. In short, you may finish the recess
in any way you like, providing that you do
not put anything on the ground against which your
couch would bump if it were moved. In a small
room like this it is better to have two firm, solid little
tables, each about three feet by two, and let them stand
against the sides or in the corners of the room accord-
ing to the arrangement of your furniture. The piano,
if it must be in this room, had better be between the
door and a fireplace, and so out of the draught, and you
can put an easy-chair or two in any corners not occupied
by your tables. I think the piano would be better in
the dining-room, but this is a matter of no great moment,
as I will suppose that in furnishing your sitting-room
thus you really mean to use it. In a room of the size
I have named, the furniture already mentioned will be
all that you can possibly manage, and even then in the
centre of your room you would only have a space of
eight feet by ten clear, even if everything were straight
against the wall, an arrangement not to be commended.
For a room of this size the pattern of the paper
cannot be too light or too small. Do not attempt to try
an aesthetic sage green with dull gold on it, but choose
instead one of the pretty French patterns that look like
lace with the sun shining through it. Let the carpet
be of a rich colour and not too light, and cover your
walls with all the pictures, prints, photographs, fans,
banners, and other things of the kind you can afford. All
these things are cheap enough, and no direction can tell
you how to arrange them. Your own good taste must be
your guide, only do not aim at duplicating everything.
You can balance the wall on each of the two sides of a
window, or a door, without having everything in pairs.
Don’t have your room so fine that your children may not


come into it; on the contrary, encourage them to sit
there with any quiet employment or amusement, for
when you have done your best with the arrangement of
a room it will always look hideously unattractive unless
it is constantly occupied. In conclusion, let me hint that
the outside value of the entire furnishing of a room of
this size should not exceed fifty pounds, excluding the
price of the piano. You cannot possibly keep within
the bounds of good taste if you once transgress into
extravagance. The two things are entirely incompatible.
Chapter XI.
POOE MAEY ANN.
I suppose that those of my fair readers who now and
then seize occasion to grumble at the burdens I ask
them to take upon themselves will hint that, whatever
and whoever “poor Mary Ann” may be, she certainly is
not a man, and that the way to manage her can have
little to do with the way in which to manage her master.
I am fully prepared to put up with any little fault-
finding I may meet on that score. My object is to work
up not to the narrowest limits of my title, but to the
broadest extent it will cover. What you have to
manage when you manage a man is not only the creature
himself, but that belonging to himself which he has to
confide to your charge: his house, his children, his
friends, his good name, his reputation for hospitality, his
property, his comfort, his standing in society —and,
assuredly, his servants. I have chosen poor Mary Ann
as the peg on which this chapter shall be hung simply
because she came forward as a writer in the public press
the other day to proclaim the woes of her class, and is
indeed a little given to vaunt her sorrows publicly when
she can get a chance. What she said of herself I have
said at greater length of her sisterhood in many places,


and that which she said, as well as that which I have
previously written upon the subject, has been curiously
emphasised by the recent strike among the tailoresses,
which has disclosed the fact that young women gladly
work hard in factories for eleven and twelve hours a
day for wages far less in actual amount than those
which they obtain in service.
I have no patent remedy to propound. lam only
going to suggest to you the necessity for taking thought
in order that you may not suffer by this state of things,
and in order that you may so manage your servant —for
I am going to assume you have one and no more —that
the contract between you may be profitable and mode-
rately pleasant to you both. Assuredly it is an
important point towards managing your home and
securing your husband’s comfort to so arrange your
servant’s work that he is not bothered with your con-
stant stories of her misdoings and is not inconvenienced
by her neglect of her duties. It is not, in my opinion,
at all difficult to provide for moderate efficiency and
good feeling if you go the right way about it, and this
a little reflection will help you to do.
Don’t expect perfection to begin with. I have been
young and now am old, but never did I see the time
when people did not refer to some far back period
“when servants were not what they are nowadays.”
Turn to your Shakspeare, a book without which no
house can possibly be properly furnished, and see where
Young Orlando, in “ As You Like It,” when he is extra
delighted with the generosity of Old Adam —calls out at
once about—
The constant service of the antique world,
When service sweat for duty not for meed.
Much he could have known about it —a country boy,
aged nineteen or twenty at the very outside. Pray,
what do you think he knew about the antique world and
its service ? He repeated the cant of the day as you do,
and as I do sometimes, when, for instance, poor Mary
Ann makes the tea with smoky water, or, worse still,
boils the tea, or tries to black boots with a hat-brush, or


to bake a batter pudding in an eggshell cbina preserve
dish. It’s all rubbish, and three minutes’ thought will
convince you that it is rubbish. Poor Mary Ann must
always have been a poorer woman than her employei,.
must never have been as well educated as her employer
—that is, as a rule—l know of cases wherein the
employer cannot spell, and I know some poor Mary
Anus who can play the piano and speak French—and
must always have been her employer’s inferior in house-
hold management, simply because she had not had a
house to manage. The fact of it is that as long as you
will condescend to do your part, poor Mary Ann will
usually do hers well enough. It is when you forget
your business, when you expect her to think as well as
work, to plan and manage as well as carry out the
plans, that you find her at her worst. The fine lady who
£ leaves all these things to the servants ” does not get
on very well, be sure. Work is your ordained lot, and
you can’t get away from it. If you leave undone the
work God gave you to do for your family, you are quite
sure to interest yourself in bazaars, church choirs,
missionary enterprises, and other devices for the destruc-
tion of home comfort. You will be just as busy, only
you will be doing the wrong thing instead of the right
one. I have no patience with married women with small
incomes who cannot be easy unless they are assisting to
furnish dear Mrs. Busybody’s stall and helping that
good woman to flatter men into buying goods they don’t
want at twenty times their value. These things are all
very well for school girls, old maids, and other women
whose proper vocation is debarred them, but how a
woman with a house to manage can devote time to them
I cannot think, and never could. To my mind the most
hateful woman Dickens ever pictured was that awful
Jezebel in Bleak House. “An extremely dirty lady
with the ticketed price of her shawl still sticking to it,
whose home was like a filthy wilderness, but whose
church, Caddy told me, was like a fancy fair !” Think
of the misery of that woman’s husband and children, and
make up your mind to stop at home, order your house
decently, and manage— Pooe Mary Ann.


In the first place yon must give up the idea that you
have a right to the whole of poor Mary Ann’s time, to
control the minute at which she shall go to sleep, and
that at which she shall awake in the morning, and to
influence her leisure as well as her work. Once upon a
time, no doubt, servants were slaves, but their mistresses
were little better. In the days when the mistress might
beat the maid if she liked, her own and her husband’s
life, liberty, and property lay in the mercy of the king.
Your class has long been emancipated. Why do you try
to keep your servant in subjection P
I suggested in the Melbourne press then, as I have
often suggested in private life, that poor Mary Ann
should be regularly allowed a couple of hours of
absolute leisure in the afternoon, should be free from
any calls upon her at all after dinner is cleared away in
the evening, and should have a fair measure of liberty
every Sunday. In short, I propose that, instead of
trying to get the whole of a girl’s time, to which you
have no right, legal or moral, and must fail in obtaining,
you should give her definite and regular hours of work
and leisure, just as her sisters have in the factories. I
have tried this plan for years, and I find it suits the
colonial girl admirably. My work is always done by
the middle of the day, even on washing day. Luncheon
—a very light meal with us, as we have an evening
dinner—is on the table sharply at one o’clock. By two
o’clock poor Mary Ann is at liberty to go out if she
wishes to, which she very often does not. At any rate,
she knows that under no pretext will she be wanted
until four o’clock, at which time she will be expected to
begin to cook dinner, so as to have it ready by six
o’clock. Dinner over, an hour’s sharp work puts every-
thing straight that need properly be put right that
night, and, when it is done, Mary Ann is again at
liberty. She may go out or stay at home, or go to bed
if she chooses. The last thing she does for us is to take
away the colfee-tray out of the sitting-room, soon after
dinner is over. This she generally fetches by half-past
seven at the latest, and I never see any more of poor
Mary Ann. I expect her to be at home, excepting sho


asks for leave, soon after ten, so tliat she may go to bed
early. But I never fuss if I find her sitting late over a
bit of finery. My time begins in the morning, and I
seldom find much to grumble at.
On Sundays you will find it a good plan to dine
earlier than your usual time, but a little later than the
midday hour which is so common in Australia. Ser-
vants like to go to mass or morning service as well as
other people. Why not make an arrangement with
them, according to their persuasion, as to what they
shall do and keep to it ? My own opinion is that if a
servant makes your beds and cooks your meals on
a Sunday she has done all you have a right to expect,
and more than you will always get satisfactorily done if
you try for too much. Some girls like to go to morning
service, to have a little chat with their friends after-
ward, and then come home ready for anything. A girl
who goes to mass cannot comfortably be home before
two o’clock, or even half-past. Unless you are going to
try and turn her into a heathen, in which case you will
be the loser, you must either cook your own dinner or
have it late. Besides, I suppose you go to church
yourself, if it’s only for fashion’s sake, and surely her
interest in church-going is as great as yours.
If you let your servant go to mass or service on a
Sunday morning you will find her ready to do anything
when she comes back, as a rule. She will be able to
prepare many things for dinner before she goes. She
will turn to with a will when she returns. Your dinner
will not be particularly late after all, and you will have
peace and quietness. If on the other hand, you decide
on an early dinner, then, except in very special
instances, you had better let Mary Ann go out in the
afternoon and evening, too, merely providing that, unless
leave is arranged for, she is to be home in time to lay
the tea-table, and attend to tea, a matter of about an
hour’s work altogether. This she will gladly do, because
she wants her own tea also.
Now by these arrangements you will get an average
of ten hours’ steady work every week-day out of a


servant. Supposing her to rise from six to half-past six,
and she will have to be up at five on a washing day, and
to go to bed at half-past ten, there are sixteen clear
hours between those times. Of these, if she have two
hours in the afternoon, from two o’clock until four, and
is free after eight at night, she will have, including meal
times, which may be reckoned at an hour and a
half, six hours to herself, and you have the other
ten. Have you the slightest right to any more ? If
your husband have to work ten hours a day, does he
not make all Australia ring with his hardships? You
may say that your own work is never done. Neither
is hers. Only that part of it which she does for an
employer comes to an end. She, like you, has her own
affairs and her own family affairs to attend to. She
does not cease to be daughter, sister, niece, or sweet-
heart because she scrubs your floor, washes your clothes,
or cooks your dinner. Icon get by this arrangement ten
hours work every day, and, say, five or six on Sunday.
Ho you pay so much, so very much, if you give a girl
twelve or fourteen shillings a week and plain food for
this amount of labour ? The days are over when you
could get it for less, and you must march with the times.
One well-paid and well-treated servant is worth a score
of scolded idiots, and you must try and accommodate
yourself to circumstances. I find I have already said
so much about poor Mary Ann that I must reserve the
completion of my suggestions for my next chapter.


Chapter XII.
POOR MARY ANN AGAIN.
In my last cliapter on the subject of servant
management I suggested that, by allowing a servant
a couple of hours to herself every afternoon, and liberty
in the evening for two hours and a half more, her
working hours should be reduced to ten pei day, which,
with half a dozen hours on Sunday, would give sixty-
eight hours as a week’s work, counting the extra time
got by rising early on a washing-day. I did not, of
course, expect that this proposal would pass without
comment, and I certainly have had a fair share. In
addition to various letters of remonstrance or encourage-
ment addressed to myself, an indignant newspaper
correspondent asked whether I would not like the
master to light the hre and black the boots, and the
mistress to answer the door, while Mary Ann reads
the Loudon Journal. I certainly had no such intention.
On the contrary, if poor Mary Ann works honestly for
sixty-eight hours per week, she will have ample time to
light fires, clean boots, keep the house clean, and do the
cooking and washing for a small family of two or three
persons. If more than that is wanted ot her she will
break down, and to get that much out of her should be
quite enough for anybody. I see that the journeymen
bakers have decided not to allow the two hours extra
work now exacted on hridays eight hours should be
the limit of a day’s work, as eight hours’ work
was considered quite enough for any man.” If it is
enough for any man it is enough foi any woman. Yet
the same journal that reported the resolution passed
at the meeting of the bakers in these words had
a ponderous leading article on the sei\ant question,
in which it contemptuously pooh-poohed my sug-
gestion. “Some Solon, we see, has proposed that
the eight-hours system shall be introduced into our
Melbourne houses —that is, we suppose, that eveiy


family is to have three shifts of nurses and two of
housemaids and cooks.” Now my suggestion did not
limit the work to eight hours a day, hut ten, and
certainly did not imply anything of the sort. But I am
quite prepared to accept the conclusion of the lordly
leading article writer and say: “ Yes; if you require
continuous service for the whole twenty-four hours you
must, of course, engage relays.” Even Mrs. Gamp would
not engage to render continuous service. “ Me and Betsy
Brig, one off and the other on, could undertake it, and
gn e satigef action, she said. There are some employers
who never get “ satigef action,” because they think that
they are entitled to body, soul, and spirit and all. As
rar as Solon is concerned, I never heard that he was a
housekeeper, and I never heard of a lawgiver who was,
lading article writer either. Literary men are
chiefly remarkable for kicking up a litter, and any
housekeeper, old or young, will find it difficult to keep
them in order.
The mere settling of the vexed question of leisure will
not do much toward managing the work, although it
P oor Ann in good heart to turn to and do
it. Ihe next thing, and the most important, that you
have to do is to so set the work out for her that she has
nothing to think about but to go steadily on until she
has done her appointed task. Eor this purpose you will
have to consider carefully what shall be done every day
m the week, establish a certain order suited to your
household, and stick to it. A very good plan is to write
it down and hang it in the kitchen inside a cupboard
door or anywhere else where it can be easily referred to.
Certain days should be set apart for certain standing
duties, and certain hours for regular things that have to
be done every day. These rules should be strictly kept,
although they may require a little modification from day
to day, according to circumstances, which have to be
explained at the time.
Thus, albeit that as a rule the kitchen, hall, and
dining-room should properly be thoroughly cleaned
every morning before breakfast, and can easily be done


if poor Mary Ann begins not later than half-past six in
the morning, yet on a washing-day the work will have
to be lightened by letting some of the business be don©
the day before. For this reason Tuesday is, except
where the family is very small indeed, a better washing-
day than Monday. Sunday usually brings visitors in
middle-class households, and therefore on a Monday
morning the house wants plenty of setting to rights.
This can be done, and later in the day all the prepara-
tions for washing can be made. A careful servant will
easily be encouraged by steady direction and watchful-
ness to prepare little things over night, which will
enable her to begin early in the morning; and if she
does so the washing will be all over by twelve o clock.
A good servant, who is well treated in the matter of
leisure, will begin her washing at five o clock in the
morning, and, if the day be fine, will have it all out of
the way by noon, and that easily, too.
Wednesday, if this rule be carried out, will be the
day for ironing, and that will not necessitate early rising
or putting oft; work, because it will not matter much
even if some small portion of the ironing be left over
until Thursday. But properly Thursday and Friday
mornings should be devoted to house-cleaning, leaving
Saturday to prepare for Sunday by a general smartening
up of everything in the place. Thus the week s work
would be : —Monday, clearing up after the Sunday’s
reunion of the family and preparing for the Tuesday’s
wash ; Tuesday, washing; Wednesday, ironing ; Thurs-
day and Friday, house-cleaning; Saturday, completion
of all work and preparation for Sunday, so that on
Sunday nothing need be done but cooking and bed-
making. Every good manager’s house should be, and
is, as bright as a new shilling by the Saturday after-
noon, so that the inevitable visiting on Sundays is
thoroughly convenient. Daily work requires fore-
thought exactly in the same way. The passages,
kitchen, and dining-room being thoroughly cleaned
before breakfast —which should always be the case
unless breakfast is so very early that it is impossible,
in which case the hall may be left till afterwards —


leaves the morning after breakfast free for the bed-
rooms and sitting-room, windows, knives, and other
household work, all of which must be planned accord-
ing to the circumstances of the case. But by careful
management everything may be finished in a small
house by twelve o’clock, leaving the servant free after
luncheon until four o’clock, at which time she should
begin to prepare the six o’clock dinner. A girl who has
been at work cooking or washing or house-cleaning all
day until two o’clock is clearly entitled to a couple of
hours’ rest, and you will find it profitable, as well as
pleasant, to let her have it. After your six o’clock
dinner she will, if she knows she is to have the evening
for herself, bustle and get everything cleaned up, so that
by eight o’clock she will be at leisure again. If there
be only yourself and your husband you will find one
servant, properly treated, will keep your place like print,
and will be able to do the whole of the necessary
washing if you have the proper utensils. But if you
have a family you will not find any servant in the world
that can be maid of all work and nursemaid too. In this
case you must either take care of your own children —
much the easiest thing to do —or you must help her in
some way by getting her assistance, or by doing a part
of her work.
In planning work for your servant it is not enough
merely to tell her that you want certain things done at
such and such times. You must be prepared to give
detailed instructions. Thus, you should learn, as you
easily may from any cookery book, how long the various
parts of your dinner will take to cook, so as to tell her
exactly what to do first. You ought to be able to call
her and say: “Now, it is four o’clock,put on the water
to boil for your pudding, make up the fire for your roast
meat, then make your pudding so as to have it ready
to put in the saucepan by half-past four —that will give
it an hour and three-quarters to boil. It will be done at
a quarter past six exactly. Put your meat into the
roaster immediately you have put your pudding into the
saucepan, and that will be ready exactly at six. Then
prepare such vegetables to be put on at a quarter past


five o’clock in cold water, and such others to be put on
at half-past five in hot water ; put your soup on to get
hot (of course it was made before) at half-past five. At
ten minutes to six melted butter should be made if
wanted. The soup should be brought in at six exactly,
and while that is disposed of the meat and vegetables
should be dished ready to replace it. When these are
on the table the pudding can be taken up ready to bring
in piping hot when they are removed.” Waiting at
table, I have before explained, a servant of all work
cannot do ; all she can manage is to bring in the things
fresh and hot as required. This she will be able to do
without any delay, if you help each other at table —no
mighty trouble.
It is not difficult to give such as these, or
any others that may be necessary. A very little thought
will enable you to do it, and the effect will be that you
Mill make your work easy to your servant, and will gain
her respect into the bargain. “ I never have any bother
with the dinner,” she will say; “the mistress says do
this and do that, and it all comes out right.” If there is
anything extra particular to be done you ought to do it
yourself —at any rate until you are quite sure that she
knows your ways and wishes. For instance, you
certainly should always make your own custards, jellies,
salad dressings, and small pastry, such as cheesecakes
and tartlets, and trifles of that kind. By-and-bye you
will find that any handy girl, with that natural taste for
housekeeping which every good woman has in her unless
circumstances crush it out, will begin to imitate you —
will, perhaps, shyly bring to table a tartlet or pudding
of her own composition made after your style. In such
a case praise and encouragement should be freely
administered; because, of course, everything she learns
to do is so much lifted off your shoulders.
Never make a fuss about the immense superiority of
your ways to everybody else’s. Let it be clearly under-
stood that you have things done in a particular way
simply because you like them so. When you go into
the kitchen to do anything take care not to make your


visit serve tlie extra purpose of enabling you to find
fault. There is a time for everything, and if you
interrupt the preparations for dinner by finding fault,
you will not have a very good dinner when you get it.
Go calmly to work to make any little thing you desire to
do, accepting any help your servant can give you as a
matter of course, and explaining to her the reason why
you do certain things—as, for instance, why custards
must never be let to boil and must be always stirred one
way; why you must put the vinegar last in making a
salad dressing; why you must roll your paste lightly
and as little as possible; why peas and new potatoes
must be put into boiling water and allowed to boil as
quickly as possible ; and so on, always of course explain-
ing merely what you are doing at the moment, or*what
she may be doing wrongly, and showing that it comes
out all right. It is ten chances to one that she will
remember everything of which she knows the reason
why, and nothing of which she does not. It is twenty
chances to one that she will rather oblige you than
disoblige you, if you treat her with moderate kindness
and civility; and ninety-nine chances out of a hundred
that, if you prove your own ability to satisfy your own
wishes, she will think your ways the best in the world,
and will swear by you. Never keep a servant an hour
if she proves dirty, deceitful, or dishonest. These are
incurable faults ; all others you can conquer. Even
incivility will give way to firmness, and laziness may be
cured by exhortation and example. But dirt means the
utter loss of all comfort; and it is better to put an end
instantly to a connection which cannot be good for you.
It is far best to engage servants by the week and to
simply agree for a week’s notice. In practice you will
find it quite impossible to keep them after they wish to
go, however long the engagement may be. I know a
country station manager who, to save himself the trouble
of getting servants often, used to engage them by the
year. The result was that in the course of three years
he had to go twice to the police-court to get the agree-
ments cancelled with utterly worthless servants who


would not go away, and twice more in tlie same period
the women he had engaged resorted to unbearable
conduct to induce him to cancel agreements they had
made up their minds not to carry out. A connection
which suits both persons to it will last without any tie,
and one that does not will be broken in spite of all ties.
The very first week will show you if the girl means to
try and please you, and if she does, the best thing you
can do is to stick to her. Good-will is everything.
Very good servants are got from respectable registry
offices, from advertisements, and in many other
ways. Tradespeople can often recommend decent
servants also. This last class of recommendation is a
very safe one, for they usually know a great deal more
about your means, temper, and habits than you think
for, and can guess pretty well who will be able to get on
with you. There are plenty of black sheep among
servants, but a little care will enable you to keep clear
of them. A decent girl will generally have someone to
speak for her, and a little tact will enable you to tell
which of the duties you mention are to her liking, and
which she is resolved to shirk. For my own part a very
long and varied experience convinces me that the average
Victorian servant is quite as good, quite as willing, and
quite as much to be depended upon as her English sister,
and ten times more so than her American cousin. She
gets more pay than the first, and less than the second.
A London paper in my sight at this moment offers a
housemaid eighteen pounds a year, a parlourmaid twenty,
and a cook thirty pounds. A San Francisco paper offers
a chambermaid (housemaid) thirty dollars a month, a
waiter (parlourmaid) thirty-five, and a cook, forty
dollars. Every dollar a month is exactly equal to a
shilling per week. But in London clothes are consider-
ably cheaper, and in San Francisco much dearer than
in Melbourne, and therefore the Melbourne servant, in
actual purchasing power, is but little better off than her
London friend, and not much worse off than her class-
mate in San Francisco. Servants’ wages appear to me
to be proportionate to the means of the community here,


just as they are everywhere else. Servants for light
duties in small families can generally be got for twelve
shillings per week, and some for even less, and it seems
to me that they are very well worth the money. At any
rate the careful housekeeper who wishes to make her
menfolk comfortable will do wisely to make up her mind
to keep up a good understanding with —Poor Mary Ann.
Chapter XIII.
STOCKINGS AND SUPPEES.
It is an interesting characteristic of the male of the
human species that after any special form of enjoyment
he gets hungry and must be daintily fed, and this is
especially noticeable with regard to his proclivities at the
conclusion of that form of public entertainment associated
in the masculine mind with—stockings. And by this
exordium I trust I have already relieved your mind of
the idea that I am going to write about making, mending,
darning, dyeing, or otherwise caring for those integu-
ments —as yet. No ! The stockings lam directing your
attention to are those upon which your husband and all
other men will gaze rapturously by the hour together,
when they are lit up by the electric light or the lime
light, or the patent incandescent, non-explosive, oxyhy-
drogen illuminator —or whatever the latest invention for
showing up stockings maybe. Stockings ! That’s what
it comes to. What’s “Estrella?” Stockings! and plenty
of’em. What’s the Pantomime ? Stockings again, and
more of ’em. What’s “La Mascotte ?” More stockings
still, and prettier than all the rest. The only reason the
Opera does not fill like the rest of the theatres is
because neither Lucia nor Norma nor Lucrezia Borgia
show their stockings, and if the minstrels could manage
to appear in theirs I believe they never need go away. I
make them a present of the suggestion anyhow.


I am perfectly aware that the noble lord in “ Martin
Chuzzlewit” insisted that it was legs that the public go to
see, but he was a noodle, purposely created by the late
Mr. Dickens as a noodle. Noodles may call them legs—
I call them stockings. What do they know about the
filling up, wadding, padding, horsehair, tow, other stock-
ings sometimes, rags, rubbish and bran. All these
articles and more, too, go into stage stockings as well as
legs, and form a portion of the attraction no doubt.
Why, I know one lady —and a fine woman she is, too, and
a very attractive one to the young men who talk so much
about her —who deliberately puts in larger pads and more
filling up when she puts on her dark stockings in—well,
I shan’t say which piece, than she does in the light ones,
which she wears on the same evening in the scenes before
and after. “ They look smaller in dark colours, my
dear !” says thiswise woman, who, by the way, will never
see thirty-five again, nor thirty-six either, in spite of the
twaddle all the critics —bah ! —write about her witchery,
and her fascination, and her charms, and her loveliness.
“ It’s the stockings as does it,” she says, with a snigger,
pointing at them while she pins on her back hair and
touches up her chin with a sponge dipped in—well,
never mind what.
After your noble lord has stared at stockings for
three mortal hours, or thereabouts, he is bound to be as
hungry as a hunter, and if you let him alone will spend
half a day’s earnings in an oyster shop, where you will
get your oysters good enough, but —oh ! such bread and
butter, and such smeary glasses to drink stout out of,
and such a horrid little box to sit in, with rude people
making remarks about your bonnet, as if you could
possibly put it on properly in those frowsy, fusty, foolish
little cloak-rooms at the theatres. I wonder whether
Williamson, Dignold, and all the rest of them are married
men, and if so, why their wives don’t wake them up and
make them give the ladies nice, neat cloak-rooms like they
have in some theatres that I know of elsewhere. Then
the next day when my lord counts up what he spent
he says, “ Going to the theatre’s deuced expensive ! by
Jove!”


•-c W ’ ady i ce bring him home to supper, and
it he wants oysters to eat let him eat them there. Yon
can pop into the oyster shop as you go to the train, and
get them already opened in a little green bottle, which
you can put in your pocket, and the rest of the matter
will give you no trouble at all—to say nothing of the
saving of expense. I will engage for three things—
firstly, that I am going to describe a dozen of little
suppers which you can make for yourself, after you
come home from the theatre, in ten minutes each on the
average; secondly, that the total expense of them will
be less than a third of what they will cost you in a
supper-room; and, thirdly, that your husband will like
them ever so much better—as, indeed, he ought to—
because they are about twenty times as nice as any that
those clumsy fellows in the refreshment rooms can turn
about Wltll all their Wkite aprons and tlleir slapping
You should buy yourself one of those little gas stoves,
or urners, I might almost call them, which stand upon
three feet, a few inches high, and give a single ring of
tiglit. Ihey are very cheap, and six feet of tubing will
connect them with any ordinary gas jet, which gives all
the gas they require. The stove and tubing together
snouJd not cost more than five or six shillings I
brought one from England with me a dozen years ago,
tor which I gave two shillings in 1860, and the half-inch
tubmg is only a few pence a foot. It is wiser to have a
little jet screwed into the side of your chandelier to
connect the tube to, but you can put it over any ordinary
burner, and remember, you will only want it for ten
minutes. Mind, you must have some contrivance of
is kind, because the essence of the comfort of the
v lole arrangement is that you cook your supper in the
parlour, without taking off your finery, excepting your
hat, shawl, and gloves, and eat it there and then within
ten minutes of entering your own door. So if you have
no gas—poor creature—then buy yourself a little petro-
leum stove a mere toy, not much bigger than a quart
pot. Wright and Butler s make are very good, and you
get one complete, with all sorts of utensils, saucepan,.


frying pan, kettle, and food warmer for about a
guinea. Of course the gas stove is the best. In addition
to the gas stove you will want a little French omelette pan.
I like those in earthenware. They cost about 3s. 6d. If
you are afraid you will break the earthenware omelette
pan, buy one of iron with an enamelled inside what is
called a saute-pan.
Now then. Before you go out to the theatre lay a
tablecloth on your parlour table. Place upon one-half of
it bread, butter, cheese, two plates, with knives and
forks, a small dish, a cruet-stand, a salt-cellar, two
tumblers, the water carafe, a bottle of beer, or two if you
like, a corkscrew, an extra knife and fork for your
cookery, and finally the stove, which, whether it be a gas
or petroleum stove, will stand on a dinner plate. On the
stove lay your saute or omelette pan, and beside it any
thing you mean to cook when you return, except oysters.
Turn the remaining half of the cloth over the whole lot,
and right in the middle of the unoccupied half of the
table place a box of matches, so that you can get a light
when you come home without setting your husband
fumbling in ail his pockets for lucifers, a thing which is
safe to make him cross.
Directly you have let yourself in at the door, for, of
course, your servant is in bed hours ago if she is to get
up in the morning, light all the gas, except that you
want for your stove, so as to make the room brilliant.
Don’t treat your husband to one miserable light half
turned down. Then turn your cloth back, and the sight
of your sparkling glass and china, all ready laid neatly
for two people, will put him in a good humour directly.
Set himTo draw the beer and pour it out, and while he
does that put a lump of butter as big as a walnut into
your saute-pan, and light the gas under it. Cut into it
a quarter of a pound of cheese in thin slices. You can
have this ready cut before you go out if you like. Let it
gently melt in ihepan, stirring it occasionally. It will take
but a very few minutes, and while it melts cut a couple of
rounds, not slices, of bread and butter. Lay one on each
plate, and by this time the cheese will be ready. A tea-


spoonful of beer may be stirred into the melting cheese
with good effect. When the cheese is melted, pour it on
to the rounds of bread and butter and eat it instantly. It
wants a plentiful dressing of mustard, pepper and salt,
all or which are on the table, and I can guarantee from
long experience that within ten minutes from your going
to the room you may be eating the first mouthful. This
S W mann er of preparing a Welsh rarebit is so
eirectiYe, especially if it be accompained with a little
good ale, that the invariable comment of your lord and
master is, ‘‘My dear, if it won’t be too much trouble for
you I would like another.”
.. However, you need not depend upon cheese for your
little suppers. Suppose before you go out you lay beside
your little gas-stove two or three thin, small slices of
bacon and a couple of kidneys. When you come home
slip the bacon into your saute-pan before lighting the
gas under it, then light the gas and let it gently fry
turning it once or twice. Then slice the kidneys as thin
as you can, each one into ten or a dozen pieces as thin as
fv Ve “shilling-piece. Take out the bacon and lay it in
the plates upon slices of bread or bread and butter. Lay
the slices of kidney in the hot bacon fat in the pan, and
let them frizzle until the gravy shows on the top side,
T ml 1 be m about one minute to one minute and a
halt. Then turn them and let them frizzle on the other
side until the gravy shows well again. Then they are
done. Turn half the contents of the pan—fat, gravy
and all—into each plate, wherein the bacon is already-
and again you have a nice, hot, savoury dish, which will
barely take five minutes to cook. With plenty of pepper
salt, and mustard they go admirably, and again the
comment will be “ My dear, what a pity you only pro-
vided two kidneys.” Then if you are really a wise
woman, you will produce a couple more from conceal-
ment, and try the process again.
Supposing that mushrooms are in season, you may do
a very great deal worse than leave a dish of peeled
mushrooms beside your little gas-stove when you go to


the theatre. They are lovely —done in a saute-pan. All
you have to do is to put in the aforesaid lump of butter,
lay in the mushrooms topside-down and stalks uppermost,
and let them slowly simmer till they are done. They
will only take ten minutes, but you will be wise to cover
them over with a plate or cover while they are cooking,
because they smell so nice that your lord and master
will chafe like the lions at the Zoo when the meat is
coming round. In this, as in all cases where food is
cooking in the saute-pan, cut a round of bread and
butter to lay in each plate, and pour over it whatever
there is the saute-pan. There’s no waste in my system,
believe me. No rat can get a living in my dust-heap,
and the flies would starve in my house if I did not keep
them out of it to save their lives.
There’s not the least reason why you should not have
oysters, and there’s safe to be an association of oyster
suppers with theatrical stockings in your husband’s mind
which will make an oyster supper particularly welcome.
Only in that case you must make a cupful of batter
before you go out, and leave it at the side of your stove
with a plateful of grated bread crumbs, or, better
still, biscuits crumbled to powder. For the batter,
a teacupful of milk, an egg, a tablespoonful of flour, a
saltspoonf ul of salt, and grated nutmeg enough to lie on a
sixpence. Slip into the oyster shop as you come to the
train, and get the bottle of oysters, and when you get
home pop them into the batter. Put the lump of butter,
as before, into your pan; dripping, if quite clear and
nice, will do better. Take each oyster out of the batter
separately with a spoon, and dip it into the bread crumbs,
and then place it in the pan. You can omit the bread
crumbs if you like. As soon as the first dozen are ready
pop six on to his plate of bread and butter, and eat six
yourself, while another dozen cook. You can keep on
for half an hour at least in this way, but the first dozen
will be ready in five minutes from the time they begin.
They will be all the nicer for being eaten hot, and, hot
in this fashion, you can eat twice as many, which is a
comfort, as oysters are very digestible.


MEX, AND HOW TO MANAGE THEM. 97
I find I have come to tfie limit of this chapter, so I
must save the rest of my little suppers until my next
You can try these four meanwhile, if you like: the
Welsh rarebits after opera bouffe, the sauted kidneys
atter grand opera, the sauted mushrooms after the
minstrels, and the fried oysters after the pantomime.
it } r ou tail, let me know, and I’ll show you the reason
why.
Chapter XIV.
MOEE STOCKINGS AND MOEE SUPPEES.
A fair correspondent writes to express her approval
ot the general idea of giving a husband supper after the
theatre at home, instead of at a restaurant, but cannot
see why the servant can’t attend to it for one thing, and
why the necessary preparations cannot be made in the
kitchen for another. “ Why should she not go into the
kitchen for what she wants, for instance, when she
comes home if she pleases, instead of having everything
laid in the parlour before she goes out P” Because, my
dear lady, men hate fuss. If you go into the kitchen
tor anything when you come home from the theatre you
will see a beetle or a rat, and faint; or you will find out
that poor Mary Ann has left a saucepan with water in it
on the range, and you will rush back to your husband
and declare that “ either Mary Ann leaves the house or
you will, ’or something of that sort. Even if no such
catastrophe happens, poor Mary Ann will hear you go
bothering about in her kitchen, and will wonder what
you want there, and will next day express her opinion
about people that call themselves ladies goi n< r a
peeping and prying about in kitchens in the middle of
the night.” She will be quite right, and you will be
wrong. The proper time for you to wake up to poor
Mary Anns delinquencies is after your hus'band has


gone out in the morning; not at night, when all he wants
is a little cosy bit of supper, and, perhaps, a chat with
you. As for the servant staying up to make your
supper, the idea is preposterous. She ought to have
done all you want of her by eight in the evening, and to
be in bed by half past ten, so that she may be up soon
after six. You cannot work servants night and day too.
The great charm of these simple suppers will be in
the surrounding circumstances. You can talk to youi
husband all the time they are getting ready; they take
no longer to get ready than they would i you wen . ,
restaurant or oyster saloon; they are 311 st the same kmc
of suppers you would get there, and they manifestly
give no trouble. There is another great charm m the
fact that they cost next to nothing.
I have already given you four receipts out of the
dozen I promised—namely, the Welsh rarebit, the sauted
kidneys and bacon, the sauted mushrooms, and the tried
oysters. Here are two more receipts for oysters in less
than ten minutes, each of which will be found delightful.
When you lay your cloth before starting for the
theatre, as advised in my last chapter, with everything
completed for your supper, place beside your stove, m
addition to the articles already enumerated, a teacuptul
of cold savoury broth of any kind from which you have
strained out the vegetables, and into which you have
stirred a fair teaspoonful of flour or arrowroot, the latter
for choice. When you come home bring with you a bottle
of oysters, which you can easily get as you come from
the theatre. You will pass at least one shop in any
direction. Set the broth over your gas-stove m a little
tin saucepan to get warm, just stirring it now and then.
When it boils, which it very soon will do, take it oft the
stove and stir in the oysters, and pour the liquor into it.
Set it over the stove, and in three minutes they will
plump up and be just ready to eat, and very nice you
will find them.
To make stewed oysters, plain (after the manner of
the shops, only better), you need, when you lay your
cloth before going out, to set beside the stove a break-


fast-cupful of milk, thickened with a heaped teaspoonfol
of arrowroot, and flavoured with pepper and salt.
Wiicn you come home, bringing your bottle of oysters
with you, add the liquor to the thickened milk, put it
into a little tin saucepan over your stove, stir it well,
adding a small piece of butter the size of a walnut, and,
just when it begins to boil, remove it for a moment from
the stove, add the oysters, and stir again over the stove
till the oysters plump up.
JN'ow, before you go any further, just see what you
have saved out of these six suppers :
At Home.
No. I.— Welsh Rarebits.
S (Z
Cheese, Colonial, at Bd. ... ... ... 0 2
Butter, say 2oz. in all, out of which a small piece
goes into the Welsh rarebit, at 2s. per lb. ... 0 3
Bread, say ... ... ... _ _ q j
Beer, quart bottle, best ... ... i q
I 0
1 6
Abroad.
2 Welsh rarebits
1 quart bottled beer
2 0
2 0
4 0
Ihe saving is 2s. 6d. on this first and simplest of the
suppers.
No. ll.— Sauted Kidneys.
4 kidneys—outside price
2 small slices bacon, say ...
Bread, butter, and beer, as before
0 6
0 3
1 4
2 1
The restaurant price would be :
Sauted kidneys for two persons, at Is. 3d.
Beer ...
2 6
2 0
i b
Your saving this time is 2s. 5d


The mushrooms would cost you as little as the kidneys
to buy them yourself, say 6d. for quite enough for you
both. Therefore, the bread, butter, and beer would only
bring the cost of your supper up to Is. 10d., as you want
no bacon. But in a restaurant, supposing yon to get
sauted mushrooms at all, which is very unlikely, you
would have to pay the same price, 4s. 6d., for the two
dishes and the beer. The price of oyster stews at a
restaurant or oyster saloon is Is. 6d. each. The price oi
those I have directed you how to make at home would
run thus: —
At Home.
s. d.
2 doz. oysters ... ... ••• ••• 1
£-pint milk ... ... ••• ••• .
Arrowroot and butter ... ... ••• a 4.
Bread and butter, say ... ••• *• ••• „
Beer ... ... ••• ••• ••• *** 1
2 6
Abroad.
2 oyster stews, Is. 6d.
Beer ...
3 0
2 0
5 0
Again your saving is 2s. 6d., simply because you use
your own plates, knives, forks, and condiments instead
of those of the restaurant-keeper.
Now we will take a fresh departure, and go to dishes
which your restaurant-keeper will seldom give you at
all.
Hot lobster, though a little indigestible, is very nice.
It is excellent prepared either with milk and arrowroot,
lust as I directed for plain oyster stew, or with savoury
broth, as I directed for the savoury oyster stew. Ail
you have to do is to add to your preparations when you
la y the cloth before going out a tin of preserved lobster
of a good brand, and a lever knife for opening it. Then,
when the broth or the thickened milk is hot, put in as
much lobster as you like—about half or two-thirds of a
tin is plenty for two persons —and to give it a flavour


stir in also a couple of teaspoonfuls of anchovy sauce,
or shrimp sauce, the juice of half a lemon, and a little
cayenne. Do not put any of the liquor from the lobster
into the stew. It may have some use, but I have never
been able to find it. But if you choose to make your
oyster stew with preserved oysters—which I should not
do myself, though they are handy for chowder—you may
use a part of the liquor you find in the oyster tin. In
this case, as with the lobsters, be quite sure that the
contents of the tins are sweet and fresh before usin<*
them. °
“I may venture to observe,” says Mr. Micawber,
“ that nothing is nicer in its way than a devil.” And a
devil is one of the very easiest of dishes to make for an
after-the-theatre supper. Put a lump of butter the size
of a walnut in your saute-pan, and light the gas under
the pan ; let the butter get hot, and then lay in it a few
slices of underdone roast mutton, or underdone roast
beef, first dusting them well with pepper. Do not let
them fry or brown, but turn them over two or three
times until they are quite hot through; squeeze over
them a little lemon juice, and just a dust of cayenne,
and a minute before taking them out of the pan add a
teaspoonful of mushroom catsup, and, if you like, a
teaspoonful of brandy or wine. You may devil in the
same way slices, not joints, of cold poultry and game,
and serve them with a clear conscience. None of them
will take more than five minutes to cook, and in each
case you may have your supper within seven minutes of
entering your house, provided that you have taken the
pains to prepare the table before going out, as previously
described.
. Replace the saute-pan with a small saucepan, and put
into it a teacupful of stock, thickened with a fair
teaspoonful of flour or arrowroot, a teaspoonful of mush-
room catsup, and a tablespoonful of red wine ; lay in it
a few slices of underdone roast beef, and a dozen
oysters, or two dozen if you think you can eat them, and
gently stir the whole over your gas-stove until the gravy


is thick, and the are plump ; jnst before serving,
squeeze in the juice of half a lemon, and a mere dust of
cayenne, give a final stir and serve. Again, in five
minutes you have a supper for a gourmand, or a hungry
theatre-goer.
Pick all the meat out of a big cray-fish, which you can
buy at the oyster shop as you come from the theatre to
the train. Chop it up small, and while you do so let a
cup of thickened stock or broth of any kind get hot on
your gas-stove. Put the chopped cray-fish into the stock
with the juice of half a lemon, a spoonful of anchovy
sauce, and a dust of cayenne, and let it simmer gently
for six minutes ; and once more you have a supper worth
eating. This is such an extra nice dish that you
deserve a bottle of wine to drink with it, and you can
consequently, instead of drinking stout or ale at a cost
of twelve shillings a dozen, go threepence better and
have Chasselas at fifteen shillings, or White Hermitage
at a pound a dozen. The latter is, to my mind, the best
of all Victorian wines, and I may tell you as a most
profound secret that the Victorian wines are the best in
Australia by many degrees. Indeed, our White Hermi-
tage at a pound per dozen is better than any European
wine of the kind at double the price, at the least.
I think I have fully performed my promise to tell you
of a dozen little suppers, each of which may be actually
ready for you in less than ten minutes after you return
home ; and it would be very easy for me to go and give
you a dozen dozens. I will not insult you by reminding
you that eggs in any shape are done in four minutes,
that omelettes of all kinds take only two, three, or four
minutes, according to size; that any kind of cold fish or
meat or game or poultry will be very nice either turned
over in butter in a saute-pan or warmed in a few table-
spoonfuls of thickened stock or broth ; that either mush-
rooms or oysters will be excellent simply simmered in
the broth; and that when broth or gravy is scarce a
little common Colonial wine, either white or red, is a
delightful substitute. Nor is it necessary to do more


than just hint that even a few nice cold potatoes cut in
thick slices and warmed gradually in butter in the
saute-pan, with a little salt and pepper and lemon juice,
form that high-sounding dish, Famines de terre d la
Maitre d'Hotel, which you pay for extra in the supper
rooms. It is true that a little chopped parsley is added
in the supper rooms, but then that offers no difficulty if
you want it. The truth is that there is no end to the
nice dishes you can make over a little gas-stove in ten
minutes if you like.
The effect of these things on the masculine temper is
of a soothing and stimulating kind. Some years ago I
noticed that a son of mine had something on his mind
which he evidently did not care to tell me. So one night
after the theatre the gas-stove was lit and I put on a
cupful of red wine to warm, and in it I put the whole
of the stuffing out of a cold duck. I stirred it well, and
in three minutes it began to simmer and smell good. In
two minutes more the gravy thus made was strained
into a basin, the joints of the cold duck were in the
saute-pan, and the gravy (merely the wine thickened by
having the stuffing simmered in it and strained out) was
back again in the pan with them, and a dozen little
button mushrooms to boot. Five minutes’ simmering,
the juice of a half lemon and a dust of cayenne com-
pleted the process. Twelve minutes by the clock from
the time the latch-key turned in the door his highness,
whose face was as long as the third act of JNffrma and
as dismal as the first tenor solo in Faust, was eating his
supper. He thawed visibly the moment he began, and
I took care, you may depend, to keep his plate supplied.
“ I don’t care for anything,” he said, lugubriously, as he
came in, “I think I’ll go to bed.” “All right,” said I,
“ but have a glass of ale first and pour one out for me.”
Before that bottle was open and the glasses filled the
wine began to simmer. Before his first glass was done
with I hinted that I thought he might just try the
merry-thought of the duck to taste it. I put it on his
plate with two of the little mushrooms and barely a
spoonful of the gravy. You could have covered the lot
with a five-shilling-piece. But if you tickle the palate


of a boy of eighteen with anything nice he won’t stop in
a hurry if he be ever so miserable, and presently a leg
followed the merry-thought, a wing went after the leg,
and the whole of the breast vanished likewise. He was
quite consoled by the time I gave him the parson’s nose,
and it was as much as I could do decently to secure
three of the mushrooms and a scrap of that duck for
myself. Long before we got that far he had begun to
prattle as men always do when they have something nice
to eat which takes up their attention at the same time ;
and it all came out. It was a mere trifle of a lovers’
quarrel, and they are married now, but Jupiter only
knows how far they might have drifted apart if it had
not been for that thrice delightful duck. If ever you
are similarly placed try that recipe, and see if you won’t
call down a blessing on the head of the Old House-
keeper.
A few words more and all I have to say about stock-
ings and suppers is done. Don’t forget when you bring
home -oysters to turn them out of the bottle into a basin
before you use them, and take them out of that separ-
ately with a spoon, so that if there be a morsel of shell
your husband does not get it into his teeth. That won’t
improve his temper, I promise you. The liquor they
come in is all right if you strain it —a very simple task.
If you have to use broth or soup, strain out all the
vegetables and stir into it a little arrowroot for thicken-
ing. It is better than flour and very cheap. This you
can do before you go to the play.
If he be exhilarated by your nice bright room, your
good supper, and his own feeling of comfort, and looks
like sitting up half an hour to smoke a pipe, don’t be
cross, but let him do so. Take up your knitting as
quietly as if it were three in the afternoon, and let him
chatter, or be silent, as he may choose. He will look at
you through the smoke, and see you patient, helpful,
kind, careful of him, and his heart will expand to his
household goddess, even if he give no immediate sign of
it. He will understand that you have taken pains to
make him happy, that you have sacrificed half an hour


of rest to Ills fancy of the moment, and it will take him
back in thought to the time when you were both ready
to sacrifice any possible convenience for each other.
Through the quiet smoke of that after-supper pipe you
will look as fair as you did in the days of: your girlhood,
and all the ravages that the trials and troubles of twenty
years of married life have made upon you will soften into
mere kindly touches of familiar time. No present word
may reward your pains. I have known times when men
hardly cared to trust themselves to speak when they con-
trasted the care and forethought of a simple attention of
this kind with the odds and ends of forgetfulnesses of
which the best of them know they are guilty.
N.B. —It is not uncommon for a man at such a time as
this to offer you the money for something you have been
wishing for. In such a case always take it on the spot.
Indeed, it is a good thing to have a pen and ink ready
on the side table in case he wants to write a cheque.
Only never introduce such a subject yourself, for if you
do you won’t get him to eat any more suppers, however
cheap they may be. In short, never set a trap for him ;
but if he opens his pocket after you have opened his
heart, why, there’s no great harm done, especially if
you spend the money in the way you got it —that is,
according to my advice.
Chapter XY.
BOYS AND THE IB WAYS.
There comes a time in the life of every good woman
when she finds that the interests of her boys and the
habits of her husband have a tendency to pull her in
different ways. Just when the elder boys are growing
past childhood, their father, even if he have wisely
married young, takes Ids first step towards middle age,
begins to have an affection for his easy-chair, likes a
quiet evening, wonders why the children can’t be sent to


bed directly after dinner, and considers himself deeply
injured if anything disturbs him when he is plotting and
planning new business complications for the ensnare-
ment of his customers or clients.- Then is the time
when the priceless value of a man’s den is appreciated,
and if you recollect what I said upon that subject in a
former chapter, you will do well to act upon the advice
I gave you, so that he may have a den to retreat to by
the time the boys begin to be ten or twelve years old.
But it will by no means do for him to make a habit of
bolting off to his den upon all occasions. Yon have got
to draw him and his boys closer together, not to separate
them ; to bring the brightest side of their own father
constantly forward for their imitation, and to induce
him to polish himself up and keep himself brilliant so
that his example may be really useful to them. I think
I should be going a little too far if I said that any
division between father and sons will be your fault; but
I am quite sure that lam right in saying that it would
be your misfortune, and also that in ninety-nine cases
out of a hundred that worst of divisions can be avoided
if the housemother sets her wits to work in the right
MAnn ur.
What you have to do is, not to repress your boys,
because that will either make them milksops or drive
them away from home, both of them such dire evils that
I cannot tell which is the greater. You must cultivate
and develop them, so as to bring them nearer to their
father, and you must drag him out of retirement,
persuade him to shake off all feelings of lethargy, and
even to be satisfied with less business or income rather
than to waste the precious opportunities of turning your
boys into good men.
I have a very high opinion of the better class grammar
schools and colleges of Victoria, and know that the boys
trained in them are quite as well bred as they would be
in any of the historic English foundations, and infinitely
better taught. But even if you be rich enough to send
your boys away to some really good school, I think it is
a question whether you are doing the best for them in


parting with. them. They may turn out very good men,
but they will have a heap of interests, feelings, and
friendships in which you will have no share; they will
seek their confidants away from home, and cannot fail
to miss something of the unity of spirit that distin-
guishes well-brought-up families whose members are
kept together. If it be absolutely impossible for your
boys to be decently educated near home, there is nothing
else to be done, though even then it would often be
better to be satisfied with a plainer course of school
learning supplemented by careful home training.
If you are fortunate enough to have a good day-school
near you, the best place for your boy is there. It is of
no use to trouble your mind about the rough companion-
ship, the harshnesses and occasional carelessnesses of
schoolmasters, and the hundreds of other grievances
which doting mothers make for themselves. The school
is a miniature world, with all sorts of people in it, and
it affords the best preparation for the real world I know
of. JNTo doubt your boys will learn a great deal you
don’t want them to learn, as well as much that you
desire; but the great charm of having them at a day-
school is that you can, if you be wise and patient,
neutralise the bad and cultivate the good day by day.
The first thing that will happen when your boy goes
to a day-school among other boys will be the formation
of a schoolboy friendship ; and as those alliances are
generally very close while they last, you will find to
your horror and surprise that some commonplace urchin
is quoted to your face as an authority to whom you
ought to bow down, and that nobody in the world is half
so attractive to your hopeful as Jones minor. The
only thing to do in this case is to follow the plan the
grocers do with their new boys, who are allowed to stuff
themselves with raisins and sugar until they get tired of
the very idea of those luxuries. By all means take care
that your boy has plenty of the society of his hero, and
that at once, before opposition has deepened his attach-
ment. Open your house to Jones minor, and to as
many other boys as you can make room for. You


can choose some of these yourself. Give the boys
the run of your garden, and of all those parts of your
house where they can do no harm. Encourage them
to practice their sports and games somewhere on your
premises, if you have room, and let there be plenty of
chances for Jones minor to show what he looks like
when other boys are about. If he still remains a hero
in your boy’s sight you may be quite sure there is more
in him than you can see, and in this, as in many other
matters, you will have to let nature take its way. You
will even then have accomplished a very great deal.
You will have accustomed your boy to make his chosen
and particular chum a part of his home circle, and you
will quietly have subjected that companion to the strong
test of comparison with others. More than that, if
Jones minor returns your boy’s affection, which is not
always the case —for school friendships are often all on
one side, like that of George Osborne and William
Dobbin in Vanity Fair —he will be grateful to you for
furthering their association, and jmu will have an extra
hold on your boy directly, through the influence you
will acquire over his mate. You have but to turn to
David Copperfield or Tom Brown to see the peculiar
regard that a boy entertains for the mother of his school
friend if she gives him a fair chance, and you may
easily, if you be patient and self-denying, make the first
thing that would attract your boy from his home the
means of fastening him closer to it.
It is already clear that a great inroad will be made
upon the comparative peace and quietness which you
have enjojmd while your boy was too young to be sent
to a public school, and too immature to care for any-
thing but childish games and amusements. It cannot
be helped. A boy is not really a child, and it is of no
use to treat him as if he were. Boyhood is a perfectly
distinct and well-defined period of masculine existence,
and must be recognised and provided for upon that
footing. It is a time when you may, if you like, find
your life full of a new happiness, or when you may
easily fill your own days with trouble, and ruin the
future of your offspring.


Chapter XVI.
BOYS AND THE IE WOEK.
As soon as a boy bas fitted himself with a friend to
his mind he is safe to find himself a pursuit—one, if not
many—and all your patience and love will be put to the
test, for the hobbies of boys are varied, to say the least
of it. They run very much in grooves, however, and in
nine cases out of ten are determined by circumstances
which are well within your own observation, and conse-
quently, to a moderate extent, within your control.
Thus, a popular schoolmaster or parson, who happens to
have a turn for entomology, or botany, or geology, will,
if he have the knack of enthusiastic description, set half
the boys in the place madly hunting after beetles, or
weeds, or stones of an unimpressive appearance. You
will find collections of newts, tadpoles, and water spiders
in the drawer where your boy should keep clean linen
only, or some ill-smelling mess in your best glass jug
will turn out to be dock leaves in process of maceration,
or a quantity of road metal will be neatly labelled and
placed among the delicate china that ornaments your
overmantel. In such cases as these your course is very
easy. It is simply to do with your boy as you do with
an overfresh horse. Let him go until he has taken a
little of the extra steam out of himself. Then you can
handle him gently and turn him in any direction.
Should your boy happily take up any of these harm-
less pursuits, encourage him by all means. A paper of
pins for the impalement of specimens, a box of gum
labels for the proper description of the same, and a card-
board box or two, which you can beg from your draper,
are generally enough stock-in-trade for your juvenile
entomologist, botanist, or mineralogist. With a little
encouragement from you, and a display of real interest
upon your part, he will generally get far enough to com-
plete and arrange at least one box of specimens, and, if
he manage that much, the best thing you can do is to


stick up a plain shelf or bracket in his room, and let the
box be added to the permanent ornamentation of that
chamber. Most boys are so fond of change that the fit
will rarely last long with all the encouragement you can
give it. But by encouragement each pursuit in turn
may be made to yield some fruit. Suppose your boy’s
cabinet of insects, or stones, or dried plants contains
only twenty specimens, their collection and arrangement
will have passed many hours pleasantly and harmlessly
away, and their want of any real value or scientific
interest will be fully compensated by the formation ot
habits of order. . ,
If you display no interest in such pursuits your boy
may not even in the inmost recesses of his mind blame
your indifference, but the result will be that he will get
into a habit of following each passing fancy for a
moment, and there leaving it. Your endeavour must be
to induce him to follow each of his self-chosen ways at
least far enough to show where it would lead in the long
run. To do this will require you to force yourself out
of your own groove occasionally. You may have to put
down a favourite book or a piece of needlework to show
Master Jack how to paste divisions in a box, or which
part of a cockroach is least likely to be impaired in
beauty by being punctured with a pin. If you are a
wise woman you will apply yourself seriously and
calmly to help in all these matters, however trivial,
distasteful, or inconvenient they may seem. They are
no trifles to your boy. They will be no trifles to you it
death should remove him, and you have nothing but such
things left to remind you of what you have lost.
with a mechanical turn is likely to give you
more trouble, but the difficulty must be faced. Set
apart some place for his experiments, buy him a box of
tools and whatever materials he may require, and keep
him at it. There is the great secret. Induce him by
every means in your power to finish any one thing he
may begin, so that when he gets tired of the pursuit
itself there may be as little lumber as possible and
something to show for the time, long or short, he has
spent at it A pursuit for which you may think he has


a real knack may very often be made interesting to him
after lie has slightly tired of it by your giving him an
actual commission to make something for you. The
juvenile joiner, tired of his tools, will resume them with
avidity if you ask him to make you a soap box, and use
it when you have it. Indeed, I have many a time
stimulated boyish industry by paying properly for such
trifles when they were made. It is astonishing the
amount of pains a boy will take to earn a shilling or a
half-crown which is his very own, and not a gift, and it
is delightful to hear the happy speculations upon the
amount of money that he will make by and by, which
such earnings usually arouse.
Most boys have some constructive ability, and can
make something. They should always have some
corner, some room, some shed, some place, however
small, where they can do exactly as they please, and
where their property will remain entirely undisturbed.
They will not object to your glancing in now and then if
you scrupulously refrain from ridiculing anything you
see, or from interference of any kind. Indeed, if you
confine your directions and criticisms to requests that
the implements that require cleaning may be cleaned,
and that the unfinished work may be completed, your
presence will be welcome if it be not too frequent. But
you must respect your boy’s right of ownership, and you
must force the servants and the other children to
respect it also. Many and many a boy cherishes bitter
feelings of resentment because a servant is allowed to
speak contemptuously of his pursuits, or to destroy his
materials as rubbish ; and many a family quarrel begins
when Jack or Jill is permitted to interfere with
Tommy's or Harry’s “things.” If you desire peace,
order, affection, and unity in your house, let your
children’s property, however trifling, be held entirely
sacred. They are imitative animals and soon learn to
be just. If you give each of them some place to be his
own, he will keep away from the places of other people
Your servant will seldom be bothered with Master
Harry’s messes in the kitchen if Master Harry has a
shed, or a corner of one, where he can saw, and hammer


and boil glue, and make chips, and do as he pleases.
He’ll give her a wide berth willingly if he can get what
he wants in his own domain.
You cannot, to my mind, be too indulgent to your
boy, as long as he does no real wrong, and the majority
of boys are good enough if they get a fair chance.
Half the mischief they do is directly due to your own
fault, and the other half might be avoided by your care.
A boy whose wishes are never studied, whose parents
buy him what they think best for him, give him pocket
money at their own times, and insist upon an mutation o±
grown-up behaviour, will be in disgrace halt his time,
however" loving and well-meaning his trainers may be.
He finds himself unexpectedly the possessor ot five
shillings to-day, and remembers that yesterday fie
would have given one of his ears for sixpence, tint tfie
blest opportunity of yesterday is gone, and the posses-
sion which was then coveted is out of reach. Ail e
same that five shillings burns in his pocket, and must be
spent. So he gets a knife with six blades, and a gimlet
and a corkscrew in the handle, and operates upon tfie
furniture, or he spends three-and-sixpence in a pastry-
cook’s shop, and has a bilious attack. “ How destruc-
tive that boy is,”you cry. “How wasteful and greedy,
says your unmarried sister, who would spend tfie
whole of the family income in finery if she could get it.
Poor boy, he is neither the one nor the other. He is
only ill-managed. If he had a proper tool-box, a corner
of his own to keep it in, and a few shillings woith o
material now and then to work with, your chairs would
be unchipped. Had you listened to his petition for a
shilling or two the day before, when Jenkins’ pigeons
were to be sold so cheaply, or Jones was ready to part
with that terrier puppy, the five shillings would have
gone for the material for a dove-cote or a dog s house.
It is a matter of shame and disgrace to parents, who
no doubt mean well, that they will not bestow a tithe of
the care and pains upon the study of the whims and
humours of their children that they will upon those of
their acquaintances. The visitor s oddities are borne
with, his likes and dislikes are carefully remembered*


and Ins convenience is a matter of extreme consideration.
No one hints that he eats too much, or too fast, or too
slowly, that he sits too near the fire, talks too much is
too quiet, or too anything else. But a boy is pecked’ at
from morning till night. Girls are given to prepare
themselves for the future management of mankind by
practising upon their brothers in childhood; and the
boy who has the luck to be the only one amon" half a
dozen sisters generally has a lively time of it They
are never satisfied with his dress, attitudes, manners
or conduct, and, between their own admonitions and
those which they draw upon him from the elder powers
ic has not much chance of peace. If there be many
girls m the family, the boy will want a great deal of pro-
tection in a quiet way from their sharp eyes and satirical
tongues. I have managed a good many boys in my time,
and 1 have found it a pleasant and by no means an irk-
some task. I have seen a good many trained well, and
not a few trained badly, and I know their ways as well
as most people. But I never did yet see a boy who could
stand sarcasm and satire, and consequently never yet
saw a boy exposed to the unrestricted tongues of a pack
ot girls who was not more or less unhappy. The average
boy would rather be thrashed than ridiculed, and very
rightly so too. But as no wise parent who begins
properly ever finds fit necessary to thrash a boy, the
harsher punishment certainly cannot be necessary. I
don t mean to say that no boys ever require thrashing,
but 1 do know by experience that they are generally
in ashed tor faults they would never have acquired had
they been properly trained at first; and I know a most
happy and prosperous family where the children were
neither scolded nor beaten under any circumstance
whatever. They were a little boisterous, but not very
much so because they naturally imitated the quiet
habits of the well-bred people by whom they were sur-
rounded, and they were the happiest and best children I
ever saw.
It is the fashion among writers who pretend to know
all about boys to insist upon the necessity of giving them


some special allowance of pocket money, which they are
never to exceed, are to be made keep an account ox,
and about which they are generally to take unheard ot
pains. This sorry trash has been repeated to my certain
knowledge in any number of books for the confusion ox
youth during the last century and a half, and numberless
boys have been made miserable by it. By all means give
your boy an allowance, and encourage, by daily example
’and wise hints, the prudent outlay thereof. But don t
make his life miserable with precept upon precept and
lecture upon lecture. Becollect that all the v orld is
new to him. You have cut open your doll and found
that it was sawdust in your time. Don’t expect him to
take your word for it that his doll is stuffed with sawdus
too until he has cut it open and tried for himself. Let
him waste his money now and then if he likes ; let him
buy something that is useless if he fancies it. lour
purchases are not invariably wise. But do not so tie
yourself up with rules that when he has made a goose ot
himself you are absolutely bound to let him suffer or be
inconsistent. Bather let him feel that there is no
possible scrape out of which you will not help him, no
mistake which will draw a reproach or a sneer from you,
no accident that you will not repair. Let him teei that
you are his sure refuge in all time of trouble, equally
ready to mend a torn garment, heal a cut finger, replace
a lost shilling, or bestow some coveted gift. In a little
while your boy will be a man, and will repay you, oe
sure, or, more important still, will hand down your
methods to his children. Let every memory he has ot
his own boyhood be a memory of kindness, so that when
in due time his boys require his care the recollection ot
your unfailing sympathy and untiring love may soften
his heart to them, and make him considerate, generous,
and helpful. So shall your good deeds bear fruit in
constant reproduction, and, generations after your name
is forgotten, some kindly method of your own shall sur-
vive to do its part in the gradual improvement of your
race.


Chapter XVII.
THE POWEE OF THE PUESE.
In matrimony, as in all other partnerships, it is much
sater and easier to keep out of quarrels than to make
them up, and as money is the most fruitful source of
disagreement a clear understanding with regard to
financial matters will do much toward making home
happy. Men naturally hate worry, are usually bad
hands at small bargains, and have no idea of the careful
distribution of expenditure necessary to make house-
hold affairs go easily. It is, therefore, imperatively
necessary that the wife should manage all that part of
the income which is spent in the house, and that the
duties of the husband should be confined to providing it
as regularly and liberally as his means allow.
i ? desirable that you should not drag the
last shilling you can out of him, but should leave him a
fair margin for any extra expenditure he may deem
necessary from time to time; nor is it advisable that
you should watch too closely to see whether his income
will bear a little more drain upon it than you have
already established. Make a fair agreement in the first
place as to what you can afford for actual housekeeping
—that is expenditure upon food, fuel, and daily neces-
saries. I hen have a certain sum, however moderate,
set aside for your own personal expenses of dress
chanties pocket-money, and so forth. The moneys set
own under the first of these headings you should keep
a careful account of, which you may very easily do in a
simple manner in an ordinary account-book, such as
you may buy for a few pence at any stationer’s. I
would not bother myself with the carefully-systematised
printed books, wherein every item of household expen-
diture is arranged under a heading. Some of the
headings you will not want to use for a year at a stretch,
and others you may want three times in a week, now and


tlicii. A plain, simple, sixpenny cash-book is as good as
anything yon can have. Write at the head of a page
“ Monday —such a day of such a month—set down
everything you buy or pay for, just in the order of your
payments, as nearly as possible, and at the end of the
week add them all up, so that you begin afresh every
Monday. Sometimes the week’s payments may have to
be carried forward over two or more leaves, and some-
times they will all go in one; but if you invariably
begin at the top of a new leaf every Monday, and put
the other dates at the side of the page as you go down,
you will have no trouble at all. Your weekly totals can
easily be cast together at any time, and by the end of a
quarter you will have a very fair idea of what your
housekeeping really costs on the average all the year
round.
Of your private expenditure no account need be kept
at all. No man wants to know what his wife does with
her own money. But when family changes or fluctua-
tions of prices compel you to revise your scale of expen-
diture, your housekeeping book will prove to be of the
highest value. It will enable you also to judge of the
characters of your servants and tradespeople, as well as of
the cost of every inmate of your household, and, in short,
will fully repay you for the trifling trouble spent upon it.
If you do not keep a housekeeping-book you will never
feel quite certain as to whether your supplies have been
properly expended or wasted, and you will be quite
unable to exercise that silent carefulness which is far
more economical than the closest thrift.
It will be better for you to have charge of a third
fund, which is to be devoted to rent, rates, servants’
wages, and matters of that sort; but these things some
men like to pay themselves, and they must be made
matters of mutual agreement. Supposing your husband
to be careful with his own private moneys, he can be very
safely trusted to do these things. But there are many
men who arc careful and accurate in business, honest
as daylight, and perfectly well meaning, who cannot
carry a pound intact from the Town Mall to the Public


Library. They are bound to lend it, spend it, or give it
away, and if you have got bold of a man of this kind
you will do well to get him to let you relieve him of
every responsibility connected with the home. The
less money he carries about with him then the better,
and he will have the less to carry, and be less likely
to think of carrying any at all, if he settle up everything
with yon at short intervals.
The shorter the intervals are the better, as the money
will be less to part with; and even the most generous of
men feel a twinge when they get rid of large sums.
Consequently, the best thing you can do, when you have
arranged between you how much is to be devoted to each
of the headings of expenditure I have mentioned, is to
settle, once and for all, whether it should be handed to
you weekly, monthly, or quarterly, and to get it then and
there. Weekly is the best way of all, but if your
husband happens to be in any situation, of course your
pay-day will depend upon his. Even if you do not want
the money at the moment, it is better to draw it
regularly when the time comes, because it may be most
inconvenient to draw it just when you do want it. The
best place for it is the Savings Bank, where you can
draw small sums without notice. Even if the money
only lies a week or so, every now and then a few pounds
will accumulate, on which a trifle of interest will accrue
and every few shillings of this kind is clear profit!
Ihererore, with the exception of the money you may
want for immediate use, you will do well to pay any cash
you have, however small the sum may be, into the
bavmgs Bank, even if it appears at the time that you
will want it within a week or ten days. It will do you
no harm, and it will enable you to lay by money for
periodical payments without the danger of keeping it in
the house. r &
Suppose, for instance, you live in a cottage home
with your husband and one servant, and his means enable
mm to allow you for housekeeping thirty shillings a
week ; for servant’s wages, thirty pounds a year; for
rent, forty pounds ; for fuel, etc., twelve pounds ; and


for your own dress, another forty pounds. These
sums make £2OO a year, and that is £3 17s. per
week, within a fraction. If you get your £3 17s.
every Monday morning, the odd silver will probably
pay all you really want until the next Saturday.
Your baker will not thank you to pay him oftener than
once a week, nor your milkman, nor your butcher. Of
course, I am supposing you to live in a town or populous
suburb. Your servant will probably like her money
monthly, as a rule, and your rent will usually be
quarterly. Your own expenses come at odds and ends of
times, according to the seasons and their changes.
Sometimes, of course, your Savings Bank account will
be drawn right down, and at other times you will have
twenty or thirty pounds there ; but it will be odd if you
do not, in the course of a year, find that a little balance
will accumulate somehow almost insensibly.
I have allowed ten shillings per week for the actual
keep of each adult member of the household, and that
will in practice be found sufficient, even at Melbourne
prices, with proper household management. Indeed, I
should have no difficulty in showing you how to do it
comfortably upon less money, and we may come to that
by-and-bye. But thus far, as I have previously explained,
I have been dealing not with the poorest classes of my
fellow-subjects, but with those whose incomes rank from
five pounds a week onward and upward to three or four
hundred pounds a year. Smaller incomes of course
necessitate greater economy in dress and house rent, and
probably the dispensing with a servant. But a woman
whose husband can give her two hundred pounds a year
should be able to keep a cottage home in excellent order,
to give a friend or two a quiet little dinner now and then
of the kind described in one of the previous chapters, and
to leave her husband the rest of the income to make a
provision for the inevitable increase of expenditure that
comes with the increase of his family.
It will be far better for you to manage your husband
in money matters in this way than to make a habit of
running to him every time you want a sovereign. Home


will, in the latter case, come to mean a place where he
always has his hand in his pocket, and his expenditure
will be so confused with yours that he will never know
how much you spend. Do not, however, imagine that he
will deceive himself into the idea that you spend less
than you really manage with ; on the contrary, he will
believe honestly that you spend the lot. But if you
manage him in the way I have indicated, modifying it
according to your circumstances and his, he will feel
much richer after marriage than he did before upon the
same income. Supposing him to have three hundred per
annum, for instance, if he gives you two, to be divided
as I have set forth, he has one left to pay for his own
life insurance, clothes, pocket-money, and whatever he
may lay by for a rainy day. It does not seem much for
these purposes, but I will wager you a copy of my next
new book on housekeeping, whereof you will see a flaring
puff shortly, that he had not a hundred a year to devote
to these purposes when he was a bachelor. Indeed, the
Melbourne bachelor on three hundred a year is, as a
rule, so resplendent a being that all his gold is on the
outside, as it is with gingerbread.
Now, regarding the life insurance subject I have
a word or two to say. Eemember that, if your husband
is suddenly killed, the sum of money thus secured is the
only thing that has to be deducted from the irreparable
pecuniary loss you sustain by his death. I say pecu-
niary loss advisedly, for I am not talking about your
feelings, but about your children’s bread. ' A man’s fair
expectation of life at twenty-one is twenty-eight more
years. When those twenty-eight years have expired,
he has still twenty years due to him according
to the actuaries’ theories, while even at eighty he is
taken to have a good chance of three or four years’
lease of life. Therefore, if your husband be snatched
away from you in the early prime of manhood by some
terrible disaster, you lose an income on which you had a
right to rely for a quarter of a century, during which
tune you would, in all human probability, have launched
a large family into active life. If you think what this


means —if you give five minutes’ consideration to the
difficulty you would have in earning any money at all,
and the imperative need you would have of it, you will
see that life insurance is all-important. At twenty-one
a healthy man can insure £2OO at death by an annual
payment of £3 15s. 2d.—about Is. sd. per week. This
is not enough —not nearly enough. If your husband s
earnings are five pounds a week, his life ought to bo
insured for at least two years income say £SOO.
If he be a careful, prudent man, and not a merely
impulsively affectionate one, he will do this himself,
look after the payments, and guard the investment as
something too sacred to be interfered with. If he be a
little careless or extra sanguine, as some of the best and
dearest of men are, he may very probably postpone and
neglect this duty. In the latter case, make one supremo
effort —get him to safely insure and to give you the policy
—then Tceejp it ujp yourself! Let it be a first charge on
your expenditure after the barest aie pro-
vided for, and let nothing induce you to let it go. It
will cost you about four shillings per week, and, as a
rule, you may safely depend upon his finding you the
money. MThen he does not, by any chance, you had
better go without butter or beer twice over than let it be
for a moment in danger.
A great deal of nonsense is talked about the credit
system and its evils, and it is always advisable to pay
cash if you can gain any corresponding advantage
thereby. But it very often happens, especially in the
suburbs of Melbourne, that the cash buyer not only gets
no advantage by paying cash, but is sometimes a little
snubbed and thought but lightly of. If you live near
enough to any of the co-operative institutions or great
cash shops, then it is advisable to deal with them. It is
also always advisable to let your tradespeople know that
you will prefer to pay cash if they will give you any
benefit in return. But it is useless to break through the
general rule of the respectable storekeepers in your
district; and all you can do is to make your settlements


promptly, and to insist on all the discount you can get.
Don’t be afraid that any storekeeper will take off more
than he can afford.
The way in which too many of them deal may be
illustrated by a certain circumstance which happened to
me in my own dealings with a Melbourne house of very
high standing a little while ago. I had just come down
on a visit from a country town, and I went to make some
purchases, which amounted to about sixteen pounds.
The goods were sold at the ordinary list prices, and when
I got the bill—for which, by-the-way, I had actually to call
a second time before leaving Melbourne—l asked for
some discount. I expected to get sixpence in the pound,
but I got instead a long oration about net prices and
other business jargon, which I cut short by paying the
cash in full, and going away disgusted. When I got
home I told a friend of my experience, and was laughed
at, as I fully expected to be. “ I,” said my friend, “ deal
at Bluestone and Gryll’s, as you know, and very good
things I get there; but they never refuse me discount.
Look here !” A drawer full of papers was hunted up,
and I found that my friend, paying the same prices as I
did, had an account sent in every quarter, which was paid
within two or three weeks afterwards at any convenient
opportunity; and the very people that had refused me
discount of any kind for my money down always most
thankfully acknowledged the receipt of a cheque after
four months’ credit from which discount was invariably
deducted, and “respectfully requested the favour of
further commands.” Pay cash by all means, but do not
pay two and a half per cent, extra for the privilege, as I
did.


£500,000; fel M
THE
AUSTRALIAN ECONOMIC BANK,
LIMITED.
COLLINS STREET WEST,
MELBOURNE.
Subscribed,
£225,000;
Paid up and Reserves, £85,500.
gmdoxs:
M. H. Davies, Esq., M.P., Chairman.
John Danes, Esq., J.P., Vice-Chairman,
Wm. Anderson, Esq.
John Hoodie, Esq.
T. B. Muntz, Esq., C.E.
FIXED DEPOSITS RECEIVED.
CURRENT ACCOUNTS.
GENERAL BANKING BUSINESS.
HENRY CORNELL, Manager.


WILLIAM RADFORD,
Wholesale and Retail Tinsmith,
GALVANISES AND JAPANNER,
19 LITTLE BOURSE ST. EAST, MELBOURNE.
Awarded Silver Medal, Exhibitions 1872-3 and 1881.
Baths, Tanks, Cheese Tubs, Washing Conners Vat-q nnr? Q n i• a a
Domestic and Dairy Utensils on hand aAdVade to order.^ 8 ° £
All kinds Of Passengers• Tinware always on hand. Repairs executed.
AUSTRALIAN
HOUSEWIVES’
MANUAL.
OLD HOUSEKEEPER.
Author of "Men, and How to Manage Them," “Comfortable
Cookery," dc., etc.
PRICE ONE SHILLING.
A. H. MASS I N A & CO.,
PUBLISHERS, MELBOURNE.


,; v ,'v\
E. COULSON & CO.’S
a Jj .. - h
.Mr *
a
JS- '- " ' „ %#.' a
'' - §
''•mUk v .■• g
<s- r -■ ~ vi- ’ v . - •-■ C 5
% a
€ ?
•■ -; - ■ « - ‘*W -.-; _
w
I s
a
0
■M
C/ 3
m
ft
2
o
O
0
fl
O
M
%
TEA TREE BRAND TEAS *
Sole Proprietors celebrated “ Inviota” "WMstey.
SHIPPING GROCERS.
OBNAMENTAL GLASS FILTERS AND lEONMONGEBY.
PRODUCE MERCHANTS.
Have on Sale Woolpaoks, Cornsaoks, Twine, and Machine Oils.
Receive every class of Goods on Storage or Consignment for Sale
E. COULSON & CO.,
157 COLLINS ST. WEST, MELBOURNE.


- ■' J
182 COLLINS ST. EAST, M
MELBOURNE.
Diseases and Failures of Married Life
CONSULT
Dm. L. L. SMITH.
• 1
182 COLLINS STREET EAST.
MORNINGS
EVENINGS
from 9 till 2
5 i 7 55' 8.30
Separate Waiting Rooms for Ladies and Gentlemen.
PERSONAL CONSULTATION - £1 i Sm
(INCLUDING MEDICINES FOR TWO DAYS.)
CONSULTATION FEB BY LETTER - £l.
N.B.—Medicines forwarded all over the world appro-
priately packed to avoid observation.


s'Ss> <03r %#
Pure ,
Cocoa^^M
Makers to the Queen WsSk
■
► <
I
Makers to the Queen
■ :■ zm :■ :■ :■ :■ :• i
_▼_▼_»_»_ ▼ ▼ ▼ _ v -r ▼ v
•HMMW~ " a " A "
tT-r
-yyr* *■#•••* "j/ir
-s.-rr-—-
