

MEN FOR THE COLONY.
A ILECTU IE IE 9
DELIVERED TO THE MEMBERS OF THE
. KYNETON MECHANICS’ INSTITUTE
THE REV. FREDERICK GEORGE BARTON, B,A.
APRIL, MDCCCLVI.
KYNETON:
PRINTED AND PUBLISHED BY O. J. SANDS, EBDEN STREET,
FOR THE MECHANICS’ INSTITUTE.
Price 2s. >5l.




MEN FOE THE COLONY,
k iLECfmißij
DELIVERED TO THE MEMBERS OF THE
KYNETON MECHANICS’ INSTITUTE
THE REV. FREDERICK GEORGE BARTON, B.A.
APRIL, MDCCCLVI.
KYNETON:
PRINTED AND PUBLISHED BY G. J. SANDS, EBDEN STREET,
FOR THE MECHANICS’ INSTITUTE.
r(, 71 0




K 33 S' S/FB % j t>
SL-i—- _’"t ST
PREFACE.
This Lecture, published by those for whom it was composed, and to
whom it was delivered, I feel to be too little worthy the honour they
confer upon it. I deeply regret the haste with which it was prepared ;
and could I have forseen its destiny, would have endeavoured, by
longer time and greater care in its composition, to have made it a litter
offering for the shrine of publication.
The occupations, varied and wide-spread, of an Australian Clergy-
man, prevent, in this stage of our history, that studious and contem-
plative retirement which makes easy and delightful the ministerial and
literary labours of the old country; and, to the due performance of such
a task as that undertaken here, study and contemplation are certainly
essential.
Study and Contemplation are, however cf divers kinds, suited to
their different spheres. In England, the Library of Books must con-
stitute a main element in the usefulness of Preacher and Lecturer alike ;
hut here, the most interesting Library of Living Men has claims of
incomparable importance.
Would w'e serve each other'—we must know each other’s wants,
Would we work mutually for the general good—we must mix together
confidentially and cultivate common interests.
“ The noblest study of mankind is Man—
Nowhere, happily, is that more true than here ; and in fact it is
piactically true everywhere, that—everything general resolves itself
ultimately into the particular —everything national (or Colonial)
becomes when traced to its origin, individual. This is what makes
individual character of such vast [importance ,in all considerations of
this kind ; this is why, in the conversion of a thriving colony into a great
country, the chief desideratum is—individual men of the right stamp.
As to our lack of Literary privileges then, this 'must be compen-
sated by right “ Men for the colony,” and cordial intercourse amongst
them. Instead of each other’s looks we must read each other. O
that we may do so kindly ! O that Brotherly affection, whilst it en-
sures the exercise of anxious and sound judgment, may diminish to
each another’s faults, and magnify to each the other’s excellence !


Mechanics’ Institutes I have ever held to be admirable means of
kindly union and general improvement; and that “The Kyneton
Mechanics’ Institute” is pre-eminently so, is cause of much hope-
fulness to many, whose lot is cast in this unquestionably best and
most beautiful District of the Colony.
One remark in the way of explanation it is necessary for me to
make. In my observations generally upon Gold-seeking as an indus-
trial pursuit, I have considered the Gold-Fields alluvially only, as
yielding their treasures chiefly to the lucky and the unskilled, and
have left out of consideration the great subject of our Gold-Mines,
daily becoming more important, and destined, as I conceive, to turn
Diggers into Miners, and substitute a regular, scientific, and soundly
commercial occupation, for the almost chance-work of mere Digging,
as, for the most part, it now exists. And, moreover, I have supposed
an unsuccessful Digger attaining to speedy prosperity in other ways—
to show that even on the supposition of failure in that particular course
upon which Emigrant ambition builds such splendid prospects—-we
have here, an unlimited security for success in almost every Trade,
Profession, and Occupation of civilized life.
The issue of this Pamphlet from a Kyneton Press—and that but
recently established here—is an event that marks our growing impor-
tance, and points to a future pregnant with local prosperity. The
manner of its execution too promises to be highly creditable to Mr.
Sands, our local Printer, whose advancement and success we should, as
a community, contribute to secure
Errata —Page 7, line 27, after the words “and have had” read
“in two many instances;” and at line 30, instead of
“ All,” read “ Many of.”
Kyneton Parsonage,
June 2nd, 1856.
F. G .B.


MEN FOR THE COLONY.
“ Delightful land, in wildness even benign,
The glorious past is ours, the future thine !
As in a cradled Hercules, we trace
The lines of empire in thine infant face.
What nations in thy wide horizon’s span
Shall teem on tracts untrodden yet by man!
What spacious cities with their spires shall gleam,
WTiere now the panther laps a lonely stream,
And all but brute or reptile life is dumb !
Land of the free ! thy kingdom is to come.”
CAMPBELL.
Unparalleled, with one far distant exception, in the
suddenness of our birth, and the rapidity of our
growth, as a people—we stand almost alone in
modern history, and through the novelty of our cir-
cumstances are prevented from benefiting by the
experience ot the Past, otherwise than as Man’s
distinguishing characteristic is, in all times and under
all circumstances, to become in the Future what in
the Present he aspires and prepares to be.
"Where history is deficient as a Teacher and a


Guide, from the very strangeness of our lot. —where
the records of experience fail to enlighten us, because
scarce any ever were before as we are now ; —There,
my Friends, we must supply deficiencies, and elicit
light and guidance, by recurring to the first principles
of human character and conduct, by tracing home to
its heart-origin each measure contemplated for the
public weal or calculated to affect class interests,
by weighing every proposition in the balances of
original justice, by subjecting every device of every
kind intended to influence our interests and direct our
destiny to the test of Primeval Truth—remembering
ever that fundamental law of our common Chris-
tianity “As ye would that men should do to you, do ye
also to them likewise,”
This being our only code of regulations—our only
safe guide through hitherto untrodden ways —we
having verily to lay everything bare, andjudge of eacii
by its own intrinsic worth and its justice relatively to
other things; and our future as a People being
thus wholly in the hands of our own honest dis-
crimination, and high impartiality— it is evident that,
much if not all of our progress depends upon
the kind of people we are; upon ourselves personally;
upon the question whether we in our own individual
characters and as to our acknowledged responsi-
bilities, are the “ Men for the Colony.” “ The
Colony,” I say,—and the phrase suggests two
things,—lst. That to us at all events the name
“ Victoria,” whether well or ill chosen, designates
definitely that particular Colony of the British Empire
which is the adopted home of our affections—the
chosen sphere of our labours—the grave perhaps of
many a disappointment, and cradle of many a
hope:—and secondly, That, in the world comprehend-
ing catalogue of lands, rich, powerful, and promising,
which hangs as an appendage from the sceptre of


our Island Queen —this one in which our lot is cast
is really the richest, and if not the most powerful,
certainly the most promising, of all.
Some six or seven years ago, and for some com-
paratively short period previously, the “ Men for the
Colony ” were —unsteady men of restless enterprise
and wide territorial ambition, to whose views the Old
Land at home presented nothing sufficiently exciting,
and who gladly came hither for the gratification of
tastes not to be satisfied in any old and established
country; tastes congenial indeed to all that was
new and interesting here, in the form of vast estates
—pastoral dominion —fabulous possessions of flocks
and herds—andalifeof unrestricted liberty and hither-
to unknown independence—but unsuited to the quiet
and orderly pursuits of old and settled communities.
Such were the “ Men for the Colony ” not long ago ;
and I claim for them, on grounds of justice and of
gratitude alike, the title of honoured Pioneers in our
course of extending influence and fame : but such
are no longer par excellence “The Men for the
Colony,” except indeed in so far as we have huge wil-
dernesses of beauty still, surrounding every centre of
population, and occupying a vast extent of our terri-
tory,unavailable for any other than purely pastoral pur-
poses, and therefore ready, now and always, to
receive with welcome, and sustain with more than
baronial dignity, those who are envious of the honours
of £quatocracy. But, our Gold Fields, opened up
by Him who accomplishes his own wise purposes in
his own “unsearchable ” ways, have altogether
changed the character and the requirements of the
Colony. Victoria, but a few years since a map of
stations and runs—the wide-spread dominion of a
few Englishmen—the rich maintenance of countless
thousands of their sheep and oxen—and the native and
appropriate haunt of savage tribes, the lowest and


least hopeful in the order of mankind —Victoria—un-
named, and comparatively unknown, abandoned thus
to the few civilized and the many barbarian amongst
men, and useless for any other purpose than the
grazing of flocks and herds—has quite recently become,
in the immediate dispensation of Providence, the
scene of honourable and amazingly remunerative
labour, —the home of an active, enterprising, and
rapidly increasing people; the centre of attraction
to all the old countries in the world ; and beyond all
comparison the most interesting spot on the surface
of the earth.
We are beginning a mighty Empire, my Friends: we
are, as an orator of the old country was wont to say, “mak-
ing history.” Look where you will around you, and you
cannot but see that fact in every feature of our adopted
land. Ask the soil on which you tread if it be des-
tined to greatness, and called at last out of its long
sleep to play a mighty part in the world-scene of
history. —The richest and most extensive Gold-fields
ever known —gold mines unequalled in number and
repute—arable districts almost fabulously fertile —
de-pasturage that fattens faster and incomparably
better than the stall-feeding system of England—
mineral and metallic wealth yearning for develop-
ment—a climate on the whole congenial to us
because softly European—water salubrious and plentiful
in many places, and sufficiently obtainable almost every-
where with common exertion and care—and scenery
magnificent —all these give forth their answer, and
say —“ Where we are, a mighty people not only may
but must arise; we hold in our embrace, as of
necessity and peculiar right, an embryo nation :we
want but the skill of man to open up our resources, and
develop us for good—our character is fast being
appreciated, and crowds are flocking towards
us daily—only give us the right style of men


only let ns be treated properly—and soon shall
this country equal if not surpass, in everything that
distinguishes great and thriving lands, the time-
honoured favourites of matured civilization.”*
Thus speaks the “Colony.’’ Victoria wants men.
What sort of men shall we claim for her, my Friends?
The object of this Lecture is to answer that. Our
purpose to-night is simply to consider and decide
what are the proper, the profitable, and the necessary
characteristics of “ Men for the Colony,”—that the
Colony may prosper, and fulfil its manifestly glorious
destiny.
The character of man may be divided into several
modes of its existence and development, for the pur-
pose of some kind of system in the examination of
it. For our mutual benefit then, in the accomplish-
ment of our present task, let us consider “ Men for
the Colony ” in these four ways, viz., commercially,
socially, politically, and religiously. In point
of fact, my Friends, we are, in our aggregate or associ-
ative capacity,. Commercial, Social, Political, and
Religious beings ; in these ways we are necessarily
related one to another, and each to all ; and this
division will therefore suit us well enough ; particularly
as what we want is, to find out the right “Men for the
Colony,” in a right practical and effectual manner, as
regards the common good.
Commercially, then, what sort of men do we
want ? Everything Commercial is needed amongst
* There is, just at present, a remarkable falling off in the num-
ber of our immigrants; but snch vacillations are to be expected
as part of our unusual history. That many of our countrymen
in the old world have been deterred latterly from coming to
Australia by prejudicial reports, springing out of disappointment,
evil disposition, and self-interest in its many forms—is a fact
that is as sure to precede reaction in an opposite direction as
the peopling of this Continent is divinely sure.


us. The requirements of a fast-growing and already
great population are demanding more and more
continually. Over and above the great peculiar and
fundamental occupation of our people, for the present,
that of procuring gold directly from the earth, in all
the various forms of doing so —there is not a
business, a trade, or a profession, which does not
invite aspirants, secure their establishment, and
richly reward their labours. Commerce, in its sense
of intermutual dealings of all kinds amongst men,
craves an unlimited supply of candidates for action,
for usefulness, for fame; and every fresh arrival in
the field brings with him the germs of new and more
imperative demands. Men, as to numbers, may be
had ; but, as to character suited to do us real good,
there is more difficulty in the way of satisfying our
wants.
Commercially, my Friends —comprehending in
that term industrial occupation generally—we want
men of Industry, Discrimination, and Patience; —of
untiring industry, wise discrimination, and cairn
self-restraining patience. Let us examine these
commercial characters each in turn, that we may see
how requisite they are to us
It is easy to say of them—“ Why these things are
wanted everywhere, as well as here;”—it is so truly-
but every want of every kind is exaggerated, I might
say aggravated, in such a community as ours: things
that are only very desirable indeed in older countries
with their ready resources and settled ways, are
vitally essential in new ones, where they constitute,
in themselves, resources, means of settlement, and
all; qualities that secure wealth and adorn individual
success in an old world are necessary to bare liveli-
hood and the public safety in a new one. And,
besides, we labour under the very serious disadvantage
on the very threshold of our work of nation-building


iii new spheres, that it is not in general the
industrious, the prudent, and the patient, that leave
the land of their birth to seek one for their adoption.
We do then peculiarly need these qualities in
ourselves and our fellow colonists; and it is well that
we carefully reflect and candidly acknowledge how
much we need them.
The first industrial occupation of almost ninety-
nine in every hundred of our able-bodied immigrants,
whatever their particular calling may be by previous
education and present ability, is the all-attracting
all-absorbing one of Gold-digging. To the Emigrant
on England’s shores Victoria is the long-dreamt-of
land of ruddy gold: the red vision deepens in intensity
as wind and wave bear the anxious expectant hither-
wards : the hasty foot no sooner presses its longed-
for goal, than implements are bought and every
preparation made to be off to “the Diggings”,—and
the chequered scene that follows on all this, many of
us know well, some alas! too well.
Take then the “Digger,” at Ballarat, or Bendigo,
anew chum, with new tent, bright scarlet jumper, and
well-pointed clean-handled pick—one fresh and buoyant
amongst thousands worn and wearied —one certain of
success, and hastening to be rich, in the midst of
crowds who have dug and delved full many a weary
month, and have had their labour for their pains, or
little more. He, however, is a lucky one ;he always
w 7 as; at home they called him so; his ow n heart
always echoed it, and does so now. All these around
him have failed, indeed, or done but little ; he,
however, has come amongst them to prove the wizard
influence of his lucky star; to him, whose virgin
pick is yet unblunted and unsoiled, to dig for gold is
only another mode of using the cap of Fortunatus,
Alas ! he thinks so obstinately through many fruitless
weeks—he digs on still, and barely pays his way; to


keep his tools in order costs him more than he can
earn, and his scarlet jumper is clay-coloured now—
presently he grows anxious for the future, nay, he
begins to doubt il dreams are to be trusted in. Now,
Young Man, Mechanic—Tradesman—Learned Pro-
fessional— whatever you may be —give yourself the
benefit of that sober warning doubt —add to your
industry discrimination. You are working hard
amidst mud and filth of every kind, and hitherto you
have not found it pay —consider if working hard at
something else, whatever you are fittest for, and
cleaner in all likelihood at least, might not be better
—more remunerative, and more improving. Consider
carefully, Young Man ! Well! do you determine to
give il up to rise out of that hapless hole and seek
for something to be done in the fair face of open
day ?.—do you dread the sure effects of continued
disappointment upon your own character—do you
turn with a shudder from the sight of yon helpless
ruined-one who would dig on and hope on,
until starvation begot pity, and pity doled out
nobblers to his burning lips that brought a trembling
madness on, and made him the wreck he is—and has
your eye, in turning, lit upon that other wretch, who
leans there against the tavern-door, the worn-out
dying victim of his own intemperance fostered by
that very good fortune you once boasted to be yours,
good fortune, alas! by which he won with ease rich
nuggets to be melted quickly into liquid flame to burn
away his life P— Ah, young friend, you cannot bear
the sight in either case ; despair and recklessness,
however contrarily produced, you see have wrought
most terrible effects —you have resolved to leave the
scene of such potent dangers on every side—you lay
the Digger’s sullied uniform aside, and swag on
shoulder wend your thoughtful way to the nearest
town to try another road to happiness. Give me thy


hand, Young Man, I like thee well, and am disposed
to trust thee Thou hast laboured industriously , hut
so far unfortunately —thou hast exercised however a
due and just discrimination , and that in time —now
add to your industry and discrimination patience only
in some other well-chosen pursuit, and thou hast the
three cardinal virtues of commercial character—and
depend upon it the probabilities are a hundred to
one in favour of your being The Man Jorthe Colony
at last. Think not, however, I pray you, my Friends,
that I seek to cast any blot upon that great and most
important class of our people—7 he Gold-Diggers.
Nothing could be further from my thought or pur-
pose. To be a Gold-Digger, yea, and a successful
one, is not necessarily to be the slave of selfishness,
or creature of vice, or necessarily to sacrifice, in any
degree, the nobler instincts and aspirations of
humanity. To very very many, Gold, when ever so
abundantly procured, is but the means of entering
healthily and cheerfully into higher and nobler
engagements ; but, when Stirling character triumphs
thus over all that tends to overcome it—ultimate
happiness and general usefulness still spring, not
from the lucky gold-search, but from the industrial
disposition that could discriminate , and still in time,
and patiently decide between gold and its uses —
personal wealth and its public responsibilities—
the fever of rapid acquisition and the slow
sound happy health of natural gradual and
ordained prosperity. The Gold-Fields have brought
hundreds of thousands here —but on the successful
and unsuccessful alike they have no influence to keep
them here. The fact is, in general, and will be for
many years to come, that our auri/erous]and (whether
alluvial or quartz) brings us Emigrants, and our
arable and pasture land converts them into Colonists.
Emigration and Colonisation are very different


things. The Emigrant comes, he scarce knows why,
exceptfor gold and novelty,—struggles hap-hazard for
the most of anything that he can grasp—stumbles and
falls and often hurts himself severely in a life-contest
for he scarce knows what, but learns, one way and
another, that lesson of calm self-restraining patience
we found him in possession of just now—and then he
is satisfied and glad to merge his own selfish and
fondly-cherished but wholly misunderstood interests
in those of a rising strength-gathering community
—becoming the useful member of a body healthy
and strong—no longer the isolated slave of avaricious
selfishness, but the genial and generous contributor to
a grand system of social, and therefore individual, good
—and thus he rises nobly from the rank of Emigrant to
that of Colonist .-—Cherish him, my Friends, he is
worth your care,—whatever tool he has taken up,
instead of the relinquished Pick, from spade to pen,
from stockwhip to rifle—whatever trade in lieu of
Gold-seeking, from Literature to Licensed-Victual-
ing, he has been led to enter on—Cherish him: he
has learnt the lesson that converts the Emigrant into
the Colonist, his present is intimately connected with
your future, he belongs to the new land intrinsically,
his welfare is part and parcel of the universal weal—
as fellow-colonist and fellow-citizen he claims your
sympathy and brotherhood, and henceforth and for-
ever freemasonry of heart binds him to you and you
to him. He began, industrious but selfish and mis-
taken—self fell away, and clear discrimination taught
it how honourably to rise again—and now, in the
quiet honourable exercise of some useful calling,
Patience, bought and paid for, steadys his efforts and
directs his way —he is not without a laudable
ambition, but he is content to grow rich and
influential by legitimate degrees —he works with and
not against his fellow-men —he recognises unity of


spirit and common interests—-and, in contributing
industrial skill of whatever kind, or at least industrial
labour, to the common good—he is, and he is more
from day to day—precisely, literally, accurately, and
to all practical and conceivable intents and purposes.
The Man for the Colony, in a Commercial point of
view.
And now we are to ask who are the men for the
the Colony Socially.
Here, again, that rude and ugly picture of deep-
bored holes and upturned soil which constitutes at
present so large a portion of our peopled region, has
no satisfaction for the moral eye. The social bond
—for a bond it is, and one immensely powerful in
effect though tender and gentle in kind—has no
influence, or scarcely any, upon the loose-holding
self-seeking ever-changing masses of the Gold-Fields.
Have the several inhabitants, or rather the uncomfort-
able occupants, of some neighbouring tents, discovered
the benefit of such meagre association as their cir-
cumstances allow, and do they meet together when
they can to enjoy after a fashion each other’s com-
pany P—Man being characteristically associative—what
we call amongst the beasts gregarious*—it may be so.
Alas ! how long is this society to last -what root is
it to be permitted to take —what fruit, or even flower,
to bear P Intelligence at evening of a new Kush ten
or a hundred miles away, scatters the company when
morning dawns—and each one, carrying like the snail
his house upon his back, disappears over the distant
hills in search of richer claims, forgetful altogether of
those claims deep and strong within the human
breast, the practical acknowledgement of which binds
man to man in permanent brotherhood, and renders
humanity, in the Christian sense, an acceptable offer-
ing to the God of all. No—Man as a Social Being
can find nothing satisfactory on a gold-field. The


social affections grow in permanent and happy homes
—and neither permanency or happiness can be
counted upon on any Gold-Field. However the
elements of a state ultimately social may be gathered
partially in the midst of that changeful golden
harvest—neither the scene of it locally nor the occupa-
tion of gathering is consistent with the enjoyment of
a really social state.
That Young Friend whom we left a little
while ago in the practise of some useful and
respectable industrial pursuit—a wiser and a better if
not a sadder man after the Gold-Fever left him. —He
is in a very hopeful way indeed to become Socially as
well as Commercially The Man for the Colony. He
is sobered down, you see, into quiet satisfaction with
a fair day’s wage for a fair day’s toil—or is it trade
that he has turned to, well —he is teaching some of
the older-established tradesfolk around him, who are
suffering somewhat still from the raging epidemic
of two or three years ago, and cannot help a little
lingering effort to make a gold mine of the shop, a
good claim of the counter, and a nugget-registry
of the ledger—he is teaching them, that they are
behind the times and must quicken their pace —that
fortunes are no longer to be made in weeks—that a
fair and steady profit is enough -that commercial and
social interests are linked together, and are equally
characterised by slow and sure development. In fact,
Ladies and Gentlemen, that experienced Young
Friend of ours grows interesting, and if I do not
greatly mistake will show himself a type and
model of what we are looking for—“ Men for the
Colony.” !
Socially, my Friends, we want good moral
character, respectability of conduct, an honourable
sense of independence and self-respect, respectability
of conduct, and a fair share of what is called public


spirit, i.e. of interest in the general advancement
socially. But, most of all we want in this respect —
Home — Feelimjl —7 hat, my Friends, is the grand
requisite to our Social Good—Excellent moral
character—the highest respectability —self-respect—
and public spirit— lose half their good effects as to
Society at large, if the permanency of Home-Feeling,
the solid satisfaction so peculiarly dear to the
English heart of being able to say “ This is my
Home/’ be not the foundation they all rest upon—the
ground from which they rise, and whence they spread
their fertilising powers. Religion, of course, elevates
intensifies and hallows all—but that we shall consider
the need of presently.
Well, then, Socially, we want in this Colony,
beyond everything else, the permanency of Home
interests—in a Social sense, and respecting our Social
state, there is no permanency and therefore there can
benoreal prosperity, without the concentration and firm
settlement of Home-affections here. Of all the curses
that can afflict a Colony, of all the withering influ-
ences that can attenuate and cripple a growing-
country—that one is the very worst and most
baneful which infects the air with “ I am going Home
as soon as / can get arvag .” We are speaking of our
prosperity as a “Colonyand People,”and it behoves us
therefore to declare,that until the affection for Fatherland
be, for practical purposes, transplanted into the New
Land, so that it becomes really a land of adoption,
and men really feel themselves “ at home ” in it —
until then, in the present and prospectively we
labour under a disadvantage that clogs prosperity,
and fetters progress —a weakening influence is in the
heart of society and circulates throughout the Body
commercial, social, political, and religious, producing
a general debility, which too often further degenerates
into careless apathy and cruel contempt.


J hear, and on good authority, that since we
last parted with our Model Young Man for
the Colony, or him who promised so fairly to become
so—he has, by dint of commercial industry of some
kind or other, and evidently actuated by right social
principles, been enabled and induced resolutely to
determine upon the immediate accomplishment of
two purposes, which will form such important
features in his history, and in ours too, that I must
tell you of them, and this is the best opportunity
I shall have for doing so. Our Young Friend is
going to he married to one in all things worthy of
him—as thank Heaven full many such there are—and
plans and specifications for a moderate-sized stone
residence, and store or workshop, to be built for him,
are already in the hands of a Contractor. Ah !my
Friends, I thought all along this was the man for
the Colony ; he has prospered, you see, by sheer
industry and good moral conduct, helped no" doubt
by a just tolerable education in his childhood—and
now he wisely proceeds to fix himself socially as well
as industrially, and gather within him fresh motives,
in fresh and sweet responsibilities, for further activity
and wider influence. Such is my own opinion of that
Young Man —that I shall not wonder in the least if
we find him, long before old age has chilled his zeal
or crippled his energies, an honoured member of the
“Lower,” perhaps the “Higher/’ House in our
New Constitution.
But —for the present —he marries prudently, and
builds a stone residence to live in. This I call
consecration and consolidation. The social
character is secured as regards domestic love and
happiness, from which so many social duties flow-
social responsibilities are thoroughly acknowledged —
social respectabilities are sure to follow in their most
beautiful and attractive form —The Husband and The


Father will consecrate the Colonist, and claim for him
a responsible position amongst men: —And that
stone house of his, finished now—for the Man for
the Colony is no sluggard in his pace—Oh ! that
comfortable stone house —not to disparage bricks by
the bye—looking so English-like and homely —it has
been long I understand the object of his ambition —
is a worthy casket for the precious treasure it
contains, a strong safe permanent and becoming
shelter for incomparably the most valuable and
desirable of all the elements of the social system, an
indusrtious, a respectable, and an amiable Christian
family.
Canvas, and Wood, my Friends, are very well to
begin with; and the latter may do for a long time
even —but let us always aspire to Stone, and
determine to have either that or Bricks as soon as
possible ; for our houses re-act upon ourselves.—
Stone walls reflect strength and steadiness into the
mind that planned and values them—and there is no
surer sign of individual or social progress, than the
raising up of dwelling-places worthy to contain, and
competent to protect, our prosperity -
So much then for man viewed socially, as we
stand in need of him for the general health strength
and progress of our community; and now let us
take another step, and look at our political
requirements in the individual members of our
Colonial Body —not, remember, that we are to take
up Politics in any difficult discursive manner, as to
forms of Government, or different schemes of
Administrative or Executive Economy—but only as
to the best style of Politician in every-day life, in so
fiir as each individual has a responsibility and a share
in the character and conduct of the State.
A man’s usefulness in this respect amongst us,
my Friends, appears to me to depend very much


indeed, simply upon those negative qualities which
free him from political prejudices, and party-
predilections, almost unavoidable in the old country,
but altogether unnecessary and irrelevant here.
Under any circumstances —and equally in the oldest
as in the youngest country —1 look upon the best
Politics (on the loftiest pinnacles of authority, as well
as in the spheres of common life) to be just the
most unflinching integrity and best practical honesty
in Public affairs; and this, enlightened of course by
a sufficient information upon the leading topics of
the day, and their reference to the various
classes interested in them, is, I am quite sure, the
most desirable kind of Political character in “ Men
for the Colony ”
Those Political Parties —old and new—which divide
amongst them the history of so many old countries,
and especially of that which is native and dear to us,
in each of which men are banded together artificially,
under unnatural names, and not for national but
factious purposes—all such, with all the heart-
burnings, embarassments, and difficulties, they must
produce, are unnecessary and most objectionable
here. To belong to a Set, and to follow a Leader, is
as easy in Politics as in anything else-—but
this is only to merge individual responsi-
bility in mere partizanship, and to cancel thereby
some of the highest and holiest duties incumbent upon
man in relationship to men.
Honesty is the same personal thing politically as
morally—and it is equally dangerous and wrong in
the one case as in the other, to fuse individuality into
the general mass, and escape personal liabilities by
going with a crowd.
There is, too, after all, as intimated just now, less
difficulty in practical Politics than many suppose :
States grow like individuals—and as they grow in


every other way, so do they too, politically. The
Commercial and Social interests, —illustrated in
what we have already dwelt upon, —demand the nur-
ture, protection, and direction of the State; and
public business must be conducted systematically,
and by means of regular and appropriate machinery :
thus, the whole community, as it increases and extends,
develops itself politically, equally as otherwise—and
I have no doubt whatever, that, other things being
equal—tyranny i.e., of one or many, being excluded
in the origin and confirmation of things—every
nation—Empire, Kingdom, Republic, all—has
assumed, and will' assume, and does so naturally,
just that form and phase of Political existence, which
is peculiarly adapted to its own character and
requirements.
Our advantage in this Colony T believe to be,
(and grateful should it make us, my Friends, to
Him, “who ruleth in the Kingdom of Men ”) that
we are starting in the very best and fairest manner
possible, in the career of our political history as a
People. I believe that we possess inestimable, and
hitherto unknown, endowments of a political kind.
Not that our “ New Constitution ” is perfect—nothing
human is or can be —but, that taken in its entirety,
viewed fairly, and considered justly as to its source,
the ordeals it has passed, its present suitableness,
and its promises, and probable powers, for the great
hereafter of Victoria—that Constitution is, and
signifies, much that is creditable to the experience-
whetted sagacity of Downing-street, and profitable to
us—to us, my Friends, whose collective importance
it acknowledges, whose practical independence it
allows, whose claims it generously meets- and who
may therefore cheerfully and thankfully receive it, as
a boon containing much present good, and
glorious promise for the budding future.


The Father-land and Children-Colonies are
otherwise now, each to the other,—than once they
were. The asserted claims of Colonists are now' the
acknowledged rights of Fellow-Citizens, not for one
moment to be tampered with, but instantly and on
their own merits to command assent. “ Experience-
whetted sagacity of Downing-street ,” I said just
now—yes, my Fellow-Colonists and Fellow-Towns-
men, yes —Once, in the far West, and barely a
century since, an angry English Monarch and his-
purblind statesmen-servants raised, by despotic obsti-
nacy, such a storm, as nothing but the triumphant
vindication of insulted manhood—triumphant, alas !
in protracted war, and on many a well-fought field—
alone could quell. That lesson taught manfully was
learnt effectually. We hear no more, nor in all like-
lihood ever shall, of English injustice to England’s
colonies. We, for our own parts, brought with us hither
those lessons of the past, which guide our kinsmen in
that now trusted and trustworthy Senate-house, whence
Anglo-Saxon power emanates, to circle the habitable
world with a halo of everywhere-welcome light, the
constituent rays of which, are Truth, Justice and Love.
We, as Colonists, have in our bosoms the same sen-
timents, which influence the counsels of those whom
we have left behind, to preside over our destinies,
and reflect our rights—we are one with them and they
with us;_therefore, we enjoy apolitical existence, and
political privileges, with the promise at least of which
the most captious cannot but be satisfied; —therefore,
our personal responsibilities with reference to the
great principles of Colonial Government, are light and
easy; —therefore, we have, in the present, indepen-
dence, and in the future, culminating greatness;—and
we, my Friends, shall constitute, and that in the probable
experience of most of us,—nay very soon indeed, for
History with us is a quick thing—a prominent and


beautiful feature of Anglo-Saxon Empire—helping
on, in this hemisphere, the manifest development of
Jehovah’s will —representing here His chosen instru-
ment for the execution of His purposes—inseparably
bound to the centre of our race, by the golden link
of the British crown, and yet, for all the practical and
local benefits of separate and unrestricted action, in-
dependent and free.
You will gather, then, from this, that I believe the
Man for the Colony in a political point of view, to be,
the loyal loving subject of Her, whose gentle
but firm hand now sways the sceptre of Anglo-
Saxon majesty the man, who owns as his
proudest honour, and guards as his dearest privilege,
politically, heart-fealty to England’s throne—who
bows, in subjection real as well as political, before “the
Lord’s Anointed” in his island birth-place, and, gladly
recognising all the benefits of a far-distant, safe, and
mighty Executive—actually influential only when all
here would seek, and wait for, its decisions, and really
more beneficial by presiding over, than by acting for
us—gives his own attention to secure local interests,
foster local development, and build up local influence.
You will gather, my Friends, from what I have now
said, that such is the man in my opinion calculated
to contribute to the political welfare of the Colony.
Your mere Agitators, my Friends, in petty spheres
for petty purposes —your little Partizans, your narrow
advocates of obsolete principles, or unneeded mea-
sures, and all such— hoc (jenus omne— are not by any
means the politicians for the Colony. Our long-lost-
sight-of Friend-that prosperous man in the Stone
residence, is ever active in all matters involving the
of his town and neighbourhood, is indeed
the trusted exponent of his townsmens’ views, soon
perhaps to represent them (as we shrewdly surmised
might yet be possible)in the high regions of state


authority, but his political history, hitherto, has recorded
only unquestionable benefits to his own locality—local
institutions—charitable, educational, commercial and
civil—foundedand upheld by his indomitable zeal, and
generous aid_and, at the present moment, he is anx-
iously engaged in urging on the assumption by hk
township of an independent Municipal existence —stri-
ving to satisfy the least-energetic and most timorous,
that, as each separate family can best manage its own
affairs, and should even repudiate the interference of
others, so each District knows best its own wants, and
can best' minister to its own prosperity. And this is
a safe and useful branch of political activity—nay, it
is just the kind of politics we really want. Politically',
then, Men for the Colony are they who rest contented
and happy, because safe and confident, under the
shelter of Britannia’s wing, as to all great and fun-
damental principles of Government—and whose
energies are directed to the practical improvement of
everything within their reach —they verily securing
thus the general good, by attention to particular
interests.
I do not think, moreover, that our Model Colonist
that self-made man of wealth and power, who is
respected by every one, and whose stake in the coun-
try is increasing every day,—will object in the slightest,
to that element in our new phase of Political Life,
which some are wont to suspect as savouring of the
Oligarchical, or at least the Aristocratic—l mean the
Upper House of Representatives, nicknamed our
“House of Lords.No, I think his sensible opinion
about that is, that however it may have to grow, and
continually adapt itself to our quick development, as
everything else in the New Constitution must also
do—the principle of the thing is good, that principle,
being, that all classes to be governed, should be re-
presented as fairly as possible, in the sphere of


Government—and as to different Classes, and thereby
separate interests, or rather interests of different kinds,
his own experience and good common-sense satisfy
him fully, that they are natural, necessary, and
altogether unavoidable—not to say (what I know he
thinks) useful and desirable too, as facts and powers in
Society. He knows, my Fiiends, that in the natural
and ordained order of things—the varying conduct
of individual men must be followed by various effects —
he knows, that if it were possible to reduce all men,
in a moment, to exactly the same level, in every way,
the very moment of such reduction would be preg-
nant with rapid change —that the industry and energy
of some would raise them up with speed almost in-
credible, whilst the laziness and inertia of others
would weigh them down as surely, and almost as soon
—some, also, remaining, perhaps, in a strange and
semi-good-for-nothing state of stupid indifference,
just in the very spot where the wand of the enchanter
placed them. Well, all this being inevitable, and
different classes being thereby a necessary fact—our
sagacious Friend, who will see facts as they are, and
will not profess to ignore any thing, in which I quite
agree with him, —looks upon this plan of the Two
Houses in the New r Constitution, as simply an acknow-
ledgment of facts which cannot be denied, and a prepa-
ration to deal justly with them. I suspect, certainly,
that he has no sympathy with the antique and shri-
velled system of Hereditary Legislation, other than,
for reasons particular, as to the Monarchial ele-
ment in Government. I suspect that ranks and titles
—coats of arms and coronets—are matters quite in-
different to him,—but, that the whole scheme of suck-
ing Senators and cradled Statesmen, is to him a
farce upon which, wherever played, the curtain can-
not drop too soon; he holds, if I mistake not, (that
admirable Man for the Colony,) that men can no


more be born Legislators than they can Lord Chan-
cellors ; and I have no doubt, that if such a system
sought admission amongst us, he would say boldly —
“No; —to legislate is to perform a solemn function
not only amongst but over men —it requires high and
proved ability —it must be prepared for carefully } and
by the slow process of practical experiencecall
yourselves what names you will, and wear what seals
of honour you please, and let those names and seals
be heirlooms to your descendants, if it suit you that
they should—but, capacity to make laws for man, and
to preside over his dearest interests, cannot be hand-
ed down from Father to Son ; it is not hereditary by
Nature, and we must not, therefore, attempt to make it
so in fact —Hereditary honours may do good—Here-
ditary Legislation must do harm —It suits not Aus-
tralian Taste: it will not do for us; “Men for the
Colony” —and no others—must legislate for the
Colony !” lam quite sure our Friend is right —
such is the kind of Politics we want, assuredly ;
and, by the inculcation of his principles on the
popular mind, we shall accomplish for this coun-
try presently, a destiny unequalled upon earth.
—a destiny, my Friends, made up of every thing
good in the English system, with none of the alloys
that injure it, a destiny that will leave us amply
free for self-management, and self-rule, whilst it will
secure our position as an integral portion of the
greatest Empire in the world, and thus we shall
participate to the full, in the brightening glories of
our Anglo-Saxon Race, whilst, as Australians, we
shall have all the privileges, and exercise all the
powers, of a prosperous and mighty Nation.
Politically then, my Friends, I believe that
“ Men for the Colony” are men who hold such views
as those I have here enunciated—and I hope you
will agree with me in general that it is so, and that


such men we should welcome to our shores, and do
all in our power to encourage and support.*
And now we come to the last consideration I pro-
posed to enter upon, that, viz. of “ Men for the
Colony” in a religious light.
We have done our best, my Friends, to decide
upon the right “Men for the Colony” Commercially,
Socially, and Politically; —the attempt has neces-
sarily been a very imperfect one, equally from my
want of ability to do anything like justice to so
great a theme, and from my utter inability to
snatch sufficient time from my professional pur-
suits, for the due digestion and proper pre-
paration of my Lecture, It has occurred to
me many times indeed since I began my task,
that the Bush-Parson and the Public Lecturer are
utterly hopeless incompatibles. We have, however,
under the circumstances, done what we could. It
remains that we secularise as much as possible,
in order to make it appropriate to the occasion, a
brief concluding reference to the religious interests
of the Colony.
By Secularising my observations upon this sub-
ject, I only mean, carrying on the character of a
Lecture and not turning aside into a Sermon. Let
* Here I would take leave of my Young Friend—the unsuc-
cessful Digger, but thoroughly successful Man. And in doing so,
before I proceed to consider “Men for the Colony” in their religious
aspect in general, I would just state of him one fact, which, though
hitherto I have rathe* implied than asserted it, has ever lain at the very
foundation of his prosperity in every way. He came here strongly
imbued with sound religious principles, and has never suffered them to
decline,but on the contrary, has cherished them with all the greater zeal
on account of his new position and unaccustomed relationships to God
and ynan. O that this were a more common case ! O that the
religious principles, and reputable habits, of Fatherland, were more
generally fostered and continued here! O that the solemnities and
respectabilities, not to say the eternal verities, of our Faith, habitually
regarded in Christian England, were more consistently acknowledged
amongst our people, as they advance from the rank of Emigrants to
that of Colonists.


me be understood to mean no more—because, although
I hold that secularity should be evangelised un-
sparingly and always —by which I mean that “ the
earth” should be kept freely “salted” at all times—no
one can condemn more than I do, such an accom-
modation of Religion to Secularity, such a modify-
ing of “the salt” into “the earth”, as the term “ to
secularise religion” usually signifies.
We want religious “Men for the Colony ” above
all other men, simply because the Religious Man
is the best man, secularly and every other way. You
see, we are to advocate Religious Men in their
connexion with Society, and as they affect the general
character and doings of a people and therefore; it is
not so much the influence of the ever-blessed Gospel,
upon one’s own personal disposition, in the new crea-
tion of the Holy Spirit we have to look to, as the
influence of Christian men upon other men in their
associative aspect, and of Christian Churches upon
each other and the general mass.
I must say, however, that so far as the fundamental
fact of a realised personal salvation goes~there is
no question that they who bear the name of “ fhe
People of God,” in its true and effectual sense, are
beyond all comparison the most valuable members of
any community. The “ brimstone and fire ” had not
destroyed Sodom of old, you remember, if only “ ten
righteous” had been there, to shield the wicked from
just destruction, and afterwards bring them back to
God ; and we read—“ When it goeth well with the
righteous, the city rejoicethand “ By the blessing of
the upright the city is exaltedand, “ Righteous-
ness exalteth a nation, but sin is a reproach to any
people.” Yes, my Friends ; every true Christian, —
man, woman, or child —is the most precious of all
possessions everywhere, bringing down upon society
around the refreshing dew of Divine blessing; but'—


as in the other branches of our subject to-night, we
were called upon to consider men as to the style or
tenor of their Commercial, Social, and Political con-
duct amongst their fellow-men —so, we are to examine
now, the kind of religious conduct, in a social sense,
as it were, that is suited to us in this Colony—the
form of religious development, in general or nationally,
that we should encourage amongst us as a people.
As with regard to Politics, then— so with reference
to Religion also, in this general aspect of it amongst
ourselves—my belief is—that the first grand requisite
for usefulness here, is, simply, renunciation and for-
getfulness of old prejudices, and the laying aside of
wholly uncalled for Sectarianism. In the old land
in the other hemisphere, the great Christian com-
munity presents one highly-endowed and almost
dominant Visible Church, towering above all com-
petitors, and indeed rather ignoring, than assenting to,
the very fact of their existence, “The Church” and
“the Dissenters” divide between and amongst them,
and that in no amiable spirit, the religious interests
of the Community; and, that there is, under the cir-
cumstances, ground for undue assumption on the one
part, and for jealousy and envy on the other, cannot
be questioned—nay, that there is thus a feeling even
of animosity engendered, and maintained in divers
wrfys, amongst the various Religious Bodies in Great
Britain and Ireland, is a fact to be deplored and not
denied; and that these things must be injurious to the
national Religion can scarcely, I think, be doubted
by any candid inquirer.
Here—however—we meet together religiously on
equal terms; here, it is not “Church’ and “Dis-
sent ”by which the religious area is occupied; here,
we all constitute Churches alike and all have equal
opportunities at least, of state connexion and state
aid; so that if prejudice linger still in any mind, if


sectarian animosity smoulder still in any breast, these
are not the signs of any just cause occasioning either,
but only that individual uncharitableness is unwilling
to lay bitterness aside, and take up love in its place.
The equal Denominational system of Religion as
it obtains in this Colony is, I think, as justly a cause
of mutual congratulation to us all, as we have seen
our political advantages to be in their way; and I
feel deeply that the “ Men for the Colony” in
this socially religious point of view, are just they
who will strengthen, and protect, as one of the most
precious treasures of the Commonwealth, that fair
and equal, courteous and generous relationship of
Church to Church, which is healthily growing up
amongst us, and becoming illustriously characteristic
of us.
Ancient Prejudice and ever-existing Envy are
alike actively engaged in the accursed task of causing
disunion and discord amongst men, individually and
collectively. They preach to us ever, the unholy
doctrine, that, in Religion especially, the different
developments of Denominational character are
naturally antagonistic to one another —that Churches
are characteristically inter-inimical, and can never
cease to carry on an internecine war —that, to belong to
one visible Body, is to be hostile and hateful to every
other— and, that the existence of distinct religious
Bodies is in itself a general Sin, and community of
feeling, and co-operation in fact, impossible amongst
them.
Now, in triumphant opposition to all this, Truth
says; —no principles are naturally antagonistic to
each other, but those of Good and Evil; they alone
are natural-born and irreconcileable enemies; and,
so far from different developments of Good being es-
sentially opposed to one another, they are verily by
nature, kindred, congenial, and co-operative, and


become otherwise only by that personal disposition to
discord, which consitutes the most unhappy feature of
the fallen character of Man.
Men do not quarrel amongst themselves, because
their varying circumstances necessarily involve hos-
tility—but because the impression of Cain’s curse
is too often cherished rather than destroyed—and
Prejudice and Envy are allowed to usurp the Empire
of Christ—dissolving unity, distracting amity, and
ranging “ Brethren” against each other, upon grounds
equally preposterous and puerile.
This Colony, as it grows into a Country, shall
demonstrate to mankind the glorious fact, that
different Denominations of Christianity are not only
natural and right—but, that they can delight in all
the mutual courtesies, kindly association, and useful
co-operation, that distinguish Christian men in their
treatment of one another and in their common regard,
as individuals for the cause common to all. It is be-
cause our present arrangements in religious things
appear to me to encourage and secure all this, that I
rejoice in them unfeignedly, and hope to see them es-
tablished among us for all generations.
Much then upon this point need not be said—our
proceedings under this last division of my subject,
are such as I believe require only to be consistently
maintained. That the religious element in every
State or Community, should be the promoter of
Public peace, the soother of Public sorrows, the
balm and remedy for Public wounds, and the prolific
source of universal harmony —is, that Religion should
fulfil its sacred mission, and do that faithfully for
which God charters it.
My firm conviction is, my Friends, that our aspect
in Victoria as Religious Bodies, toward the State,
towards each other, and above all towards Him, the
light of whose countenance shines down upon us all


—is just that, which is most calculated to secure these
happy issues, enhance them as they flow, and trans-
mit them safely, “from generation to generation.”
Therefore, T pray that we may never want “ Men for
the Colony,” to sympathise with our religious arrange-
ments as they stand, so that, under the watchful care of
the God and Father of all, we may grow Religiously,
as Commercially, Socially, and Politically;
and, with equally quick development in all these dif-
ferent but co-operative ways, may stand forth more
prominently, year by year, firmly to grasp, and nobly
use, the glorious destinies made ready to our hand! *
FINIS.




