

The Gate of
Eternal Memories


"Menin Gate
at Midnight"
The Story of
Captain Will Longs tafPs
Great Allegorical Painting.
Issued by
AUSTRALIAN WAR MEMORIAL
Exhibition Building, Nicholson St., Melbourne.
Exhibition Building, Chalmers Street, Sydney.




FOREWORD
SftTjjN response to many requests this story of Will
JjfiA LongstafTs famous painting has been compiled
from records in the possession of the Australian
War Memorial. Most of the information relating
to the Menin Gate Memorial has been obtained from the
Introduction to the Register of Names issued by the Imperial
War Graves Commission.
With one exception (where suitable acknowledgment is
made) the photographs were taken by the Australian official
photographers and the copyright is owned by the War
Memorial.
This booklet has been published for free distribution to
those who subscribe for the reproductions of this notable
picture which the War Memorial has agreed to issue. In
making these reproductions available, the War Memorial is
seeking to achieve several objects which it is believed will
assure the movement of the support of the public. It is
desirous of satisfying the wide demand for copies of this
remarkable painting, and in this way of bringing the pic-
ture, which has a deep significance, to the notice of many
who may never have an opportunity of viewing the original.
The framing, packing, and distribution of the reproductions
will provide employment for returned men. The proceeds
will augment the Australian War Memorial Fund, estab-
lished by Act of Parliament in 1925, and used to promote
the aims and purposes of the War Memorial.
Hung in the homes of Australia, the pictures will help
to keep alive and evergreen the memory of the A.I.F.
3




THE GATE OF ETERNAL
MEMORIES.
YPRES.
■F all the towns in France none stands out more
prominently than Ypres in the history of the
British Armies in the Great War.
Ypres is one of the old towns of Flanders,
and eight centuries ago it was the greatest of them. It
decayed through changes in trade and industry, through
political troubles, through many sieges and some captures.
It was attacked by an English force under the Bishop of
Norwich in 1385, and stormed by the English Puritan
Troops who formed part of Turenne’s Army in 1658; and
Vauban captured it for Louis XIV. in 1678, and subse-
quently fortified it.
Ypres was described in 1905 as a dead or phantom town,
a cemetery, deserted by industry and trade, but carefully
guarding the great buildings erected in its prosperity, of
which the best known were the famous Cathedral and Cloth
Hall. The ramparts built by Louis XIV., modernised by
the Dutch Government before 1830, and dismantled by the
Belgian Government in 1854, remain as wide promenades
on the east and south sides. They were pierced by two
gates, of which the gate towards Lille retained its flanking
towers, but the gate towards Menin was only a passage
between two ends of wall. In 1914 Ypres was one of the
smaller towns of the Belgian province of West Flanders,
joined by canals and railways to the French border and the
sea. It stood in flat, intensely cultivated country; but to
the south-west was a low range of hills running from Kem-
mel westward to Godewaersvelde, and rising again at
Cassel; and to the north and east were the gradual ascents,
afterwards known among the British troops as the Pilckem
Ridge, the Passchendaele Ridge, and Menin Road Ridge.


The Ypres Salient.
Showing the lines reached during the successive stages of the Third Battle of Ypres in 1917.


THE YPRES SALIENT IN THE WAR.
A few weeks after the war began—between the 19th
September and the 18th October, 1914 —the original Ypres
Salient was formed as a result of the operations in which
“the Old Contemptibles” and the French and Belgian
Armies barred the German advance on the Channel ports.
It was the scene of fierce fighting in the following year,
particularly between the 22nd April and the 25th May.
This battle was marked by the employment by the Germans
of lethal gas for the first time, and in the fighting the
Empire lost over 60,000 soldiers killed, wounded, and
missing. The remainder of this year and the whole of 1916
was passed in trench warfare or local attacks. At the end
of the latter year the Australian infantry divisions had
their first experience of the Salient when, in September
and October, after the fighting at Pozieres, the I. Anzac
Corps changed places with the Canadian Corps. The
Salient was then unnaturally quiet, the troops on both sides
having been withdrawn thither after taking part in the
great struggle farther south. There was consequently an
opportunity, seldom offered at Ypres, for fortification, and
two months were spent by the Australians in hastily im-
proving the front line defences, and in establishing new
lines farther back so as to increase the security in the
position. After two months thus spent “resting” the Aus-
tralian Divisions returned to the Somme to take part in a
new development of that battle.
In the Salient the first half of 1917 was occupied with
the comparatively quiet trench warfare. The second half
saw a series of successful, but costly, attacks by the Allied
forces. The first was the Battle of Messines, in which the
3rd and 4th Australian Divisions took part. This battle was
marked by complete success. A few weeks later, on the
31st July, the Third Battle of Ypres began. In the first
stage only the artillery of the Australian divisions took part.
The operations gradually came to an end in the morass


caused by heavy rainfalls. It was not until the 20th Sep-
tember, 1917, after three weeks of dry weather, that the
infantry of the I. Anzac Corps (then comprising Ist, 2nd,
4th, and sth Australian Divisions) took part in the launch-
ing of the second phase of the great battle. Only part of
the ridge overlooking the Salient had by then been
wrenched from the Germans. If that ridge is likened to a
sickle, with its handle at Messines and its blade curving
from the Menin Road heights through Broodseinde to
Passchendaele, the British had then seized the handle and
the junction of the handle and blade, but the Germans
still held the blade. The phase which now commenced saw
the launching, during a fortnight’s fine weather, of a series
of tremendous hammer-strokes, by which the Germans were
thrust back about a mile at a time, precisely as planned,
until they held only the northern part of the ridge, from
Passchendaele onwards. The I. Anzac Corps, later with the
11. Anzac Corps (New Zealand, 3rd Australians, and two
British divisions) on its left, occupied a more or less central
position in each of these strokes, which they delivered in
conjunction with a larger number of British divisions. There
was no especial secrecy about the operations; the Germans
knew well that they were to be attacked, and that the
operations would take place at dawn. They were uncertain
only of the precise British plans as to date and sector. The
retaliatory fire was consequently heavy; the roads back to
Ypres were perpetually barraged—Birr Cross Road and
“Hellfire Corner” are names which, in Australia as else-
where, bring a shudder even to this day; the nearer
bivouacs were drenched with “mustard” gas. But so over-
whelming was the power at that time of the British artillery
that no counter-measures which the enemy could take
availed him in the least. On the day appointed for each
attack the British advance rolled on exactly as intended.
The Germans counter-attacked, as they had been wont to
do successfully in the earlier stages of the battle; but, so
long as the fine weather lasted, these attempts were easily


detected, either by the front-line infantry or by aeroplanes,
and the tremendous barrage, descending like a dense cur-
tain, engulfed them. In several cases counter-attacks were
thus utterly stopped without the front-line infantry ever
knowing that it had even been threatened.
Only once within Australian experience in this phase of
the battle was a German counter-attack even partly suc-
cessful. This was immediately before the second attack of
the series. In the first—that of 20th September (usually
known as the “Battle of the Menin Road ) —the Germans
had been pushed back from Nonne Bosschen and “Glen-
corse Wood” into Polygon Wood, across which their line
now lay. The Butte was still in German possession, and
in the next operation, planned for 26th September, it was
intended to thrust the Germans back from this position,
and, farther north, to reach the neighbourhood of Zonne-
beke. The Ist and 2nd Australian Divisions, which had
played a central part in the battle of the 20th, had been
relieved, and the troops of the 4th and sth Australian
Divisions, which were to deliver the next attack in this
sector, were partly in position and partly on the way
thither when, after an unusually severe concentration of
artillery fire, the Germans counter-attacked immediately
south of the sth Division’s flank. Only the southern edge
of that division was involved, but the Germans forced their
way into the line farther south by the Reutelbeek. A hand-
ful of Scottish troops held out magnificently, although en-
tirely surrounded, but their survival was, at the time,
unknown to anyone on the British side. The sth Australian
Division, by heavy fighting, made good its own flank and
part of the ground adjoining; but the plans for the next
day had been seriously upset, and the authorities were
forced to consider whether the intended operation could
be carried out. It was, however, decided to “carry on,”
and the reserve brigade of the sth Australian Division was
accordingly hurried forward at the last moment to assist


its southernmost brigade in the task. On 26th September,
at the appointed hour, the great attack moved forward,
the southernmost Australian brigade making special
arrangements to protect its flank, since the intended ad-
vance of the line south of that point could not be fully
carried out. This advance went like a whirlwind to its
objective. Though fired into from its right rear, the sth
Division seized The Butte; and, when the Germans pre-
sently debouched to counter-attack, an Australian machine-
gun from the mound assisted in sweeping away their at-
tempt. Farther south the gap in the line about the
Reutelbeek was presently filled, the brave Scots being found
still holding their own against a surrounding enemy.
The next operation of the series resulted in the heaviest
blow sustained by the Germans during the Third Battle of
Ypres. Although the British line now ran over the heights
at Polygon Wood, farther north it lay in the lowlands of
Zonnebeke facing the Germans, whose front line still lay
near the foot at the ridge. This was to be assaulted on
4th October, the Australians having shifted slightly north-
wards so that the I. Anzac Corps (Ist and 2nd Australian
Divisions) was opposite Broodseinde, with the 11. Anzac
Corps (New Zealand and 3rd Australian Divisions) on its
left. Both Australians and New Zealand troops were
especially elated, since this was the first time that four
Australasian divisions had fought together in line. Moreover,
on their southern flank was the 7th British Division, which
had fought beside Australians some months before at Bulle-
court, and for which they had an especial affection and
regard.
The battalions allotted for this attack had marched up
during the night along the tracks taped out for them, and
were lying down in the dark along other tapes marking the
“jumping-off line,” with the graceful white flares of the
Germans rising and falling from the opposing line 300
yards in front, when there shot up another sort of flare.
Continued on Page 13.
10


The Ramparts of Ypres.
The photograph was taken on the 19th September. On the following
day the Australian Infantry was engaged in the battle of Menin Road.
“Telling the Latest.”
A scene in billets in Ypres.
11


In Billets in Ypres.


bursting into hundreds of golden spangles. This was fol-
lowed by others of the same sort, until these were rising
thickly along the enemy’s front. It appeared almost certain
that the Germans had seen the waiting troops, and that
this was his call to his artillery for barrage. Within a few
minutes the German artillery opened, its shells falling fairly
across the waiting lines of the Ist and 2nd Australian
Divisions, and for half an hour the officers and men lying
out in shell-holes had to endure this tempest. Losses were
heavy, and officers were wondering whether their units
could possibly carry out the assault, when, at 6 a.m. (the
hour for the attack), the German fire suddenly ceased,
and simultaneously the British barrage, enormously greater
in volume, descended. The troops rose to their feet, lit their
cigarettes, and began to advance. In the dim light a man
would be visible about 40 yards away, and they had gone
100 yards when they saw before them another line of
men, rising to their feet, and looking round them as if
puzzled, waiting for an order.
It was a line of Germans. The enemy command had
planned an assault at exactly the same hour as the British,
but on a smaller scale. The attacking troops of each side
had been lying out in No Man’s Land at 5.30 a.m. without
the other’s knowledge. The yellow flares probably meant
the detection of some part of the Australian force, but the
German bombardment was part of the normal preparation
for their own attack. When the two lines met the Aus-
tralians rolled over that of the Germans and continued on
up the Broodseinde heights to where some of the German
staffs and the artillery observers were awaiting news of
their own operation. The officers and men at these head-
quarters, beside the road along the ridge-top, fought
sternly, but the heights were captured; from its trenches the
new front line looked out, at last, into the comparatively
green country beyond the ridge, and the Germans were
thrust from the observation posts from which they had so
long directed the fire of their batteries upon the Salient.


The weather then broke, but so striking had been this
last success that it was decided to accept the risk of failure
and make, at last, a definite attempt to break through the
German front by attacking Passchendaele. To bring for-
ward infantry, guns, and stores over the morass of mud-
pools, miles of plank road and “duckboard” track were
laid by the pioneers. Two battles were fought on 9th and
12th October. In these operations the New Zealand, 2nd,
3rd, and 4th Australian, and a number of British divisions
took part; but the mud of that dreadful battlefield clogged
the effort both of infantry and artillery, and, in spite of
their most gallant efforts, the final advance broke down in
the wire of “Bellevue Spur” and the mud of the Ravebeck.
The conditions of the battlefield had now changed, and
so did the policy of the high command. The main task of
attacking Passchendaele —no longer in an attempt to break
through—was transferred to the Canadian Corps, which,
despite the mud, tackled the operation in three stages and
carried it to success. In this phase—the third (and last)
of that battle—several Australian divisions played only
subsidiary parts on the flank of the main attack, though
all the Australian divisions suffered in the mud and in the
bombardments of the back area. In November they were
withdrawn to spend the winter at Messines, leaving the
New Zealanders at Polderhoek. In the spring the Somme
again took them, and they never again returned to the
Salient.
In April, 1918, the Germans in the Salient attacked
heavily, but their offensive was gradually brought to a
standstill. It was not until within three or four weeks from
the end of the war that the deadly Ypres Salient ceased to
exist. By then the town had indeed become, in a sense
not foreseen by the writer who had used the terms thirteen
years before, a “phantom city” and a “vast cemetery.”
It was razed to the ground. Around it were the graves of
hundreds of thousands of Allied and enemy soldiers, and
thousands lay within the city boundary.


WAR’S AFTERMATH.
The Armistice was followed by three years of active
search for the unburied dead, or those buried in scattered
graves where they fell. Neither then nor since did the
battlefields give up all their dead; in the mines, the deeper
trenches, and the woods bodies are still being found, and
will be found for some years to come. These men fell
beyond the limits of organisation, in places where courage
alone held good. No man knows of their grave to this
day.
Thus it was that here, as in all the other theatres of the
Great War, fortune dealt unequally between man and man
in this: to one it gave a place of burial, known and marked
from the day of his death, or discovered later by search
or accident, while to others it denied this honor, and to
their kin this consolation. The armies of the contending
nations (and first among them the armies of the British
Empire) originated and developed, as the war proceeded,
military organisations for ensuring, as far as possible, the
burial of their dead, so that their graves might be per-
manently preserved; but even in trench warfare and in
successful attack these tasks could not always be completed,
and in times of retreat they often could not be attempted.
The exchange of information on this subject between the
combatant Powers did something, though comparatively
little, to supply the lost details.
The Imperial War Graves Commission—as the organisa-
tion set up by Great Britain and the Dominions to main-
tain the war cemeteries is known—was faced with the fact
that a considerable proportion of the soldiers of the Empire
who fell in the Great War have no known graves. It was
recognised from the beginning that to mark the graves
and to leave uncommemorated even one of the dead would
be a failure in duty; and it was, therefore, decided to re-
cord, not only on paper, but also in stone or bronze, the


names of those who lay buried in unidentified graves or
under the battlefields or the sea. Monuments have been, or
will be, erected differing in size and design according to
the numbers involved and the places chosen, but alike in
that each is inscribed with some of those names which do
not appear on headstones.
In the vicinity of Ypres there are 137 cemeteries con-
taining the dead of the Empire. Of the graves in these
cemeteries, 40,000 contain the remains of unidentified
soldiers. These, and 50,000 others whose graves are not
even known or marked, are the officers and men com-
memorated chiefly on two imposing memorials which have
been erected by the Imperial War Graves Commission in
this sector.
For the more important of these memorials the Menin
Gate was a natural site for selection. Hundreds of
thousands of men passed through it to the battlefields of
the Ypres Salient. Then the Menin Road was an avenue
of death. Now it is hallowed by the gallantry and self-
sacrifice of those who marched along it—many never to
return. It was, therefore, fitting that this beautiful
Memorial to those who fell should be erected on the site
of the gateway to their Via Dolorosa.
$ *
They shall not grow old, as we that are left grow old;
Age shall not weary them, nor the years condemn.
At the going down of the sun and in the morning
We will remember them.
LAURENCE BINYON.


Moving Up.
Australian Infantry passing through Ypres on their way to the front line.
The Menin Gate, 20th September, 1917.
“ ... Only a passage between two ends of wall.”
17


THE MENIN GATE MEMORIAL.
Pathe Picture.


Hell-fire Corner on the Menin Road.
Idiot Corner.
Infantry and pack mules moving forward along a corduroy road
to the forward area.
20


The Menin Gate Memorial
■ESIGNED by Sir Reginald Blomfield, the eminent
British architect, this stately Memorial is a great
stone structure, composed of two arches —one at
each end—having a central semi-circular opening
30 ft. wide for traffic. The top of each arch is 30 ft. above
road level. On either side of each arch is a flat arch 10 ft.
6 in. wide, and 24 ft. high. These smaller arches span the
pavement. There are four engaged stone circular columns
on each end elevation, which carry the heavy stone cornice.
Some idea of the weights that had to be lifted will be
grasped when it is known that each column stone weighs
about four tons, and that every stone in the main cornice
weighs between four and eight tons.
On the town end, the arch is surmounted by a sar-
cophagus, carved out of a single block of stone, and on the
other end by a typical representation of the British lion,
also in stone. Between the stone arches at each end is
the portion of the Memorial known as the Great Hall, the
side walls of which are 66 ft. apart, while an elliptical
concrete coffered arch forms the roof. From each side of
the hall runs a staircase leading up to the ramparts. From
the ramparts access is given to the loggias, which extend
the length of the Memorial at rampart level.
The stone employed for the Memorial is a French lime-
stone, known as Euville Marbrier, which is quarried near
Commercy, on the line between Bar-le-Duc and Nancy, and
had to be transported in rough blocks to Ypres, a distance
of about two hundred miles.
The length of this majestic pile is 135 ft. 6 in., the width
104 ft., and the height from the roadway to the top of the
lion stone is over 80 ft. Some 6,000 tons of stone, 11,000
tons of concrete material, and over 500 tons of steel were
employed in the structure, the total weight of which
approximates 20,000 tons.


No. of
Regiment.
Names
8lh Infantry Battalion .
. 109
9th Infantry Battalion .
. 119
10th Infantry Battalion
. 87
11 th Infantry Battalion
. 64
12th Infantry Battalion
. 70
13th Infantry Battalion
. 50
14th Infantry Battalion
. 66
15th Infantry Battalion
. 42
16th Infantry Battalion
. 80
17th Infantry Battalion
. 105
18th Infantry Battalion
. 84
No. of
Regiment. Names.
Army Medical Corps ... 31
Army Service Corps ... 3
Artillery 140
Engineers 63
1 st Infantry Battalion . . 98
2nd Infantry Battalion . . 82
3rd Infantry Battalion . . 77
4th Infantry Battalion . . 48
5th Infantry Battalion . . 97
6th Infantry Battalion . . 133
7th Infantry Battalion . . 94
The inscription repeated over the two main arches is:
“TO THE ARMIES OF THE BRITISH EMPIRE
WHO STOOD HERE FROM 1914 TO 1918, AND
TO THOSE OF THEIR DEAD WHO HAVE NO
KNOWN GRAVE.”
The inscription repeated over the two staircases lead-
ing out of the main hall is:
“IN MAIOREM DEI GLORIAM.
“HERE ARE RECORDED NAMES OF OFFICERS
AND MEN WHO FELL IN YPRES SALIENT BUT
TO WHOM THE FORTUNE OF WAR DENIED THE
KNOWN AND HONOURED BURIAL GIVEN TO
THEIR COMRADES IN DEATH.
“THEY SHALL RECEIVE A CROWN OF GLORY
THAT FADETH NOT AWAY.”
The names of 56,000 officers and men are incised in
Portland stone panels which have been fixed to the inner
walls of the hall, up the sides of the staircases, and inside
the loggias. Of the names, 6,160 are those of members of
the Australian forces. The distribution of these names
among the units of the A.I.F. may be of interest:
22


No. of
Regiment. Names.
43rd Infantry Battalion . 114
44th Infantry Battalion . 109
45th Infantry Battalion . 191
46th Infantry Battalion . 60
47th Infantry Battalion . 170
48th Infantry Battalion . 108
49th Infantry Battalion . 171
50th Infantry Battalion . 93
51 st Infantry Battalion . 92
52nd Infantry Battalion . 113
53rd Infantry Battalion . 66
54th Infantry Battalion . 28
55th Infantry Battalion . 55
56th Infantry Battalion . 82
57th Infantry Battalion . 81
58th Infantry Battalion . 63
59th Infantry Battalion . 75
60th Infantry Battalion . 40
Light Horse 13
Machine Gun Corps . . . 241
Pioneers 46
Trench Mortar Batteries . 44
Tunnelling Companies . . 13
No. of
Regimen I. Names.
19th Infantry Battalion . 68
20th Infantry Battalion . 114
21st Infantry Battalion . 94
22nd Infantry Battalion . 72
23rd Infantry Battalion . 71
24th Infantry Battalion . 86
25th Infantry Battalion . 89
26th Infantry Battalion . 73
27th Infantry Battalion . 67
28 th Infantry Battalion . 116
29th Infantry Battalion . 73
30th Infantry Battalion . 41
31st Infantry Battalion . 105
32nd Infantry Battalion . 40
33rd Infantry Battalion . 100
34th Infantry Battalion . 143
35th Infantry Battalion . 156
36th Infantry Battalion . 148
37th Infantry Battalion . 158
38th Infantry Battalion . 140
39th Infantry Battalion . 87
40th Infantry Battalion . 108
41st Infantry Battalion . 71
42nd Infantry Battalion . 126
To each his dreams, and mine to me.
But as the shadows fall I see
That ever'glorious company —
The men who bide out there.
Rifleman, Highlander, Fusilier,
Airman and Sapper and Grenadier,
With flaunting banner and wave and cheer.
They flew through the darkening air.
And yours are there, and so are mine,
R an\ upon ran\, and line on line.
With smiling lips and eyes that shine.
And bearing proud and high.
Past they go with their measured tread.
These are the victors, these—the dead!
Ah. sin\ the \nee and bare the head
As the hallowed host goes by!
ARTHUR CONAN DOYLES


“MENIN GATE AT MIDNIGHT,”
In the presence of the King of the Belgians, Field
Marshal Lord Plumer, who, for a long period, commanded
the British Army which fought in the Ypres Salient, un-
veiled the Menin Gate Memorial on Sunday, 24th July,
1927. Later, as the relatives of the fallen filed past him.
Lord Plumer said to each, “He is not missing. He is here!”
This is the theme of the great allegorical picture painted by
Captain Will. Longstaff, a well-known artist who served in
the Australian forces during the war. The story of the
picture is one of romantic inspiration and conception. The
artist was vividly impressed with the unveiling ceremony,
and could not sleep. He went out in the moonlight to walk
off his restlessness, and in imagination he saw steel-helmeted
figures arise from the poppy fields. He was so inspired that
he could not rest until he completed the picture. From the
moonlit cornfields arises “a deathless army” moving forward,
past Hellfire Corner to the line where they held, and
eventually drove back, the enemy, while in the foreground
bloom the poppies which inspired the notable war poem:
IN FLANDERS FIELDS,
In Flanders fields the poppies blow
Between the crosses, row on row ,
That our place , and in the sky
The larks , still bravely singing, fly
Scarce heard amid the guns below .
We are the Dead . Short days ago
We lived , felt dawn , saw sunset glow ,
Loved and were loved, and now we lie
In Flanders fields.
JOHN McCREA.
24


Death’s Messenger.
Taking cover from a heavy shell-burst near Glencorse Wood.
Nine Elms Military Cemetery, Poperinghe (near Ypres).
25


In Vlamertinghe, near Ypres.
". ... More honorable far
Than all the orders is the cross of wood,
The symbol of self-sacrifice that stood
Bearing the God whose brethren you are.”
26


When the picture was exhibited in London early in 1928
it created a sensation. It was purchased for two thousand
guineas (probably the highest price ever received by an
Australian artist) by Lord Woolavington, who offered it
to the Commonwealth Government. In a letter to the Aus-
tralian High Commissioner Lord Woolavington said:—“lt
seems fitting that this work should find its home in Aus-
tralia. If you can arrange to hang the picture worthily at
Canberra I should be proud to present it to the Common-
wealth as a tribute to the gallant Australians who served in
the war, and also as a mark of admiration of the Common-
wealth.*’
Lord Woolavington’s offer was accepted by the Aus-
tralian Government, and this remarkable work will be
preserved for all time in the Australian War Memorial in
Canberra.
Shortly after the picture was accepted by the Common-
wealth, and before it left England, Their Majesties the
King and Queen asked that it should be sent to Buckingham
Palace so that they might have an opportunity of seeing
it. Subsequently it was exhibited in Manchester and
Glasgow, and then shipped to Australia. It has been
placed on view for short periods in the State Capitals and
many of the country cities, and has already been seen by
more than 250.000 people.


Guardians of the Gate.
“ . . . . Who stood here from 1914 to 1918.”
Here where they stood they sleep ,
Still Guardians of the Gate;
No challenge of the guns
Shall wa\e them soon or late.
Here where they died they lie
Around their hard-fought hill;
No heavy mischance more
May wor\ them any ill.
O houseless , unnamed host ,
Sleep without fear or fret;
This land for which you died —
Shall not forget.
JOE LEE.


Reprinted by permission from
The Australian Christian World*
12th April, 1929.
“MENIN GATE AT MIDNIGHT.”
Captain Will Longstaff's Picture.
By REV. T. E. RUTH.
SHERE are pictures painted with a large brush
whose entire significance can be seen at a glance.
But Captain Will Longstaff’s “Menin Gate at
Midnight” is not one of them.
I can imagine visitors in a hurry, spending a few
minutes before the picture, and standing six or eight feet
away from it, without being at all impressed. A casual
reading of the canvas, like a casual reading of Scripture,
brings little or no revelation. Impression and inspiration
depend upon imagination and insight. The artist was un-
doubtedly inspired. It is somewhere written, “And the
word of the Lord came unto His servant. Will Longstaff,
saying. Get thee up and paint a picture of the spirits
of the martyr-men which I will reveal unto thee at Menin
Gate at Midnight.” And the spectator with imagination
and insight will most certainly be impressed and inspired
by the spiritual reality and genius of the painting.
The longer you look into this picture—and you must look
into it, not simply at it—the more you see, the more men,
the more soul.
The vast canvas of Tintoretto’s picture of Paradise is
crowded with angel faces. That is the obvious thing about
it. But the longer you look, the more angels you see.
Behind the first angels which you see at the first glance
there are other angels and yet others and others again,
fainter and further in; and as you look the great idea
of the picture seizes you, and you find yourself gazing
into the angel-filled deeps of eternity from the glory on
the outer faces to the glory that is further in and in and in,
without measure and without end.
Similarly the picture of the Madonna de San Sisto at
Dresden depicts the Infant Saviour in the arms of His


Mother, surrounded by clouds—clouds which seemed
simply clouds until the long look revealed the suggestive
fact that the clouds are composed of myriads of angel
faces.
See “Menin Gate at Midnight” with its mystic lights and
shadows. The lights will find you at once. The magnificent
memorial flooded in moonlight will immediately minister to
you. Mind and soul will respond to the significance of such
magnificent honoring of the memory of the armies of the
dead. But look into the shadows, past the red poppies in
the foreground, and past the slight suggestions of harvest;
look into the dark shadows, into the darker shadows, into
the darkest shadows, and you find them alive with the
spirits of men, with the living spirits of men, men so alive
that presently you feel that they are in the light and it is
you who are in the shadow.
You see this picture not simply in the historical per-
spective of the Great War, and against the immediate
background of a phantom city and a vast cemetery.
You place it against an infinite background, against
a Bible background, realising that the Bible is typical
revelation, that reality is something that is constantly
unfolding. You may relate Captain LongstafTs picture
to one of the greatest word-pictures in the Old
Testament, an inspiring soldier scene. You may relate
it to one of the most vivid figures of speech in the New
Testament. The artist is own brother to ancient prophet
and apostle and modern philosopher. His art has Scripture
and science in it.
Here is a typical fragment of history from the sixth
chapter of the second book of Kings:
Two unarmed and defenceless men look out on the
self-same scene —ten thousand armed enemies, ten thousand
terribly substantial warriors, and the sight made the servant
of Elisha shiver like a leaf, and, with chattering teeth, he
said, “Alas! my master, how shall we do?”
Elisha saw all his servant saw, and as clearly. He saw
all the facts, but he saw further in. Beyond the light


gleaming from Syrian swords he saw other swords shining.
Beyond the prancing horses and the imposing chariots of
the Syrian army, he saw celestial horsemen and chariots
of ethereal fire. While his servant is so much afraid that
he has already mentally surrendered, Elisha, with the
psychic power of a prophet, sees that spiritual reality which
brings mental confidence and moral courage and bathes
the face in mystic light. He prayed for his servant, and
the Lord opened the eyes of the young man, and he saw
the mountain full of horses and chariots of fire round about
Elisha, huge battalions of celestial swordsmen, the armies
of the living God, and he knew the truth behind the satire
that God is on the side of big battalions; he knew that
“They that be with us,” though there are only two of us,
“are more than they that be with them,” though there are
ten thousand of them.
There is a psychic quality in that ancient prophet and
in this modern artist which makes the soldier scene in
Israel’s Iron Age and the canvas depicting the deathless
army at Menin Gate akin in spiritual significance.
The prophet sees something the servant does not see.
The artist has visions beyond the memorial at Menin Gate.
That is the difference between one man and another.
Here is a man with five senses and a tape measure, a very
able and well-equipped man of affairs, at home with facts
and figures. Here is another man with a sixth sense and
the golden reed of a man that is an angel. He has all the
ability of the man of affairs. He is familiar with the facts
and figures that concern the man with the five senses plus
faith and vision.
It is all here in this picture of Menin Gate at Midnight.
The Menin Gate Memorial is a great stone structure —a
magnificent pile 135 feet long, 104 feet wide, 80 feet high,
having 6,000 tons of stone, 11,000 tons of concrete, 500
tons of steel. You can measure it and weigh it, that
physical part of it. But it is a stately sermon in stone.
It is a memorial of martyrdom—a spirit you cannot weigh
or measure, a spirit you cannot kill. Menin Gate at mid-
night is alive with the spirits of martyred men.


The builder’s account of the Menin Gate Memorial, any
material account, is utterly inadequate. The architect’s
story, so magnificently told in the eloquent lines and striking
symbols in stone, leaves the sublimest thing unsaid. Even
the Field-Marshal who said to the relatives of the men with
no known graves, “He is not missing; he is here,” spoke
truth and comfort which an artist with psychic genius made
live.
The names of 56,000 officers and men, of whom 6,160
are those of the A.1.F., are written there. Their graves
are not known. We are assured that “Their name liveth
for evermore.” And the artist shows us that they, them-
selves, are alive.
In the central idea of his picture, the artist has something
more than fellowship with a great prophet. He has the
authority of a great Apostle.
The author of the Epistle to the Hebrews conducts us
through an ancient cemetery, reading the names and
epitaphs of the heroes of Hebrew history, patriarchs,
prophets, martyrs—“ These all died in faith,” he writes.
And then, suddenly, with one of those deft touches that
transforms a barren fact into a radiant truth, he says, in
effect, what Arnold Bennett says, “There are no dead,”
what Will Longstaff says in his picture, what Napoleon, in
his Egyptian campaign, pointing to the pyramids, said:
“Soldiers, forty centuries look down on you.” So the
Apostle lifts our thoughts from a vast cemetery to the
crowded tiers of an amphitheatre and says, “We are com-
passed about with so great a cloud of witnesses.” That
is the splendid literary transition. That is the inner Truth
of things. The dead are not dead. They are not asleep
in the cemetery. They are keenly interested spectators of
the great drama of life in the theatre of being.
In the ancient amphitheatres, while the competitors were
preparing for the contest, stripping themselves of every-
thing that would hinder their free running toward the dis-
tant goal, the spectators would gather, filling tier upon tier,
until, to the competitors, the vast multitude of well-dressed
people appeared like clouds of witnesses, witnesses touched


with such varied and gorgeous colourings as are cast on
clouds by the rising or the setting sun.
So we are swept from the survey of a cemetery and the
reading of epitaphs to the contemplation of a full, vigorous,
glorious life and the conviction that it is not death to die.
Captain Longstaff isn’t exaggerating in this great picture.
He is understating the truth. Originally his canvas was
called “The Ghosts Menin Gate.” The truth is that
there are no ghosts. The New Testament truth is ex-
pressed by Dr. Alexander McLaren, prince of expositors:
“Every man that has died is at this instant in the full
possession of all his faculties, in the intensest exercise of
all his capacities, standing somewhere in God’s presence,
and feeling in every fibre of his being that life which comes
after death is not less real, but more real; not less great,
but more great; not less intense and full, but more intense
and full. . . .”
Our living dead encompass us as an encircling cloud of
witnesses in the actual theatre of being. Artist and poet
invite us to “greet the unseen with a cheer.” Prophet and
apostle tell us that the unseen are cheering us as we carry
on. Our living dead are not removed from us by im-
measurable leagues of space. They have not been carried
by the angels into some vague and distant heaven far, far
away. The separation is on our side, not on theirs. The
very din of our conflict is caught up in the music of unseen
choirs. This idea gripped the imagination of the early
Church. The first Christians felt that though unknown
they were well known; that the little earth-stage on which
they played had all heaven for its theatre. Dying doesn’t
mean blind forgetfulness and stifled sympathies. Your
soldier son, your soldier husband, your soldier father, your
soldier lover think of you with the old affection. The old
home is dear to them, and the old church. The old interests
thrill them. They watch and applaud the struggles of their
fellows still on the stage. They have joined the great
cloud of witnesses.
And in worship we find all the inspiration of Elisha’s
invisible army and the Apostle’s cloud of witnesses, and
transcend the teaching of Menin Gate at Midnight. “Ye


are come unto Mount Zion and unto the City of the Living
God, the heavenly Jerusalem, and to an innumerable com-
pany of angels, and to the spirits of just men made perfect,
and to Jesus. . . .”
That is where this picture ultimately leads. That is what
it means. It is charged with that prophetic vision. It has
that apostolic sense. And though naturally Captain Long-
staff says, “I am not a psychic artist and this is not a
psychic picture,” he is in line with the higher psychic
ministry of prophet and apostle and modern philosopher.
He knows the meaning of the prophet’s burden of the
Lord and the apostle’s waiting for inspiration. Of his
other picture, “The Immortal Shrine,” he says, “When
the inspiration came after two lonely hours at the Cenotaph
from two o’clock on Monday morning, I started on the
canvas and worked on till I had finished. I painted con-
tinuously for forty-eight hours, and never once made an
alteration. Neither food nor sleep was necessary. Inspira-
tion sustained my concentration and kept me from feeling
the physical strain. ... I painted the phantom army march-
ing as cheerfully through the downpour as they did in
Flanders. I actually saw them and their quick, buoyant
stride. I saw the picture complete before I touched my
canvas.”
We must not imagine that Prophet and Apostle and
Artist see what is not there. The Artist has fellowship also
with Philosopher and Scientist.
Sight is not the measure of reality. Things are not
what they seem. Appearances are deceptive. Normally
we see only the surface of things. Attention brings unveil-
ing. You say that distant mountain is not peopled. Well,
give your attention to it; look long at it. Turn your glasses
upon it. You will find birds in the trees, sheep in the fields,
men on the farms.
Look longer. Call in the aid of scientific apparatus.
Examine animals, plants, cells, atoms, electrons. Every-
thing is alive, everything. Philosophers, like Professor
Taylor, of St. Andrew’s, Physicists, like the Astronomer,
Eddington, of Cambridge University, are finding some


kind of mentality in almost everything. They assert that
every physical entity is also psychical. Well, if that is so,
if atoms and their elements have some kind of conscious-
ness, it is obvious that the universe in every part of it
throbs with mental life. It isn’t a mechanistic universe
we live in. It is a mental universe. All scientists assume
that it is rational.
This rational universe conserves matter and energy.
Does it waste mind and soul? Would a rational universe
waste Christ, the Christ-mind, the Christ-spirit ? Isn’t Easter
as essential to rational existence as the dawn and the
spring ?
Professor Alexander, of Manchester, in “Space, Time,
and Deity,” teaches that there is a pressure toward entities
higher than minds. Matter is followed by life, life is fol-
lowed by mind. What comes after mind?
There is something higher, some other orders of being.
And we are climbing upwards. Death doesn’t hinder us.
Death helps us. It is in the line of our development. It
is a ladder by which we ascend. To hear Christ, the Christ
of God, the Christ of Creation, the Christ of the consum-
mation of all things, say, “Because I live ye shall live also,”
is to make of the Easter faith the most radiant reality of
life.
Lord Woolavington’s gift of Captain Longstaff’s paint-
ing to Australia will play some part in keeping alive our
faith in the immortals and will take an honoured place
in the Australian War Memorial in Canberra.
When nearly two years ago the Duke of York opened
with a golden key the massive doors of Parliament House
at Canberra, he opened a door in the sky for the listening
multitudes of the Commonwealth. He said, referring to
such men as Captain Longstaff’s picture portrays:
“Though they have passed into the great beyond, they
are still speaking of the noble army of the dead, and if
the great army of those living and those yet unborn is
determined to march in step with them towards the ideal
for which they died, then the glorious destiny of this
country will be assured for all time.”






