

MENTAL
RUBBISH
FROM
OVERSEAS
A PUBLIC PROTEST
“FOR AUSTRALIA.”
PRICE TWOPENCE.
Pamphlet No. 1.
Published by the Cultural Defence Committee .
June, 1935.


NO objection is taken to bona
fide cultural intercourse with
other countries, nor to
American culture as such, nor to
American books and periodicals of
an educational or at least a literary
quality. Objection is taken to the
“dumped” import into Australia, of
magazines, newspaper or syndi-
cated features, radio dramas and
music, and Alms, which normally-
decent people in America would
themselves condemn as being a
travesty of American ideas and
culture.
This campaign is being organized
to free Australian thought and
education from the infection of a
set of foreign ideas which are not
only nasty but also literally cheap.


Cultural Defence Committee
FOUNDED BY THE FELLOWSHIP OF AUSTRALIAN WRITERS.
Chairman: P. R. STEPHENSEN.
Hon. Treasurer;
FRANK CLUNE,
“Marengo,”
Princes Avenue,
■ Vaucluse.
Hon. Secretary.
N. S. COTTER,
16, Wingello House,
Angel Place,
Sydney.
All coirmunications should be addressed to the Hon. Secretary.
THE Cultural Defence Committee has been founded
at the initiative of the Fellowship of Australian
Writers to combat the menace to Australian
intellectual workers of unfair economic competition
from overseas in the literary, artistic, and allied fields.
“Dumping” of cheap cultural material from over-
seas results not only in the lowering of standards of
living for Australian intellectual workers, but also it
is frequently destructive of Australian sentiment and
national ideas.
3


Mental Rubbish from Overseas
A Menace to Australian Culture
I.
AUSTRALIAN citizens of responsible mind have
noticed, with growing alarm, during recent years, a ten-
dency in media of public information and entertainment,
such as newspapers, wireless programmes, and films, to
propagate a set of cultural ideas which are entirely and
literally foreign to Australian sentiment and British-
Australian traditions. In theory it is unreasonable to
protest against the quality of something which one is not
compelled to buy, but in practice it might well be argued
that, in the modern world, newspapers, the wireless, and
films have become virtually public utilities, and are
inescapable cultural influences. The quality of mental
culture dispensed by these great public utilities is therefore
a matter of concern for all who look to the future of Aus-
tralia as a civilised nation. The Press is very properly
regarded as a “Fourth Estate,” and as the guardian of a
nation’s ideas and traditions. If, with its modern allies
the Cinema and the Radio, the Press betrays its implied
public trust and begins to act in an irresponsible manner, it
is time to enter a public protest so powerful that notice
will be taken of that protest.
Such a time has now arrived in Australia.
The Cultural Defence Committee, founded at the
initiative of the Fellowship of Australian Writers, has
taken upon itself the public duty of organising an effective
protest against the permeation of Australian life by a set
of ideas not only foreign, but in essence degenerate and
socially dangerous. Public opinion is behind this protest:
the Cultural Defence Committee will organise a campaign
and take whatever practical steps are necessary to combat
an evil recognised as such by every thinking person in the
community.
As examples of the imported cultural rubbish to which
the Committee takes exception the following may be
noted in the general field of Australian journalism:—
(i) In a women’s newspaper, distributed throughout the
Commonwealth, a full page of each weekly issue is
devoted to a pictorial serial, of American origin. This


series of drawings depicts the grotesquely incred-
ible exploits and adventures of a sorcerer who masquer-
ades in the guise of a vaudeville conjuror. By black
magic, and with the aid of a Negro henchman, the
sorcerer is shown, week by week, in the act of perform-
ing miracles so preposterous and mad as to cause as-
tonishment that any editor could be .so cynical as to
allow such a ludicrous exponent of demonology to be
shown in the guise of a “hero.” This serial outrages not
only common sense and science, but also common
morality and intellectual decency: the “hero,” for ex-
ample, is shown in one episode as escaping from his
adversary, the rival wizard, by means of a trick; but
the “trick” is nothing more subtle than a breach of
pledged word and parole, a down-right lie and false
promise which is assumed, for the purpose of the nar-
rative, to be commendable. The cumulative effect upon
the minds of young Australians, of such a hotch-potch
of demonology as this serial can do nothing other than
foster superstition, credulity, and emotional weakness.
The origin and background of such a set of ideas
as is represented in this serial may be found in an
aspect of American life entirely without parallel in
Australia. A section of the population of the United
States has been drawn from illiterate and superstitious
peoples of Central and Southern Europe, in the days
of unrestricted immigration. Such migrated peasants,
carrying with them to America ideas of demonology
and witchcraft which found a new stimulus from con-
tact with the Aframerican negro ideas of voodoo, might
provide an appreciative audience for the magical feats
of a modern sorcerer; but in Australia such ideas
are nonsensical and bizarre. We do not intend with-
out protest to allow the Press to use its power of
propaganda to foster such ideas here.
(ii) In an evening newspaper, daily instalments are printed
of another American picture serial. This feature of
the paper is as senseless as it would seem to be endless.
As far as can be discerned from an,inspection of more
than a hundred daily instalments of this “strip” serial,
it may be described as being concerned with the mean-
ingless adventures of a group or groups of knicker-
bOckered American explorers in the African jungle
country, amongst an impossibly-vOodooed tribe ; or tribes
of assegai-carrying Negroes and other strange black


villains. The white American heroes are armed with
rifles and revolvers for which they find constant use
in shooting the black villains. A white girl figures in
the story from time to time and is kidnapped or
coveted by lascivious Negroes, and duly rescued with
much slaughter of the Negroes. Of actual plot or
story-construction there appears to be no trace; the
serial considered as a story is merely senseless. Its
effect upon Australian youth can only be described as
one of entire bewilderment.
(iii) In a Sunday newspaper yet another American
syndicated picture-serial is to be found in every issue,
printed in this instance with the added attraction of
colour. This feature tells the fantastic story of the
adventures of a muscular American superman with
more “lives” than a cat, who, transcending time and
space, encounters in mortal combat on strange planets
creatures of delirious imagination, and demons of
various kinds. It may be urged that such creatures
are not the product of delirium tremens or dementia
precox, but are creatures of imagination or of pseudo-
scientific fantasy comparable with the characters in the
scientific romances of writers such as H. G. Wells
or Jules Verne. The very comparison illustrates the
weakness of imagination in the creator of this “strip,”
who (unlike Wells and Verne), deserts probability
entirely, and therefore, to all intents and purposes,
presents a raving mad view of the universe. Imagination
quite uncontrolled is nothing but lunacy, and is to
that extent a parody and a degradation of the imagin-
ative faculty which creates human art.
(iv) In numerous other Australian newspapers, similar
expositions of modern American demonology, witch-
craft , sorcery, voodoo, and moronic insanity are
solemnly propounded, not be it noted, as jokes, but
as serious and regular “features” of the papers con-
cerned. These features are published without any
apparent consideration of the moral and mental effect
which such manifestations of chaos and sorcery must
have upon young or uncritical readers.
(v) To supplement the visual propaganda of cultural
nihilism in the Press, Australian wireless stations, day
by day and hour by hour, may now be heard broad-
casting similar material, but of an audible nature, from
overseas. Imported gramophone records are broadcast
6


and rebroadcast, and the Australian ether is made to
resound with an execrable moaning and groaning Negro
slave-noise known as “Crooning,” which represents the
destruction of all tonic musical values. Alternately the
stations may be heard at almost any hour broadcasting
strange and bestial dramas, such as “Tarzan of the
Apes,” a compound of jungle-maniacal screams,
groans, and sobs of animals in rage and pain. Such
an atavism of the African jungle involves an emotional
“return to the primitive,” which might represent only
a few generations for vast numbers of American and
Aframerican listeners; but in Australia it is a hideous
barbarism. We inhabit a continent in which the
indigenous fauna, with few exceptions, are gentle.
Kacially we come of almost pure European stock,
ninety per cent British. The Negro and his African
jungle form no part of our national heritage and
consciousness, and we will not have him here, neither
in person nor by proxy through the permeation of his
culture.
(vi) Discarding the newspaper, and turning off the wireless,
the Australian paterfamilias decides to take his wife
and children for an evening’s mild entertainment at
the Cinema. Here, almost certainly, he will again be
assaulted mentally by America’s atavistic culture. Here
the propaganda of mental decline may be seen at its
nadir. In viewing the animated but noisy photographs
flickering on the screen, he may vicariously absorb
the atmosphere of Chicago machine-gunning crime,
of suggestive “Come-up-and-see-me-some-time” sex, of
pop-eyed and goitred American comedians, of wise-
cracking American Jews, or he may marvel at the
magnified close-up kisses of pasty-faced Hollywood
“stars” of both sexes swooning with what is called
“love,” It is true that of recent years Hollywood’s
first and worst outrages against the human decencies
have to some extent been curbed by developments in
the art of the cinema, by cinema criticism, and by the
competition, long-delayed in arriving, of films made in
other countries. But Americanisation of the Cinema
is still to be reckoned with. American film-distributors
are entirely ruthless in their methods of meeting
competition and in “block-booking” programmes of film-
theatres. Crime and sex and wild-beast films from
America are by no means yet ousted from the field
of cultural influence upon Australian mentality. They


supplement other forms of Americanisation here
referred to. Their advertisements command respect
from the newspapers.
(viii) Finally, in this survey, must be included the vast
rubbish-tip of American “dumped” periodicals and
magazines, imported as waste-paper, and distributed to
be sold as fiction in newsagents shops in every town,
suburb, and township throughout the Commonwealth.
The titles of some of these magazines, taken from a
recent distributors’ catalogue, show the extent and
variety of approach:
FROM A CATALOGUE SENT OUT
BY A MAIL ORDER BOOKSELLER.
Western Magazines: Ace High, Western Trails, Lariat, Big
Book Western, Western Ace, New Western, Frontier Western,
Round Up, Popular Western, Mavericks, Complete Western,
Conflict, Wild West, Thrilling Western, Star Western, Masked
Rider, Dime Western, Western Book, Thrilling Ranch, Western
Romance, Ranch Romance (2 numbers), Western Novel.
Real America: Expositions of Graft, News of Interest, etc.
Psychology: The Modern Thinkers Magazine.
Amazing Stories, Wonder Stories: Future Science Stories
of Planets, Worlds, and Dreams.
Detective, Mystery: -Black Book, Dime Mystery, Complete
Detective, Secret Six, Dime Detective, Spider, Terror, Two Book
Detective, Black Mask, Super Detective, Ten Detective Aces,
Phantom,- Popular Detective, Detective Fiction, Thrilling Detec-
tive, Operator Five, Mystery, Detective Mystery (2 numbers),
Secret Agent, Spy Stories, True Book Detective.
Romance, Love: Ranch Romance, Thrilling Love, All Story
(2 numbers), Serenade, Breezy, Advance, Range Land Love,
Love Fiction Monthly.
Adventure: Saga, Pirate Stories, Blue Book, Thrilling
Adventures, World Adventure, Adventure.
Air Stories: Flying Ace, Sky Fighters, .Wings, Sky Birds,
Lone Eagle, Squadron, G 8 and His Battle, Aces, Dusty Ayres
and His Sky Birds, Dare : Devil Ace, Battle Birds, War Birds.
Sport: All American Sport Stories. Non-fiction, Golf,
Racquets, The Ring.
The unrestricted sale of such publications in mil-
lions of copies throughout the Commonwealth is a
menace not only to our national culture in general, but
more specifically to the proprietors of Australian news-
papers, magazines, and periodicals who are thus them


selves confronted with the competition of dumped goods,
and denied the measure of protection which almost every
other Australian manufacturer and producer enjoys:
tariff protection against unfair foreign competition. It
may be that such competition has driven some Aus-
tralian newspaper proprietors in self-defence to the use
of American syndicated material in their own columns.
If so, they are being driven towards Americanisation
unwillingly, and should welcome the campaign which this
Committee has now launched.
The cumulative effect of newspaper, radio, cinema
and periodical publication of American culture-propaganda
has now reached a point where it can no longer be dis-
regarded by the present generation of thinking Aus-
tralians, who have the future of a great nation in their
trust.
A propaganda so barbarous, so wide-spread, so con-
tinuous and so insistent upon the minds of Australian
young people must be combated at its point of entry into
the Commonwealth and brought under control by a
sustained national effort. Popular indignation, long
smouldering or suppressed in a vague hope that “something
should be done” has now reached a point at which it can
no longer be ignored. The Cultural Defence Committee is
prepared to take the responsibility of organising the
sustained national effort necessary to suppress this tipping
of mental rubbish from foreign countries into our Common-
wealth that is as yet clean and mentally healthy.
II.
Why have Australian editors and newspaper proprie-
tors, who in other respects may be presumed to specialise
in knowing “What the public wants,” so persistently
attempted in these “Syndicated features,” to give the
public what it does not want? . Why have Australian
editors and newspaper proprietors, who in other respects
may be presumed to be good Australians and jealous of
their country’s welfare, so consistently lent their power
and influence in the community to the propagation of a
set of foreign, senseless, morally-pernicious, and anti-
Australian ideas?
The answer to both questions is to be found in the one
word: price. Foreign syndicated “features” are cheaper
to buy than original work by Australian writers and


artists. The Cultural Defence Committee is preparing and
in due course will publish, exact details of comparative
prices paid for imported copyright features, and for similar
work by Australians. It will be seen that the prices for
the imported work are one-fourth or less of the prices paid
for original work in the local market, even at the depressed
prices which are customary remuneration for Australian
literary, artistic, and other creative workers.
The “dumped” price of imported syndicated material,
in other words, amounts to grossly unfair competition in
the economic field for a class of Australian workers who
are not organised in any trade union or traders’ union, but
nevertheless perform work, and create or manufacture or
produce goods for sale which are highly important to the
welfare of the nation. Literary, artistic, and other creative
workers in Australia enjoy no measure of protection and
receive no public assistance in the marketing of their
product. They do their work subject to unrestricted com-
petition from overseas, and on the average, as workers,
they are paid less than the lowest basic wage for manual
workers. Australian intellectual workers, who by the very
nature of their work are capable of adding a dignity to the
word “Australian” which it can not otherwise possess,
have been, in the best circumstances of past years, starved
and driven out of the Commonwealth to an extent which
has become a serious international reproach to Australia’s
good name as a civilised country.
In the best of times the Australian intellectual creative
worker has been nationally suppressed, ignored, and
starved both of food and opportunity. • Now, with the most
recent developments of unfair foreign competition in the
very market where the Australian creative worker alone
can sell his product, the position has become desperate and
almost hopeless. With the courage born of despair he has
decided to fight for the right to earn a living, however
meagre, in the Commonwealth. If a species of trade union,
or trade protection, action is necessary, Australian intellec-
tual workers are determined to take that action.
In organising this campaign to free Australian
thought and education from the infection of a set of
foreign ideas which are not only nasty but literally cheap,
the Cultural Defence Committee wishes to make it plain
that no objection is taken to bona fide cultural intercourse
with other countries; such intercourse is recognised as
necessary by every thinking person in the Commonwealth.


Objection is not taken to American culture, as such.
Indeed, everything possible should be done to strengthen
true cultural relations between the United States and the
Commonwealth of Australia. It is recognised by every
well-informed person that authentic intellectual develop-
ment in America has reached a very high point of interest
to the rest of the world. We in Australia desire to make
contact with the best American thought, as we desire to
make contact with the best thought of every coqntry in
the world.
The objection is taken, not to American books and
periodicals of an educational or at least a literary quality,
such for example, as: The Cosmopolitan Magazine, The
Saturday Evening Post, The American Mercury, Fortune,
The Nation, The New Republic, Life, Judge, The New
Yorker, Munsey’s, or any other periodicals which present
an intelligible view of American life and ideas. Objection
is taken to the “dumped” import into Australia, of maga-
zines, newspaper syndicated features, radio dramas arid
music, and films which normally-decent people in- America
.would themselves condemn as being a travesty of American
ideas and culture. It is possible that an approach will be
made to the American Government to ask that an embargo
should be placed on the export of such travestied material;
for it might well be pointed out that America’s reputation
abroad is damaged by the export of such products.
Pending such action however, something definite will
be done, in Australia, to prevent infection of the Australian
mind by a mental plague no less serious than cholera
morbus in its sociological effects; and the more dangerous
because those effects are often difficult to isolate and trace.
The contention is that price alone and not quality has
occasioned the flooding of the Australian market with
these cheap and undesirable idea-products. If editors and
other users of imported idea-material were obliged to pay
the same price as is customary for Australian material of
a similar nature, it is presumed that the use of the
imported material would dwindle or cease, except in the
use of imported material intrinsically superior to anything
offered locally.
The Cultural Defence Committee, in planning decisive
action, recognises the danger of placing any absolute
restrictions on the importation of ideas into Australia, and
will not advocate anything in the nature of a “tax on


knowledge” from abroad. For example, no exception could
possibly be taken to the serial publication, in Australia, of
a “feature” such as the memoirs of Mr. David Lloyd
George; nor would exception be taken to the syndication
here of articles by President Roosevelt on the “New Deal,”
or of any other work of true educational or literary value
of foreign origin. The only principle advocated is that, in
the case of such works as those cited, the price paid for
serial rights or copyright should not be less than the price
which would be paid in Australia for a series of special
articles on public questions, for example by Mr. William
Morris Hughes. 'Nor should the price paid for articles on
cricket by Mr. Carr of Nottingham be less than the price
which would be paid for similar literary articles by Mr.
Bradman of Bowral.
What applies in the political and sporting fields,
should apply also, and with greater force, in the purely
literary and artistic fields. Australian writers and artists
welcome competition, fair competition, in Australia, be-
tween their own work and that of overseas workers; but
the competition must remain fair. While the prices of
overseas work are so far below the prices paid for Aus-
tralian work, editors and other buyers will naturally tend
to buy the cheaper products. It is unfortunately not their
prime concern, if, in so doing, they strangle Australian
culture at birth.
The Cultural Defence Committee will therefore
advocate, in the course of its campaign, the following pro- :
visional objective;—
THAT A TAX SHOULD BE PLACED UPON THE
USE OF LITERARY, ARTISTIC, AND OTHER CUL-
TURAL MATERIAL OF OVERSEAS ORIGIN, WHICH
WILL MAKE THE PRICE PAID FOR SUCH USE AT
LEAST EQUAL TO THE PRICE NORMALLY PAID
TO AUSTRALIAN PRODUCERS OF SIMILAR
MATERIAL.
This is a Minimum Demand. It is urged, with con-
siderable reason, that such a tax should bring the sale price
of overseas culture-material to at least twenty-five per
cent, ad valorem above ruling Australian prices; and that
editors and other users and distributors of imported
matter should thus be given a practical inducement to
prefer the Australian product. Other things being equal;


it is assumed that Australian editors will not give prefer-
ence to overseas culture-material when equally good
material is available to them here. It is presumed that
price alone determines the use and sale of the. culture-
material to which this Committee takes such strong
exception. It is regrettable that our newspapers which have
in the past,- and are now, assisting Australian cultural
development by the use of features Australian in matter
and manner should lend themselves to the increasing use of
the imported rubbish to which objection is taken in this
pamphlet.
III.
THE CULTURAL DEFENCE COMMITTEE is con-
stituted in a manner which will enable it to enter upon a
sustained and determined campaign to obtain its objectives.
It has been founded at the initiative of the Fellowship of
Australian Writers as an independent and permanent
Special Committee “to deal with all matters concerning
unfair economic competition from overseas in the literary
and artistic and allied fields, and in particular with the
importation or copyright syndication of literary and
artistic work.”
The Cultural Defence Committee has powers “to
add to its numbers, to co-opt or affiliate persons or
organisations, to elect its own officers, control its own
finance, and act autonomously in any way it considers
advisable to obtain its objectives.”
In accordance with these powers, the Committee has
already taken steps to establish a Campaign Fund, and to
secure the affiliation and support of all organisations and
persons interested in the work which the Committee has
undertaken.
Special Sub-committees have been set up to collect
information for the purposes of conducting the campaign
and attaining success in it.
An approach has been made in the first place to
responsible editors and other users of imported copyright-
material, to ask for their support on the grounds of public
interest. Pending replies, a campaign is being organised
to bring the utmost public and legislative pressure to bear
on those who persist in spreading what is regarded as a
disease of culture.


An educational campaign will be conducted to inform
the public, including readers of and advertisers in, offend-
ing papers, and listeners to and advertisers on offending
radio stations, exactly what prices are being paid for
foreign culture-material of the objectionable sort. The
Committee has been founded, and has embarked upon its
work, in a' spirit of absolute determination to win a contest
which ought never to have become necessary; but which
now, being entered upon, cannot be shirked, and will not
be shirked, until a victory is achieved. It is considered that
Australian sentiment, and the very foundations of culture
in Australia, are menaced, as never before in our national
history, by the unrestricted propaganda of these foreign
and socially-dangerous ideas condemned alike by public
sentiment and by the individual sense of patriotic
Australians.
This being so, the Committee appeals with confidence
for individual and organised public support for its work.
Approved kindred organisations upon paying an affiliation
fee may send delegates to the Committee. Contributions
to the Campaign Fund from individual supporters of the
Committee’s work will be gratefully received and
acknowledged.
Information, in writing, relative to the matters within
the scope of the Committee, in particular supplying details
regarding price-competition (such as would be suitable for
presentation to a possible Royal Commission, Parliamen-
tary Enquiry, or Tariff Board Enquiry), will be welcomed.
Donations, applications for affiliation, written informa-
tion and all correspondence should be addressed to;—
The Secretary,
Cultural Defence Committee,
16 Wingello House,
Angel Place,
SYDNEY.
[Newspapers please copy,]


What YOU Can Do:
1. WRITE A LETTER TO YOUR MEMBER
OF PARLIAMENT, protesting against
dumping of overseas culture-material at
cheap rates.
2. WRITE A LETTER OF PROTEST TO THE
EDITOR of any paper which prints cheap
overseas syndicated features.
3. SPONSOR RESOLUTIONS OF PROTEST
in any public body to which you belong, and
forward the text of these resolutions to the
Cultural Defence Committee and to the Press.
4. SEND YOUR NAME to the Secretary of the
C.D.C. to be enrolled as a supporter of the
campaign.
5. ASSIST IN DISTRIBUTION OF THIS
PAMPHLET. Supplies are available, price
2/- per dozen, post free.


set up and printed in Australia by
ROBERT DEY, SON & CO.,
66-68 Bathurst St., Sydney,
1935.
