

INTERLEAVED FOR REFUTATION
UNLIMITED
MENTAL FREEDOM
NECESSARY
TO THE WELFARE OF MAN.
AN ESSAY,
RESPECTFULLY ADDRESSED TO THOUGHTFUL MEN.
BY EDWIC.
MELBOURNE:
ROBERT BELL, STEAM PRINTER, 97 LITTLE COLLINS STREET EAST.
1868.
ALL BOOKSELLERS.
PRICE THREEPENCE.
PUBLISHED BY THE AUTHOR.


AN ESSAY ON RATIONALISM.
We intend in the present discourse, in the first place, particularly, but concisely, to
defend the publication of the work lately published in Melbourne, entitled “ The
Real Place in History of Jesus and Paul,” and then, more at large, in a general
way to portray the present extent of rationalism, the causes of its still increasingly
rapid extension, its prospects, and its intrinsic worth.
The first number of the above-named work, of which about five hundred copies were
sold, principally in the city of Melbourne, was received, of course, by men of different
opinions in a different manner, but, on the whole, with a feeling of disfavor. The
leading journal of this city, in consequence of pressure brought to bear, positively
refused to advertise it, the second one for a time demurred to do so. The leading
booksellers refused to sell it, and even needy men who did not know where they ■
should get the next meal refused to hawk it. The clergy followed the modern
tactics of their order—as a rule, publicly ignored it, tried privately (at least several of
them) to prevent its sale, and if they did happen to publicly refer to it, did so in the
tone of wholesale and supreme contempt with which they usually speak of all works in
any way opposed to their own peculiar doctrines. One referred the author for in-
struction to “ the junior members of a Sunday-school class,”* another stigmatised the
work as “a most presumptuous production,” another as “a piece of unmitigated
arrogance,” and so on. Many of the more liberal part of the community, nominal
Christians, but virtual free-thinkers, also spoke of it with disfavor. They said, “We quite
agree with you —what you have said is the truth, and nothing but the truth; but then
what good will it do P will it make people any better ? will not the discussion of these
subjects unsettle men’s faith and make them lawless ? You must have some form of
religion or superstition to keep the ignorant mob in check, * to act as a muzzle to the
brute.’ * The fear of hell is the hangman’s whip to keep the wretch in order.’ We
feel, we know, that an everlasting hell-fire is a myth, but we must keep up the belief
as an engine of civil and social government to curb the evil passions of the masses.
The bulk of what the masses believe is superstition indeed, but sweep away this
superstition and anarchy will stalk through the land.”
We shall now attempt, in as few words as possible, to answer these objections, and
to shew that they are unreasonable in theory, and unwise in practice. First, then,
with respect to the journalists and booksellers. There are, no doubt, many journalists
and booksellers who conscientiously believe that that they ought not to advertise or
sell books which controvert the peculiar doctrines that they themselves hold, and
consequently will not advertise or sell such books. This, doubtless, they have a right
to do, and, although we may consider them unwise and illiberal in not allowing the
other side to be heard, we cannot altogether blame them, as they follow the course
which they believe to be right. But fully half of the journalists and booksellers of
Protestant Christendom at this moment, in matters of faith, are virtually free-
thinkers, and from these we naturally expect better things—in fact, a free and open
field. A public journalist who refuses to advertise, or a public bookseller who refuses
to sell, a book, because he believes it would be productive of harm, we may excuse; but
a journalist or bookseller who agrees with the tenets of the book, that the opinions
expressed in it are truthful, and yet would refuse to sell it, simply, and for no other
reason, than because he might lose the custom of two or three illiberal individuals
whose peculiar notions of doctrine it might happen to disagree with, is most decidedly
to blame. That a Mahometan journalist or bookseller, in a Mahometan country, should
refuse to advertise or sell a critical enquiry into the doctrines of the Mahometan
faith—that a Catholic journalist or bookseller, in a purely Catholic country, should
refuse to advertise or sell a critical enquiry into the Catholic faith, may be excused ; for,
* Melbourne Church News, June 17th, 1867.


talk as we may, men sometimes, if they would live at all, have to bend to overwhelming
circumstances; but that rationalistic journalists and booksellers, in a Protestant
community, the very watchword of which community is the right of private
judgment in all matters relating to religion, should refuse to sell a temperately
written enquiry into the prevailing faith is inexcusable. We hope and believe that
the time is not far distant when public men will shew themselves to be made of
sterner stuff, and not abjectly surrender a great principle —a principle which they
themselves hold and feel to be right —for a paltry consideration which they could in
most cases well do without. We would have them feel, and they will yet feel, that
money received even indirectly as a consideration for the stifling of free enquiry is,
in fact, the wages of iniquity, as it violates a great principle, which reflection must
demonstrate to any reasonable man should be sacred and inviolable.
This stifling of free enquiry in matters of religion is one of the still lingering
relics of a barbarous age, and a manifest sign of the present weakness of orthodoxy,
characteristic of no other branch of human knowledge, except, perhaps, politics in a
despotic country where “ might is right,” or the notion still exists of “ the divine
right of kings.” The fact that the clergy attempt to put down opposing publica-
tions shews the weakness and sophistical nature of their doctrines, for no man who
is thoroughly convinced beyond all doubt that his faith is the absolute truth,
unassailable by adverse arguments, would shirk or attempt to stifle enquiry; nay, more,
he would count it as a thing most to be desired, so that in answering he might have
the opportunity of shewing how clear, how reasonable, and how impregnable it was.
“Who ever,” says Milton, “knew truth to be put to the worst in a free and open
encounter?” These words are absolutely and imperishably true. Truth cannot
suffer by enquiry, and he who feels that he has it beyond all possibility of doubt,
never dreads enquiry—it is a consciousness of weakness only that makes men dread
enquiry into their doctrines, a feeling that they cannot effectually defend them to the
satisfaction of themselves and those around them. The natural philosopher does not
refuse enquiry and bring an unfair influence to bear upon the journalist and bookseller
to stifle opinions opposed to his own; the astronomer, the geographer, the geologist, the
chemist, thephysician, the phrenologist, the moral philosopher, and in. the most advanced
countries, even the statesman, allow books to be published against their views—
journalists to advertise, and booksellers to sell them. It is only the clergy of nearly
every religion throughout the world who arrogate to themselves the right, by their veto,
applied by means of penal enactments or other unfair influences, to prohibit the pub-
lication and sale of any work containing opinions radically opposed to their own. But
in the present age of the progress of human knowledge, of the gradual appreciation
and acknowledgment of individual human rights, and, above all, of the irresistible
impulse of critical enquiry into all and every subject whatever that affects the
welfare of man, this system of mental slavery is happily doomed. It may, it will,
linger for a time, but, as sure as the sun shines in the heavens, it shall eventually
vanish away ; and a hundred years hence the fact that, in the centre of civilization,
respectable journalists refused to advertise, and respectable booksellers refused to
sell, a temperately written controversial work, because it disagreed with the general
opinions of the clergy of the day, shall be smiled at as a monstrous but popular
error of the past.
We shall next attempt to answer the charge of presumption made against us by
some of our orthodox critics. An individual who would stand forward in any
nation, Christian, Mahometan, Buddhist, Hindoo, or that of any other faith on earth,
and deliberately call in question the foundations of the faith of that nation, the
faith held most sacred by the majority of its traditionally-learned men of every
degree, must expect to be called presumptuous by those whose faith he attacks. It
would be strange if he was not; and yet, in fact, he might not be guilty of
presumption at all. For ourselves, we have thought long and earnestly upon the
subject, have respectfully and honestly, although plainly, spoken what we thought,
and therefore, although but a unit among the millions, we deny that we have acted
presumptuously. To us this frequently urged accusation of presumption ever
appeared to arise from presumption itself, or, at least from a false assumption—the
assumption that one man possesses some peculiar right to dictate to another what he




should think; but v. r o hold that a more monstrous idea than this never gained cur-
rency among men, for if, in the whole range of great principles that are to guide the
conduct and shape the destiny of man, there is one thing that we feel more certain of
than another, it is—that it is absolutely and eternally true, that in matters of thought
every man is an independent sovereign in his own right, over himself every man has
an undoubted unalienable right to think for himself; and the man who denies that
right is guilty of presumption, and not he who exercises it. The mere act of
thinking with the minority, or even thinking contrary to the opinion of the learned
multitude, does not constitute presumption; if so, Galileo was guilty of presumption
when he pronounced, contrary to the belief of the learned multitude, that the earth
revolved round the sun, and not the sun round the earth; Yirgilius was guilty of
presumption when he pronounced that the earth was globular, and not flat, as the
learned multitude said; Columbus was guilty of presumption when he persisted in
affirming the existence of a western land ; Harvey was guilty of presumption when
he affirmed the circulation of the blood ; and so on with thousands and hundreds of
thousands who have thought for themselves and spoken what they thought, irrespective
of the numbers of the traditionally-learned arrayed against them. Socially, it may be
a misfortune to think with the minority, but it is not, never was, and never can be a
fault. The man who, after much reflection, soberly and honestly affirms his convictions,
should such convictions disagree with the united opinion of all the rest of mankind,
would not bo guilty of presumption. Nor is it even presumption in any individual
man to utter his thoughts and address them to others, as long as it is a recognised
right in society of which he is a member, that others should utter and address their
thoughts to him. Apply that most beautiful and holy of all precepts—“ do as you
would be done by,” and this will at once be conceded.
Upon the broad principle, then, of this undeniable right of free thought, this
sovereign and independent right of every individual to think for himself, we take our
stand; and, however weak may have been our arguments, and however faulty the
convictions arrived at, being conscious of having thought earnestly, and spoken
honestly, what we have thought, we deny the charge of presumption, and, did we
feel inclined, could fairly throw it back on those who make it.
We shall now make a few remarks upon the present position of affairs, the present
signs and symptoms apparent in the religious world —as one among the millions,
attempt to indicate what we consider to be the proper mode of action under the
circumstances ; and also to answer that ever-recurring but absurd question, con-
tinually addressed to the outspoken free-thinker—“ What goodwill it do ? will it make
people any better ? is it not judicious to keep up some form of superstition, as an
engine of civil and social government to keep the ignorant mob in check, to ‘ act as a
muzzle to the brute ?’ ”
Scepticism of the ancient dogmas of religious faiths is one of the most universal
and glaring manifestations of the present day in Christendom, and more especially
Protestant Christendom. It thoroughly permeates and crops out again, again, and
again, from the fleeting periodical and other literature of the day, on change, at the
club, at the comers of the streets, and in the multitudinous conversations of social
life; among all ranks and conditions a sceptical tone almost universally prevails.
Perhaps never in the history of men was scepticism in the faith of their forefathers
so deep-seated and all-pervading as it is at this moment. From every part of
Christendom a loud and universal wail at the fearful scepticism of the times is going up,
from the clergy of every sect and every grade —from the Pope upon his throne down to
the poor enthusiastic or illiterate itinerant that addresses the crowd in the street. As a
fair specimen of a multitude of these clerical utterances, forced out by the aspect of the
times, we shall give one delivered a short time ago by an eminent divine of this city.
Dr. Cairns, in a lecture entitled, “ Thoughts suggested by a recent visit to England and
Scotland,” delivered in St. Andrew’s Church, Carlton, in June last, thus refers to his
native Scotland, not long ago noted as the most priest-ridden and dogmatic of
Protestant countries : —“ He visited the old country as a minister of Christ, and in
such a spirit he viewed all things. . • . . Prosperity everywhere met his
gaze —great commercial wealth to reward the industry and crown the genius of man.
This immense wealth brought its inevitable concomitants —luxury, pride, and a


vacillating faith, if not arrant infidelity. He noticed that the upper classes without
exception, and the middle classes with very few exceptions, looked down upon the
calling of a minister as one altogether beneath them, and totally unfitted as a
profession for their sonsalso that “ scepticism was deeply implanted among the
common artizan class.”—Repoi’t in Melbouime Argus, June 26rh, 1867.
In another lecture, entitled, “ The Phases of Modern Infidelity,” delivered in May
last, before the Presbyterian Assembly of Yictoria, after speaking of the extensive
spread and peculiar characteristics of modern scepticism generally, he said—“ The
denial of the obligation of the Sabbath existed more widely than was generally
supposed, and it appeared to progress hand in hand with infidelity. The resources
of the church were not adequate to cope with the growing manifestations of the
powers of evil, and it must give way unless supernatural assistance was vouchsafed.”
—Report in Melbourne Age, May 10th, 1867.
And such, according to evidence of the most unquestionable nature from all
sides, is the present religious position of Christendom. It is one of a strong and still
spreading scepticism of the dogmas and tenets of the old faiths, and of irreverence
and latent disrespect towards the office of those who still preach them as true.
And now, we may ask, what is the cause of this state of things coming about ? A
question that may puzzle the still orthodox individual, but is easily answered by the
free-thinker. It is the natural, the inevitable consequence of the increase of
education, of the spread of intelligence among the people, of the universal increase
in almost every branch of human knowledge, that has lately taken place, and is now
taking place in almost a geometrical ratio. Men have begun to think in earnest, and
the old superstitions and errors of faith are as certainly doomed to explosion as that
man, as a thinking, reasoning being exists. Dr. Cairns is quite right in saying that
the resources of the church are not adequate to cope with the growing manifestations
of the now developing powers, but these are not as he, influenced by his stereotyped
prepossessions, says—“ the powers of evil”—but the irresistible powers of enlightened
enquiry, before which the stereotyped errors of every faith shall vanish away ; and in
proportion as infatuated men persist in still clinging to these errors as to the truth,
will be their mental anguish at the destruction of them—but destroyed they must and
will be.
The variety, force, and number of evidences which impel so many thinking men at
the present day towards scepticism in the old faiths are very great, much greater
than at any previous age of the world, and have been evolved by many new and
powerful influences.
One of the most potent of such influences is the facility afibrded for the
acquisition of general information by the many easily accessible libraries spread over
the land; another, the vast amount of cheap literature, on all and every subject,
issued from the press, and spread among the masses, favoring the conditions of
mental development in the denizens of every cottage; another is the increased
communication of nation with nation, of sect with sect, and the consequent
increased observation of each other, and interchange of thought between them.
These have led multitudes who at one time, in their simplicity, believed as they
had been taught in childhood, that their religion was the only one upon earth worth
calling a religion, that there were two or three other, but false religions, the votaries
of which were heathens, evil-disposed, insincere, and to the whole extent, bad men.
Much reading and intercourse with the people of other creeds has disabused the mind
of multitudes of these first, but false, impressions. It has demonstrated to them the
startling and telling fact that the men of every creed throughout the earth —of which
there are a dozen principal ones and thousands of sectarian divisions —are equally
earnest and sincere with themselves in their religious belief ; that the people of
each creed have their own peculiar sacred scriptures, generally containing some history,
moral precepts, and rules for the conduct of life, which they teach, and honestly
believe was given by divine inspiration, was written by men at the dictation of the
Deity ; that they each and all believe theirs is the only true religion, teach that all
others are wrong, call those who do not believe in it infidels, and affirm that they
will be fearfully punished for their unbelief in a future life. The observation of
these striking similarities in the various religions of the world is now beginning to


have ita legitimate weight with numbers of men, who, bending to the influences of
the times, have just commenced to think freely and in earnest.
Another important fact that through the increased reading and observation of the
multitude is gradually forcing itself upon their minds is, that a man’s faith is purely
and solely an accident of his birth ; that in one country millions are born to one faith
and believe it, and in another country millions are born to another and believe
it equally strong; that even the high and the learned, as well as the low
and ignorant, that the monarch and the beggar alike, of every country, believe the
religion of the people amongst whom they happen to be born ; that almost
invariably a man born in Spain is a Catholic Christian, in Greece is a Greek
Christian, in Scotland is a Jfrotestant Christian, in Arabia is a Mahometan, in
Burmah is a Buddhist, and so on ; that even if born in a country where two or more
religions prevail, the rule still holds good, he generally believes the faith which his
parents taught him. If born of Hindoo parents he believes in Hindooism, if of
Confucian parents he is a Confncian, if of Sintoo parents he is a Sintoo, if of Parsee
parents he is a Parsee, if of Sikh parents he is a Sikh, if of Druse parents he is a
Druse, if of Jewish parents he is a Jew, and so on with all and every existing form
of religion. This remarkable and pregnant fact is destined to force itself, and is now
forcing itself, upon the minds of multitudes, and throwing them back upon an
examination of the real claims of their own faith in particular, and more or less, of
all other faiths whatever.
Another cause that has an immense influence in compelling men towards scepticism,
especially to doubt the divine inspiration of the Bible, is the immense progress of the
physical sciences, more especially geology, geography, and astronomy. The evidence
supplied by these sciences is almost invariably of such a nature that it cannot be
doubted by reasonable men ; and when it happens to disagree, which it frequently
does, with the notions held by the Bible writers, men many times, contrary to their
most earnest wishes, are compelled to decide in favor of the correctness of the modern
physical demonstration over that of the Bible statement.
The Bible says that the world and all the plants and animals upon it was made six
thousand years ago. (Genesis i.) Geology, by its stony records, in language which there
is no disputing, says that the world has existed for many millions of years, and that,
as indicated by the fossil remains of innumerable generations imbedded in its various
strata, undoubtedly for millions of years plants and animals have lived and died upon
its surface.
The Bible writers say that the world is flat, that it stands upon pillars, that it has
ends, corners, and uttermost parts, while modern geography says, and which few can
now doubt, that it is a globe.
With respect to astronomy, the Bible writers teach that the blue dome above is a
firmament, firm and solid, with windows and doors in it opening into Heaven; that
there are great quantities of water above it ; and that when it rains it is in consequence
of these windows or doors being opened (Gen. i. 6, 7 ; vii. 11, 12; viii. 2 ; Pa.
Ixxviii. 23; Luke iv. 25 ; Esdras, iv. 7 ; vi. 41) ; that the sun and moon were
set in this dome to give light upon the earth. (Gen. i. 14-17.) Modern astronomy
demonstrates that these writers spoke from appearances only, and not from any real
knowledge of the matter, and again, in language which cannot be called in question,
it informs us that, instead of the apparently blue dome above our heads being solid,
it is only an optical illusion, or, at most, atmospheric air; that instead of the sun
being created for the express purpose of giving light to this world, and being set in
the under surface of the dome, it gives light to many other worlds, is more than a
thousand thousand times as large as our earth, and is more than ninety millions of
miles beyond this apparent dome or firmament. One of the most striking evidences
that the writer of the account in Genesis only spoke from appearances is that in the
division of labour in the six days’ creation, he allots the Deity one day to make the
firmament, and one day to make the sun, moon, and stars. As they appeared to him
with the naked eye, no doubt he considered the construction of the firmament the
greater day’s work of the two. The eye of the modern astronomer, assisted by the
telescope, reveals the important fact that, while the firmament is merely an optical
illusion, the stars are so many millions and hundreds of millions of stupendous suns


and worlds scattered through illimitable space, so that the world upon which we
dwell is but an insignificant speck in the universe. Of all this the writer of the
account in Q-enesis evidently had not the remotest idea. With the most childlike
simplicity he informs us that God made two great lights, the greater light to rule the
day, and the lesser light to rule the night, and he made the stars also, as if the stars
were scarcely worth mentioning in an account of the creation at all. In all countries
of the world the aborigines, judging from appearances as seen with the naked eye,
have the same idea with respect to the vault above being solid, and the stars simply
insignificant specks, very much smaller than the moon. Numbers of reflecting men
are led to notice these things, and naturally enough conclude that the account in
denesis was written by an ignorant man, who judged from appearances only, was
unacquainted with the real truth, and that he was not inspired at all.*
Another powerful cause of scepticism of the divine authority of the Bible is that
it teaches as truth superstitions which the good sense of civilized society have
banished from among them, and now only exist among the barbarous tribes of the
earth. Trial by ordeal is one of these. Casting of lots was commanded for the
discovery of theft and other crimes (Joshua vii. 11-18 ; 1 Sam. xiv. 41, 42), and
also the drinking of dust stirred in water to discover adultery. (Nutn. v.)
Again, witchcraft, that terrible product of the ignorance and superstition of man
that fearful delusion which in the different countries of the world has brought thousands
and hundreds of thousands of innocent persons, especially poor, helpless, decrepid old
women, to the rack, to the stake or to the gallows, amid the derisions and execrations
of superstitious, unpitying crowds, and which now the good sense of mankind is fast
exploding, throughout every hole and corner of the earth, as a fearful fallacy, as an
impossible crime—is taught in the Bible as a sacred truth—“ Thou shalt not suffer a
witch to live.” (Exodus xxii. 18.) “ Any mau that has a familiar spirit, or that is a
wizard, shall surely be put to death : they shall stone him with stones.” (Lev. xx.
27.) These are given as the words of God himself, and have been the death warrant
of many thousands, even tap to modern times. But now in civilized countries,
except amongst a few ignorant people in obscure country districts, a universal
scepticism prevails on the subject. Numbers of thinking men of the present day,
seeing that such superstitions have been, and are now, everywhere practised among
* According to a great number of passages in the Bible the Jews, like most other rude peoples,
appear to have believed that the firmament formed as it were the ground-floor of heaven —that juvt above
it God held his court, surrounded by his a igels and archangels, like an earthly king surrounded by his
courtiers and attendants. He is sometimes spcken of as sending his messengers down, and at other times
of coming down himself upon the earth to speak personally with men, to see how things were getting on,
or for other purposes. In one place it is said that he came down to see the Tower of Babel which men
were building on the earth (Genesis xi. 5); in another place that he came down and confounded their
language (Genesis xi. 7,8); in another place that he came down to see if the rumor respecting the
wickedness of Sodom and Gomorrah was e rrrect or not (Genesis xviii. 21); in one place it says that he
rained down fir e and brimstone out of heaven upon the wicked cities (Genesis xix. 24.); in another that he cast
down great stones out of heaven upon the enemies of the Jews as they fled away (Joshua x. 11.) A hundred
other passages go to prove that the Jews believed God to dwell locally just above the firmament.
Josephus, a fair exponent of Jewish notions, informs us that the firmament was made of crystal, and
‘ put together in a manner agreeable to the earth, and fitted for giving moisture and rain ” (“ Antiquities
of the Jews,” chapter i, section 1) The Jews, like other barbarous nations, seem to have Imagined that
rain, hail, snow, ike, came from above the firmament, and that accordingly there must be great quantities
of it stored away up there. Again and again, in the Bible and other Jewish writings the waters above
the firmament are referred to (Genesis i. 7, &c., Btc ) In one place God is made to ask a man—“ Hast
thou entered into the treasures of the snow? or hast thou seen the treasures of the hail?” (Job xxxviii.
22.) But we probably get the Jewish notions on this subject in the most concise shape expressed in the
Book of Enoch, a book in considerable repute about the time of Jesus, and quoted by St Jude. It
professes to give an account of wbat the antediluvian Enoch saw when he was taken up to heaven alive.
It informs us that among other things he saw the Deity sitting on his throne surrounded by angels and
archangels, that he saw the future habitations of the blessed and the condemned, the tree of life, Btc, Stc ;
but what is more immediately to the purpose of our subject, he saw the receptacles, or great depots from
which come all the clouds and lain, and snow and hail, and mist and dew ; also, the great receptacles of
light and thunder, ana every species of lightning; the great receptacles of darkness and of the winds ; the
great receptacles of fire and water ; that he saw also mountains of the gloom which constitutes winter,
and the receptacles of all the luminaries of heaven, each receptacle in charge of an angel. (Book of
Enoch.) Of course, this journey to, and description of, heaven by Enoch is fabulous, but it was considered
canonical by tbe early Christian Church, and taken in connection with other evidence in the Jewish
writings, tends to furnish us with the common ideas of the Jews respecting meteorology, shewing them
to have been similar to those prevalent amongst uninforrasd races gsuerally—simply the result of
childlike er unscientific observation.


the barbarous tribes of the earth, very naturally conclude that these notions
once prevailed amongst the Jews when they were in a barbarous state, and were not
inspired notions at all. How much better would Moses have served the cause of
humanity if, from his stand-point, instead of uttering the words “ Thou shalt not
suffer a witch to live,” he had said, “ There are no such things as witches; banish such
a belief from your minds as a delusion, as a monstrous figment of the imagination.”
Another powerful cause of scepticism in the divine authority of the Bible is that
in many parts it sanctions, and even commands, the most flagrant wrongs and the
most revolting cruelties ; man finds there taught as right that which his own conscience
and the moral sense of mankind, loudly expressed, tell him to be utterly wrong ; he
finds there a statement that Moses, acting as the inspired servant of God, at one
time commanded ten thousand helpless captive women and twenty thousand innocent
children to be slaughtered in cold blood. (Num. xxxi. 17, 18.) # He finds there
that most fearful, that most diabolical of all crimes, that crime of crimes against our
common nature, human slavery, expressly sanctioned by the Deity. (Lev. xxv. 44-46 j
Deut. xx. 10-16.) Even the most rigidly orthodox man is compelled on this subject
to virtually condemn the Bible teaching. John Wesley, with every wish to believe
in the plenary inspiration of the book, could not at times forbear giving vent to the
more elevated feelings of his own nature, and designate slavery as “ the sum of all
villianies.” Numbers of other eminent men have spoken no less emphatically on the
subject. Lord Brougham, in speaking to the question in the House of Commons, in
the year, 1830, says —“ Tell me not of rights—talk not of the property of the
slaveholder in his slaves. I deny the right—l acknowledge not the property. The
principles, the feelings of our common nature rise in rebellion against it. Be the
appeal made to the understanding or to the heart, the sentence is the same that
rejects it. In vain you tell me of laws that sanction such a claim! There is a law
above all the enactments of human codes —the same throughout the world, the same
in all times, . . . It is the law written on the heart of man by the
finger of his Maker, and by that law, unchangeable and eternal, while men despise
fraud, loathe rapine, and abhor blood, they will reject with indignation the wild and
guilty phantasy that man can hold property in man !”
Lloyd Garrison, the eminent American abolitionist, in publicly addressing Mr.
George Thomson, the eminent English abolitionist, upon the eve of his departure to
bis native country, in the year 1850, after eight months’ lecturing through the States
against American slavery, says—“ On your return home if you are asked whether
the American Union will stand or fall in this conflict, answer, it is not for you
to prophecy. If they ask you whether slavery is destined to be abolished, answer,
on the veracity of God, yes! by the undying wants and irresistible impulses
of nature, yes ! By the instincts and aspirations of the human soul, yes!”
How much truer do we feel are these sentiments —how much more in accord with
unerring right, with eternal truth, favorable to individual freedom and human
brotherhood, than the Bible doctrine, “Ye shall take them as an inheritance for your
children after you to inherit them for a possession ; they shall be your bondsmen for
ever!”
Another great stumbling-block is what is said respecting the origin of the Sabbath.
The Bible teaches that God commanded the Sabbath should be kept holy as a day
of rest, because that he made the earth in six days,’and on the seventh rested and
was refreshed. (Exodus xxxi. 17.) All scientific men, and the great bulk of men of
general information at the present day, feel that this was not the way in which our
world came into existence, and that it is monstrous to suppose that the great Cause
of all causes could weary and be refreshed, and hence a wide-spread scepticism
respecting its peculiar sacredness above all other days for any such reason.f
*We speak approximately with respect to the numbers In verse 85 it says that the proportion
of virgins saved alive was thirty-two thousands. The reader can, if he feels inclined, estimate from that
data the probable number of the married women and male children that are said to have been slaughtered.
+ In our opinion the real cause of the origin of the Sabbath was the phases or changes of the moon.
I rom the eailiest times, according to universal testimony, men very naturally divided time by the continual
bu t regular changes of the sun and moon—those great timekeepers for the children of nature throughout
the world—and more especially by the moon, as its changes were more rapid. The quarters of the moon still


Another great stumbling-block to the thoughtful man is that respecting eternal
torments. The Bible teaches that God is a God of infinite goodness and compassion,
and yet it teaches that he has created millions and thousands of millions of poor,
frail humanity, with the certain fore-knowledge that they would sin, and, as a
consequence, would be doomed to writhe in eternal torments, in unutterable agonies,
for ever. Multitudes of men cannot believe this. It teaches that on a certain day
form the weeks of all aboriginal tribes. The lunar month is approximately thirty days, and consequently
their weeks are alternately of seven and eight days’ duration. As society advanced in various parts of the
world there would be naturally a strong inclination, for the sake of more certainty and convenience, to fix
the length of all weeks to a d finite number of days. The lunar month is a few hours less than thirty
days, and consequently in dividing it into weeks seven was the nearest number, and was accordingly
adopted, and the most advanced nations of the present time have a week of seven days. The ancient
Mexicans divided the year into lunar time, which was the priestly division, and also into solar time. 73
weeks of five days each, which was the civil time. M any other nations have divided time into lunar and solar
weeks, but the lunar division, and eventually the definite week of either seven or fourteen days, has been
by far the most general.
It cannot be pronounced with anything like certainty how the idea of setting apart one particular day
in the week as a holiday, or holy day, originated in the different counti ies, but probably it gradually grew up
as a religious custom amongst men when they were in a very rude stale, and in course of time became a
fixed institution, as many other increasing customs have done. Almost all nations at the present day keep
some one day in a given number as a holy day, and it always forms either the first or the last day of their
week. Every day of our week has been kept by some people or other as their holy day. The ancient Greeks
kept Monday, the Persians, Tuesday, the Assyrians, Wednesday, the Egyptians, Thursday, the Arabians,
Friday, the Jews, Saturday. At the present time the particular days kept holy by the different nations of
the earth are as various, and of course it would be so, as accident of time and circumstance decided its
origin. The people of most, if not all, creeds hold their peculiar Sabbath as a day of rest from labour,
and as one of special religious worship. Every one amongst us is acquainted with the fact that the
Christians and Jews do so; the Mahometans, the Hindoos, the Buddhists, and other religionists do the
same. We shall just give two or three illustrations in support of our statement.
One authority, speaking of the Cingalese, says —“ Four holy-days, or pahoya, are in each lunar
month, when the priests are ordered to preach to the assembled people the duties of their re igiou, and
inculcate lessons of mora'ity. These days are ordered to be observed in a like manner with our Sabbath.”
—Sin’s “ Ceylon and the Cingalese,” vol ii. p 110.
Another authority, speaking of the Japanese, says—“ Their week consists of half a moon, or fourteen
days. . .* Bach month is divided into portions of fourteen days; the last of each of these
portions is celebrated as a holiday, and at that period the temples are much frequented.”—■“ Gazetteer of
the World,” art. Japan.
Another, speaking of the Peguans, says—“ The talapo ; ns and priests have no possessions, hut such is
the respect paid to them by the people that they are never known to want. They preach to them every
Monday not to commit murder, to take from no person anything belonging to him. to do no hurt, to give
no offence, to avoid impiety and superstition, &c.”—“ Manners and Customs of All Nations,” p 95.
Another, writing of the Burmese, says —“ In each month there are four days of public worship,
when the people repair to pay their devotions at the temples, namely,'the new moon, the eighth of the
increase, the full moon and the eighth of the wane.” —Crawford’s “ Court of Ava,” vol ii. p 107-
Another, writing of the Siamese, says —“The eighth and fifteenth days of the moon are considered
holy by the Siamese, and are observed as days for rest and worship. On them the temples are visited,
and offerings made to Buddha, and to the priests, who preach to the people in a latge open hall. No
fishing or hunting is permitted on these days, and neither fresh fish nor meat is sold in the bazaar under
pain of fine and corporal punishment.”—Bowring’s “Kingdom of Siam,” vol. i p 158. Many more
illustrations might be given, but these must suffice
All nations, like the Jews, have some tradition or other to account for the origination of their own
favored holy-day, but these traditions are in most cases entirely fanciful, and should ever be received with
great caution. Man, the world over, in obedience to the strong faculty of curiosity within him, will have
a reason for everything, and he always does have, whether true or false, at least a plausible reason to
account for everything that he sees, and for every existing institution of his faith. The world exists, man
exists, evil exists, the institution of the Sabbath exists, and a hundred other important things exist, and for
each and every one of these among all the peoples and tribes of the earth there is some tradition or other
accounting for their individual existence. Among one people the origin of the world, of man, of evil, of
the Sabbath, is accounted for in one way, amongst another people in quite a different way, and so on, the
world through. The traditions of all nations on these points collected together would form an enormous
book, but would indeed be a most instructive and brain-clearing scripture, and give a true estimate of the
value of such traditions generally.
For ourselves, we should be very sorry to see the Sabbath as an institution done away with—as a
healthful periodic relaxation from labor, it is exceedingly valuable. Men find that a day’s rest, after six or
seven days’ labor, is very refreshing; in fact, that the exigences of the animal system call for such a
Seriodic rest. From this strong natural reason, coupled with the fact that custom has firmly established
re Sabbath, it is not likely to be done away with, but the notion of its peculiar sacredness above all
other days is, as Dr Cairns says, fast dying out. He says it is because the powers of evil are prevailing—
we say it is because men are becoming more critical and less superstitious.
We have enlarged more on this question of the Sabbath, because just now an attempt is being made
amongst us by a few zealous traditionists to interfere with individual liberty, by preventing Sunday
travelling and other accessories to innocent and healthful recreation. We believe that they will not
succeed, but at the same time hold that it is the duty of every advocate of civil and religious freedom to
raise his voice against even the presumptuous attempt.


the whole of mankind that ever breathed shall be gathered together into
one vast assembly; that they shall then be divided into two companies, the
one going to suffer the eternal miseries of hell, ancj the other to enjoy the
happiness of heaven for ever. Multitudes of men feel that such a mode of
action would be wrong and utterly unjust, they feel that such an arbitrary line of
demarcation cannot be drawn between men a little better or a little worse, in a moral
sense. Mankind cannot be divided into the totally good and the totally bad ; there are
an infinity of grades of moral character —-no man is all bad, no man is all good, but
every man is both good and bad, more or less.
“ Virtuous and vicious every man will be—
Pew in the extreme, but all in the degree;
The rogue and fool, by tits, are fair and wise,
And e’en the best, by tits, what they despise!”
In our earthly tribunals the accumulated wisdom of mankind has expressed
itself in this formula :—“ Strict justice demands that the punishment should invariably
be proportioned to the guilt.” Men feel with the conviction of certainty that such a
course is right, and that any other course would be wrong, even in another world ;
that it would be monstrously unjust to doom one man to eternal and unutterable misery
for committing ten sins, while the man who had only committed nine should, be
forgiven, and not only escape all punishment whatever, but should enjoy everlasting
and inexpressible happiness.
One more feature may be mentioned that has great influence in forcing men to
reject the doctrine of eternal torments —it is the monstrous disproportion, the
monstrous excess of punishment to the guilt in all cases whatever. They cannot
believe that a finite being, however wicked, can possibly commit in a few short years
sins, the equitable punishment of which would be an infinity of excruciating
torments. Flaying men alive, or torturing them to death by the most exquisite and
lingering modes discoverable by human ingenuity, for the slightest offence against
society, would not in the remotest degree approach it in the disproportion of the
punishment to the offence. If all the pains that were ever endured by the millions
and thousands of millions of men, women, and children that ever lived upon the
earth, all the headaches and toothaches, all the pains resulting from burns, and
scalds, and cuts, and bruises, from every wound received in battle, from every surgical
operation, from rheumatism, gravel, gout, and every form of painful disease, were
endured consecutively by one man, his sufferings would not amount to a thousandth,
or a millionth, not even to the slightest appreciable part of what one poor sinner,
according to the Bible and orthodox teaching, will have to suffer in an eternal hell.
Multitudes of men do not, they cannot, believe such a doctrine. One eminent writer,
speaking of the dogma, says—“ If an angel from heaven were to tell mo to believe in
the doctrine of eternal torments I would not believe him, for I would sooner believe
the angel a delusion than God monstrous, and we make him monstrous when we
make him the author of eternal torments.” Numbers of men feel the sentiment here
uttered to be true, and even Christians plainly show by their acts that their belief is
only fancied, and not a real one, for it they really believed, they would feel the
question to be so momentous that they could think of little else. Most men feel that
it is in accordance with the eternal fitness of things, that good or bad actions done in
this life should be rewarded or punished beyond the grave; but a feeling is fast gaining
ground that the internal gratification of having acted well will be the reward for good
actions, and remorse of conscience will be the punishment for bad ones, and then
every man will be rewarded according to his merits, and punished according to his
demerits. For ourselves, to this doctrine we can heartily accord, it seems so
reasonable and so probable; but we never could believe in that, the most flagrantly
unmerciful and unjust dogma that ever entered into the mind of man to conceive—
the doctrine of eternal torments,
We are aware that it is taught by many of the orthodox that repentance before
death is the condition of salvation, that it alone definitively decides whether a man
shall go to heaven or to hell, but this explanatory theory involves so many great and
glaring absurdities as demonstrates it to be altogether untenable. Amongst other
things, it affirms that the greatest sinner, the man who has been guilty of every


atrocity iu the catalogue of crimes, if he repents at the eleventh hour, even when
the breath is just leaving his body, that he will go to heaven ; while the man who has
lived a comparatively good life, if death happens to overtake him unprepared, ho will
go to hell—as has been remarked, the cold-blooded murderer who has a month given
him to repent will go to heaven, while his perhaps comparatively good, but unpro-
prepared, victim goes to hell. Many men feel that such explanations as these are
monstrous, are utterly untrue.
Another great cause of scepticism in the plenary inspiration of the Bible is the
many puerile and absurd stories of the Jack-the-giant-killer, mctamorphic, and
Herculean species which it contains, such as the history of Sampson ; his rending a
young lion as if it had been a kid, killing a thousand men with the jaw-bone of an ass,
throwing down a house with three thousand people upon its roof, carrying the
massive gates of a city forty miles on his back, &c., &c., and whose enormous strength
lay in his long hair ; of Moses, with his magic rod, turning it into a serpent, turning
the whole dust of a country into lice, and its water into blood, making the water of
the sea stand up perpendicular like a wall upon each side of the road, &c., &c. ;of
one man making the sun and moon to stand still; of the walls of a city falling down
flat at the sound of rams’ horns and the shouts of a besieging army ; of, at one time
a serpent, and at another time an ass, conversing in human speech ; of a living woman
being instantly metamorphosed into a pillar of salt; of a man going up by a whirlwind
into heaven ; of a whale swallowing a man, and after three days vomiting him up, alive
and well, upon dry land. These, and many other tales of a similar class, vast numbers
of men do not, cannot, believe. Take the last story, that of the whale swallowing
Jonah. How many men in our midst, and throughout Christendom, do in reality
believe it ? We happened, some time ago, to be standing in a public place listening
to an itinerant clergyman preaching the old traditional faith in all its integrity.
When he had finished, a man stood up and addressed the crowd somewhat as
follows ; —“ What you have just heard is a lot of old women’s tales, a lot of exploded
nonsense, which used to be believed in the old country, especially by our mothers and
grandmothers, but in this country things have changed, and they are scarcely
believed at all; in fact, this is acountry of contrarities, when compared wdth the
old. In the old country at noon, the sun was in the south, while here it is in the
north ; in the old country it was cold at Christmas, while here it is hot; in the old
country the trees shed their leaves, while here they shed their bark; in the old
country the cherry-stones grew inside the fruit, while here they grow on the outside,
Ac., &c.; and in a like manner have articles of belief changed —for instance, in the
old country it was the whale swallowed Jonah, while in this country it is Jonah
swallowed the whale.” These remarks were received with great laughter, and with
not the slightest sign of a rebuke. The persons present evidently relished them,
which they certainly would not have done had they really believed (he story of
Jonah to be true. Had the speaker attempted to ridicule in the same manner the
mathematical fact that two and two are four, the geographical fact that the earth is
globidar, the historical fact of the battle of Waterloo, or the siege of Troy, he could
not have done so, for the simple reason that these things are universally believed.
So little is the story of Jonah now credited that were the authorities to put it in the
census papers as a query to be answered in addition to that usually put—what
religion are you of f—it would be seen that fully one-half of the population were
heterodox on the point. This probably no government will do, but do you, reader,
feel curious on the point and wish to test it by a practical issue, ask the next ten men
that you meet the question, <Io you really and tfruly liefileve that
tlie wliale «>Vallowed JOliall f and we venture to say that five out
of the ten will either honestly say that they do not, or equivocate or qualify their
answer in such a manner as to show that their faith is of a very questionable nature.
Another, and the most powerful of all causes of scepticism in the plenary
inspiration of the Bible is the vast amount of glaring contradictions and inconsistencies
in its doctrines and statements. In many places its numbers and chronology are at
variance ; so much so that in one place a man is even made to be two years older than
his father. (2 Chron. xxi. 20 ; xxii. 1, 2 ; 2 Kings viii. 25, 26.) In some places it
says that Hod is the common, compassionate father of all mankind, whose tender


mercies are over all bis works, while in other places it says that at one time, with the
cxceptioa'of one ship-load, he drowned every human being and animal upon the face
of the earth ; at another time commanded the wholesale and indiscriminate slaughter
of whole nations (Deut. vii. 1, 2 ; xx. 16, 17 : 1 Sam. xv. 2,3) ; at another time
struck fifty thousand people dead for simply looking into a box (1 Sam. vi. 19.) In
some places it represents him as a God of strict justice, saying the son shall not simer
for the father, nor the father for the son, but every man shall suffer for his own sin ;
while in another place it represents him as sanctioning the dooming of a whole nation
to perpetual slavery for the sin of their father (Gen. ix. 20-27) ; in another place corn-
man diim the slaughter of a whole nation, men, women and children, every soul that
breathed, simply for an act of inhospitality committed by their forefathers four
hundred years before (1 Sam. xv. 1-3) ; in another place commanding seven innocent
persons to be hanged for an act of cruelty committed by their grandfather (2 bam.
xxi 1-14) : in another place condemning the whole race of mankind to innumerable
and unutterable miseries, as a punishment because the first man and woman ate a
fruit which they were forbidden to touch. , .
In one place God is made to teach that man should love his fellow man, that he
should look upon every man as a brother, that he should even love his enemies, do
good to them that hate him, and even despitefully use him and persecute him;
while in other places God is made to teach that man should hate his enemies, is said to
have commanded him to destroy whole nations with fire and sword, shew no mercy
and leave not a soul to breathe, and even made the sun and moon to stand still, that
men might have more daylight to enable them to slaughter a greater number ot their
fellow creatures. Vast numbers of thinking men feel that it is absurd to call a book
containing such point-blank contradictions the plenary inspired word of God ; they
feel that it is the very quintessence of absurdity to call that a complete rale ot taith
and practice, a revelation of the will of God to man “ so plain that he that runs
may read,” while yet, in fact, it is so contradictory and indefinite in its nature that
one hundred different, honest, earnest, well-intentioned sects spring from its teachings,
and interpret it in a hundred different ways. _ , . . ,
This fact alone has immense influence in causing many impartial observers to thinK,
and then to doubt the fact of its being a revelation at all. A man sees around
him in Christendom a hundred different sects, and every one of them seriously and
emphatically declaring that the other ninety-nine are wrong, and each confidently
appealing to the Bible as an irresistible evidence of the truth of his assertion. Bo
various are the doctrines taught in the Bible that one finds statements to support
eternal torments; another, total destruction or annihilation; another, purgatory j
another, a millenium ; one will have heaven above; another, on a renovated earth; one,
free-will; another, necessity and predestination; one, salvation by faith alone; another,
by works alone; another, by faith and works combined; one finds in it the doctrine ot
the unity of God; another, the doctrine of the Trinity; one, consubstantiation; another,
transubstantiation ; and another, neither of the two ; one finds in it a justification of
human slavery ; another, of strict equality and universal brotherhood ; one, a com-
mand of priestly celibacy ; another, of priestly marriage ; one, monogamy ; another,
polvgamy; and so on with hundreds of other matters, more or less important.
Strange fevelatlOlß this of the will of God to man !
Such are a few of the stumbling-blocks which numbers of modern thinkers see m
the Bible. Many more than we have enumerated could be given, but space does not
permit. They see in the collection of writings called the Old and ISew Testament
a book comprising much that is good, much that is beautiful, sublime, instructive,
elevating, undeniable—much that is in strict accord with the deductions of the purest
reason, much that is true as truth itself, while yet they see much that they cannot ac-
knowledge to be good or true, and consequently not inspired. They feel convinced that
the Bible is simply a collection of the opinions of many individual minds, and hence
its inconsistencies when attempted to be viewed ns a whole; that its worse parts ar#
man’s passions, prejudices, follies, and ignorance portrayed in their various forms, and
that its best parts are but the outspoken expression of man s better nature— the
natural utterances of the human heart”-that by viewing the matter m this light
the solution of the question is simple and intelligible, and that by any other they are


puzzled with innumerable and insurmountable difficulties. They coidd conceive how
that the Deity would mate a revelation of his will to man in clear, consistent, and
distinct terms—so clear that even the simplest could understand, and none could
doubt or deny; but that the Bible, with all its contradictions and absurdities, its
childlike legends and scientific errors, its superstitions, its obscenities and sactioned
wrongs, is the plenary inspired word of God they cannot believe.
To us, for many j ears, it has appeared to be one of the most extraordinary things
in the whole range of mental phenomena—that with the vast amount of internal and
external evidence against the inspiration of the Bible —how any clear-headed man
of the world could be found to believe it. How men can be found in this en-
lightened age to still believe in the inspiration of a book that gives erroneous views of
all the physical sciences on which it touches; in clear and distinct language contradicts
itself in figures and doctrines in hundreds of places ; teaches the rightfulness of
human slavery, witchcraft, and trial by ordeal; that whilst in some places it teaches
that God is unchangeable, is a God of tender mercies, the common compassionate
father of all mankind, who has taught as one of the first of precepts that man should
love his neighbour as himself, should love all mankind even to the worst of his enemies;
yet that in other places he commanded the indiscriminate slaughter of the feeble old
men, helpless women, and innocent children of whole nations, and even went so far
as to suspend the action of the solar system, to facilitate the accomplishment of a
greater slaughter of man by man than ordinary daylight would allow. We repeat
that it does indeed appear most strange to us that in this age of refined human
feeling, of extensive information and of severe ci’itical inquiry, how any intelligent
men can be found to still believe it; and that scepticism in its plenary inspiration,
instead of being only extensively partial, should not he total and universal.
We have now attempted to demonstrate some of the principal causes of infidelity,
or, to speak more correctly, scepticism. A scepticism which is already very extensive
is fast spreading among all ranks and conditions, and which, as we have shewn, from
its very nature, from the vitality, number, and power of its causes, is destined to
become universal in spite of all opposition. We have shewn that this so-called
infidelity does not, as JNclson, Pearson, and other orthodox writers assert, arise from
the inherent depravity, the natural badness of man’s heart, but as an irresistible
consequence from his increased general information, observation, and the exercise of
his reasoning faculties. And now we may pertinently ask —in fact, it is our duty to
ask—What shall be the result of all this ? What is to be the faith of the future, but
more particularly, how are we, as rational, responsible beings, to act under the present
circumstances ? The vast importance of the last question we think no reasonable
person will deny—we shall attempt to answer it first. *ln considering the subject, the
first question that occurs to us is, What is the position of the present paid public
teachers of the people, the clergy. We believe, and shall attempt to shew, that
their present position is a false one—one utterly subversive of the advance of truth,
and consequently of human welfare. As a body at the present moment, they are
looked upon by multitudes of thinking men as the dogmatic conservitors of the old,
but now exploded, doctrines and traditions of an ignorant and superstitious past,
viewed with a feeling half of respect, half of pity, tolerated and supported, to some
extent, as a species of moral police over the ignorant, and a solace to the afflicted ;
but to a greater extent, as a genteel incumbrance, bequeathed by the old order of
things, and difficult to,shake off; still listened to with affection and trust by many of
the women, but regarded, more or less, as confirmed, irredeemable sophists by great
numbers of men.
The great bulk of the people are gradually feeling more and more that the present
position of the clergy of Christendom is a false one. Frequent recurring indications,
sensible and insensible, from all sides, demonstrate to them in language plainer than
words that the constitutional narrow-mindedness and dogmatic conservatism of the
clergy is utterly opposed to the progressive, and essentially truthful, genius of modern
thought, and they act consistently with such opinion when "the matter comes home to
themselves. Considering the calling of a minister an equivocal even if not absolutely
a false one. Yery many parents now feel little inclination to adopt it for their
children, as we have seen. Dr. Cairns, speaking of Scotland, says —“ He noticed


that the upper classes, -without exception, and the middle classes, with very few
exceptions, looked down upon the calling of a minister as one altogether beneath
them, and totally unfitted as a profession for their sonsand what the Doctor says
of Scotland may, to a great extent, be said of England, and every other country of
Christendom. By the mass of thinking men the clergy are becoming more and more
looked upon as professed sophists, and the peculiarity of their position as expounders
of the Bible as a plenary inspired book continually compels them to be more and more
sophistical. Scientific discoveries and general human knowledge is advancing, and
one statement after another in the chronology, history, science, &c., of the Bible is
demonstrated to be erroneous. These in each case they attempt to reconcile, and
accordingly the web of sophistry is wove on. We heard a Christian preacher of a
some what liberal turn of mind, in a discourse, a short time ago, thus characterize the
orthodox clergyman’s mode of preaching in the present day “He opens the Bibte,
reads out a text, preaches from it an elaborate sermon of an hour in length, and the
whole purport and burden of the harangue is to prove that the words of the text do
not mean what they say.” Jlbere is. much truth in this picture. How different are
the Bible explanations given now by the clergy generally on many matters from what
they were three hundred back. Then, as the Bible simply said, the world was
made in six common days five or six thousand years ago, but since geology has
demonstrated in language which there is no disputing, that the world is millions of
years old, the accommodating explanation of the clergy is that the six days were only
figurative days, and mean periods. .
Then it was a fact, as the Bible said, that the whole world was drowned in the
time of Noah, and the passage was literally correct which said that ah the high hills
under the whole heaven were covered with water; but since, geology has proved to
demonstration that no such flood ever took place, the accommodating interpreta-
tion i--, that it was only a partial flood, and the words, “ all the high hills under the
whole heaven,” was figurative language and only meant some of them.
Then it was a fact, as the Bible said, that the world was flat, fixed and immovable,
that the sun was subordinate to the earth and daily moved from one side of the
horizon to another; but since science has demonstrated that the earth is a globe,
that it moves with an immense velocity, that the sun is a million times as large as it,
and does not, in fact, move from one side to the other as it appears to do, the accom-
modating interpretation is, that the Deity suited his language to the comprehension
of simple men, that if he had informed them of things as they were and not as they
appeared to be, they could not have understood him* _ _
Then it was taught that the passage “ Thou shalt not suffer a witch to live,
meant exactly what it said ; but since, human observation and research has shewn
that witchcraft is only a superstition prevalent amongst savage and barbarous tribes
throughout the world, and simply the effect of ignorance, the accommodating
interpretation is that the word witch should be rendered poisoner, and not witch at
all, and that the story of the witch of Endor bringing up a dead man- from the grave
to hold a conversation with another man (1 Sam. xxviii. 7-19) has to be explained in
some other way.
Then it was taught that the passage in reference to human slavery— X e shall take
thorn as an inheritance for yoiu’ children after you, to inherit them for a possession;
they shall be your bondsmen for ever”—meant what it said, simply perpetual slavery.
* It is frequently said that the Bible was never intended to teach man science, and that when God
spoke to him he used accommodating language, that he accommodated himself to man s ideas of nature,
and tlrngs in general. But is it not a monstrous libel on a God of intelligence and truth to say that when
he wished to convey information to man he made use of falsehoods to bring it within his comprehension 4
This appears to us to be one of the most pitiable and wretched statements ever uttered by man—-to tiy 1°
prove the erroneous statements of ignorant men to be the words of a God of truth. Lne writer ot the
account in Genesis—the asserted mouth-piecc of the Deity, in giving an account of the creation, says—
“ And God made two great liglrs, the greater light to rule the day, the lesser light to ru e the night, and
he made the stars also. And he set them in the firmament of the heaven to give light noon the earth.
Would it not have been as easily comprehended by man if lie had said—•“ That great light which .you see
is of au enormous magnitude—more than a million times as large as the earth—but being at such a great
distance makes it look comparatively small; that second light is very much smaller than the other, _hut
being much nearer to the earth, it looks nearly as large ; it is not a light of itselt, but merely a reflection,
which, receiving light from the sun, throws it off again, as a looking glass, or any polished surface, throws


But since of late years the more refined sense of right and humane feelings of man-
kind hare risen up against slavery, and branded it as a monstrous crime against our
common nature, the accommodating interpretation is that the words “ for eyer”
meant only a limited time.
We might mention many other passages in which the evident sense has to be
explained away. There are, in fact, hundreds of these literal passages which the
believer in the plenary inspiration of the Bible has to explain away in a similar
manner, because they disagree with some other passages in the book, or with some
secular, but irresistible, evidence outside of it. The office, therefore, of a modern
orthodox clergyman becomes of necessity, to a great extent, that of a sophist, and the
good, sound sense of vast numbers of the laity compels them to observe this. Again,
anything in the Bible which to the common reader appears to be absurd, of
questionable decency, or trivial, is generally explained to contain some hidden, but
most important, meaning; hence the absurd story of Sampson, “ when viewed in a
spiritual manner, portrays the actions and reign of Christthat poetical and
impassioned love story, the Song of Solomon, is “ a spiritual prefigment of Christ’s
kingdom.” Most of the puerile and trivial ceremonies of the Jewish priesthood, so
seriously and solemnly detailed in the Pentateuch, “ were types and figures of Christ
and his kingdom.” Hundreds of instances could bo adduced from the teachings of
the clergy, in which they attempt to wrest the evident sense, and to make
important capital out of the most childish stories, or simple and common-
place remarks. We shall give one more illustration; it is from the explanatory
notes of the Douay Bible, as authorised by the Catholic Church, and, therefore,
we may fairly assume, sanctioned by the largest section of the Christian clergy.
In the book of Tobias, chap, xi., it says, “Then the dog which had been with
them in the way ran before, and coming as if he had brought the news, shewed his
joy by his fawning and wagging his tail.” The note on this is as follows : —“ chap,
xi., verse 9, The dog, etc. This may seem a very minute circumstance to he recorded
in sacred history ; but as we learn from our Saviour (St. Matt. v. 18), there are iotas
and tittles in the word of God, that is to say, things that appear minute, but which
have indeed a deep and mysterious meaning in them.” Surely human folly can go
no farther than this, when learned doctors of divinity stand up and seriously tell the
Jieople that most probably there is indeed a deep and mysterious meaning in the
awning of a dog, or the wagging of his tail, or in the record of the same. Is it not
enough to make us wonder at the perversions of the human intellect, to blush for the
follies of our race ? In the present age of rational investigation such explanations go
far with men in making them sceptical, and coupled with other causes, are leading
multitudes to pay little respect to all clerical teaching whatever. The upper and
middle classes, many of them, still go to church, not because they believe the doctrines
taught there, but because it is fashionable, and by many is supposed to be good for
trade, while the great bulk of the denizens of the workshop, who care little for the
fashions, and have no hopes of pecuniary gain, remain away.
A few months ago a body of eminent clergymen in London held a conference with
the representatives of the artizan classes to ascertain from them collectively why they
off rays of light that fail upon it; these small-looking stars are not really small, many of them being as
large as the sun, hut being at such an immense distance from the earth, they appear small to you ”
This could he comprehended by a school-boy, or any ordinarily iu'elligent savage Suppose a missionary
went into a foreign country to teach the savages, would he teach them science as it is laid down in the
Bible ? would he teach them that the earth stands upon pil'ars, that it has four corners to it, that the blue
vault above is a solid firmament with windows in it, and great quantities of water above it; that when it
rained these windows were opened and the water came down through them, and when they were closed
again it left off. Certainly not! And are we to believe that a God of truth taught, or inspired men to
teach, that as true which any missionary wou : d scorn to do ?
Again, many in attempting to reconcile the teachings of Jesus and Mcses, say that it was necessary
to teach the Jews to offer bloody sacrifices, and to practice laws of retribution—an eye for an eye, a tooth
for a tooth—because they could not comprehend, or were not far enough advanced to’receive the doctrines
of Jesus. But does the Christian missionary when lie goes to teach the veriest savage, first teach him to
sacrifice animals, or the doctrine of an eye for an eye, a tooth for a tooth, before he teaches him the
precepts of J esas ? Most certainly not 1 l'o us these orthodox explanations ever appeared as exceedingly
trivial, far-fetched, and illogical attempts to meet the difficulties of a most contradictory matter; as futile.
If not sometimes disingenuous, attempts to reconcile teachings which are in themselves essentially different
and utterly irreconcilable.


did not attend the various places of worship. The answer was unanimous, decisive,
and to the point. It was not aversion to religious truth, pure and simple, but to
the sophistries and other shortcomings of those who professed to teach it. An
authority before us, writing of the conference, makes a statement which clearly shews
what the artizans as a body think of the clergy. He says : —“ The chairman (Mr. Ed.
Miall) in his opening remarks reminded the meeting that their proceedings could be
of little value unless they were characterized by ‘ perfect honesty of purpose, and
freedom of utterance.’ From the report, we should judge that the first was not
wanting, while, as to the freedom of speech, there can be no manner of doubt, for wo
should say that ecclesiastical history does not furnish another instance of a body of
ministers submitting to such free and plain-spoken criticism at the hands of working,
or of any other class of men.” They were told that they taught what the people
could not believe, that they took the people’s money and gave little in return, that
the people “ absented themselves from the church, ‘ for the same reason that they
kept away from the shopkeeper who gave short weight and measure, and adulterated
his things ;’ that the ministers ‘ made religion a profession ;’ that they had always
shewn themselves averse to the teachings of science ; that although men were
making enormous advances in general knowledge, yet the clergy stood still, and there
was little or nothing new to be heard in the churches ; that the people ‘ might go there
Sunday after Sunday —but what did they hear ? The same thing over again,
a clergyman would get up and read a rigmarole sermon that had, perhaps, been
published half a century before.’ That ‘ science told a different tale to that taught in
the churches, both as to the creation and many other things, and the working classes
had come to the conclusion that the priests must be very lazy, or very ignorant, or
very unwilling to come over to the side of the truth.’” The substance of the whole of the
utterances appears to have been that the clergy, with their present notions, wore
altogether unfitted to act as guides to the people, and were not worth listening to. —
Melbourne Argus , March 21st, 1867.
Similar conferences have been held during the last year in several of the largest
towns of England, and the general purport of the utterances on the subject for the
consideration of which they were convened have been the same. We have before us
a notice of a numerously attended one being lately held in Liverpool, and the
reasons advanced for absenteeism from the churches are of a similar strain to those
given above. The clergy were accused of being too distant towards the masses, of
incompetency, and of teaching too little undeniable truth, &c. In particular, “ One
speaker, a shoemaker, said he knew that seventy-five per cent, of his fellow-workmen
were, or believed themselves to be infidels, and he alleged as a reason for this the
gross anomalies and inconsistencies which they beheld on every hand in the practice
of religion.”—Melbourne Age , April 30, 1868.
The press of England are now commenting on the subject matter of these
conferences, on the real state of affairs generally in the religious, or rather the
religio-social, world, and on what is to be done to mend this anomalous and particularly
unsatisfactory state of things. Some recommend one thing, and soma another.
The iStar newspaper, in particular, “ recommends the clergy to lay themselves out for
the masses, to come down from their social dignity as chief Philistines of their
respective districts, and not \ only mingle with the people, but learn to view life,
temporal and eternal, from the people’s point of view.” For ourselves, we cordially
agree with the last-quoted remarks, and in these strictures on the clergy generally. We
would not bo misunderstood, for, in spite of his glaringly false position, we still
consider the office of clergyman as one necessary to human welfare. What we would
wish to see, and which will yet most certainly be seen, is not the clergy and religious
institutions done away with, but reformed and made to serve the cause of humanity
better, infinitely better, than they at present do. There are not too many churches
and chapels, but too many sophistical arguments and stereotyped errors taught in
them, while many of the most important truths are not taught at all; there are not
too many ministers of religion gaining a livelihood by studying the religious and
social welfare of the people, but too many incompetent and even evil-disposed
Eersons monopolising the place, receiving the pay, and not doing the work,
[umanity will still have religious and social wants requiring special attention: a


-n-eat number of moral, talented, philanthropic, and earnest individuals could not be
better employed than in reproving, exhorting, advising, and teaching their fellow-
men ; attending to the neglected part of society, sympathizing with, advising the
poor, and assisting them by appealing to the charity of the richer man 5 attending
and consoling the dying moments of the unfortunate and forlorn; arbitrating diflei-
ences; preaching to all men, peace and forbearance in the social and every other
relation of life ; honesty, chastity, sobriety, industry, truthfulness, charity, in thought,
word, and deed; and holding continually up before men s minds an example to follow,
both through their words and bv their actions. The great half of humanity must
have examples to follow, and authorities to guide and advise them ; and all men,
more or less, feel the same want. In all wisdom let them have them, hut look well
to it that the men who are chosen are such guides—arc men of the clearest heads and
noblest hearts, the best and fittest that can be found in the entire community.
It may be thought by many that we have spoken too strongly of the clergy as a
body, but we haye simply spoken what we feel to be the truth, and strongly because
we feel the matter to be most important. We feel that the vast amount of mental energy
that is expended in explaining in an ingenious manner, and making the sanctified errors
and absurdities of the Bible plausible to the masses, is worse than wasted—that it
instructs them in the wrong direction, when it might instruct them in the right
that it immensely conduces to their injury, by mystifying and making them foolish
when it might equally conduce to their welfare by developing their intelligence and
matin" them wise. None more than ourselves would wish to love and respect the clergy,
and notwithstanding their offensive spiritual pride, their excessive intolerance, then-
bigotry, and their sophistry, we still feel affection towards them for their usual gen-
tlemanly bearing, kindly feelings in social life, and for their general sincerity and
<rood intentions, for we cannot, and never could, agree to the accusation of systematic
hypocrisy so commonly made against them by the rationalists generally. We do not
believe that, as a class, they are hypocrites, but that the great bulk of them are
sincere men honestly mistaken; as a rule, believing almost with the conviction of
certainty that they are right. What we blame them most for is not deceit, but mental
blindness and even for this the blame must not be altogether unqualified. In common
fairness, the rationalist should remember that the regular graduated minister of
religion is the creature of peculiarly overwhelming circumstances, is subject to
influences of no ordinary kind from his earliest childhood, causing impressions
generally exceedingly difficult to remove in after-life ; that generally when the first
stop is 'taken to make a minister of him, inexperienced as of necessity he is m
general knowledge, he is already an earnest, enthusiastic believer m the faith in
which he was born. From that time every lesson that is set him, every book that is
put into his hands, is ex parte in support of that faith. He is told that there are
men who speak against his religion, and even write books against it, but that such are
wicked men, are infidels, who, believing one thing, basely pretend to believe another,
that their arguments are sophistical, and that it is exceedingly wicked to listen to
them, or read their hooks. He is industriously shewn the beauties of the Bible, and
none of its defects —he is, in fact, emphatically told that it has no defects—and that
only wicked men, who wish to throw off all restraint and follow the natural inclinations
of their own evil hearts, say no. He is told again, again, and again, that no matter
what difficulties may appear to the carnal reason, they are fallacious, for the Bible,
bein'* given by divine inspiration, must be true and cannot be doubted ; that it is
exceedingly sinful to doubt, that doubts are the suggestions of the devil, and should
invariably be stifled at the very first appearing. He is told verbally and m books that
there are other religions in the world, but that his is the only true one ; that all the
others arc false, irrational, and wicked, that they are, in fact, the work of the devil,
and are simply the various modes which he has instituted to deceive mankind. With
such teachings as these inculcated perpetually and at every turn of Ins religious
studies, from his childhood up, it is not surprising that when arrived at manhood his
faith in his peculiar creed should be strongly formed. He has gradually and insensibly
been led to believe with his whole heart and soul that beyond all point of question Ins
faith and every part of it is absolutely true, and that any one who would attempt to
call it in question must bo either mentally blind or wicked. At this point he has


received an education of that strong, prejudiced, and one-sided nature, which the
ordinary man of the world, or the rationalist, who is given himself to look at things
from various points of view, can scarcely understand or appreciate, consequently they
frequently think him hypocritical, while he is simply an honest victim of an intensely
prejudiced education.
The clergy, therefore, in every country of the world will, in the very nature of
things, be the last to become emancipated from the thraldom of the old dogmas of
superstition, and enter heart and soul into the newer and truer order of things—those
who, by virtue of their office, should lead the faith will, of necessity, be the very last
to lag behind: still we hope, nay, more, we feel certain, that they will eventually follow.
They cannot long remain unmoved amidst the varied and mighty rational influences
playing around them, and which are already exercising so much influence among the
laity in demolishing their old faith and establishing a more reasonable, social, and
universal one among them. We think that the one fact alone —that their faith is
the accident of their birth, when in the future it is, and undoubtedly it will be,
pointed out to them at every turn —will have much influence in shaking their
prejudices. When they come to reflect upon the pregnant fact that the fifty thousand*
clergy of Great Britain are determined Protestants, simply because Great Britain is a
Protestant country , and they happen to have been born in it; that the thirty
thousand clergy of Italy are determined Catholics, because Italy is a Catholic country ,
and they happen to have been born there; that the sixty thousand clergy of
Russia proper are determined believers and teachers of the doctrines of
the Greek Church, because that is the faith of Russia, and they happen to have been
born there ; that the twenty thousand priests of Burmah are determined Buddhists,
because Burmah is a Buddhist country and they happen to have been born there;
that the twenty thousand priests of Persia * are determined Mahometans,
because Persia is a Mahometan country , and they happen to have been born
there; and so on with the priests or clergy of every religion throughout
the world — in each case they believe and teach dogmatically the faith of the
country in which they happen to have been born. Undoubtedly the consideration
of this fact must eventually tell upon the clergy of every land, no matter how strong
their prejudices may now be.
True, it is most difficult and painful for them to surrender fundamental tenets of a
faith long cherished with intense affection, for others as yet less strongly defined ; but
the influence of modern discoveries and the many intelligent logical deductions of
modern thought are irresistible and increasingly conclusive in their nature. The
situation in all its stern reality exists, and there is no alternative but to bend to it;
and, hard as the task is, we believe that they will gradually bend —that the church
will be reformed, and not as some think annihilated by the now widely spreading
rationalism. Yes, the church must stand. Human requirements demand that it
should, and it will stand ; but it will be reformed. Already in various quarters we
see some hopeful signs of such a reformation gradually coming about; already some
of the less prejudiced and more observant of the clergy, in spite of their adverse
education, shew a strong liberal tendency to keep pace with the march of events,
and to meet the exigences of the times. They are beginning to feel that doctrines,
the enunciation of which drives the most intelligent part of the community from the
churches or communion as thoughtful unbelievers, may not be so absolutely true after
all. Such doctrines as salvation by faith alone, eternal torments, and others equally
irrational, are gradually, and we believe conscientiously, being left in the background,
while less exceptional and more rational ones are being brought to the front.
This step of a portion of the clergy is one in in the right direction, and every lover
of progress heartily and joyfully bids them God speed in their onward and
essentially upward joumey.f
* We speak approximately with respect to the numbers in the various countries.
t As instances of such tendencies in our neighbourhood, we are credibly informed that a few strong
believers in the old doctrine of eternal torments have seceded from one of the largest congregations in
this city because the pastor did not give sufficient prominence to that doctrine in his ministrations.
With respect to improved sermons, we heard a good one delivered a few months ago in the theatre of


We shall now attempt to answer that frequent, that ever-recurring question put by
the large class of conservative sceptics to the progressive ones—“ What good will it
do to unsettle men’s faith in the superstitious ? It serves, to a certain extent, to keep
the evil passions in check, to act as a muzzle to the brute : if you by your reasoning
sweep this away, what will you give them in its place that shall be equally efficacious
in preventing crime?” This question, so frequently put, ever appeared to us to be, in
spite of its plausibility at first sight, indeed a most monstrous one, and utterly
unworthy to emanate from any thoughtful man ; for it simply amounts to this—that
the moral government of the world can best be carried on through the instrumentality
of a lie!—a conclusion at which the finest feelings of our nature and our sober reason
alike revolt. To believe and practice such a doctrine would be uprooting the very
foundations of morality itself—the systematic propagation or even favoring of error
never yet profitably served the cause of humanity, and it never can. Superstition
has been, and still is, in the different countries of the world systematically used by
numbers of calculating and often well-intentioned men as an engine of religious, civil,
and social government, and certainly has served the purpose to some extent, but a
what a fearful cost—at the cost of men’s mental and moral degradation, irue, it
has kept them within bounds —but as frightened beasts, and not as intelligent beings,
and such a course we hold to be enormously wrong. We would have men honest,
but we would have them intelligently honest; we would have them honest, not trom
superstitious fear, but from principle, from the irresistible dictates of their own
enlightened conscience. It may bo stated as an undeniable proposition that a know-
ledge of the truth is the one thing needful for man’s happiness; therefore, it is
plainly the duty of every man, as much as in him lies, to try to discover truth at all
times, in all places, and under all circumstances ; and when to teach
it to his fellow-man, and never in any case teach him to be true that which he himse t
is convinced is false. Truth is far too sacred to be tampered with at the will or whim
of any man on the miserable plea of expediency. “ Pious frauds ever were
pernicious, and ever will be pernicious, and it is indeed surprising how rational men can
be found in the present day, who, if they do not themselves practice them, yet wink at
them as commendable on the score of expediency. Instead of teaching men false-
hoods and superstitions to prevent them committing crime, instead ot treating
them through life as children, it is wiser, nobler, and in every respect more rightful,
to treat them as rational beings, as brothers —to favor their education in every
possible way, to teach them to expand, to develope their nature, to serve the purpose ot
their being, to become men and vindicate their right as equals in the universal
brotherhood of man. Individually, we feel that to teach anything different from or
short of this is reprehensible, is absolutely wicked. . , ,
Ignorance in all its multitudinous forms is the greatest enemy of man it debases,
enslaves, destroys him; while knowledge elevates, refines, ennobles him, saves im
from innumerable ills, and is destined to indefinitely elevate him in the chain ot
being. Plainly, then, the duty of every man is to assail error wherever he sees it, or
even advisedly thinks he sees it, by all and every rightful means, never fearing that
by striking down the bad that the good will go with it. Sometimes a portion ot the
good may appear to go, but rest assured that the appearance is delusive, tor
“ A charmed life old goodness hath.
The tares will perish—hut the grain
Is not for death.”
It may sometimes be unpleasant, it may sometimes be even dangerous, to oppose
errors long sanctified by time, or held most dearly; but ever remember that it is your
duty as a rational, thinking being, as one who would assist in the cause ot human
progress, as one who would leave the world better than he found it, at every convenient
opportunity to oppose them by every reasonable argument in your power. Ihe
active, earnest, out-spoken, creed-destroying rationalist is not, as some think, the
enemy, but is the greatest friend of mankind; for every error demolished is in
fhia city from the text (Ecless. ix 4.) It was really an intellectual and moral treat, and a fair specimen
of what Ve consider sermons should be. We believe that such sermons are increasing and will increase
more and more as time rolls on.


reality a stone built up in the edifice of eternal truth. The poet I “ pired
when, in his vision of the progress of the error-destroying reformer, he sung
“ I looked—aside the the dust cloud rolled—
The Waster seemed the Builder too;
Up springing from the ruin’d Old,
I saw the New.
“ ’Twas but the ruiu of the bad —
The wasting of the wrong and ill;
Whate’er of good the old time had
Was living still.”
It is frequently urged by those who believe in the divine inspiration of the old faith
that the rationalistic critic would pull down all religion subvert allßeligious tru h,
but this is a most erroneous conclusion. He cannot do that; he may, he w ,
destroy superstition, but he cannot destroy religion ; he may overthrow the historic
credibility of the gospels, banish miracles from history, prove Jesus to berao y
an ordinary man, and the Bible, and every so-called scripture in the "orid, to have
been the work of unassisted men, more or less ignorant, and true religion will no
suffer the slightest damage. Religion is an indestructible ever-flowing emanation
the necessary product of man’s nature. The greatest “JJJ
sublime moral precepts, are but the “natural utterances of the human heart the
sense of right and wrong, the grand, central germ of all religions, of all religious
truth is immutably, eternally fixed in man’s nature, and to destroy it, to overturn
real religion, yon Lst annihilate man Cicero, who lived in the first^cen tury before
Christ speaking of the law of right and wrong implanted in man says- True law
is right reason, conformable to nature, universal, unchangeably eternal whoso
commands urge us to duty, and whose prohibitions restrain us
it enjoins or forbids, the good respect its injunctions, and the wicked treat them
with J indifference. This law cannot be contradicted by any other law, and it is not
liable either to derogation or abrogation. Neither the senate nor the people can gw
us any dispensation for not obeying this universal law of justice,
expositor and interpreter than our own conscience. It is not one thing at Rome and
another thing at Athens-one thing to-day and another to-worroic, but m all times
and nations this universal law must for ever reign eternal and lt is the
sovereign master and emperor of all things-God himself is its author, its
promul-ator, its enforcer, and he who does not obey it flies from himself and does
violence to the very nature of man, and by so doing he will endure the severest
penalties, even if he avoid the other evils which are usually accounted punishments,
viz., the civil punishments of earth, and the assumed corporal tortures of hell.
Cicero on the Commonwealth, book iii. chap. 22.
It is this internal sense of right and wrong that has been the guide of life to the
good men of all times and countries, and punished bad men with a conscwusness of
miilt It is this that made Pythagoras, Socrates, and Plato, Zoroaster, Buddha, and
SnLius Lfgood men that they were; it was this that madeJitus Antonmrss
Pius and Marcus Aurelius, the best men that ever sat on the imperial throne of
Rome much better than the great majority of the Christian emperors. Pounders
Swds may adopt the principle here and there, ally or blend it with superstitions and
cLceitfr/tellus in all sincerity that as favored ones they speciahy received it
from heaven ; but in each and every case it was from man s better nature it emanated,
and from nowhere else. Let any man fairly interrogate his conscience, ohey its
dictates, and he will not go far wrong. Let him in spirit, if not to the letter, adopt as
a rule of life, the following golden maxim of Pythagoras :
<• Let not soft slumber close thine eyes,
Before thou recollectest thrice
Thy train of actions through the day—
< Where have my feet found out their way t
What have I learned where’er I’ve been,
From all I’ve heard, from all I’ve seen r
What know I more that’s worth the knowing r
What have I done that’s worth the doing i
What have I sought that I should shun t
What duty have I left undone V
Or into what new follies run V
These self enquiries are the road
That lead to virtue.”


Let any man sincerely follow such a rule and ho could not possibly be a bad man, and
could all of us but be determined to put it in constant practice, how much better,
holier, happier should we be, and what a different state of society, mentally, morally,
physically, and socially should we have from what at present exists !
And now a few final remarks about the relative claims to our regard of human
reason and revelation. It is continually, dogmatically asserted by the votaries of every
religious creed throughout the world that human knowledge naturally acquired is an
insufficient guide for man’s conduct through life —that it was absolutely necessary for
the welfare of mankind that the Deity should make a supernatural revelation of his
will to man through some favored channel, that they each have such a revelation
peculiarly made to them, that their revelation is an all-sufficient guide, a complete
rule of faith and practice, and that human reason must invariably succumb
when it in any way conflicts with such revelation. Now we hold that human reason
is an all-sufficient guide for man to follow, that human knowledge is the highest and
only knowledge that man possesses, that all that man ever did know, all that he does
know, and all that he can know, will be the result of his observation and reflection;
that in each and every case these so-called divine revelations are no divine revelations
at all, but simply the venerated, sanctified writings and assertions of certain
individuals, more or less ignorant; are simply consecrated human opinions, and that
when they clearly disagree with the sober deductions of human reason, in spite of
their traditional sanctity, they must succumb to it, and not it to them. We hold
that this so-called inspiration has been, and still is, one of the greatest curses that
ever plagued, or does now plague, humanity—it enslaves the mental energy, tends
to smother or pervert every rational thought, every newly-discovered truth, in any
way opposed to its teachings —it perpetually acts as a clog, as a horrible incubus on
the mind, and retards it in its onward and upward progress to its high destinies —it,
more than any other thing, has been the cause of quarrels, bloodshed, and deadly
hatred between man and man in all countries and ages. One man believes in the
revelation of some peculiar tenet, and another man in the revelation of another
tenet quite opposite, and they hate, anathematize, and kill each other, about that
which the unprejudiced reasoner would settle to the satisfaction of both parties in
a few minutes, could they but disbelieve revelation and exercise common sense.
At the present moment these so-called revelations, more than any other thing,
keep men enemies; they destroy alike the peace of households and the amity
of nations, they set brother against brother, father against son, neighbour against
neighbour, community against community, and people against people. Most emphati-
cally, they more than any other cause have retarded and still do retard the unity of
man. The Christian, the Mahometan, the Hindoo and the Buddhist hate and
dispise each other, call each other infidel, and other opprobrious names, and in all
sincerity consign each other to eternal torments, not because they disagree about any
important truths, but about matters in reality absurd or trivial. They each alike
believe and teach that man should do to others as he would wish to be done by, that
he should protect the widow and orphan, give alms to the needy, that he should
be honest, sober, industrious, chaste, humane, just in all his dealings, sincere and
truthful in every thought, word, and deed. These things which the universal
reason, the universal conscience of man holds to be good and true, the Christian, the
Mahometan, the Hindoo, the Buddhist, the Jew, and the men of every other
religious creed are alike agreed upon. All that is really true and good is everywhere
admired by man—it is only the trivialities, the Absurdities, the monstrosities, the
senseless rubbish of these so-called divine revelations that have in the barbarous past
made men cut each other’s throats, and which still more than any other thing makes
them hate and anathematize each other.
It is said that man’s reason is an insufficient guide—that there are things which it
is absolutely necessary that he should know, but which he never could have
discovered by his unassisted reason, and hence the necessity of a supernatural
revelation; but we can see nothing, not one item of knowledge, in the so-called
revelations of the past that could not have been discovered by human reason. And
we hold that it is exceedingly presumptuous in any man to limit the powers of the
human mind, and dogmatically assort that it could not in the past, and more especially


cannot in the future, discover this or that thing. Before any man is justified in doing
this, he must bo personally acquainted in detail with the sum total of human capacity
in the past, and also in the progressive, infinite future, and surely no
man can claim such knowledge as that. How frequently do we hear
persons asserting in the most positive manner that this or that thing can
never be discovered by human research. To instance one thing among the
many, how often is it asserted that man will never be able to fly through the
air! and yet probably nothing in the undiscovered future is more likely to happen.
We firmly believe that the navigation of the air, as successfully as the navigation
of the ocean now is, will be but a thing of to-morrow. If it had been said to the
majority of men, four or five hundred years ago —“ The time will come when men will
be able to tell the distance of the planets, predict to the minute an eclipse of the sun
or moon, years before it happens ; invent machines by the aid of which they can see
a thousand times as far as can be now seen with the naked eye ; others by which they
can shew a drop of clear water with the magnitude of a lake, and teeming with living
animals ; can rise up in the air miles above the ground, send heavy-laden carriages
over the ground faster than the swiftest race-horse, send intelligent messages a
thousand miles a minute, extract teeth, cut off arms and legs, etc., without putting
the patient to the slightest pain”—all these things they would have pronounced
impossible, and yet human research has realized them; ’ and we may reasonably
ask—What man shall attempt to limit it for the future, or pronounce in relation to
its discoveries, the word impossible.
Again and again in depreciation of human reason it is triumphantly asked, “ Canst
thou by searching find out Hod ?” We believe that all that can be known of Hod
must be found out by preception and reflection, by observing facts and reasoning
from them; that man’s original idea of Hod and all that is or ever has been known of him,
has been found out in the same way. True, the men of every religion throughout the
world, each and all, assert that the idea of a Supreme Being was first specially
revealed to them in a supernatural manner ; but we see in this assertion only another
instance of consecrated human opinions. We cannot believe in these darling
egotistical pretensions, but we can and do believe that reasoning men have in different
parts of the world reasoned in a similar manner, and arrived at a similar conclusion
•—that different men have reasoned up from nature to an author of nature, from
design to designer, from effect to cause, and so on to a first cause, or a cause of all
causes—and thus the idea of Hod. Men, more or less ignorant or superstitious, in
the various ages and countries of the world, have amplified this idea of a Supreme
Being, given him various and sometimes contradictory attributes, and surrounded
him with a multiplicity of ministering agents of various forms and natures. But
the grand, central, logical idea, the product purely of the severest reason among them
all, is that from all time there in reality existed a great first cause. It required no
supernatural revelation for men to arrive at such a conclusion—it was the simple,
natural consequence of man’s observing and reasoning at all.
Again, it is frequently asserted by men with little appreciation of the nature and
enormous extent of human discoveries, of what the human mind really has accom-
plished in its search after truth, that man virtually knows nothing, and more
particularly because he is liable to err. They recite some case in which the reasoning
man has been at fault before, and from it draw a sweeping conclusion that he knows
nothing—that, in fact, the sum total of human knowledge is nought. Such a
conclusion is exceedingly erroneous. They are not justified in concluding that because
he has been sometimes deceived that, therefore, he will always be deceived. That he
cannot at once solve all the problems of the universe is true, but that he is increasing
in universal knowledge is equally true, and he would be a bold man who would
pronounce that human knowledge has not vastly progressed within the last few
hundred years, and witli every prospect of progressing in the future in an increased
ratio. Men are not justified in jumping at the conclusion that because man already
does not know everything, that, therefore, he knows nothing. Ho one who is
thoroughly acquainted with the science of astronomy alone could possibly utter so
absurd a thing as that man knows nothing. Hear an astronomer on the subject, one
who knows what he is speaking about. After portraying in ten of the most eloquent,


instructive, and soul-elevating lectures in the English language, the great, sublime,
known truths of astronomy, and shewing the gradual, but heroic, and finally,
successful, struggles of man after the truth, or, in his own words, “ The onward,
steadvt triumphant march of mind in its study and exploration of the universe,
he concludes as follows :—“ Here I must close. The intellectual power of man, as
exhibited in his wonderful achievements among the planetary and stellar worlds, has
thus far been our single object. I have neither turned to the right hand, nor to the
left—commencing with the first mute gaze bestowed upon the heavens, and witdi the
curiosity awakened in that hour of admiration and wonder, we have attempted to follow
rapidly the career of the human mind through the long lapse of six thousand years.
change has this period wrought! Go backwards in imagination to the plains
of Shinar, and stand beside the shepherd astronomer, as he vainly attempts to grasp
the mysteries of the waxing and waning moon, and then enter the sacred precincts ot
yonder temple, devoted to the science of the stars (the Cincinatti observatory.)
Look over its magnificent machinery, examine its space-annihilating instruments,
and ask the sentinel who now keeps his unbroken vigil the nature of his investigations.
Moon, and planet, and sun, and system are left behind. His researches are now.witmn a
sphere to whose confines the eagle glance of the Chaldean never reached. Periods,
and distances, and masses, and motions, are all familiar to him, and could the man
who gazed and pondered six thousand years ago stand beside the man who now ii is
his place, and listen to his teachings, he would listen with awe, inspired by the reve a-
tions of an angel of God. But where does the human mind now stand ? Great as are its
achievements, profoundly as it has penetrated the mysteries of creation, what has been
done is but an infinitesimal portion of what remains to be done. But the examinations
of the past inspire the highest hopes for the future. The movement is one constantly
accelerating and expanding. Look at what has been done during the last hree
hundred years, and answer me to what point will human genius ascend before the
same period shall again roll away ?” —Mitchell’s Orbs of Heaven.
In chemistry, in surgery, in geology, in geography, in mathematics, and in
a hundred other branches of knowledge, as well as in astronomy, determined, earnes
human research has already discovered much that is pre-eminently useful in
instructing, ennobling the mind and mitigating the miseries of man. Man has oiten
been deceived, often drawn wrong conclusions, but his general course has been upward
and onward, and upward and onward again. There is much, an infinite deal that he
does not know, still he knows much, immensely more than he did a tew centuries
ago. True he has had to struggle for it, but for his struggles he has received a positive
and ample reward. It is in the eternal order of things that man obtains knowledge
under difficulties —to arrive at truth he has to toil, and think, and reason, and it
deceived at one time, or baffled in one direction, turn to another; but when the truth
does come it comes as the reward of labour, and is all the more precious lor it.
often seems to us that the difficulties which man has to encounter m arriving at truth
are so beautifully ordered as to form a stepping-stone to intellectual greatness that
difficulties are wisely arranged, that the overcoming of them should dilate the
intellect and ennoble the man. We think that humanity without difficulties to contend
with would stagnate, could never progress in intellectual greatness, or enjoy its highest
felicities—in fact, so certain do we feel that this is the case, that if the question was
put to us—“ Would you receive acknowledge'at this moment gratis, but unearned, or
receive it gradually as the just reward of the labour of discovery ? —wc would
undoubtedly choose the latter, and we think that most reflecting men would do the
same. The gradual discovery of truth by the industrious exercise of the intellect is
truly the most soul-educating power, and the source of a continued, refined and
unspeakable gratification to man. . . , „ , ,
We, therefore, disagree in toto, and cannot but view as virtually the greatest
enemies of their race, those who would stifle or depreciate the use ot the reasoning
faculty in man; for we see in it a power, a sacred agent, that is destined to work out
his salvation, ennoble him, and make him happy ; and we disagree in toto with
those who affirm that because man has sometimes drawn wrong conclusions and does
not know everything that, therefore, he knows nothing. There is much, very niuc i,
which demonstrates that human knowledge at this moment is advancing and expanding


in all directions for human good. Dr. Cairns, in his lecture before the Church
Assembly of Victoria, said that “ the resources of the church were not adequate to cope
with the growing manifestations of the powers of evil, and it must give
way unless supernatural assistance was vouchsafed,” and this is the con-
firmed opinion of many of the orthodox. The progressive rationalist sees no such
growing manifestations of the powers of evil, but he does see the signs of a more
healthful order of things than have obtained in the past. Where the Doctor and
the strictly orthodox look around them and see cause for great sorrow and despon-
dency, the rationalist looks around him and sees much cause for gratification and
hope ; he sees the old, time-honoured, but fearfully pernicious, errors fast dying out
before the power of a rigorous and vigorous criticism; he sees the spread of educa-
cation in all directions among the masses, and thereby the gradual transformation of
vast numbers of human beings from boorish, ignorant, superstitious, unreading,
unthinking creatures, into respectable, rational members of society; he sees the
printing-press, that most important of human discoveries, multiplying, increasing in
perfection, and more and more facilitating the intercourse of mind with mind,
gradually conveying the beautiful, ennobling thoughts of the great men of this and
all other ages to the immediate notice of the masses the world over; he sees rail-
roads, steam navigation, and electric telegraphs, giving facilities for increased
intercommunication, and tying the nations together by mutual interest and
mutual knowledge of, and consequent friendship for, each other —for, after all, upon
closer acquaintance, men find that mentally, morally, and physically they are very
similar to each other on the whole, although living in other countries, speaking other
languages, and even believing in other creeds ; he sees exhibitions of the industry of
all nations, congresses of social science, and increased statistical enquiry of many
kinds, gradually accumulating data for vast improvements in the condition of man,
physically, morally, and socially; he sees that human suffering is more and more
being prevented, by means of the application of human discoveries to cure, alleviate,
or prevent diseases ; that by draining marshes, removing putrefactions, introducing
ventilation, by vaccination, the use of chloroform in surgical operations, and many
other improvements that within the last century in the most civilized countries the
average of human life has increased twenty per cent., while a vast amount of most
acute human suffering has been prevented, he feels that one of the greatest blessings
which man can enjoy is to live in health to a good old age and then depart this life
with scarce an earthly pang, and he sees that by the discovery and application of
knowledge such a consummation is gradually being brought about; he sees the
gradual acknowledgment of individual human rights, the consequent emancipation
of the weaker man from the thraldom of the stronger, the abolition of slavery in
the British possessions, the United States, Brazil, and other countries, and of serfdom
in Russia; he sees the gradual abolition of despotic government and the correspond-
ing spread of representative institutions, of representation according to population,
vote by ballot and universal suffrage; he sees the gradual repeal of cruel and partial
laws, and the enactment of others more humane and more just between man and man ;
he sees more humane feelings and a more universal sympathy with human sufferings
gradually prevailing; a greater number in proportion to population of hospitals,
benevolent asylums for the lunatic, deaf, blind, dumb, maimed, old, and the afflicted
generally, than at any time in the past; he sees more humane prison discipline and
more humane treatment of dumb animals; he sees more humane treatment of
soldiers and sailors, more humane treatment of prisoners of war, and more humanity
in the whole conduct of war generally; he sees that in consequence of the advance
of knowledge and refinement of feeling, that wars are becoming less frequent —in
fact, that men are gradually, but surely, arriving at the conclusion that war altogether
is a mistake, that all disputes should be settled by appeals to the understanding and
not to physical force, which is but brutal, and is as likely to go wrong as right; that
war is not only irrational but inhuman and monstrous in the highest degree ; that
man’s faculties, mental and physical, could and should be better employed than in
compassing the destruction of his fellow man.
The orthodox of the present day looking around him may think that he sees the
“ growing manifestations of the powers of evil,” because of the wholesale decline of


faith in the sanctified traditions of the past; but the rationalist sees that this very
scepticism is a step in the right direction, that it is, indeed, a great blessing, for it
disenthralls the mind and allows it free expansion, and he sees that although there
is a decrease in blind faith there is in reality an increase in good works.
That there is in our present moral and social state much that is objectionable,
much to be deplored, much, very much, still that is wrong, yet we think that he
would bo a bold man who, after he had sat down and fairly considered society in all
its multifarious ramifications, in all its relations and aspects, race with race, grade
with grade, and man with man, who would pronounce that its tone is on the whole
morally lower, or less hopeful, or would even deny that it was more moral and more
hopeful, than it was a century ago, or at any other epoch in the past history of the
world. For ourselves, taking history as a guide, we have no hesitation in asserting
that on the whole the human race is more moral than ever it was, and that an increase
in human knowledge has made it, and is destined to make it more so.
Finally, therefore, we would say to the teachers of the people, and with all affection
and respect, do not in any shape or form, directly, or indirectly, suppress free thought,
however much some of its deductions may, meanwhile, differ from your own ; for by
so doing you would enslave the most Grod-like attribute of, and, indeed, act
detrimental to the best interests of humanity ; allow the utmost freedom of enquiry,
and good only can result from it in the end, whatever at times may be the passing
inconvenience—nay, more, not only allow it but teach it; earnestly exhort men to
think ; no longer let millions of your fellow men remain in ignorance, but one
remove abovg the brute, with their highest faculties undeveloped, while you possess
the influence to prevent it; educate them by every means in your power —it is your
highest, your holiest privilege, your most imperative duty ; exhort them from your
pulpits, and platforms, and studies, not to receive your own or any man’s utterances
as absolute, unquestionable truth, but as far as in them lies, to rationally
examine and see if these things are so; exhort them ever to act to the
best of their knowledge, and continually try to know all they can,
to weigh all systems, to examine all the articles of belief before and after
adoption—to have a faith, but to test it and try it, and try it and test it
again, and if found wanting to discard it; to have a faith, not a forbidding, do-nothing
one, composed entirely of cold, unsocial negations, but a living, vital, positive work-
producing, growing faith, the product of the purest electicism, one that fears not but
courts enquiry—one so rational that not all the powers of the freest and fullest
criticism can shake it, and whose every touch shall but make it shine the brighter.
Such, we believe, is destined to be the universal faith of the future, and we do
indeed look forward with a lively hope, with an undoubting faith, to the time when
men the world over shall concede universal and absolute liberty of thought to each
other ; when the freest and fullest development of the human intellect shall be taught
as the thing most to be desired, as necessary to the perfection of the individual and
to the welfare and eternal progress of humanity at large; when the men of every
race, and creed, and color, and clime, by the exercise of a common intelligence, shall
be irresistibly impelled to join in the one strong universal faith, and become united
in the one strong bond of universal brotherhood.
Please to lend this pamphlet to your friend or neighbour if
you agree with its principles.
Robert Bell, Steam Printer, 97 Little Collins Street East, Melbourne.




Will be published July 20th,
PART II of THE REAL PLACE IN HISTORY; OF JESUS
AND PAUL,
Price Is.; by post Is. 4d.
Also, will bo ready July 20th,
VOL. 1., containing Parts I. and 11. of the above work, complete in
itself, being an unusual review of the Miraculous
History of Jesus.
Octavo, cloth, price Bs. Gd.; by post, 4s. Gd.
Sold by E. W. COLE, 8 Easteen Market, and all Booksellers.
