

VC Z l^'
Se^>—
MESSRS. ANGUS AND ROBERTSON’S
PUBLICATIONS AND ANNOUNCEMENTS.
89 Castlekeagh Street,
SYDNEY, June, 1898.


INDEX.
ALGEBRA—Parts I. and II 13
ARITHMETIC —Class 111 13
ARITHMETIC—CIass IV 13
ARITHMETIC AND MENSURATION
-Class V 13
AUSTRALIAN COPYBOOK .. U-15
AUSTRALIAN LETTERING BOOK .. 12
BEOKE AND JEFFERY THE
MUTINEER .... .. 16
BRACKET (0.) ARCHITECTURAL
AND TRADES DRAWING .. 16
BOAKE (B. H.) WHERE THE DEAD
MEN LIE 2
BOYD (Mrs.) CAUSEBIES FAMILI-
ERES .. ..10
BRENNAN (C.) XXL POEMS .. .. 7
BEE RETON (J. LE GAY) SWEET-
HEART MINE 7
BROWN (Prof. W. J.) WHY FEDE-
RATE?.. 7
CAMERON (W. A.) KEITH HOPE .. 16
CAMPBELL (J.) SIMPLE TESTS FOR
MINERALS 9
CAMPBELL (J.) PROSPECTOR’S
BOX 9
CASE TAKING CARD .. ..■ .. 8
CONWAY (J.) ENGLISH GRAMMAR 16
COMPANION TO SECOND READER 13
COURTENEY (W. T.) LINOGRAPHIC
MANUAL 10
CURRAN (J. MILNE) NOTES AND
TABLES FOR CHEMICAL STU-
DENTS 16
DALEY {VICTOR J.) AT DAWN
AND DUSK 16
DYSON (E.) RHYMES EROM THE
MINES 3
ENGLISH HISTORY-two parts .. 13
EUCLID—Books 1., 11., and HI. .. 13
EUCLID—Books 1.-111. in one vol. .. 13
FARRELL (JOHN) AUSTRALIA TO
ENGLAND 7
GARRAN (R. R.) COMING COMMON-
WEALTH 7
GEOGRAPHY OF AUSTRALASIA .. 13
GEOGRAPHY OP EUROPE, ASIA,&c. 13
GEOGRAPHY OP NEW SOUTH
WALES.. .. .. ..11
GRAMMAR AND DERIVATION BOOK 13
HISTORY OF AUSTRALIA .. ..18
JOSE (A. W.) THE GROWTH OF
THE EMPIRE 6
KNAGQS (Dr. S. T.) HUMAN FADS 9
LAWSON (H.) WHEN THE WORLD
WAS WIDE 3
LAWSON (H) WHILE THE BILLY
BOILS 4
LIVY—Book XXVI 15
LINOGRAPHIC NOTE BOOK .. .. 10
MACK (LOUISE) TEENS .. .. 5
MACK (LOUISE) GIRLS TOGETHER 16
MANUAL OF PUBLIC EXAMINA-
TIONS 16
McBURNEY (Dr) AUSTRALIAN
SONGSTERS 12
MULLINS (Dr.) BRIEF HISTORY OF
SMALLPOX 8
PARKES (Sir H.) AN EMIGRANT’S
HOME LETTERS 7
PATERSON (A. B.) MAN FROM
SNOWY RIVER 2
PATERSON (A. B.) THE BUSHMAN’S
SONG 16
PATERSON (A. B.) LAST WEEK .. 16
PATERSON (A. B.) DAYLIGHT IS
DYING 16
ROWAN (Mrs.) FLOWER - HUNTER
IN QUEENSLAND 6
SONGS PROM “SNOWY RIVER” .. 16
SPELLING BOOKS 13
SPRINGTHORPE AND MULLINS’
DIET LISTS 8
SYDNEY UNIVERSITY CALENDAR 16
TABLE BOOK AND MENTAL
ARITHMETIC 13
TAYLOR (J. M.) GEOGRAPHY OF
NEW SOUTH WALES .. .. 11
WHITPELD (.). M.) SPIRIT OF THE
BUSH FIRE 5
WICKEN (Mrs.) THE KINGSWOOD
COOKERY BOOK 8
WICKEN (Mrs.) LENTEN DISHES ~ 11
WILEY (D. T.) OBJECT LESSONS—
JUNIOR 11
WILEY (D. T.) OBJECT LESSONS—
-SENIOR 16


Ready on Saturday , 2nd July.
At Dawn and Busk: Poems
by Victor J. Daley. Crown
Bvo, cloth gilt, gilt top. Uni-
form with " The Man from
Snowy Riverd Price, ss.
We are glad to he able at last to
definitely announce Mr. Daley s long-promised
volume of verse. Speaking of it, The Bulletin
of June 11th says ;
“ One does not depreciate our prized
hush-balladists in saying that the publication
of Daley s book will be the most memorable
Australian literary event since the publication
of Kendall and Brunton Stephens. Daley has
not the rugged force of Lawson or Boake, but
he has the sense of form which permits to write
nothing bad or ungraceful—he is our classic,
our dexterous master of poetical art.”


THE SNOWY RIVER SERIES.
THE MAN FROM SNOWY RIVER & OTHER VERSES.
By A. B. Paterson.
Fourteenth Thousand. With photogravure portrait and vignette title. Crown
Bvo, cloth, gilt top, os. ; post free, ss. Sd.
The Times : “At his best he compares not unfavourably with the author of
‘ Barrack Room Ballads.’ ”
Pall Mall Gazette : “He shows real poetical power.”
Spectator : “ These lines have the true lyrical cry in them. Eloquent and
ardent verses.”
Athenseum : “ Swinging, rattling ballads of ready humour, ready pathos,
and crowding adventure. . . . Stirring and entertaining ballads about great
rides, in which the lines gallop like the very hoofs of the horses.”
Melbourne Argus: “They have caught the tone and the spirit of Aus-
tralian bush life to perfection.”
The Scotsman : “It has the saving grace of humour, a deal of real
laughter, and a dash of real tears.”
Literary World : “We turn to Mr. Paterson’s roaring muse with instan-
taneous gratitude.”
Glasgow Herald; “ The poet has also a note of pathos, which is always
wholesome.”
Black and White : “ The material is new as the treatment is artistic.”
Westminster Gazette : “ But Australia has produced in Mr. A. B.
Paterson a national poet, whose bush ballads are as distinctly characteristic of the
country as Burns’ poetry is characteristic of Scotland.”
WHERE THE DEAD MEN LIE AND OTHER POEMS.
By Baecroet Henry Boake.
Second Thousand. With portrait and 82 illustrations by Mahony, Lambert, and
Fischer, Crown Bvo, cloth, gilt top, ss. ; post free, 6s sd.
J. Brunton Stephens, in The Bulletin ; “The contents of the volume
amply justify their reproduction in collected form. The impression of native
power is confirmed by reading the poems in bulk. Boake’s work is often praised
for its local colour ; but it has something better than that. It has atmosphere—
Australian atmosphere, that makes you feel the air of the place—breathe the
breath of the life.”
Sydney Morning Herald : “ There is no question, can be none, of the
intimate faithfulness of every touch that gives us landscape atmosphere.”
Sydney Daily Telegraph: “An essential publication, full of human
interest. It is among the most excellently printed and illustrated books issued in
Austra la.”
The Australasian: “There is enough merit in these remains to show
that Boake was, to say the least, a writer of promise, and to make us regret that
his life was cut short in so sad and untimely a manner.”
South Australian Register; “Should be placed upon the shelves of
everyone possessing anything like a library.”
Sydney Mail: “Take it altogether, memoir and poems, the volume is a
human document of fascinating type.”
The Queenslander: “This most entertaining book of poems
contains the true poetic spirit. The memoir is intensely interesting.”
Brisbane Courier: “The verse is racy of the soil, as Australian verse
should be—vivid, full of character, with a certain note of earnest manliness and
sincerity ringing in every line of it.”


THE SNOWY RIVER SERIES.
WHEN THE WORLD WAS WIDE & OTHER VERSES.
By Henry Lawson, Author of “ While the Billy Boils.”
Seventh Thousand. With photogravure portrait and vignette title. Crown Bvo,
cloth, gilt top, ss. ; post free, ss. 6d.
Mr. R. Lb Gallibnnb in The Idler: “ A striking volume of ballad poetry.
A volume to console one for the tantalising postponement of Mr. Kipling’s promised
volume of sea ballads.”
Weekly Chronicle, Newcastle (Eng.): “ Swinging, rhythmic verse.”
Sydney Morning Herald: “The verses have natural vigour, the
writer has a rough, true faculty of characterisation, and the hook is racy of the
soil from cover to cover.”
Melbourne Age: “ ‘ In the Days when the World was Wide and Other
Verses,’ by Henry Lawson, is poetry, and some of it poetry of a very high order.”
Otago Witness; “It were well to have such books upon our shelves .
they are true History.”
New Zealand Herald: “ There is a heart-stirring ring about the verses.”
Bulletin : “ How graphic he is, how natural, how true, how strong.”
New Zealand Weekly Press : “Henry Lawson possesses genius of the
rarest and finest kind, and the reading and re-reading of these collected pieces has
confirmed our faith.”
Brisbane Courier: “Mr. Lawson and Mr. Paterson have captured the
Australian lovers of literature, which is, in the truest sense of the phrase, a native
product. We are proud of these books, which deserve all the good things many
critics have said of them.
RHYMES FROM THE MINES AND OTHER LINES.
By Edward Dyson, Author of “A Golden Shanty.”
Second Thousand. With photogravure portrait and vignette title. Crown Bvo,
cloth, gilt top, 6s. ; post free, ss. 6d,
The Academy: “ Here from within we have the Australian miner com-
plete : the young miner, the old miner, the miner in luck, and the miner out of it,
the miner in love, and the miner in peril. Mr. Dyson knows it all. What we prize
in Mr. Dyson, as in Mr. Lawson, is the presentation of some observed oddity cf
human nature.”
Sydney Morning Herald: “ Mr. Dyson has done 'good work in this
book.”
The Queenslander: “His work has a ring that will always make it
popular in Australia.”
Melbourne Punch: “The mines have wanted a man to sing their
stories, and the hour and the man have arrived. The hour is now, and the man
is Edward Dyson.”
Daily Telegraph ; “Shows the trained intelligence of an observant eye, a
musical ear, and a mind and taste in sympathy with his subject.”
Melbourne Age: “A book that is sure to be read with pleasure, and
especially by those who are familiar with the various phases of life upon the
goldfields, which he depicts in such a sympathetic spirit and with so nice a
perception of their more picturesque aspects.”
The Australasian: “ Thoroughly racy of the soil, and reproduce with
great fidelity many of the rougher and more striking aspects of Australian society.”
Diamond Fie I ds Advertiser (Kimberley): “All the joys and tragedies
of a digger’s life are touched here by a skilful and sympathetic hand. The
entrance of this book into the tents of the diggers would be as a ray of sunshine.”


WHILE THE BILLY BOILS : AUSTRALIAN STORIES
By Henry Lawson,
Author of “In the Days when the World was Wide.”
Tenth Thousand. With eight plates and vignette title by F. P. Mahony.
Crown Svo, cloth, 3s. 6d. ; paper cover, 3s. 6d. ( Postage, 6d.)
The Academy: “ A book of honest, direct, sympathetic, humorous writing
about Australia from within is worth a library of travellers’ tales. Mr. Lawson
shows us what living in the bush really means. The result is a real book—a book
in a hundred. His language is terse, supple, and richly idiomatic.
The Spectator: “In these days when short, dramatic stories are eagerly
looked for, it is strange that one we would venture to call the greatest Australian
writer should be practically unknown in England. Short stories, but biting into
the very heart of the bushman’s life, ruthless in truth, extraordinarily dramatic,
and pathetically uneven ”
The Times : “A collection of short and vigorous studies and stories of
Australian life and character. A little in Bret Harte’s manner, crossed, perhaps,
with that of Guy de Maupassant.”
Westminster Review: “Clever and lifelike Australian sketches that
cannot fail to attract attention.”
Glasgow Weekly Herald: “Short stories of great power and dra-
matic force.”
Black and White: “Marvellously-etched pictures of real bush life.”
The Literary World: “A very striking series of studies of life in Aus-
tralia.”
The Bookman: “ Strong, vivid pictures of camp life and character. The
stories—clever, energetic, and kindly—have some of the best qualities of Bret
Harte’s earliest manner.”
The British Weekly: “He silhouettes a ‘swagman’ in a couple of
pages, and the man is there, alive.”
The Scotsman: “No one could read the book without being interested
and amused by its lively delineations of an adventurous and spirited set of people. ’
Weekly Chronicle. Newcastle (Eng.); “The book will prove a brimming
reservoir of recollections. The reader who knows Australia will lay it down and
sit still and smoke and see %isions ! ’
Melbourne Argus : “No other Australian writer we bring to mind could
do such work as this with more graphic power and certainty of touch.”
Review of Reviews : “ ‘ While the Billy Boils ’ gives him an assured place
amongst the few Australian prose writers.”
The Australasian : “There is both humour and pathos in the volume.”
New Zealand Mail: “The best book on Australian bush life ever pub-
lished, we call it, without the slightest reservation.”
The Queenslander: “We might easily fill several pages of The Queens-
lander wdthout wearying the reader.”
London : Simpkin, Marshall and Co., Ltd.


TEENS. A Story of Australian Schoolgirls.
By Louise Mack,
With li full-page illustrations by F. P. Mahony. Cloth gilt, 3s. 6d. ; post free, is.
N.S.W. Educational Gazette : “The tone of the book is admirable.
It bears the stamp of success on its every page.”
Sydney Morning' Herald : “Ought to be welcome to all who feel the
responsibility of choosing the reading books of the young ... its gaiety,
impulsiveness, and youthfulness will charm them.”
Sydney Daily Telegraph: “Nothing could be more natural, more
sympathetic.”
The Australasian : “ ‘ Teens’ is a pleasantly-written story, very suitable
for a present or a school prize.”
Bulletin : “It is written so well that it could not be written better.”
Review of Reviews : “ The book is pleasantly written, pure in tone,
and ought to delight many girls.”
The Austral Light : “A charming story, true to life, and absolutely
free from the taint of anything that might be considered objectionable by the most
censorious,”
Melbourne Leader : “ Excellent work. Full of fun and girlish frolic, and
in its sympathetic treatment of youthful vivacity exhibits a charm which will be
acknowledged by all.’’
Melbourne Age : “A very creditable production, both as to its matter
and the dress in which it has been sent forth by the publishers.”
Sydney Mail : “An excellent story of schoolgirl life.”
THE SPIRIT OF THE BUSH FIRE AND OTHER
AUSTRALIAN FAIRY TALES.
By J. M. Whitfeld.
With 36 illustrations by G. W. Lambert. Cloth gilt, 3s. 6d. ; post free, is.
N.S.W. Educational Gazette: “Itis a matter for congratulation that
we are gradually building up a child literature all our own, and Miss Whitfeid’s
latest contribution is one of the happiest efforts in that direction. . . . This
bright and readable volume.”
Sydney Morning Herald: “ The youngster will find a delight in Miss
Whitfeld’s marvellous company.”
Daily Telegraph: “We venture to predict that ‘ The Spirit of the Bush
Fire ’ will be the success of the Christmas season among our small people.”
Town and Country Journal : “It is hard to believe that this
fascinating collection owes its origin to the lively imagination and graceful fancy
of a single writer.”
The Catholic Press : “ One of the few Australian fairy books ever pub-
lished, and the best addition to our Christmas literature.”
Review Of Reviews: “ Miss Whitfeld has a pretty gift of fancy, is very
happy in her invention of names, is not without humour, and her book may well
prove a delight to hundreds of Australian households. The illustrations are
exceptionally clever.’’
New Zealand Mail; “Miss Whitfeld writes very well, and we can
answer for it that oldsters as well as youngsters will find delight in her clever little
tales. There is not one of them which does not display considerable pow er of
originality in idea and treatment. Mr. Lambert has provided a series of highly
effective illustrations, and the book is beautifully printed and most tastefully
bound.


THE GROWTH OF THE EMPIRE.
A Handbook to the History of Greater Britain. (Covering- the
period set for the N.S.W. Public Service Examinations,)
By Arthur W. Jose (formerly Scholar of Balliol College, Oxford).
With l'f Maps. Cloth gilt, 7s. 6d.; post free, Bs.
The Sydney Daily Telegraph, in its review, says: “An immense task.
. . . Yet Mr. Jose, by dint of careful condensation, wise selection, and that
clear, yet live, style with which those who know him as a lecturer are already
familiar, has accomplished it with admirable success.”
Town and Country Journal ; “Mr. Jose has given us much more than
a mere narrative; ne has shown us Great Britain as an organic whole, its nature,
the causes that produce it, and the forces that support it. A valuable contribution
to political science,”
New South Wales Educational Gazette; “Mr. Jose has done his
work well, and has succeeded in producing the most useful epitome of the growth
of our Empire for school purposes that has yet been written.”
New Zealand Mail : “Stands out from the ruck of historical works.”
Stock and Station Journal: “Mr. Jose has a thorough grasp of facts,
and a clear and forcible style.”
Cape Argus : “ A very interesting and historically valuable volume.
Times of Natal ; “ A history and a romance in one; reliable and well-
written.”
Cape Times : “Mr. Jose deserves all the credit of an industrious and suc-
cessful pioneer in one of the unappropriated regions of history.”
South Australian Register: “A fine, free-flowing rhetorical style,
frequently rising to real eloquence. . . He never allows his evident love for
picturesqueness in style to cause him to overlook the greatest necessity for accuracy
in detail.”
A FLOWER-HUNTER IN QUEENSLAND AND NEW
ZEALAND.
By Mrs. E. Rowan.
With map of Northern Queensland, and 19 original full-page coloured and
other illustrations. Cloth extra, 7s. 6d.; post free, Bs. Id.
New Zealand Mail: “Written in a graceful style, which is most fasci-
nating. Shows an intimate knowledge of botany, but is never too technical.”
Brisbane Courier : “ There is not an uninteresting page in the whole
book,”
South Australian Advertiser : “ Her descriptions of the luxuriant
vegetation which she studied, of the alligators that studied her . . . are graphic
and altogether effective.”
Otago Witness: “Mrs. Rowan is evidently one of those happy travellers
to whom perils, adventures, and incidents ‘ arrive ’ by the score.”


AUSTRALIA TO ENGLAND: A POEM.
By John Farrell.
Booklet, in envelope ready for posting, Is.; post free, Is. Id.
The Athenaeum ; “A poem at once stronger and more restrained than
Australian poetry is wont to be.”
Pall Mall Gazette: “It is strong, restrained, and definite.”
XXL POEMS. Towards the Source
By Chris. Brennan.
* # * Of 200 copies 150 are for sale ; price, 2s. 6d. each.
SWEETHEART MINE : LYRICS OF LOVE AND
FRIENDSHIP.
By J. Le Gay Brereton.
Gr. Bvo, 2s. 6d. A few copies on large paper. Us.
THE COMING COMMONWEALTH.
An Australian Handbook of Federal Government.
By Robert Randolph Garran, B.A.
Bvo, cloth, 7s. 6d. ; post free, 8s
The Times: “ This useful and interesting book.”
Daily Chronicle: “Mr. Garran has dealt in a lucid manner with the
incidents of Federal Government in especial connection with the question of
Australian Federation.”
The Scotsman: “ It is ably and thoughtfully written.”
AN EMIGRANT’S HOME LETTERS
By Sir Henry Parkes, G.C.M.G.
Crown Bvo, cloth, gilt top, 65. ; post free, 6s. Ud,
The Athenaeum: “The simple and dignified pathos with which the
wretched story of his early struggles is related has touched us more than any book
which has come before us for many days. Beyond almost anything of the kind in
literature.”
Standard: “The book is interesting as a record of self-help as well as a
graphic presentment of the difficulties which beset an almost penniless emigrant to
the Antipodes at the beginning of the Queen’s reign.”
WHY FEDERATE?
By W. Jethro Brown, M.A., LL.D., Professor of Law and Modern
History in the University of Tasmania, and acting Professor
of Law in the Sydney University.
Crown Bvo, hoards, Is.; post free Is. Id


THE KINGSWOOD COOKERY BOOK.
By Mbs. Wicken (late Teacher of Cookery, Technical
College, Sydney.)
Fourth edition, revised and enlarged to 372 pages. Crown Bvo, cloth gilt, Ss. 6d. ;
post free, Us.
Newcastle Morning Herald: “ Mrs. Wicken has long been recognised
as an able exponent of the arc of cooking, and the success of her book is probably
due to the fact that it was written by a practical teacher, of many years’ Australian
experience.”
Sydney Morning Herald: “Her excellent 1 Kingswood Cookery Book’
which is handsomely issued.
Sydney Daily Telegraph : “ This work may be said to fulfil all the re-
quirements of a practical course of instruction.”
Australian Star: “The best Cookery Book that has been published in
Australia.”
Town and Country Journal; “ A real boon to Australian women.”
Maitland Mercury: “The merit of the book is that it is written by a
scientific teacher who has had ten years’ Australian experience.”
Hobart Mercury : “ When in doubt, trump—with Wicken-.”
Austral Light: “When a publication of this kind reaches its fourth
edition it is strong evidence that it meets a public want.”
Adelaide Advertiser ; “ No materials are mentioned which are not easily
procurable, while the quantities in every case are concisely stated.”
Otago Witness; “Altogether the book is both comprehensible and
excellent.”
Christchurch Weekly Press: “ She has had ten years’ experience of
colon’al life, and has adapted the scientific principles of South Kensington to
the requirements of Australasia.”
DIET LISTS FOR AUSTRALIAN MEDICAL
PRACTITIONERS.
CHEAPER EDITION. Cloth, 3s. 6d.; post free, Ss, 9d.
By J. W. Spkingthoepe, M.D., and Geokge Lane Mullins, M.D.
This volume contains 160 Detachable Diet Lists, 12 kinds assorted)
for use in the following cases :
1. Albuminuria 5. Convalescence 9. Gout
2. Anaemia and Debility 6. Diabetes 10. Infant Feeding
3. Biliousness 7. Diarrhoea 11. Phthisis and Wasting Disease
i. Constipation 8. Dyspepsia 12. Pyrexia
The above Diet Lists may also be had bound separately, 50
copies of one kind, in cheque book form, 2s.
Australasian Medical Gazette; “We most warmly recommend this
book as an essential companion to every practitioner in his consulting room and
on his rounds of visits, being, as it is, a very useful means for readily responding
to that often-asked and puzzling question—‘ And what about the diet, Doctor?’”
CASE TAKING CARD for the Use of Students of Medicine at the
Prince Alfred Hospital, University of Sydney, compiled by the
-Clinical Medical Tutor. Cr. 16mo, Is. ; post free, Is. Id.
A BRIEF HISTORY OF SMALLPOX AND VACCINATION
IN NEW SOUTH WALES. By Geokge Lane Mullins,
M.A., M.D. Price, Is.


SIMPLE TESTS FOR MINERALS ; OR, EVERY MAN
HIS OWN ANALYST.
By Joseph Campbell, M.A., F. G.S., M.I.M.E,
Fourth edition, revised and enlarged ( completing the ninth thousand). With
illustrations. Cloth, round corners, 3s. bd. ; post free, 3s. 9d.
Newcastle Morning 1 Herald: “ The book is a thoroughly practical one.”
Bundaberg Star : “A handy and useful book for miners and all interested
in the mining industry.”
Daylesford Advocate : “ A very useful and valuable work.”
Bendigo Evening Mail: “Should be in every prospector’s kit. It
enables any intelligent man to ascertain for himself whether any mineral he may
discover has a commercial value.”
Omeo Standard : “ Exactly the work required.”
Bendigo Advertiser : “ To those engaged in prospecting for minerals
this book should be invaluable.”
Brisbane Telegraph: “ The best book of its class. A safe guide and
true helper to the thousands of men engaged in the search for minerals.”
gueensland Sportsman: “ Everything right up to date.”
yneton Observer: “ Invaluable to prospectors.”
Ballarat Evening Echo: “ Cannot but prove invaluable. . . Com-
pressed, but complete.”
Ballarat Star: “An excellent little work.”
Hobart Mercury: “ It will prove of much practical use,”
Wyalong Star : “ With this book it is possible for miners and prospectors
to test anything which has a commercial value.”
Kalgooriie Miner: “There can be no doubt of the value of this handy
work.”
Otago Witness: “Invaluable, as it enables the merest tyro to identify
any mineral, metal, or precious stones, and as well gives an idea of their
approximate value.”
Havensworth Mining Journal: “The work takes the place of an
experienced analyst, and will prove of great use to miners, prospectors, and others.”
Marlborough (N.Z.) Press: “We can hardly conceive any book more
serviceable to the class for whom it is intended.”
Taranaki Herald (N.Z.): “Will be found most serviceable to pros-
pectors or to persons interested in the development of our mineral resources,”
CAMPBELL’S PROSPECTOR’S EOX.
Polished Deal, 13in. x 6in. x 6in.
PRICE, £2 10s. (postage in N.S.W., 35.; outside N.S.W., 55.)
Contents.— Pocket knife, blowpipe, compressed charcoal, spirit lamp, grease
lamp, platinum wire, glass tubes, test tube holder, magnet, forceps, glass'fllter,
watch glass, packet of filter papers, pestle and mortar, borax, carbonate of soda,
potassium, cyanide, nitric acid, hydrochloric acid, sulphuric acid, ammonia,
sodium chloride (common salt), tartaric acid, potassium ferro-oyanide, quicklime,
caustic potash, bismuth nitrate, spirits of wine, nitrate of cobait, stannous
chloride, ferrous sulphate, sapphire, topaz, and quartz crystal.
HUMAN FADS, FOIBLES, FALLACIES, FALLIBILITIES, &e.
By Samuel T. Knaggs, M.D,
Paper cover, Is.; post free. Is. 2d.


CAUSERIES FAMILIERES ; OR, FRIENDLY CHATS.
A Simple and Deductive French Course. By Mrs. S. C. Boyd.
(Prescribed for use in schools by the Department of Public Instruction, N.S.W.)
Pupils’ Edition, containing all that need be in the hands of the
learner. With 3 plates. Cloth, limp, Is. 6d. ; post free, Is. Bd.
Teachers’ Edition, containing, in addition to the above, grammatical
summaries, exercises, a full treatise on pronunciation, and other
matter for the use of the teacher or of a student without a master.
With 3 plates. Cloth, limp, 2s. 6d. ; post free, 2s. 9d.
Professor Morris, Melbourne University, says: “I have looked into the
two French books, and find them very good. In my humble judgment they are
books with a good method, and the details are well carried out. I like especially
the Australian flavour given to the stories.”
New South Wales Educational Gazette : “In the hands of an
intelligent teacher no more rapid and effective course could be placed in the hands
of beginners. . . . Mrs. Boyd has a definite object in every word and every
phrase. We notice a ‘ Legende Australienne,’ and a Fable, ‘ Les Jaoasses
Rieuses,’ which cannot fail to appeal to sons and daughters of the soil.”
‘Victorian Educational News : “ It is a considerable improvement on
the old style of French courses. Mrs. Boyd’s book will be a powerful aid in the
hands of a good teacher.”
Queensland Educational Journal: “Likely to commend itself to
all teachers who have an ambition that their pupils shall have a command over
living language.”
Stock and Station Journal: “ This is the book we have been waiting
for. . . . Mrs. Boyd’s method is very simple and very rational. . . . There
is not a silly or a dull line in the whole book. . . . Boys and girls w r ho learn
French under Mrs. Boyd’s guidance may consider themselves lucky.”
Bathurst Daily Times ; “The pupil’s eye and ear are alike appealed to;
his daily life, his sympathies, his sense of humour, are ail turned to account.”
Singleton Argus : “ Some of the anecdotes in the book under notice are
illustrated, others are racy of the soil, and all are helpful to the student.”
Sydney Morning Herald: “The merit of this method is that, besides
interesting the child, it offers lines of development which can be followed accord-
ing to the pupil’s capacity and the teacher's. It is also an interesting experiment
in giving young Australian students something familiar, and speaking of their own
country.”
Review of Reviews : “The idea is good, and the execution clever.”
THE LINOGRAPHIC MANUAL.
Being a guide to a new system of Shorthand.
By W. T. Courteney. Cr. Bvo, 3s. ; post free, 3s. 2d.
LINOGRAPHIC NOTE BOOK.
Specially ruled to suit the Linographic Manual, 3d. ; post free, 4d.


GEOGRAPHY OF NEW SOUTH WALES.
By J. M. Taylor, M.A., LL.B.
With 30 illustrations and 2 folding maps. Cr. Bvo, cloth, 2s. 6d. ;
post free, 2s. 9d.
*** Prescribed for use in schools by the Department of Public
Instruction, New South Wales.
Queensland Education Journal: “A mine of thoroughly well
arranged, perfectly accurate, and, for the most part, interesting - information on
the general physical and political features of New South Wales.”
N.S.W. Educational Gazette: '“The Geography of New South
Wales’ is an undoubted success. Mr. Taylor has selected his matter with judgment,
and arranged it in such a manner as to fully satisfy the requirements of our
standards for teachers, pupil teachers, and pupils. There are thirty full-page
illustrations representing.typioal scenes in the colony; and two maps—an excellent
relief map, and a map of the Railways of New South Wales. On the coast of this
map are shown the principal seaports and headlands, with their distances by sea
from Sydney.”
The Australasian: “There are any number of excellent and striking
photo-prints .... commendable features in a school book.”
The Queenslander: “The book embraces within its ISO pages all the
information that a geography should, presented in an easy assimilable form.”
Sydney Morning Herald: “ Something more than a school book; it
is an approach to an ideal geography.”
Newcastle Morning Herald : “ The publication is an excellent one in
every respect.”
Hobart Mercury: “ Well worth the modest half-crown at which it is
sold.”
Austral Light: “Mr. Taylor’s Geography ip really excellent.
It has 32 first-class illustrations.”
WILEY’S AUSTRALIAN OBJECT LESSON BOOK.
Part I. For Infant and Juvenile Classes. With 43 illustrations.
Crown Bvo, cloth, 3s. 6d. ; paper cover, 2s. 6d. ; postage, 4d.
N S W. Educational Gazette : “ Mr. Wiley has wisely adopted the plan
of utilising the services of specialists. The series is remarkably complete, and
practically includes almost everything with which the little learners ought to be
made familiar. Throughout the whole series the lessons have been selected with
judgment and with a due appreciation of the capacity of the pupils for whose use
they are intended. The illustrations (forty-three in number) are admirable.
Teachers should lose no time in placing their orders for this excellent book of
object lessons.”
RECIPES OF LENTEN DISHES.
Containing over 250 useful recipes for preparing Fish, Soups, Vege-
tables, Cakes, Pastry, &c., &c. By Mrs. Wicken, author of
“ The Kingswood Cookery Book.” Cloth, Is. ; post free, Is. 2d.


THE AUSTRALIAN LETTERING BOOK.
Containing the alphabets most useful in Mapping, Exercise Headings, &e. (with
practical applications), Easy Scrolls, Flourishes, Borders, Corners, Rulings, &c.
3% pages. Cloth, limp. Price 6d. ; post free, 7d.
N.S.W, Educational Gazette: “We must, therefore, emphasise the
necessity for neatness and taste in all written work at home and at school, and it
is just here where this little book becomes a valuable aid to the teacher. The most
complete and artistic collection of alphabets ever submitted to the Australian
public.”
Victorian Educational News : “This is one of the best published,
and should be of great use to ever scholar whose exercise books and maps are
ornamented with scroll work, flourishing, or correct printing. The specimens of
simple borders, corners, and rulings, and the exercise headings and scrolls, supply
what we have needed for some time.”
Queensland Education Journal: “Contains some very valuable
hints on the art of lettering in pencils, inks, and oils. , . . Hints and examples
for borders, corners, and rulings are supplied. A neat map, by way of illustrating
how each kind of lettering may be used, is printed, and will do a great deal
towards settling a very desirable model for this purpos.-.”
THE AUSTRALIAN PROGRESSIVE SONGSTER.
Containing graded Songs—the words by A. B. Paterson (author of “ The Man from
Snow’y River”), and others —Rounds and Exercises in Staff Notation,
Tonic Sol-fa, and Numerals, with Musical Theory.
By S. Mcßurnby, Mus. Doc., Fellow T.S.F. College.
No. 1 —For Junior Classes, 40 pages ... Price 6d, ; post free, 7d,
No- 2 —For Senior Classes, 48 pages ... Price 6d. ; post free, 7d.
Numbers I. and 11. combined Price Is. ; post free, Is. 2d.
N-S.W. Educational Gazette: “ Simply and sweetly harmonised. In
the second part the ‘ Song of the Drover ’ is an old and valued friend. ‘ The Bush-
man’s Song,’ by A. B. Paterson, is in quite a new dress so far as the words are
concerned. We also notice the ‘ Flying Gang,’ and the ‘Tale of the Beil Birds,’
by the same talented writer. The musical setting of these songs—and, indeed, of
all the part songs- is tuneful and appropriate.”
Victorian Educational News: “ A special point is that an excellent
selection of songs, rounds, and exercises, distinctive Australian songs, have been
included. At the price it ought to be in the hands of our pupils as an ordinary
school book.”
Queensland Education Journal: “Dr. Moßurney’s name is a
sufficient guarantee that the character of the songs introduced is worthy of place
in, and the trouble of getting them up for, the school repertoire. The songs
chosen are within easy compass, very tuneful, and the harmony is not only well
arranged, but free from those technical disfigurements which are making modern
harmony a torture instead of a help to the melody in the case of children’s vocal
exercises. Much of the poetry of the songs is by the celebrated Australian author,
‘ Banjo.’ ”


ANGUS AND ROBERTSON’S SCHOOL SERIES.
Companion to the Second Reader (now in use in schools
under Department of Public Instruction, N.S.W.), 64 pages, cloth cover. Price, 2d,
Grammar and Derivation Book. 50 pages. Price, 2d.
Table Book and Mental Arithmetic. 34 pages. Price, Id.
Nearly one-half the book is devoted to Mental Arithmetic.
Chief Events and Dates in English History.
In two parts, each 50 pages. Price, 2d. each. PART I. embraces the chief events
and dates from 55 b.o. to 1485 a. d. PART 11. covers the period from Henry VII. (1485
to Victoria (1895).
History of Australia- 40 pages. Price, 2d. The best authorities
have been consulted in the compilation of this work, and information is guaranteed
to be strictly accurate.
History Text-book for N.S.W. Public Service
Examinations. See Jose’s “ Growth of the Empire,” page 6.
Geography. PARTI. Australasia. 50 pages. Price, 2d. Thisisageo-
graphy of the Australian Colonies and New Zealand, together with geographical
definitions and three illustrations.
Geography. PART 11. Europe, Asia, Africa, and America. 50 pages.
Price, 2d With definitions in Mathematical and Physical Geography, and four
illustrations.
Geography of New South Wales. By j. m. Taylor.
See page 11.
Spelling Books. For pupils using Collins’ Second, Third, and Fourth
Australian Readers. Price, 2d. each. These books contain all the difficult words
in each lesson, arranged in order of sequence.
Euclid. Book I. With Definitions, Postulates, Axioms, and general terms
used in Geometry. 54 pages. Price, 2d.
Book 11. With Definitions and Exercises on Books I. and 11. Price, 2d.
Book 111. With the University “ Junior ” papers from 1891 to 1897.
Arithmetic—Home Exercises for Class 111- 48
pages. Price, 2d. This book contains over one thousand exercises. There are
numerous exercises given on the Rules prescribed in the “Standard of Proficiency.”
Answers to above, 2d.
Arithmetic—Home Exercises for Class IV. 57 pages.
Price, 2d. This book contains over thirteen hundred exercises and numerous
“ Exemption Certificate ” Test Questions.
Answers to above, 2d.
Arithmetic and Mensuration—Home Exercises
for Class V. 65 pages. Price, 3d. With the Arithmetic Papers set at the
Sydney University Junior Public Examinations since 1885, together with the Papers
set at a'l the Public Service Examinations to date.
Answers to above, 2d.
Algebra. PART I. Exercises in Notation, Simple Rules, Easy Equations
and Factors. 49 pages. Price, 2d. Contains, nearly nine hundred carefully
graded Exercises, selected from all sources, and thereby giving a greater variety
of questions than is usually found in one Text-book.
Answers to above, 2d.
Algebra- PART 11. To Quadratic Equations. 89 pages. Price, 4d.
Contains nearly twelve hundred Exercises, including the Junior University Papers
from 1888 to 1897 inclusive, and the Public Service Papers of January and
June, 1897.
Answers to above, 4d.


THE AUSTRALIAN COPY BOOK.
Approved by the Departments of Public Instruction, New South
Wales, Queensland and Tasmania, by the Public Service Board
of New South Wales, and by the Chief Inspector of Catholic
Schools.
PRICE
1. Initiatory Short Letters Short
Words.
2. Initiatory—Long Letters—Words.
3. Text—Capitals—Longer Words.
4. Half-Text—Short Sentences.
5. Intermediate Australian and Geo-
graphical Sentences.
6. Small Hand—Double Ruling—Aus-
tralian and Geographical Sentences
—Prefixes and Examples.
2d. Bach.
No.
6a. Text —Half-Text Intermediate—
Small Hand.
7. Small Hand Single Ruling
Maxims—Quotations —Proverbs.
8. Advanced Small Hand—Abbrevi-
ations and Contractions com-
monly met with in commercial
and everyday life.
9. Commercial Terms and Forms—
Addresses.
10. Commercial Forms Correspond-
ence-Addresses.
Numerals are given in each number.
Specimen Sets will be sent post free on receipt of 2s. in stamps
of any Colony,
TESTIMONIALS IN FAVOUR OF
THE AUSTRALIAN COPY BOOK.
The original testimonials may he inspected at the
Publishers’ . In their complete form they are more
telling, hut Our limited space prevents us from printing
them verbatim.
The Style is favoured by the Public Service.
J. W. Holliman, Esq., Secretary, Public Service
Board, Sydney : “I am directed to inform you that the Public
Service Board would be perfectly satisfied if the writing of candi-
dates for employment in the Public Service came up to the standard
as exhibited in the Australian Copy Book.”
W. Houston, Esq., Under-Secretary, Department
of Lands, N.S.W, : “ Most desirable on account of its
legibility,”
Joseph Cook, Esq., Postmaster-General, N.S-W.:
“ Admirably adapted to encourage the formation of a free business
style.”


Business Men Approve of the Style.
Richard Teece, Esq., General Manager, A.M.P.
Society ; “ A thoroughly good commercial style of handwriting.”
J. Russell French, Esq., General Manager, Bank
Of N.S.W.: “ Well calculated to lay the foundation of a good
mercantile handwriting.”
J. C- Remington, Esq., Manager, Mutual Life
Association of Australasia : “A great improvement upon
any I have heretofore seen.”
George Maiden, Esq., General Manager, Golds-
brough, Mort, and Co., Ltd. ; “ A distinct step in the right
direction.”
A. W. Meeks, Esq., General Manager, Messrs,
Gibbs, Bright and Co. : “ The style of writing should develop
a good business hand.”
F. B. Winchcombe, Esq. (Messrs. Winchcombe,
Carson, and Co.) : “ A good, clear, commercial hand.”
Sir George Richard Dibbs, General Manager,
Savings Bank of N.S.W. : “They appear well designed to
give young people a knowledge of a good, clear, business hand.
Wm. Reid, Esq., Secretary, A.J.S. Bank, Ltd.:
“ Excellent judgment shown in carrying out the undertaking.”
P. T. J. Parfitt, Esq., General Manager, Bank of
New Zealand: “Very suitable for general commercial require-
ments.”
A. Hellicar, Esq., Bank of Australasia : “Specially
suitable for banking and commercial bookkeeping and correspon-
dence.”
Wm. H. Hoskins, Esq., General Manager,
Messrs. W. Gardiner and Co. : “ Clear, legible, and
suitable in every way for commercial purposes.”
B. L. Truman, Esq., Secretary, Messrs. Lark,
Sons, and Co., Ltd. : “Should prove a boon to the mercantile
world generally.”
The Annual Writing Competition,
Open to all schools in Australasia, takes place in October
of each year.
Prizes to the value of £63 —including eight gold medals and eight
silver medals—given annually. For Conditions see Copy Books.
Reports of previous competitions, with portraits of medallists,
free on application.
LIVY—Book XXVI With Notes by W. H. Nicholls, B.A.
3s. 6d. ; post free, 3s. 9d. (The text-book prescribed for the
Senior Sydney University Examination of 1898.)


A THE CALENDAR OF THE UNIVERSITY OF SYDNEY
FOR 1898-9. Cloth, 2s. 6d. ; post free, 3s. 2d.
MANUAL OF PUBLIC EXAMINATIONS HELD BY
THE UNIVERSITY OF SYDNEY, 1898-
Is. 6d. ; post free, Is. Bd.
THE BUSHMAN’S SONG. “I’m travelling down the
Castlereagh and I’m a station hand.” Words by A. B. Pater-
son ; music by E. P. Truman. Is. net; post free, Is. 2d.
LAST WEEK. “Oh! the new chum went to the back
block run, but he should have gone there last week.” Humorous
song. Words by A. B. Paterson; music by E. P. Truman.
Is. net; post free, Is. 2d.
DAYLIGHT IS DYING. Words by A. B. Paterson;
music by Rent; Goring-Thomas. Is. net; post free, Is. 2d.
ANN OUN CEMENTS.
Victor J. Daley.
At Dawn and Dusk. Poems by Victor J. Daley. [July 2nd.
Becke and Jeffery.
The Mutineer. By Louis Broke and W. Jeffery. [July 2nd.
William A. Cameron.
Keith Hope- By William A. Cameron. A tale of the
A I Australian backblocks. [Shortly.
Louise Mach.
Girls Together. A sequel to “Teens.” By Louise Mack.
Illustrated by Geo. W. Lambert. [Shortly
David T. Wiley.
Australian Object Lesson Book. Part 11. For Senior
Classes. With numerous illustrations. [Shortly.
J. Conway.
Manual of English Grammar, Composition and
Precis "Writing. ( Uniform with Taylor’s Geography oj New
South Wales.) [Shortly.
Cyril Blacket.
A Course of Instruction in Architectural and
Trades Drawing. Elementary series. 24 hand-coloured
plates, by Cyril Blacket, Lecturer on Architecture and
Building Construction, Technical College, Sydney. Price,
£l2 12s. [Shortly.
Rev. J. Milne Curran.
Notes and Tables for Chemical Students. By Rev. J.
Milne Curran, Lecturer on Geology, Mineralogy and Mining,
Technical College, Sydney. 200 pages, demy Bvo, cloth gilt,
4s. 6d. [July 2nd.
16


I
3 1508 01846557 0


Websdale, Shoosmith and Co., 117 Clarence-street, Sydney.
