

/ fr? ' rb.'rM%A
METHODISM OF
OPPOSED TO
Holy Scripture, Apostolic Order, and
John Wesley:
-
BETWEEN
THE RIMIREND RALPH MANSFIELD
THE REVEREND GEORGE F. MACARTHUR.
WITH
A PREFACE
ILLUSTRATIVE NOTES.
■' F
GEOE;GE HA MAGAETHTJE,
HEAD MASTER OF THE KING'S SCHOOL.
PBICE OITE SHILLIUG.
|)arrama;Ua:
JOHN FERGUSON, “CUMBERLAND TIMES” PRINTING OFFICE.




A PREFACE
WRITTEN
SPECIALLY FOR CHURCHMEN.
I did say that I would not write any Preface to this Pamphlet:
I have since then decided otherwise. The reasons tor this
•course will become apparent as the subject matter of the corres*
pondence is considered.
It is the constant boast of our Politicians that the results of
legislation in Australia have been such as to secure for all re-
ligionists the most unlimited liberty of opinion; and that so
thoroughly is the principle of Toleration accepted by our citizens,
that no one denomination would dream of questioning the right of
another to promulge the specialties of its own polity, whatever they
might be. How far the circumstances of the following cor-
respondence will serve to illustrate the truth of these statements,
I leave others to say.
If it is undoubtedly the great business of every man to seek for, and
obtain, a knowledge of God’s Truth ; if it is his duty to aim at this for
himself, and for those with whom he is brought into contact during his
passage through life; if this is the great business and duty of every
man ; how much more is it the business and the duty of those, who,
by virtue of Education, and Profession, and Commission, are the
authenticated and recognised Teachers and Preachers of God’s
Truth ?
St. Paul exhorts all Christians to “ teach and admonish one
another ” (Col. hi., 16.) ; to “exhort one another,” (Heb. hi., 13). ;
How much more is it the special duty of the Ministers of Christ to
admonish and warn —nay, if need be, to rehulce the transgressors
{l. Tim, v., 20) ?
If it is a necessary duty, from which there is no way of escape,
that every man should endeavour to preserve the Truth of God, as
revealed in Holy Scriptures, pure and unimpaired, how much more
is it the bounden duty of those, who, by Education, Profession, and


Commission, are set apart for this very Office? “It was needful for mo
to write unto you, and exhort you, that yo should earnestly contend
for the Faith which was once (“ hapaxff once for all, only oncej de-
livered unto the saints” (Jude, 3). “ Hold fast the form of sound
words, which thou hast heard of me, in faith and love, which is in
Christ Jesus. That good thing which was committed unt thee,
keep by the Holy Ghost, which dwelleth in us” (2 Tim. i., 13, 14-j,
“ There be some that trouble you, and would pervert the Gospel of
Christ. But though we, or an angel from heaven , preach any other
gospel unto you than that which we have preached unto you,
let him be accursed. As we said before, so say I now again,
if any man preach any other gospel unto you than that ye
have received , let him be accursed” (Gal. I. vii., 8 9). “There
shall he false teachers among you, who privily shall bring in
damnable heresies, even denying the Lord that bought them”
Peter ii,, 1). “If there come any unto you, and bring not
this doctrine, receive him not into your house, neither bid him God
speed” (2 John, 10). “ Beloved, remember ye the words which
were spoken before of the Apostles of our Lord Jesus Christ ;
How that they told you there should be mockers in the last
time, who should walk after their own ungodly lusts — these be
they who separate themselves, sensual, having not the Spirit.
But ye, beloved, building up yourselves on your most holy f th, praying
in the Holy Ghost, keep yourselves in the love of God, looking for
the mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ unto eternal life ” (Jude, 1 7 —21).
From these passages of Holy Scripture (and many others of
similar import might be produced), I conclude that “ false doctrine,
heresy and schism” are grievous calamities both to my own soul
and to the souls of others, and, once having arrived at this conclu-
sion, I maintain that, as a Minister of Christ, I have no option as
to what I ought to do in this matter. lam bound, if Ibe honest
and loyal, “to admonish and exhort ,” and, if need bo, “ rebuke those
who transgress.” “ Woe is unto me if I preach not the Gospel —
Christ’s Gospel, —the Church’s Gospel,—not the Gospel of “ those who
separate themselves ,” that is (so say all the most holy, and learned,
and honest expounders of Scripture), those who “ cause schisms and
divisions by needlessly severing themselves, both in opinion, and con-
versation, and act, from the communion of the One Catholic and
Apostolic Church of Christ, in which we, as Churchmen, profess to
believe every time we rehearse our Creed.
To this condemnation, by the Ministers of the Church, of false
doctrine, heresy and schism, some persons object. They say, that,
if a Minister of Christ declares ONE special phase of opinion to be the
only phase which he can, without sin, entertain and teach, he is ob-
structing the progress of Truth ;heis “ uncharitable he is “male-
volent he is “ rancorous he is “narrow-minded he is “danger-
ous.” They say, that the development of Truth demands /reeinvesti-


fz . Nov.'m
gation and entire freedom of opinion AS A eight and A butt ; They
say, that, “if a Minister of Christ condemns certain heterodox
opinions, he is thereby violating both right and duty ; because, by so
doing, he condemns the very opinions to which some men may
have been conducted by a love of Truth and the sequence of
Inquiry they say, that if a Minister of Christ asserts, in his
teaching, that “ the doctrines of the Church, at whose altars he
serves, are true , and that contrary doctrines are false, he is guilty
of ‘ impertinent assumption ,’ because others may assert the same
thing in favor of their views. So they conclude, that any condemn-
ation of other men’s opinions, by a Minister of Christ, is unjust, and
wrong. I think it will be admitted, that I have done full justice to
the position which my opponents have assumed, nay more, in point
of fact, I have stated their case far more explicitly, and more logically
than they have chosen to do for themselves. Now let us see what
all this really means. Have I anything to say in reply ? Hear me,
and, having heard, then ( not before, as some persons have unrighteously
done), judge me by what I say.
On a matter of this kind we must reason from analogy. Suppose
two men holding diverse opinions, were discussing some question,
other than one in which religious considerations were involved, would
they argue on the supposition that each of them had an equal right
of Truth to assert that his views were true? Would not each of
them argue upon the fact , that there was Truth, and that there was
Falsehood, as well as Opinion, to be considered ? Neither of them
would admit, for a moment, that his adversary had an equal right of
truth to that which he believed himself to- possess : each of them
would condemn the views of the other ; each assuming that he had the
means of ascertaining the Truth. For instance : two men argue as
to the shape of the earth, both of them having — if they choose to use
their Common Sense and Reason — -the means of knowing what its shape
really is : the one says, “It is round the other says, “It is flat. ”
Has the one who asserts its rotundity a right to say, that his oppo-
nent is absolutely wrong ? Or, can he truthfidly say, that he “ might
be right ?” Is it not his duty to maintain and promulgate his own Truth
viz., that the earth is bound, and thereby to condemn the opinions of
his opponent, who says falsely that “it is flat ?” Again : suppose a
learned Botanist —who had the means of knowing, and whose profes-
sion required him to know, that a certain medicinal plant was abso-
lutely poisonous and destructive to life —were to indulge an unin-
formed or ignorant pupil (who also had the means of Icnowing the\
truth, if he would attend to and hear his teacher,) in his preconceived
and prejudiced notion, that it was not only harmless, but good
for food, and, out of “courtesy,” or “policy,” or ideas of
“safety,” he were to disguise, or conceal, the Truth, and allow his pupil
to eat the Poisonous Herb ; would, I ask, that learned Botanist be
doing his duty, or would he not rather be responsible, before God
r/js** /hum
9


and man, for the consequences? Would he not be, in fact, a
m ' Nwflmaintain, on the authority of Holy Scripture and Common
Sense, that in Religion, as well as in Physics and Botany, there is
Truth and there is Falsehood. I maintain, that it is the absolute
duty of all men to seek for Truth, and having found it, to # hold it
fast without wavering Further, I maintain, that the Ministers of
this Truth who, by their Profession and Commission, are its responsible
Teachers and Preachers, are bound UNDER THE MOST a weul ANH
solemn obligations, to declare this Truth ; which, if it be faithfully
done, must of necessity condemn error* and will, by reason ot the
haughtiness of men, provoke the enmity of those who do not receive
the Truth. Is the Minister of God’s Truth therefore not to declare
it ? Is he to allow considerations of “ worldly policy , or of safet ,
to hinder him from declaring the whole counsel of God . is he.to
abandon every sentiment of honor, and love, and duty to his Mast ,
because wicked men may, and will, misrepresent his motives, question
his honesty, falsify his words, and then brand his name with every
opprobrious epithet they can discover ? I will not answer these
questions, for they have been answered for the instruction and en-
couragement of all those who are sent to teach and to preach God s
Truth “ Son of man, thou shalt say unto them, ‘thus saith the Lord
God,’ and they, whether they will hear, or whether they will forbear
(for they are a rebellious house), yet shall know that there
hath been a prophet among them. And thou, Son of man,
be not afraid of them, neither be afraid of their words though
briars and thorns be with thee, , and thou dost dwell among
scorpions ; be not afraid of their words nor be dismayed at
their looks, though they be a rebellious house. And thou shalt
speak my words unto them, whether they will hear, or whether they
will forbear, for they are most rebellious. But thou, son of man,
hear what I say unto thee. Be not thou rebellious like that rebel-
lious house” (Ezekiel ii., 4, 6, 6,7). , -
“ 0 Son of man, I have set thee a watchman unto the house oi
Israel • therefore, thou shalt hear the word at my mouth and warn
them from me. When I say unto the wicked, 0 wicked man, thou
shalt surely die ; if thou dost not speak to warn the wicked from
his way, that wicked man shall die in his iniquity ; but his blood mil
I reguL at thine hand. Nevertheless, if thou warn the wicked of his
way to turn from it; if he do not turn from his way, he shall die in
his iniquity, but thou hast delivered thy soul. (Ezek. xxxiu. 7, o, J.)
What the Ministers of the Church of England have to complain
of, in this matter, is this, that, when actuated by a solemn sense of
duty and of their obligations to the great Head of the Church,
they are compelled, in defence of thevr flocks, to enunciate those
•principles of unity and order, which are essential for the protection of
their people, —lukewarm—or careless—or ignorant Churchmen—in-


stead of strengthening their hands, and encouraging their efforts on
behalf of those who are committed to their charge, and tor whom,
at the great day of the Lord, they will be required to give account,
-actually side with the Separatists, who are notoriously com-
passing heaven and earth to obtain proselytes from the Church
ot England to Dissent. There is not a Clergyman of the Church
of England, who, being engaged in a parochial cure of souls,
lias not got tale upon tale to tell of the unworthy and
underhand way in which it is being attempted to seduce the
children of the Church of England into Dissent; every
kind of effort is being made to capture the unwary. Now i
ask the members of the Church of England whether under these
circumstances, their Clergy are to be blamed for asserting the
duty of a loyal adherence to the Church s order and discipline
If a conscientious Clergyman is not those truths whici
he, as a Churchman, is supposed to accept, and which, most
assuredly, ho is commissioned to teach, »0R what, I ask, was h.s Office
instituted f Is he to administer the Holy Sacraments only and not to
dare to teach, and preach, the whole Truth of God . Has theMmirtry
of the Church of England come to this deplorable degradation . The
Clergy expect opposition and abuse from the Separatists, when t ey
do their duty in these matters ; but, surely, they have A bight o
receive sympathy and support from the members of their own Church.
The efforts of the Clergy are far more enervated and hindered by
the wavering lukewarmness, and indolent listlessness of merely nom-
inal members of the Church, than they are by all the opposition which
comes from without her pale. This is no question of High C urc
versus Low Church; it is no question of Ritualism versus A
decent and orderly method of conducting Divine Service : { But it is
a question of Catholic and Apostolic order the last day
Inventions of those “ who have separated themselves.
Parramatta, if we may judge of its spiritual condition by t o
number of Sects it contains, is, or ought to be, an eminently
religious Town. There are Methodists Wesleyan, Methodists
Primitive, Presbyterians Established Kirk Presbyterians Free
Church, Baptists, Baptists Christian, Baptists Church of God, Freewill
Baptists. Latter Day Saints, Swedenborgians,Unitarians, Irvmgites,
Congregationalists, Lutherans, Germans Evangelical, Quakers, and
Plymouth Brethren. As I give these from memory, there are
probably others that have escaped me. All these claim their right
to preach, teach, and circulate their various and conflicting dogmas,
without let or hindrance. There seems, indeed, to be a sort ot
bond between them, that, in so far as they are concerned, anything
they may choose to say, or do, is to be tolerated and approved
But WOE be to the outspoken Churchman, who shall dare to give
expression to his views of Christian Truth, or to assert those
principles of Ecclesiastical Polity, which distinguish the Church


from the Sects. Let him do so, and forthwith an outcry is raised
that. “ a monstrous wrong has been perpetrated,” and that “ such
audacity and impertinence is intolerable and shameful.'" !!!
What right, say these liberal minded Separatists, what
possible right, can a “ narrow-minded” and “ antiquated” Church-
man have to assert his principles in the august presence of Dissent ?
“ How can he dare to say that he believes Episcopacy to be of Divine
Institution?” “It is all well and right for Dissenters to declare
their dogmas ; but, for a Churchman to set forth and maintain those
of his Church is a dire offence against ‘good manners’ and ‘an in-
vasion’ of the exclusive ‘rights of his peaceable Protestant neigh-
bours.’ ” Such is the style of language which has actually been
held towards me by some of the Dissenters, because I honestly stated
the reasons why I was constrained, our principle, to refuse a subscrip-
tion to the erection of a Primitive Methodist Chapel. It may be
asked, why I felt it to be my duty to express any reasons at all ?
Why could I not have courteously declined without 11 exposing my-
self” to the attacks of those whose capabilities, in a certain faculty ,
most Churchmen understand ? The answer is simply this, —“ Ido
not choose to sail under false colours.” Let me explain. When I
first came to Parramatta in 1869, out of deference to the wishes of the
present Lord Bishop of Sydney , I determined to make myself as use-
ful as I could, in any work of love which seemed to be for good, and
which would not compromise my own principles as a Churchman ;
accordingly I was glad to serve in the cause of the School of Arts, and
other more private matters. An impression gained ground that I
was so liberal, and, I suppose, so utterly unprincipled in my opinions,
that I would go in for anything and everything, I was accordingly
beset with applications for money from all sorts and kinds of people,
whose motives and principles were as wide apart as the poles. I be-
came vexed with myself, for I fancied that I had created the impres-
sion by my own habit of, at least, trying to be kind and civil to all
men ; so I determined, on the first good opportunity , to speak out
firmly, in order that I might no longer be misconstrued. It was
not long before an opportunity arrived in the shape of a note and
printed circular from the Primitive Methodist Minister, asking for a
subscription. His note, which I never regarded, —and which no
sensible man could ever regard, —as a private communication,
forms the first contribution to this correspondence. When I
saw what use the Methodists had made of my letter to Mr.
Dash, —and that a notable champion had been sent forth ostensibly
to attack, but, really to make by-play of me, as a medium
through whom Church principles might, as they thought, be dis-
paraged and Methodism exalted to the skies, —I determined to take
up their Champion’s glove and do battle for the cause of the dear old
Church of England. As to my style —I wrote for those who are either
too Celtic, or too Saxon, to understand those obscure refinements, and


THE CORRESPONDENCE.
(No. 1.)
2, Boundary-street, Parramatta,
August 13th, 1860.
Dear Sir.—l write to ask if you will kindly give a
subscription towards the erection of the Primitive Methodist Church
in this town, the foundation stone of which will be laid on Monday
next The enclosed circular (a) will give you all necessary informa-
tion, and we trust that the object will meet with your sympathy
and’ help. Waiting your reply,
I am, dear Sir, yours, &c.,
J. H. DASH.
Rev. Gr. Macarthur.
(No, 2.)
The King’s School Parramatta,
August 16th, 1870.
To the Rev. J. H. Dash,
Dear Sir, —In reply to your note of the 13th instant
requesting me to subscribe towards the erection of a Primitive
Methodist Chapel in this town, I regret to say that it is out of my
power to do so. lam desirous of cultivating the kindest personal
feelings towards all men ; and I would never allow any religious
differences to mar those sentiments of regard which every Christian
man should cherish towards his neighbor. But beyond this 1 can-
not s-o As a member of the Church of England—whose especial
glory it is to represent in her polity, Apostolic Order no less than
Apostolic Doctrine —it cannot but be that I should hold those P™ 1 -
ciples which you, as a Primitive-Methodist, so worthily represent, to
be entirely opposed to the teaching of my own Church. How tmn
can I in Charity, “which rejoices in the■ truth, encourage the
development of principles which I conscientiously regard to bo
erroneous and hurtful. It is partly for these reasons that I have for,
many years been an opponent of “ state-aid. I hold it to be wiong
(a) The Circular was a printed document, as I have explained at page 20
of this pamphlet. Observe Mr. Dash invites a reply to this Public Circular.


for a Government, under any circumstances, to support and encourag*®
the 'propagation of error, exactly for the same reason that I think it
would be wrong for an individual to assist in doing so. But, if a
Government aids and supports several conflicting systems, it must he
assisting to propagate error, and this is, I am persuaded, a false
position. The theory of a national church is consistent enough,
and, of course, the Government of any nation which had such a
church could, and ought to be its support, But, there is no such
• church here ; nor is it at all probable that there ever will be such :
men are not likely : again to “sell their birthright for a mess of
pottage.” Let us look at this matter of your application to me for a
■ subscription from another point of view :
The Methodists have separated from the Church of their fore-
fathers and gone out from her. Then, they must have adjudged her
to be so far gone in vital error as to justify them in taking so serious
• and responsible a course of action, because nothing but essential error
can justify division. But, they are constantly urging upon all who
lend them ears, that “ there is no great difference between their
teaching and that of the Church of England.” If this be true,
then, surely, there is nothing to justify their separation, —there is no
sufficient cause for “ setting altar against altar, and priest against
priest.” If, on the other hand, there be essential differences, then it
can scarcely be consistent for the Methodists to ask members of the
Church of England to support a system which, if they realise any-
thing of Church principles at all, they believe to be opposed to the
oi’dinances of God. If I can consistently assist the Methodists, who
utterly ignore Holy Orders, why should I not, with equal consistency,
assist the Roman Christians, who have added to the same ? To my
mind there is just as much sin in subtraction, as in addition, when
you apply these processes to the things which are ordained by God.
I hope, dear Sir, you will regard what I have written as a friendly
explanation of the reasons which constrain me to refuse you even a
mite towai'ds the erection of your chapel. To send you a subscrip-
tion would simply be to approve of the principles you represent. I
cannot do this. lam not one of those who, on platforms, address
the representative ministers of Methodism as their “ dear brethren
iu Christ,” and'then, apart from their association, speak hard and
bitter things. If, dear Sir, I could consistently recognise your office
as being that of one “ who was called of God as was Aaron,” nothing
should prevent me from asking you’to exchange pulpits and afford me
the privilege of your sympathy and brotherly love; but, as I cannot
do so, you will, at least, recognise in me one who respects you for
your personal worth, and admires you for your zeal, and who is not
uncharitable enough to refuse your request on a false plea.
May I venture to subscribe myself as your sincere friend,
G. F. MACARTHUR,


(No. 3.)
(To the Editor of the Cumberland Times.)
StR, —I find that some of my friends are under -the im-„
pression that I sent to you for publication the letter which appeared
iu your issue of the 20th iustant, addressed to me, and signed “ G. F. ,
Macarthur. ” I wish to disabuse their minds on this point, other-
wise I had not the slightest intention of taking any notice of it,
whatever, as the letter speaks for itself, and the antiquated notions
therein contained are an insult to common sense. I can only
express my surprise that a man, sustaining the position Mr.
Macarthur does, should let the-enlightened public of this town know,
that he holds opinions so erroneous and unscriptural.
Let me then distinctly say that the letter was published with-
out either my authority or knowledge ; indeed, I knew nothing
whatever about it until I read it in your paper on Saturday morn-
iug*. I suppose that it was sent to you by the person whose
signature it bears.
I am, sir, yours respectfully,
J., H. DASH.,
2 Boundary-street,
To the Rev. G. F. Macarthur, the King's School, Parramatja
Rev. Sir. —A friend has invited my attention to a letter
published in the Cumberland Times of Saturday last, addressed to
the Rev. J. H. Dash [A minister of the Primitive Methodist Church
who had written to Mr. Macarthur soliciting a contribution towards
the erection of a..place of worship in Parramatta] ( b ) and signed with
your name. I have learnt that Mr. Dash had never heard or
seen anything of this letter until it made its appearance in the
newspaper. I am, therefore, free to believe that it was published
by yourself, and that you wrote it for the public rather than for the
gentleman named in its superscription.
Although you here speak ostensibly of a religious body to which
I do not belong, I cannot doubt that most of your readers would
understand you to allude, also, in the main points of your letter, to
the body of. which I am a member —the Wesleyan Methodist
Church. Nor can I ..doubt that suqh allusion was intended. I must
therefore beg permission to say a few words in reference-to those
points.
You state it to be the “ especial glory ” of the Church of which
you are a member “to represent in her polity Apostolic order , no
less than Apostolic doctrine.” The innuendo-obviously is, that this
polity of your Church differs essentially from the polity of Method-,
(b) The passages in Brackets represent the, Foot-notes in Mr. Mansfield’s
subsequent publication.


xsm. I meet the innuendo by affirming that Apostolic order, not less
than Apostolic doctrine, is the especial glory of the Church of
which lam a member. The Wesleyan Methodist Church holds that
the authority of her Ministers to preach the doctrines which the
Apostles taught, is founded on the scripturally attested and duly
recognised fact of their having been called to the office ani work
of the Ministry by the same Divine Spirit which called the Apostles
to that office and work. ,
You allege that “ the Methodists have separated from the Churcb
of their forefathers, and gone out from her.” As regards my own
Church I must be allowed to attribute this assertion to a miscon-
ception’ of historical facts. Our venerable father in Cod, the Rev.
John Wesley, was indeed a member and a Minister of the Church
of England, and never “separated” or “went out” from her ; but
was rudely ejected from her pulpits, and despitefully used and
persecuted by not a few of her dignitaries. If the bond of fellowship
between her and him was broken, it was broken by herself. Nor
did the Wesleyan Methodist Church ever “ separate ” or “ go out
fro m the Church of England, for to that Church she never belonged.
Of her original members, some no doubt had been accustomed to
attend the°services of the Church by law established ; others might
have been connected with the various nonconformist churches of the
day ■ but the history of her early times abundantly shows that the
e-reat bulk of them had belonged to no Church at all, but were
gathered by the instrumentality of Mr. Wesley and his fellow laborers
from the moral wastes of the world. .
In thus addressing you, Sir, I would wish not to be misunderstood.
Ido not complain of your having written this letter, [meaning, not
that I approved of his having written it, but that his having written
it was not the point to which I was then addressing myself,] but I
think you ought not to have published it. _ I cannot see that the
circumstances called for such a step ; and it appears to me that in
takino- such a step, you went out of your way to wound the feelings
of many of your peaceful and unoffending neighbors.
I am. Rev. Sir, your obedient servant,
R. MANSFIELD.
Hanley Villa, Parramatta, 24th August, 1870.
(No. 4.)
To the Rev. Ralph Mansfield.
Reverend Sir, — I should be sorry, indeed, to wound the
feelings of any one of my “peaceful and unoffending neighbors,”
nor can I see why so temperate a letter, as mine to Mr. Dash un-
doubtedly was, should have had that effect.


You, Reverend sir, whose time and energies are sedulously de-
voted to the affairs of so important a Company, as that is, which
supplies the Metropolis with Gas, can scarcely be in a position to
know, or appreciate, the circumstances which induced me to publish
my letter to Mr. Dash, or to advise as to the propriety of my not
publishing , however much I might be justified in writing it. I,
being cognisant of all the circumstances, think that they did call for
such a step. You, being entirely ignorant of them, think that they
did not. All I need say on this point is, that the circumstances
which induced the publication of my letter are such as seriously
affect my responsibilities as a clergyman of the Church of England,
and, in these matters, man’s judgment is to me of little moment,
to my own Master I stand, or fall. I should be very sorry to think
that my neighbors in Parramatta cannot bear the temperate
discussion of any subject without their “ feelings being wounded,’
but, if it be so, nevertheless, the truth must be spoken. And why,
Reverend sir, if it be spoken in love, should it wound even the most
sensitive mind ? My neighbor and I may disagree on such
questions—we may oppose each other at every tarn, where oar
diverse views are cmcerned, but, surely we need not quarrel. St.
Peter and St. Paul —inspired apostles —■ withstood each other “to
the face,” but their charity did not fail. Wny, then, should my
neighbors be wounded because I withstand them to the face
on a matter of principle ? You, surely, reverend sir, do not mean
to imply, by your censure of me, that we are to be peaceable at the
cost of truth. My Bible tells me to be first pare, then peaceable ;
and I mean, God helping, to’ obey my Bible in this, as in all other
matters. I mean to speak out boldly and truthfully, but I do not
desire, nor do I need, to wound any reasonable man’s feelings. If
TRUTH wounds his feelings, perhaps it is the best thing that ever
happened to him—it may arouse him to “prove all things, and,
having done so, to “ hold fast that which is good.” Row, as you are
a business man, let us go to business, but pray do not allow
anything I may write to “ wound your feelings.” I will simply state
what I believe to be truth : you can set me right if I am wrong :
lam open to conviction. There is no knowing how many of us
antiguated Churchmen you may convert to Methodism ; but I tell
you honestly that I wish to keep our Church people from either going
to, or supporting your Methodist Chapels. I know, as a fact, that your
agents are trying to proselytise our people in every possible way,
and I am convinced that our duty, our solemn duty, as Ministers of
Christ and clergymen of the Church of England, is to speak out
boldly on this point of fellowship. I am not going to allow my
trumpet to blow any uncertain sound on this question. I intend to
be clearly understood on this “ main point ” of our differences with
the Methodists. The Church of England has everything to lose and


nothing to gain by reticence. Her reticence — which' in nine caeet ■
out of ten has arisen from. a mistaken view of charity —has been
interpreted to imply weakness, and many a one has been misled by
plausible, but most unscriptural and erroneous statements —it has
been assumed that, because the clergy have been charitably silent,
they must be egregiously wrong.
Allow me, then, Reverend sir, to inform you that your inference
as to the letter, which bears my signature in the Cumberland Times
of the 20th ultimo, having been published by me, and of its having
been written rather for the public than for Mr. Dash, is, in a great
measure, correct. Perhaps it would be more correct to say that it
was published rather for the consideration of members of the Church
of England, than for the information of that reverend gentleman.
But it is not correct to conclude that Mr. Dash knew nothing of its
publication, because I wrote to that gentleman and informed him :
that, as his letter to me applying for a subscription to the Primitive
Methodist Chapel involved a matter of public principle, I intended to
reply to his application through the public prints, and I directed his
attention to the “ Cumberland Times ” for such reply. My letter to
him was posted on the Friday prior to the publication mn the
following Saturday. How that gentleman then could, several days
after the receipt of my private letter to him, write thus : —“ I
suppose that it was sent to you (the Tomes) by the person whose
name it bears,” is very strange, to say the least of it, because if he
received my letter (I have proof that he did so) he must have known
that I sent it long before he wrote those words. Did he intend the
public to “ suppose ” that. I had never communicated my intention to
him ? If so, I have done with Mr. Dash, and am more content than
ever to prefer those {£ antiquated notions of truth, ’ which he affects
to despise, to all his modern religious developments, which, in this
case, have well nigh led him into something which I do not care to
characterize. You are perfectly correct in having inferred that the
main point of my letter included Wesleyan Methodists, although I
by no means intended to limit the effect of what I wrote to them.
Ido not think that I merely implied by innuendo, that the polity of
the Church of England differed essentially from the polity of
Methodism ; my impression is that I asserted that it did so ; at least
if I did not assert it then, I do so now, and this is one of the main
points upon which I desire my trumpet to blow a very clear sound.
I wish Churchmen to know that there is a difference, yes, an essential
difference, which ought —if they are consistent and loyal members
of the Church of England —to prevent them from assisting a cause
which is not only diametrically opposed to the teaching of their own
Church, but also to the teaching of Holy Scripture, as witnessed by
the uniform constitution of the Catholic Church for 1500 years after
Christ. It has been, and still is, a method with the Methodists to


endeavour to lead uninformed members of the Church of England to
suppose that there are no “ main points” of difference between their
own Church and Methodism, and, as a means towards this end, they
have adopted the Common Prayer Book of the Church of England,
taking care, at the same time, to emasculate it of every expression,
and every service, which indicates the distinctive polity of the Church
as a firm, and uncompromising witness, and keeper of the Divinely
appointed Orders of Bishops, Priests, and Deacons. As a Clergyman
of the Church of England and a Minister of the Gospel of Christ, I
believe it to be the bounden duty of the Clergy to teach that the three-
fold orders of Bishops, Priests, and Deacons, are an element in the
Divine Economy— and that it is their bounden duty to insist on their
being scrupulously retained. “Let us not fear, ’ says tne judicious
Hooker, “to be herein bold and peremptory, and if -anything in the
Church’s government, surely the first institution of Bishops^was fiom
heaven, even of God, the ftoly Ghost was the Author of it. When,
then, Rev. sir, you affirm that Apostolic order , not less than Apos-
tolic doctrine is the especial glory of Wesleyan Methodism, I reply
to you in the words of the same judicious Hooker, and say, We
require you to find out ONE Church upon the face of the whole earth
that hath not been ordained by the Episcopal Regiment since the
time that the blessed Apostles were here conversant.” I reply to
you, in the words of Grotius, “ Episcopatus est ab Ecclesia Universal!
receptus; initium habuit ab Apostolicis temporibus, et Divino judicio
est approbatus .” I appeal to the maxim of Chief Justice Coke,
“Consuetude optimus legum interpres : Contemporanea expositio
optimaand then, I am bold to assert, with no doubtful trumpet
sound, that, “No example, before our age, can be showed that ever
the Church of Christ, in any place, or time, since the Apostles
died, had any other form of government, than by Bishops
succeeding, and ruling, as well the Presbyters, as the people that
were under them.” “Scire debes Episcopum in Ecclesia esse, et
Ecclesiam in Episcopo, ” says Cyprian, and when you affirm that
“ the Wesleyan Methodist Church holds that the authority of her
ministers to preach the doctrines which the taught, is
founded on the scripturally attested and duly recognized fact of
their having been called to the work of the ministry by the same
Divine Spirit which called the Apostles to that office and work,
I reply that it is nothing to the question what Wesleyan Methodism
holds—or does not hold —we must have proof of the which
is merely assumed. We deny that their authority is “ scripturally
attested and duly recognised. ” The Divine call per se was never
regarded as a sufficient authority. Aaron was not only called of
God but, at God's own express command, was visibly ordained by
Moses. Even Christ glorified not Himself to be made an High
Priest : He did not enter on His Ministry until he was visibly and


audibly commissioned to do so. And in the same way Ihe Twelve
were chosen and sent by him. St. Paul says of the Christian Min.
i ß t r y_“ How shall they preach except they be sent?” “No man
taketh this honour to himself, but he that is called of God, as was
Aaron and St. Jude distinctly tells us, that in the days
there shall be those who “ perish in the gainsaying of Core.”
In maintaining these “ points ” we are not guilty of any want of
Charity. ...
“ Veritas est maxima Caritas ” Truth is the greatest Charity; it is
no charity to assist in the propagation of error, or to suppress truth.
True charity seeks to remove error and maintain truth. Even
Calvin could write —“ Episcopatus a Deo profectus est ; Episcopi
munus Dei auctoritate constitutum est, et legibus definitum.
I will now, with your permission, set forth the actual teaching
of the Church of England on this subject and proceed to show what
the great and good John Wesley thought and taught in reference
thereto. This will enable us to see how far the Wesleyan Methodists
of these days have any moral right to claim John Wesley as the
founder of their present distinctive system ; and how far you, Rev,
sir, are historically correct when you say that the Wesleyans did
not separate from the Church of England.’
I.—The Church’s Trumpet.
Art : XIX. Of the Church.
The visible Church of Christ is a congregation of faithful men
in which the pure Word of God is preached, and the Sacraments he
duly ministered according to Christ s ordinance in all those things that
of necessity are requisite to the same.
Art : XXII. Of Ministering to the Congregation.
It is not lawful for any man to take upon him the office of
publick preaching or ministering the Sacraments in the Congrega-
tion, before he be lawfully called, and sent to execute the same.
And. 7 those we ought to judge lawfully called and sent, which be
chosen and called to this work hy men who have public authority
given unto them in the Congregation, to call and send Ministers into the
Lord's Vineyard.
The Preface to the Ordinal,
It is evident unto all men diligently reading the Holy Scripture
and ancient authors, that from the Apostle's time there have been
these orders of Ministers in Christ's Church ; Bishops, Priests, and
Deacons. Which offices were evermore had in such reverend esti-
mation, that no man might presume to execute any of them, except
he were first called, tried, examined, and known to have such
qualities as are requisite for the same; and also by publick prayer,
with imposition of hands, were approved and admitted thereunto by
lawful authority And therefore, to the intent that these orders


may be continued, and reverently used and esteemed, in the United
Church of England and Ireland ; no man shall be accounted or
taken to be a lawful Bishop, Priest, or Deacon in the United Church
of England and Ireland, or suffered to execute any of the said
functions, except he be called, tried and examined, and admitted
thereunto, according to the form hereafter follow ing, or hath had
formerly Episcopal Consecration or Ordination.
So much for the teaching of the Church; now, if it be not
presumption, allow me to sound
II. — John Wesley’s Trumpet,
In Sermon cxv., (vol. iii., of his “ Sermons on several occasions,”
published by John Mason, London, 1847;) he says —“In ancient
times the office of Priest, and that of a Preacher, were known to be
entirely distinct.” “I cannot prove from any part of the New
Testament, or from any author of thq three first centuries, that the
office of an Evangelist was the same with that of a Pastor, frequently
called a Bishop. In 1744, all the Methodist preachers had their first
conference ; hut none of them dreamed that the being called to preach
gave them any right to administer the Sacraments. Did we ever
appoint you to administer the Sacraments ? To exercise the Priestly
office ? Such a design never entered into our mind; and it was the
farthest from our thoughts; and if any preacher had taken such a step
we should have looked upon it as a palpable breach of this rule, and
consequently as a recantation of our connexion.” (The rule of
Conference was, that they should do that part of the work which was
appointed.) “It was several years after our society was formed
before any attempt of this kind was made. The first was, I appre-
hend, at Norwich, one of our preachers there yielded to the impor-
tunity of a few of the people, and baptised their children. But as
soon as it was known he was informed that it must not be, unless he
designed to leave our connexion. He promised to do it no more, and
I suppose, he kept his promise. Now as long as the Methodists heep
to this plan they cannot separate from the Church , and this is OUB
PECULIAR GLORY. The Methodists are not a sect or party, they do
not separate from the Church to which they at first belonged. They
are still members of the Church; such they desire to live and die.
And, I believe, one reason why God is pleased to continue my life so
long is to confirm them in their present purpose not to separate from the
Church. I dare not separate from the Church, I believe it would be a
sin to do so.”
“It does not follow from hence” ( [i.e ., because God had called them
to preach,) “that ye are commissioned to baptise, or administer the
Lord’s Supper. Ye never dreamed of this for ten or twenty years
after ye began to preach. Ye did not then, like Korah, Dathan, and
Abiram, seek the Priesthood also. Ye know no man taketh this
honor to himself ; but he that is called of God as was Aaron. 0


contain yourselves within your own bounds. I earnestly advise you
abide in your own station; in God’s name stop there.”
Now, Rev. Sir, I ask how far the Wesleyan Methodism of 1870 is
consistent with such teaching 1 as that which I have just quoted ? I
ask how far the Methodists of 1870, —who do take upon themselves to
administer the Sacraments; who, in every sense of the phrase, set
“altar against altar, and Priest against Priest,” —can have any moral
right to call the great and good man, whose words must rise up
in judgment against them to condemn them, their Founder ?
Beecham in his life of Wesley, says: “There is not, indeed, so
much of formal union between the Methodists and the Church as in
Mr. Wesley’s day. The general introduction of the Sacrament of
the Lord’s Supper, a measure which MR. WESLEY STRENUOUSLY
OPPOSED TO THE LAST, has certainly made the separation
between his followers and the Church more visible; but this was
not the result of hostility to the Church, nor for the reasons usually
urged by the Dissenters. The separation which subsists between
the Methodists and the National Church was rather the result of cir-
cumstances.” And, yet, Reverend Sir, you are bold enough to affirm
that “the Wesleyan Methodist Church never did ‘separate’ or ‘go
out’ from the Church of England, ‘for to that Church,’ so you say,
“she never belonged,” and to charge me with a misconception of
history, because I asserted that, which all history justifies, namely,
“that the Methodists separated from the Church of their forefathers'
for no sufficient cause.” There was no “hostility:” it was simply
“circumstances,” and it took place “so as to leave unimpaired the
general feeling of affection on the part of the Methodists, for all
that is excellent in the Establishment. That feeling has strength-
ened as the number of Evangelical laborious Ministers has increased
in the Church, and her services have thus increased in spirituality
and efficiency.”
“Recognising in her ‘the Mother of US all,” and contemplating
with the deepest admiration her noble army of Confessors and Martyrs,
and the illustrious train of her Divines, whose writings have been,
and continue to be, the light of Christendom, the followers of Mr.
Wesley wish the National Church prosperity and perpetuity.”—
(Beecham’s life of Wesley, page 49.)
So then, Reverend Su*, this Church of England, from which I
saj the Methodists separated, is, according to one of your illustrious
Divines, the Mother of all Methodists, and a right good mother, too.
Of course you do not believe in Mr. Beecham’s statements; but, as
he is admittedly one of your best, and most trusted men, and as his
“Life of Wesley” is one of your —may I not say our —standard
books, I have a perfect right to receive and make use of his state-
ments, as being truthfully representative of Wesleyan history.
Now, permit me, with Beecham’s description of the Church of
England before me, to sound John Wesley’s trumpet once more
before I close this letter.


“ These things being considered, it is easy to answer that ques-
tion, ‘ What is the Church of England ? ’ It is that part, those
members of the Universal Church who are inhabitants of England,
The Church of England is that body of men in England in whom
there is one Spirit, one Hope, one Lord, one Faith ; which have one
Baptism, and one God and Father of us all. This, and this alone, is
the Church of England, according to the doctrine of the Apostles, ”
Sermon LXXIV., Yol. 11. Then in his sermon on Schism —LXXV.,
Vol. 11., he says, —“ Suppose, for instance, you were a member of
the Church of Rome, and you could not remain therein without
committing idolatry ; without worshipping idols, whether images or
saints, or angels ; then it would be your bounden duty to leave that
community, totally to separate from it. Suppose you could not
remain in the Church of England without doing something which
the word of God forbids, or omitting something which the word of
God positively demands ; if this were- the case (but blessed be God it
is not,) you ought to separate from the Church of England. I will
make the case my own r I am now, and have been from my youth,
a member and a Minister of the Church of England, and I have no
desire nor design to separate from it, till my soul separates from
my body. Yet, if I was not permitted to remain therein without
omitting what God requires me to do, it would then become meet
and right, and my bounden duty to separate from it without delay.
To be more particular, I know God has committed to me a dispen-
sation of the Gospel : yea and my own salvation depends upon
preaching it. Woe is unto me if I preach not the Gospel, * * *
“ But suppose the Church, or society, to which I am now united
does not require me to do anything which the Scripture forbids, or
to omit any thing which the Scripture enjoins, it is then my indispen-
sable duty to continue therein ; and if I separate from it without any
such necessity ” —(let Beecham’s evidence, as quoted above, show
whether there was any necessity), —“ lam justly chargeable (whether
I foresaw them or not), with all the evils consequent upon that
separation. ”
I have, Reverend Sir, a great veneration for John Wesley, and I
wish the members of the Church of England in Parramatta to know
more about him. Many, very many of them, have been taught to
regard him as the founder of the Wesleyan Methodism of 1870, and
I am grateful for the opportunity which was afforded me by Mr,
Dash for setting them right in this matter. Indeed, lam persuaded
that it would do a great deal of good if Wesley’s three sermons —
on the Church, on the Ministerial Office, and on Schism—were
circulated among the members of the Church of England through-
out the country. If any teachings could impress them with feelings
of loyal love to their Church, and convince them of the “sin”
(Wesley’s word) of Schism, I do think that Wesley’s teaching
would be more likely than any other to produce so desirable a


result. It is not very long since one of the leading Wesleyans in
this town, one for whom I entertain a warm and sincere personal
regard, went out of his way to express regret that the same friendly
communion, which existed between the Clergy of the Church of
England and the Ministers of the Methodist Connexion in years
gone by, had ceased. He implied that the blame —if blame there be
—attached to the clergy of the Church ; now, I venture to say that,
if the Methodists had remained faithful to their original principles—
if they had continued “as extraordinary messengers, raised up to
provoke ordinary ones to jealousy ” —and if as such they had limited
their work “to the casting out of devils,” and refrained from the
usurpation “of the priestly office;” against which Wesley so
earnestly warned them ; —if, I say, they had acted thus, the estrange-
ment, which does, and must exist, under the changed state of affairs
—for which they alone are responsible —would never have been
realized. I, for one, regret it more than I can express, but I feel
sure that could John Wesley now speak to us, he would not be so
unjust as to charge the Clergy of the Church of England with the
“ evils consequent upon a separation,” which was neither expedient
nor necessary.
With every assurance of that sincere regard which St, Paul felt
for St. Peter, even when he withstood him to his face, allow me,
Reverend Sir, whose duty it is to withstand you, to subscribe myself
as yours in love,
GEO. F. MACARTHUR.
(No. 5.)
To the Rev, G. F, Macarthtjr.
Reverend Sir. — l have read with attention your long letter
in the Cumberland Times of last week. My chief object in doing so
was to see whether you had justified, or explained, or regretted, in
a way that I could deem satisfactory, the improper act which had
induced me to address you. You have done neither. Your explana-
tion is an open avowal of the fact of which previously I had only
circumstantial proof; and your attempt at justification is a pitiable
failure.
In contempt of the well understood usages which regulate the
intercourse of gentlemen, you had answered a private letter (c)
(c.) Touching this so-called “private note” —my public reply to which Mr.
Mansfield professes to regard with so much virtuous indignation. Now that he
has expended all his ire at my ignorance “of the usages which regulate the
intercourse of gentlemen,” let me state that the so-called 'private note, to which
I replied in the Cumberland Times, was a Feinted Circular which had been
distributed far and wide throughout Parramatta. This Printed Circular was


without its author’s consent, through the columns of a newspaper.
You have not justified that. You had made your unauthorised
answer the weapon of attack upon the religious tenets of many of
your peaceable neighbours. You have not justified that.
Instead, indeed, of either justifying or apologising, you have
repeated the offence in another form, and in more amplified detail,
and in more insulting terms ; and have attempted to unchurch not
only the religious communion of which I am a member, but every
religious communion in the world which does not submit to your
own narrow dogma of priestly succession.
From the gentleman with whose private letter you have taken
so unwarrantable a liberty, you have turned upon the humble
individual who had publicly dealt you what he thought, and still
thinks, a well merited rebuke. And you have turned upon me as
if the main question between us was one of creeds and systems of
Church government; while the question demanding your attention
related to your own conduct. Admitting all you say about creeds
and Church government, what can be said of your unprovoked
onslaught on the religious concerns of your neighbours, dealing
your “ apostolic blows and knocks ” right and left, in reply to a
civil private note ? Was such conduct becoming a Christian gentle-
man, a Christian minister, and the Head Master of a school for
Christian youth ? That is the point; and upon that point I think
there are not many persons, either in your own Church or in any
other, who will differ with me in the opinion that you had “ gone
out of your way,” made a grievous mistake, and ought to be heartily
sorry.
Of your flippant remarks upon my own Church, my former letter
adverted to two points. You had insinuated that while she might
glory in Apostolic doctrine, she did not or could not glory in Apos-
tolic order. I met your insinuation by affirming that she gloried in
both. For insinuation you now substitute direct assertion, and you
will have it that her glorying is vain; that all the glory belongs to
your own Church, and not a glimmer of it to mine.
You have charged the Methodists with having forsaken the
Church of their forefathers. I attributed your charge, in so far as
it was aimed at my own Church, to a misconception of historical
facts. You reply by quotations which prove one part of my case,
but do not disprove the other. They prove that Mr. Wesley had not
himself separated from the Church of England, and was unwilling
that any of his adherents (such of them, that is, as had been wont
enclosed in the note, which forms No. 1. of the Correspondence, and which, no
doubt, was written by Mr. Dash to insure my attention to the Circular. My
letter to Mr. Dash (No. 2.) acknowledged the note and replied to the Circular'—
a reprint of the Circular will be found at the end of the Correspondence —from
which it will be seen that the Primitive Methodists expect to raise six out of
seven hundred pounds by appealing to the sympathies of those who neither
belong to their Society, nor approve of their views.


to attend her services) should take a course different from his own ;
although he did not hesitate to acknowledge, “The Uninterrupted
Succession which I know to be a fable, which no man ever did or can
p rove ” — an acknowledgment which perhaps you did not find it
convenient to quote. But your quotations do not disprove my asser-
tion that the Wesleyan Methodist Church had never separated from
the Church of England, seeing that to that Church she had never
belonged. _
But suppose you had disproved it. What then? Had she not a
right to separate if she thought proper to do so ? Had she not as
good a right to separate from your Church, as your Church had to-
separate from the Church of her forefathers ? (d) And if it was right
pjy I vvill not here accuse my correspondent of a “ misconception’’ of history
but Ido charge him with an “ ignorance” of history. The Church of England
never separated from the Church of her forefathers ; nor did she ‘ come out
of the Church ot Rome at the time of the Reformation. Ihe facts of the case
are these, and I challenge Mr. Mansfield, or anyone else, to gainsay their
historical accuracy. I.—There is good reason to believe, on historical testi-
mony, that a branch of the Catholic and Apostolic Church was planted in
England before a branch of the same was planted even in Rome herself,
Gildas, who died A.D 570, the earliest of British historians, says,—“ Glaoiali
frigore rigenti insulas (he is treating of Britain) Christus suos radios, id est
gua prjecepta, indulget, tempore ut scimus summo Tiberii Caesaris.” Upon
which Crakantborpe observes. “ Supremum Tiberii tempus inoidit in
XYII. kal. April, A.D. XXXIX. natalitia vero Romance Ecolesias in XV.
kal. February, A.D. XLY. (teste Baronio.) Disce jam hinc sapere. Disc©
Romanam Eoclesiam Britannicae nostras non MATREM sed iSOROREM
atque sororem integro quinquennio minorem.” So that if Gildas testimony is
worth anything —and who will say that it is not ?—there was a Church estab-
lished in Britain 15 years before there was a Church in Rome. Crakantborpe
g a y ß —“ J)e Britannica Eoolesitl nostril liquidum est fuisse earn aliquot ante
Romanam annis fundatam.” When Augustine, the first Roman missionary, went
to Britain in A.D. 596, he testifies that the Christians (for he found Christiana
and Christian Bishops already there) “did things ”—(the keeping of
Easter, to wit,) “ quae moribus noatris contraria and the British
Bishops declared to Augustine that they were under a Metropolitan
of their own, the Bishop of Caerleon in Wales, and that they
knew nothing of the Bishop of Rome as an Ecclesiastical Superior. Bat
to go back still farther, there were three British Bishops present at the
Council of Arles in A.D. 314. St. Alban was martyred under Diocletian in A.D..
305, nearly 300 years before Augustine landed in England. Origen (A.D. 254)
speaks of Britain “consenting in the worship of the true God.” _ Tertullian,
who lived in the second century, speaks of “ places of the Britons inaccessible
to the Romans, but subdued to Christ,”~and Eusebius asserts positively that
some of the Apostles “ passed over to Britain.”
2. In course of time the Church of England became corrupted with Roman
error, but she remained the same Church : just as a man, who was once healthy
becomes sick —but he is the same man notwithstanding,
3. Again, in course of time, at the Reformation, the Church of England
she ok off the errors which she had contracted by contact with Rome, and
was restored to truth and spiritual health, —but she was the same Church
still. Just as the sick man who has undergone medical treat-
ment, and has taken proper remedies, shakes off his disease and
becomes once more a healthy and useful man—but not another man—he is the


for you to come out from the Roman Catholic Church because of
what you believed to be her corruptions, was it not just as right for
us to come out from the Church of England because of what we
believed to be the corruptions of the great bulk of her clergy, many
of whom even Mr. Wesley, with all his High Church prejudices, was
constrained to brand as "‘Heathenish Priests and Mitred Infidels?”
If you reply that your Church was a branch of the Catholic
Church long anterior to Martin Luther’s day, your answer applies to
my Church as well as to your own, Methodism is a branch, and
not an unfruitful branch, of the Church Catholic, and existed long
anterior to John Wesley’s day. The essence of Methodism, Sir, is
New Testament Christianity, the life of God in the soul of man,
holiness of heart and life. It flourished on the day of Pentecost; (e)
and, blessed be God, from that day it has never ceased to exist, but,
under many names and many outward forms, Episcopalian, Presby-
terian, Congregational, Quaker, Methodist, &c., &c., has come down.
same man still. Those who talk about the Church of England as having
“ separated from the Church of Rome,” or, as having been “ born at the
Reformation,” are guilty of gross ignorance. What, I ask, does the word
RE-formation mean ? —does it imply a previous existence or not ? Any Public
Schoolboy, now-a-days, knows the meaning of the Prefix.
(e.) All this is an utter fallacy.—lt assumes as a fact that which is contradic-
tory to the teaching of Holy Scripture, and all History for 1500 years after
Christ—lt assumes, as a fact, that Our Blessed Lord did not institute A Visible
Church on earth—which was designed to be “ One in doctrine and fellowship
and in breaking of bread and in prayers ”—even “ to the end of the world. ”
It assumes, as a fact, one of the most hurtful and unscriptural heresies which
have ever afflicted Christendom —I mean that heresy which that any
man may choose for himself as to ho to and where he will worship his God —in
despite and neglect of God’s own ordained means of grace. It assumes that
Christ gave to His Church a vestment of many coloured patchwork—and not
one which was “ without seam, woven from the top throughout.” It assumes
that because, within the Church Visible, there is an Invisible Church, whose
members are known only to God—The Church of the Elect Therefore, there is
no Church of the Called. It assumes that, because the wheat and the tares grow
together, therefore there is no Field belonging to the Lord : —that because there
are wheat and chaff lying together, therefore, there is no Barn. It assumes that
because there were both clean and unclean animals to be saved from the Deluge
of God’s wrath, therefore there was no Arlc, It assumes that any MAN or num-
ber of Men may arrogate to themselves the exclusive Prerogative of GO D
Himself, by presuming to form a Church,' (which means the House of the Lord)
and then call it after their own names. If this be not profane Ido not know
what is so. Can Man— (Sinful man !)—create the Body of Christ ? The Bible
says that the Church is the body or Christ. Can Man, I ask, create THIS ?
It was to this Church—this visible Church —that by Holy Baptism (a visible
ordinance) so many souls, which were being saved, are said to have been added
on the day of Pentecost. Every intelligent person can see that it the theory
of the Dissenters be tenable, then, any twenty persons may, in perfect consis-
tency with their principles, form and constitute twenty new sects to-morrow.
St. Augustine, Brev. Coll. 3. says, —“ Ecclesia est corpus vivum in qua est
anima et corpus; Animx signifioat interna dona Soiritus Sancti : Corpus vero
Externam fidei Professionem et Sacramentorum Communionem.”


to us from generation to generation, and will surely grow and pre-
vail until it cover the earth as the waters cover the sea. [That
Methodism is not an unfruitful branch of the Church Catholic is
shewn by the following statistics, taken from Dr. Jacoby’s History
of Methodism, recently published in two volumes at Bremen, in the
German language. Number of Methodists throughout the World :
Enrolled Members, 3,389,166; Ministers, 19,049; Local Preachers,
67,934; Sunday School Scholars, 3,654,215; besides probationers
and attendants on Public Worship not included in these numbers.
The figures comprise Wesleyan Methodists, Primitive Methodists,
the Methodist Episcopal (!) Church of the United States of America,
and other branches of the Methodist communion. The attendants
on Public Worship who are not enrolled members average about 5
or 6 to 1 of the latter. This gives for the Methodist family an aggre-
gate of about Twenty Millions of Souls.] (f)
And now, sir, I must tell you that I shall not follow you into that
interminable wilderness of bootless controversy into which you have
thought fit to wander from the central point at issue between us,
namely, the rightness or the wrongness of your own conduct.
To put that conduct the more plainly in what I conceive to be
its true light, allow me to suppose a case. Let me suppose that a
member of your Church sends me a private note asking a subscrip-
tion towards the erection of a Protestapt Episcopalian place of
worship. Let me suppose that I answer him through the columns
of a newspaper to the following effect:—“ Dear Sir, —I cannot
conscientiously send you a subscription for the following reasons : -
Although your Church professes to glory in Apostolic order, I do
not believe there is on the face of the earth a Church that exhibits
so shocking a spectacle of Disunity, both in doctrine and in worship,
as she does; she is torn to pieces by schisms, not only among her
laity, but among her Bishops, Priests, and Deacons ; they have
marshalled themselves under the antagonistic banners of High
Church, and Low Church, and Broad Church ; of Ritualism, Rational-
ism, Puseyism, Colensoism, and Evangelicism ; some of them extol
their Church as the bulwark of Protestantism, others execrate the
name of Protestant, and hold up their own noble army of martyrs
to ridicule and scorn ; some of them insist that her baptismal water
regenerates the soul, others that the fable of baptismal regeneration
is a perilous delusion ; some that at the bidding of her priests her
sacramental elements of bread and wine are miraculously turned
(f) If these figures be true—which I have good reason to doubt —they
afford the strongest argument for “The Church” to be up and doing. The
greater the schism, by so much is there greater need for the assertion of those
principles of order, which Christ, by His Apostles, ordained. These figures,
as quoted by Mr. Mansfield, more than justify a decided course of action on
the part of Churchmen, so as to stay this great SIN which they profess to
represent.


into flesh and blood, others that this pretence is downright Popery ;
some that her clergy can forgive sin, others that to forgive sin is
the incommunicable prerogative of Deity. You will therefore
admit, dear Sir, that I see good cause for declining to give one
farthing to a Church so deformed with error, and so frightfully
divided against herself. I am, dear Sir, &c. (g')
(q) This is intended to tell against my position, as a Churchman, but it has
exactly an opposite effect. Granted that there is so much difference of opinion
within the Church of England ; what follows ? What, but this ? That, if B^e— AS
A CHURCH —is so Catholic and Inclusive in her terms of communion, that an
the Schools of religious thought here named can exist within her fold, the
Methodists, who admit that she is all but perfection, can have no possible
excuse for perpetuating their most unjustifiable schism. Mr. Mansfiela has
here over-stepped himself, and has unwittingly proved that the Methodist
SCHISM is as unnecessary, as it is sinful. He cannot see that there is the grea
est possible difference betwixt the position of men, who, whilst holding diverse
views on open questions, remain within thp Ark of Christ a Church Visi e ;
and that of others, who, because of their diverse views, betake themselves
without her pale and so rend the Body of Christ. Surely a man had better e
in error within the Visible Church, than without her pale. In the one case he
has every Scriptural guarantee of Help and Forgiveness ; in the other he has
none Christ has no where promised His blessing and His forgiveness outside
His own ordained means of Grace. Personally, I cannot altogether accept the
peculiar or special views of any one cf those Schools, here named by Mr. Mans-
field as causing division of opinion within the Church of England; any mor
than, I suppose, he can accept the diverse views, or approve of the intensely
hitter strifes, which have SO sorely divided Methodism, that not more than i -
THIRDS of the Methodists in England, it is said, will abide by, or recognise the
authority of their own Conference : but I have no hesitation in saying, that i
wonld, on grounds of safety, infinitely prefer to hold Communion with any one of
the Schools of thought, which he derisively names, as causing division within
the Church, than I would imperil my Scripturally guaranteed hopeof Salvatuin by
encouraging, or holding Communion with schismatlcal and MAN-IN VEIN IhU
Societies outside the Church. And for this reason, my Bible nowhere Caches
me to expect, or hope for salvation outside the fold of that Visible Church
to which there were daily added “ such as were being saved.” It is a fact—
which speaks volumes in support of the Church of England, and every other
branch of the Catholic Church, on this quistion—that the word “church,
when used of created man, is NEVER ONCU applied, throughout the New Testa-
ment to describe what our modern innovators call “ The Invisible Church.
Out of ninety-four passages, in which the word “church” occurs, it is in
every single instance used to denote that Visible Society of Believers w ich
was instituted by Our Blessed Lord and organised by His Holy Apostles,
and with which He promised to be present “ even to the end of the world.
Imagine, my Reader, when ihe Deluge was impending, and the door of the
Ark (which God had ordained to be the ONLY place of refuge from the
devouring Flood) was yet open— one of Noah’s sons preferring- ( because there
were some Lions and Tigers and, it may be, some very venomous reptiles therein)—
to risk his safety on a frail and leaky Raft, rather than enter, and remain in, the s.
sea-worthy and substantial Ark. Imagine this, I say, and you have an exact
counterpart of those misguided and disobedient men, who prefer to trust them-
selves for salvation on the frail Raft of Schism, rather to enter into, and remain
safely WITHIN, the Ark of Christ’s Holy, Catholic, and Apostolic Church,
Read 1 Pet. iii., 20, 21, in connexion with Acts ii., 41 to 47, and with Jude,
D


And if, Mr. Macarthur, I should be blamed, as well I might Tie,
for taking so impertinent a method of dealing out my asperities
upon a large body of my fellow Christians, I could plead that I was
only following the example of the Rev, Head Master of the King s
School at Parramatta. _
Your personal allusions to myself are scarcely in good taste, and
were certainly no more called for than your original attack upon
,'your Methodist neighbours. If I, though an ordained Minister, am
earning my bread in a secular pursuit, you, Sir, though an ordame
Minister, are doing the same thing. And if you can account for t e
anomaly of your position by reasons satisfactory to your own
•conscience, so can I. [The circumstances which, many years ago
T 7 to 35, and you will see that I ara not “ wresting ” the Word ’~
'truthfully declaiing it for your soul’s Eternal peace. The prayer of the Lhorofo
tor each one of her children, at Holy Baptism, is, that “ being delivered rom
Hod’s wrath, he may be received into the Ark of Christ’s Church, and being
steadfast in Faith, joyful through Hope, and rooted in Charity (which cannot
exist apart from Truth) may so pass the waves of this troublesome world, t a
’finally he may come to the land of everlasting life, there to reign with Goi , wor
without end.” This Holy Sacrament having been consummated, she asserts,—
■as the special and appropriate ground for her thanks to Almighty God— that each
one of her children, so baptized, “ is regenerate and (if agraff is broken oft
from the stock it ordinarily dies) into the BODY of Christ’s Church, and she
prays that “he may lead the rest of his life according to this beginning —that
is, in complete and unwavering union with the Church of his Baptism, the
Spiritual Mother, through whom he has been rescued from his ‘ state by
nature,”as a “child of wrath,” and has been “ horn again ” into ‘‘a state of salva-
tion,” as a ■“child of grace.” As he voyages on through life, her prayer—her fre-
quent prayer—(for she never loses sight of him i Isaiah xlix,, 15,) still is, that
“ being hurt by no persecutions he may evermore give thanks unto God IN
His Holy Church." When, again, in Holy Matrimony—that most solemn and
holy ot all engagements —he takes to himself \ help-meet for “ so long
as they both shall live,” she reminds him that God has consecrated the state ot
Matrimony to such an excellent mystery, that in it is signified and represented
the spiritual marriage and unity betwixt Christ and His Church.” And,
when the chastening hand of a God-sent sickness, at the eventide of life, is
preparing him for his passage from this transitory and only seeming life, to
that which is eternal and real, yet, once again, she prays God to renew m
him whatever has been decayed by the fraud and malice of the Devil, or by
his own carnal will and frailness, and to continue ( conserva ) him in the UJNIIY
of THE CHURCH.” Thus, dear Reader, the Church of England would
conduct every one of her children from the cradle to the grave not allowing
them to be “ blown about by every wind of doctrine ” —(for the fickle wind, you
know, is everchanging—still, the wind, in its way, does good, it fulfils its mission.
The God of Nature has ordained it to blow, otherwise the atmosphere, which
we breathe, would stagnate, and become unwholesome and impure : for the
same reason, in the world of Grace, God permits the winds of diverse
doctrines to blow over and upon His Church, in order that His I ruth, by its
collision with Error and Heresy, may be kept bright and pure, “ that they which
are approved may be made manifest,” lCor.,xi, 18,19. —but joining them to-
gether “ by Apostolic doctrine ” and “knitting them together in ONE com-
munion and fellowship, she would, atlast, present them to her Bridegroom with
“ exceeding joy.”


induced tHe writer to withdraw from the service of the Wesleyan
Missionary Society have been publicly explained by him more than
once. They involved nothing of which he ever was or ever needed
to be ashamed, though much that he deeply lamented. He is not
aware that the circumstances which induced Mr. Macarthur to
exchange the cure of souls for the business of a school-master,
though pretty well understood, have ever been explained by him to the
public, (h) It is known that he left the incumbency of a Church in the
suburbs of Sydney; that he set up a school at Macquarie Fields ;
that the speculation was not a commercial success ; that he there-
upon turned to his present enterprise at Parramatta ; and that hia
friends entertain the hope that this adventure, if not damaged by
imprudence and mismanagement on his own part, may prove
remunerative.]
It may not be out of place to remark, that towards the venerable
Church of England I have ever cherished kindly and respectful
feelings. For half a century I have occasionally attended her
services, and partaken of her Holy Communion ; and with not a few
of her clergy it has been my privilege to enjoy brotherly intercourse
both in the private circle and in public movements.
Nor may it be unseasonable in me to refer to the odd coincidence,
that some one and thirty years ago it devolved upon me, as a public
journalist, to defend your late respected father, Hannibal Hawkins
Macarthur, Esq., against the censures of his Bishop for having laid
the foundation stone of the Wesleyan Centenary Chapel in this town
of Parramatta ; and that now, in this same town of Parramatta, it
has devolved upon me to rebuke the son of that lamented gentleman
for having gone out of his way to insult the very Church to which
his father had thus publicly bidden God speed.
(h) I left St. Marks, Alexandria, in 1858, in obedience to a medical order,.
which absolutely prohibited me from engaging in public duty. St, Mark’s
Collegiate School was moved from Darling Point to Macquarie Fields, where
the School Chapel was duly licensed for the celebration of Divine Service, and
the administration of the Holy Sacraments. The Lord Bishop, at stated <
times, held Confirmations therein for the Alumni of the School. In 1869 St.
Mark’s Collegiate School, when it had sixty nine boarders on the roll, was
amalgamated with “ The King’s School ” so as to enable me io meet the wishes
or the bishop, who had urged that, in his opinion, the “ interests of the Church
would be promoted” by my removal to Parramatta. I obeyed the Bishop’s
wishes :I am thankful that I did so, " The King’s School” was authoritatively
declared to be a " Cure of souls,” by the Lord Bishop of Sydney, at the Church
Conference, November 26th, 1858, and, on this status, ray predecessor, the
Rev. P, Armitage, was summoned thereto. So much for Mr, Mansfield’s
accuracy. Does he regard Mr. Fletcher, the deservedly respected Principal
of the Wesleyan Collegiate Institution, as being secularly employed ? I confess
that I should like to hear my correspondent tell Mr. Fletcher that his occupa-
tion, AS PRINCIPAL OP THE WESLEYAN COLLEGIATE INSTITUTION, was QUITE AS
secul* ras that of the Secretary of the Sydney Gas Company. I scarcely
think that Mr, Fletcher would feel flattered..


Here, Sir, our contest ends. On this arena I shall have nothing
more to say to you about yourself or your Church; nor shall I read
anything more that you may say about my Church or me.
But in retiring from the lists, let me say a few heart-breathed
words May you long be spared to sit under the vine and under the
figtree of the Church of your affections, reposing in quiet beneath
her tranquil shades, and banqueting on her pleasant fruits; and
may you have grace to breathe a like kindly prayer for all your
neighbours who love the Lord Jesus Christ in sincerity, whatever
name they bear. And with regard to that better land in which I
humbly hope to meet you when we shall have done with the con-
flicts of the Church Militant, allow me to relate an anecdote of good
and large-hearted John Wesley : “It is said that once, in the visions
of the night, he found himself at the gates of Paradise, and asked
who were within.” “Any Wesleyans here? No, was the
answer. “ Any Presbyterians ? ” “ No. Any Church of Eng-
land men ?”■“ No.” “ Any Roman Catholics ?” ‘‘ N°. _ Whom
have you, then, here?” he asked in astonishment. We know
here,” was the reply, “of any of those names that yoa
have mentioned; the only name of which we know anything is
Christian : we are all Christians here ; and of these we have a great
multitude which no man can number, of all nations and kindreds
and peoples, and tongues.” ' . ~ , . ~
To that great multitude may you and I, Sir, be added in the day
of our Lord’s appearing.
I am. Rev. Sir, your obedient servant,
J R. MANSFIELD;
Hanley Villa, Parramatta, September 6, 1870.
Ci) [To this letter a rejoinder appeared in the Cumberland Times
of Saturday last, the 17th instant. I have not seen it, nor do I
intend to see it; (fc) but lam informed by many persons that for
malevolence and vulgarity it excels its predecessors. The mildest
epithet I have heard applied to it is, that it is shameful .
({ ) This paragraph was printed as a Postscript to Mr Mansfield s expartb
in point of time it is subsequent to my Letter No. 6, to winch it
refers, but it comes in better here, than elsewhere.—G. t. MA.
rn And vet in the Prefatory Remarks to his exparte publication, he
aoh allv attempts to reply to one of the paragraphs of this “ unseen ” letter :
I n e^llbrThe tone of rebuke, "to“ Ml half a century ” Compare
this with Letter No. 6. “ One more remark,” to feel a rebuke as well as
give one.”


(No. 6.)
To the Reverend Ralph Mansfield.
Reverend Sir, —Although you have said that you will not
f< read anything I may have to say about yourself or your Church,
I think that others, perhaps, may honor me with a perusal of such
observations as I may find it my duty to make in reply to your
letter published in the Times of to-day (September 10th).
You charge me with bad manners, in that I had “ answered a
'private letter without its author s consent , through the columns of a
newspaper.” Allow me to say that I did not answer a private
letter in the columns of a newspaper.” I answered a letter written
to me by a public personage, on a public question, which involved
public principles. It is a palpable absurdity, and a misrepre-
sentation, to speak of Mr. Dash’s letter to me applying for a
subscription to a public object —as being in any sense whatever a
private letter .” Mr. Dash, a Minister of Primitive Methodism in
his capacity as such —addressed me, a Minister of the Church of
England, in my capacity as such —on a matter affecting the public
interests of this community. I had—whatever you, Rev. Sir, may
say, or write to the contrary —a perfect right to treat that appli-
cation as a public matter , and to reply to him through a public print.
On two occasions I have been made to feel the folly of writing
private replies to similar applications ; my answers, which were
made in good faith, were privately handed about distorted and
falsified. There is an old adage which will exactly explain to all
intelligent persons, why I preferred to publish my reply to Mr. Dash,
rather than write to him privately , — Twice bit, once shy, (altered
to suit my case). . n
Again, Rev. Sir, you say that I “ made my unauthorised answer
to Mr. Dash, the weapon of attack upon the religious tenets of my
peaceable neighbors.” I deny this ; —rather put it thus that I made
my answer to be a defence, for members of the Church of England,
as against the eajolerie of those who would persuade them that their
Church and Methodism were “just the same that there ‘ was no
difference whatever between them;” and that “it could not matter
much whether they went to Church or Chapel but, “ probably they
would gain more by going to Chapel , as there they were sure to hear
the pure Gospel preached ;no alloy —no priestcraft nothing but
the real , true, pure Gospel.” Yes, Rev. Sir, put it thus, and you will
be stating the truth and nothing but the truth. The Roman Jesuits,
I trow, are not (in the matter af seeking proselytes) the only followers
of Ignatius Loyola in Australia. Yes, see “how great a matter
a little fire kindleth.” I, in the gentlest terms — even the Protestant
Standard has admitted that —explained the grounds upon which I
felt it to be my duty, and the duty of all loyal Churchmen, to with-


told their aid from any Society, the teaching of which was in direct
antagonism to that of their own Church : the moment I spoke of
bishops —the Eumenides of Ultra-Protestantism broke loose and I
exclaimed —“ Tantcene animis ccelestibus irce ” — JEheu !
It would seem that some of my neighbors suffer from corns, and
I have happened to tread upon their toes, whereupon they cry out
in the agony of their “ hurt feelings ,” and abuse me for my bad
manners. Well, lam sorry to have hurt them, or caused them pain ;
they should not have put their toes in my path; however, now that
they know how painful, and tender, and bad their corns are, would
not the best and wisest course they can adopt be to cut them out ?
Again, Rev. Sir, you say that I have “ unchurched ” not only the
religious community of which you are a member, but every religious
communion in the world, which does not submit to my own narrow
dogma of priestly succession.” This is the old cry, let us see how
it will bear examination. My reply is, that I have unchurched no
man. If men, with their Hihles in their hands, adopt a course of
action, which is antagonistic to, and inconsistent with, those
principles which the Great Head of the Church ordained, as to be
those which should, “ to the end of the world ” constitute the “ order
of that Church, which was to be ONE in, (1) doctrine and (2) fellow-
ship ( il Koinoma" —I wish you would study the true import (I) of this
significant word), and to which Church “ the Lord added daily such as
were being saved.” I say, if they depart from those principles
which the Great Head of the Church, by his Holy Apostles,
has laid down for the guidance of all Christian men, it is not the
Church of England which unchurches them, but it is they them-
selves, who, by their departure from Apostolic order, do so.
O ye Methodists, if you are Wesleyans, why do you not obey
John Wesley’s voice ? If you love him, why do you set at nought
his loving counsel ? He, in 1746, wrote thus: —“I dare not renounce
the Church of England. As a minister I teach her doctrines, I use
her offices, I conform to her Rubrics, I suffer reproach for my attach-
ment to her; as a private member, I hold her doctrines, I join in her
offices, in prayer, in hearing, in communicating.”—Wesley’s Works
(1812) vol. xii., p. 862.
He, in 1747, wrote thus:—“We continually exhort all who attend
on our preaching to attend to the offices of the Church. * * * *
And for this very thing, are we reproached as bigots to the Church ,
by those of most other denominations. —Works (1812) vol. xii., pp.
414, 420.
He, in 1741, wrote thus:—“Mr. Swindells informed me, that
Mr. E. would take it a favour, if I would write some little thing, to
advise the Methodists not to leave the Church, and not to rail at her
(0 “ Koinonia”—Acts ii., 42, communi usu bacr.® : participate :
eoMMUNio : conjunctio : bocibtas : consortium :—Vide Schleusner.


ministers. I sat down immediately and wrote, ‘A Word to a Metho-
dist,’ which Mr. E. translated into Welsh and printed.’ —Journal,
Feb. 27. „ , -
He, in 1768, wrote his “Twelve Reasons for not separating trom
the Church.” • * . r
He, in 1761, wrote thus:—June 9th, “We had a long stage from
hence to Swaldale, where I found an earnest, loving, simple people,
whom I likewise exhorted not to leave the Church, though they had
not the best of Ministers. —Journal. _
He in 1761, wrote thus: —“I quite agree, we neither can be
better ’men, nor better Christians, than by continuing members of
the Church of England.” —Works (1813) vol. xvi., p. 44.
He in 1763, wrote thus; —“October 11 —I then related what i
had done since I came to Norwich first; and what I would do for the
time to come, particularly that I would immediately put a stop to
preaching in the time of Church service. , Journal.
He, in 1767, wrote thus: —“I rode to Yarmouth, and found the
Society, after the example of Mr. W p, had entirely left the
Church, I judged it needful to speak largely upon that head. Ihey
stood reproved , and resolved , one and all, to go to it again. Journal,
Feb. 23. « „ , .
He in 1768, wrote thus :—“ We are in truth, so far from being
enemies to the Church, that we are rather bigots to it. I dare not,
like Mr. Venn, leave the Parish Church where I am, to go to anlndepen-
dent meeting. I dare not advise others to go thither rather than to
Church. I advise all over whom I have any influence, steadily to
keep to the Church.” —Letter to a Clergyman. July 19th, 1768.
In Minutes of Conference, August 4th, 1769, he wrote this :
“Let us keep to the Church. Over and above all the reasons
that were formerly given for this, we add another now, from long
experience— they that leave the Church, leave the Methodists. The
Clergy cannot separate us from our brethren ; the Dissenting Minis-
ters can, and do. Therefore, carefully avoid whatever has a tendency
to separate men from the Church; in particular, preaching at any
hour which hinders them from going to it .’ Works (1810) vol.
’He, in 1770, wrote thus: —“Let us be well observed. I fear
when the Methodists leave the Church, God will leave them.
Minutes of Conference.
(Remember, Reverend Sir, your statement — that the Methodists
never left the Church, because they never belonged to it.” What is your
statement worth ? Who, I ask, has “ misconceived history t Let
others judge.) „ , , ™ ‘ ,
He, in 1772, wrote thus :—May 10th—“I attended the Church
of England service in the morning, and that of the Kirk in the
afternoon. ‘Truly, no man having drank old wine straightway desiretn


■new.' How dull and dry the latter appeared to me, who had been
accustomed to the former. — Journal.
He, in 1778, wrote thus July 6 th—“ Our little Conference
began, at which about twenty preachers were present. On Wednes-
day we heard one of our friends at large upon ‘ the duty of leaving
the Church,’ but, after a full discussion of the point, we all remained
firm in our judgment, that it is our duty not to leave the Church
wherein God has blessed us, and does bless us still”
(N.B. —This was thirty-two years after Wesley had read Lord
King’s treatise “on the Primitive Church,” after the perusal of
which he has been falsely charged, by the Wesleyans, as having adopted
the opinion that Bishops and Presbyters were the same Order in
the Primitive Church. Lord King was convinced of his error soon
after he had published his treatise.)
He, in 1785, wrote thus September 4th—“ Finding a report
had been spread abroad that I was just going to leave the Church,
to satisfy those that were grieved concerning it, I openly declared
in the evening that I had now (in 1785 ! !) no more thought of
separating from the Church than I had forty years ago. Journal.
(N.B. This quotation is worthy of particular notice. The
Methodists grant that previous to the year 1746, in which year
Wesley read Lord King’s book, he was a rigid Churchman. Now
if you will take 40 from 1785, it will bring you back to 1745, or,
the year before Wesley read Lord King's treatise: Ergo, if Wesley was
.a rigid Churchman in 1745, we have his own word for it that he was
.the same in 1785.)
He, in 1786, wrote thus :—July 25th—“ Our Conference began.
About eighty preachers attended on Thursday, in the afternoon.
We permitted any of the Society (observe Wesley never called his
Society a Church —he knew better) to be present, and weighed
what was said about separating from the Church ; hut we all deter-
mined to continue therein, without one dissentient voice. — Journal.
He, in 1787, wrote thus:—January 2nd—“l went to Deptford,
but it seemed I was got into a den of lions. Most of the leading men
of the Society were mad for separating from the Church. I en-
deavoured to reason with them, but in vain ; they had neither sense
nor even good manners left. (What do you think of that, Mr. Mans-
field F) At length, after meeting the whole Society, I told them, ‘if
you are resolved, you may have your service in Church hours ; but
remember, from that time you will see my face no more. ’ This struck
deep, and from that hour I have heard no more about separating
from the Church.” — Journal.
He, in 1789, wrote thus, in a letter which he published in the
Lublin Chronicle (forty-three years after he read Lord King's treatise),
dated June 11th: —
“ ‘Thirdly’ the Observer affirms, ‘to say you will not leave the


Church,’ meaning l thereby all true believers in England, is trifling !
Certainly, but I do not mean so, when I say, ‘ I will not leave the
Church.’ I mean, unless I see more reason for it than I ever yet
Saw, 1 WILL NOT LEAVE THE CHURCH OF ENGLAND, AS BY LAW ESTABLISHED,
while the Breath of God is in my nostrils.” —Works (1813), vol.
xvi., p. 35. These words John Wesley spake one year and nine
months only before he died —Did he waver from this resolve ? Let
his own friends and biographers —Coke and Moore —answer this
question. The last prayer he was heard to utter —yes, the last
prayer — just before “ the breath of God left his nostrils Was this:
“ Bless the CHURCH and King, and grant us truth and peace,
■through Jesus Christ our Lord, for ever and ever.” —(Life of Wesley
by Coke and Moore.)
Now, Oye Methodists—l cannot call you “ Wesleyans,” for you
are not obedient followers of W esley—l have given you John
Wesley’s opinions fully and fairly. If you doubt me, borrow his
works and read for yourselves. God forgive those men who tell you
that John Wesley ever changed his mind as to the duty of continuing
in strict communion with the Church. I assert that he did not.
Search his writings, every word of which will prove the truth of
what I say, and then, judge ye, like honest men, and, if you are
Wesleyans, follow his advice, and return to the Church of your
Forefathers, and never leave her so long as the “ breath of God is in
your nostrils .” She will teach you the truth, the whole truth, and
nothing but the truth, so help her God. Some of you blame me
for being outspoken. Why so ? If what I say is true (and as I
shall hereafter stand before God’s judgment, I believe what I say to
be so), why should I not be outspoken ? Truth is always bold.
Truth fears not the opposition of either men or devils. If I spoke
untruths, then I might well foar, but since I speak truth, I know
that God is on my side, and I fear not what can either say or
do, concerning me. To the law and to the testimony is my motto,
.—“lf they speak not according to this word, it is because there is
no light in them.” —Isaiah viii., 20. Men may call me A Papist
in disguise,” “A semi-Papist,” “A Puseyite,” (men always do
become personally abusive when they know they have got the worst
of an argument), but what do I care for their abuse ? They called
my Master an emissary of Beelzebub, the Prince of Devils. Am I
not highly honored when lam permitted to share with Him a
similar distinction ? O ye “ blind, and ye leaders of the blind,
repent, and do your first works ; return to your first love—the
Church of the living God—or, ye may “ both fall into the ditch.”
But to revert to the more immediate points of your letter, Rev.
Sir. You are scarcely consistent in finding fault with me because I
—as you say, but as I deny—“unchurch” others (tens of thousands
some one said). How clearly you can detect the mote in my eye,
whilst you, and those who think with you, cannot see the huge beaai


■which darkens your own. What about the tens of millions of the
Church of Rome, whom your brethren have, in such unmeasured
terms, consigned to perdition ? If I were to hurl avalanches of the
most disgusting abuse against them, I should be a paragon of per-
fection. Yes, in that case, the “Protestant Standard’ 7 —that repre A
sentative of pseudo-Christianity —would canonize me, and eagerly
parade me, as a personification of Charity. But God forbid. Between
me and the Church of Rome there is a great gulf fixed; but, whilst
I hate the errors of that Church, I cannot forget that for them, as
for you and for me, Christ died. My Master loved sinners and gave
Himself for them, and how great soever, and how many soever, be
the errors of the Church of Rome, or any other Church, still my
Master Christ would have them all to be saved, so He loves THEM,
though He condemns their SIN. I love you, Rev. Sir, though I con-
demn your sin —why should you be angry with me ? If I did not
love you and the Methodists, I would not tell you of your sin; but
because I tell you, you love me not. If I told a Romanist of his
errors, he would not turn upon me and call me naughty names he
would bear with me, and hear me patiently ; he would not turn again
and rend me; great as his errors are —and God knows I some
of them to be very sad—still his charity and “ good manners" con-
trast very favourably with the same qualities, as they are evidenced
by some of my ultra-Protestant fellow-citizens; they may take a
profitable lesson out of the Romanist’s book in this respect —“ Pas
est et ah Eoste doceri.” Depend upon it, Rev. Sir, ultra-Protestants
will never convert a Romanist from the error of his ways by abuse.
If they do not wish to convert sinners to God, I can undersiaud their
tactics; but, if they do, then I say, they are, very short-sighted to
act thus. If our Lord and Master were to deal out to THEM the same
measure of malignity and hatred, which they exhibit towards the
members of the Church of Rome, I have no hesitation in saying that
not one of them could be saved. Is such language as we recently
heard in our Senate, and have read in the “Protestant Standard,
Christian language, or not ? I say, that those men, who indulge in
it, are driving the Romanists farther away than ever from the truth
of God. God would have all men to be saved: The Devil would
keep them from salvation. Those who abuse the Romanists thus
wantonly, are taking the Devil’s work out of his hands and are doing
it for him—by indisposing them to listen to the truth. “How,” say
they, “can there be truth or love with men who use such language F ”
And so, they turn away. # _
Again, Rev. Sir, you say that n my dogma is narrow. Mine i
It is the Church’s authoritative declaration of truth to which you
object. I feel humbled, yet encouraged, by your having thus iden-
tified me with that BODY of which Christ is the Head. Oh ! what
a glorious consummation of all my hopes and longings, if I were so
one with the Church, which is the “body of Christ,” that not man, but


Gov, would recognise me as being one with Christ and with Him.
Rev. Sir, you do me great honor —Alas ! I deserve it not. But the
Church’s dogma or way —and mine too, thank God —is narrow.
Our Blessed Lord has told us that “ the gate,” _ (did this mean the
dogmas f) by which alone men can enter the Kingdom of Heaven,
“is narrow, and few there be that find it.” Not, Rev. Sir, because
all men may not enter in, who will, but because the majority will
not stoop to obey aud follow the ordained faith which leads to
the narrow gate. God says : “ This is the way, walk ye in it. Man
say, “ Tush ! Nonsense ! Popery! Paganism! we will have none of
this way, we prefer to invent a new way, a way of our own seeking.”
“ Are not Abana and Pharphar — rivers of Damascus (i.e., their own
native country —man was born in sin and a child of wrath) better
than all the waters of Israel ” —-(i.e., God s own chosen country
the Holy Land—the type of his Church.) Why may we not wash
in them and be clean ? Well, the waters of Abana and Pharphar
were, as a matter of fact, clearer streams than Jordan, uhich was a
muddy water ; and to their human, self-sufficient intellect, and
narrow minds, it seems better to wash in clean than in muddy water ;
but there was a charm in the waters of Jordan, whilst yet, in point
of fact, the water itself was not so good as either that of Abana or
Pharphar. Where then was the charm ? Surely, it was in obedience
to God’s will. God chose to cure Naaman of his leprosy in Jordan’s
muddy stream, and Naaman was, at last, wise enough to learn obe-
dience and to practice it. So he went to Jordan the before des-
pised Jordan— obeyed, and was cleansed. If God had said, “ Wash
in Abana,” then Abana’s streams would have been as healing waters ;
but God had said “Wash in Jordan,” therefore, Abana’s waters were
useless, except to teach Naaman a lesson which others would do well
to learn, viz., unquestioning and child-like obedience to God s com-
mands. God works as He wills, not as we, in our stupid and wicked
pride, would dictate. If we dictate to Him as to the means, which
He has chosen, may we not lose the blessing, which we really and
sincerely covet ?
As to there being any analogy between my occupation, as an edu-
cator of youth, —or in other words, as one who is striving to train
the children of God’s Church for the Kingdom of Heaven , in direct
obedience to my Lord’s command —“ Feed Lambs, and that
of yourself, Rev. Sir, as the recognised “ Managing Secretary of the
Sydney Gas Company,” I leave others to judge. I think, that it
would take more than even “an angel of light to convince them
that there was such. One thing I will concede to you —this —that
you have certainly sent an abundant (gas) light into all the Sydney
Churches, and I do most heartily wish that you would extend your
favors to poor benighted Parramatta, I, for one, would gladly
subscribe to such an object.
One more remark on what you are pleased to call an odd


coincidence.” In this matter, Reverend Sir, I scarcely know which*
to admire most, your impertinence, or your presumption. “It is,”
you say, “an odd coincidence that your late Father laid the Foun-
dation Slone of the Centenary Methodist Chapel in Parramatta j
and that I, who had defended him against the censure of his Bishop,
for having done so, should have it devolved upon me to rebuke his
son for having gone out of his way to insult that very Church.”
“ Should have it devolved upon you ! !” by whom I ask, or by what,,
save your own presumption? It is the office of a Bishop “to rebuke
an Elder, ’’ and the idea of the Secretary of a Gas Company
usurping the special functions of a Bishop appears to us Churchmen
as savoring somewhat of presumption and impertinence. I hope
Reverend Sir, that you can feel a rebuke, as well as give one.
Again, I deny that I ever insulted your society, or any individual in
it. You might as well say, that Mr. B. insults Mr. C. when he, on a
matter of principle, mereiy opposes his views, and strives, at every"
turn, to oust his Government. Did ever any man hear such narwro-
mindedness, as this is ? However,, in reference to the “ coincidence ,”
let me tell you, that my venerated father laid the funodation-stone-
of the Chapel, to which you have alluded, long prior to the time
when he, with many others, was precipitated to worldly ruin. Let
me tell you, Rev. Sir, that those worldly troubles, as they seemed to-
be at the time , set him upon a right-hearty, and truthful searching
out of himself : in short, he was “ exercised ” by those “ mercies in
disguise” which “worked for him/’ I feel persuaded, “an eternal
weight of glory.” Now, one of the few regrets he had cause to feel
a hd he did feel this one keenly —was the fact that he had allowed
himself to be over-persuaded by the Methodists to do that which he
afterwards clearly saw, and admitted, to have been “ a great error
of judgement.” I adopt, in part, your language, and say, that it is
“an odd coincidence ” that you and I should meet, after so many
years, in Parramatta. You, Rev. Sir, —“ the defender ”of an act, which
the aotor himself afterwards deplored —still to uphold Methodism. 1,,
the son, to do all in my power, as God helping me I will, to remedy
the effect of a great, but deeply regretted, mistake. I think that
you had far better have left “ the odd coincidence ” out of this question
its mention has profited you nothing. Here, Rev. Sir, to quote
you again, our personal contest (why contest ?.) ends, lam sorry to
find that you have resolved not to read anything I may write “about
you, or your Church,” because it makes one feel uncomfortable.
However, I cannot help it. Should you, Reverend Sir, at any future
time, regret your present decision, and determine to express your
opinion on these matters, let me assure you that I will read, and
form a carefully considered estimate of the value of every word you
write. But although you have “ retired from the lists,” —as you
phrase it —yet have not I. Let me clearly point out that the question
is not as between yourself and me ; it is as between Truth and Error..


When I was ordained a Priest of the Church, I was asked this ;
question : “Will you be ready, with all faithful diligence, to BANISH
and DRIVE AWAY all erroneous and strange doctrines contrary to
God’s word ? * * * * * *
I replied :“I WILL, the Lord being my helper.” It is, Reverend
Sir, “ an erroneous and very strange doctrine,” to say, that Bishops
are not of Divine Institution ; and, therefore, in order to do my
bounden duty and office herein, I propose to prepare and publish—so
soon as “feeding the lambs” will permit me to do so —a Treatise (of
course you will not read it), on “ The Bishop’s Office,” wherein I
will prove to all Bible-loving and Bible-obeying Christians that
Episcopacy is (1) Of Divine Institution and Scriptural ; (2) that it is
Apostolical; (3) that it was Catholic, or Universal, for 1500 years
after Christ; and (4>) that it was preserved and retained by the
Church of England because it ivas held to he an Order of JDIVINK
Institution and, therefore , not to be set .aside.
I am,. Reverend Sir, still yours in love,
GEO. E. MACARTHUR.
The above letter (No. 6) was followed by Mr. Mansfield pub-
lishing HIS OWN two letters (Nos. 3 and 5 of the series) with
Prefatory Remarks and some notes ; —I now reprint his Prefatory
Remarks, together with a few observations which I have thought it
necessary to make, in order that the FACTS may be known, and
appreciated, by those who love truth and hate its opposite.
“ THE REV. GEO. F. MACARTHUR’S ATTACK ON THE
WESLEYAN METHODISTS.”
The following letters (m) were originally published in the Cumber-
land Times, a Parramatta newspaper, and are reprinted in their
present form for the purpose of giving them a wider circulation
than they have hitherto obtained, the reverend gentleman to whom
they are addressed still persisting in the offensive course they
denounce, and their author having no intention to prolong the
contest through the columns of a newspaper.
In excuse for the tone of rebuke which he has not felt it unbe-
coming to assume, (») the writer may be permitted a reference to the
fact, that the disparity of years between himself and his correspon -
dent is equal to the disparity between father and son ; that he is
one of the oldest Ministers of Religion, and, he believes, the oldest
Wesleyan Methodist Preacher, in the Australian Colonies, having
been ordained early in the year 1820, having commenced his minis-
( m) (i.e. Mr. Mansfield’s own two —Nos. 3 and 5.)
(n) Vide page 30 — line 1 to 14 — and remember that Mr. Mansfield never
M saw ” Letter No. 6^


terial labours in Tasmania and New South Wales in the same year,
and having been mercifully spared to continue those labours to the
present time, thus completing a full half century, (o)
During this lengthened series of years he does not remember
having ever witnessed an assault upon the Wesleyan Methodist
Church breathing a spirit so virulent, expressed in language so
coarse, persisted in so long and so rancorously, and above all, so
entirely unprovoked, as that which has called forth this publication.
And he is bound to add, that, in his judgment, the assault is in
no small degree aggravated by the consideration that the assailant
is one to whom have been confided two important trusts, —the
education of the sons of some of our most respectable families, and
the Chaplaincy of our Volunteer Force. It will be generally
admitted that in neither of these departments of social responsibility
can such an example of sectarian rancour be expected to produce
any but the most pernicious fruits., (p)
The first of the following letters, as may be inferred from the
mildness of its tone, was written under the impression that upon
reading it Mr. Macarthur would see the errors he had fallen into,
and regret the step he had taken. The sequel proves the impres-
sion to have been far too charitable. The first offence was mild
compared with the second; the second is said to have been mild
compared with the third. And the author is informed that these
attacks through the newspaper have been followed by attacks from
the pulpit; that on Sunday last, in All Saints Church, Mr. Mac-
arthur, officiating for the incumbent ( q ), then sorrowing under a deep
(o) These statements cannot be satisfactorily accepted, unless th re are two
persons of the same name. The gentleman with whom I imagined that I was
corresponding cannot be the same who has, “for a full half century been contin-
uously employed in Ministerial labours. My correspondent has been for some
twenty-nine years Secretary of the Sydney Gas Company; before that, lam
informed, he was Secretary of the North Shore Ferry Company, and prior to
that, it is said, he was an Auctioneer in co-partnership with one surnamed Front.
(p) This paragraph will be better appreciated, if the fact be known that its
author is one of the Council of “ The Wesleyan Collegiate Institution,” an
establishment which is in active competition with “ The King’s School.” Readers
will observe that at page 26 I am described as “ earning my bread at a secular
pursuit here, I am, for the nonce, admitted to be occupying an “ important
trust and department of social responsibility.” This paragraph simply means
the Wesleyan Collegiate Institution” (which of course is not sectarian !) versus
The King’s School,” (which of course is sectarian !) Well, I hope my readers
will appreciate the unsectakian (!) spirit which characterises this, and the
preceding paragraph.
(q) To show the “ animus" which afflicts the author of this Preface, I beg
to state that the deplored event, to which he here so unfeelingly, and so im-
pertinently, alludes, in order, no doubt, to aggravate the assumed enormity of
my conduct in every possible way, did not occur until several days aftek my
sermon had been preached ! ! !
Accipe nunc Danaum insidias, et crimine ab uno
Bisce cm nes. —JEneid IT , 65.


domestic affliction, preached so pointedly and so bitterly against- {he
Methodists, That several of the congregation 'signified dis-
by taking up their hats, and talking out of the church, (i*)
Parramatta, 20th September, 1870. R.Mv
* v
I *
’(To IPhe Editor of the Cumberland Times.)
Sir, —I doubt not that the unprejudiced thinking portion of
the public will sufficiently appreciate Mr. Mansfield’s one-sided
publication. Why— if he wished to propagate truth —did he not
publish my “ vulgar ” letters ? If, Sir, they were what he in his
exparte publication —represents them to be, he could have done
nothing which would have better served his own cause.
The fact is, the Reverend gentleman has got angry. You see,
Sir, when I put these things in an enjoue style, he cannot appreciate
or understand me. (s) Good-humour —fjheerfulness Bandinage
with him are equivalents for “ Vulgarity ” 11 and
“ j ßancour.” All this exactly proves the truth of what I said in a
previous letter, viz., that when people get the worst of an argument
they very often use hard words of their opponent, and that by
abuse they will deter decent people from entering the lists. How-
ever, T am so “ vulgarly ” constituted that these epithets do not, in
the slightest degree, affect me, they go_ for absolutely nothing/ and
altogether fail of their purpose, which is to lead me away from the
“ main points ”at issue. I wish to direct the attention of those
who have taken the trouble to read the correspondence, to a few
points worth notice ;
1. That I have not written one unkind word of the Methodists,
(r) The whole of this sentence is absolutely untrue; I never mentioned the
“ Methodists ” in my sermon, which is most untruthfully charged with being
“ pointed and bitter ” against thorn. Will it be credited, in th ■■ face of such a
statement (coming, as it does, from one who boasts of having been continuously
employed for a “ full half century ” as a Minister of Truth,) that only two
persons left the Church during the time of Preaching, and that one of them
left before he could by any possibility have known what I intended to say.
"Ylgfsach is the fact. Both of those, who went out, know full well that the pur-
pose, which they fulfilled after they left the Church, was in no degree germane
to anything my sermon contained.
(s) It does not follow, because a subject is serious and sacred, that the
Caricaturists of such a subject, who bring it into disrepute, deserve to be treated
with gravity and shielded from ridicule — Buttevant.
“ quanqnam ridentem dicere verum
Quid vetat ? ut pueris olim dant crustula blandi
Doctores, elementa velint ut discere prima.”
Horace, Sat. 1., 1., 24.


as individuals, however strongly I have expressed my entire dis*
approval of Methodism, as a system, which is diametrically OPP 0 ® 6 **
to the teaching of Holy Scripture and the Divinely constituted
Order of the Church. ~ ~
2. That Mr. Mansfield has not denied (because he cannot,) the
departure of the Methodists from the principles of John Wesley, wine
I set forth in extracts from his own writings.
3. That although Mr. Mansfield “has not seen, nor does he
intend to see,” my letter in the Cumberland. Times of the 17th
instant, yet, he has availed himself of indirect information as to its
contents. Query—Why should he be so unwilling to read what 1
have to say ? He constituted himself the champion of Methodism, as
against my “atofe,” and having done so, he has igno mimously
withdrawn from “the lists ” without having written anything save
personal abuse of me. The fact is, he has done in tis raa er,
exactly what Louis Napoleon did in another, i.e., declared war
BEFORE HE WAS READY. . 0 -
That the statements in the foot note of his publication at page Z 7,
in so far as they refer to me, are utter untruths and have no founda-
tion in fact, as I am prepared to prove to any person who may think
it worth his while to seek the truth by coming to me.
6. That the statement in his Preface, viz., that on Sunday, the
18th ultimo, I preached in All Saints’ “ so pointedly and so Utterly
against the Methodists, that several of the congregation signified
their displeasure by taking up their hats, and walking out of the
church,” is also UNTRUE. Two persons were seen to go out during
the service—the one almost immediately after I had declared my
text Acts xvii., 10,11 ■ —fif this text of Scripture is “ bitterly ” opposed
to the principles of Methodism, Bible-loving Christians had better
at once abandon them) ; the other left while I was explaining the
difference between the teaching of the Church of England and Rome
on the paramount authority of Holy Scripture. My words (the
ipsissima verba uttered), as he left, were these Admitting t lat
truth is discoverable, where is it to be found ? How is it to be
ascertained ? It will be answered by Protestants of every deno-
mination and sect, as well as by the Protestants in the Church, In
Holt Scripture, and in Holy Scripture only.’ The Roman Catholic
replies to the question by appealing to the authority of the Church,
as represented by the Pope, whose infallibility has, so recently, be;.!
adopted as a dogma of their Faith. He maintains that, what the
Church asserts the member of the Church is to receive without
questioning, because, to him, the Church is infallible ; and this
whether what is asserted be found in the Bible or not. You see,
brethren, the Roman Catholic makes the authority of the Church
absolute; and so with him the Church supplants the Bible. With
him the Church is the primary authority, and the Bible, instead of
being the mistress and guide of the Church , is only part of that


Church’s teaching. This at once overthrows the Reformation. The
Reformation was based on the fact that the Church, as it existed at
the time of the Reformation, had erred, and that it was therefore
necessary to bring the Church itself to the test of a higher authority--
that of Holy Scripture. Beautifully, though quaintly, is this
■expressed by Bishop Hall — 1 The Scripture is the sun ; the Church
is the clock, whose hands point to, and whose sound tells us the
hour of the day. The sun we know to be sure and. regularly constant
in his motion. The clock, as it may fall out, may go too fast or too
slow. We are wont to look at, or listen to, the clock to know the
time of day : but, where we find the variation sensible, we believe the
SUN AGAINST the clock, NOT the clock against the Sun. As, then, we
should condemn them of much folly that should profess to trust the
<dock rather than the sun, so we cannot but justly tax the miscredu-
lity of those who will rather trust to the Church than to the
Scriptures.”
Was it doctrine like the above which offended the second person
who left All Saints’ Church ? (ft) If so, and he were a Churchman,
lam ashamed of him. If so, and he were a Methodist, lam sorry
for him. One thing I wish to state, that there were both Methodists
and Roman Catholics in All Saints’ Church, on that Sunday morning ,
who not only did not go OUT of the Church, but who intend to follow
John Wesley’s advice, and remain in her for so long as “ the
breath of God is in their nostrils .” Hinc illce lacrymw !! !
6. That, as Mr. Mansfield has expressed a desire that HIS two
letters should have a large circulation, and as he has ingenuously (?)
suppressed all my “ vulgar ” letters, I propose to gratify his wishes,
as far as I can do so, by publishing the whole correspondence— (of
course I shall include all the extracts from John Wesley’s writings)
together with a few NOTES of my own. Mr. Mansfield’s PREFACE
is so refined, and exhibits so gentle and truthful a spirit, that I shall
be spared the trouble of writing one. My reverend opponent is a
man who knows well how to use “fair sounding words.” Let aU
remember his reproduction of the old worn-out “ad captandum
story of John Wesley’s dream. The theory, I believe, is, that
dreams mostly represent the opposite of fact. John Wesley was a
truly good man, but, being only a man, he had his faults, as we all
have : one great fault which he had, was being too dreamy.
I am, dear Sir, yours faithfully,
GEO. F. MACARTHUR.
The King’s School, October Ist, 1870.
p g_ —Any one who cares to know what the abusive sermon
was about, may find its reflection in John Wesley’s Sermons
(f) I have, since this was first published, been assured by the second gentle-
man who left the Church, that, “although he did not agree with parts of my
sermon —his leaving had nothing to do with it.” —One part of the sermon, with
which he did not agree, was Bishop Hall’s simile.


(although, in truth, MT expressions are very mild as compared with
His} and in the Dean of Chichester’s sermon on “ The Rule of Faith,”
Nay, more, any unprejudiced Searcher for truth may read my sermon
as I preached it, if he will spend half an hour with me on any
Sunday afternoon. GEO. F. MAC ARTHUR.
APPENDIX.
Since this pamphlet was sent to Press, the following Letter and
Review have appeared in the Cumberland Times. There is so
much in the Review which strengthens my position, and throws
additional light on the subject, that, without committing myself to
an approval of ALL that appears in the Church Times, I have
thought it advisable to reprint it.
GEO. F. MACARTHUR.
THE “PARRAMATTA CLERGYMAN” NOT FAR WRONG.
(To the Editor of the Cumberland Times.)
Sir, —By the last Mail the subjoined Review of Four works which have
recently been published in England, came to hand.
After the abuse which has been heaped on Mr. Maoarthur, for the honest
outspoken enunciation of the views he entertains on the subject which
these works refer, it is but right your readers should be informed that his posi-
tion and arguments are far more than sustained by men at home of whose ability
and standing there can be no question. Nobody who reads this Review, which
was published in London contemporaneously with the publication of Mr. Mac-
arthur’s letters here, and compares it with those letters, will fail to be struck with
the remarkable identity, both in thought and expression, which is to be found
between them, thus verifying our University motto, —“ Sidere mens eadem
mutate.” FAIR PLAY -
REVIEW.
(From the tc Church Times,” September 2, 1870.
1. The Relations of John Wesley and of Wesleyan Methodism to the Church of
England; investigated and determined. By Dr. Rigg (Longmans) 1868.
2. Correspondence between Dr. Rigg and the Rev. H. W. Holden, Assistant
Priest of St. Andrew’s, Middleton-in-the-Wolds (Church Press Company),
1869. 3. John Wesley in company with High Churchmen, By an Old
Methodist, [Mr. Holden] (Church Press Company), 1869. 4. John Wesley’s
Place in Church History. By R. Denny Urlin (Rivington), 1870.
Various circumstances have latterly brought into prominence a controversy
of some standing, namely how far the founder of the Wesleyan Society can be
fixed with any complicity in the origination of the Wesleyan Sect ? The four


publications which we have enumerated above, will afford the reader sufficient
materials for the determination of the question. In No. 1 is stated pretty
nearly all that can be found in support of the theory that Wesley is responsible
for the deeds of those who call themselves his “ sons,” but we do not think
that if the Founder, in the spirit of prophecy, could have known ho v his disci-
ples would write of him, he would have contemplated the prospect with much
complacency. Assuredly his comment would have been “Ifl am these men’s
father, where is mine honor ?” Dr. Rigg’s wholo case, when stated in plain
English, is a disabling of Wesley’s judgment. John Wesley, it will be remem-
bered, was born in 1703. In due time he was ordained, and soon after his
father’s death, in 1735, he sailed with his brother for Georgia. In 1736 Charles
returned, and in 1738 John followed. Up to this time, says Dr. Rigg, he had
been a High Church Sacramentalist, but in the April of that year he fell in with
one Peter Bohler, a Moravian, and “ all his life afterwards he taught the Evan-
gelical doctrine of salvation by faith. The grave-clothes of Ritualistic supersti-
tion still hung about him for a little while, even after he had come forth from,
the sepulchre, and had, in his heart and soul, been set loose and free ; and he
only cast them off gradually.” In the year 1746 he might be “ said to have thrown
overboard the last of his High Church leanings.” Unfortunately for this theory,
to the end of his life, and especially in his last years, these said High Church
leanings break out with considerable vehpmence. Thus, in October 1786, ho
expresses in his Journal his conviction that to allow service during church
hours would be an act of formal separation; and, on the 2nd of the following
January, he writes, “I went over to Deptford but it seemed I was got into a den
of lions. Most of the leading men of the Society were MAD for separation
from the Church I endeavoured to reason with them, but in vain ; they had nei-
ther sense nor even good manners left. At length, after meeting the whole Society,
I told them * If you are resolved, you may have your service in Church hours.
But remember from that time you will see my face no more. This struck deep,
and from that hour 1 have heard no more of separation prom the Church.’
In May 1790 he delivered a famous discourse on Heb. v., 4, in which he told hia
preachers that for such as them to attempt TO CELEBRATE THE SACRA-
MENTS WAS TO COMMIT TUB SIN OP KoRAH, DATHAN, AND ABIRAM. He Said
“ Ye yourselves were at first called in the Church of England ; and though yo
have, and will have, a thousand temptations to leave it and set up for yourselves,
regard them not: be Church of England men still! Do not oast away tho
peculiar glory which God hath put upon you, and frustrate the designs of Pro-
vidence the very end for which God raised you up.” This sermon naively
remarks Dr. Rigg, “ was one of the latest” (Wesley died on the 2nd of March,
1791,) “ and by no means one of the ablest, most careful, or wisest” of his ser-
mons. In fact he more than insinuates (Relations p, 26) that the “ old man
eloquent” was suffering from a touch of “ dementia senilis,” that his faculties
had shown symptoms of failure, and that what little brains he had left were
turned by the flatteries which had at last begun to be showered upon him.
Further, the Doctor spends a great deal of his time in an attempt to prove that,
whether Wesle> contemplated the secession of the Methodists or not, he ought
to have known that secession would be the inevitable result of his policy—in
other words, that he ought all along to have been aware that he was creating a
spiritual Frankenstein.
It is due to the memory of a great and eminent Christian to defend him
from these insinuations, and, on the whole, the task is not difficult. Wesley’s
character was peculiar. Notwithstanding the expression of firmness that
stamps the beautiful postmortem portrait which Mr. Denny Urlin has
prefixed to his volume —an expression that strikingly recalls the features of
another great Wesley, the Duke of Wellington—the Founder’s mind was
remarkable por its receptivity. I had a singular tendency to take up—at
all events, por a time —new ideas. That he was for the moment impressed
with Peter Bohler’s theology, and Lord King’s theory of Orders, is likely
enough ; but that either had much abiding influence upon him is not proved.
Thus, in May 1738, he writes to Law almost abusing him for setting value


on Ordinances (Relations, p. 33); but by the beginning of 1740, he was just
as vehemently denouncing Bohlerism (John Wesley in Company, p. 67-71).
Having seen it in action he brands it as “ poison,” and he takes to system-
atically preaching St. James’s Epistle ;heis “ utterly ashamed of having
highly esteemed Luther’s blasphemies about good works and the law of God.
In 1767 he repudiated the abticulus stantis vel cadentis ecclesle ; and ha
STOOD TO HIS FIRST DOCTRINE TO THE VERY LAST _
As regards Holy Orders it is in complete accordance with Wesley’s tem-
perament that he should have been sometimes a little inconsistent. Sur-
rounded as he was with baptised pagans, it was only natural that he should
attach greater importance to the preaching of repentance than, to Church
Rules ; and when he found himself, as preachers of truth and righteousness have
often,'since his days, found themselves, resisted by “heathenish priests and
mitred infidels,” he might well be pardoned for at times doubting of the
grace of Orders. But his habitual belief never really wavered ; and it is :
instructive to notice how secretly conscious the officials of his Society have
all along been that their position was untenable. In the first place Dr..
Whitehead, the friend and biographer of Wesley, wrote tor ms tomb in the
City-road Chapel an inscription in which he described him as “ the Patron
and Friend of the Lay Preachers; ’’but, according to Mr. Urlin, this
striking expositio contemporanea of Methodism has been absolutely erased,
Nor does this fact stand alone. In 1828 Aexander Kuox drew attention to the
fact that the passage relating to the Deptford Society, and the Korak
Sermon , were omitted from Wesley’s Journal and his works. After this
exposure they were restored, and then the theory of senile imbecility was
invented to account for them. Mr. Urlin mentions a very fact in
connection with the Sermon. He quotes Dr. Whitehead’s distinct assertion that
“it was sometimes delivered before the assembled preachers. As the
preachers were accustomed to assemble but once a yea' - , it appears from this-
evidence, that the sermon had been preached to them for more than one
year —that is to say por several years.” It was, in fact, not a passing freak,
preached once on the date usually assigned to it, but A solemn charge
deliberately prepared and oft repeated. Finally he summed up his protest
against secession in a valedictory address which was published within a year of
his death :—“ I never had any design of separating from the Church ; I have
no such design now :I do not believe the Methodists in general design it. I do,
and will do, all that is in my power to prevent such an event;, nevertheless,
in spite of all I can do, many will separate from it; although lam inclined to
think not one half, perhaps not one thi'd of them. These will be so bold
and injudicious as to form a separate party, which, consequently, will dwindle
into a dry, dull, separate party. In flat opposition to these, J declare, once
more, that I live and die a member of the Church of England, and that none,
who regard my judgment will ever separate from it.”
Pregnant words, and in their substance, prophetic. The secession has ;
been even more complete than Wesley contemplated, but so has been the
ruin which has fallen on his work. The Conference has suffered from
repeated schisms, and its authority is not now RECoGNisED||by more than two-
thirds of those who profess and call themselves Wesleyans. Moreover, the
predicted dulness and dryness has come upon the whole body. As an order
within the Church they would have been as the very salt of the earth ; as a sect
they have fallen to the ordinary level and enjoy no special reputation for
sanctity or zeal They exist in Christendom a unique specimen of a schism
without the pretence even of an excuse. Wesleyanism now-a-days ,ie, in ‘fact,,
the counterpart of the war which- has unhappily broken out on the Continent,
It remains to add a few words respecting the two last books upon our list.
They are so different in plan that they should both be read by all that are
interested in the question. Mr. Urlin’s is a regular methodical essay; Mr-
Holden’s is an elaborate conspectus of High Church and of Wesleyan doctrine.
Of the two, Mr. Urlin’s is the more readable ; but as a book to circulate


amongst Wesleyans. Mr. Holden’s may, perhaps, be the more useful, as it
explains not only Mr. Wesley’s sentiments but the sentiments of the Catholic
School in our own day.
A simple test of the justifiableness of the Wesleyan Secession may be her®
suggested.—Let any impartial person read what Messrs. Urlin and Holden have
printed, and then consider what John Wesley himself would think of the posi-
tion taken up hy his followers, if he could return for a moment into this world.
If he could see,the magnificent growth of the English Episcopate, the yet
more wonderful movement in favour of Church building, or restoration, at home-,
and the rehabilitation of the character of the Clergy—if he could witness the
vast revival which has taken place in the matter of week-day Services, and of
Sunday, not to speak of Daily Celebrations —if he could look on our Churches
crowded with kneeling worshippers and vocal with articulate worship, our Altars
thronged by fasting communicants, our Clergy and Laity vying with each other
in their several legitimate spheres, who should best do the work of Evangelists—if ho
could have been present at our great Pan-Anglican Synod, and witnessed our all
but formal reconciliation with t he Oriental Church, which he so greatly admired,
—[also the celebrated twelve days Loudon Mission] —surely he would say “ this
work which, is the Lord’s doing, and is so marvellous in my eyes, must have-
been effected hy the hands of my disciples ! ” We appeal to all that reverence
Wesley’s memory, to think how sore a pang it would have cost him to learn that
any, who called themselves would ever lend their aid to the
opposition op religious education on the ground that the Clergy were in soma
places guilty of “ proselytism ” —that is, of doing jnst the very thing it grieved,
him so sorely, in his time, that they would not do —feed the lambs of Christ’s
flock. We do not ask Wesleyans to give up their Society, but, we do call
on them to reflect what a blunder and a crime it is to'be Methodists in any other
sense than the sense in which John Wesley understood it —and let them, under
no pretence, countenance any act on the part of any “ Minister” that is heyondi
the functions of a “ Lay P-eaoher.” Let them, in a word, be honest men,
and let them scorn to make use op John Wesley’s name and Society to do
what John Wesley would have abhored.
Note —All through this Pamphlet I have made large use of both Italic®
and Capitals, as I know them to be a great help to those who are “poor
scholars,” enabling them to seize upon the point of a sentence, which,
mnaided, they would be certain to miss.—Q. F. M'A„


THE PRINTED CIRCULAR
Which. Mr. Mansfield has persistently asserted to be “ a private
letter —
“ Primitiye Methodist Church, Parramatta,
“We desire to lay before you for your favorable consideration
the following- urgent and important case. The Primitive Methodist
Society, in Parramatta, have for many years been destitute of a
convenient place in which to conduct Divine Service. The Church
used by them at present being hired property, and in a very
dilapidated state, they are necessitated to commence the erection of
a new building as soon as possible. The estimated cost of the New
Church is about seven hundred pounds; towards this sum, the
Society has contributed about one hundred pounds, but being com-
posed of the labouring classes, they are unable to accomplish their
purpose without the assistance of those in more affluent circum-
stances.
“ We, therefore, earnestly solicit your generous aid, and trust
that the object will meet with that practical sympathy from you
which it deserves.
“J. H. DASH.
“ Boundary-street, Parramatta,”
Prints© by John Ferguson, Parramatta and Sidney.




♦■ ' '
*•
% • *
\
_ v
k.: Vt# • v ,
>
■>
