

X (p O^-
C /'^rß/^rry^. S-o
* \/ <5 '^jsuvx^Si
. e
>Vo
/?3/
' o




MISCELLANEOUS COMMUNICATIONS.
THE WESLEYAN METHODIST. (No. XLIX.)
METHODISM IN VAN DIEMEN’S LAND.
To the Editor of the Wesleyan-Methodist Magazine.
The island of Van Diemen’s Land
is about the size of Ireland, thickly
covered with trees, and rather moun-
tainous. There are numerous tracts
of rich soil; and not a few of 'the
locations of the emigrants form farms
of the finest description; hut that
portion of the surface which is capa-
ble of cultivation bears a very small
proportion to the whole. Hobart-
Town is in south latitude 44°: the
temperature is moderate, being a little
warmer than that of England, and in
general very agreeable to British re-
sidents, especially to those who re-
pair thither from India for the resto-
ration of impaired health. The winter
produces little frost, and the summer
no excessive heats, except during the
occasional visitations of hot winds.*
The aborigines are of a dark com-
plexion ; they have woolly hair, like
the Negro of Africa; and though
not deficient in intellect, nor natur-
ally ferocious, they are doubtless, in
the knowledge of the common arts
of civilized life, among the lowest
of the human race. Their number
is small: some say, not more than
six hundred in the whole island ;
though others conjecture there may
he as many as three thousand. The
hostility at present existing between
them and the colonists will, it is
feared, lead to their extermination.
This is deeply to he regretted; and
the Lieut. Governor has shown the
utmost anxiety to avoid it; hut
every pacific measure seems to fail of
its desired effect. The colonists now
number about twenty thousand per-
sons ; being all British convicts, or
British emigrants, with their respec-
tive descendants. Hence, after a
long and dreary voyage of fourteen
thousand miles, and reaching even
the opposite side of the globe, on my
• These winds, blowing from the westward
over the vast Pacific ocean, are not easily
accounted for. On some occasions the air
appears heated as the steam of a furnace :
I have seen the thermometer stand in the
shade at 113 degrees. In a few hours (the
utmost duration of such extreme heat) the
gardens, &c., exposed to the stroke of the
wind have been scorched as with tire.
landing at Hobart-Town, in April,
1820, I found myself in a country
whose population was composed en-
tirely of English, Scotch, or Irish;
and as they had of course borne with
them, across the wide ocean, the lan-
guage, customs, and manners of
their country, it truly seemed “a
little England on the south side of the
sun.” Hobart-Town had then been
founded about sixteen years ; and
was a surprising place, considering
that it had risen, in so short a period,
out of the wild woods. It now con-
tains above six thousand inhabitants,
spreads over an extensive space of
ground, and is pretty regularly laid
out, being intersected by streets
running nearly at right angles. The
harbour is capacious and excellent,
and sometimes contains a large
number of ships. Hills of consi-
derable eminence surround the great-
er part of the town, one of which,
lying two or three miles inland, rises
to the height of near four thousand
feet; and is, r during three-fourths of
the year, occasionally capped with
snow, presenting a conspicuous and
striking object from both the town
and harbour.
When I landed, after my long
voyage, I was filled with shuddering
and horror at the sight of so many
men, “kept bound with chains and
in fetters,” every one of whom, in
more than one circumstance, resem-
bling the “fierce” and “injurious”
man among the tombs. On the
Sabbath morning I went to the gaol-
yard, and got about one hundred and
fifty of them assembled in the open
air. I read an appropriate portion
of Scripture, and addressed them as
pathetically and faithfully as I could,
and then distributed among them a
number of religious tracts. I was
pleased with their attention, and ap-
parent respect and gratitude ; and
the gaoler, some years afterwards, in-
formed me, that the unhappy men
continued long to speak of that occa-
sion in such terms of approbation
as if it were the only engagement of


widow, whose conduct is commended by our Lord, he replied, “ Never
mind that; the Lord will provide.
‘ The birds without barn or storehouse are fed :
Of them let us learn to trust for our bread.’ ”
He possessed an ardent zeal for the salvation of men. After having
toiled hard in his worldly occupation, on the ordinary days of the week,
he frequently travelled to Hathersage, Castleton, and other villages in
Derbyshire, to hold meetings for prayer and religious communion. “ I
have frequently known him,” said the friend before referred to, “ take
his Bible, and go from house to house in the court in which he lived, and
read to the inmates the third chapter of St. John’s Gospel, enforcing up-
on them the necessity of a death unto sin, and a new birth unto righteous-
ness. In one of these houses a number of infidels were accustomed to
meet on the Sabbath-day, to read the ‘ Black Dwarf,’ and similar publi-
cations. Samuel resolved to break up this establishment; and for this
purpose visited it, and preached ‘ repentance towards God, and faith in
the Lord Jesus Christ: ’ nor did he desist until the members of the club
entirely abandoned the premises.” Would to God, that all those who pro-
fess the religion of the blessed Jesus were, in their respective spheres,
equally zealous, faithful, and persevering.
With all these excellencies, Samuel Wardlaw was a very humble man.
He frequently, and especially in our love-feasts, recommended the culti-
vation of a meek and humble spirit; and in the last love-feast he ever
attended, in Carver-street chapel, he very feelingly touched on this topic.
Amongst other remarks, he observed, “ I found it very difficult to get in-
to the valley; but now that I am there, I find it to be a most lovely place.”
As a proof of the humbling tendency of the doctrine of entire sanctifi-
cation, it should be noticed here, that our deceased friend often said, he
did not properly understand what humility was until he was made “per-
fect in love,” and filled with the fruits of righteousness, which are by
Jesus Christ, unto the praise and glory of God.
His end was peace. During the last month of his life, his bodily
strength rapidly decreased; but he experienced little or no pain, and
was not entirely confined to his bed until within two or three days of his
death. On the evening of October 31st, 1829, it was evident to those
who were attending him, that the time of his departure was at hand; and
as they were anxious to ascertain the state of his mind at that solemn
season, his son-in-law, who is a useful Local Preacher in the Sheffield
East Circuit, roused him from a slumber into which he had fallen dunng
the day, and inquired, “ Father, is Jesus now precious to you?” to which
he replied, with much of his usual energy of feeling, “ Aye, aye.” Have
you any fear of death ?” his son-in-law further inquired. He answered,
in a similar manner, “ No, no.” Thus lived and thus died Samuel Ward-
law, in the eighty-third year of his age, having been, during fifty years
of his life, an exemplary member of, and for thirty years a useful Class-
Leader in, the Methodist Connexion.


the kind that had afforded them in-
terest and pleasure. Having given
previous notice, at the corner of a
street, near the centre of the town, I
stood upon the steps of a small build-
ing, then used as a court-house, and
preached on three or four successive
evenings to congregations tolerably
numerous and increasingly attentive.
As the worship was conducted with
singing and extemporary prayer,
(things then quite novel there,) and
familiar and earnest addresses to the
hearts and consciences of the hearers,
it produced some stir in the almost
undisturbed dominions of Satan.
However, plain dealing did not ofiend
them; there was not a murmur of
disapprobation; and on my taking
leave, some of them followed me in
the street, entreating me to stay
among them; intimating that they
were sheep without a shepherd, left
to perish in their sins, surrounded by
ignorance and crime. Indeed, of
this little nominally Christian state
it might then be said, with peculiar
propriety, " The whole head is sick,
and the whole heart is faint; from
the sole of the foot even to the head
there is no soundness in it; but
wounds, and bruises, and putrefying
sores : they have not been closed,
neither bound up, neither mollified
with ointment.” The principal au-
thorities were living in the open and
indecent contempt of the laws of
God; and the mass of the commun-
ity, lost to country, character, and
family, were doing “ evil, only evil,
and that continually.” My spirit
was stirred within me. I did sin-
cerely pity their great moral and re-
ligious destitution ; and under strong
excitement of mind, while on my
passage to Sydney, I wrote on their
behalf to the Missionary Committee.
This letter, part of which was pub-
lished in the Missionary Notices the
following year, induced a benevolent
friend in England, not wealthy, but
whose various efforts and sacrifices
to promote the cause of IVJissions
demonstrate his “ yearning pity for
mankind,” to present the Committee
with 100 Z., on the stipulated condi-
tion that a Missionary should be im-
mediately appointed to Van Diemen’s
Land. This letter also moved some
pious persons, members of our so-
ciety, to emigrate to Hobart-Town;
and they have proved a blessing to
God’s infant cause in that remote
and sinful region.
It was in the year 1821 that the
first Methodist society was formed in
the island. Two or three pious sol-
diers, belonging to the forty-eighth
regiment, who had been brought to
the knowledge of the truth in New
South Wales, were the chief instru-
ments of the work. Of these “ de-
vout soldiers,” Serjeant Waddy was
the most distinguished and useful.
He was brought to God under the
ministry of Mr. Lawry, at Sydney;
was highly respected by all classes,
and was made useful to many of his
comrades and others. When he pro-
ceeded with the regiment to India,
he bore with him the strong regards
and sympathies of many of the co-
lonists ; but in that unhealthy cli-
mate, he soon fell a victim to disease,
and was removed to a better world.
These worthy men had no sooner
reached their barracks at Hobart-
Town, than they “ saw the wicked-
ness of the place was great, and it
grieved them at their hearts.” Ac-
customed to meet for social prayer at
Sydney, they diligently sought a con-
venient place for a prayer-meeting,
that their own hands might be
strengthened, and that they might
call upon God in behalf of a wretched
people, so destitute of the means
of grace, and so given to ini-
quity. They met for some time,
without molestation, at a little ob-
scure house, I think in Liverpool-
street. Interest was soon excited;
their meetings became well attended;
and the power of God was present to
wound and to heal. A class was
now formed, the meetings were re-
gular ; a Sunday-school was attempt-
ed ; and the praying soldiers ob-
tained assistance from certain people
of the place who had joined with
them. These things could not pass
unnoticed; opposition was roused;
stones were thrown at the windows ;
and some confusion was produced.
In addition to this circumstance,
the owner of the house was threat-
ened with evil from another quarter,
more to be dreaded than the stones of


the rabble. He became alarmed, closed
his door against the little society, and
told them they could meet no more
under his roof. Thus persecuted and
expelled, they were at a loss where to
go: but God, who has the hearts of
all in his hands, soon provided for
the ark “ a quiet resting-place.” At
this time Charles Down, of Argyle-
street, a constable, a freed convict,
and a man of good report, was
erecting on his premises a little
room of a certain temporary con-
struction, known there by the name
of a skilling. This was thought a
suitable place, and two persons were
deputed to make inquiry. Charles
was busily at work about the skilling
when the men arrived. He had no
objection to let the little place for
such a purpose; but it would not be
safe for him to do so till he had con-
sulted his wife. This woman was
a notorious drunkard, a frightful
scold, and a bitter Roman Catholic.
She refused, declaring she would
suffer no Methodists to come near
her dwelling. In consequence of
this formidable opposition, the obse-
quious husband met the applicants
with a flat denial; and the poor men
retreated, disappointed and grieved.
During the succeeding night there
was a severe thunder storm, a rare
occurrence at Hobart-Town; and
while
“ The lightnings flash’d and thunders roll’d,”
Mrs. Down lay on her bed listening
in the deepest agitation of mind, ter-
rified by guilt and superstition; and,
believing that God had sent this awful
visitation to warn her of his anger
at the sin she had committed, in re-
fusing to grant his servants the use
of the house for a place of prayer, in
the darkness of the night, and in
terror of conscience, she exclaimed to
her husband, “ O, the Methodists shall
have the skilling, Charles ! The Me-
thodists shall have the skilling! ” In
the morning a message was dispatched
to the “ little flock,” informing them
of the important revolution in their
favour ; and that the room, as soon
as it was finished, would be at their
service. They came, and erected
the altar; and there “ God was en-
treated of them.” Charles Down
became a true convert, and lived and
died an ornament to the society.*
His ungodly wife was soon drawn
by curiosity, or some other motive,
to join the outer circle of the little
praying company. God met with
her, in his great mercy, enlightened
her dark, polluted mind, and “ con-
verted her from the error of her
ways.” From the time she was
“ created anew in Christ Jesus,” she
lived about two years, witnessing a
good confession, and then died tri-
umphant in the faith ; leaving us in
possession of another glorious proof,
that “the Gospel is the power of
God unto salvation.”
Within the year after the com-
mencement of the work, Mr. Horton
arrived from England, to occupy the
station. He found a little society
and congregation ready to receive
him, assembling in the house of
Charles Down, which had now un-
dergone an enlargement, and was
held at a weekly rent. Mr. Horton
was soon after joined by Mr. Turner,
who continued there for some time ;
and his labours were rendered useful
to many. The room for worship was
now too small, and was further en-
larged ; but still as a chapel it was
very incommodious and badly si-
tuated ; a new chapel therefore was
obviously required. This was com-
menced in 1822, on an eligible site
in Melville-street, presented by Mr.
David Lord. Many of the inhabi-
tants subscribed liberally towards its
erection, and Mr. Horton was inde-
fatigable in begging for it of all
within his reach. Scarcely a vessel
entered the harbour, but he visited
it, for the purpose of obtaining aid
in behalf of the chapel. The utmost,
however, which he could do was to
raise the walls, on which he expended
above 400/., labour and building ma-
terials being then exorbitantly high.
Want of funds to proceed occasioned
the work to stand still for nearly two
years. At length some little assist-
ance, in the way of materials and
labour, was obtained from the Colo-
nial Government; and the Missionary
Committee granted the Trustees the
sum of 200/., and also a loan of 500/.
At this period. May, 1825, 1 returned
* See Wesleyan-Methodist Magazine for
1828.


thither from New South Wales, and
found the roof then being put on.
The chapel was completed, and open-
ed on the 12th of February following.
Its dimensions are sixty feet by forty
without; and being stuccoed neatly,
it ranks among the ornamental build-
ings of the town. A vestry and
school-room are included in the
building, being separated from the
chapel by apartition wall. The interior
of the chapel has an excellent appear-
ance. 1 think I have scarcely seen any
one of its size to equal it. To me, as-
sociations render it peculiarly dear ;
and many times have I heartily joined
with the pious people therein assem-
bling, to bless God for so “ amiable a
tabernacle,” in so remote a part of the
world. Within its hallowed precincts,
preaching, prayer-meetings, class-
meetings, lovefeasts, sacraments,
have been “ as rivers in dry places;”
for there in his ordinances, the glori-
ous Lord has revealed himself as a
place of broad rivers and streams.
May the eyes of Jehovah ever be to-
wards that sacred spot, and may his
ears be open to the prayers of his
people worshipping there!
Before we quitted the old chapel,
we held, as suggested by the Confer-
ence of 1824, the centenary of the
venerable Wesley’s ordination to the
Christian ministry. It was with us
a high day, and should never be for-
gotten in the history of Methodism
in Van Diemen’s Land. To myself
it was unquestionably one of the
most happy days I ever spent; and
such a disposition to praise God for
Wesley and Methodism I never be-
fore experienced. For several years
the glory of the Methodistic church
had been hidden from my eyes; I had
wandered in dry and barren wastes ;
my harp was hung on the willows,
and I felt I could scarcely “ sing the
Lord’s song in a strange land.” But
on that happy day, we were joined to
British churches ; we were joined to
Methodism from its commencement.
Standing as on an eminence, with our
eyes fixed on Oxford, and all theglories
of the Methodist world before us, we
sung with indescribable sensations, —
“ See how great a flame aspires,
Kindled by a spark of grace j
Jesu’s love the nations fires,
Sets the kingdoms on a blaze : ”
together with the other hymns in
our book so beautifully descriptive of
the triumphs of Gospel grace. It
was a holy day to the “ congregation
of the Lord ; ” no servile work was
done thereon; we were early in the
house of God ; and there, with little
intermission, we continued till late
at night. At the close of this “ fes-
tival day,”—after the congregation
had been addressed by three speakers
on the following subjects respec-
tively, namely, the character and
labours of that eminent Minister of
Christ in remembrance of whom the
day had been kept; the doctrine and
discipline which God had been pleased
so signally to own in the conversion
and salvation of souls; and the pre-
sent extended state and prospects of
Wesleyan Methodism in the Chris-
tian world, —a liberal collection was
made towards the formation of a pub-
lic library, to bear the name of Wes-
ley, as a characteristic memorial of
this wondrous man, and of this dis-
tinguished day. This was the first
public library in these colonies; and
it did not fail to provoke, in various
quarters, a laudable and profitable
emulation. It is deposited in the
excellent vestry belonging to the new
chapel, and contains at present about
five hundred volumes, comprising
all the large standard Wesleyan
works, and a valuable collection of
history and general literature. One
branch of it forms a lending library
for the use of the poor belonging to
the congregation. It has also a ju-
venile branch; and the institution
altogether promises to be of consi-
derable importance in diffusing that
knowledge which is “ profitable ” for
the “ life that now is, and for that
which is to come.”
The Hobart-Town society is not
large, having seldom been above fifty
members. From the peculiar cir-
cumstances of this and the sister co-
lony, the cause of genuine piety can-
not reasonably be expected to make
a rapid progress. Every inch of
ground is gained only by the most
strenuous exertion, and retained only
by the greatest vigilance. In addi-
tion to a turpitude of character con-
fessedly of deeper die than in any
other branch of the empire, there is


the unsettledness of abode naturally
attendant on new colonies, and a fe-
verish state of business, which keeps
the mind continually on the rack.
Where there are large interests at
stake, with small capital, and little
confidence, the effect is paralyzing to
the moral and religious character.
How unfavourable to piety residence
in a new colony is, none can form
any conception but from experience.
Hence every pious emigrant should
move from his native shores, trem-
bling for his spiritual and eternal
safety. I had occasion to enter into
a correspondence on a matter of con-
science with a distinguished indivi-
dual in one of the colonies; which
was concluded by him in the follow-
ing words ; —“ lam not disposed to
justify myself. If I have erred, I
trust it will please God to make my
way plain, that I may not err again.
But it is not in this instance only
that I am in perplexity and danger.
My office is daily surrounded by
temptations, of which the enemy is so
sure to take advantage, that unless
counteracted by the influence of the
Spirit in an extraordinary degree, the
soul must be ruined.” This extreme
peril of the soul extends to every occu-
pation, civil, commercial, and domes-
tic. The successive removals to
India of the pious soldiers, with their
respective regiments, also consider-
ably diminishes the number of the
society. But if it be numerically
small, considering the time and cul-
ture bestowed on it, it should be ob-
served it is second to no other church
there, and contains much stable,
lively, intelligent piety. The con-
gregation, too, is of a most interest-
ing kind, and for some years has
exhibited a steady improvement. It
contains several amiable, large, and
respectable families, presenting an
inviting field for pulpit and pastoral
labours.
Methodism, according to its own
native genius, bears on its front in
Van Diemen’s Land the stamp of
active piety. “ I like your society,”
said the late Attorney General to me
one day, after he had in another
quarter experienced some little disap-
pointment in procuring agents to pro-
mote the interests of the Auxiliary Bi-
ble Society; “ I like your society, for
you are all a working people.” I am
happy to testify in behalf of our
friends there, that they are active in
promoting their Master’s cause; and
their zeal has provoked many. No
work of Christian benevolence fails
in their hands. In the Sunday-
school department, the Bible, Mis-
sionary, Tract, Strangers’ Friend,
and other kindred Societies, they
exhibit a conduct whose lustre can-
not easily be obscured by comparison
with other churches abroad or at
home. Our Sunday-school, the oldest
and the largest in the colony, con-
tains one hundred and fifty children,
and has been for several years con-
ducted in a manner highly creditable
to the teachers. Nearly five hundred
children have passed through it since
its commencement in 1821. This
institution is much respected by dif-
ferent classes in the colony. When
the venerable Archdeacon Scott visit-
ed the colony from New South Wales,
in 1828, he attended an annual ex-
amination of the children, lauded the
teachers and the school, and left a do-
nation of five pounds to the funds of
the institution. Some time ago, a se-
cond school-room was wanted for the
accommodation of the children. The
Lieutenant Govenor was applied to
on the subject. His Excellency very
promptly answered the application ;
and after strongly commending the
school, and the Mission of which it
was a branch, he gave us a grant of
three hundred acres of land, with
permission to dispose of it to the
best advantage for securing the ob-
ject. We sold the land, and with
the proceeds purchased a very eligible
house and premises beside the chapel.
For their zeal and liberality in the
Missionary cause, the members and
friends of our society deserve special
praise. The branch society was form-
ed in 1824 ; and that year, by great
exertion, and to the astonishment of
not a few, they raised one hundred
pounds. The next year it was feared,
from various considerations, that sum
could not be equalled ; but, to our
great gratification, it was exceeded.
The next year, notwithstanding the
scarcity of money and the commercial
distress which prevailed, our zealous


friends exceeded the former by above
twenty pounds. The two succeeding
years were attended by a similar pro-
gress. In the year 1829, the last of
which we have any account, there
was an augmented Missionary feel-
ing. Two respectable females, one
of whom had a large family of very
young children, by resolution and
indefatigable toil, raised the sum of
sixty-five pounds. Before the an-
nual meeting, the subscriptions in
the town amounted to above two
hundred pounds sterling. At the
meeting, about two hundred and fifty
persons were present, including poor
convicts and their children, of whom
there were many; and though the
greatest donation did not exceed a
sovereign, the amount of the collec-
tion was nearly twenty-seven pounds
sterling.
If it cannot be said, “ the word run-
neth very swiftly,” yet in a pleasing
manner the little leaven is gradually
spreading. At a social meeting con-
nected with the Wesleyan Library,
the given topic for conversation was,
“ How can a private Christian make
himself most useful in the world ? ”
The subject was canvassed in its va-
rious bearings, and many profitable
observations were made. A private
member of the society who was pre-
sent received a new impulse of bene-
volence ; and on leaving the meeting
he resolved to make a new “essay to
do good.” On the following Sab-
bath, taking with him a quantity of
tracts, he walked about six miles into
the interior; visited several families,
some of whom had scarcely attended
public worship for twice twenty years;
got as many of the inmates together
as he could ; talked affectionately to
them about their souls’ interests;
prayed with them, and left his tracts.
Thus he went from house to house,
embosomed in the thick woods. He
visited them a second and a third
time; then rented a house for a li-
mited period, at his own expense ;
engaged them to meet together on
the Sabbath, and procured suitable
persons to attend from Hobart-Town
to conduct public worship. God was
pleased to own the pious effort; se-
veral were “quickened who had been
dead in trespasses and sinsa class
was formed, a Sunday-school estab-
lished, and they met on week-days
for prayer among themselves. They
now felt their want of a chapel, and
expressed a desire to make an effort
to raise one. Accompanied by the
friend who first visited them, I called
on them at their respective houses ;
and, though generally very poor,
procured subscriptions for a chapel
to the amount of fifty pounds; and
about two months before I left the
colony for England, I had the plea-
sure, amidst a large party of friends
from Hobart-Town, of laying the
foundation stone, and of preaching
on it to a very interesting congrega-
tion ; when upwards of eleven pounds
were collected towards the erection.
While we afterwards sat taking some
refreshment, and singing hymns, un-
der a rude shady bower, previously
prepared for us by the well-disposed
people on the spot, Mr. C.,a surgeon,
from Hobart-Town, in extensive
practice, (who, though not a member
of the society, had for three or four
preceding years liberally attended the
Missionary’s family gratuitously,)
observed to the company, that he was
a friend to Methodism, and wished
to show his desire to befriend those
who were its friends ; that having
just heard that the valuable and eli-
gible site on which the chapel was to
be erected had been given by a poor
man present, who was his patient,
he took that opportunity of publicly
stating, that he was so pleased with
the benevolent act, that he did then
freely remit the long-standing bill
which was due to him for professional
services, from the owner of the
ground, his late father, and other
branches of his large family.
I must not close this paper without
a brief narrative of our Mission at
Macquarie Harbour. This is the
penal settlement of Van Diemen’s
Land, situated at the back of the is-
land ; and so surrounded by vast
mountainous ranges, deep impassable
ravines, barren rocks, and trouble-
some seas, that it seems naturally
fitted for the last place of human
banishment. To this dreary region
the convicts are sent who have been
convicted of various felonies com-
mitted in the colony. Not a few.


therefore, of the men sent thither
have been twice or oftener respited
from the gallows. Here then, in
consequence of the necessary priva-
tions and rigours of the place, the dis-
agreeable employment of the wretch-
ed men, and their own wickedness,
—“ hateful, and hating one another,”
—misery and despair exercise a joint
and frightful tyranny, and the “pains
of hell ” are endured upon earth.
This unhappy place, of which “the
tale cannot be told,” had been estab-
lished several years previous to the
government of Colonel Arthur; but
though some hundreds of men had
so long resided there, the feet of one
messenger of Heaven’s mercy had
never yet approached their wretched
abode. Our worthy Lieutenant Go-
venor heard much of them ; felt
much for them ; and finally resolved
to send them a Methodist Missionary,
if one could be procured. One morn-
ing I received from him a hasty mes-
sage, desiring my immediate attend-
ance at Government-House. I found
him surrounded by papers and clerks
making up despatches for a vessel
about to sail for England. His Ex-
cellency stated to me, he was then
employed in writing to Earl Ba-
thurst, His Majesty’s Secretary of
State, requesting that application
might be made to the Wesleyan
Missionary Committee for a Mission-
ary to be stationed at Macquarie Har-
bour : intimating, that what he had
seen of our Missionaries in the West
Indies, and elsewhere, had induced
him to believe that they, of all Mi-
nisters whose labours he had witness-
ed, were best fitted .for his object;
and requesting me to write, by his
despatch, to Mr. Butterworth, to ap-
prize him of the interview and the
object of it; and expressing His Ex-
cellency’s hope that Mr. 13. would
become the-medium of communica-
tion between Downing-street and the
Committee. Before my letter reach-
ed England, our valuable friend, Mr.
8., was no more; but a communica-
tion was made to the Committee from
the Colonial Office, which led to an
interview with the noble Secretary,
and an agreement to send out, as
soon as possible, a Missionary for
Macquarie Harbour,on condition that
Government should allow to the
Committee one hundred and , fifty
pounds for his outfit and passage,
and one hundred pounds a year to-
wards his support. In consequence
of this arrangement, Mr. Schofield
arrived at Hobart-Town, October,
1827. But having previously touch-
ed at New South Wales before he
reached us, he heard so many fright-
ful accounts of the privations, perils,
and hopelessness of Macquarie Har-
bour, that he entertained considera-
ble doubts as to the propriety of pro-
ceeding to such an appointment.
However, when I accompanied him
to Government House, and he had
listened awhile to the pious and pa-
thetic pleadings of His Excellency in
behalf of three or four hundred of
our own countrymen, more wretched
and more needing the aid of a Chris-
tian Minister than any class of
Heathens, in the true spirit of a man
of God, “ reasoning not with flesh
and blood,” he consented to engage
in this new experiment of mercy.
Soon after, in the name of the Lord
Jesus, and with weapons mighty
through God, he proceeded in a Go-
vernment vessel to encounter the foe
in his last and best fortified “ strong
hold.” Mr. Schofield has proved a
right man for the benign and magna-
nimous enterprise, and has justified
the choice of the Committee, and the
favourable opinion of His Excellency
the Lieutenant Governor. Good has
been done among the chief of sinners
at Macquarie Harbour. The excellent
Missionary is much respected by all
classes there; and by many of the
wretched men he has been hailed as
a Minister of “glad tidings of great
joy.” He has been indefatigable in
the use of various methods of Chris-
tian instruction ; and there, as for-
merly at Corinth, the power of the
Gospel has triumphed over “ thieves,
and drunkards, and fornicators, and
revilers.” “ Such they were; but they
are washed, and sanctified, and justi-
fied in the name of the Lord Jesus,
and by the Spirit of our God.” I bear
testimony to what I have seen and
heard. Before I left Hobart-Town,
men had returned from that place of
sin and sorrow, walking in upright-
ness of life, and with their mouths


filled with praises to the great Ruler
of events; who, in his beneficent and
inscrutable providence, had made
banishment to Macquarie Harbour
subservient to their conversion to
God. Pursuing them by the calls of
his Gospel to the “ farthest verge ”
of the “ far country,” and “pulling
them out of the fire,” he there made
them the monuments of mercy, and
partakers of his salvation. It may
be stated, as a pleasing proof of the
general estimation in which the Mis-
sion is held there, that last year near-
ly twenty pounds were raised by the
poor soldiers and the few civil offi-
cers of that place, for the support of
the general funds of our Missionary
Society.
Although there are some pleasing
circumstances relative to Methodism
in this distant region which remain
untold, I dare not add to the length
of these statements. But, in conclu-
sion, I may be permitted to remark,
that if in the designs of a gracious
Providence, Methodism was raised
up, as our venerable Founder sup-
posed, “ to reform the nation, and
spread scriptural holiness over the
land, ” then there is reason to hope
that in Van Diemen’s Land it as-
sumes its natural position, and is,
in some humble degree, answering
the end of its existence.
“ More and more it spreads and grows.
Ever mighty to prevail ;
Sin’s strong holds it overthrow’s.
Shakes the trembling gates of hell.
“Jesus, mighty to redeem,
He alone the work hath wrought :
Worthy la the work of Him,
Him who spake a world from nought.”
Penzance, 1831. B. Carvosso.
P. S. Since the above was written,
I have received letters of recent date
from Van Diemen’s Land, which con-
tain interesting intelligence relative
to the work of God since I left. In
the chapel at Hobart-Town, a new
gallery has been erected for the ac-
commodation of the children of the
Sunday-school; and about forty new
members have been added to the so-
ciety. Some of their public meetings
had been attended by remarkable
displays of divine power in the
conviction and conversion of sinners.
The little chapel at O’Brian’s Bridge,
of which I laid the foundation-stone
on new year’s day, 1830, had been
opened on new year’s day, 1831.
The Rev. A. Macarthur, the Presby-
terian Minister, preached on the oc-
casion ; and the collection amounted
to upwards of 20 1, sterling. The
pews were all let, a good congrega-
tion was formed, and the society was
increasing. Having received an ac-
cession of Local Preachers, several
new preaching places were attempted.
The proceeds of the Branch Mission-
ary Society had exceeded the former.
The public collection at the Anni-
versary, amounted to 44 1. 55.; and
the total subscriptions and collec-
tions for the year, to 275 1. ss. 10 d.
The colony now supports its own
Missionaries, and has this year re-
mitted to the funds of the parent in-
stitution a surplus of 100 Z.
B. C.
THE STUDY OF THE HEART.
To the Editor of the Wesleyan-Methodist Magazine.
The subject which is suggested by
the title of this paper, is one which
has occupied, more or less, the at-
tention of the wise and good of every
age. The reader has probably heard
of the seven Grecian sages. Ancient
Greece produced seven men of supe-
rior wisdom, who were distinguished
by taking, each as a motto, some
striking aphorism which they deemed
worthy of universal attention. The
first of these, Solon, appropriated to
himself that admirable saying which
Juvenal thought, from its excellence,
must have descended from heaven ;
TvSiQi <reavr6v* This Grecian legis-
lator showed a mind greatly in ad-
vance of his contemporaries, by ap-
proaching so near to that dictate of
heavenly wisdom which says, “Com-
* “Know thyself.” Their sayings were
not all of equal Importance : two or three of
the others, however, were good. That of Cle-
obulus was, ''Apii'ov fxtrpov, “ The medium is
to be preferred.” That of Perlander, MeA errj
rb Truy, “ Industry does every thing.’’


mune with your own heartand by
discovering that self-knowledge is
worthy to be placed among the most
important science.
This peculiar study is more apt to
be neglected than almost any other.
It is astonishing, if we reflect seri-
ously upon it, how many of the hu-
man race live and die without ever
obtaining any knowledge of them-
selves at all. The various workings
of that mysterious mind which dwells
within them, —its motives, inclina-
tions, prejudices, and self-deceptions,
its strength and its weakness, its su-
periority to the body, and yet its sub-
jection to it, —all this includes a vast
‘field which is to them totally unex-
plored. And that which renders this
ignorance the more wonderful is, that
the subject so important to be studied
is not, from its distance or abstruse-
ness, difficult of attainment. It is
not confined to scarce and rare vo-
lumes, nor written in languages un-
known. All that vast collection of
mysteries which man includes in the
term “self,” is always near at hand,
and lies open continually to his own
inspection.
How is it, then, that by the great
majority of mankind, this self-know-
ledge js never acquired ? Many rea-
sons sufficient to account for this
maybe assigned. There are, it must
be recollected, many causes in con-
tinual operation either to prevent
man entirely from acquiring this self-
acquaintance, or, at least, to reduce
the time spent in the investigation of
his own character to a very small
amount. The view of “ the naked
human heart ” is not the most agree-
able one to fallen human nature ; and
it is not likely to be approached except
as a matter of mere duty. Man wil-
lingly turns aside from the contem-
plation of the failing and defective
parts of his own mind, to dwell on
a more soothing and delightful vision
in his supposed excellencies. He is,
besides, continually surrounded with
objects, the natural tendency of which
is to attract his attention entirely to
themselves, and thus to withdraw it
altogether from what passes within
his own breast. Outward objects
are, indeed, perpetually soliciting
entrance to the mind ; and while it
is occupied with these, there is from
the effects they produce an inward
process still going on, by which the
character of the man is formed, or
at least greatly influenced ; while he,
not being habituated to inspect what
passes within, is in great measure a
stranger to the whole.
The mind, as it has often been re-
marked, is in this respect in a situa-
tion perfectly analogous to that of
the eye, in reference to the body. It
is continually receiving impressions
of which it is at the same time un-
conscious. It views all things; but,
without a reflex act, it views not it-
self. We have the means of placing
the eye fully in its own view, as a
subject of interesting examination.
But where is the mirror that shall
give to the mind the same facility for
self-inspection ? The power which
the mind, as compared with the eye,
possesses of obtaining an exact re-
flection of itself, is much less per-
fect. It becomes, indeed, the sub-
ject of its own examination only
through the means of long-continued
effort, and of a habit of directing
the operation of thought back upon
itself, which is not easily acquired.
Children, and young people in ge-
neral, are so taken up with external
objects, that they seldom give any
intimation that the scrutiny of the
heart forms any part of their intel-
lectual exercise. And the same is
true of the generality of the unedu-
cated classes, who, in this respect at
least, are but “ children of a larger
growth.” And, unless in those cases
where the mind becomes the subject
of powerful religious impressions, we
may say that even the greater num-
ber of educated men continue all
their lives, as nearly as possible,
complete strangers to themselves.
They may not be aware of this ; they
would perhaps most strenuously de-
ny it. But to any discerning mind
it appears plain, that they are the
slaves of powerful inclinations, cf
the very existence of which they are
unapprized ; that they are under the
influence of prejudice, which they
mistake for reason; and are govern-
ed by ruling'passions, which they call
by the name of duty.
To view this subject, however, in


00333712


