

Methodism:
ITS RELATION TO
Catholic of Christ.
l890.




METHODISM:
ITS RELATION TO THE CATHOLIC CHURCH
OF CHRIST.
AN ADDRESS
DELIVERED AT THE
SIXTH GENERAL CONFERENCE
OF THE
AUSTRALASIAN WESLEYAN METHODIST CHURCH,
In Sydney, 7TH May, 1890.
Dedicated —without Permission —to the Members of the Conference.
Publisbeb by tbe request of the Conference.
By JOHN C. SYMONS,
Ex-President.
MDCCCXC.




PREFACE.
I have adopted the unusual course of printing beforehand
the address which I am required to give in retiring from the
chair of the General Conference. I have done this because I
am impressed with the importance of the subject which I have
attempted to discuss, and am anxious to deal with it as fully as
the circumstances under which I have to speak will admit; while
at the same time I desire to take the entire responsibility for the
views which I express.
I have used the name “ Catholic,” of set purpose, in the sense
in which it is used in the Apostles’ Creed. I decline to surrender
that term to any one section of the Church as its exclusive right.
I am conscious of repetition in several instances; but it has
seemed to me that by such means I could more distinctly present
my views.
The length of the address will make it necessary that I should
omit considerable portions in its delivery. I have added additional
notes at the end, which I hope will be found of service in con-
firming and illustrating the arguments of the text.
I have inserted dates to some of the statements and authorities.
Those having reference to ecclesiastical history must be regarded
as approximate, and mostly have regard to the particular quota-
tions in the text.
The New Testament quotations are from the Revised Version.
JOHN C. SYMONS.
7 th May, 1890.
“The Conference presents to the Ex-President its hearty
thanks for his clear and elaborate address delivered before the
Conference, and requests him to furnish a copy for publication
in a permanent form.”




METHODISM:
Its Relation to the Catholic Church of
Christ.
In letiring from the chair of the General Conference, to which
honourable and responsible position my brethren were good
enough to elect me, I am required to “ deliver an address prior
to the election” of my successor in office. It will be believed
that the performance of this duty is one of no small difficulty,
the selection of subject or subjects to be dealt with,-together
with the manner of treatment when selected, involves anxiety
since it is sure to evoke great difference of opinion as to the*
wisdom or propriety of the selection, and probably as to the
views which may be expressed.
We meet to-day under circumstances which in my judgment
are of exceptional interest; and the question to which I desire to
your thoughts is the position of the Australasian Wesleyan
Methodist Church, and the relation which it bears to the
Universal Church of Christ and to the world.
Wesleyan Methodism began in these Colonies as missions from
the mother land. These missions, by a gradual consolidation,
weie erected into a “ Connexion” of societies in 1855, and entered
upon self-government, subject only to a confirmation of their
acts by the parent Church. A second step was taken, when, in
1 .73’ loca h or colonial self-government, was provided for. A
still further advance was made when, in 1875, provision was
made that laymen were to be formally—they had previously been
virtually associated with ministers in the government of the
Church, and were to be constituted members of Annual and
Genera Conferences. A final development took place when the
General Conference of 1881, composed of equal numbers of
ministers and laymen, sat together as one body, possessing and
exercising equal powers.
Gradually, between 1812—when the first Methodists in New
oouth Wales formed themselves into a society, and in 1814 wrote
asking the parent Church in England to send them a minister—
and the present time, throughout Australasia, New Zealand, and
the islands of the Southern Seas, Christian societies have been
formed.-' These have been consolidated and federated, until
ioth T iBis firSt miSSlonary ’ the Rev * S * Lei g h . reached Sydney, August


to-dav as the representatives of these “united societies,” we
meet as the supreme governing power of this spiritual federation.
But the question arises to-day in a manner, and certainly to an
extent which it has not hitherto assumed, Do we meet as the
reDresentatives of voluntary Christian societies, or as the repre-
sentatives of a Connexion of Churches, which by voluntary action
have become a federated Christian Church—a true branch of the
Catholic Church of Christ-with all its rights. responsA.ht.es
and obligations to Christ and to the world ? I p- the
unanimous reply by this audience would be, We meet as a true
and ”al Christian 7 Church, and I take it that reply would be
echoed throughout the Christian communities of our land.
And vet I L not sure that this would be so lam convinced
th£ lar-e numbers of members and adherents of our own Church,
both here and in England,.have no correct conception of their
“ Church” relation to Methodism, or of the relation of Methodism
to the Universal Church of Christ. And there is an . ot t he r r ' las ®
who positively refuse to acknowledge that the Methodist Chuich
—or P indeed any non-Episcopal Church throughout the wor
has any right to be recognised as a true Chuich of Ch ,
that hs ministers have any scriptural claim to be ministers of
Christ; and that therefore its Christian ordinances or sacraments
are invalid, and, worse than that, are sinful m the sight of God
Were this dogma held only by the Roman Catholic Church, I
should not waste my time and your patience m even notmmg 1 .
If it were held only by the “ Oxford Tractanans,” and their school,
It might be permitteli to die a natural death ; but when it meets
us continually, if not in its extremest views, at any late under
some of its guises; when men like the eloquent Canon Ltddon
nnr i t u e “ Principal of Pusey House, Oxfoid, and others, are
pressing these extreme sacerdotal theories to-day 1 trust it will not
be deemed either uninteresting or untimely that I should otter to
you some thoughts on these topics. My remarks must necessarUy
be fragmentary and—relatively—brief, when the extent of the
questions are concerned, although I fear they will be long enough
to tire'your patience.
The nucleus of the Christian Church was formed when, during
the life of Christ, He sent forth seventy of His disciples, to go
before His face” into the cities and villages, and pieach
“the kingdom of God was come nigh to them. •‘ The twelve
apostles were the personal attendants of our Lord ; they were
also to preach that the “ kingdom of God was at hand, f Aftei
* T nke x i—l 7. In Matt. x. 1,7, Mark vi. 7, 12, we are informed of the
LuKe x 1 y , , as nreachers Whether this preceded or
*oTSe not dear The twelve were no,
to go into any cities of the Gentiles or the Samaritans,
f Mark iii. 14 —19 1 Lrik e ix. i 6.


His resurrection He directed the eleven disciples to “go into
all the world, and preach the Gospel to the whole creation.
From this it would seem as if the duty of preaching —of making
disciples —was to be theirs exclusively, notwithstanding the seventy
had previously been so engaged : they were to be witnesses of
Christ’s life, and especially of His resurrection.f They were
also to be invested with extraordinary and miraculous powers.J
These were conferred upon them on the day of Pentecost.§
The first distinct association of Christians after Christ’s
ascension was the gathering together of “about a hundred and
twenty,”|| who waited in Jerusalem “ for the promise of the
Father” that they should “ be baptised with the Holy Ghost not
many days hence.”^[
The inauguration of the Church was at and by the descent of
the Holy Ghost on the day of Pentecost, when the “ all” who
were with “one accord in one place,” were baptised with the
Holy Ghost. And not the apostles only, but all the one hundred
and twenty “ brethren,” no distinction being made between the
apostles and others.
After Pentecost the organisation of the converts was of a very
simple kind. The Christian Church presented a striking
contrast to the Jewish Church. Peter’s sermon resulted in the
addition of three thousand to the new religion. These—added
to the apostles and brethren assembled at Pentecost —“ con-
tinued steadfastly in the apostles’ teaching and fellowship, in the
breaking of bread and the prayers.” **
A further statement is that “ all that believed were together,
and had all things common. . . . And day by day, continuing
steadfastly with one accord in the temple, and breaking bread at
home, they did take their food with gladness and singleness of
heart, praising God, and having favour with all the people.”ff
What exactly is meant in this brief record is not quite clear, and
for a full exposition of the passage I must refer to the various
commentators.
The apostles’ “teaching,” was the truths declared by Peter in
his sermon, and must also include explanations of these in
personal instruction. Fellowship must comprehend some well-
understood regulations, to which all agreed, and to which they
submitted. Whether it meant anything more than “partnership”
in the community of goods which we are told existed, or
whether it also included fraternity in the sense of social intercourse
and mutual edification, is not easy to determine ; most probably
both. Whether the breaking of bread is to be understood as
commemorative of the Lord’s death, and equivalent to the “Lord’s
I
* Matt, xxviii. 19, 20; Mark xvi. 15, &c.
f Luke xxiv. 48 ; Acts i. 8. J Mark xvi. 16—18. § Acts ii. I—4,1 —4, 7 —12..
|| Acts i. 15. If Acts i. 4, 5. ** Acts ii. 42. ff Acts ii. 44 —47.


Supper,” or simply that the converts took their meals together in
their own houses, I do not pretend to decide ; it is, however,
generally understood to mean the former. Daily prayer in the
temple was one of the things in which they continued ; it is
significant that while their prayers were in the temple, their
breaking of bread was at home ; and it is added, “they did take
their food with gladness and singleness of heart,” giving strong
countenance to the opinion that the breaking of bread was a
social meal, and not of the nature of the Lord’s Supper.
Naturally, in the earliest stages of Christianity the apostles were
the most prominent; but they do not appear to have been the
first public —and were certainly not the only—preachers. The
Saviour speaks of sending forth “ prophets, wise men, and
scribes.”* The seventy were the first Gospel itinerants and
preachers. N
But here it must be remembered that on the occasion of
Pentecost, the tongues of fire, the gift of the Holy Ghost, of
languages, and other special endowments were conferred not
upon the apostles only, but upon all the disciples —“tongues
parting asunder, like as of fire, sat upon each one of them”f —which
must mean “ each one” of the one hundred and twenty who had
been congregated together in the upper room; and “they were all
filled with the Holy Spirit,” &c. From which I gather that, while
the personal commission to preach was given by Christ after His
resurrection to the apostles only, the qualification, and with it the
duty to preach, was conferred upon all the disciples who con-
stituted the Christian Church at its inauguration at Pentecost.
That preaching was not confined to the twelve apostles, nor
to any class or order, is evident from a variety of circumstances,
(i) It is probable that though Peter’s was the only formal sermon
at Pentecost, yet that other informal addresses were given by
some of the disciples; or else the remarks of the multitudes
who heard them speak in their own language the “ wonderful
works of God” can have no (2) After Pentecost the
first recorded sermon was not from an apostle, but from Stephen,
a recent convert. (3) Next we have Peter and John “testifying
and speaking the word of the Lord” at Samaria. (4) Then
Philip instructs the Ethiopian, and subsequently is preaching at
“ Azotus,” and “in all the cities, till he came to Caesarea.” (5)
Ananias intructs Saul at Damascus. (6) Saul himself at once
becomes a public teacher. (7) The converts who were scattered
abroad upon the persecution of Stephen preached in numerous
cities and districts, and particularly at Antioch, where “ a great
* Matt, xxiii. 34.
fR.V., margin, reads, “Or parting among them, or distributing them-
selves.”
J Acts ii. 6—12.


number that believed turned to the Lord,” and where the first
Church called “Christian” was established. These instances will
sufficiently show that preaching was not the exclusive privilege
or duty of the apostles.
Naturally in the early Church the apostles occupied the most
prominent position; but we have no evidence that there was any
such marked difference in authority between them and some of
the converts as is sometimes supposed. The apostles abode in
Jerusalem while persecution following the death of Stephen
scattered the Church.* They soon became itinerants, visiting
some of the Christian communities in different parts, who had
been gathered together through the preaching of the scattered
brethren,! preaching the Gospel, confirming the believers, and
establishing Churches. What the form or order of government
of these Churches, or what the institutions to which the converts
were required to conform, or to which they had to submit, we
are not informed. Two things only seem plain that is, that
Baptism was required as the badge of membership, and the
Lord’s Supper was partaken in every congregation; but we have
no evidence that these were administered solely by the apostles.
It does not seem possible for the apostles to have personally
baptised the three thousand converts at Pentecost. Philip
baptised the converts at Samaria. J He also baptised the Eunuch.§
Ananias baptised Saul.|| Paul thanks God that he had only
baptised a few persons at Corinth, declaring, “Christ sent me
not to baptise, but to preach the Gospel.”^[
The apostles were divinely appointed as His ambassadors, and
were instructed by Christ,** and sent forth with the authority of
making laws,ff coercing the guilty and depraved when necessary,JJ'
and of working miracles when occasion required.
No definite constitution was given by Christ to the Church.
Progressive revelation has characterised God’s dealings with
man, and the same method appears in regard to the Christian
Church. Principles are laid down by Christ, but the application
of them was left to the apostles and to the followers of Christ.
It was left for others and other ages to formulate doctrines
and define discipline. And to-day, as from the very inception
of the Church, we are not bound necessarily to follow any
precedent, except so far as it may be seen to be scriptural and
apostolic. Adaptation, and not uniformity, characterised the
primitive Church. Truth must be held with tenacious grip ; but
this is perfectly consistent with variation of ecclesiastical regula-
tions, and revision as to the methods of presenting truth.
* Acts viii. i. t Acts viii. 14 ; ix. 32 ; xi. 22, 23.
+ Acts viii. 12. § Acts viii. 38. || Acts ix. 18. 1 Cor. i. 14 —17.
** Matt. x. I—2o1 —20 ; xxviii. 18— 20; Markxvi. 15 —18; Johnxiii. 20.
jcx. 22, 23; Luke x. 16; Matt. xvi. 19. 1 Cor. v. 3—6, 11, 13; Titus i. 5.


The first appointment of officers in the Church was the setting
apart the seven who were to attend to the care of the widows,
and to other duties, so that the apostles might “continue
steadfastly in prayer and in the ministry of the Word.”* In
this first appointment of officers several striking circumstances
present themselves. (1) The suggestion for the appointment
“of men of good report, full of the Spirit and of wisdom,”
was from the “twelve” apostles, and was made by them to
“the multitude of the disciples.” (2) The “whole multitude”
approved of the suggestion. (3) They made the selection of
the brethren, and submitted the men whom they had selected to
the apostles for their approval and appointment. (4) The
apostles approved the selection and nomination, and separated
them to their office by prayer and laying their hands on them.
What were the precise duties of these first officers of the
Church is not clear. There is no scriptural authority for calling
them “Deacons;” nor is it at all certain that the modern idea that
they were set apart to mere secular duties is correct. The term
itself originally means a minister, and was not restricted to any
kind of ministration.f Some, at least, of the seven —popularly
called deacons —were engaged in the work of preaching and
publicly addressing the people, as notably Stephen and Philip.
We next find Elders coming into prominence. % They were
clearly a different order, or at any rate occupied a different
position to the deacons. When they were first appointed, and
how, we have no information. That they must have been
appointed and designated to their office by the apostles is mani-
fest, and that they had most important duties allotted to them is
evident; for we find them associated with the apostles in the
direction and government of the Church. They sat with the
apostles in the first Council in Jerusalem.§ Some of the apostles
used the term “ elder” as applying to themselves. John describes
himself as “ the elder unto the elect lady,” j| or “ the elder to the
beloved Gaius.”f Peter, addressing the churches of Asia Minor,
writes, “The elders who are among you I exhort, who am a
fellow-elder.”** Elders are called by the names “presbyters,”
“bishops,” “overseers,” and these terms were undoubtedly used
indifferently to describe the same persons, or to designate the
same office.
* Acts vi. 2—7.
f Diaconos = “ follower, or helper’’—originally applied to any kind of
ministration. Used by Paul in speaking of himself (see Rom. xv. 16;
2 Cor. xi. 23; Eph. iii. 7; Col. i. 23, 25). Once applied to magistrates, as
in Rom. xiii. 4, where —as in the preceding instances —it is translated
*• minister.”
+ Acts xi. 30; xiv. 23; xv. 4, 6, 22, 23; xvi. 4; xx. 17 (R.V., margin, or
“Presbyters”); 1 Tim. v. 1, 17, 19; James v. 14.
§ Acts xv. 4,6, 22, 23. II 2 John 1. *|f 3 John 1. ** 1 Peter v. 1.


As to the form of worship, we have slight information in the-
New Testament. Diversity necessarily resulted from the circum-
stances of the times and place. Where persecution raged,
secrecy was necessary. Private dwellings, obscure neighbour-
hoods, caves, and places of sepulture had to be used for worship ;
while the worship itself must have often been of an informal and
quiet character. When caution and secrecy were not necessary,
we read of Aquila and Priscilla—both at Corinth and Rome —
having Christian worship in their own house; in the house of
Mary the mother of Mark; of Lydia; of Nymphas; and of
Philemon.* At Ephesus Paul held meetings in the school of
one Tyrannus,f no doubt hired for the purpose.
The earliest, and a most interesting, description of Christian
worship, as found in the Apology of Justin Martyr (cir. 140), is as
follows :
“On the day called Sunday, all who live in cities or in the
country gather together in one place, and the memoirs of the
apostles or the writing of the prophets are read as long as time
permits; then when the reader has finished, the president verbally
instructs and exhorts to the imitation of those good things. Then
we all rise together and pray, and as we have before said, when
our prayer is ended, bread and wine and water are brought, and
the president in like manner offers prayers and thanksgivings
according to his ability, and the people assent, saying Amen ;
and there is a distribution to each, and a participation of that
over which thanks have been given, and to those who are absent
a portion is sent by the deacons. And they who are well-to-do,
and willing, give what each sees fit; and what is collected is
deposited with the president, who succours the orphans and
widows, and those who through sickness or other cause are in
want, and those who are in bonds, and the strangers sojourning
among us, and, in a word, takes care of all who are in need.
But Sunday is the day on which we all hold our common
assembly, because it is the first day on which God, having wrought
a change in the darkness and matter, made the world ; and Jesus
Christ our Saviour on that day rose from the dead.” J
In the discussions which arose between the Jewish and Gentile
converts at the Council at Jerusalem,§ the apostles did not
exercise independent authority, but united the “elders” with them.||
Apostolic Christianity had no sacerdotal class; it had no
* i Cor. xvi. 19; Rom. xvi. 3,5; Acts xii. 12; xvi. 40; Col. iv. 15;
Phil. 2. f Acts xix. 9.
\ Justin Martyr , p. 66, Clark’s edition. See also the description by
Tertullian , Vol. 1., p. 119. It will be noted that the word “ president” is
here used, not bishop, or elder, or deacon. So also in the description of the
Lord’s Supper the same term “ president,” or “ to one of the brethren who
was presiding” (see Justin, pp. 63, 65, Clark’s edition).
§ Acts xv. 1 —29. II Acts xv. 4, 6.


hereditary order, as had the Jewish Church. All Christians were
a “holy priesthood.”* Every believer, if so inclined, was at
liberty, according to his gifts and graces, to take part in the
public services of the Church, if he could do so to the edification
of the Assembly,! and without creating disorder. The only
exception to this was that women were forbidden to take part in
the public services.”!
The Apostolic Christian Church was afamily, of which Christ was
the Head. He was and is the Prophet and High Priest of and for
entire humanity—the Mediator for all mankind. When the Old
Testament idea of the priesthood is applied to Christ, it is to
show that while no visible particular priesthood exists in the
Christian community, yet that Christianity has its “ great High
Priest, who hath passed through the heavens and since access
to God through Him is free to all, so there needs no human
priest to stand between God and the believer. Christ “hath
opened the kingdom of heaven to all believers.”
Neander says: —“The essence of the Christian community
rested on this: that no one individual should be the chosen
prominent organ of the Holy Spirit for the guidance of the
whole; but for the advancement of the Christian life and of
common ends, all were to co-operate, each at his particular
position, and with the gifts bestowed on him, one supplying what
might be wanted by another.” || Thus there were diversities of
gifts, but the same spirit.
The result at which we arrive is, that at the first each Christian
community or Church was composed of the converts, and the
presiding and officiating officers or ministers. “ Discretionary
power existed of forming the government of the Church in such
manner as the circumstantial reasons of times and places, &e.,
may require . . . and every Christian society has a right to
make laws for itself, provided that these laws are consistent with,
charity and peace, and with the fundamental principles of
Christianity.”^
Leaving the primitive and apostolic Church of the first century,
we pass over the ages, and at the end of eighteen hundred years
we inquire what is the Christian Church of to-day ? I cannot, of
course, pretend to present to you the peculiarities of doctrine,
discipline, Church order, or government of the different denomi-
nations of Christendom ; nor can I even discriminate between
the claims of the Eastern and Western, the Episcopal and non-
Episcopal sections into which the Christian Church unhappily
* i Peter ii. 5, 9 ; Rev. i. 6.
t 1 Cor. xii. 27 —31, compared with 1 Cor. xiv. I—l 9,1 —19, 27 —33.
+ 1 Cor. xiv. 34; 1 Tim. ii. 12. § Heb. iv. 14, 15.
|| Neander’s History of Church, Vol. 1., p. 250 (Bohn’s edition).
■II Mosheim’s Ecc. his., Vol. 1., p. 87.


is divided. Restricting my remarks to the Protestant Church,
how enormous and striking are the differences between the
primitive Church and that of the nineteenth century ! Whether
these are in the main such only as naturally arise from the
changes in the world during these centuries, and are adapted to
the new and ever-varying conditions of race and circumstances,
or whether—as some believe—Christianity, as it existed and was
taught by the apostles, in its power, its appliances, and its
spirituality, has been lost, or at any rate largely diminished, I
shall not attempt to determine.
I am, however, compelled to inquire, Is it, or is it not true
that a large portion of the Christian world have so far departed
from Christ’s authority as that they are virtually without the
Sacraments which He has ordained, and are deceiving them-
selves with the erroneous belief that they are true Churches Of
God, while they are outside, and are left to the “ uncovenanted”
mercies of Almighty God —whatever that may mean ?
It is claimed that Christ founded His Church in “ the sense of
a visible society; that there is a great continuous body—the
Catholic Church. There it is; none can overlook its visible
existence, let us say, from the time when Christianity emerges out
of the gloom of the sub-apostolic age down to the period of the
Reformation. And all down this period of its continuous life
this society makes a constant and unmistakable claim. It claims
to have been instituted as the home of the new' covenant of
salvation by the Incarnate Son of God.”*
It is further insisted that “Jesus Christ founded a visible
society or Church, to be the organ of His Spirit in the world, the
depository of His truth, the covenanted sphere of His redemptive
grace and discipline. Now, such a society, as by its very nature
is to be universal and continuous, must have links of connection ;
and in the uninterrupted history of the Church, as it is spread
out before us, from the latter part of the second century, one
such link has always existed in the apostolic succession of the
ministry.”!
Now, though I should not be disposed to adopt these terms,
yet it may be conceded that “the Church of Christ is, by the
admission of all parties, apostolical, or derived in some manner
from the apostles.”!'
But the question to be decided is, What is the nature and
character of this “ succession ?” With the claims of the Roman
Catholic Church I do not propose to deal ; but those of the
Anglican Church—as distinguished from those of the Reformed
Church of England, and as belonging to one section of that
Church —must be briefly stated.
* Gore’s Ministry of the Christian Church. + Ibid.
> Palmer’s Book of the Church , Vol. 1., p. 172.


Dr. Hook says: “There is the line in which the ministry of
the Church is handed on from age to age : the corporate lineage
of the Christian clergy, just as in the Jewish Church there was a
family lineage. The Church of England maintains the apostolical
succession in the preface to her ordination service. Those are
said to be in apostolical succession who have been sent to labour
in the Lord’s vineyard by bishops who were consecrated by
bishops who were consecrated by those who, in their turn, were
consecrated by others, and those by others, until the derived
authority is traced to the apostles, and through them to the Great
Head of the Church. The apostolical succession of the ministry
is essential to the right administration of the holy sacraments.
The clergy of the Church of England can trace their connection
with the apostles by links not one of which is wanting, from the
times of St. Paul and St. Peter to our own.’”” Elsewhere Dr-
Hook writes: “ Here the reader will perceive what is meant by
iminterrupted succession —viz., a perfect and unbroken transmission
of the original ministerial commission from the apostles to their
successors, by the progressive and perpetual conveyance of their
powers from one race of bishops to another. The process thus
established was faithfully carried on in every branch of the
universal Church. And as the validity of the ministry depended
altogether on the legitimacy of its derivation from the apostles,
infinite care was taken in the consecration of bishops to see that
the ecclesiastical pedigree of their consecrators was regular
and indisputable.” “ Without this”— i.e., uninterrupted succes-
sion—“an distinction between a clergyman and a layman is
utterly vain, for no security exists that heaven will ratify the acts
of an illegally constituted minister on earth. Without it ordina-
tion confers none but humanly derived powers.”f
Canon Liddon argues from the texts, “All power is given
unto Me in heaven and in earth; go ye, therefore, and make
disciples of all “As My Father hath sent Me, even
so I send you.”§ He says : “ The apostles, thus invested with
the plenitude of ministerial power, detached from themselves, in
the form of distinct grades or orders of ministry, so much
as was needed at successive epochs for building up and
supporting the Church. First, they created an order that was
charged with the care of the poor and with the administration of
Church funds, although also especially empowered to preach
and to administer the sacrament of baptism. Next, they
bestowed upcn the Church a large separate instalment of minis-
terial power--that of the presbyters or bishops—as in those
first days the second order was called indifferently. To this
* Church Dictionary. Article, “Apostolical Succession.”
f Hook’s Church Diction try. Article, “ Succession, Apo.stolical.’
+ Matt, xxviii. 18, 19. § John xx. 21.


•order full ministerial capacity was committed, except the faculty
of transmitting the ministry. Lastly, St. Clement of Rome tells
us that, desiring to avoid controversy, which they foresaw, the
apostles ordained certain men, to the end that when they should
have fallen asleep in death others of approved character might
succeed to their special office. Such were Timothy and Titus,
not yet exclusively called bishops, but certainly bishops in the
sense of the sub-apostolic and of our age; men who, in
addition to the fulness of ministerial capacity, had also the
power of transmitting it.”* “ Upon a true succession depends
the validity of the Eucharist —one chief means of communion
with our Lord.” “ The bishop alone can transmit ministerial
power to others.” He is the “ one teacher within its limits”—
i.e., his diocese. “In the eye of the Church all the clergy are his
substitutes.” “ Non-episcopal bodies may have a true baptism,
supposing the matter and words of that sacrament to be truly
administered.” “ That which in our belief, and to our sorrow,
the non-episcopal communities lack, is participation in those
privileges which depend upon a ministry duly authorised by
Christ our Lord, and in particular the precious sacrament of His
body and blood.”f
It would be easy to present other and fuller statements of the
Anglican theory of the Church ; but I have neither time, nor is
it necessary to do this. What, then, according to these “High
Church” claims, is essential to a true Church, and to the validity
of Christ’s sacraments ? The reply is that there can be no true
Church to-day which has not a ministry which is ordained by a
bishop who is able to trace back his ecclesiastical lineage through
other bishops through all the ages to the apostles themselves ;
that “ a ministry not episcopally received is invalid—that is to
say, falls outside the covenanted security;” and that, whatever
there may be that is scriptural, or pious, or spiritual in non-
Episcopal Churches, they can have no true ministers, and no valid
sacraments. Such is a brief but exceedingly moderate statement
of high Anglican claims.
What answer have we to make to this ? Are we willing to
accept this dictum ? Are we, as a portion of the Church of Christ,
content as ministers to regard ourselves, or to be regarded as
“ Korah, Dathan, and Abiram,” and as people to be left to the
“uncovenanted” “grace” of God? Or do we believe that our-
selves, and other non-Episcopal Churches, are true Churches, and
that we are true ministers of Jesus Christ ?
Our reply must necessarily take us over very wide ground, and
must, from the nature of the case, be fragmentary and brief. It
should take us to the institution of the Christian Church by
■Christ Himself; to its constitution and development under the
* A Father in Christ , &c., pp. 9, 10. j Ibid, pp. 16—21.


direction of the apostles ; to the rise, progress, and remarkable
claims of sacerdotalism ; to the conflicting theories of Church
government in the present, and especially the claim of the Divine
right of Episcopacy. I must, however, refer you to the very con-
densed reference to the Church of the apostles which I have
already presented to you, and must pass at once to the considera-
tion of the Anglican claim of apostolical succession.
It will be necessary here to state the meaning which we attach
to the word “Church.” The word itself is derived by some from
the Greek kuriakorr, “pertaining to the Lord,” or “ the Lord’s
house.” From this comes the Scotch kirk ; the Anglo-Saxon
cyrce, or circe; the German kirche. Others derive the word from
kuren , “to elect,” or “ the called,” or “ called out.” It is derived
by some from the Latin circus , or the Greek kirkus.
' In the New Testament the word translated Church is ecclesia ,
“an assembly,” which is its classical meaning.* Watson gives
its meaning" as “an assembly met about business, whether
spiritual or temporal.”!
In the New Testament the word “ Church” means an assembly
worshipping in any given place,! or the collective body of
Christians throughout the world.§ It is also used to designate
the building in which public worship is held.
It seemed at first to be doubtful whether the Saviour intended
His followers to be formed into a body separate and distinct
from the Jewish Church; but from Matt. xvi. 18, and especially
from Matt, xviii. 17, where under certain circumstances com-
plaints are to be submitted to and decided by the Church, || all
doubt on this head was removed.
It will be admitted that Christ founded a Church, “ in the
sense of a visible society,” which He clearly designed to be
perpetual. In the beginning discipleship preceded unification-
Reception into the brotherhood of Christ’s Church was accom-
panied with some outward sign and pledge of fealty. The
converts before Pentecost were disciples only, save the apostles.
* See Acts xix. 32, 39, 41.
t In this sense it is used on the occasion of the tumult at Ephesus (Acts
xix. 23 —41). It describes an assembly of citizens, called together usually
by a herald, or in some public manner. Those thus called were designated
the elect—the called. In this instance the town clerk contrasts the dis-
orderly gathering (verse 41) with the lawful assembly, or ecclesia (verse 39).
J 1 Cor. i. 2; xvi. 1; Matt, xviii. 17; Acts xii. 1.
§ Acts v. 11; ii. 47. Instead of “ there were added to the Church,” &c.,
the R.V. reads, were “ added to them”— i.e. , to those spoken of in verses-
-44—47.
|| Instead of “Tell it to the Church,” the R.V. reads in the margin,.
“ congregation. ” There is not the slightest authority, either from
Scripture or tradition, for the claim set up by Dr. Hook on behalf of the
Anglican Church, that it is “the Church,” to the exclusion of all other
Churches.


The converts at and after Pentecost were recognised as members
of the Church by their being baptised.' 5 ' 5
The Church of England at the Reformation adopted the well-
known definition, “ The visible Church of Christ is a congrega-
tion of faithful men, in which the pure Word of God is preached,
and the sacraments duly administered according to Christ’s
ordinance in all those things that of necessity are requisite to the
same.”f This definition distinguishes between the whole body
of believers in every age and the company of. faithful men who
are associated and known as such to each other. The former is
called the “whole family in heaven and earth,”j who are named
by the Father, “The Church of God, which He hath purchased
by His own blood.”§ This is the invisible or universal Church.
The visible Church comprises those who are united together in
Christian life, worship, ordinances, discipline, and effort.
We have next to inquire whether there is any scriptural evidence
for the claim of what is called “Apostolical Succession.”
What were the qualifications, what the powers of the apostles ?
Had they any successors ?
They were “ messengers” sent forth by Christ with a definite
message. They were His ambassadors to the race which He came
to seek and to save. They were restricted in their number, and
were called “ the twelve.” They were the personal attendants
upon Christ, and thus were instructed by Him. They were
gifted with plenary authority as teachers in regard to faith
and morals. They had the power of working miracles;
and they were witnesses to the facts of the life, teachings,
and resurrection of Christ. Now, was it possible that they could
have successors ?|| If the twelve apostles were ambassadors, it
is evident that they could not transmit their powers to others. If
they were witnesses, that was a qualification which could not be
transmitted. Whatever else may or may not have been the
qualifications of an apostle, it is certain that he must be a personal
witness. “Ye are witnesses of these Matthias was
elected to fill the vacancy of Judas because he was “a witness
with us \_i.e., the apostles] of His resurrection. ”** Paul the apostle
born out of due time, was called by Christ, who said to him, “For
to this end have I appeared unto thee, to appoint thee a minister,
and a witness both of the things wherein thou hast seen Me and
of the things wherein I will appear unto thee.”ff The apostles
had and could have had no successors. (See Note A, p. 32.)
* Acts ii. 41. f XlXth. Article of Religion. JEph. iii. 15. gActsxx. 28.
|| Dr. Isaac Barrow says :—“ The apostolic office, as such, was personal
and temporary, and therefore, according to its nature and design, not com-
municable to others in perpetual descendence from them.” — Barrow's
Work, Vol. 111., 53. Supremacy.
% Luke xxiv. 46 —48. ** Acts i. 21, 22. ff Acts xxvi. 16 ; xxii. 14, 15.


It is contended that although in their extraordinary quali-
fications the apostles could have no successors, yet that they were
empowered to commit and transmit to others the ordinary gifts
which they possessed, and that they did so transmit these gifts
and powers to and through special officers who are called
“bishops,” and that through this order the gifts and powers of the
apostles are possessed and exercised to-day by duly consecrated
bishops. Is there any scriptural evidence of this ? Is there
evidence of the existence of such an “order” in the records of the
New Testament ? ' We reply—
Two orders only of ministers are mentioned in the New
Testament—deacons and elders, called indifferently “presbyters,”
“bishops,” “overseers” —they were different names for the same
office. As we have seen, Peter, though an apostle, calls himself
“your fellow-elder.”* John speaks of himself as an elder.
Paul, when addressing the elders at Ephesus,f and committing
the care of the Churches to them, exhorts them, “ Take heed
unto yourselves, and to all the flock, in the which the Holy
Ghost hath made you bishops. Here the same persons
are described as elders (presbyters), overseers, bishops; the
terms are convertible. It is attempted to be shown that Timothy
and Titus were bishops in the modern Anglican sense. In
reply, it may be noted that neither Timothy nor Titus is called
a “bishop” or a “presbyter”; Timothy was to watch in all things,
endure afflictions, “do the work of an evangelist, fulfil thy
The ordination of Timothy was to the office of an
elder or presbyter, because his ordination was “with the laying on
of the hands of the presbytery.”|| Nor is this inconsistent with
the direction, “ Stir up the gift of God, which is in thee through the
laying on of my hands. Evidently the elders were associated
with Paul in Timothy’s ordination ; but if it were episcopal
ordination, then those who were only presbyters performed the
mockery of taking part by laying on of hands in an episcopal
ordination, and that, too, in association with an apostle!
Titus was to abide in Crete “to set in order the things that
are wanting, and appoint elders in every city” as the apostle
had directed. Describing the character of those who should
be appointed, the apostle writes, “ For a bishop must be
blameless,” and immediately before speaking of the elders, “If
any be blameless,” &c., clearly showing that the two names are
synonymous, and refer to the same office.** Similar remarks apply
to i Tim. iii. i, 2.
The late Bishop Lightfoot, one of the ablest scholars of the
day, says: “It is the conception of a later age which represents
* i Peter v. i, 2, + R.V., in the margin, “ presbyters.”
t Acts xx. 28—31-. R.V., margin, “overseers.”
§ 2 Tim. iv. 5. || 1 Tim. iv. 14. 2 Tim. i. 6.
** Titus i. 5 —7. R.V. in margin reads “overseer.”


Timothy as Bishop of Ephesus, and 1 itus as Bishop of Crete.
St. Paul’s own language implies that the position they held was
temporary. In both cases their term of office is drawing to
a close when the apostle writes.” (See i Tim i. 3; iii. 14;
2 Tim. iv. 9, 21 ; 1 Tit. i. 5; iii. 12.)
1. The word bishop (episcopos) is never in the New
Testament used to signify the office of oversight over ministers,
but only over the “ flock” of Christ.*
2. Bishops and elders or presbyters are terms which in the
New Testament are common and convertible, meaning the same
office. This is admitted by all parties.
3. Bishops and presbyters are described as possessing the same
■qualifications,! receiving the same ordination, and discharging
the same duties.
4. Presbyters sat with the apostles on equal terms at the first
•council in Jerusalem*! Had there existed any such order as
bishops in the modern sense, it is inconceivable that they should
not have been mentioned. (See Note B, p. 32.)
Turning from Scripture to ecclesiastical history, what is its
-evidence on this question ? Undoubtedly Scripture alone can
decide the question at issue; still we do not refuse to look at
tradition —for such early ecclesiastical history largely is.
Jerome (cir.- 390) says: —“In the beginning the churches
were governed by the common council of presbyters.”§ “We
may show that anciently bishops and presbyters were the same ;
but by degrees, that the plant of discontent might be rooted, all
care was transferred to one. . . . The bishops who are set
•over them should know that they are greater than the presbyters,
rather by custom than by the appointment of the Lord. ||
Speaking of what was done after John had written his Epistles
the beginning of the second century —he says : “ What was done
afterwards, when one was elected who was set over the rest, was
for a cure of schism, lest every man insisting upon his own will
rend the Church of God.”^[
On the passage in the Teaching of the Apostles —viz., “ Elect,
therefore, for yourselves bishops and deacons worthy of the Lord,
&c. —Bishop Lightfoot says : —“ When our author wrote, ‘ bishop
still remained a synonym for ‘ presbyter,’ and the episcopal office,
properly so called, had not been constituted in the district in
which he lived.”** (See Note C, p. 33.)
Archbishop Cranmer says : —“ The bishops and priests were
(the same) at one time, and were not two things, but both one in
office, in the beginning of Christ’s religion.”
* Acts xx. 28; Phil. i. 1 (“ with,” not over, -'the deacons”); 1 Tim. iii.
I—s1 —5 (“taking care of the Church of God”); 1 Peter ii. 25. R.V., margin,
* ‘ overseer. ’ ’
f 1 Tim. iii. 1,2 ; Titus i. 5—7; Acts xx 17,28. R.V.,margin, “overseers.”
-+ Acts xv. 2,4, 6, 22, 23. § Comment on Titus. || Ibid.
EpistleH.,, Ad ** Expositor, January, 1885.


Archbishop Whitgift says:—“As for ‘pastors, bishops, doctors,,
deacons, &c.,’ they be necessary ministers in the Church ; but it
doth not therefore follow that there must be always one kind
and form of government.”*'
Hooker asserts that “ the first bishops in the Church of Christ
were the blessed apostles.”f But this is taking for granted the
very thing which has to be proved; it is a complete begging the
question. Besides, it makes the apostles and presbyters the
same order, since certainly in Scripture bishops and presbyters
were alike. The apostles had no successors. Hooker allows
this, for he writes: “In some things every presbyter, in some
things only bishops, in some things neither the one nor the
other, are the apostles’ successors.”^:
Hooker argues that tradition ought to be accepted as to the
apostolic origin of Episcopacy, and closes with these words:
“Let men, therefore, hereby judge of what continuance this
order, which upholdeth degrees of bishops, must needs have
been, when a general council of three hundred and twenty
bishops themselves, within three hundred years after Christ’s
death, doth reverence the same antiquities’ sake as a thing
which had been even of old observed in the most renowned
parts of the Christian world.”§ This might be well enough if
we were asked to accept Episcopacy as a method of Church
order, but not as the only true and valid order.
It will not be necessary to discuss the question as to whether
the Apostle Peter was Bishop of Rome, and that he ordained his
successor, and from him all the bishops (or popes) are descended
in direct line. There is no scriptural, and very doubtful
authority for believing that Peter ever was in Rome, or ever
presided over the Church in that city. If that could be proved
—which it cannot —ecclesiastical authority is divided as to who
succeeded him. Irenaeus says that “the blessed apostles” Peter
and Paul “ delivered the bishopric to Linus” —not Peter alone.
There was a tradition that Peter delivered it to Clement.
Irenaeus tells us that Clement was bishop of Rome after Linus
and Anacletus—being the third in order; whereas Tertullian
makes him the fourth. The apostolical constitutions make him
second; Linus being ordained by Peter, and followed by
Clement, who was ordained by Paul. In fact, the succession is
altogether confused; and I venture to say that no conveyancer
on searching a title to property under such conditions would
report to his client that it was good. (See Note D, p. 33.)
But assume, for argument sake, that the first succession of the
bishops of Rome were settled, yet the frequent subsequent
irregularities must have broken many links in the chain. Felix
* Works, Vol. 1., p. 368. f Eccles. Polity , Vol. 11., p. 245.
+ Ibid, Vol. 11., p. 248. § Eccles. Polity, Vol. 11., p. 280.


111. (355) was not considered a true pope because he was elected
during the exile of Liberius. Honorius (625) was condemned
as a heretic for Monotheism. Under John VIII. (872) the
Greek and Latin Churches separated, each of which claims to be
the true Church, and anathematised the other. Boniface \ 1.(896),
Leo VIII. (963), John XVI. (986), were all regarded as irregularly
elected.
In 1378 Urban VI. was crowned pope at Rome, but soon
after his election was declared illegal because it had been
compulsory, and Clement VII. was elected, and lived at Avignon;
so two popes were reigning at the same time, excommunicating
and anathematising one another. This condition of dual popes
continued. In 1409 three rival popes were reigning at the same
time; and it was not until 1429 that this ceased. So then for fifty
years there were two, and sometimes three popes, each
exercising—or claiming to exercise—the rights and powers of the
pope, and each excommunicating one another.
It is, however, argued that these irregularities, even plurality
of popes at the same time, do not invalidate the succession
of ordinations, because one who is not a rightful Pope may be a
true bishop. Suppose this to be true in some cases, yet when a
pope is excommunicated, and deprived of all his ecclesiastical
rights, and he is no longer a bishop, if in spite of that he
continues to exercise the rights of ordination, such ordination
must be invalid, and all subsequent ordinations through that
succession must be worthless. But further, Gregory XII. was
deposed by the Council of Constance,* and was declared to be,
and to have been for years no bishop, yet Henry Chichley,
Archbishop of Canterbury, was in 1414 ordained by him, and he
ordained English bishops and archbishops for twenty-nine years.f
Alexander 111. was one of two rival popes who for twenty years
reigned at the same time ; he was three times driven out of Rome,
and died in exile in 1180. In 1174 he consecrated Richard
Archbishop of Canterbury, who continued to confer ordination
for nine years. Only the exigencies of time and space prevent
many such additional facts as these.
Now, by what conceivable theory can orders communicated in
cases like these be valid ? A pope is formally deposed by a
Plenary Council —he is sometimes excommunicated, and declared
not to have been a legal pope during the whole of his popedom
or anti-popedom; yet during the whole of the time he has been
conferring episcopal orders. How can a bishop or archbishop
who has received orders from such a source confer valid orders
upon others ? We might turn the tables upon the Anglican, and,
in the words of the Oxford Tracts for the Times, tell those who
* April 6th, 1415.
t Gregory XII. was one of the three popes reigning at the same time
when he ordained Chichley.


have received such fictitious orders, “You are all unauthorised
teachers according to your own showing, and are treading in the
steps of Korah, Dathan, and Abirambut we will not be so
uncharitable as to say this. Since such lapses and breaks Jiave
frequently occurred in the “ uninterrupted succession,” at many
•different periods in the history of the Church, it is abundantly
evident that there is not a single bishop, priest, or deacon in
the Anglican Church who can trace his “ spiritual descent to the
apostles.”
The case becomes still stronger when we look at another
phase of the question. Baptism is necessary to Church member-
rship ; but, so far as can be ascertained, Archbishop Tillotson was
never baptised, nor did he receive deacon’s or priest’s orders by
Episcopal ordination. Baptism by non-episcopally ordained
ministers is by the Anglicans regarded as invalid; yet the
•celebrated Bishop Butler was baptised by a non-Episcopal
minister. How could the ordinations of such prelates be valid ?
I have made no reference to the immoral character of many of
the popes as invalidating their every spiritual act. Can it be
•conceivable that the Holy Spirit would convey His influences
through a channel of such moral pollution as must have been if
that channel has been through the bishops and popes of Rome ?
Let those believe it who can; I cannot.
But it is held by some Anglican authorities that the line of
apostolical succession does not need to be traced through Rome,
but comes from the apostles directly through the ancient British
Church ; that, in fact, the Church of England is not an offshoot
from the Roman Catholic Church at the Reformation, but is an
original Church, of and from the apostles. lam inclined to hold
this view, and think there is abundant evidence to show that the
British Church is the original of the present English Churches ;
that though it submitted—sometimes perforce—to the Church of
Rome, and largely adopted its doctrines and discipline, yet it
was never a vassal; it continually resisted many of the claims
made upon it, and at the Reformation did not separate and form
a new Church, but simply thrust out the Church against whose
usurpations it had protested, and to which it had never volun-
tarily submitted ; but this is a subject too large to be more than
incidentally mentioned.
That Christianity was introduced into Britain during the time
of the apostles will not be disputed. Many think there is
evidence that St. Paul visited Britain. It will be sufficient here
to say that in 314, at the Council of Arles, and in 325, at the
Council of Nice, bishops from Britain were present, and took part
in the proceedings. At the Mission of Augustine, 596, there
were British bishops* who met him in conference, and who refused
Seven, at least, were present at one conference.


to yield to the demands that they should abandon their own usages,
for that of Rome. But when it is attempted to trace these
British bishops back to the apostles, evidence fails. 1 here is no
evidence as to when Episcopacy was introduced, or in what way
it began; and if from evidence we turn to probability, it is m
the strongest degree likely that the first bishops were appointed,
not by any one of the apostles, but by the Christians through
whom Christianity was brought into our island. Ihe first link ot
the succession is wanting —viz., that the first preachers were
ordained by the apostles, or by persons who had been ordained
by the apostles. Nor did Augustine’s presence and ordination
cure this defect. What has been said elsewhere on this point
need not be repeated, but if correct, shows that neither from the
Romish nor from the British line are the links unbroken, and
even if unbroken from an early period, yet they do not reach
back to the apostles.
The identity of “presbyters” and “ bishops” . during the
apostolic age is not now disputed; but we have to inquire when
did Episcopacy, in the modern sense, arise, and how i Did the
name “ bishop,” as an order differing from and superior to
presbyters, take place during the lives of the apostles, or did it
occur later ? Bishop Lightfoot recognises that germs of Episco-
pacy are to be found in the original Church at Jerusalem, and
that from this centre the system spread throughout the Roman
Empire. The Ignatian epistles (cir. ioo), the Clementine
homilies, and the Apostolic constitutions say that James wasthe
first Bishop of Jerusalem. These documents are of very doubtful
authority. The Clementines and Constitutions are probabl) ol
the third century, or some of them later. It is argued that James,
presided over the first council at Jerusalem; but this would prove
no more than that by common consent he was elected as.
president for the purposes of order. Clearly he was no localised
diocesan. Gal. ii. 9 will show that he was an itinerant, and had
a mission to those of the “ circumcision” in general, and, as he
says in his epistle, “ to the twelve tribes scattered abroad. ' l -
It is asked, If James were not ordained Bishop of Jerusalem,,
how are we to account for the influence which he exerted ? Ihe
answer is plain: he was the brother of our Lord; he was a well-
known resident of Jerusalem; his personal character was such
that he was named “the Just.” These certainly were quahfica
tions sufficient for his being placed in the chair ot the council at
Jerusalem. (See Note E, p. 34.)
“ In the country and cities where the apostles preached they
ordained their first converts for bishops and deacons over those
who should believe. Nor were these orders new ; for for many
ares past it was thus prophesied concerning bishops and deacons,.
* James i. i.


I will appoint their bishops in righteousness, and their deacons
in faith.’
If bishops, as a distinct order in the Church, did not arise by
the appointment of the apostles themselves, nor in the sub-
apostolic age, when and how did diocesan Episcopacy arise and
extend so rapidly ? It is really no part of our duty to answer
this : the onus probandi is with the advocates of this theory. We
may, however, answer the question in the words of Jerome,
who affirms unhesitatingly that in the beginning"'the Churches
were governed bythe common council of the presbyters.”! “There
is but one bishop in a church at a time.”! Cyprian (cir. 250),
speaking of eighty-seven bishops in council at Carthage, declared
“that none of them were bishops over bishops.”§ The bishop was
related to his flock “as a pastor to his sheep, and a parent to his
■children.” || Ihe titles given to this pastor are “bishop, pastor,
president, governor, superintendent, and (See Note F,
P- 34-)
The word diocese, as applied to the sphere of a minister’s
jurisdiction, was never heard of in the earliest centuries. It
seems to have first made its appearance when Constantine the
Great, in the beginning of the fourth century, divided the empire
■ecclesiastically into divisions similar to the provinces of the
empire. Up to this period the word which we render parish was
used to indicate the “bishop’s cure.” Irenseus (196), writing to
Victor, Bishop of Rome, calls the bishoprics of Asia “parishes.”
Eusebius (cir. 330) speaks of the “parish” of Alexandria, the
“parish” of Ephesus, the “parish” of Corinth, the “parish” of
Athens, the “ parish” of Carthage, and so of other places. Lord
King says that Eusebius uses the word hundreds of times,
“denoting the very same that we now call a parish—viz., a
competent number of Christians dwelling near together, having
one bishop, pastor, or minister set over them, with whom they all
meet at one time to worship God.” He gives illustrations of this,
and continues: “So that a parish and a particular church are
synonymous terms, signifying one and the same thing; and
consequently a bishop, having but one parish under his juris-
diction, could extend his government no further than one
congregation, because a single congregation and a parish were
all one, of the same bulk and magnitude.” Lord King quotes a
number of passages from the fathers, particularly Justin Martyr,
Ignatius, and Tertullian (cir. 204), in proof of his position.
The Ignatian Epistles are greatly relied on in defence of
Episcopacy having been introduced by the apostles. The
genuineness of these is one of the most difficult and fiercely-
contested questions. Several are acknowledged to be spurious.
Bishop Lightfoot maintains that others are genuine. There can
* i Epistle of Clement to Corinthians. f Com. on Titus.
+ Lord Kin g- § Cyprian. || Cyprian, Epis. 83. II Epis. 69.


be no question that they speak of three orders of ministers, but
Dr. Lightfoot himself holds that the “ bishop” of Ignatius is not
diocesan, but congregational.
Clement of Rome speaks of the “ Church of the Corinthians,”
Irenseus of “The Church of Smyrna,” Ignatius of “The Church
in Magnesia,” “The Church in Philadelphia,” “The Church in
Antioch.” And that this means not the Churches of these
places over which a bishop presided, in the modern sense, is
evident from the language of Tertullian, who says that “Polycarp
was ordained bishop of the Church of Smyrna,” not bishop of
Smyrna, as though he had jurisdiction over more than one con-
gregation or church in that city.
It is argued that there is evidence to prove that from the
apostles’ times bishops alone exercised the right of ordination,
confirmation, and other acts, which showed that they were a
distinct and higher order than presbyters. Is this so ?
That originally the right of ordination was exercised by pres-
byters is evident. St. Paul, though an apostle, received his
■credentials as an accredited minister from Antioch. Those who
laid hands upon him and Barnabas are called “ prophets and
teachers.”* There is no evidence that they themselves had
received any ordination —most likely not —yet they laid their
hands upon Paul and Barnabas, and sent them on their mission.
When some called in question the validity of his claim to apostle-
ship, Paul appealed to the effects of his ministry as his credentials.
“ If I be not an apostle to others, I am to you, for the fruit of
mine apostleship are ye in the Lord.”
That ordination by presbyters is scriptural is plain from
i Tim. iv. 14, where Paul writes to Timothy, “ Neglect not the gift
that is in thee, which was given thee by prophecy, with the
laying on of the hands of the Presbytery.” And there is no dis-
crepancy between this and the statement in 2 Tim. i. 7, where
Paul exhorts him “to stir up the gift of God which is in thee
through the laying on of my hands.” This shows the apostle
was associated with others in the laying on of hands, and those
others were the presbyters. Firmillian (cir. 230), Bishop of
Caesarea, makes this empathic declaration: “All power and grace
are established in the Church where the elders preside who possess
the power both of baptising and of imposition of hands, and of
ordaining.”f Tertullian’s words explain this when he says : “In
the ecclesiastical courts approved elders preside, not distinguished
by their opulence, but worth of character.” (See Note G, p. 35.)
’Eutychius, Patriarch of Alexandria, expressly affirmed “that
the twelve presbyters constituted by Mark upon the vacancy of
the See did choose out of their number one to be head over the
* Acts xiii. I—3. f Works of Cyprian , Epistles lxxiv., Chap. 7
{Clark’s edition) Vol. i, p. 290.


rest, and the other eleven did lay their hands upon him and
blessed him, and made him their patriarch.”*'
Jerome says: —“After the apostles’ times one presbyter was
placed over the rest, as a remedy against schism ; for at Alex-
andria, from the Evangelist Mark up to Heraclates and Dionysius
(cir. 250), the bishops and presbyters always elected one from
among themselves, and placed him in the higher chair, and they
(the presbyters) gave him the name of bishop, in the same manner
as an army may make its general, or as deacons elect one of
themselves whose industry they know, and call him archdeacon.”!
Hooker admits that exigencies may arise which would justify
a departure from episcopal ordination; and in this he really gives
up the whole ground of the Divine right of bishops, since, upon
his theory, every congregation must judge as to whether the
“ cases of necessity” are sufficiently extraordinary to warrant
non-episcopal ordination.
The conclusions to which we are brought may be stated as
follows, viz.:—
1. The apostles and the first evangelists were chosen and
sent forth by Christ Himself; and to the apostles — i.e., the twelve
—was committed the ordering and government of the Church.
2. At first there was no distinction of clergy and laity, nor was
preaching and teaching confined exclusively to the apostles, or
to the seven, named deacons ; that, in fact, the first Church —
after the original Church at Pentecost —called Christian, was
gathered and formed by what would now be called lay preachers,
3. The first ministers appointed by the apostles—afterwards
called deacons —were selected and elected by the “ whole
multitude of the disciples,” and were then set before the
apostles, who approved of them, and laid their hands upon
them, and ordained them to their office and work.
4. During and after the time of the apostles the ministers of
all grades were either selected by or approved of by the
Church —or rather by the particular Church in, and perhaps over
which they were to be ministers.
5. That originally, and in the sub-apostolic age, there were
only two orders of ministers in the Church —viz., elders — i.e.,
presbyters, sometimes called bishops or overseers —and deacons.
After the death of the apostles these presbyter-bishops exercised
and administered all the government of the Church, the ordaining
of ministers, the administration of the sacraments, and all the
functions required in such government.
6. That at an early period the presbyters, or elders, were
accustomed to select and elect one of their number, to whom
they voluntarily committed certain duties, and who presided over
their assemblies for the sake of order.
* Stillingfleet’s Irenicon., p. 274. f Jerome, Ad Evagrius.


7. There is ample evidence that the presbyter who was thus
elected, and clothed with authority, was not regarded as belong-
ing to another or higher order of ministry ; he was chief among
equals. Peter calls himself “your fellow-elder, or presbyter,
and John uses similar language.
8. There is no scriptural evidence that the apostles ordained
any persons as their successors; and from the fact that one of
the qualifications of an apostle was to be a “ witness” of the life,
death, and resurrection of Christ, it is impossible, from the
nature of the case, that they could have any successors.
9. There is no evidence that Christ or His apostles directed
or authorised any distinct order of Church officers which was to
be perpetuated as the one and only order by and through whom
the Father would communicate His grace to His Church. Nor
is there any evidence that preaching and other acts which are
called ministerial were intended to be confined entirely to what
are called the “ clergy,” but were to be performed also by what
are called the “ laity.”*
10. Nor can any evidence be produced of the existence of
diocesan Episcopacy from the writings of the apostolic fathers;
and further, if such evidence were forthcoming, it must be
received with the utmost caution, because of the unreliablenesS'
of the records from which such evidence must be produced.
11. That something like diocesan bishops gradually grew up
during the latter part of the second century; and during the
third century the presiding presbyters, by that time exclusively
called bishops, were recognised as a separate order, and this has
continued with the Episcopal Churches to the present time.
12. While antiquity may be fairly pleaded for diocesan Episco-
pacy, no sufficient argument has been adduced to show that it
was ordained by Christ or His apostles, or that it is essential to a
true Church, or necessary to the validity of Christian ordinances.
13. Diocesan Episcopacy is of ancient, but not of apostolic
authority; art early, but not the earliest form of Church order.
But “ an uninterrupted succession” of bishops from the time of
the apostles to the present is not only without Scripture warrant,
but is also without evidence to support it, and is rendered
absolutely impossible through irregularities and breaks which
have taken place so frequently in the consecration of Romish
popes and English prelates.
14. As a mode of Church order and government, Episcopacy
has a high claim to be recognised, because of its antiquity and
its adaptability to certain states and conditions of Christendom
* See p. 8, 26. A sermon preached by a layman is reported in the second
epistle of Clement. In the apostolical constitutions we read, “ Even if a
teacher be a layman, still if he be skilled in the word, and reverent in
habit, for the Scripture says, ‘ They shall all be taught of God’ ” (see also
1 Cor. xii. 25—31; xiv. 23—40).


"but the demand of the Anglican clergy, that it only is the true
order, without which there can be no real Church, and no valid
sacraments, is not supported by evidence from Scripture, or
ecclesiastical or other history —is, in fact, impious and absurd.
15. There is a true apostolical succession, a succession which
does not depend upon any mere act of a bishop, or any number
-of bishops, a succession of apostolic doctrine, discipline, zeal,
and devotion ; and this exists in all the branches of the Catholic
Church where these characteristics are found, whether the
Church order be Episcopalian, or Presbyterian, or Connexional,
or Congregational.
A chain is no stronger than its weakest link. We have tested
this chain of “apostolical succession,” and have found that the very
first link—Peter or the apostles —is missing. Along the chain,
•every here and there, links are broken or are missing. It is neither
fastened to the “ Rock, Christ Jesus,” nor are all its links welded
•one to the other. Scripturally, apostolically, and historically it
is defective and worthless. “ The uninterrupted succession is a
fable.”
What is the position of the Methodist Church, and its relation
to the Catholic Church of Christ ?
Familiar as is the development of Methodism to you, yet I
must ask you to spend a few minutes in hurriedly running over
its history in relation to the question which we have under con-
sideration. John Wesley began his public life as a High
Churchman, holding the Divine right of Episcopacy, the
sacerdotal theory of episcopally ordained clergymen, and
baptismal regeneration. He was suddenly called to face
the problem of lay-preaching. Spite of the first shock to
his ecclesiasticism, he not only admitted the scriptural validity
-of preaching on the part of unordained men, but used them in
his widely scattered societies, and made their employment a most
important part of his system. It is not too much to say, that
but for its lay (or local) preachers Methodism could never have
been what it is to-day; and further, that it can never retain
its position without the continued employment and generous
recognition of this most valuable and scriptural agency.
Adopting great irregularities of Church order, yet Mr. Wesley
never could persuade himself that he was separating from the
Church. He declared over and over again that he would only
leave the Church of England when driven out. He remained to
his death an Episcopalian and a clergyman of the Church of
England. Yet he acknowledges that the Methodists were being
■driven out “ in the most cruel manner.”
So early as 1746 he was convinced that in the primitive Church
bishops and priests (or presbyters) were the same order, and that
originally every Christian Church was independent of all others.
From this he reached the conclusion that he, as a presbyter, had


a scriptural right to ordain; and he accordingly exercised that
right (in 17 84) in regard to his societies in America, calling those
whom he ordained “ superintendents,” which he acknowledged
to be the same as “bishops,” both the terms being ecclesi-
astically synonymous with “ presbyter.” He thus laid the
foundation of the Methodist Episcopal Church of America.
Before his death he went still further, and ordained some of his
preachers in England as presbyters. A final step was his
executing the Deed of Declaration (in 1784), by which the
Conference was legally defined, its powers and duties set forth,
and its perpetuation provided for —constituting, in fact, an act
of separation from the Anglican Church, which was to take effect
after his death.
After Mr. Wesley’s death there followed the demand for the
administration of the sacraments, the holding public worship in
“Church hours,” resulting in the Plan of Pacification in 1795,
the ordination of ministers by the imposition of hands by
presbyters in 1835, and, as was reasonable, the usages and
responsibilities of a branch of the Catholic Church.
Such a development was the natural and necessary evolution
from the principles which Mr. Wesley finally held, and which
were loyally accepted by his “ societies.” At first all the members
of the Methodist societies were regarded by Mr. Wesley as
members of the Church of England, and their reception into or
exclusion from his societies did not interfere with their Church
membership. Most if not all of them had been baptised in the
Church of England, and were more or less identified with it.
Three generations have passed since Mr. Wesley’s death. At
least two of these have never been associated with any Church
but Methodism. In no sense can they be regarded as members
of any other denomination than it; and to-day we have to do
■with the fact that there are tens of thousands who regard the
Methodist Church as their ecclesiastical —and we trust spiritual—
.home. (See Note H, p. 36.)
Is the Methodist “ Connexion” in a position to afford them
this home ? Are we able to offer to them the ministrations and
sacraments of Christ’s Church ? or are we acting towards them
under false pretences, professing to be a Scriptural Church, and
‘Conforming to Christ’s laws, while all the time we are usurpers
and deceivers of the people ?
If what I have previously proved is true, we can answer these
■questions without hesitation. The non-episcopal character of
Methodist Church government and of the ordination of its
ministers in no degree whatever invalidates its claims to be
a branch of the one “ Catholic and Apostolic Church” of
Christ. It rightly claims to be “a congregation of faithful
men in which the pure Word of God is preached, and the
.sacraments duly administered according to Christ’s ordinance


in all things that of necessity are requisite to the same.” It has-
the four marks of the Church of the apostles. It holds and for-
mulates the apostles’ “teaching,” it maintains Christian brotherly
fellowship, it is steadfast in its observance of the breaking of
bread in the Lord’s Supper, and it enjoins and practices the duty of
prayer. Difference of opinion will exist as to the precise Church
order and organisation which is maintained amongst us; but I
presume that there is no doubt that we possess all the essentials
I have mentioned of a true Church. The Methodist Church
exhibits the marks of the Apostolic Church. The orders of its
ministers are Scriptural; its discipline will bear the scrutiny of
severest criticism ; its right to exist is abundantly evidenced by
its usefulness to the world. Our answer to those who examine
us is this : Have we not power to adapt our ecclesiastical organi-
sation as did the apostles and primitive Chistians ? Has the
Anglican or the Roman such a prerogative as that they alone
can so depart from primitive and apostolic usage, or that they
can claim a Divine right for Episcopacy ? Personating the
Church—which for the moment I represent —our final answer is,
“Am I not an apostle ? Are not ye my work in the Lord ? If
to others I am not an apostle, yet at least I am to you ; for the
seal of mine apostleship are ye in the Lord.”*
What is the future to be ? Is the prayer of the world’s
Redeemer ever to be answered, “That they may all be one; even
as Thou, Father, art in Me, and I in Thee, that they also may
be in Us: that the world may believe that Thou didst send Me?”f
Not so long as the divided sections of the Christian Church are
hostile to each other; not so long as the Anglican Episcopalian
unchurches the non-Episcopal denominations, and the non-
episcopal sections, in their turn, remain divided from each other;,
not so long as mere differences of Church government and
discipline divide the members of the Methodist family into
separate and antagonistic camps, instead of merging their
differences and uniting as one phalanx of the army of God
against sin, and for the promotion of holiness; not so long
as conditions of membership that neither Christ nor His
apostles insisted upon are demanded by any section of the
Catholic Church; not until Episcopalian and Presbyterian and
Congregationalist and Methodist agree to shake hands, and to
accept each other’s “ orders” of ministry as scriptural and valid,,
and to join in one grand army of the living God.
I venture to assert my belief that the extreme and unscriptural
claims of the Anglican clergy regarding the so-called “uninter-
rupted apostolical succession” and the Divine right of Episcopacy,
and their refusal to acknowledge as true ministers of Christ those
who have not received Episcopal ordination, is to-day, more
* i Cor. ix. i— 4. f John xvii. 21, 22, 23.


than any single fact, responsible for the divisions of Protestant
Christendom; and that next to that, the divided—and .in many
respects antagonistic—positions assumed and maintained towards
each other by the Methodist Churches stand m the way of the
fulfilment of the prayer of the Redeemer.
If I have said nothing respecting the spiritual character and
work of the Church and its organisation, it is not because 1 under-
rate its importance, but because the recognition of its importance
makes it unnecessary—to an audience like this—to dwell upon
it. All that I could say to you respecting .the need of a renewed
baptism of Pentecost—and more—goes without saying.
Brethren, I feel that we meet to-day under the weight of most
solemn responsibilities. As a true branch of the “ One Catholic
and Apostolic Church” of Christ, the deliberations and decisions
of this Conference must have a wide and important influence, not
only upon those who are members and adherents of Methodism,
but upon the practical Christianity of our land. Brethren, we are
face to face with sin and vice; with intemperance and sensuality,
with worldliness and luxury; with agnosticism and secularism;
with indifference and want of spirituality; with the substitution of
culture for conversion; with greed for gain and with grinding
poverty; with a brood of evils which are certainly gathering
strength from year to year. What are we doing to fight this
le°ion ? What are we doing to reach the masses and permeate
them with the Christianity of Christ? What is the Methodist
Church doing? God forbid that I should disparage the
multitudes among us who, in various ways, are loyally anc
devotedly working for the salvation of men, for the good of the
world, for the glory of God ; never, perhaps, in numbers, in
devotedness and effectiveness, have they been exceeded, it
equalled. But are we satisfied ? Let us review our position;
let us look out intelligently upon the divided hosts who profess
to be Christians; let us see if we cannot, by wise and heaven-
directed legislation, help to heal some at least of these divisions ;
let us strive to gather into and consolidate the numbers who, in
our own section of the Church, stand upon the outskirts, and
bring them into our ranks, where they can effectually promote
their own religious life, and take their places on the side of
Christ as His servants and soldiers. . , ,
“ Now the God of peace, who brought again from the dead
the °-reat Shepherd of the sheep, with the blood of the eternal
covenant, even our Lord Jesus, make us perfect in every good
thino- to do His will, working in us that which is well-pleasing
in His sight, through Jesus Christ, to whom be the glory for ever
and ever. Amen” (Heb. xiii. 20, 21).


Note A.
In the New Testament {Apostolos) = “ one sent forth” with authority as an
ambassador and representative of Christ. It is used as a title of our Lord
Himself—“ The Apostle and High Priest of our profession, Jesus Christ, who-
was faithful to Him that appointed Him” (Heb. iii. 1). This title is given
by Christ to twelve disciples, whose names are given in four places. They
are frequently spoken of as “ the twelve,” or “the twelve apostles.” Paul
and Barnabas are also called “ apostles” (Acts xiv. 4, 14) ; James (Gal. i.
19); Timothy, and Silvanus (1 Thess. i. 1, compared with 1 Thess. ii. 6)
are designated apostles. In these cases it is used in a secondary sense,
and means “ messengers.” It is so translated in 2 Cor. viii. 23, and Phil,
ii. 25 (R V, margin, “apostle”). It is, however, significant that in Rev.
xxi. 14, written long after the name had been used in the secondary sense,
we have the language, “ The wall of the city had twelve foundations, and
on them twelve names of the twelve apostles of the Lamb,” clearly
showing that those who had been specially called and constituted apostles
by our Lord had never been added to; a strong incidental evidence that
the apostles were to have no successors.
Dr. Hinds, Bishop of Norwich, pronounces it to be “ridiculous” to
believe that the true administrations of Christ’s ordinances depend upon
whether a minister can trace his ministerial pedigree by an uninterrupted
succession to the apostles (Hinds’ Rise and Early Progress of Christianity
p. 240).
“ That the Church in the corrupt sense—that is, a priestly government,
transmitted by a mystical succession from one priest to another—is of
apostolical origin seems to me to be perfectly groundless.”— Dr. Arnold's
Life , p. 322, Ward and Lock’s ed. [See also p. 405.]
Under the form of “ Conferences of Reformers and Divines of the Early
British Church,” the Rev. Henry Fish, M.A., collected the opinions of
about fifty bishops and divines on various points of the teachings of the
Oxford Tractarians. Mr. Fish represents the different persons whose
opinions he cites as being present, appointing a moderator and giving
expression to their views. On the question of “Apostolical Succession”
thirty-six are represented as present. The moderator states the views of
the “ Tractarians.” extracted from their writings, and then the opinions of
the “Reformers” in opposition. The result to which the Conference
arrives, nem. con., is that the Apostolic Succession “is without warrant.”
Full references are made to the published writings of the various
“ Reformers ” for every statement. Among the authorities are Cranmer,
Whitgift, Jewell, Hooper, Ridley, Sherlock, Chillingworth, Stillingfleet,
and twenty-eight others. The work is both curious and valuable, and will
well repay careful study.
Note B.
The Speaker's Commentary on Phil. i. i says : —“ From Chrysostom
downwards, it has been generally admitted by writers of diverse views on
Church government that the office of ‘ bishops' here addressed is the same
as that of '■elders' elsewhere spoken of (Acts xi 30). So St. Paul calls the
elders of Ephesus ' bishops ; and so, after speaking (Tit. i. 5) of the ordi-
nation of elders, he proceeds, ‘ A bishop must be blameless,’ &c. And such
is apparently the meaning of ‘ bishop ’ in 1 Tim. iii. 2 and fol.”
Bishop Barry (late of Sydney), in Ellicotfs Commentaiy on Phil. i. 1, says :
“ In this passage the word ‘ bishop’ is for the first time used as a title,
although in Acts xx. 28 it is used as a description of duty, with a distinct
reference to its etymological meaning and origin. In the Pastoral Epistles
we find it similarly used (as 1 Tim. iii. 2 ; Tit. i. 7). There is now no


question-and but for supposed ecclesiastical necessities there never could
have been any question—that in Holy Scripture as also in the first
epistle of an apostolical father (St. Clement to the Corinthians, chap. xix.>
the two titles of ‘ bishop’ and ‘ presbyter’ are applied to the same persons.
TThe remainder of the comment is too long for extract.] . . n
The word bishop (. Episcopus ), overseer, or guardian was not originally
applied to an ecclesiastical officer. It was used to designate simply an
overseer-it might be military, or civil, or ecclesiastical-to whose care
an D^a 1 n S Mirma?™a 1 ys t :—“ The earliest Christian communities appear to
have been ruled and represented, in the absence of the apostle who was-
their founder, by their elders, who were likewise called bishops, or over-
seers of the churches. These presbyter-bishops and deacons are the
ordy S two we discover at'first in the Church o Ephesus, at
Philippi, and perhaps at Crete” (Acts xx. 17, compared with Phil. 1. 1.
Tit us i. c_ 7 ). He adds that at an early period “ one religious function-
ary superior to the rest appears to have been almost universally recog-
nised” [History of Christianity, Vol. 11., p. 64).
“ Episcopacy in the sense of superintendence, not in that of succession
to the apostles, has apostolic precedent to recommend it; but no direc-
tions for the form of Church government . . . are laid down in the
New Testament as to the Christian ministry (Rev. A. R. Fawcett s
Englishman's Bib. Cyclop., art. “Bishops. ) ,
Mr. Wesley writes “Asto my own judgment, I still believe the
Episcopal form of Church government to be scriptural and apostolical I
mean, well agreeing with the practice and writings of the apostles. But
that it is prescribed in Scripture Ido not believe. This opinion, which I
once zealously espoused, I have been heartily ashamed of ever since I
read Bishop Stillingfleet’s Irenicon. I think he has unanswerably proved
that ‘ neither Christ nor His apostles prescribe any particular form ot
Church government, and that the plea of Divine right for diocesan
Episcopacy was never heard of in the primitive Church (Letter to Rev.
Mr. Clarke, Wesley's Works , Vol. 111., p. 179< third Bvo edition).
Note C.
A remarkable manuscript was discovered by Bishop Bryenmos in 1883,.
in the Jerusalem Monastery at Constantinople, known as the “ Teaching
of the Apostles.” The treatise is believed to be as old as the beginning ot
the second century. Its interest and importance it is almost impossible to
over-estimate. Respecting the orders of ministers, chapter xv. ot the
“Teaching” says “ Appoint therefore for yourselves bishops and deacons
worthy of & the Lord, men meek and uncovetous, and true and approved,
for they too minister unto you the ministry of the prophets and teachers.
Therefore despise them not, for they are honoured among you with the
prophets and teachers.” I have followed Dr. F. W. Farrar’s translation
He adds this note to the word appoint The ‘ bishop’ (i.e., the presbyters),
&c. were elected by the congregation.” It will be seen that in this oldest
ecclesiastical manual the orders of ministers are bishops and deacons, the
former being clearly synonymous with elders or presbyters.
Note D.
The question as to whether Peter was ever at Rome is much disputed.
Canon Farrar pronounces “ the assertion that Peter was Bishop of Rome,
but that he constantly left it to exercise apostolic oversight throughout
the world, is nothing but an ingenious theory.” The statement that he
came to Rome about a.d. 42 is first found in Eusebius, early in the fourth


century. Farrar collects all the patristic information upon the subject,
and presents it in a succinct form in his Early Days of Christianity, pp.
64—66, 594. A very remarkable discussion took place in Rome in 1872,
and is published in a pamphlet under the title, Discussion Held in Rome
between Catholic Priests and Evangelical Ministers concerning the Coming of
St. Peter to Rome. It deserves careful study.
Note E.
It is often contended that the head-spring of Episcopacy—in the modern
sense of the word—is to be discovered in the original Church at Jerusalem,
but we can find no trace of this. The apostles presided over the Church
at Jerusalem (Acts viii. 1). They united in the ordination of the seven
(so-called) deacons (Acts vi. I—7). When they heard that “ Samaria had
received the word of God” (Acts viii. 14) they sent Peter and John to
them. They sent Barnabas to Antioch to visit the converts there. It is
evident that in all these cases the apostles acted conjointly. Clement of
Alexandria and Eusebius record a tradition that the twelve apostles abode
in Jerusalem for twelve years after the crucifixion. At Paul’s first visit to
Jerusalem (see Gal. i. 17 —19) he saw Peter and James (cir. 37). His
second visit is referred to as taking place “after the space of fourteen
years” (cir. 50 or 51), on the occasion of the council respecting the Gentile
usages—some twenty years after the organisation of the Mother Church
(see Acts xv.). It is evident that at that time there was no diocesan
bishop. Paul speaks of “ James and Cephas and John, who were reported
to be pillars.” Luke tells us that the “apostles and elders”—James,
Cephas, and John included —sat together exercising independent judgment,
and freely expressing individual opinion, even to the extent of “much
questioning,” and arriving at last at a unanimous decision. It is argued
by some that Peter’s action showed him to be chief, because, as they
allege, he spoke first; others that James was chief, because he spoke last,
and in doing so uses language employing authority—/.<?., “My judgment
is,” &c. But neither of these opinions is sustained by the record; for it
was after “ much questioning” (A.V., disputing) that “ Peterrose up” and
addressed the assembly; and it was after the “judgment” of James that
the final decision was arrived at. 44 It seemed good to the apostles and
the elders, with the whole Church,” to adopt the summing up of James,
and to give their verdict for it. The rescript was not sent in the name of
the apostles, either individually or collectively, but by the “apostles and
elder brethren. ” There is nothing whatever in this whole transaction to
show that either Peter or James exercised any official precedence. Even
if it could be shown that either of them presided over the council—as most
probably James did—it would prove no more than that, for the sake of
order or convenience, he occupied that position, just as the moderator of a
Presbyterian Synod or General Assembly, or the chairman of a district, or
the president of a Methodist Conference presides over such bodies, the
precedence being not that of superior ministerial rank, but simply as chief
among equals, and for the orderly transaction of business.
Note F.
The appointment of bishops as a distinct order of ministers was for the
purpose of securing unity, both of doctrine and discipline, among diverse
centres. During the second century numerous errors disturbed and
divided the Church. To secure peace and unity the presiding officers of
the presbytery in different localities were armed with special authority,
and thus arose the system of presbyter-bishops. So far as can be ascer-
tained, the practice began in Rome about from 139 —142. Cyprian, about


a century later, writes: —“The unity of the priesthood took its rise” in
Rome (see also Hatch’s Organisation of the Early Church , p. 99).
“ The name (bishop] in ecclesiastical writings being applied unto Church
governors, at first unto all, and not unto the chiefest only, grew in short
time peculiar and proper to signify such episcopal authority alone as the
chiefest governors exercised over the rest ; for with all names this is usual,
that inasmuch as they are not given to the things whereunto they are given
till the things whereof they are given have been sometime first observed ;
therefore generally things are ancienter than the names by which they are
called” (Hooker’s Etcles. Polity, Vol. 11., p. 241).
Dr. Lightfoot writes: —“Towards the close of the second century the
original application of the term ‘ bishop’ seems to have passed not only out
of use, but out of memory. . . . ‘Among the ancients,’ says Jerome,
‘ bishops and presbyters are the same, for the one is a term of dignity, the
other of age’ ” {Lightfoot on the PAUL, p. 96).
Waddington, in summing up the constitution and government of the
Ante-Nicene Church, says Thus, in the unsettled constitution of the
primitive Church the elements of three forms of government subsisting
under apostolical direction—the Episcopal, the Presbyterian, and the Inde-
pendent” (Waddington’s Church History, Vol. 1., p. 380).
Wesley in his journal writes: —“ 1746. Monday, 20th January.—l set out for
Bristol. On the road I read over Lord King’s Account of the Primitive Church.
In spite of the vehement prejudice of my education, I was ready to believe
that this was a fair and impartial draught; but if so, it would follow that
bishops and presbyters are (essentially) of one order, and that originally
every Christian Church was a Church independent of all others”
( Wesley's Works, Vol. 11., p. 6, third edition, 8vo).
Note G.
As to the argument from the word “ ordained” in Tim. ii. 7 —“ Where-
unto I was ordained a preacher and an apostle”—the word is tithemi , “ to
put,” “ place,” or “ set,” and is rendered in the R.V. “ appointed,” so that
it does not carry the idea of ordination to an order of office in the Church,
but an appointment to a certain duty, or sphere of work. In Titus i. 5
the word is kathistemi , which means l, to place,” or to “ set down,” and is
rendered in the R.V. “appoint” instead of “ordain.” In Acts xiv. 23,
instead of “ ordained” the R.V. reads “ appointed them elders in every
place.” In 2 Cor. viii. 19, where the A.V. reads “ chosen of the Churches,”
&c., the R.V. has “ appointed”— cheivotoned, to lift up or extend the hand
in voting. The duty of Timothy and Titus was to appoint to positions or
localities of service, and not separation of persons to office.
Hooker, after maintaining that the order of bishops, as distinct from
presbyters, is of apostolic authority, in a passage too long for quotation,
admits that while ordinarily “no ordination can stand but only such as is
made by bishops which had their ordination likewise by bishops before
them till we come to the apostles of Christ themselves,” yet that “ men
may be extraordinarily admitted to spiritual functions in the Church” in
two ways. One is “when God Himself doth of Himself raise up any
whose labour He useth without requiring that man should authorise
them.” Another is “when the exigencies of necessity doth constrain to
leave the usual ways of the Church, which otherwise we would willingly
keep . . . therefore we are not simply without exception to urge a
lineal descent from the apostles by continued succession of bishops in every
effectual ordination” (Hooker’s Eccles. Polity , Vol. 11., p. 308, &c.).
Dr. Hinds, Bishop of Norwich, in speaking of the ordination of Timothy
and Titus, says:—“There is ample evidence that this new class of
ministers was distinct from the apostles. ... In tracing back the


annals of Episcopacy, we find the custom scrupulously observed, and the
bishop and the presbyters uniting in the laying on of hands. Occasionally
mention is made of the ceremony being performed by the bishop alone,
probably considered as the head of the presbyterian body, but never of the
presbytery alone” {Rise and Early Progress of Christianity, p. 173, &c., p. 17 7)-
Dr. Hinds here forgets the case of Paul and Barnabas at Antioch, who were
“ separated to the work” whereunto God had called them, not by presbyters
with the bishop at their head, for there was no bishop there ; and it is
doubtful whether the “ prophets and teachers” themselves were presbyters-
—most likely they in our day would be ranked as laymen.
In the Minutes of Conference 1785 a letter appears from Mr. Wesley in
answer to the question, ‘‘What is the state of our societies in North
America ?” After a brief reference to their separation, civil and ecclesias-
tical, from Great Britain, Mr. Wesley proceeds“ Lord King’s Account of
the Primitive Church convinced me many years ago that bishops and
presbyters are the same order, and consequently have the same-right to
ordain. For many years I have been importuned from time to time to
exercise this right by ordaining part of our travelling preachers; but I
have still refused, not only for peace sake, but because I was determined
as little as possible to violate the established order of the-National Church
to which I belonged.” After explaining the special circumstances of the
American societies, he proceeds: —‘‘I have accordingly appointed Dr.
Coke and Mr. Francis Asbury to be joint superintendents over our brethren
in America, as also Richard Whatcoat and Thomas Vasey to act as elders
among them by baptising and administering the Lord’s Supper,’ &c..
(Minutes of Conference, pp. 179, 180, Vol. 1., Bvo edition).
Note H.
The Minutes of the British Conference of 1889 has, for the first time
since the existence of Methodism, asserted its true position as a Church.
The report on Church Membership adopted by the Conference of 1889
deserves to be carefully read and considered. The law in regard to
“ Church Membership” is declared to be as follows [I have italicised a
most important passage]:— •* It should be borne in mind that it is our rule
that no member shall, either upon the recommendation of a leader, or
otherwise, be left without a ticket until he has been personally visited by a
minister. It must also be understood that there exists no rule which
requires a minister to refuse a ticket solely on the ground of irregular
attendance at class. It must not be forgotten that to exclude a person
from membership is the most serious and painful exercise of ecclesiastical
discipline, to be undertaken only when necessity demands it, and under a
sense of solemn responsibility. Indeed, in the independent ecclesiastical position
into which Methodism has been led by the providence of God since the death of
Wesley, exclusion from membership in the class-meetings involves, for the time
being, excommunication from the visible Church." —Minutes, p. 409.
■ See also A Comparative View of Church Organisation, Primitive and
Protestant; with Supplementary Chapter on Methodist Secessions and
Methodist Union, by Rev. James H. Rigg, D.D.
A Handbook of Scriptural Church Principles, and of Wesleyan Methodist
Polity and History, by the Rev. Benjamin Gregory, D.D.
Mason, Firth & M'Cutcheon, Printers, Little Collins




