

A LECTURE
DELIVERED IN THE
MASONIC HALL, SYDNEY,
12TH MAT, 1876,
AT THE REQUEST OF THE
SYDNEY & ILLAWARRA RAILWAY COMMITTEE,
BY
JOHN DUNMORE LANG, A.M., D.D.,
l-iriTrf
For many years one of the Kepresentatives of the City of Sydney, in the
Parliament of New South Wales.
Sghncg:
GIBBS, SHALLAED, & CO., GENEEAL STEAM MACHINE PEINTEES,
108 Pitt Street, Next Union Bane,




METROPOLITAN
ILLAWARRA RAILWAY
SYDNEY
Rev. Dr. LANG, A.M., D.D.
GEORGE THORNTON, Esq., J.P.
WILLIAM NEILL, Esq., J.P.
Hon. ROBERT OWEN, M.L.C.
JOHN YOUNG, Esq.
Hon. J. B. WILSON.
WILLIAM WATKINS, Esq.
Alderman JAMES MERRIMAN, J.P.
GEORGE HURLEY, Esq.
JOHN WOODS, Esq., J.P.
Dr. DANSEY.
JACOB MARKS, Esq., J.P.
C. A. W. LETT, Esq.
WILLIAM HEZLETT, Esq., J.P.
E. VICKERY, Esq.
J. J. MOORE, Esq.
J. GRAHAM, Esq.
J. W. WATKIN, Esq.
JOHN McINNES, Esq.
T. W. GARLICK, Esq.
COMMITTEE
Alderman JAMES GREEN, J.P.
JAMES HENRY, Esq.
W. M. ALDERSON, Esq., J.P,
J. S. GORDON, Esq.
GEORGE RATTRAY, Esq., J.P.
J. B. NORTH, Esq.
J. WALTER SMART, Esq., J.P.
R. A. WATSON, Esq.
Alderman PLAYFAIR.
Alderman JOHN REDDY.
J. G. RAPHAEL, Esq., J.P.
JOHN ALGER, Esq.
CHARLES MOORE, Esq,
Dr. MARSHALL.
J. C. NEILD, Jun., Esq.
A. W. WARREN, Esq.
HENRY SMITH, Esq.
EDWARD LOWTHER, Esq.
ALFRED G. NEALE, Esq.
OFFICE: 131 KING STREET.
ANDREW ALLAN,
Hon. Secretary.




METROPOLITAN AND ILLAWARRA RAILWAY.
On Thursday, the 12th of May, 1876, a lecture was delivered, by par-
ticular request, in the Masonic Hall, Sydney, by the Rev. Dr. Lang, on
the subject of the Metropolitan and Illawarra Railway. The chair was
taken at eight o’clock, by Dr. Spencer, and there were on the platform
a number of ladies, and also the Hon. Thomas Holt, M.L.C., Hon. R.
Owen, M.L.C., Captain Charles, M.L.A., Messrs. W. Neill, J.P.,
J. Young, J.P., J. Raphael, J.P., Jacob Marks, J.P., Dr. Marshall,
Mr. Alderman Reddy, Messrs. J. C. Neild, J. Dingwall, A. Allan,
P. M‘Cabe, J. Dowe, J. Biggar, and other gentlemen from Illawarra.
The chairman, in a few appropriate remarks, introduced the reverend
lecturer to the lai’ge audience, who said—
Mr. Chairman, Fellow-Citizens, and Friends, —
I am here this evening at the instance and request of a number of
gentlemen of the highest standing in our community who, convinced
of the great benefits that would certainly accrue to the colony, and
especially to the City of Sydney, from the construction of a Railway
from Sydney to Illawarra, are anxious to strengthen the hands of the
Government in their proposal to appropriate a sufficient amount of
public money for the accomplishment of that important object. These
gentlemen, it seems, are of opinion that, from my long experience in
the colony, I may be able to throw some light upon the case, and so to
forward their views, by delivering a lecture on the subject to my
fellow-citizens. I fear they may have formed a higher estimate of my
ability than the result will justify; at all events, I shall do what I can,
as I cordially approve of the object. At the same time, I have to
ask the indulgence of the audience in making much more use of my
manuscript than I was accustomed to do on somewhat similar occasions
in the olden time, when addressing large numbers of my fellow-citizens,
either in this hall or elsewhere ; for I feel my memory somewhat
failing me, which I am sure you will not think at all remarkable in a
person like myself, of the ripe age of seventy-seven.


The person who first suggested the idea of a Railway to Illawarra,
and who has expressed to myself his regret at being unavoidably absent
from Sydney this evening, is a gentleman well known to this community
—Mr. James Manning. That gentleman, to whose zeal and intelligence
in this matter his fellow-colonists are much indebted, not only suggested
the undertaking, but zealously co-operated with the surveyor appointed
by the Government to mark out the line. The proposal of the present
Government, however, to carry out Mr. Manning’s idea, by placing a
sufficient sum upon the Estimates for the construction of a Railway to
Illawarra, has encountered much opposition in all the other three sections
of the territory—the North, the South, and the West, but especially in
the Newcastle district. Since the subject was first mooted, I have
visited, in the discharge of clerical duty, Newcastle and the Lower
Hunter—the Western district, as far as Mudgee—and the Southern, as
far as Queanbeyan and Cooma; and, in all these localities, whenever
the silly ect of a Railway to Illawarra has been mentioned, I have observed
that the idea has either been ridiculed as a piece of egregious folly on
the part of its authors or denounced as a manifest injustice to the rest
of the colony. Now, I maintain, without fear of contradiction, that
this opposition on the part of our fellow-colonists is altogether unrea-
sonable and unwarranted. We, the people of Sydney and its suburbs,
form one-fourth of the whole population of the colony. Now, while
Railway expenditure has been incurred to the extent of upwards of
seven millions sterling for all the other three-fourths of our general
population—as, for instance, in the line to Goulburn, for the South ;in
the line to Bathurst, for the West; and in the line to Tamworth, for
the North—to premote the general interests of the inhabitants of these
three great sections of the colony respectively, are we, the people of
Sydney, the remaining fourth part of the whole population of the colony,
to be denied a fair share of the general Railway expenditure of the
country for the promotion of those interests with which we are more
especially identified ? For I maintain it, and shall prove it in the
sequel, the proposed Railway from Sydney to Illawarra will, in com-
parison with all the otfier lines I have mentioned, be peculiarly the
metropolitan line, for the development and advancement of the peculiar
interests of the people of Sydney,
Besides, contrast for one moment the manner in which this metro-
politan city—the real and undoubted capital of Australia, notwith-
standing all the pretensions of our younger sister to the South—contr-ast
the manner in which this metropolitan city of Sydney has been treated
by every Government we have had these forty-five years past, ever since
the system of granting the Crown lands of the colony was superseded by
that of selling them by public auction at not less than a fixed minimum
price in the year 1831 ; —contrast, I say, the manner in which this city
has been treated with that in which the chief cities of other countries
have been treated by their respective Governments, and the manifest
injustice of withholding from Sydney a Metropolitan Railway at the
public expense will be strikingly and convincingly apparent. In the


year 1840 I visited the United States of America, and ti’aversed not
fewer than eleven of these States —from Salem in Massachusetts, in the
North, to the city of Charleston in South Carolina, the city in which the
great civil war of America burst forth in the year 1861. During my
stay in that comparatively ancient city (for America) I ascertained that
the Corporation of Charleston was invested, from the origin of the
city, with all the unoccupied land within the city and for some distance
beyond it, to be disposed of from time to time for whatever public
purpose the Corporation might think proper. And the ciraumstance
that brought the subject particularly under my notice at the time was the
fact that, in order to revive a college which had fallen into abeyance in
the city, the City Corporation of the day had granted to the trustees of
the college a whole block of land, or the whole extent included within
four of the principal streets of the city ; and the same thing, I under-
stood also, was the rule in the other chief cities of America. But every
Government we have had in this colony for the last forty-five years has
regularly appropriated every inch of Crown land, both within the city of
Sydney and all around it, for carrying out (by its sale) all the public
improvements of the day, in many of which the citizens of Sydney have
only a secondary interest. By this means the Corporation of Sydney, as
you all know, is a mere poverty-stricken, deeply indebted, and powerless
Corporation ; all the valuable Crown land within and around the city,
from which it ought to have been deriving a noble revenue for thirty or
forty years past, having been seized and appropriated by the Govern-
ment for the general purposes of the colony. Surely, then, this state of
things greatly enhances our claim, as citizens of Sydney, to a fair share
of the Railway expenditure of the colony, which you can all testify we
have never yet had.
We, the citizens of Sydney, have no desire to prevent the carrying
out of all the three great trunk lines of the colony—the Southern, the Wes-
tern, and the Northern, Nay, lam sure we should all be glad to see
the projected line from Wallerawang to Mudgee, and the other projected
line from Grafton to Glen limes, in actual progress of construction. And
why are not all these lines in actual progress, as well as our Sydney line
to Illawarra 1 Why, it is because our Government have for twenty years
past been virtually acting on the fatal policy announced in a resolution
passed in the Legislative Council of the day, on the motion of the late
Mr. Wentworth, in the year 1850, to the effect that it is no part of the
duty of the colonists to pay for the importation of emigrants * ; it is because
* Note. — The following is an extract of a letter from Earl Grey to Sir Charles
Augustus Fitzroy, then Governor of New South Wales, of date Downing-street, 27th
May, 1851, in which his Lordship embodies the resolution in question, at which he
seems so utterly confounded that he merely copies it without saying a single word
on the subject:—“ I have received your Despatch of the 31st December last, for-
warding an Address from the Legislative Council of New South Wales to the Queen,
setting forth the amount expended on immigration from the Land Fund since the
year 1836, and the debt incurred upon it for the same object, setting forth the advan-
tages derived from the outlay to the mother country, and urging that it it is no part
of the duty of the colonists to pay for the importation of emigrants. ” —“ Council Paper.”


at this very moment our Government isallowing two millions and upwards
of its surplus funds to be burning holes in the pockets of the Bank of
New South Wales and elsewhere, instead of bringing out thousands and
tens of thousands of useful immigrants to the colony, to construct all
these lines of Railway, and to supply the growing demand for labour all
over the colony.
The period in the history of this colony to which I can look back
with the greatest pleasure, for its moral as well as its industrial progress,
is the period that elapsed from the time when the Land Fund had reached
a few thousands a year, and the whole of that fund was expended in
bringing ont, passage free, to the colony useful families and individuals
of the industrial classes from all parts of the mother country —selected
as these immigrants were by competent and responsible agents, chiefly
surgeons in the Royal Navy. There was no Validating Act, such as has
recently been passed by our Parliament, required then; for any family
or individual of reputable character, who were likely to prove serviceable
to the colony, had a free passage given them at once, as far as the funds
would go. I wish, I confess, with all my heart, that this right system
had never been changed. We have lost our prestige by changing it for
the anti-immigration policy of the last twenty years. We have sunk
down as a colony, in the estimation of the people of England, from the
first and highest to a very inferior rank among the Australian colonies.
Our population, which is now but little above half a million, would
have been a million and upwards long ago, while millions of British
capital, which has never reached us, would have flowed into our colony,
and the progress of settlement in all parts of the territory would have
exceeded immensely its actual rate.
Moreover, while we, the citizens of Sydney and its suburbs, form
one-fourth of the whole population of the colony, and have never had
anything done for us directly in the way of Railway expenditure, the
Illawarra district, for which we are now agitating, is no part of any of
the three great sections of the territory—the South, the West, and the
North—and has never had anything done for it in the way of Railway
expenditure to the present day. The Illawarra district is as much a
distinct section of the colony as the Southern, the Western, or the
Northern section. The Illawarra Railway will not, therefore, be a mere
branch line but a main trunk line, for a distinct section of the territory,
hitherto overlooked and neglected in the way of Railway expenditure.
Having thus cleared away the objections that are urged in
most parts of the interior against the policy of a Railway to Illawarra,
I shall now endeavour to vindicate that policy by pointing out and
illustrating successively the various reasons for which, in my humble
opinion, it ought to be adopted. I have no misgivings on that subject
myself. lam confident that the construction of a Railway to Illawarra
will be of unspeakable benefit to the colony at large, and especially to
the city of Sydney.


My first reason, therefore, for advocating tlie construction of the
proposed Railway to Illawarra is that it will pay. As lam not a man
of business, however, and my testimony on such a subject might be
questioned, I am happy to avail myself of the following statistics, which
have been furnished me by gentlemen who are well versed in financial
matters, and who have made this particular point their special study.
There have been grave doubts on this point, from time to time, as to
all the other Railways in the colony— doubts as to whether they would
pay; but the gentlemen who have furnished me with the following
particulars assure me that there can be no doubt whatever that the
Railway to Illawarra will certainly pay.
Metropolitan and Illawarra Railway.
Cost of construction of Railway .. .. • • £740,000 0 0
Interest on the above amount @5% .. • • • • 37,000 0 0
Freight by rail of 400,000 tons of coal
per annum, @4/ per ton.. .. £BO,OOO 0 0
Working expenses on Government
Railways, 46 % on freight (as per
last reports) . • • • • • 36,800 0 0
£43,200 0 0 Net revenue.
To pay interest on cost of construction,
£740,000, at 5 % 37,000 0 0
£6,200 0 0 I Net profits towaMs
| general revenue.
Such is the estimated result of the coal traffic exclusively on the
future Railway to Illawarra, for there is no doubt that that quantity of
coal could easily be excavated annually from the Southern mines and
conveyed to Sydney by the Railway, on the completion of the line in
three years hence.
Present passenger traffic by land—2ooo, @ 15/ each .. . • £1,500
” bySe “ -lfL° £3,000
Steam freight to and fro for goods on’nnn
e 9Q non
Freight of coal by sea .. . • • • i oaa
Horses, cattle, and sheep, with private carriages .. . • • • • •
£53,200
Surely, therefore, there can be no doubt whatever that the future
Illawarra Railway will pay.
My second reason for advocating the construction of a Railway to
Illawarra is, that it will supply the City of Sydney with abundance of
the best coal at the lowest price. This, indeed, may be inferred from
the fact that such a Railway will bring the Southern coal mines of the
colony within two hours of Sydney, where the largest ships could be
laden with coal for all parts of the world in the shortest possible time,
and at the smallest possible expense. The extent and value of the


Illawarra coal-fields are truly wonderful. Mr. Moody, a mining
engineer, states that the top seam—seven feet six inches in thickness—
taking an area of 500 acres, will yield 5,285,000 tons of marketable
coal, giving an output of 500 tons a day for over 35 years.
The seams contained in 600 acres of this land will yield the
enormous quantity of 31,250,000 tons of coal, supplying a vend or sale
of 1000 tons per day for more than 100 years.
This quantity of coal, if raised and sold at 10s. per ton, would
realize £15,625,000, and 1200 acres of such coal will yield more wealth
to the colony than the whole of its gold mines worked from 1851 to
1874, inclusive; that gold value being £30,536,250.
It is no business of mine to prove that a Railway to Illawarra will
supply us with coal at a much cheaper rate than that at which we now
get it from Newcastle ; for even supposing that the Illawarra coal should
be no cheaper than coal from Newcastle, have we, the citizens of Sydney,
not a right to get our coals from the South as well as from the North llt
is, no doubt, the fear that this Illawarra Railroad will enable the coal
proprietors of that distinct to undersell our Newcastle friends in the
Sydney market, and thereby break up their present monopoly, that has
roused their indignation and embittered their hostility. This is the
reason, and the only reason, why they shout so lustily—“ We will have
nothing to do with the shop over the way,” The outcry they make
therefore merely strengthens our case.
Our Newcastle friends allege that there is already a sufficient means
of communication with Illawarra, and the coal country to the South, by
sea; but they forget to tell us that there is no harbour along that line of
coast for large vessels to load coal for foreign ports—they forget to tell
us that there is no remedy for such a state of things but a Railway to
Illawarra, to bring the coal of the Southern mines to Sydney.
My third reason for the construction of a Railway to Illawarra is,
that it will transform our noble harbour of Sydney into a great coal
exporting harbour for the Southern hemisphere. There is nothing in
the whole case that presents so magnificent a prospect for the city of
Sydney as this. Besides making adequate provision for the passenger
traffic along the future line between Sydney and Wollongong, the
terminus for the coal traffic will be a little to the westward of the city,
opposite Cockatoo Island, where there is a large extent of deep water,
and where the largest ships could be laden with coal direct from the
train, without interfering in the least with any of the business parts of
the harbour. Only think of such magnificent steamships as the St.
Osyth and the Whampoa, or as those of the San Francisco line, bring-
ing us out from England, under some better system of immigration
than we have at present, thousands and tens of thousands of respectable
families, and individuals, to be dispersed over the whole territory by
smaller steamboats along the coast, or by all the great trunk lines of
Railway, to the interior—only think of these magnificent vessels, after
landing their immigrants in some suitable place in the lower harbour.


passing up to the upper, or coal harbour, and loading with coal—perhaps
even for England ! For scientific men of the highest standing in the old
world tell us that at the present rate of consumption the coal-fields of
England herself will be exhausted in much less than a hundred years
hence; and when that event of the future takes place, where can the
good people of England find a nobler harbour than Sydney, or a more
extensive coal-field than New South Wales ? There is something tru
animating and spirit-stirring in such an idea, which I have no doubt w
yet be realised.
I would, in the meantime, administer a word of consolation to ou
Newcastle friends in this matter; for the magnificent prospect for the
future I have thus indicated is for them as well as for us. There will
unquestionably be a Railway also, at no distant period, from the New-
castle coal-fields across the Hawkesbury River to the deep waters to the
westward of our city; for they are equally available for the purpose on that
side of the harbour as on this; and the coal trade of the colony will ere
long be extensive enough to require the services of both such Railways.
Why, then, should there be such opposition as there is in the Newcastle
district to the construction of a Railway to Illawarra for our side of the
harbour 1 Surely it is only fair that our turn should come first.
I repeat it, the prospect of transforming the deep water to the
westward of Sydney, by means of railways both to Illawarra and to
Newcastle, into a great shipping port for coal to all parts of the world,
perhaps even to England, is one of the most interesting, the most
animating, to an Australian patriot that can possibly be conceived.
What a magnificent city would it not make Sydney at no distant
period ! What a vast amount of trade of all kinds and of remunerating
employment for all the industrial classes would it not create for this
metropolitan city ! What mines of wealth would it not open up for all
future generations of the inhabitants of Sydney !
My fourth reason for advocating the Government proposal for
the construction of the Illawarra Railway is, that it will afford the
inhabitants of Sydney almost immediate access to one of the finest and
most romantic districts of this noble colony. There is nothing more
urgently required for the welfare of this great metropolis than easily
available means of access to suitable places out of Sydney for health
and relaxation for its inhabitants; and there is no place within a
moderate distance of Sydney that would serve such purposes so
effectually as the district of Illawarra, which, although quite close to
us, is at present virtually inaccessible by land, and still a terra
incognita to the great majority of the people of Sydney. From the
volcanic character of the soil of Illawarra in many parts of it, and
the shelter which the coast range of mountains affords the district
from the cold westerly winds of winter, the indigenous vegetation
is actually semi-tropical; insomuch that Baron Hiigel, an Austrian
traveller of the highest scientific attainments, who spent some time in
it many years ago, observed that in the woods in Illawarra he could.


fancy himself in the natural forests of Ceylon. The scenery is romantic
and beautiful in the highest degree, and the climate along the coast
healthful and bracing. My first visit to that part of the territory
was in the year 1830, that is forty-five years ago, before most of you
were born. I paid a second visit to it, along with my late brother, in
the month of May, 1836, when rather an amusing incident of Austra-
lian travel occurred to us, which I shall take the liberty to relate.
We had travelled by coach to Campbelltown, where we hired horses
for the rest of the journey, the distance from Sydney being about
seventy miles. We had reached the summit of the Illawarra mountain
when it was getting dark ; and leading our horses by the bridle, we
took the narrow pathway to descend the mountain, the descent being
almost precipitous. But we had only got down part of the way when
we were enveloped in midnight darkness, and being afraid either to
go on or to return, we had to sit at the roots of the trees on the face
of the mountain, with our horses’ bridles in our hands, cold and comfort-
less enough, for twelve dreary hours, from six o’clock at night till
six next morning. I trust, however, when any of you shall visit the
romantic and beautiful district of Illawarra, you will have it in your
power to do so in two hours of comfortable travelling by the Metro-
politan and Illawarra Bail way; the direct distance by the proposed
line being only 48 miles.
Another incident of my own experience in the Illawarra district
will serve to show how rapidly the value of property had increased in
that district from and after the period I have referred to. At that
period, in the year 1836, I had an estate of upwards of a thousand
acres, in one of the finest parts of the district, along the beautiful
Illawarra Lake, which I was obliged to dispose of in the pursuit of
objects which I deemed of the utmost importance to the colony. My
late brother, Mr. Andrew Lang, afterwards M.L.C., was the purchaser,
at the rate of two pounds an acre, which was considered a good
price at the time. But shortly after the gold discovery of 1851, the
same land had risen in value to from twenty-five to thirty pounds an
acre.
My fifth reason for advocating the construction of the Illawarra
Railway, as proposed by the present Government, is that it will afford
the inhabitants of Sydney an abundant and cheap supply of all garden
and dairy produce. Illawarra has long been deservedly styled the
Garden of the Colony; and the construction of a Railway from Sydney
would immediately lead to the settlement of numerous industrious
families along the line as market gardeners, for the supply of the
inhabitants of Sydney with all kinds of vegetables, fruits, and roots
at a reasonable rate. There would also be an abundant supply of fresh
fish from Mullet Creek, in the heart of the district, as well as from
the sea, and dairy produce from the rich lands of Illawarra would be'
both plentiful and cheap. We should then, as I have been told by a
respectable inhabitant of the district, have pure milk from the cow by


the morning train from Illawarra at fourpence a quart, instead of the
sky-blue stuff from the pump for which we now pay eightpence. In
short, Illawarra, if opened up to us by the proposed Metropolitan
Railway, will prove a land of milk and honey to the inhabitants of
Sydney.
My sixth and last reason for advocating the construction of the
Metropolitan and Illawarra railway, is that there is a large extent of
valuable Crown land along the proposed line, the sale of which for
suburban and village allotments will go a long way towards the
construction of the Railway. The proposed line traverses a tract of
country, commencing about fifteen miles from Sydney, of the richest
character imaginable, both in soil and in scenery. Anticipating a rush
to that portion of the territory for the purposes of free selection when
it should be known that he had given the order for a trial survey for
the proposed Railway, Mr. Parkes, our late Premier, very wisely reserved
from purchase a hundred thousand acres of the land to be sold after the
construction of the Railway in suitable allotments for the public. Now
it is expected that much of that reserved land will bring, when it comes
into the mai’ket, not less than eight pounds per acre, and will therefore go
a long way towards the construction of the line. Mr. Parkes was, doubt-
less, much in favour of a Railway to IllawaiTa when he ordered the trial
survey and made that most judicious reservation. Having since acquired
a lai’ge extent of coal-bearing land, however, considerably further South,
in the district of Jamberoo, he is no longer in favour of the Railway to
Illawarra; for it is alleged, with great probability, that if the construc-
tion of a Railway to Illawarra should be negatived by the vote of the
Assembly, a great Company will immediately be formed in Melbourne
to construct a Railway from Jamberoo and the other Southern portions
of our great Southern coal-fields, to the noble harbour of Jervis Bay,
which is second only on this coast to that of Sydney, without asking
any aid from Parliament at all. And what would be the result of this
very feasible project! Why, instead of coming into this harbour for their
supplies of coal, such large vessels as the Whampoa and St. Osyth would
be sent to Jervis Bay to carry it direct to Melbourne from the Jamberoo
Railway, and thus a large portion of the trade of the Southern regions
of this colony would very soon be diverted from Port Jackson to Jervis
Bay and Melbourne. By the Railway now in progress from Echuca to
Derriliquin, we have virtually handed over to Melbourne a large portion,
if not the whole of the trade of Riverina, in the South-west; and we have
only to forbid the construction of the railway to Illawarra in order to band
over to Melbourne a large portion also of the trade of the South-eastern
section of our noble colony. In the words of the old Scotch song,—
There’s cauld kail in Aberdeen,
An’ custocks in Stra’bogie.
So there are go-head men enough in Melbourne to take advantage of
the laggards of Sydney, if we only give them the noble opportunity


they want by putting a veto on the Illawarra Railway. In that case
they will soon be raising a pillar of remembrance seventy feet high, in
honour of Dibbs, Lloyd, and Co. of Newcastle, for helping them to
the future Jamberoo Railway. By a piece of artful dodging, such as
the political annals of this colony are full of, Sir William Denison got
the Northern boundary of this colony, which was fixed by the
Imperial Parliament at the thirtieth parallel of latitude, extended to
Point Danger at the Tweed River, in the far North: but believe me, fellow-
colonists and friends, the real Point Danger on this coast at present is
Jervis Bay. If the Railway to Illawarra is conceded, it will be easy to
extend it at any time to Jamberoo and the Southern extremity of our
great coal-field, so as to bring all our South-eastern trade to Sydney;
but if we only allow it to slip out of our hands into those of our go-
ahead friends at Melbourne by putting our Parliamentary veto on the
Illawarra Railway, we shall never be able to get it back again while the
world stands.
Let us now, in conclusion, reckon up the points we have reached in
this our trial survey of the Illawarra line.
In the first place, therefore, we have ascertained that a Railway to
Illawarra will pay a fair interest on its cost from the first. I need not
repeat the proof to this effect I have already given.
Our next ai'gument in favour of the construction of a line of
Railway to Illawarra is, that it will supply the City of Sydney with
abundance of the best coal at the lowest price. Equally unnecessary is
it to repeat what I have already stated on this point.
Our third ai’gument for the construction of a railway to Illawarra
is, that it will transform our noble harbour of Port Jackson into a great
coal-exporting harbour for the Southern Hemisphere, and perhaps for
the whole civilized world. If there were no other argument in the case,
surely this of itself might suffice.
Our fourth argument for the Illawarra Railway is, that it will
afford the inhabitants of Sydney immediate access, at the merest trifle
of cost, to one of the finest and most romantic districts of the colony.
Whether such an outlet is not a matter of the first necessity for our city
population, whether for health or relaxation, I am sure I can appeal
with perfect confidence to the eminent physician who now occupies the
chair.
Our fifth argument for this great undertaking is, that it will afford
the people of Sydney an abundant and cheap supply of all garden and
dairy produce, as well as of fresh fish, both from the sea and from Mullet
Creek—a famous place for fishing, in the heart of the district. Mr. Dibbs
tells us, indeed, that Illawarra is not a grain-producing country, and
does not even supply its inhabitants with food. No wonder, for much
of the soil is too rich for wheat, and it pays the farmer much better to
occupy his land in garden and dairy produce, and to purchase wheat
from Adelaide. What, I ask, is the earth made for but for such cases
as this 1 ?


Our sixth and last argument for the construction of a Railway to
Illawarra is, that through the intelligent foresight and judicious manage
xnent of Mr. Henry Parkes, our late Premier, who ordered the trial
survey of the line, there is a Government reserve of a hundred thousand
acres of land along that line, much of which will sell for eight pounds
an acre, and go a long way towards its construction.
With these observations, I beg to leave the matter in the hands
of those whom it more immediately concerns, hoping and trusting that
the Honourable the Legislative Assembly will not stultify itself and
disappoint the long-cherished hopes and expectations of the inhabitants
of this great city by rejecting the grandest project that has ever been
submitted to the Parliament of New South Wales. (Loud and long-
continued cheering).
Mr. John Young, after referring in the most complimentary terms
to Dr. Lang and his long and varied services in the colony, moved the
following proposition :—“After hearing the very able lecture by Dr.
Lang of the advantage to Sydney and country generally of the Illawarra
railway, a deputation be appointed to wait upon the members of the
Government in order to urge upon them the necessity of having the
railway from Sydney to Illawarra commenced as early as possible ; and
that such deputation consist of Rev. Dr. Lang, Messrs. John Young,
William Neill, Jacob Marks, George Hurley, John Reddy, J. C. Neild,
jun., Dr. Spencer, Dr. Marshall, Dr. Dansey, John Alger, J. G. Raphael,
and the Secretary, with power to add to their number.” In moving this
resolution, Mr. Young referred at some length to the resources of the
colony, which the proposed railway would open up, including the coal-
mines and the farm and dairy produce, and particularly to the kerosene
shale in the district, which was highly appreciated in America, but
could not be used there, on account of the high price charged for it. He
also referred to the claims of the 20,000 settlers in- Illawarra to a railway
to their district, and to the objection made against this particular line,
that it would not pay. Wheu, he asked, was such a question asked
about any other line 1 He was an advocate for progress, and this
railway meant progress in the right direction. He gave his own
estimate of the probable revenue of the line, by which, even admitting
that the railway should cost a million in construction, there would be a
clear profit ■ more, he believed, than any other railway here could
show, and he asked what objection there could be to laying out
public money on an undertaking if it were shown that the undertaking
would pay the public? Notwithstanding all the blundering on the
English railways, they were now paying 41 per cent., and this was a
proof that in the end, railways were profitable, and marked the pro-
gress of a country. He also pointed out that just now the land through
which the proposed railway would pass was either Crown property or
would be given by the owners ; but if the present opportunity should
be lost they might not be able to get the private land on such favour-
able terms; and might have, as they had had to do in other cases, and


as they would have yet to do in Sydney, buy the Crown ]and back
again. Then the present time was a favourable one in the money
market; but who could say what it would be if the country postponed
this work to a future day. We had abundance of money now, but
there might be a reaction, and no time was like the present. (Cheers).
Mr. J. C. Neild seconded the resolution. The fact that the
inhabitants at both ends of the proposed line had so numerously
petitioned for its construction was, he urged, a strong argument that it
was really required. He spoke also of the advantages of railway over
water conveyance, and as to the objection which had been made that
the money spent in the Wollongong and the Illawarra harbour had been
wasted, he urged that the mere fact that some blunder had been made
there was no proof that the present scheme was fallacious. He
admitted that he was not originally in favour of the Illawarra Railway
line; but having carefully considered the whole matter, he was now
fully prepared to advocate it. (Cheers.)
The motion was carried.
Mr. Neill, J.P., then moved, and Mr. Reddy seconded, a vote
of thanks to Dr. Lang for his able and eloquent lecture. This was
carried by acclamation; and thanks having been accorded, on the
motion of Captain Charles, to Dr. Spencer for his conduct in the
chair, the meeting concluded with cheers for the Queen, and a round
of applause for the Rev. lecturer.
CTXJST PUBLISHED,
In two volumes octavo, and for sale at William Haddock’s, Bookseller, 383 George-st.,
Pbice One Guinea,
Si) kqd stktistidkl Sddotint of XewjSotitl) Wkles,
fdoiq tl)e tip dip of tl\e Colony ip to,tl)e pde^ept
dky,
JOHN DUNMORE LANG, D.D., A.M.
&c., &c., &e.
NOV 1992
-x- N
