

Most Perfect TROOGHING,
. ALL STEEL and
WIND MILL ALL IRRIGATION
AUSTRALIA. Ill SPECIALITIES.
Mrttrr-’ All StppTV^^^Wf Contractor8tothe Varions t
WIND MOTOR State GoYernments - I
I / i Complete Pumping Plants Quoted For. I
Patent 1915. ’ | V/yikc/ ESTIMATES FREE. B
METTERS LIMITED, Adelaide, Sydney and Perth.
Publisher* Ltd., Printers, Young Street, Adelaide.


Introduction
npO meet the increasing interest and demands for lines of our
A manufacture, we have found it necessary to publish a more complete,
up-to-date Catalogue of our Goods.
We have made many important Introductions during the past years,
and it is our intention to describe, with Photographic Illustrations, the
Leading Lines of our Manufacture. It is quite impossible to list all lines
that we can supply, so that in the event of your failing to find that
which you require, we will accept it as a favor if you will enquire
if we are producing the line.
We have had so much success with our ME I TERS* ALL STEEL
WIND MOTOR and the attributing lines, that we are to-day in a premier
position as Manufacturers of Wind Power Machinery. It is our determin-
ation to maintain this position by keeping up-to-date with our Plant for
manufacturing, so that the cost of production may be such, that no other
firm can supply at a lower cost, also, in keeping ahead of the times
with our methods we have something of interest to explain at all times.
The Purpose of this Catalogue is, more particularly, to describe
the improvements in our 1914 ALL STEEL WIND MOTOR, as well
as oth£r changes and additions made during the past season.
Seeing that it is impossible for most of our clients to inspect the
Goods at our various Showrooms, we are making our Illustrations and
descriptive matter our responsible selling medium, all Illustrations being
from True Photographs of the article itself so that every confidence
may be placed in this Catalogue.
In thanking you for your paSt favours we wish to convey to you
our very urgent desire for your further support. We want your Trade
and are prepared to give your Commands the very beSt attention.
METTERS’ LIMITED,
Adelaide, Sydney and Perth.


‘Che width of J veil.
‘‘Che depth of Well from surface to
bottom.
“Che depth of Water in the Well and
does this depth vary in seasons.
e Do you require Storage ‘Canks ?
What Capacity?
‘Do you require ‘Cank Stand?
What Height ?
What distance from the <*%Cill will the
tank be established ?
‘Do you Want Troughing ?
What size and quantity ?
Horn far from ' the Tank do you
propose establishing the trough ?
‘Che height of ‘Cower required to
raise the wind wheel / 0 ft. above
obstructions ?
‘Che quantity of Water required per
day?
How Would the Goods be forwarded?
REQUISITION FOR METIERS’ OUTFIT.
If you are requiring a Wind £M.ill Outfit please HU in the particulars as hereunder set
out or write us in the form of our Letter of enquiry published on page 40.
PARTICULARS TO GIVE AS FOLLOWS:
Horn far from ' the Tank do you
propose establishing the trough ?
“Che height of ‘‘Cower required to
raise the wind wheel / 0 ft. above
obstructions ?
‘Che quantity of Water required per
day?
IfiCame
flddress




METTERS’ ALL STEEL WIND
MOTOR.
THIS cut illustrates Metters’
All Steel Wind Motor, 10 ft.
wheel, built upon a 30 ft.
tower, raising jvater from a well
65 ft. deep and delivering into a
storage tank of 2,000 gallons capa-
city, placed upon a steel tower
20 ft. above the ground. This
picture gives a good idea of the
class of work we supply. . It has
the following claims to recommend
it—from an artistic point of view
it cannot be excelled—very little
space is required to accommodate
it; it is constructed with a view of
obtaining the maximum of strength
at a minimum of cost, and is
practically indestructible.
The 1914 Metters’ Steel Wind
Motor represents the sum total of
more labour spent upon it with
more experienced workmen en-
gaged and the most up-to-date
plant to manufacture with. That
is why the Metters’
1914 All Steel Wind
Motors have given such
complete satisfaction to
pastoralists, farmers,
orchardists and others,
and whv the sales of
Metters’ Wind Motor
have broken all pre-
vious records. No
other Wind Mill has
had the enormous sale
and the same satis-
factory results as the
Metters’ All Steel
Wind Motor.
Remember, in ar-
ranging for a Mill
plant, do not over-load
its power. You want
your Mill to run with
the very lightest wind
pressure.
BLOCK No. 1
ADELAIDE, SYDNEY, AND PERTH.


BLOCK No. s. virfVpN
BETTERS’ 10 ft.
iVind Motor, built
ipon a 30 ft. steel I^KyvJS^^
ower delivering
nto a 2,000 gallon
torage tank, /■Wfv
(laced upon a 12 ft. -
steel stand. HnW*
IN publishing this catalogue, we desire, as much as possible, to
* treat with the everyday requirements, as it is impossible for
us to illustrate here all the lines we manufacture connected
with irrigation work.
Our intention is to give a clear and precise idea of the detail
required to complete an up-to-date windmill outfit, and for this
purpose are illustrating the various sized mills that we are
making up, at work in some particular site. By these illustra-
tions (which are all true photographs), intending buyers will bo
in the position of judging the general appearance, as well as
learn something of the utility of the various outfits, as remarks
are made giving the depth of supplies and the capacity wherever
possible.
METTERS’ 10 ft.
Wind Motor, built
upon
tower
into a 2,000 gallon
placed upon a 12 ft.
BLOCK No. 4.
This cut describes one of our 10 ft. wind motors built upon a
30-ft. steel tower, delivering water into a 2,000 gallon tank
placed upon a 20 ft. steel stand, thus giving a good pressure of
water throughout the pipes. This is a most satisfactory outfit,
and is highly approved by the purchaser.
THE opinion has been expressed frequently to us
that our Mills, judging by the finish and general
appearance must be costly, but a comparison of
our prices with those of other makers will prove our
charges are lower, even though the standard of our
Mills are of the very highest.
In estimating the cost of a Wind Mill, and com-
paring the cost with other makers, the most important
consideration should be given to the capacity of the
Mill, If, for instance, our 8 ft. Wind Motor at
£l4 15/ gives as large a supply of water as other makers’ 10 ft. Mills at £2O, we should be deemed the
cheaper maker, and this is just what we do show. Our Mill is the most powerful Mill on the Market.
If a M ind Mill is placed in position for the purpose of raising water, estimate its value at the cost of
water per 1,000 gallons, and do not consider so much the size of the Mill.
Metters’ Mills have been erected over all the States, and arc working some of the deepest holes,
as well as shallow holes, and our very strong point is we prefer to send you to a man who is using our
Mills for reference, as we make the very best friends of all our clients. There are many unique points
about Metters’ Mills. We have kept them up-to-date by applying all the modern ideas and employing
the most expert engineers and pattern makers, and can assure the public of the very best results.
ADELAIDE, SYDNEY, AND PERTH.


METTERS’
ction an
BLOCK No. 2.
Matters’ 8 ft. Wind Motor,
built upon a 30 ft. steel
tower.
warrant the 1914 Wind Motor to be made
of the very best material obtainable for the
class of work performed, and to be the
stronger, more perfectly self-adjusting, and
far more serviceable than any other.
When properly erected according to in-?
structions and directions, hereafter set out,i
and kept in proper order, it is capable of
doing more work and running in a lighter
wind than any other make 01 Wind Mill in
the market.
Any part found faulty in material or
workmanship within one year from the date
of erection, will be supplied free of charge
at store door or on truck Adelaide or Syd-
ney, provided defective part is returned to
us, freight prepaid, for inspection. Wind
Motor Towers are warranted not to break,
■\V7E can assist you to overcome any difficulty you may
’ ’ come in contact with, and would be pleased to have
you write us explaining your troubles.
If you are an intending buyer you will obtain much in-
formation from this Catalogue, which will /ery materially
assist you in putting down the most suitable outfit to meet
your particular requirements at the least possible cost.
Illustrations we are publishing show clearly the
class of work we establish. Compare them with any others,
and you will give us the preference.
Prices quoted in this Catalogue are for goods
TERMS: delivered, if treating with Adelaide, free on
trucks at Adelaide, or free on board at Port
Adelaide. If treating with Sydney, free on trucks at Sydney,
dr free on board at Sydney.
If you are desirous of terms other than the usual cash or
30 days, kindly outline your requirements for our considera-
tion.
Our prices have been agreed upon a cash basis, so that
if extended terms are required a slight increase would be
made to the list prices.
Initial orders should be ac- METTERS'
companied with remittance \ T . . T
or references. i Wind Mill.
OUR GUARANTEE Wind
OR WARRANTY. Motor
strongest in construction and
has the greatest power. We
BLOCK No. 6.
Metiers’ 6 ft. Little Toff Wind Mill, built upon a 30 ft. steel
tower, raising water from a well 30 ft. deep and delivering
into a storage tank of 800 gallons capacity placed upon a steel
tank stand six feet high.
ADELAIDE, SYDNEY, AND PERTH


•' f
buckle, or blow down. If breakages
occur during the period covered by
our warranty, resulting from careless-
ness, or failure to properly care for
the Mill and To wer, we will not be
held responsible for same or be bound
to supply such parts free of charge.
Our warranty is based upon the condition that
the Mill and Tower shall be properly erected and
cared for, otherwise we do not agree to furnish the
free repairs. The instructions given can so easily
be followed that mistakes should not occur, and
consequently accidents will
not happen; we simply ask
you to carry out these in-
structions, the Wind Motor
will do the rest.
BLOCK No. 3.
Metiers’ 10 ft. Steel Wind Motor built upon a 40
ft. Steel Tower, raising water from a well and
delivering into two 3,000 gallon Storage Tanks
placed upon a Steel Stand 12 ft. above the surface.
Metiers’ 12 ft. Steel Wind Motor, built
upon a 30 ft. tower, raising water from
a bored well 325 ft. deep, and delivering
into a 2,000 gallon storage tank placed
upon a steel stand 10 ft. above the sur
When the wind
motor is pulled off
from the wind it will
stop pumping.
The most power-
ful mill in the States.
Our towers are the
strongest.
Any duplicates can
be supplied at short
notice.
The 1914 patent
mill is a revelation.
A wind mill should be oiled
during the winter months,
more particularly the turn-
table.
Use Metiers’ solidified oil
in grease cups.
Use heavy D machine oil
for lubrication for needle
lubricators.
We arc raising water from
bores over 400 feet in depth.
We guarantee to give you
the best possible value.
The wind is the cheapest
power.
Metiers’ wind mills are
self-adjusting.
Do not tie a wind wheel to
the Tower of Mill. If any
tying up is required, secure
wheel to the tail.
BLOCK No. 7.
Metiers’ All Steel Little Toff Wind
Mill, 6 ft. wind wheel, built upon 20
ft. Steel Tower raising water from a
well 38 ft. deep.
ADELAIDE, SYDNEY, AND PERTH.


M^mr^mBf^iz',. .yWK '*&f*ly '4> ‘ ' B hS|h|b f T 9fli fl^H
~«3 'Sh <~> II |i
r / f/ wK • || 4jft ' r ft jHrvV
.Mit— JJ ■■* JJeSS® Bb^r-' :
' ***" *'^ S -a-,.
Illustrations showing corners of Metters, Limited, Fitting Shop and Foundry.
ADELAIDE, SYDNEY, AND PERTH.


\ J
The largest and most complete display of Wind Mills, Pumps, Troughing, and Pumping appliances
ever shown on the Show Grounds
BLOCK No. 11.
An exhibit of Metiers’ Limited Wind Mills, Pumps, and other accessories, as shown at the September
Show, 1909, of the Royal Agricultural and Horticultural Society of South Australia.
ADELAIDE, SYDNEY, AND PERTH.


A FEW OF THE STRONG POINTS i. We
WHICH HAVE MADE METTERS’ can at all
MILLS SO MUCH SOUGHT FOR. times sup-
placements for any of cur Mills, even though the
pattern may be twenty years old.
2. The working power of the Mill is phenomenal.
3. The castings are scientifically made to ensure
great strength.
4. All parts are inte> changeable.
5. The very best material only is used throughout. BLOCK No. 27
6. The working parts are all machined, giving Metters’ to ft Wind
1 1 , j , • , , Motor, with 30 ft. Steel
idoubted accuracy in adjustments. Tower. Bu ? lt in con .
undoubted accuracy in
7. All Shafts of best bright Cold Rolled Steel. junction with a 2,000
8. The bearings are unique, and are patented by us. gallon Tank and Steel
9. The Mill being properly governed cannot race. Tank Stand to ft. high.
to. The tower is built of best black Mild Steel
Angles and painted with oxide paint, and is con-
structed with dove-tailed lock-
ing arrangements at the top,
which make the tower the
strongest in the Kingdom. We
can supply galvanized towers
at slightly increased cost.
11. The tower is spread to al
low placing over larger wells
than usual.
12. The lubri-
eating facilities
are as near to
perfection as is
possible for an
engine raised
above the ground
surface. All
Wind Mills man-
ufactured by us
are now fitted
with Special
Metal Grease
Cups to receive
Metters’ Wind
Mill Lubricant.
We are not
discarding our
previous pattern
Mill, but for all
future orders we
will forward our
1914 Model, un-
less otherwise in-
structed.
There are many
ADELAIDE, SYDNEY, AND PERTH.


other very important parts and attachments explained further on
in this Catalogue, which will prove to you that the Metiers’
Wind Motor is the most perfect Wind Mill on the market.
DESCRIPTIVE MATTER FOR METTERS
1914 ALL STEEL WIND MOTORS
After many years’ experience with Metters’ All
Steel Wind Motors, we have concluded that the
principle of the Working Gears cannot be
proved; consequently, in our 1914
Wind Motor we have maintained
the same position for the pinion
wheel and gear wheel, but have in .T)
many ways improved the applica-
tion of other parts. What we have now obtained
is a powerful, light running Wind Mill, with prac-
tically indestructible bearings, so lubricated that a
minimum of attention will be required
The following illus-
trations and descriptive
matter should convey
a good impression to
any person with or
without any previous
experience of wind
BLOCK No. 12.
Metters Patent All Steel
Wind Motor, 8 ft. wind
wheel built upon a 30 ft.
Steel Tower.
power. This Mill will run for fully twelve months after
being properly supplied with solidified oil in the various
grease cups without requiring any further lubricant for
the main castings. Use Metters’ Special Solidified Oil
as supplied by the maker of the Mill.
Block 140 illustrates the Metters’ 1914 All Steel Wind Motor for
10, 12, and 14 ft. wind wheels, fitted with weight governor (A.8.C.) and
grease cups.
During the years we have been employing the Weight Governor,
the results have been most satisfactory, and we can thoroughly recom-
mend this method of adjusting and governing the Mill. The weight
A is applied to the steel bar B in sections, which allows of adjustment
being made in accordance with the speed required and considered safe;
also with due consideration to the position in which the Wind Mill is
being erected. The steel bar Bis fitted into the cast socket on furl
lever, and is held in position by the Set Screw C. The speed is con-
trolled by adjusting the weight A on bar B. The nearer the weight is
to the point C the less speed the wind wheel will attain and vice versa.
With this attachment there need be no racing or injurious speed. There-
fore the life of a Mill fitted with this governor much exceeds any other.
The Bearings as now supplied are practically indestructible, being
of the Highest Quality Gun Metal carefully turned and fitted into the
main casting, and supplied with superfine solidified oil, which is deposited
right down on the shafting, thus preventing any choking of the feed, and
avoiding any waste. The bearings are so housed that the shafting
throughout the Mill Head is true to alignment.
ADELAIDE, SYDNEY, AND PERTH.


i. The first and most important amongst the many good
points of the Metiers’ Mill is the Main Casting.
Block No. 157 illustrates the Alain Casting for our 10, 12,
and 14 ft. Wind Mills. As will be seen, the very long sleeve
encasement for the main spindle supports the weight of the
wind wheel over a very wide and extensive area. This Sleeve
Casting is continued right into the centre of the bell shaped
hub of the wind wheel, bringing the centre of the weight of
the wind wheel directly and fairly over the bearing, doing
away entirely with any overhang, and obviating any risk of
a bent shaft, while at the same time the bearing is comfort-
ably housed and gives a substantial and true line for the cold
rolled steel shafting. The Lower Sleeve, which carries the
shaft for the gear wheel, is also of considerable length, is
carefully machined to receive the long Gun Metal Bearings,
and supports the shaft true to line with the main shaft.
2. The Main Casting is fitted with four long Gun Metal
Bearings, as shown Block 158. These are carefully machined
and fitted into the main casting to receive the main shaft,
5. The Crank Pin is a
BLOCK No. is.
Metters’ All Steel Wind Motor, 8 ft.
Wind Wheel built upon a 20 ft. Steel
Tower. The angle diagonal stays and
cross girths in conjunction with the
heavy tower legs give this tower great
strength. The construction of the
ladder tends to great safety in attend-
ing to the working parts of the Mill.
fore the bearing is properly filled. See Illustration, Block No. 156,
for position of the various grease cups. Do not overlook any of
these; they require filling so seldom that, when required, do it
properly.
4. The Pitman. The pitman or driving bar is a heavy casting,
which connects the crank pin to the front rocker shaft, and is
formed to give extraordinary strength with a minimum of weight.
Provision is now made to lubricate the crank pin at the side of
the pitman, and the rocker shaft on top.
turned steel pin fitted into m \
the large gear wheel with ■Biku
steel key, to prevent the ' r* 6 .i£*i||||lieiliiew*r
the load. In forming the
pin, it is well shouldered, BLOCK No. 158. Showing Bearings.
from wind wheel and the shafting
of the gear wheel. This work is
very accurately set up in special
jigs, as it is most important that
all shafts throughout the mill head
will be running true to line wdth
each other.
3. All Bearings are fitted with
Metal Grease Cups, and we advise
as follows:—When charging these
grease cups with solidified oil,
make quite sure that the oil is feed-
ing right down on to the shafting.
Fill up the cover of grease cup and
screw it down until you are satis-
fied the grease has attained the
point required. You may have to
fill the cup up several times be-
ADELAIDE, SYDNEY, AND PERTH


and should be
driven tight into its
Rocker Shaft is fit- „. rtnv „
... , ... BLOCK No. 29.
ted With a lug to hold Rod Box. BLOCK No. 131. Swivel.
the box in position
with the rocker. The pump rod has a heavy welded yoke, which passes through the rod
box and is check nutted, thus making a most safe and secure connection. We have found
this method of connecting the rod much more effective than tapping the rod and screw-
ing it up into the rod box.
7. The Pump Rod Swivel is standardized for our various sized mills, at the point
where the swivel attaches to the solid rod. We have enlarged the hole in the casting
to receive a liner; this liner fits nicely on to the solid rod and into the swivel casting.
The rod has a long thread at swivel end on to which we first pass a nut, then a washer,
and follow with the steel liner. This is then passed through the swivel, a washer placed
over the thread and check nuts on end of rod. Screw nuts up tight and you find a perfect
swivel is formed; the two washers are bearing on the liner, allowing the swivel to work
free.
8. Rocker and Furl Shafts are of cold rolled steel shafting, cut to length and fitted into
position. The Back Shaft is drilled hollow at either end to receive Grease Cups, with
diagonal holes drilled to distribute the grease to the place of bearing.
9. The Wind Wheel is constructed to give the greater strength to support the wind
f pressure, and so adjusted to give off the
greatest possible power from the least
BLOCK No. wind pressure. This is done by altering
_ 6 " , the method of applying the wind-sails or
xvoq Box and m . rp«
Pump Rod. vanes to the inner and outer rings. Inc
clips are rivetted on to the back of the vanes, which
in turn are rivetted on to the inner and outer rings.
BLOCK No. I£3.
Inner and Outer Sail Clips.
leaving the face of the wheel perfectly free from
any obstructions to the wind; allowing the wind to
slide from the vane as the energy propels the wheel
around.
10. The Pipe Barrel upon which the head of the
Mill is placed and kept in position, is now fitted
with a solid wrought iron ring which is sweated
on with great care without cutting any material
grove in the pipe barrel, thereby we retain the full
strength of the pipe tube. With our 10, 12, and
14 ft. Mills we supply a cast iron collar, which is Wind Motor Head-on* Wheel and Tail.
ADELAIDE, SYDNEY, AND PERTH.


placed over the pipe barrel under the wrought iron ring. This cast collar eventually rests upon the
top end of the Mill Tower angles, thus relieving the wrought iron of the greater amount of its strain.
11. The Turntable is provided with a loose gun metal ring, which is placed upon the turntable
by passing over the top end of the pipe barrel. This ring is an intermediate between the main casting
of the Mill and the wrought iron ring, and prevents the Mill from sticking in any one position. We
find this more effective than ball bearings in the turntable, as when balls are introduced the Mill head
BLOCK No. 30.
Showing Top of Tower.
works or swings backward and forward with each stroke of the Mill, thus losing
quite a lot of its lifting power. In each case where we had supplied ball bearings
in the turntable we have replaced them with the gun metal ring.
12. The Furl Handle is fitted with steel loop to which the galvanized furling
wire is attached; when the furl handle is pulled down the back vane should be
in a parallel line with the wind wheel. If the wire stretches, lower the furl handle
slightly.
13. The Tower Angles are dove tailed at the junction of the pipe barrel,
not merely lapped, as with others. We have four heavy studs or cross bolts about
twelve inches from the top of tower to bind the angles together; further, at the
extreme top a heavy clamp, and at the base block four bolts passing through the
base casting and through the angles forming the tower legs. When these are
all drawn tight the Mill Tower is perfectly locked, and will not sway.
14. Our Towers are built of the very best square root mild steel angles, put
together in 10 ft, sections, for convenience of packing, with heavy cross stays
and girths. In this matter of towers we maintain we have the strongest and
most serviceable structure on the market. We guarantee our Mill Towers to
stand any wind shock it may receive if put up according to our instructions
given.
15. The Galvanizing of Mill Towers. We have discontinued this practice for
many years, as we maintain, for the purpose of strength, a painted mild steel
angle properly coated with oxide paint will carry greater weight and responsibility
than galvanized angles. The process of submerging steel angles into molten
metal, for the purpose of coating the angle with galvanizing metal, so crystallizes the angles that they
become too brittle. (You will not find galvanized girders being introduced into bridge buildings or
any purpose where weight is to be supported.) But, if the locality requires galvanized Towers, we
can supply at increased cost if short notice is given us.
16. All Shafting throughout the Mill is carefully adjusted so that each is running in a parallel line
with its fellow shaft.
17. As all Parts of our Mills are Kept in Stock, there would be no delay in replacing fittings; also
you would not require the assistance of an expert for’the purpose of putting in replacement parts. In
ordering any spares please state accurately the size and pattern of Mill and
the date when supplied.
18. Our Castings are not hard and brittle as in many machines. We
have a special mixture which allows the casting to carry a very great re-
sponsibility. We are manufacturers anxious to give to you the best pos-
sible, and, if not good enough for you, it is of no value to us. We hope to
continue supplying your Wind Mill requirements for all times, and will
guarantee to give you replacements for any of our manufactured Mills you
may have in use.
19. Lubrication. This is perhaps the most important consideration in
a Wind Mill plant, as owing to the working parts being much above the
ground level, faults are frequently not detected until after quite a lot of
BLOCK No. 135.
Matters Special Lubricant.
ADELAIDE, SYDNEY, AND PERTH.


7.
damage has occurred. We have made
quite a number of very severe tests before
deciding to adopt the present method. Our
conclusions that undoubtedly 'the Non-
Fluid or Solidified Oil has a very great
advantage over liquid oil. We are now fit-
ting up our Mills entirely with metal grease
cups for the purpose of using solidified oil,
which we are supplying in a handy canis-
ter. We advise you to use Metters’
Specially Selected Lubricant, as we have
proved this to be the right thing to use on
Wind Mills.
Block 156 illustrates clearly the position
for the various lubricators. No. 1 supplies
the bearing for the end of wind wheel
spindle. No. 3 gear wheel spindle. No.
2 is fitted with a short piece of i-in. pipe,
so that the lubricator is more accessible.
Nos. 5 and 7 apply to the pitman. No 8,
rod box casting. Nos. 6 and 9to the back
rocker shaft, and No. 10 to the turntable.
The governor bar is fitted into the furl
lever casting at point No. 11, and held in
position with a steel set screw.
We now claim to have the following ad
vantages; —
The Lubrication is Good.
There is No Waste.
Less Time Taken Up in Oiling.
No Dirty Mill, Tower, and Platform
No Dust or Grit Entering the Bearings.
We ask you to go carefully into the de-
tail which we have here stated, when we
feel sure you will recognise we have a good
grip of the requirements of a Wind Mill
plant, and have been able to meet these re-
quirements in our 1914 Wind Motor.
BLOCK No. 15 6.
Showing all Lubricators.
We have decided not to publish 1 estimonials, and would be pleased to give von reference to some
one near you who has our Mills in use.
Metters’ Mills have been on the market for over 20 years, and in those districts which require Mills
in continuous operation Metters’ Mills are in the greatest favour.
If you know of a Metters’ Mill which has not been a success, we would esteem it a favour if you
will advise us of same, so that we can advise an adjustment for the plant.
ADELAIDE, SYDNEY, AND PERTH.


i
*th — 4
c 1 if
DESCRIPTIVE MATTER This 8 ft. Wind Alotor is materially similar to our 10, 12, and 14 ft. 1914
FOR METTERS 1914
8 FT. WIND MOTOR.
Pattern Wind Alotor. The main difference is the bearings supplied with
the 8 ft. Mill, as shown in Block 139. These bearings are of high-class
Gun Aletal, and are fully described hereunder.
1. The Main Casting is designed to receive the working parts exactly in the same manner as the
1914 Pattern Mill which is fully described in the foregoing pages, and is of high-grade metal, compact
and strong, although constructed with a minimum of weight, and is easily accessible to all parts.
BLOCK No. 139.
Main Casting.
2. Bearings (see Block 139). The main casting is provided with two gun metal
interchangeable bearings for the main shaft, which are housed in white metal and
designed to allow of easy replacement and be of absolute rigidity. At the end
of the long sleeve A we have increased the area of the casting to allow the bearing
Cto enter. B. shows the end view of this bearing with a portion of the flange
cut away. This fits under the projection at the end of the main
sleeve A for the purpose of holding the bearing in its proper
position. Two screws arc used to draw the gun metal bearing
tight into its white metal seating. A similar bearing is applied
Ito the other end of the main sleeve. These two bearings are
interchangeable with each other. The wear to the front bearing
is on the bottom, owing to the weight of the wind wheel. The
wear on the back bearing is on the top, owing to the load
forcing the pinion and gear wheel apart. Simply changing the
position of these two bearings will bring the working parts into
a true alignment and give new service to the Wind Mill.
3. All Bearings arc fitted with metal grease cups for the use
of Aletters’ Special Solidified Oil.
4. The Pitman and Crank Pin are now cast as one fitting. The projecting piece of
Pitman (see Block 137) at point (B) is cast hollow, turned and ground externally, enters the
gear wheel at (A), this being drilled and ground to receive
same. Bolt C passes through the bottom casting B from !
gear wheel side, and is check nutted, thus holding the cast- I 1
ings in their working positions. The special advantage of
this adoption is, we now have the load supported inside ,
the line of gear wheel, in place of outside the gear wheel.
The projecting piece of pitman is so contained in the gear
wheel that there is no risk of wear. Sufficient lubricant
can be forced into the bearing to give many months’ snp-
ply. Further, most of the knocking so familiar with steel
geared Wind AT ills has been eliminated.
5. The Pump Rod Connection, Block No. 143, is dif-
ferent in construction in the Top Connection. The rod
itself is formed having a solid eyepiece, which fits snug
into the rod box casting with a heavy bolt passing through jjf JfcywV !S»
and securing the same. The rod box is held into position
with the rocker by a cast hook, which engages a stud on
the rocker casting.
The various other parts of our 8 ft. Wind Motor are
similar in detail to the 10 and 12 ft. Mill, except that
BLOCK No. . . . ....
145. we do not require the cast iron ring under the turntable
Connection, which is employed with the larger mills.
BLOCK No. 137. Pitman and Crank Pin.
ADELAIDE, SYDNEY. AND PERTH.


6 and 7 ft. diameter wheels
are fitted with 4 spokes ol
angle steel, to which attach
16 wind sails. The 8 ft. wheel
has 4 spokes and 12 wind
Csails. The 9 ft. wheel has 5
BLOCK No. 114. | , . . , .. _
Working Parts of Toff | s P okes and 15 wind sails. To
Mill- assemble the Wind Wheel
bolt the steel angle spokes to the inside of the cast hub
then attach the wheel sections.
The Hub is a strong casting designed to give ex
ceptional stability. The main shaft of the Mill is keyed
into the Hub, passing through the main casting and
supported by a long arm.
The Main Spindle passing through the long sleeve
is running in a white metal fixed bearing at either end.
The sleeve casting has two holes drilled to receive
metal grease cups (3 and 4). The Pinion Wheel is
serviceable,
Block 114 illustrates
working parts of The Little
Toff Wind Mill.
We can supply this
of Wind Mill with 6, 7, 8,
and 9 ft. wind wheels. In all
sizes the type and applica-
tion are the same, except B I OC K No. 13*.
with the spokes and sails for Toff 8 x 20 Wind
the various size wheels, Mill
which are as follows, viz.:
The demand for a serviceable, up-to-date Wind
Mill of smaller power than our Wind Motor was
instrumental in bringing about the introduction of
our Little Toff All Steel Wind Mill, fitted with a
6 ft. Wind Wheel. We have been so exceedingly
THE LITTLE TOFF
WIND MILL, ALL
STEEL.
successful with this Mill that we have now been induced to manufacture the
same type for larger Wind Wheels. Our list now includes 6, 7, 8 and 9 ft.
diameter wheels which, during the past year, have been most readily
accepted, owing to the reputation of the 6 ft. Mill. We want you to
realise that with this Mill we are offering a particularly powerful Mill
for the least possible cost, and would ask you to compare it with
any other Mill for
value.
The Little Toff is
specially adapted for
pumping from dams,
wells, or bores. Is
light in construc-
tion, but strong and
ADELAIDE, SYDNEY, AND PERTH


keyed on to the shaft and prevented from working loose by a back nut which screws on to the shaft
the reverse way to the travel ol the pinion wheel. The pinion travels 3 i-*7th revolutions to the large
gear wheel’s one revolution, thus gaining great lifting power.
The Pitman, or driving bar, is of special cast metal with cast shank fitted into large gear wheel and
provided with special oiling facilities at Nos. 2 ana 1.
The Large Gear Wheel is a feature of the Mill. The boss of the wheel has been materially en-
larged and turned hollow with a tight-fitting face.Plate 6. This chamber is fitted with non-fluid oil
and has an opening into the bearing of the shaft, and
provides several months’ oil storage for this particular
bearing. To replace the supply of oil in the 6 and 7
ft. Mills, remove the face plate 6 and refill chamber.
With the 8 and 9 ft. we apply a metal grease cup to the
main casting; the spindle upon which the gear wheel
revolves is hollow and receives the grease or oil from
the screwdown grease cup, and is dispensed into the
bearing through the shafting.
The Upper Portion of Driving Bar is fitted on to the
cross head, which has a cast shaft carefully turned and
fitted to the driving bar, having a washer and split pin
passing through the shaft to keep the driving bar in place
The Top of Driving Bar is fitted with metal grease cup No. 1. The
cross head is practically the pump rod head, and is provided with
flanges, allowing the block to travel upward between the steel bar and
the upright arm of the main casting. The faces of these flanges are
wide to avoid any pinching in the upward or down stroke of the pump
The Cross Rod Head connects to the mild steel tube passing
through the main casting, and joins the pump rod, which has a swivel
attachment at the bottom to which the flat pump rod is attached.
The Tail or Back Vane is placed in position by passing the end of
the tail pipe through the hinge piece on main casting and securing by
a bolt, then attach the long iron link with loop at one end over the
top cast hinge bracket. To place this in position, the bolt holding the
round casting on to the hinge bracket must be
washer taken off to admit the loop on link.
removed and the
The Furling of the Back Vane or Tail throws the Mill out of action
the attachments for furling in the Toff and Doris: a length of chain
is attached to the tail pipe, passes through the two iron sheaves or
pulleys, and then down through the pump rod tube, and connects to
the furl wire passed through the round hole in cross bar, the furl wire
connects to the swivel attached to the loop on furl handle. This furl
handle should be so placed that it is easy of access, and when the lever
is pulled down should lock under, placing just sufficient strain on the
wire to bring the wheel and tail in a parallel line with each other Be
careful not to put more than this requisite strain upon the wire. When
the wire stretches, as it will do after being in use for a little while,
slacken off the clamp of furl handle and slide it down far enough to
obtain the proper strain.
BLOCK No. 133.
9 ft. Toff Mill with 20 ft. Tower.
The Cross Guide and Rod Connections (see Block 114). 9is the cast guide which is held in position
by four bolts, passing head inward and through the tower legs, nutted outside the tower. 10 is the
swivel casting. 7is the cast rod connection. These two castings are connected by two bars of flat
ADELAIDE, SYDNEY. AND PERTH.


steel punched as shown in the Block 114. The purpose of the extra holes is to permit of the pump
rod adjustment without such careful measurements being taken as with ordinary connections. All
bolts here are fitted with check nuts and must be screwed up tight.
Full details for the assembling and erection of the Toff Wind Mill will be found further on
Lubrication.—We have given very careful attention to the matter of lubrication with the Little
Toff Mill.
BLOCK No. 31.
Little Toff Wind Mill.
All bearings are provided with
metal grease cups for the applica-
tion of Non-Fluid Oils. The ex-
posed parts, where friction occurs,
should be brushed over with the
same lubricant as is supplied for
the lubricators.
This cut illustrates the Little
Toff Wind Mill, 6 and 7 ft. We
can strongly recommend this Mill
for shallow lifts, dams, or under-
ground tanks, or wells to a depth
of 50 ft., when not more than, say,
1,000 gallons per day are required.
USE METTERS’ SOLIDIFIED
GREASE FOR ALL WIND
MOTOR LUBRICATING.
Remember, in arranging for a Mill plant do not overload its power. You want your Mill to run
with the very lightest wind pressure.
d he opinion has been expressed frequently to us that our Mills, judging by the finish and general
appearances must be costly, but a comparison of our prices with those of other makers will prove our
charges are lower, even though the standard of our Mills are of the very highest.
Metters’ Mills have been erected over all the States, and are working some of the deepest holes,
as well as shallow holes, and our very strongest point is we prefer to send you to a man who is using
our Mills for reference, as we make the very best friends of all our clients. There are many unique
points about Metters’ Mills. We have kept them up-to-date by applying all the modern ideas and em-
ploying the most expert engineers and pattern makers, and can assure the public of the very best
results.
ADELAIDE, SYDNEY, AND PERTH.


This Mill was introduced by us
f 7 MATTER FOR THE LITTLE several years back to meet an
XL STEEL WIND MILL. enquiry for a 6 ft. Wind Mill
suitable for shallow wells, dams,
round tanks, where a small supply only was required. We are pleased to
state that it has been very much appreciated during
the past. We propose here justr giving a rough out-
line as a description of this Mill.
This cut illustrates the Doris Working Head sup-
I'he Main Casting is light, but constructed to ob-
ta‘n t^ie ff rcatest possible strength from the weight
milllllilllllllßl The Casting is placed on the tower by pass-
*n£ ovcr the pipe barrel, whica is secured to the
tower by the cast base block; under the mill casting
we have provided a gun metal ring, which forms the
base of the turntable.
The Hub of the Wind Wheel is cast in conjunction with the pinion wheel,
main shaft passes through this hub and enters the main casting, and is held
osition by two steel set screws. Thus the wind wheel revolves upon a fixed
The Gear Wheel attaches to the main casting between the wind wheel and
ing, being so placed that it engages the pinion wheel under the main shaft,
ensuring a safe engagement of the gears, and allowing clearances for the
ing bar or pitman.
The Pitman is formed of special half-round steel, and is connected to the
BLOCK No. 16. , , . . . . , , , , ,
rod box, giving a six-inch stroke to the pump rod.
Little The p urnp Connection, which passes through the main casting and pipe
barrel, is a mild steel tube |-in. internal diameter, with a swivel arrangement
at the top. To prevent any side play of the pump rod, we have a round solid
guide bar attached to the rod casting passing through a cast loop or socket,
attached to the main casting. The tail or back vane is held in position by passing the end of tail
pipe through the hinge piece on the main casting, and securing by a bolt; then attach the long iron
link with loop at one end over the top cast hinge bracket. To place this in position, the bolt holding
the round casting on to the hinge bracket must be removed, and the washer taken off to admit of the
loop on link. The furling of the back vane or tail throws the mill out of action.
The attachments for furling are similar to the Toff Mill: a length of chain is attached to the tail
pipe, passed through the two iron sheaves and down through the tube pump rod, and there connected
to the wire for further extension to the lever: the wire should be passed through the swivel attached
to the lever bar.
The wind wheel is made of special galvanised steel sheets, and is bolted together in four sections,
each section comprising four sails or vanes, which are curved and dished, so as to give the necessary
power required to operate the working parts.
The tower is exactly as supplied with the Toff Mill, giving extraordinary strength with a very neat
appearance.
For particulars for erection see “Instructions for the Erection of Doris Wind Mills.”
In describing and illustrating our Little Doris Wind Mill, we feel confident there is no better Wind
Mill obtainable for the same price; at the same time, we are disposed to advise our friends to pay the
little extra cost and purchase the Little Toff Wind Mill.
ADELAIDE, SYDNEY, AND PERTH.


LIMITED,
Having now described the various
pattern Mills of our manufacture,
and before entering into details as
Head complete, with
Block No. 17.
This illustration shows one of Metters, Limited, 12 x 30 Wind Mills erected at Pinnaroo, S.A.
ADELAIDE, SYDNEY, AND PERTH.


We are unable in our limited space to give a complete list of the
PUMPS. pumps we stock; here we are only listing our most popular pat-
terns for wind power.
Select your pump carefully, bearing in mind that the pump is quite as
responsible for raising the water as is the Wind Mill. A few useful hints will
not be amiss here.
The practical limit of suction is 25 feet; but to obtain the best results the
pump should be placed as near the water line as possible. Do not reduce the
size of suction pipe; keep to the maker’s sizes.
Also we advise retaining the set size for delivery pipe; should it be de-
cided (for the purpose of keeping down the cost) to reduce the delivery, never
reduce beyond the next smaller size, and then only after making sure you have
sufficient power to contend with the greater friction.
We advise introducing an air chamber if any reduction is made in the
pipe, and also when there is any material distance to dis-
No. x. charge the water from the pump.
Pumpman When packing the stuffing box of a pump, use prepared
the market packing; dry packing is of no value.
for Wind- Select the pump according to the power you have avail
mill Power. a j 3 j e> d ue consideration to the water supply.
Use for preference the Cylinder Type of Pump, which
gives greater supply and requires less power.
If ordering a pump for replacement, state clearly the
nature of your present pump rod, so that suitable connec-
tions may be given with pump.
Metters’ Pumps are heavily built and are guaranteed to
give the very best results.
If what you want is not shown, write to us explaining what you want, and we will
fix you up.
Is a heavy type all brass pump, with cleaning
METTERS’ No.i ALL BRASS doors fitted to the retention valve at the bottom of
DEEP WELL PUMP. the pump, and the check valve delivery from the
the pump, and the check valve delivery from the
pump. Brass Piston Rod, Heavy Plunger, Cast
ings and Special Leather for all Valves and Seatings.
Internal Size Tapped Length
of Barrel. for Pipe. of Stroke
3 inches I 2 inches 10 inches
„ 2 „ 10 „
4 „ 2 10 „
A very heavy type of Deep Well Pump, with Side
METTERS’ No. 2 DEEP Bolts. This Pump will carry a bigger strain than any
WELL PUMP, other pump. Solid Brass Piston and Heavy Plunger
METTERS’
No. 2.
Very heavy
serviceable pump
for any power.
Castings. Very accessible for replacements. Bottom
Valve fitted with Cleaning Door, Delivery Pipe Connections made with heavy all brass
flanges. This is the biggest capacity pump we make.
Internal Size of Barrel. Tapped for Pipe.
Length of Stroke.
3 inches inches
12 inches
3i „ 2
12 „
4 2
12 „
5 „ 2i
12 „
6 3
12 „
ADELAIDE, SYDNEY, AND PERTH.


:[pjj
JL
| METTERS'
No. 3.
METIERS’ DEEP WELL
PUMP, No. 2A.
in one size only.
Internal Size
of Barrel.
2i inches
Internal Size Tapped for
of Barrel. Pipe.
2| inches ii inches
3 „ H
METTERS’
No. 2a.
3i „ 2
4 »j 2 „
5 ~ 2*
6 3
These are very Special Pumps with High Brass
Valve Seatings
With Heavy Brass Top and
Bottom Castings, solid drawn
tube Brass Barrel with side
bolts, Solid Brass Piston Rod,
Heavy Brass Plunger, fitted with the Best of Leather for Bucket
Valves. A very serviceable pump for long distance delivery
when the supply required is not to exceed 250 g; lions per hour.
This is a Special Pump made fo- a Special Purpose, and is made
Tapped for
Pipe,
li inches
Length of
Stroke,
12 inches
A real good value pump.
A side delivery
Pump with
and Bottom
METIERS’ DEEP WELL Heavy Brass Top
PUMP, No. 3. Castings, Solid 1
Castings, Solid Brass Piston
Rod, Heavy Brass Plunger
Castings, Solid Drawn Tube Brass Barrel of heavy gauge,
Best of Leather for Bucket and Valves.
A real good grade Low Price Pump, with heavy side bolts
Supplied in one size only,
Length of
Stroke.
12 inches
Internal Size
of Barrel.
3 inches
Tapped for
Pipe,
inches
The Barrels
METIERS’ SIDE BOLTED are Heavy
BRASS CYLINDER, No. 4. Solid Drawn
Brass Tube,
fitted with Heavy Cast Brass Top and Bottom
Castings, Iron Plunger Rod and Iron Side Bolts
with Brass Nuts. A good, clean, large capacity
pump. Easily fixed and very easily opened up
for replacements. Where Tube Brass is used
for the Pump Barrels, we can supply any length
Barrel required at slightly increased prices; but
unless specially ordered, we would supply ordi-
nary stock sizes, as stated in our list.
Length of
Stroke.
10 inches
12 „
12 „
12 »
METTERS’ No. 4.
ADELAIDE, SYDNEY, AND PERTH.


ill
J
A very Special Pump for Deep Bores. We
guarantee this pattern pump down to 500 feet.
Extra Heavy Solid Drawn Tube Brass Barrel,
with Solid Brass Top and Bottom Casting se-
METTERS’ ALL BRASS FLUSH
CAP BORE PUMP, No. 5.
curely screwed on to the Barrel. Special Valve Seating to minimise sand troubles.
Plunger Rod is supplied Iron unless specially asked for otherwise; Rod Connections
either to bolt or screw. Please state when ordering which type you require.
Flush Caps enable placing the largest possible pump into the bored hole,
Internal Size External Size Tapped for
Length of
Barrel. Pump. Pipe. Stroke.
2§ inches 2| inches l\ inches 12 inches
28 „ 38 „ 1$ or 2 „ 12
3 ~ 38 „ 18 or 2 „ 12 „
32 „ 38 „ 2 „ 12 „
4 „ 48 „ 2 „ 12 „
5 u 58 ~ ,, 12 ~
Understand, in quoting the Length of Stroke, this does not mean the length of the
pump. We can quote for any length required for the Barrel
of pump upon application.
A Heavy
METTERS’ SPECIAL DRAW PLUNGER Solid Drawn
PATENT BORE PUMP, No. 6. Tube Brass
Barrel, with
Solid Brass top and bottom Castings, Brass Plunger Rod
with Heavy Plunger Castings. Special Bottom Valve, which *
can be raised to the surface by the Cast Brass Cage shown -■ ;
alongside the Pump Barrel. This is a very special Draw
Plunger Pump, which should be used in all deep bores. No
difficulty in replacing bucket leathers. No skill required to
raise the bottom valve. The Cage is provided with special
grip, which engages the cone of the valve. We do not ad-
METTERS’
No. s.
alongside the Pump Barrel. This is a verj r special Draw
Plunger Pump, which should be used in all deep bores. No
difficulty in replacing bucket leathers. No skill required to
raise the bottom valve. The Cage is provided with special
grip, which engages the cone of the valve. We do not ad-
vocate using any suction pipe with these patent pumps. Al-
low the pump to be near the bottom of the bored well.
Internal Dia. External Dia. Tapped Length of
of Barrel. of Barrel. for Pipe. Stroke.
2$ inches 3J inches 2i inches 12 inches ML I
2 4 48 3 12 - - m vH
ese Pumps have proved very effective in our deep bores. hJ
This is our Special All I
OTTERS’ SPECIAL BRASS Brass Tube Barrel Cylin- WLM li i fee*
These Pumps have proved very effective in our deep bores.
This is our Special All
METTERS’ SPECIAL BRASS Brass Tube Barrel Cylin-
CYLINDER, No. 8. der, with Brass top and Metiers’ Patent Bore Pump
bottom Castings. The No ‘ 6 ‘
Retaining Valve of Pump is fitted with Cleaning Door. The top Casting of Pump is
bolted to the Barrel, and can be readily removed for renewals. This gives a very ser-
viceable cylinder for use where the quality of the water affects the long slide bolts. The
price being comparatively low. Longer Barrels will be supplied if required at slightly
increased cost.
Internal Size of Barrel. Tapped for Pipe. Length of Stroke.
2\ inches ii inches 12 inches
3 „ „ 12 „
3h „ 2 „ 12 „
METTERS’
No. 8.
ADELAIDE, SYDNEY. AND PERTH


* n< ” le
METTERS’
No. 4a.
| Metiers’
Pumping
ments. *5
j
'i'
i
No. 2.
Metiers’ Hand
_1 Pumping
j 3A Attachments.
'1^
METTERS TUBE BARREL SIDE DELIVERY CLEANING DOOR
PUMP, No. 9.
easily removed for the purpose of replacing Pump Leathers,
Tapped for Pipe.
ii inches
Internal Size of Barrel.
li „
2 „
METTERS’ CAST BRASS CYLINDER, No. 4 A
The very best Cylinder Pump in our list. A very heavy Cast
Brass Pump throughout top and bottom castings and Barrel. This
Cylinder is fitted with a cleaning door to the retaining valve, which is
a great convenience. We supply this pump with an iron plunger rod
to obtain greater strength. If the quality of the water requires a brass
rod, you must specify, and we will supply at slightly increased cost.
We are strong advocates for cylinder pumps; they require less power
and have greater capacity.
Internal Size Tapped for Length of
of Barrel. Pipe. Stroke. Duplicate parts of all
3 inches li inches 12 inches Pumps supplied at
li inches 12 inches Pumps supplied at
3$ „ 2 „ 12 „ short notice. State
4 „ 2 „ 12 „ what size and pattern
S „ 2| ~ 12 „ Pump Rod is being
„ 3 „ 12 „ used.
Length of Stroke,
12 inches
12 „
12 „
METTERS’ SPECIAL ATTACH-
MENTS FOR PUMPING BY HAND
POWER.
Unless the water in a well rises to
within 25 feet of the surface, it is con-
sidered beyond the limit of suction for
an ordinary hand pump; and further, at
this depth it is very hard work to ope-
rate an ordinary hand pump. With
these Special Hand Attachments the
work is very materially lightened.
No. 1 Attachment is applied to the
Pipe Stand and connected to an ordinary
Cylinder Pump, which is placed in the
well near the water line. This Attach-
ment delivers to just above the surface.
4 No. 2 Attachment is more complete,
oand can be used to force the water into
a Storage Tank above the ground line.
No. 3 Attachment is for greater depths
or larger pump, and it is furnished with
Stuffing Box, so that the water may be
delivered some distance above the ground
line.
Cutting Pipe and Rods to special lengths
we charge at special rates.
with Cast Brass Top and Bottom, Brass Piston and Heavy Plunger. The Bottom
Valve is fitted with a Cleaning Door. The Top Casting is bolted to the Barrel, and
ADELAIDE, SYDNEY, AND PERTH.


I
o
2i 2| 3 3i 4 5 6
Length of
Stroke. Gallons per Hour,
inches.
4 70 90 120 160 220 280 450 650
6 105 135 180 240 330 420 675 975
8 140 180 240 340 440 560 900 1300
10 175 225 300 400 550 70° II2 5 1625
12 210 270 360 480 660 840 135° I 95°
VARIOUS PUMP RODS AND METHODS
OF CONNECTING UP.
A. Solid Iron Rod, i in., with tapped brass
BLOCK No. i4B.
Different Types of Pump Rods.
So that you may more readily realise the necessity
of advising us the class of pump rod you require,
we are illustrating here some of the most popular
rods in use.
connections
B. Solid Iron Rod, i in., with tapped
brass connections.
C. Galvanized Tube Rod, \ in., with tap-
ped brass connections.
D. Galvanized Tube Rod, | in., with tap-
per brass connections.
E. Galvanized Tube Rod, i in., with tap-
ped brass connections.
F. Mild Steel Tube Rod, flattened at ends
and bolted together with hexagon headed
bolts and nuts. Sizes usually I or J tube.
Always measure tube rod, the internal dia-
meter.
G. Wood Rod, usually in. or 2 in. square,
jointed with iron plates on two sides, and
bolts passing through same.
Any other sizes can be supplied, but the
above are the most usual.
In quoting prices per foot for pump rod
we include the necessary connections.
The following
CAPACITY OF PUMPS. table will give
an accurate
idea of the capacity of various pump bar-
rels. The average speed of a pump applied to a Wind Mill would be about 30 strokes per minute. We
have estimated the capacities as detailed below at this speed.
Size of Pump
in inches. 2
ADELAIDE. SYDNEY, AND PERTH


In quoting the capacity of our Wind Mills, as set out below, we wish
CAPACITY OF METTERS’ to state this chart is not to be taken as the maximum supply to be
STEEL WIND MOTORS. obtained from the given depth, but as a guide to assist in deciding the
size mill that should be employed for a specified supply. In every
particular quantity stated we will guarantee that the capacity is underestimated; it is wise at all times
to have a reserve of power, as it so frequently happens during the dry months of the year, several
days of calm weather are experienced. A good strong position with regard to water supply is to ar-
range so that you have storage capacity for three or four days’ consumption. All the supplies stated
below are estimated for stock purposes, and are guaranteed.
METTERS’ WIND MOTORS will give the following supply of water under the stated conditions
c; 7P n t Depth Capacity
Size of Mill. p Pattern of Pump, of Well, per hour
™ mp ' Feet. Gallons.
12 300
12 240
35 150
50 100
30 340
50 220
20 520
50 220
20 700
40 450
8o 200
20 340
30 300
50 240
75 150
30 700
50 640
75 420
100 340
25 1950
50 1150
75 640
100 475
150 320
200 240
This cut illustrates a 12 ft. Wind Mill, built upon
a 30 ft. steel tower, raising water from a bored
hole following down a timbered shaft, and is de-
livering into a 2,000 gallon tank placed upon a 10 ft.
steel stand. This mill is raising over 1,000 gallons
per hour. The purchaser of this plant has since
placed orders with us for his station properties.
To obtain the daily capacity of any of the
above outfits, we consider a fair estimate of
the working time for a mill is ten hours out
of every 24 hours. We have mills working
on bores raising water from a depth of 425
ft., giving a regular supply of water. Our
purpose here is more particularly to treat with
the everyday requirements, and not to go into
detail for the extraordinary requirements,
which would make the matter contained
tedious and of apparent less value to the ave-
rage enquiry.
ADELAIDE, SYDNEY, AND PERTH.


6 ft. Toff or Doris
20 ft.
11 ft. 6 in.
8 ft. Wind Motor
20 ft.
13 ft. 6 in.
10 ft. Wind Motor
20 ft.
12 ft.
12 ft. Wind Motor
20 ft.
11 ft. 3 in.
14 ft. Wind Motor
20 ft.
11 ft. 3 in.
HEIGHT FOR STORAGE TANKS WHEN
USING A CYLINDER PUMP.
We wish to show here the greatest height it is
BLOCK No. 65.
Wind Mills supplied are erected to the order of J. Lewis, Lsq.,
of “Tenderten,” Woodville, for the purpose of irrigating
lucern. These Mills are pumping from bored wells, and are
delivering an average supply of 800 gallons per hour each,
into storage tanks, from which the distribution takes place by
Rainmaker Sprinklers. The result is a very fine crop of lucern
has been grown by Mr. Lewis.
There is a limit for height of storage tanks when
using a cylinder pump.
As previously stated, we strongly recommend the
uses of cylinder pumps, as giving the best results,
possible to raise water above the ground level for
delivery into a storage tank with any given
tower to the wind mill—when using a cylinder
pump.
The usual method of connecting up the de-
livery pipe from a well to the tank, in con-
junction with a cylinder pump, is as follows:
The delivery pipe is a vertical column of
pipe from the pump rising to a sufficient height
to allow the water to gravitate into the tank;
a tee piece, is screwed on to this delivery
column, and a p'pc of sufficient length to de-
liver into the tank; above the tee is a short
length of pipe, say, 2 ft. long. This forms
a head of water, and is sufficient to prevent the
water spraying over the pipe. We must not
allow this pipe to interfere with the working
of the mill swivel, just under the stage of the
wind mill tower, thus limiting the height of
the delivery, as detailed below:—
Greatest Height
for delivery
into Tank.
Height of
Tower.
Size of Mill.
ill add 9 ft. to
other hand, if
hand, if
Each extra 10 ft. of tower will
the above heights, and on the o
arrangements are being made for an automatic stopping gear to stop the mill when the storage tank is
full, the above heights will be reduced by 18 inches.
If it is required to use a Cylinder Pump and force the water to a higher elevation than is stated
in our foregoing matter, this can be done by introducing a Stuffing Box, as shown Block 119. Thus
—by placing a tee piece of suitable size on the delivery pipe, screw
the stuffing box into the tee, and connect up the pump rod and mill
rod to the brass rod which enters the stuffing box. We can supply
all sizes in this fitting.
BLOCK No. 119.
Block of Stuffing Box and Rod.
ADELAIDE, SYDNEY, AND PERTH.


The most reliable automatic stopping gear obtainable. Works
METTERS’ SELF ACTING GEAR. like an alarm clock. The principle of the gear will be under-
stood by perusing the accompanying diagram. But so that
no misunderstanding should arise, we are giving particulars of how' and under what conditions the gear
should be worked. The most important fact is the pump rod must not be allowed to revolve. Ar-
rangements must be made to allow the mill head swivel to occur above the con-
nections to the auto gear. The mode of attachment is as follows: —
First we must have the mill head ready for the connections. We provide a
short piece of flat iron which (with our Wind Motor Mills) applies to the swivel
of mill head. This must be so held that it cannot revolve; it is passed through a
cast bar, which is fixed to the mill tower and held in position by two angle pieces.
This bar is shown in our illustration, immediately underneath the swivel. The
delivery pipe being in position and tank placed (see illustration), we apply the
ratched gear by clamping to the pipe. Fix wrought iron bracket to tank and
attach float. Connect wire, about 10 gauge, from float lever to lever arm of
ratchet. The position should be, the ball weighted cast arm will be right down
as far as it can travel, and the float down about 4 in. from top of tank. Now ex-
amine the drum of ratchet; you find it notched to a certain point, where there is
then a blank space. The pawl operates this drum, and winds up each stroke
about the travel of one tooth only. Connect the chain to the furl wire of mill
head and wind it up by working the lever D when the wind wheel and tail are
pulled into a parallel line with each other, the pawl should be in contact with
the plain portion of the ratchet drum already referred to.
Now connect a wire from D arm to the flat piece of pump rod, as shown.
The operation is, when the float falls through, running off the supply of water,
the pawl is released by casting C being raised and the mill is allowed to face the
wind pressure.
The connection for the Toff Wind Mill is similar,
except the anti-swivel bar attached to the mill tower
is different in its application.
If ordering an automatic gear for a mill you al-
ready have established, should the mill be one of
our make, please give the pattern and size of the
mill, also the height of the tower. This is neces-
sary so that we can send the anti-swivel bars which
comprise two short pieces of angle steel which bolt
to the tower, one heavy cast bar, with two hook
bolts to hold the bar in position on the angles, also
one short piece of flat iron with holes punched,
which applies to the swivel and passes through the
cast bar.
Size No. I—For1 —For 6, 7, and 8 foot Wind Mills.
Size No. 2 —For 10, 12, and 14 ft. Wind Mills.
BLOCK No. 118.
Auto Gear.
There are many different methods of stopping a
Wind Mill when the storage tank is full which we will be pleased to describe jipon application.
This illustration is a photographic view of Metters’ Steel Stand, 10 ft. high, with
TANK STANDS. Jarrah Deck and a 2,000 gallon Tank in position. We can supply these stands
to carry up to 5,000 gallon capacity tanks, and to any reasonable height. We
do find there is economy in arranging, say, two separate stands with 2,000 gallon tanks, in preference
to one tank of 4,000 gallon capacity and one stand.
The Steel Tank Stand, if built under the specification we employ, will be found very much more
serviceable and has a nicer appearance than a wood tower, there being no rot or decay, and are free
from the danger of fire.
ADELAIDE, SYDNEY, AND PERTH.


- '
If the Stand does not exceed to ft. in height, sort
out tire tower legs, girths, and diagonal stays;
put one side together first. Place the girths in-
side of the tower angles, passing the bolt through
DIRECTIONS FOR ERECTING A METTERS’
STEEL TANK STAND.
from inside. The diagonal stays are placed on the outside of tower legs; follow with the side girths,
then the other two tower legs. Do not tighten up the bolts until you have all girths and stays on.
Having the tower together, you measure up for the excavations which are to receive the timber fol
BLOCK No. 46.
Steel Tank Stand and Tank.
SHEEP AND CATTLE TROUGHING
anchoring the tower.
We supply two pieces of jarrah, about 2 feet longer than
the spread of the tower legs. These should be sunk into the
ground to such a depth that when the tower is up the Ist
girth will be about 6 in. above the ground line. Have these
timbers perfectly level with each other and placed upon firm
ground, that is, if you are raising either timber to the level
of the other see that you ram the soil well down. It is
most important that this should be done. Lift the tower up
and bolt on to the timbers; place the spirit level on the cross
girth at bottom of tower to test the levels.
With towers for 1,500 gallon tanks and upward we supply
steel angle brackets to carry the jarrah frame, which bolts
to the top of tower legs to receive the deck. Bolt these
angle pieces in position before placing the timber. They
are applied to the bottom hole of the series of holes right
at the top of the angles. Rest the heavy jarrah frame pieces
on these brackets, and mark the position for bolt holes. We
do not bore these holes in the frame, as there is a danger that
the timber will twist slightly, and the hole would be of no
service. If a crosspiece of jarrah has been sent for this
frame, see that you place the timbers which have been pre-
pared to receive the crosspiece irons opposite each other.
See that this frame is level on top to receive the decking.
Place the whole of the decking on the framj before nailing
down. Our decks are cut to a circle, which gives a better
appearance than the square deck. The deck timber is placed
diagonally across the frame.
If the tank stand is of greater height than 10 feet, when
heavy tackle is not available for raising the structure, we ad-
vise putting the bottom section together as advised above.
Get this in position on the anchor timbers, then build up the
further sections one angle at a time. After the whole struc-
ture is together. Run over all bolts to be sure all are tight.
There are so many different qualities and sizes for Trough-
ing that it is one line which should have very close atten-
tion when purchasing. In our list we quote for troughing
15 in., 18 in., and 21 in. in diameter by various depths, and gauges from 22 to 12 gauge. There are also
many methods of connecting up the several parts, some more costly than others, and perhaps not much
more effective. We just issue this note of warning so that if you find we are a bit higher in price than
someone else, you will ask the reason why. We are very large importers of the raw materials, and no
one should be in a better position to quote than we are. We are illustrating some of the most popular
lines.
ADELAIDE, SYDNEY, AND PERTH.


I
This cut illustrates our 20 or 22 gauge Gal-
GALVANIZED SHEEP AND CATTLE TROUGH vanized Sheep Trough, complete with stan-
dards, ends, and cover, and division for ball
cock, made up in 6 foot sections, clamped together, and supported with steel standards. This trough
has a very ready sale for pastoralists, being easy to set up, light in construction, and very serviceable.
BLOCK No. 42.
Galvanized Sheep Trough.
The standards for sheep raises the top of the trough to 13 in.
above ground, and for cattle to 30 in. above ground. Each
trough is fitted with a longitudinal angle piece for either side
of the trough to its full length.
Sizes Stocked— 15 x 8x 20 and 22 gauge.
18 x 10 x 20 and 22 gauge.
21 x 12 x 20 and 22 gauge.
This cut illustrates a section of our light Galvanized Trough-
ing fitted with ends and cattle standards. The construction of
these standards is a distinct advantage over the ordinary stan-
dard, as the yoke and standard form a complete section, thus
doing away with the necessity of the tie bar from one standard
to another. The height of this trough is 30 in. to top of trough-
ing. We do not include timber for standards in our price;
but can supply, if required, at an extra charge.
BLOCK No. 129.
Trough and Valve.
BLOCK No. 7a.
ADELAIDE, SYDNEY, AND PERTH.


li‘ 5 e I I iT^
BLOCK i.o. 43. Cattle Trough.
This cut illustrates our Heavy Black or Galvanized Troughing complete, with ends, cover for ball
cock, and angle steel standards, made up in sections of 6 ft. to any length required, is easily rigged,
knocks down and packs into a small compass for transport. We can supply either with or without
the standards, as required, and carry a large stock of all sizes, either of Black Sheets or Galvanized, from
16 gauge to the very heavy 10 gauge. We find generally that 14 gauge is the more satisfactory.
There is a very ready sale for Cast Iron Pig
Troughs. This line is of heavy cast metal, with
centre stays and a wide inside flange to the edge
of the trough.
We also manufacture a Wrought Steel Trough
on Stand either in Black Steel or Galvanized, in
BLOCK No. 152. Cast Pig Trough.
sizes from 2 ft. to 6 ft. long. These are most serviceable, and are unbreakable. Owing to the greasy
nature of the foodstuffs, there is not much likelil ood of the material rusting through.
SQUATTERS’ STEEL
ECONOMIC
STORAGE TANKS.
We wish to bring prom
incntly before
notice
this Economic
storage tank.
It has been
very largely
used by pas-
toralists and
orchardists for
a considerable
period, with
most satisfac-
tory results.
So that you may get a clear understanding, we will describe the construction
The sheets forming the various sections arc supplied of black mild steel, or of galvanized sheets;
these sheets are punched to a set out template, and are clamped together with iron bars of a suitable
size, and bolted up with S in. hexagon bolts in the following manner: —Place the edges of two sheets
one on top of the other, with a narrow strip of tarred felt, say, 4 ins. wide, or cotton wick, between
the lapped sheets; select an inside bar (these being about 2 ins. longer than the outside bars), pass a
bolt through the top hole of bar, and through the top hole of the two sheets; then place the outside
bar in position, and apply the nut to the bolt, screwing up with thumb and finger. Put a bolt through
ADELAIDE, SYDNEY, AND PERTH.


5 * fTB—^
A B 6 @ S v\
=^= i: ===«=- : =f i =ffl=" t ==^
I 15 F <§ M 0 (^8/
(jlH E;3 0-1 t : 3 >/
\ S'
\.
_ o
— o 111U^
BLOCK No. 159. F/Q, I.
the bottom hole in like manner, then a centre bolt; now place any bolt, until all are in position. Fix
all sheets in position in like manner, but do not yet screw the bolts up tight; leave this until you have
the circle fully formed. Now fix on the angle ring at the top of the tank, when all bolts can be drawn
up tight.
In selecting the sheets you will find all sheets have a top and bottom edge; the *op edge is dis-
tinguishable from the bottom by the holes punched to receive the angle ring. Sheets will be numbered
to correspond with numbeis on the angle ring. The angle band should be applied to the outside of
the sheets.
If you have a large tank, we advise fixing diagonal twitching wires across the top of the tank, thus
overcoming a lot of the sway when full of water and exposed to wind pressure.
To pug the bottom of these tanks from 6 in. top in. of clay is required, according to the quality of
the clay; reserve the finest clay for the top layer. When you have well pugged or worked the clay,
put in a few inches of water and leave for 24 hours; if found to be holding throughout, put in another
foot of water, let this stand for 24 hours, and continue until the tank receives its full pressure.
We can supply outlets of any size. When ordering, please slate whether an overflow is wanted;
also give particulars as to size and position of outlet.
Made in sizes from 5,000 to 50,000 gallons capacity. . For prices and capacities see price list
enclosed.
Where it is difficult to obtain suitable
METTERS’ PATENT GALVANIZED SQUATTTERS’ clay for the purpose of pugging the bot-
TANKS WITH FIXED METAL BOTTOM.
Tom of The Squatters’ Economic Tank,
we advise establishing Metiers’ Patent
Tank with Metal Bottom, the whole of which is bolted together and is easily assembled. We give here-
with details of how to assemble these tanks, which will also enable you to better realise how simple
and effective the storage would be. We are only manufacturing this pattern for a capacity of 10,000
gallons, and advise for preference installing two 10,000 gallon tanks rather than one 20,000 gallon
capacity.
The method of assembling is as fol-
lows, viz.:—
First level the ground at the site se-
lected for the tank.
The flat sheets forming the bottom of
the tank are marked in alphabetical let-
ters, A, B, C, and so on (See Fig. 1).
Select the sheet A and lay it down
(marks upwards) in the position it is to
occupy, insert the jointing bolts in all
the holes along the two straight sides,
heads downwards, i.e., the heads resting
on the ground; if the ground is very soft
or sandy means will need to be adopted
to prevent the bolts from sinking down.
Strips of hoop-iron or pieces of tin
answer very well.
Cut two strips of the flat cotton joint-
ing material a little longer than the edges
through which you have the bolts, and
having pricked holes through to pass
over the bolts, paint under where these
strips are to go and pass them over the
bolts in readiness to receive the next
sheets.
Now take the sheets marked B and
ADELAIDE, SYDNEY, AND PERTH.


:^ ====^| ?= 3|*s *•
Jk
proceed as before, except that the edge which overlaps the sheet A is to pass over the bolts already
in position, and so on until half the bottom is formed.
Next pick out the flat battens (i in. x J in.) and place them temporarily in position, being guided
by the marks i, li, ill, mi, etc. (refer to chart) Fig. i. This will enable you to see where to out in
the long bolts which are provided for use where the battens lap over each other.
Now put the battens out of your way, and complete putting the bottom sheets together, after
which put on the battens and screw the nuts on the bolts, but do not screw up tight until the tank is
all together.
You will now see that there is a succession of numbers, i, 2, 3, 4, etc., in a circle near the edge of
the bottom, see Fig. 1, and correspond-
ing numbers will be found on the inside
bottom edge of each of the side sheets;
you will also see that a number of the
holes around the edge of the bottom
have a red ring around them: these are
the holes where the side sheets join each
other. You may now put in the circle
of bolts around the edge of the bottom
ready to receive the side sheets, and put
a ring of jointing cotton on them in the
same way as when you were putting the
bottom together.
Select the side sheet having the No. 1
near its inside bottom edge (referred to
as corresponding with the circle of num-
BLOCK No. 160.
bers around the bottom) and place it in position, putting two or three of the nuts on the bolts, loosely,
then follows sheet No. 2, and so on, putting a strip of jointing cotton between the lapped edges, and
securing the sheets to each other temporarily by means of two or three bolts.
Next put on the upright battens, which are marked as shown in the chart, and in respect to which
you cannot well go wrong (see Fig. 2), then follow the semi-circular battens for securing the flange of
side sheets to the bottom, and after that the top angle ring, all of which are so clearly marked as to
need no detailed directions.
Use paint on both sides of jointing cotton everywhere, and when the tank is all together go over
all the bolts and thoroughly tighten them up.
In purchasing a corrugated tank for storage purposes,
GALVANIZED remember the strain upon a tank when used in conjunc-
CORRUGATED tion with- a pumping plant is considerably greater than
TANKS. when used for household purposes. In the first place,
it generally occupies a more exposed position, invariably
being raised to obtain pressure through the service pipes, thus the vibration is
considerable. Again, so much weight of water is continually discharged into
the tank that, unless made well and of heavy material, you will very soon have
trouble with the joints. In ordering tanks show clearly the position required
for the outlet, giving the size of the pipe you purpose connecting up, and also
give the position for the overflow pipe. We do not supply taps with tanks un-
less specified.
For ordinary stock and irrigation purposes we supply open-top tanks. If
covers are required, please mention this when ordering.
For prices, see price list.
BLOCK No. 40.
ADELAIDE, SYDNEY, AND PERTH.


~ Z
This Cock supplies beautifully the de-
PILLAR COCK OR WINDMILL COCK. mand for a perfect closing low pres-
sure tap, which will allow a full and free
flow of water. There are no loose parts, as with the usual plug cock, which is furnished
with a loose key. The valve is operated just as a high pressure tap, and is just as
effectively closed; but it has this advantage: whereas with a high pressure tap, when the
valve is released the pressure of the water has to force the valve open to obtain its
exit, in this pillar cock the valve is raised in the process of unscrewing, and the water
has a free exit. We stock f and 1 in. only, which are tapped for hose connections.
BLOCK No. 117
Pillar Cock.
BLOCK No. 164.
METTERS’ FULL
FLOW TROUGH
VALVE.
BLOCK No. 53
Screwed for
I in. or 1 in. Pipe
ii in. Pipe
i£ in. Pipe
If supplied with
Showing the
THE KLEWITZ PATENT Klewitz Patent
FLOAT VALVE. Full Flow
Trough Valve
suitable for long lengths of troughing or trough-
ing from which large supplies are drawn in a
limited time. Is fitted with flanges, bolted inside
and outside of the end of troughing, having a
heavy wrought arm with a fixed galvanized iron
float.
Block 164 represents an All Brass Full
Flow Wheel Valve of very heavy casting for
low pressure service. We advise this type of
valve in preference to the Globe pattern. The
price is slightly in advance, but the advantage
of obtaining the full flow and no break to the
pressure will be much in evidence. We stock
all sizes from | in. Prices upon application.
Fig. 165 represents
the Globe Pattern
Wheel Valve. This is
a close seated valve,
and is specially recom-
mended for high pres-
sure work. All sizes
stocked from f in.
Prices upon applica-
tion.
BLOCK No. 165.
This cut represents our new pattern full
way trough valve. The advantage is that
whereas the ordinary ball valve has such a
very small outlet, we have here arranged
to give the full flow of the pipe connections.
This is most important when many stock
are watering, unless the pressure is very
strong, the ordinary valve does not allow
sufficient water to pass through. Again,
many valves have been introduced, but are
far too costly. This valve is very cheap
and effective. The adjusting screw fitted
upon the arm is to regulate the quantity
of water stored in the trough.
Price, with Galvanized Float.
complete
complete
complete
BLOCK No. 126.
Klewitz Valve.
copper float, 2/ extra
ADELAIDE, SYDNEY, AND PERTH.


CK No^52.
Showing a light and strong full flow valve.
HIGH LOW VALVE. When a ball valve is proper!)' protected
there is not the necessity of such heavy
parts. This valve operates a full flow of water with very little rise and
fall of the copper float. Manufactured in various sizes.
Made in gun metal up to 4 in. The
LAMBERT PATTERN most perfect working full way ball
BALL COCK—No. 48. valve, works equally well at high or
low pressure.
Supplied with large copper balls. The lever bar passes right
through the ball, giving a very strong and secure fastening
Sizes stocked:—
ii in. 1
in.
Complete
BLOCK No. 113.
CROYDON PATTERN ALL BRASS FULL
WAY VALVE—No. 52.
Fitted with copper ball. Can be used for high or
low pressure.
Sizes stocked,
f in.
1 in.
Ball cocks will always be forwarded complete with
balls unless ordered otherwise.
BLOCK No. 48.
There is an increasing de-
mand for fittings suitable for
tubular wells or bores. We
have introduced a number of
novel attachments to meet
these requirements. The
valve here shown is of con-
siderable importance. It is
constructed of brass through-
out, will pass down a small
tube casing, and will carry a
very heavy pressure of water.
METTERS’ ALL
BRASS FOOT
VALVES FOR
BORED WELLS.
BLOCK No. 49-
Sizes stocked are as follows:
Screwed to Fit. External Diar
External Diameter
xj inch pipe 2§ inch
inch pipe 3 inch
2 inch pipe 3! inch
Other sizes can be supplied upon application
This pattern valve can also be supplied as a check valve, being screwed at either end to receive the
particular pipe required, the extra cost for which would be 2/6 each.
ADELAIDE, SYDNEY, AND PERTH.


HORIZONTAL CHECK VALVE.
Block 166 illustrates our Heavy Cast Galvanized Horizontal Clicck Valve.
va^ve °* this type should be used on all long delivery pipes. We stock sizes
tapped for H, ii, and 2 in. pipe.
BLOCK No. 166
METTERS’ NEW
PATTERN CHECK
VALVES WITH
CLEANING DOOR.
We have just altered the
BLOCK No. 45- patterns of our patent clean-
ing valve by introducing an angle seating
for the valve leather, instead of the flat
seating as previously sold. This seating
is now formed of the best hard brass, care-
fully turned and fitted, and enables the
valve being applied either for a vertical
lift, or for a horizontal grade. We
FOOT RETAINING
VALVES AND STRAINER
A valve of this description
should be used on all suction
pipes. It ensures the more
satisfactory working of the
pump by keeping the pipe
full of water while the pump l
is at rest, so that it will start
pumping as soon as the mill
revolves.
BLOCK No. 51.
guarantee this valve to hold in any position, always given the door is placed facing upwards,
Sizes stocked and prices.
I in. li in. li in. 2 in. 2\ in. 3 in.
This clamp is
a very great improvement over the wrought
METTERS’ CAST IRON CLAMP iron clamp. The illustration clearly shows the purpose of the
FOR TUBULAR WELLS. clamp, namely, to support the delivery pipe and pump and pre-
clamp, namely, to support the delivery pipe and pump and pre-
vent the delivery pipe from working up or down, thus allowing
the pump to give the full length of its arranged stroke in delivering water. If the pump lifts with the
upward stroke of the mill there is a loss in the supply of water de-
livered at the surface. The clamp is in three parts. The bottom
section clamps tightly on to the steel casing and has a heavy shoulder
which rests upon the top of the tube. The top section grips
the delivery pipe, preventing any movement whatsoever.
Made up in sizes to suit casing from 4 in. to 6h in. exter-
nal diameter. Please state when ordering the exter
nal diameter of the casing tube and the internal diameter of
the delivery pipe.
THE SURE GRIP
CLAMP.
CAST PIPE
BLOCK No. 56.
This cut illustrates
our cast pipe clamp,
which fills a very im-
portant need. It is so
important that a fin i
foundation should b \
established for the
pump, that all who
have had experience
with pump fixings will
BLOCK No. 54-
ADELAIDE, SYDNEY, AND PERTH.


— I, —
appreciate this simple contrivance. We advise putting in the well a very firm bearer for the pump,
the clamp being in two parts is clamped firmly to the suction pipe (for preference about a foot below
the pump), then bolted down to the pump bearer. The great advantage of this clamp in a deep well is
that to replace leather in a pump, we slacken off the clamp, disconnect the side bolts of the pump, and
allow the bottom casting of the pump with the suction pipe attached to slide down the well 6 in. or 8
in.; then remove the barrel of pump, replace leathers
delivery pipe or rods.
and put all back again without disturbing the
Made to fit pipes of all sizes from H in. to 2\ in
at the following prices—•
li in.
in.
ij in
This cut illustrates the most economic
METTERS’ CORRUGATED principle of attaching service pipes to
TANK FLANGES
an ordinary corrugated tank, and has
the advantage of being applied without
calling in the aid of
With an ordinary
an expert.
ary socket, which has been soldered into a tank and
requires an expert to place in position, the area upon
which the strain is carried is very limited, but with
these corrugated flanges the strain is distributed over a
very large area.
We carry a stock of the following sizes, prices for
which are complete, including a long screw with two
hack nuts, also insertion for making the joint.
Sizes | in. i in. li in. li in. 2 in.
Larger sizes upon application
BLOCK No. 55
This cut illustrates our patent rain
THE RAIN MAKER maker sprinkler, which has been used
SPRINKLER. very successfully in conjunction with
our wind mill plant. We supply this
particular pattern in various sizes from 3 ft. 6 in. -in diameter up-
wards. The sprinkler is specially adapted for high or low pres-
sure, and can be adjusted to cover a larger or smaller area by set-
ting the position of the outlet cuts. Very few sprinklers are a suc-
cess working under low pressure, that is, the pressure obtainable
from the ordinary storage tank. But with the rain maker sprinkler,
if the storage tank has an elevation of 10 ft., an area of 23 to 25 ft.
in diameter is covered with an even supply of water. These
sprinklers can be fitted to fixed stand pipes, or supplied attached to
tripod or sledge stands. We advise the sledge stands, as this can
BLOCK No. 58.
Metiers’ Patent Rain Maker Sprinkler-
be pulled along whilst the sprinkler is working, and no need to walk over the wet ground
Write for complete catalogue with prices.
ADELAIDE, SYDNEY, AND PERTH.


c
BLOCK No. 59-
Mill over the pump. These Cradles can
be supplied to meet any particular eleva-
tion above the pump, and can be placed
in any position. A and B are places of
bearing, C and E connections to the
pump and to the mill. The distance at
D may be anything in reason; this por-
tion of the rod must be properly sup-
ported to avoid any sagging and conse-
Strong, safe, and serviceable, as well
LADDERS as economic in cost. No waiting your
STEEL ANGLE
FOR WELLS.
neighbour’s convenience to lower you
down the well when the pump requires
attention.
These ladders are constructed throughout of mild steel angles bolted
together in sections from 8 to 12 ft. The steps are rivetted on to the
upright angles.
No well is complete without a ladder.
These are safe, and are easily fixed in the well.
Price per foot, 1/6, including bolts.
In ordering state the size of timber to which
the ladder is to be attached, and if possible
give the distance between each bearer.
This cut illustrates a
STEPS TO BOLT cheap and very safe
ON TO PIPE. means of getting down
tip-top ladder, no timber is required, and
be fixed on in a few moments.
When ordering, state the depth of well and
the size of the delivery pipe.
Block 121 illus
WIND MILL CRADLE. trates our me
chanical Cradle,
which we employ with good effect on mill rods BLOCK No. 112.
when it is not practicable to place the Wind teps t0 bolt 0,1 to Pipe '
BLOCK No. 121
the w’ell to attend to
renewals for the pump. Is formed of steel
angle pieces properly formed so that they may
be bolted to give a right and left tread. The
delivery pipe in the well forms the pillar or
bearer to which the steps are bolted; can be
spaced 15 to 18 in. apart, being shaped to the
size of the pipe to which they are to be ap-
plied and clamped securely. These make a
ADELAIDE, SYDNEY, AND PERTH.


I 'A I aj\ / \
quent loss in travel. The important point is that the upward stroke of the mill rod must be the upward
stroke to the pump. The brackets must be so placed to obtain this result.
The construction of our Wind Mill Tower is eminently suitable for Lookout Towers. The Metro-
politan hire Brigade Board have adopted these Towers throughout the State. The illustration No. 172
shows one of our Steel Towers with Steps Rigged, having cast iron landing steps. This tower stands
to a height of 75 feet, and is established at our Chief Fire Station. The structure is most rigid and
easy to mount. We can supply any class of tower to any height. Prices upon application.
Having described in detail the various
POINTS WORTH methods of establishing wind mill plants,
KNOWING. we wish to summarise in a concise form
some of the most important points
which have been explained throughout our catalogue, as follows:
1. The practical limit of suction is 25 ft., but to obtain the
best results the pump should be placed as near to the water line
as possible.
2. Never
reduce the size of the suction pipe.
3. We do not advise reducing the delivery pipe below what
is arranged for in the construction of the pump. But if it is
found necessary to reduce the size of the pipe, never diminish by
more than the following size, and then to overcome the in-
creased friction introduce an air chamber into the delivery pipe
as near the pump as possible.
4. Use cylinder pumps for preference, because they require
fully one-third less power to operate.
5. If compelled to use a force pump, we advise establishing
air chamber in all wells where the pipe exceeds 65 feet.
6. If delivering water from a well to any great distance for
storage purposes, better results will be obtained if one of our
patent check valves is placed a short distance from the pump.
This valve docs not relieve the pump of any strain, but it pre-
vents the water from escaping through the stuffing box of the
pump when the mill is idle.
7. A foot valve should at all times be placed on the suction
pipe. It retains the water in the tail pipe. In the event of
placing the pump right at the bottom of the pipe and without
any tail pipe, then the valve would not be required.
8. Make sure in erecting your mill that the tower is per-
fectly plumb, so that all the working parts will receive only their
proper proportion of strain, and that the bearings may have an
even wearing.
9. See that the pump is in a dead plumb with the centre of
the mill swivel, more especially if the pump is a force type of
pump, with piston rod passing through a packing box.
10. Remember that the wind mill is a machine, and must be
BLOCK No. 172.
ADELAIDE, SYDNEY, AND PERTH.


Internal Diameter.
Velocity in feet.
Supply in gallons
of pipe.
per second.
per minute.
I inch
1.16 feet
1.33 gals.
1 »
* 1-37 „
2-79 „
»
i-S6 „
4-97 „
i i „
i-73 „
7-93 „
2 „
2.04 ,,
16.61 „
2i „
2.31 „
29-45 „
3 „
2.56 „
46.99 „
Size of pipe.
3 inch
cwts.
I
qrs. lbs.
o 5
i „
I
I 22
ii „
.. f . ..
2
I 10
ij
. . , , , ,
, ,
2
3 2
2
4
o 6
3 „
.. 6
o 8
properly and carefully oiled to obtain the best results. Do not use light oils, as they get away from the
bearings far too quickly. Use Heavy D machine oil if Mill is fitted with Needle Lubricators. This \vc
find best adapted for either summer or winter use. And Metiers’ Special Solidified Oil if fitted with
Grease Cups.
it. Bear in mind it is most important for the safety of the Avind mill that during the winter months
the turntable is kept Avell oiled, as this is the safety valve for the mill during a storm.
12. When it is desired to force Avater through along line of pipe into a storage tank placed on an
elevated position, avc adA r ise delivering the water through the bottom of the tank, so that the same
pipes can be used for distributing tire Avater over the intervening area. Do not suppose that if a tank
has a holding capacity of 4,000 gallons that the whole Aveight of this Avater is being supported by the
pump if the delivery takes place in the bottom of the tank, you are really only displacing the actual
area of the pipe.
13. In reticulation from tanks, the height is the only factor which creates pressure. The quan-
tity of AA r ater stored does not influence the pressure in any Avay. In arranging the delivery pipes
from the storage tank, you should first decide the size of your outlet taps, then, lioav many taps you
are likely to have open at one time. From this you will arrange your main pipe so that it Avill be
sufficiently large to alloAV this Aoav. This is an example. We decide that 1 in. taps are to be used,
and that four taps may be required at one time, so avc Avould put in a 2 in. main pipe. Sec the folloAV-
ing chart for flows of Avater from given sized pipes.
This chart will be a useful guide in arranging for the distributing pipes, mains, and branch pipes.
The quantities estimated to Aoav through the given pipes are based upon a fall of 10 feet through 100
feet of pipe.
14. Use loav pressure outlet taps for distributing purposes, and full Aoav stop cocks.
15. The right place for the mill is directly over the well or bore hole.
16. If found absolutely necessary to place the mill any great distance above the source of water
supply, speh as A' hen pumping from a river walied in by high cliffs, avc can provide attachments
Avhich Ave are Avorking successfully in several places along the River Murray, Avhich alloAvs the mill
to operate the pump even though it is placed 80 10 100 feet above the level of the pump. These at-
tachments are knoivn as cradles, and are practically a combination of levers. We shall be pleased
to give particulars of these upon application. See page 36 for illustration.
WEIGHTS OF GALVANIZED PIPE.
Weight per 100 feet.
ADELAIDE, SYDNEY, AND PERTH.


J DIAGRAMS showing sonic of the positions to which
__our Mills arc adapted, and the Accessories that may be
When asking us to quote prices for complete outfits,
■ ■ 3 send us a rough sketch as here shown, tilling in dis
-V, I,J tanccs, depth of well, depth of water in well, diametei
of well, and the nature of soil around the surface o
, , well, also height of tower required to raise the rail
LK' S’OCKTiNKgn . .
- 'TA. above obstructions.
The Mill and Pump may be set a ai*>
i . mp distance from the water to be pumped,
3 but the pump should not be fixed • tF r .
f I g , / I J h/S pian.t ccuibc
v | (5 more than 25 ft. above the water. used for either a
S I Ji As the Wind Motor derives its <5 Hn Tank or Dane
~ roar VAiaa , , , .... . . I /,|\1 =- =
33—b power solely rrom the wind, it should r 1|\ Hr.
The tratzr level of Stream be placed above all obstructions to { § IY\ \
water Hole o' tvell not to ensure its proper working, . V iiM
be more than Z4 feet f\y]
below the Tump or Cylinder / j H
V This oUstcmce to be given 'Source of Supply
•na.j 6c tVell or iore
°*1® Tcw * r
1 1* I V e ori
I \ O X \ o r too o*3v r to£cn£
1/ \ * \-l~
wvpw " ‘ ~ A
j : I _1_ cfl,e * v aivf Thu distance to be given
- - - V icnecr
I i «<>
£fki source of Supply //[Cl 1
fc, y be a Sire a nx or ft \1 s I
Wed uxXh water not , vo lvt £ •
mere than. Zfy ft beta* Jo rip *
|''' 'fm'shijearixc This oUslojxetr Co be given
— udr S to be given .. ,
H d O Lippiy n 1 ay
* | bm a. ct*e.jo mt(i
cr Bore i/r\cL*.r To
DIAGRAMS showing sonic of the positions to which
our Mills arc adapted, and the Accessories that may be
used.
When asking us to quote prices for complete outfits,
send us a rough sketch as here shown, filling in dis
tanccs, depth of well, depth of water in well, diameter
of well, and the nature of soil around the surface of
well, also height of tower required to raise the mill
above obstructions.
BLOCK No. 47-
ADELAIDE, SYDNEY, AND PERTH.


r ‘- *1
:
nn
% t * ihjiia
BhIhSKbfiiftil 1
? * 1 fan8Bi \ I ill \
**• .„ .ygj
We manufacture a large number of accessories for use with our various plants, which are too
numerous to give in illustration and detail in this catalogue. There is no trouble that confronts you
in connection with your pumping or irrigation plant that we cannot overcome, and we are at all times
ready to advise you with our experience in these matters. Write explaining the particular trouble
you would like to remedy, and our experience is at your service. We have placed plants over all
the States, and our best reference is the man who is using goods of our manufacture.
All our fittings and fixtures are made in the best manner and of the best material that can be ob-
tained, as we have the reputation of turning out only first class goods we cannot afford to give you
a second grade article
BLOCK No. 64.
This wind mill is answering a most unique purpose in pumping
bulk kerosene into raised cylindrical storage tanks, from which
it is tapped off into delivery carts. This plant was erected to
the order of The British Imperial Oil Co., Ltd., at their store,
West Terrace, Adelaide, and has been operating their supply
to their entire satisfaction.
When writing to us for a
WHEN MAKING quotation to meet your re-
ENQUIRY. quirements, be very expli-
cit with your detail; dc>
not take anything for granted; remember that
every mill outfit we have sold has something
which has not been supplied or required with any
other mill. This is an example letter which en-
ables us to quote for every particular require-
ment, and will be a guide to you in filling up your
particulars;—
“Please quote me for the supply and erection
of a wind mill plant to meet the following re-
quirements, on trucks at
“My well is 45 feet deep, is a round shaft 4
ft. in diameter, is bricked right to the surface,
and has 3 ft. of water in the well. I wish to
raise about 2,000 gallons of water per day into
a storage tank of 2,000 gallons capacity, to be
placed about 8 ft. from the well on a steel tank
stand 10 ft. high from ground line.
“I also wish to have a galvanized trough 12 ft.
long with cover for ball cock, fitted on a stand
of sufficient height for cattle, and placed close
to the tank stand. Please quote a suitable outfit
to meet these requirements, on trucks, at your
forwarding port, and include cost of erection.
I will board and lodge your fitter, provide him
with sufficient help, and I will meet him at the
nearest station and deliver him back again with
the least possible delay.”
With these particulars before us, we can
give you the least costly plant to meet your
requirements.
Should you not want our expert to erect, you
would not refer to this part of the specification
whatsoever.
ADELAIDE, SYDNEY, AND PERTH.


To quite a number of purchasers
INSTRUCTIONS FOR ERECTION OF of wind mills the cost of the erec-
METTERS’ STEEL WIND MOTORS. tion is an item which appears to
give more concern than the pur-
chasing of the plant. We are desirous of making our instructions clear and ex-
plicit, so that any ordinary person, with a slight knowledge of tools and tackle,
could erect these plants. We ask you to carefully read the following particulars,
paying strict attention to the building of the parts and to the establishment of
the foundations. Adhere strictly to the list given for bolt sizes. If this is done,
we are sure you will find the erection a simple matter.
This block of our 30 ft. mill tower illustrates the following parts:—
No. I —Dove tails locking tower.
„ 2—Stage or platform.
„ 3 —Pipe barrel.
„ 4 —Cross girths.
„ s—Diagonal5—Diagonal angle stays.
„ 6—Diagonal angle stays.
These terms are applied to the various parts throughout the instructions.
It will be noticed in building our 20 ft. mill towers that the top section of
tower angles are slightly bent to obtain a greater spread at the base of the tower.
Thirty foot towers are built with the angles perfectly straight, as are all
towers of 30 ft. or any greater height. W r e have adopted a standard spread of one
foot to each five foot in height, thus a 30 ft. tower has a spread at the base of six
feet.
METTERS’ STEEL WIND MOTOR TOWERS.
This cut shows an 8 ft. steel wind motor tower put together and ready for
attaching the hauling tackle. The height of this tower is 20 ft. above the ground
BLOCK No. 77.
BLOCK
No. Bi.
when raised into position. We advise putting a block of some kind under the tower when bolting to-
gether, about mid-way (where marked by X) between the stage and bottom end of angle legs; it is de-
sired to prevent the angles sagging, so that the cross girths and diagonal stays will go into their respect-
ive positions without straining.
ADELAIDE, SYDNEY, AND PERTH.


• BLOCK 74.
We here give an illustration of a tower put together and having the tackle rigged ready for hauling,
so that you may understand the use of the tackle we beg to explain the various parts as follows:
(a) Gin poles, either of timber or two lengths of pipe, crossed at top, securely tied, and the
legs spread beyond the width of tower. Thesp poles should be about two-thirds the length
of tower.
(b) Hauling ropes. These should be strong ropes.
(c) Pulleys. The greater number of sheaves in the pulleys, the easier to move the load
(d and h) Guy or guide ropes. These can be dispensed with, but are a good safeguard.
(e) Back rope. This rope is of great importance, as its use is to prevent the tower being pulled
beyond the perpendicular, and is required for pulling the tower legs to the line of the anchor
post bolt holes.
(f) Is a tie rope holding the gin poles in position.
(g) Timber bolted under the tower legs, which, coming in contact with the foremost anchor
posts, prevents the tower dragging too far forward in hauling.
Now follow these instructions given below, performing the work just as it is here set out, and
thereby avoid confusion.
Four of the angles which form the tower legs will be found dovc-
PUTTING THE TOWER tailed at one end (the top), and have numbers stamped on them as a
TOGETHER. guide for putting them together.
Pick out the two legs numbered 1, and lay them upon the ground flat
side up, and with the dovetails fitting into each other. Now make these two legs up to their full length
by bolting on the lower angles, being careful to note that these angles have the outer corners rounded
a little at one end (the top) to allow their fitting closely inside; use f x f bolts for leg joints of 8 ft. and
10 ft. mills, and 1x £ for 12 and 14 ft. mills. You will find the cross girths in sets of four, one of
each set having two holes punched near the centre for attaching the ladder. Take one of the longest
girths (one without the ladder holes in it) and bolt it across the two legs (inside the angle) at the
ADELAIDE, SYDNEY, AND PERTH.


third hole from the bottom, with the flat side of the angle girth to the top of tower, using i x |
bolts in 8 ft. and 10 ft. mills, and i| x J in. in 12 ft. and 14 ft. mills. Now bolt in one of each set of girths
in like manner, using the same size bolts, excepting where there are more than two sets of girths, in
which case the intermediate girth or girths need bolts i in. longer, so as to accommodate the two sets
of diagonal stays which meet at that point. The diagonal angle stays will be found in sets of eight.
Take any two of the longer ones (if there is only one set they will be of equal length), and bolt
them together in the form of the letter X, using |x i bolt; then with the two long legs downwards
bolt them to the tower legs (on the outside of angles, on the same bolt as the girths), beginning at the
bottom of the tower. See that the stay which goes from the bottom left-hand corner and to the top
right-hand corner has the angle outwards.
JWe advise your referring to the illustrations shown throughout our catalogue to guide
you as to the number of stays and girths required for the various height towers, but the
following is a schedule of the parts.
Eight feet and 10 ft. mills with 20 ft. towers have one set of angle diagonal stays and
two sets of angle girths.
Twelve and 14 ft. mills with 20 ft. towers have two sets of diagonal stays and three
sets of angle girths. Each additional 10 ft. section of tower adds one set of diagonal stays
and one set of angle girths to the above.
When you have completed putting this side together, turn it right over, and raise the
top or dove-tailed end of tower high enough to enable you to put on the platform. Get the
platform or stage, and pass it over the top end of tower legs with manhole upwards, and
angle irons towards the bottom of tower; bolt it to the tower legs at holes which meet the
holes in platform irons, using | x | in. bolts in 8 ft. and 10 ft. mills, and I x J in. bolts in
12 ft. and 14 ft. mills.
Now take away any supports you may have under the tower, and allow the platform to
• rest on the ground. See that the tower is not allowed to sag downwards under its own
weight—you can prevent this by blocking up the angles about mid-way between the plat-
form and the bottom of the tower.
* Next, get the mill head and place it in position in top of tower, the pipe-barrel resting
BLOCK snugly inside the angles, and the bolt holes in base block opposite the holes in corners of
No ‘ 78 ’ legs. You will need to pack up under the head to do this.
Having got this far, you should have no difficulty in completing the tower; remember to keep the
cross girths for ladder on the top side, as the tower now lies. Leave all the nuts a bit slack until
all bolts are in their places; then go round and tighten all up. When the legs, girths, and stays are
all in position, and before you tighten up the nuts, put in the studs, which, in 8 ft. mills, are 4 x | in.
hexagon headed bolts and nuts, and in the 10 ft., 12 ft., and 14 ft. mills 5i xi. These studs are for
pulling and holding the dove-tails together. You will notice that the studs lie at a slight angle when
in position.
Take the small cotter pin out of the end of the pump rod, inside the swivel, remove the nut
and washer, take off swivel and ferrule (this ferrule is a liner), remove remaining washer and
nut, then pass the cast iron rod guide over end of pump rod, and also over end of furl bar. 'Flic rod
guide is bevelled at ends to fit inside the taper of tower legs, and goes across them diagonally. Bolt
the guide into the most convenient angles, passing the bolt through rod guide first, then through holes
in the tower legs. Use 2i x § in. bolts in 8 ft. mills, and 2\ xiin 10 ft., 12 ft., and 14 ft. mills. Use a
washer under the nut.
The rod guide fits snugly into its place, and may have to be driven a little to make it meet the
holes. Now replace the nuts, ferrule, washers, swivel and cotter pin on the pump rod just as you
found them.
Please notice that there is a set of holes punched in tower legs a little below the platform, for
which there are no girths or stays; these holes are used only when automatic stopping gears are
used, and are for attaching the angle bearers which support the anti-swivelling bar.
ADELAIDE, SYDNEY, AND PERTH.


BLOCK No. 83.
1 ” Illustration of Tail. ==== ®
The ladder is now to be fixed. Take the short section and bolt to the top of tower below the
stage with same bolts used to bolt the stage to tower posts in 8 ft. and 10 tt. mills; 12 ft. and 14 ft.
mills have special holes in stage irons for ladder. Next section is attached with 1x | in. bolts, and so
on to the bottom.
Now you attach the tail or back van
Pass the small casting on
tail bone over the iron pin at the bottom of main casting, put on washers
and cotter pin, bolt the tail bone to the cast tail pivot or quadrant, pass
the bolts downwards through the casting, then through the tail bone,
put two nuts on each bolt and screw
up tight. Use 1J x | in. on 8 ft.
mill, i| x f in. on 10 ft. mill, and 2
x J in on 12 ft. and 14 ft. mills.
This completes the tower, which is
now ready for the anchor posts.
Bolt the anchor posts to the flat side
of the 6x 3 in. jarrah, which should be cut in length 2 ft. 6 ins. long. Use 4x i in. bolts.
lake the exact spread of tower legs at the bottom of the tower, and sink holes for anchor posts
accordingly, allowing the timber to go across the corners of the square. The holes should be sunk
BLOCK No. 82.
Anchor Post.
so that the top ends of anchor posts remain above the ground about
6 inches. Place the two anchors nearest to the mill into their re-
spective holes, and with straight edge and spirit level see that these
are perfectly level at the top holes, and ram these in tight. Place
other two in the same manner, and see that all are level. Now, to get
mill up, use a piece of timber 12 ft. or 15 ft. long.
5x3 in., or thereabouts. Bolt this across the outer side of tower
now resting on the ground, pass the bolts first through the timber,
If bolts are too long, pack up with washers, etc.,
under the head of bolt. Have the nuts only next to the tower. Now
pull the tower up to the anchor posts, so that the timber is in close
contact with the anchor post. Remember the anchor post fits inside
of the tower legs.
to your tackle for hauling. Put in a short post
about 20 yards from bottom end of tower. Have this post very se-
cure, and rammed tight; also one about 10 ft. from the head of mill
and in a line with the other post. Then get a strong rope and pass
singly over the gin poles. These gin poles consist of two supple
poles or two lengths of pipe of even lengths tied
securely together near the top end. Spread the
other ends apart. The gin poles should be a trifle
over half the height of tower. Up-end these about
6 or 8 ins. from the bottom of tower, but do not
secure.them at ground end, as these poles should fall
over after they have been relieved of the strain of
the mill, and should fall clear of the well. Fasten
one end of strong rope at the top of tower just below the main casting, but clear of tail pivot; the
other end make fast to the blocks for hauling.
A moderately strong rope is also wanted at the back. Fasten this to the top of tower and then
to post at the back. Now pull up the tower, allowing the tower legs to pass over anchor posts. Bolt
the opposite side first, then remove long piece of timber, and bolt to other anchor posts, screwing up
bolts tightly. Keep the strain on ropes until you have your anchor bolts in properly. Use I xf in.
bolts for 8 ft. and 10 ft. mills and 1 x i in. for 12 and 14 ft. mill anchors.
ADELAIDE, SYDNEY. AND PERTH


1 I^J^B
yr' v. ■3^^^?
- | W
Next take the furl handle, fasten it to one of the tower legs (about 3 ft. from the
ground) by passing the clamp over outer side of angle and through holes in handle.
This handle should be fix-
Ed on same side of mill ■ ""11I" -I—,:=r:
tower as the furl bar pass-
, . , , , , BLOCK No. 86. Spoke,
the furl bar to the loop on
the handle with the galvanized steel wire. The wire to be only just long enough to
allow the handle to fit tightly against the inner side of angle when the wheel is out of
the wind, and the buffer spring on quadrant to rest against the cushion on main casting.
Now the wheel comes next. Take the spokes and bolt them in their places on the
hub. Pass all bolts towards outer side of hub, and put two nuts on all bolts. Use
T-J x f in. bolts for 8 ft., and 2 x i in. on 10 ft., 12 ft., and 14 ft. mills.
Then take a section of wheel, comprising three sails or vanes in 8 ft., 12 ft., and
14 ft. mill, and four sails or vanes in 10 ft. mill, and bolt this into position. The inner
rings are put underneath the cross bars inside the spokes, and the outer ring is put on
the outside end of spoke. Do not ,—..
tighten up bolts at this stage. Now
turn the spokes, a o that the section
just put in is at the top of the
wheel. Put in two sections at the
present bottom of wheel, then
Furl Handle. again turn wheel and add balance
BLOCK No. °i wheel. When the bolts are in
go their places, screw them all up
tightly. All wheel bolts passing
through the rings and spokes
should be double nutted, and have
a washer under the first nut. Use
U x i in. bolts on inner rings, and \\ x § in
at outer ring, and 1 x i in. at the single lapping
of rings for 8 ft. mills. For 10 ft. mills
x § in. on inner rings, i| x i in. on outer rings
at spokes, and 1 x f in. on lapping ends of
rings. In 12 ft. and 14 ft. mills use il x j
in., 2 x J in., and 1 x i in. respectively for the
same joints. With 12 ft. and 14 ft. mills we
supply two extra steps, to be placed above
stage. These arc fastened with clamps and are
used in oiling mill head.
Adjust the weight governor on the weight
bar according to the speed you wish your mill
to work to. With the 8 ft., 10 ft., and 12 ft.
mills we advise starting the mill with the
weight about 6 to 8 ins. from the end of bar,
and for the 14 ft. mill about 4 ins. from the
end of the bar.
BLOCK No. 84. Section of Wind Wheel.
ADELAIDE, SYDNEY, AND PERTH.


I&
,'%p
-r
The pump should be fixed in a vertical line with the pump rod swivel as near
THE FIXING OF to water line as possible, and never more than 25 ft. above the water. Take
THE PUMP. your plumb bob and line, attach to the pole swivel, and lower your weight down
the well. Fix your pump timber ir well so that the piston of pump will work
in a dead line with your plumb line. Bolt the pump securely to vour pump bearers, and screw on
suction pipe, with foot valve and strainer attached, ke on gil alv ■ about 6 inches from the well bot-
tom. Now fix your delivery pipe to tank or receiver, make everything firm in the well, slay your pipe
so that it does not swing. If pump is more than 12 ft. from the surface, fix pipe bearers about 12 ft.
apart, and put a U bolt around pipe and through the bearers. The pump rod should have guides
bolted to the same timber as carries the pipe.
In dealing with wells of considerable depth, and in cases where bends and angles are necessary in
the delivery pipe, an air cushion should be used, also a retaining valve in the column of delivery pipe.
The air cushion is made by introducing a tee piece just above the pump with 6 ft. of pipe made air
tight at top. An air cushion greatly assists the mill and pump.
Great care should be exercised in placing the pump rod. It must not be too long or too short,
as then it will strike either the top or bottom of the pump and cause breakages. See that the pump
bucket has plenty of room to work up and down stroke. For the guiding of the rod in the mill tower
we supply 2 x 2 in. timber and rod brackets to be bolted to this timber. The timber is fixed to the
cross girths with the hook bolts we supply. Pass the hook bolt up on to the outer side of cross girths,
then through the timber.
It frcqucntl}' happens that the
cost to erect a mill plant would
exceed the cost of the plant itself
if it were necessary at all times to
send expert fitters from the works
to assemble the mill outfit. By
applying oneself to the data here
given, any handy man can erect
a Metiers’ Wind Mill.
So that our instructions may be given in such a form that any handy
man could apply them to the process, we arranged to have one of our
staff working in conjunction with a purchaser of one of Mctters’ Steel
Wind Motors, writing up the pro-
cess during the erection of a par-
ticular plant, thus being able to
describe every separate proceeding
as it took place, and answer the
questions raised by the purchaser.
We are confident these explana-
tions will be found of very great
assistance.
BLOCK No. 173.
BLOCK No. 174,
ADELAIDE, SYDNEY, AND PERTH.


|
i H i i 1 •
»*
DUPLICATE PARTS
For MetterY 1914 8 ft. Wind Motor.
Fittings required for 10, '>.u ‘ -4 tt. Wind Motors may be ordered from these same numbers;
but please state at all times when ordering the size of Mill and the date when Mill was supplied.
Please give the Name to the fitting as well as the Number,
1. Pipe Barrel.
2. Main Casting.
3. Brake Casting.
4. Pinion W heel.
5. Gear Wheel.
6. Crank Pin.
7. Gear Crank Shaft.
8. Pump Rod Head.
9. Furl Handle.
10. Quadrant.
11. Brake Rod.
12. Pitman.
13. Rocker Spindle.
14. Tic Bar.
15. Pipe Casting.
16. Pump Rod Swivel.
17. Cross Guide.
18. Bell or Hub.
19. Bell Spindle.
20. Pump Rod.
21. Furl Bar.
22. Furl Bar Casting.
23. Furl Wire.
Furl Wife Disc.
25. Gun Metal Turntable
Ring.
26. Base Block.
27. Pipe Collar.
28. Furl Lever.
29. Tail Hook.
30. Governor Bar.
31. Governor Weight.
32. Tower Clamp.
33. Tail Bone Casting.
34. Cover for Gear
Wheel.
35- Leather Washer for
Gear Wheel.
36. Tin Lubricant.
37. Brass Washer for
End of Wheel
Shaft.
38. Brass Bearings.
BLOCK No. 143.
If ordering Parts for Old Pattern Mills, use these same numbers, and give the size of Mill Wheel and
the Date the Mill was supplied.
ADELAIDE, SYDNEY, AND PERTH.


I
m
These two mills are so much alike in detail for erec-
INSTRUCTIONS FOR THE ERECTION tion that we propose treating them as one line.
OF METTERS’ “DORIS” AND
“LITTLE TOFF” WIND MILLS.
This block illustrates a “Doris” or “Toff” tower put
together, and ready for rigging the tackle or hauling
ropes. The rigging of the ropes can be applied as
for the wind motor, but this structure being so light, can be readily put up by hand without elaborate
ropes and pulleys.
BLOCK No. 87
FIG 2.
FIG. 1
We herewith show cuts. Figure 1 and Figure 2, which
illustrates the formation of the towers; also a cut show-
ing the tower fully established. Wc desire to give our
instructions in the simplest possible form, so that un-
skilled labor may be employed for the purpose of erec-
tion.
The first important duty is to lay out all the pack-
ages, knock off all tying wires, and check various parts
and fittings to be sure everything has been received.
Select the four top section angles, having their edges
cut away, and numbered 1 to 4. Take two of these with
corresponding numbers, place same inside the square of
platform (No. 5, Figure 1), placing the platform with
man-hole uppermost, and bolt the angles to platform,
using | x | in. bolts.
Next, take one si x | in. bolt and pass it through the
top holes of angle legs. Place the mill head into these
two angles, allowing the top of angles to fit close up
to shoulder of base block (No. 3, Figure 1). Place the
other angle legs in position, and bolt them inside the
square of platform, using 1 x I in. bolts (these same
bolts are used for top length of ladder). Put in three
other si x f in. bolts and nuts through top hole of
tower legs, arranging two bolts above and two bolts
below the flange of base block. Tighten these bolts
up with a spanner, and put on the small flat clamp at
BLOCK No. 88. top of tower legs, just under the shoulder of pipe barrel. BLOCK No 89
ADELAIDE, SYDNEY, AND PERTH.


Next, place the cast iron cross guide (No. 4, Figure 1) inside the angle tower legs.' Use 2x § in.
bolts with a washer outside the angle under head of nut. Then follow on with the next section of tower
legs. Place the end which has the sharp corners of angle cut away, inside the angle forming the top
section, and use |x i in. bolts to connect. Now sort out the angle cross girths; for 20 ft. tower you
will find three sets each of four angles. One of each length has four holes punched on one flange of
angles, and these must be reserved for ladder side of tower. Take the short lengths and place in posi-
tion (No. 6, Figure 1) using 3 x i in. bolts one endand i| in. for other end, as this bolt is also used
for securing the diagonal stay. The girths arc placed inside the tower legs; proceed with all
girths in a similar manner, and note the diagonal stays are placed in
opposite positions on the various sides (figures 2, 9, and 10). The lad-
der side of tower requires no diagonal stays (figure 1). Bolt sections
of ladder as shown in figure 1.
Tighten up all bolts throughout the tower, and next take the
spread of tower for the purpose of sinking anchor post holes. These
holes should be sufficiently deep to allow the bottom girth to come
within a few inches of the ground level; therefore, sink holes about
two feet deep. If the 4x3 hardwood to be used for foundation of
anchor posts is sent in one length, this must be cut into four equal
lengths, which should then be about 2 ft. each. Bolt these to bottom
of tower legs with 4x I in. bolts. The tower is now ready for raising,
and being a light structure, elaborate tackle is not required. Lift the
mill forward so that the bottom legs are directly over their respective
holes, then lift the mill right up into the perpendicular position.
To make sure the tower is perpendicular before filling in the
anchor holes, place a spirit level on the bottom girth of tower. Get
these level, and then ram the soil firmly in anchor holes.
Next put the tail, or back vane, in position. Take out the 5-16 in.
bolt in socket at the side of main casting, insert the pipe tail bone into
the socket, and pass bolt through the socket and hole at end of pipe
tail bone. Put the long link which is attached to the tail over the
hinge bracket near the top of main casting. To-do this, remove the
bolt and take off the top washer, slip the loop over the stud, and
replace washer and bolt.
BLOCK No. 91.
Tower fully established.
Now attach the chaih for furling the mill, by passing the chain over pulley at top, thence through
pulley working on a swivel joint, and connect end of chain to tail bone with the 1-in. bolt, the other end
to be hooked to the galvanized furl wire, passed through the |-in. pipe of mill head, and down through
the round hole in rod guide, and connect the wire to the swivel attached to the hand lever. This lever
is to be fastened to the tower leg in such a manner that when the lever is pulled down it will lock in
the tower angle. Next, bolt on spokes of wind wheel to hub, using 1x i in. bolts, and put on sec-
tions of wind wheel, 1 x i in. bolts to be used on inner ring, and 3 x i in. where the rings lap each
other. Screw up all bolts with spanner.
ADELAIDE, SYDNEY, AND PERTH.


Id
n *
FOR FIXING PUMP
BLOCK No. 92.
Showing Pipe Brace?
We supply with a 20-ft tower three pipe braces, which are formed of
angle steel, and arc placed as shown in adjoining cut.
No. 1 represents the corner angles
No. 2 represents the girths
No. 3 the pipe brace.
No. 4 the pipe holder.
Before bolting the brace No. 3 in position, fix your plumb line to the mill
head, attaching it to the piece of square iron passing through the rod guide.
The centre of the pipe-holder No. 4 should be plumb with the top of the
pump rod. If this result is obtained, you will find the mill works more
satisfactorily'.
Before starting the mill see that lubricators are all in position and properly charged with oil.
Always bear in mind that unless a mill is properly and sufficiently oiled, poor results will be ob-
tained. Sec descriptive matter for position of Lubricators.
In the main casting a hole is drilled near the turntable. This is an important lubricator, and oil
should be regularly applied here, as in the event of the turntable being neglected, the mill will not
readily respond to the wind.
The “Doris” mill is provided with oil holes only, and oil should be applied every three or four
days. Do not imagine that because you arc not requiring water, the mill should not be attended
to. At all times it is most important that the turntable should be oiled. This is the governor
of the mill.
Use axle grease upon the two gear wheels, but only in moderation. It is necessary, after the
mill has been working for a period of three or four weeks, to screw up all nuts throughout the mill
and tower, there being a risk that the bolts when first screwed up do not obtain a perfect seat-
ing.
ADELAIDE, SYDNEY, AND PERTH.


L : j 4 )
DUPLICATE PARTS.
For Matters’ Little Toff Wind Mill.
We must ask you in ordering: replacements to slat- the number shown below; also, to avoid
confusion, give the trade term we have applied to the particular part. It assists us very materially if
you give us the date when the mill was supplied to you, and whether 6 ft. or larger wheel
We arc
anxious to send you the correct part, as we know that delay means a considerable loss to the user of
the mill
BLOCK No. 94.
No. Part.
t. Main Casting.
Gear Wheel.
3. Gear Wheel Spindle.
4. Pinion.
5. Wind Wheel Hub.
6. Hub Spindle.
7. Pitman or Connecting Rod.
8. Pump Rod Head or Crosshead,
g. Pipe Barrel.
ic. Base Block.
11. Main Pump Rod
12. Top and Bottom Swivel Castings.
13. Shea ve P illey for Head.
14. Sheave Pulley for Swivel.
15. Sheave Carrier.
r6. Tail Hinge.
No. Part.
17- Tail Hanger.
18. Oil W ell Cover.
19. Buffer Spring.
20. Cross Guide.
21. Crosshead Guide.
Top Section of Pump Rod.
23. Tower Clamp.
24. Furl Handle Complete.
25. Furl Chain.
26. Spoke (state if 6 ft. or larger wheel).
27. Sail Clip (small).
28. Sail Clip (large).
29. Sail (state if 6 ft. or larger wheel).
30. Inner Ring (wheel).
31. Outer Ring (wheel, slate if 6 ft. or larger wheel)
32. Gun Metal Turntable Ring.
ADELAIDE, SYDNEY, AND PERTH.


is ,
■■*■ '~ -^'' ; ' - , * «-• - ■■-• . ■ jl • , .., ■•• »- -
DUPLICATE PARTS.
For Metters’ Little Doris Wind Mill,
These parts arc, in many cases, similar to the castings shown for the Little Toff Mill, but in con-
struction the parts are not interchangeable with the Little Toff Mill. Therefore we ask you to exercise
the greatest care in ordering replace parts, give the number shown below, also the trade term we have
applied for the particular part, so as to avoid delay and confusion.
BLOCK No. 95-
No. Parts.
1. Main Casting.
2. Gear Wheel.
3. Gear Wheel Spindle.
4. Hub and Pinion.
5. Hub Spindle.
6. Pipe Barrel.
7. Base Block.
8. Main Pump Rod.
9. Pump Rod Head.
10. Cross Guide.
it. Hub Cap,
12. Tail Hanger.
13. Tail Hinge.
14. Buffer Spring.
15. Sheave Carrier,
Xo. Parts.
i(). Sheave Pulley.
17. Pump Rod Guide Bracket.
18. Pump Rod Guide.
19. Top Section Pump Rod.
20. Pitman or Connecting Rod.
21. Pump Rod Casting.
22. Gun Metal Turntable Ring.
23. Tower Clamp.
24. Furl Handle.
25. Complete Spoke.
26. Furl Chain.
27. Sail Clip (small)
28. Sail Clip (large).
29. Sail.
30. Inner Ring (wheel).
31. Outer Ring (wheel).
ADELAIDE, SYDNEY. AND PERTH.


IND&X.
ILLUSTRATIONS OF METTERS’ WIND MILLS ARE SHOWN ON
VARIOUS PAGES, AS FOLLOWS:
Illustration. • Page.
6 ft. Doris Mill on Stub Tower .. .. .. .. .. .. • • 18
6 ft. Toff „ „ „ •• 16
6 ft. Toff „ 30 ft. „ .. .. .. .. •• •• 3
8 ft. Steel Wind Motor on Stub Tower .. .. .. .. 10
Bft „ 20 ft. ~ 9
8 ft. „ „ „ 30 ft. 9
10 ft. „ „ 30 ft. 7
10 ft. „ „ „ 40 ft. „ 4
12 ft „ 30 ft. 4
Steel Tank Stand, 2,000 gal. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 27
Pumps, Various Patterns .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 19
Capacity of Pumps .. .... .. .. .. .. .. .. 23
Capacity of Metters’ Mills .. .. .. •• .. .. 24
Hand Pumping Attachments .. .. .. .. .. .. 22
Automatic Stopping Gear .. .. .. .. .. .. 26
Sheep and Cattle Trough .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 28
Tanks, Squatter and Corrugated .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 29
Capacity and Weight of Pipes .. .. '.. .. .. .. .. 38
Valves, Miscellaneous .. .. .. .. .. .. 32-
Clamps for Wells and Bores .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 34
Strong Points of Metters’ Mills .. .. .. ~ .. .. 7
Descriptive Matter—Wind Motor .. .. .. .. .. 8
~ „ Little Toff Mills .. .. 14,
„ ~ Little Doris Mills .. .. .. .. .. .. 17
Instructions for Erecting Wind Motor .. .. .. .. .. 41
„ „ ~ Little Toff Mill .. .. 48
„ „ „ Little Doris Mill .. .. .. .. 48


