

Wii
■ # J ..JBBa,
fOp
■ (fO.\- 4-5302.q
4.<34-
t^ASqS
V. Cr:o3. PTV. L.
WIN DM ILL MANU FA CTU !£RS
264-266 CITY ROAD
. LBOU aNA
Makers of the
Pumps, Tanks,
Most Perfect
All Steel
Troughing
and all
Irrigation
Specialities
Wind Mill
in Australia
y> i
AN I'' V' A.' A'EL
CITY HOAD
Contractors
Matters' All Steel
Wind Motor
To the Various
State Governments
Complete Pumping Plants
Quoted for Estimates Free
Patent, 1923
jpjr | iAvL'^7
METTERS LIMITED, Adelaide, Sydney & Perth


Introduction
T HE
past years have seen some very Radical Changes in the constructive
efficiency of Wind Driven Machinery. No cheaper power is ever likely
to be obtained and, therefore, it is the special objective of engineers to give
the closest attention to the working detail of Wind Mills, so that the maximum
of efficiency will be obtained and the minimum attention need be given to a
working plant.
In presenting our 1923 Wind Mill Catalogue we are desirous of convey-
ing to our Patrons a clear and lucid description of the Self Oiling Mills which
we have introduced during the past four years, our previous pattern Mills are
all illustrated and described, as we are still Manufacturing all types. During
the past four years we have made most exhaustive experiments and tests of the
various working parts of The Nuoil and Selfoil Mills, and are convinced
that the Mill we offer to-day is capable of carrying extraordinary responsi-
bilities. Many changes have been made during this period. Being anxious to
offer the most Reliable Outfit, we have discarded many attachments owing to
their not standing up to our severe test, and in other cases have strengthened
where found necessary. All of our Illustrated Matter has been taken from
I rue Photos so that it can be relied upon to give the correct impression.
Seeing that it is impossible for most of our clients to inspect the goods at
our various Show Rooms, we have endeavoured to make our Catalogue our
Responsible Selling Medium, at the same time, we cordially invite all who
possibly can to inspect our Show Rooms, as we are very strong advocates for
personal inspection. It is not possible to make the illustrations truly repre-
sentative.
In thanking our Clients for past favours, we wish to convey our very
urgent desire for further favours, we want your support and are prepared to
give your commands the very best attention.
METTERS LIMITED,
142 Rundie Street, Adelaide ;
also Elizabeth Street, Sydney, N.S.W.; Hay Street, Perth, W.A.
JIL. . Ski


The width of Well or internal dia-
meter of Bore Casing
The depth of Well or Bore from
surface to bottom.
The depth of water in the Well or
Bo>e and does this depth vary
in seasons.
Do you require Storage Tanks ?
What Capacity ?
Do you require Tank Stand ?
What height ?
— .
What distance from the Mill will
the Tank be established ?
Do you want Troughing ?
What size and quantity ?
How far from the Tank do you pro-
pose establishing the Trough ?
The height of Tower required to
raise the Wind Wheel 10 feet
above obstructions ?
The quantity of Water required per
day and the purpose the water
is required for ?
" ' -
How would the goods be forwarded ?
Name
"V . -
'■l
REQUISITION FOR METTERS* OUTFIT
If your are requiring a Wind Mill Outfit please fill in the particulars as hereunder
set out or write us in the form of our Letter of Enquiry published on page 39.
PARTICULARS TO GIVE AS FOLLOWS:
Address


METTERS LIMITED
ADELAIDE, SYDNEY, AND PERTH.
JN publishing this Catalogue, we desire, as much as possible, to
treat with the everyday requirements, as it is impossible for
us to illustrate here all the lines we manufacture connected
with irrigation work.
Our intention is to give a clear and precise idea of the detail
required to complete an up-to-date windmill outfit, and for this
purpose are illustrating the various sized mills that we are making
up, at work in some particular site. By these illustrations (which
are all true photographs), intending buyers will be in the position
of judging the general appearance, as well as learn something of
the utility of the various outfits, as remarks are made giving the
depth of supplies and the capacity wherever possible.
METTERS' 10 ft.
Wind Motor, built
upon a 30 ft. steel
tower, delivering
into a 2,000
gallon storage
tank, placed upon
a 12 ft. steel
BLOCK NO. 4.
onj4. CUt j. describes one of our 10 ft. wind motors built upon a
30 it steel tower, delivering water into a 2,000 gallon tank
placed upon a 20 ft. steel stand, thus giving a good pressure
water throughout the delivery service pipes. This is a most
satisfactory outfit, and is highly approved by the purchaser.
opinion has been expressed frequently to us
that our Mills, judging by the finish and general
appearance must be costly, but a comparison of
oui prices with these of other makers will prove our
charges are lower, even though the standard of our
Mills is of the very highest.
In estimating the cost of a Wind Mill, and com-
paiing the cost with other makers, the most important
consideration should be given to the capacity' of
the Mill. If, for instance, our 8 ft. Wind Motor at
say, £25, gives as large a supply of water as other makers' 10 ft. Mills at £35, we should be deemed the
cheaper maker, and this is just what we do show. Our Mill is the most powerful Mill on the Market
If a Wind Mill is placed in position for the purpose of raising water, estimate its value at the cost of water
per 1,000 gallons, and do not consider so much the size of the Mill.
We are not publishing Testimonials.
Metters Mills have been erected over all the States, and are working some of the deepest holes as well
as shallow holes, and our very strong point is we prefer to send you to a man who is using our Mills for
reference, as we make the very best friends of all our clients. There are many unique points about Metters'
Mills. We have kept them up-to-date by applying all the modern ideas end employing the most expert
engineers and pattern makers, and can assure the public of the very best results.


METTERS
Wind Motor
built upon i
30 ft.
steel tower
BLOCK No. 2
Metters' 8 ft. Wind Motor,
built upon a 30 ft. steel
tower.
warrant our Wind Mills to be made of the
very best material obtainable for the class
of work performed, and to be the stronger,
more perfectly self-adjusting, and far more
serviceable than any other.
When properly erected according to in-,
structions and directions, hereafter set out, ,
and kept in proper order, they are capable
of doing more work and running in a I'ghter
wind than any other make of Wind Mill in
the market.
Any part found faulty in material or
workmanship within one year from the date
of erection will be supplied free of charge
at store door or on truck Adelaide or Sydney,
provided defective part is returned to us,
freight prepaid, for inspection. Our Wind
Mill Towers are warranted not to break,
IITE can assist you to overcome any difficulty you may come
in contact with, and would be pleased to have you write
to us explaining your troubles.
If you are. an intending buyer you will obtain much
information from this Catalogue, which will very materially
assist you in putting down the most suitable outfit to meet your
particular requirements at the least possible cost.
Illustrations we are publishing show clearly the class of
work we establish. Compare them with any others, and you
will give us the preference.
Prices quoted in this Catalogue are for goods
TERMS: delivered, if treating with Adelaide, free 011 trucks
at Adelaide, or free on board at Port Adelaide.
If treating with Sydney, free on trucks at Sydney, or free on
board at Sydney.
If you are desirous of terms other than the usual cash or 30
days, kindly outline your requirements for our consideration.
Our prices have been agreed upon a cash basis, so that
if extended terms are required a slight increase would be made
to the list prices.
Initial orders should be
accompanied with remittance
METTERS'
or references. T ..., , y
Little Toft
Our Wind Mill
OUR GUARANTEE Wind *S /sSDk
OR WARRANTY. Mills
are the
strongest in construction and
have the greatest power. We
BLOCK No. 6.
Metters' 6 ft. Little Toff Wind Mill, built upon a 30 ft. steel
raising water from a well 30 ft. deep and delivering
into a storage tank of 800 gallons capacity placed upon a steel
tank stand, 6 ft. high.


ii 1 Metters' 12 ft. Steel Wind Motor, built
fjj I upon a 30 ft. tower, raising water from
tjl | a bored well 325 ft. deep, and delivering
Mi J iuto a 2,000 gallon storage tank planed
jjff I JM upo',1 a steel stand 10 ft. above the surface.
0l?f j Our towers are the
" ' strongest.
buckle, or blow down. If breakages
occur during the period covered by our
warranty, resulting from carelessness
or failure to properly care for the Mill
and Tower, we will not be held ;
responsible for same or be bound to
supply such parts free of charge.
Our warranty is based upon the condition that
the Mill and Tower shall be properly erected and
cared for, otherwise we do not agree to furnish the
free repairs. The instructions given can so easily
be followed that mistakes should not occur, and
consequently accidents will
not happen; we simply ask
you to carry out these in-
structions, the Will Mill will
do the rest.
Our towers are the
strongest.
Any duplicates can
be supplied at short
notice.
BLOCK No. 3.
Metters' 10 ft. Steel Wind Motor, built upon a 40
ft. Steel Tower, raising water from a well and The Nuoil Mill is a
delivering into two 3,000 gallon Storage Tanks revelation
placed upon a Steel Stand 12 ft. above the surface.
A Wind Mill should be oiled
during the winter months,
more particularly the turn-
table.
Cse Metters' solidified oil
in grease cups.
Use heavy D machine oil
for lubrication for needle
lubricators.
Self-oiling Mills such as
our Nuoil and Selfoil Mills
require oiling once only each
twelve months. Use medium
heavy oil for Nuoil and Selfoil
Mills.
We are raising water from
bores over 400 feet in depth.
We guarantee to give you
the best possible value.
The wind is the cheapest
power.
Metters' Wind Mills are
self-adjusting.
Do not tie a wind wheel to
the Tower of Mill. If any
tying up is required, secure
wheel to the tail.
BLOCK No. 7.
Metters' All Steel Little Toff Wind
Mill, 6 ft. wind wheel, built upon 20
ft. Steel Tower, raising water from a
well 38 ft. deep.


A FEW OF THE STRONG POINTS 1. We can at
WHICH HAVE MADE METTERS' all times supply
MILLS SO MUCH SOUGHT FOR. replacements for
any of our Mills,
even though the pattern may be thirty years old.
2. The working power of the Mill is phenomenal.
3. The castings are scientifically made to ensure
great strength.
4. All parts are interchangeable.
5. The very best material only is used throughout,
6. The working parts are all machined, giving
undoubted accuracy in adjustments
7. All Shafts of best bright Cold Rolled Steel
8. The bearings are unique, and are patented by us
9. The Mill being properly governed cannot race
10. The tower is built of best Black Mild Steel
Angles and painted with oxide paint, and is constructed
with dove-tailed locking arrangements at the top for
the Wind Motor, for the Selfoil and Nuoil a heavy
cast cap forming the base of the ball-bearing turntable
is fitted over the top section of
angles, which makes the tower the
strongest in the Kingdom. We
can supply galvanized towers at
slightly increased cost,
11. The tower is spread to allow
placing over larger wells than
usual.
12. The lubricating facilities
are as near to perfection
possible for an en-
gine raised above
the ground surface.
All Wind Motor
and Toff Mills
manufactured by
us are now fitted
with Special Metal
Grease Cups to
receive Metters'
Wind Mill Lubri-
cant. The Nuoil
and Selfoil Mill is
fitted for Oil, and
i s automatically
supplied.
We are not
discarding o u r
previous pattern
Mill, but for all
future orders we
would ask you
to clearly state
which pattern Mill
you require.
There are many
other very im-
portant parts and
attachments ex-
plained further on
which will prove
to you that the
Metters' Wind
Mills are the most
up-to-date obtain-
able.


Various Pattern Mills
So that we may convey to you a compact idea of the various pattern Mills we manu-
facture, we are giving a list herewith, stating the type or pattern of the Mill and the
various sizes of Wind Wheels applied to the same, all of which are fully described in the
pages of this Catalogue. They are as follows :
" Nuoil"
A Double Geared Self-Oiling Mill, fitted with Wind Wheels 8, 10, 12, and 14 feet diameter.
"Self Oil"
A Single Geared Self-Oiling Mill, fitted with Wind Wheels 6 and 7 feet diameter.
The Ail-Steel "Wind Motor"
Grease Lubricated*, fitted with Wind Wheels 8, 1.0, 12, and 14 feet diameter.
"The Toff" All-Steel Wind Mill
Grease Lubricated*, fitted with Wind Wheels 6, 7, 8, and 9 feet diameter.
"The Flirt" Direct Acting Mill
One size Wind Wheel only, viz., 5 feet.
Towers are provided to any height that may be required. To ensure proper working,
the Wind Wheel should be quite clear of any obstruction.


METTERS' NUOIL WIND MILL
The title Nuoil suggests something new in oiling methods. The Nuoil Wind Mill is an
entirely New, Self-Contained, Automatically-Oiled, Wind-Driven Motor, which we beg to
describe herewith: —
DESCRIPTION OF METTERS' NUOIL WIND MILL.
First: We beg to state we have produced a Powerful Double Geared Wind-Driven Motor, which carries
a sufficient quantity of oil for twelve months' continuous working, securely stored, the working parts being
perfectly covered to protect them from dust and water.
BLOCK No. 232.
THE MAIN CASTING (A) is
formed to accommodate the
working Gears, and is also the oil
container. The Sleeve portion of
this casting receives the Main
Driving Spindle attached to the
Hub (C) of Wind Wheel, and has
two Oil Wells (B) from which
the oil is supplied to the Spindle
by loose rings. Any surplus of
oil in these wells is conveyed
back into the main receiver
through a cored passage in the
casting.
TWIN GEARS. The Gearing-
is Double Gears. Two pinion
wheels are securely keyed on
Main Shaft, and the large Gears
are secured to a short heavy
shaft mounted in white metal
bearings supported by a heavy
Central Cast Pedestal.
STEEL ROUND ROD GUIDES
(D and D) control the movement
of the Pump Rod Head, and are
also employed for bracing down
the Galvanised Steel Cover to the
working parts.
PITMAN. Two Pitmans (E
and E) are connecting the move-
ments of the Crank Pin to the
Rod Head (G).
THE ROD HEAD (G) with the
top or upper end of Pitmans are
supplied with oil from a Copper
and Brass Ball Yalve Pump (U),
the oil being delivered into the
Oil Trough (H) and distributed
where required.
THE OIL PUMP is a solid casting fitted with Steel Ball Yalves, is applied by set Screws on to one of
the Rod Guides (D), and is operated by the Travel of the Rod Head (G) on its downward motion, working
the steel lever of the pump and forcing a plentiful supply of oil to the Cast Oil Trough (H) right at the top
of the Mill Head, from whence it is distributed through drilled holes to the top working parts.


THE PUMP ROD (I) is securely fastened to the Rod Head (G) and passes through the Main Casting
for connection to the Pump Rod Swivel.
THE PIPE BARREL. The Main Casting (A) is securely fastened to the Steel Pipe Barrel, which now
revolves in Tower Cup Casting (L) and in the Base Block.
THE PUMP ROD HEAD (G ( ) is fitted with a heavy flanged Wheel, guided by the two Round Steel Rods
(D), ensuring a perfectly upright stroke to the Pump Rod (I), and has a Steel Shaft passing through the
centre of the Rod Head Casting, forming a bearing for the Grooved Wheel, and Shaft for the turn Pitmans
(E and E). These Pitmans are held in position on the Shaft by Cotter Pins and Washers. The bottom end
of Pitman is connected to the Gear Wheel by a Steel Crank Pin securely fitted into the Gear Wheel and held in
position by a Steel Nut; the bottom bearing end of Pitman has a White Metal Bushing.
CRANK PIN OR WRIST PIN is of Steel, carefully turned and fitted into the Gear Wheel with a Feather
Steel Key, and drawn up tight with a Faced Steel Nut.
THE GOVERNOR WEIGHT AND BAR (S and T). The speed of the Wind Wheel is governed by a
weight similar to that which we have applied for many years with great satisfaction to our Wind Motor
Mill. The Tail or Back Vane is attached to the Main Casting by passing the top end of the Tail Bone (N)
over threaded end of Tail Hinge Spindle (X) and bolting the Bottom End to the Bottom End of same
Spindle, where provision is made for a Bolt and Nut. The Tail Hook (V) connects the Head Weight Lever
(W) to the Tail Bone at point (N). The Buffer Springs (R) attached to the Tail Bone Brace are provided
to reduce the shock to the Back Vane or Tail when the Mill is subjected to heavy wind storms, or when
being pulled off or released to the Wind Pressure. The Weight Bar (T) enters the Cast Head Weight Lever
(W) and is secured by a Steel Set Screw; the position of the Weight (S) governs the speed of the Wind
Wheel, thus the weight being placed at the extreme end of the bar will allow of greater speed being attained
by the Wind Wheel than when placed nearer to the Cast Lever. The Governor is an important safeguard
for a mill. The 12 and 14 Mills have different Buffer arrangements; a Long Wrought Iron Arm prevents
the Tail from striking the Wind Wheel.
BALL BEARING TURNTABLE. The Top Tower Casting (L), with Casting (J) working in conjunction
with a series of large Steel Balls, form the Ball Bearing Turntable, thus; the Castings (L and J) are
manufactured having a chilled channel. A number of large Steel Balls with a heavy Gun Metal Cage is
placed between the two Castings. The Balls running in these Channels are well supplied with grease by a
Screw Down Grease Cup, and are protected from dust and rain by the construction of the Casting (J and
L); the latter is also the Cap for Tower Legs, and is held securely with four Steel Bolts and Nuts, On the
top surface of Casting (J) two Cast Projections engage the Flange of Main Casting at point (K), so that
any movement of the Head of the Mill compels the free movement of the Ball Race.
THE FURLING. A distinctly New and Simple Method to Furl the Mill has been applied, and has proved
most efficient. The operations are: First, a strong Twisted Link Chain (M), applied to the Hook on the
Tail Brace at point (N), passes over two Cast Sheave Pulleys (F) and through the Main Casting, and Pipe
Barrel is connected to the Furl Bar and Furl Wire at a point inside the Pipe Barrel. Connect Galvanised
No. 8 Wire to the Furl Bar and attach to Furl Lever, which is bolted to the Tower Angles about 4 feet from
the ground. When the Furl Lever is pulled down the Tail or Back Vane is brought into contact with
Brake Bar (O), which acts as a Clamp on the Brake Band (P), and thereby checking the momentum of the
Wind Wheel. The Brake Band (P) is formed of Spring Steel, is held in position on the Main Casting wito
a Casting (Q) bolted to a solid Casting which is part of the Main Casting. A Steel Bolt passing through
both ends of the Brake (P) holds the Band to its proper position, and also regulates the opening of the
Band; a guard is applied to the large Sheave Pulley (F), which keeps the Chain in its position.


BLOCK No. 231.
This Block illustrates the NUOIL MILL with Cover in position.
THE GALVANISED STEEL
COVER. The whole of the
working parts of the Nuoil Mill
are securely covered by a Heavy
Galvanised Cover, which protects
the workings from dust and rain.
If the rain water enters the Oil
Receivers, oil will be floated out;
therefore it is essential for a
Self-Oiling Mill that the cover
should be properly constructed.
A Brass Trap Screw is fixed in
the cover of 8 ft. Mills so that
oil may be replenished without
removing the Cover. The larger
Covers are fitted with a water
tight Sliding Door as an inspection
door or for placing further oil
supply.
IN PRESENTING THE
DOUBLE GEARED NUOIL
WIND MILL for sale, we do so
with every confidence, having
subjected the Mill to a most
severe test, covering a period of
two years, which has proved the
oiling arrangements are working
as desired, oil being evenly dis-
tributed throughout the Working
Parts, and does not escape. This
is due to the fac-t that our Main
Casting is a solid Casting, from
which it is not possible for the
oil to escape. Further, the
relative position of the Gear and
Pinion Wheels allows the Mill to
start with a very light Wind
Pressure. No more trouble
through Lubricators working
loose and falling out.
WHEN PLACING A NUOIL HEAD ON ANY OTHER TOWER. If requiring a Nuoil Mill Head to
replace any other maker's Mill Head, it is quite a
alterations are required to attach our Top Castings. To
Template so that the position of the Bolt Holes may be
If Replacing a Metters' Wind Motor Mill, the Wind
portion of the Tail, may be used, thus cutting down the
simple matter to apply to any Angle Tower. Slight
avoid any mistakes we supply with each Mill Head a
accurately marked.
Wheel in its complete form, also the Galvanised
cost of the Replacements very considerably.


*
The " Selfoil" Wind Mill
Having received such universal support with the Nuoil Self oiling Mill, and realising that the present-day
purchaser will be satisfied with only the best possible machinery, we now have to introduce Mills of smaller
capacity in the "Selfoil" Mill, fitted with all the advantages that are applied to the "Nuoil" Mill. The
"Selfoil" is built and fitted with Wind Wheels 6 and 7 feet in diameter, is perfectly self-contained, and
welve months' continuous working
from our Factory are far too
The "Selfoil" fully
established with
Galvanised Hood to
protect the workings
from Dust and Rain.
is carrying a supply of oil which will provide for at least
The advantages of the '' Selfoil'' Mill as supplied
numerous to set out here.
Suffice it to say we are
fully convinced from evi-
dence obtained during the
past season that —Ist, the
average person does not
enjoy climbing the ladder
of a Wind Mill Tower
to oil the working parts;
2nd, they prefer to pay the
slightly increased price to
; 3rd, the Metters' Mill will
obtain the "Selfoil";
give the least possible
trouble
The "Selfoil" can oe readiiy
applied to any make of
Angle Steel Tower. A Template for the purpose of
accurately marking the necessary bolt holes is supplied with
bolt holes is supplied with
the Mill if Tower of other Mill is to be used. If to be
applied to a Wood Tower, only a very short Stub Angle
Steel Tower is needed. Another strong point is if a Metters'
"Toff" Mill is being replaced, the Wind Wheel and Back
Galvanised Yane may be used, and thus make a considerable
and thus make a considerable
The "Selfoil" Mill is a Single Geared Self-Adjustlng Machine. Is fitted with Ball Bearing Turntable
and Galvanised Steel Wind Wheel.
THE MAIN CASTING is a solid one-piece Casting.
which has the working parts firmly and conveniently
established, and is also the oil tank.
THE GEAR WHEELS are arranged to give a maximum of power under light wind pressure, and working
continuously in a bath of oil will give long service. \ ,


J ROD GUIDES are securely
PITMAN is a strong heavy
The "Selfoil"
Mill with Hood
removed show-
ing the working
fastened in the Main Casting to
control the movements of the Pump Rod
Casting connecting from the Gear
is accurately turned to receive
is recessed to receive oil from
Oil Pump
THE OIL PUMP is a solid
Casting fitted with Steel Ball
Valves, and is operated by the
Travel of the Rod Head on its
downward motion working the
Steel Lever and forcing a
plentiful supply of oil to the top
of the Main Casting, where it is
distributed to the working parts.
is the same principle as
THE SPEED GOVERNOR
applied to the Wind Motor and "Nuoil," and can be
to give off different speeds simply by adjusting position of the Weight on the Bar,
TURNTABLE is fitted with a Ball Bearing, Running in a Hard Chilled Race, and supplied with Screw
down Grease Cup.
FURLING is a very secure and simple process. Chain connected to the Back Vane or Tail passes
through 2 Sheave Pulleys into the Pipe Barrel, and is then connected to the Furling Wire, which is con-
trolled by the Pull-out Lever at the bottom of the Mill Tower.
BRAKE. This Mill is fitted with a Lever Bar, which, when Furling the Mill, comes in contact with
the Tail Bone, and applies a Steel Brake Band to the external portion of Wheel Hub, making a most secure
Buffer or Brake.
From the very severe tests we have put this Mill to we have every confidence in recommending it to
our clients, and would ask you to write us for Complete Catalogue if any further particulars are required.


Descriptive Matter for Metters
Wind Mills and 1915 All Steel
Wind Motors.
After many years' experience with Metters'
Steel Wind Motors, we have concluded that
principle of the Working Gears cannot be
proved; consequently, in our 1915
Wind Motor we have maintained
the same position for the Pinion
Wheel and Gear Wheel, but have in
many ways improved the application
Wheel and Gear Wheel, but have in
many ways improved the application
of other parts. What we have now obtained is a
powerful, light running Wind Mill, with practically
indestructible bearings, so lubricated that a minimum
of attention will be required.
The following illus-
trations and descriptive
matter should convey a
good impression to any
person with or without
any previous experience
BLOCK No. 12
Metters' Patent All Steel
Wind Motor, 8 ft. wind
wheel, built upon a 30 ft.
Steel Tower.
of wind power. The
Mill will run for fully twelve months after being properly
supplied with solidified oil in the various grease cups without
requiring any further lubricant for the main castings.
Use Metters' Special Solidified Oil as supplied bv the maker
of the Mill.
Block 140 illustrates the Metters' 1915 All Steel Wind Motor for 8,
10, 12, and 14 ft. Wind Wheels, fitted with Weight Governor (A BC) and
Grease Cups.
During the years we have been employing the Weight Governor the
results have been most satisfactory, and we can thoroughly recommend
this method of adjusting and governing the Mill. The weight Ais applied
to the steel bar B in sections, which allows of adjustment being made
in accordance with the speed required and considered safe; also with due
consideration to the position in which the Wind Mill is being erected. The
steel bar B is fitted into the Cast Socket on Furl Lever, and is held in
position by the Set Screw C. The speed is controlled by adjusting the
Weight A on Bar B. The nearer the Weight is to the point C the less
speed the Wind Wheel will attain, and vice versa. With this attachment
there need be no racing or injurious speed. Therefore the life of a Mill
fitted with this Governor much exceeds any other.
THE BEARINGS as now supplied are practicably indestructible, being
of the Highest Quality Gun Metal carefully turned and fitted into the Main
Casting, and supplied with superfine solidified oil, which is deposited right
down on the Shafting, thus preventing any choking of the feed and avoiding
any waste. The Bearings are so housed that the Shafting throughout the
Mill Head is true to alignment.


any good
1. The first and most important amongst the m
points of the Metters' Mills is the MAIN CASTING-.
Block No. 157 illustrates the Main Casting for our 8, 10, 12,
sleeve
and 14 ft. Wind Mills. As will se been, the very long
Encasement for the Main Spindle supports the Weight of the
Wind Wheel over a very wide and extensive area. This Sleeve
Casting is continued right into the centre of the Bell-shaped
Hub of the Wind Wheel, bringing the centre of the Weight of
the Wind Wheel directly and fairly over the Bearing, doing
away entirely with any overhang and obviating any risk of
a bent shaft, while at the same time the bearing is comfortably
housed and gives a substantial and true line for the Cold
Rolled Steel Shafting. The Lower Sleeve, which carries the
shaft for the gear wheel, is also of considerable length, is
carefully machined to receive the long Gun Metal Bearings,
and support the Shaft true to line with the Main Shaft.
2. THE MAIN CASTING is fitted with four long Gun Metal
Bearings, as shown in Block 158. These are carefully machined
and fitted into the Main Casting to receive the Main Shaft
from Wind Wheel and the Shafting
of the Gear Wheel. This work is
very accurately set up in Special
Jigs, as it is most important that
all Shafts throughout the Mill Head
will be running true to line with
each other.
3. ALL BEARINGS are fitted
5. THE CRANK PIN is
BLOCK No. 15.
Metters' All Steel Wind Motor, 8 ft.
Wind Wheel, built upon a 20 ft. Steel
Tower. The angle diagonal "stays and
cross girths, in conjunction with the
heavy tower legs, give this tower great
strength. The construction of the
ladder tends to great safety in attend-
ing to the working parts of the Mill.
with Metal Grease Cups, and we g , L
advise as follows: When charging I ■
these Grease Cup with Solidified V :j—~X %
Oil, make quite sure that the Oil is 8 i \ \
feeding right down on to the f J I U
Shafting. Fill up the Cover of ' j H||
Grease Cup and screw it down until ffj|l
you are satisfied the grease has
attained the point required. You
may have to fill the Cup up several times before the Bearing is
properly filled. See Illustration, Block No. 156, Page 15, for position
of the various Grease Cups. Do not overlook any of these; they
require filling so seldom that, when required, do it properly.
4. THE PITMAN. The Pitman or Driving Bar is a Heavy
Casting which connects the Crank Pin to the Front Rocker Shaft, and
is formed to give extraordinary strength with a minimum of weight.
Provision is now made to lubricate the Crank Pin at the side of the
Pitman, and the Rocker Shaft on top.
into the large Gear Wheel
with a Steel Key to pre- 1
carrying the load. In
forming the Pin, it is well BLOCK No. 158. Showing Bearings.


S'(*^rT|2a3i
•%|F piMM
shouldered, and
should be driven
tight into its place of
bearing before screw-
ing on the Check Nut.
6. THE PUMP
ROD CONNECTION
to the Rocker Shaft BLOCK No. 29
is fitted with a lug to Rod Box.
hold the box in
position with the Rocker. The Pump Rod
Rod Box and is Check Nutted, thus making-
this method of connecting the Rod much
up into the Rod Box.
BLOCK No. 131. Swivel
lias a Heavy Welded Yoke, which passes through the
a most safe and secure connection. We have found
more effective than tapping the Rod and screwing it
7. THE PUMP ROD SWIVEL is standardised for our various sized Mills at the point
where the Swivel attaches to the Solid Rod.. We have enlarged the Hole in the Casting to
receive a Liner; this Liner fits nicely on to the Solid Rod and into the Swivel Casting. The
Rod has a long Thread at the Swivel end, on to which we first pass a Nut, then a Washer, and
follow with the Steel Liner. This is then passed through the Swivel, a Washer placed
over the Thread and Check Nuts on end of Rod. Screw Nuts up tight and you find a perfect
Swivel is formed; the two Washers are bearing on the liner, allowing the Swivel to
work free.
8. ROCKER AND FURL SHAFTS are of Cold Rolled Steel Shafting, cut to length and fitted
into position. The Back Shaft is drilled hollow at either end to receive Grease Cups, with
diagonal holes drilled to distribute the grease to the place of bearing.
f9. THE WIND WHEEL is constructed to give greater strength to support the wind
pressure, and so adjusted to give off the glar—
greatest possible power from the least lEfe, CSgL" /
BLOCTK No. w i nr | pressure. This is done by altering
Rod Box and the method of applying the Wind Sails or
Pump Rod
Vanes to the Inner and Outer Rings. The
Clips are rivetted on to the back of the Vanes, which
and Outer Rings,
in turn are rivetted on to the Inner
BLOCK No. 153.
Inner and Outer Sail Clips.
leaving the face of the Wheel perfectly free from
any obstructions to the wind; allowing the wind to
propels the Wheel
slide from the Vane as the energy
around.
which the Head of
10. THE PIPE BARREL upon
the Mill is placed and kept in position, is now fitted
with a Solid Wrought Iron Ring, which is sweated
on with great care without cutting any material
groove in the Pipe Barrel; thereby we retain the full
strength of the Pipe Tube. With our 10, 12, and
14 ft. Mills ave supply a Cast Tron Collar, which is
BLOCK No. 32.
Wind stfotor Head, complete with Wheel and Tail.


placed over the Pipe Barrel under the Wrought Iron Ring. This Cast Collar eventually rests upon the top
end of the Mill Tower Angles, thus relieving the Wrought Iron of the greater amount of its strain.
11. THE TURNTABLE is provided with a Loose Gun Metal Ring, which is placed upon the Turntable
by passing over the top end of the Pipe Barrel. This Ring is an intermediate between the Main Casting of
the Mill and the Wrought Iron Ring, and prevents the Mill from sticking in any one position.
BLOCK No. 30.
Showing Top of Tower.
12. THE FURL HANDLE is fitted with Steel Loop, to which the Galvanised
Furling Wire is attached; when the Furl Handle is pulled down the Back Vane should
be in a parallel line with the Wind Wheel. If the Wire stretches, lower the Furl
Handle slightly.
]3. THE TOWER ANGLES are dove-tailed at the junction of the Pipe Barrel.
We have four Heavy Studs or Cross Bolts about twelve inches from the top of Tower
to bind the Angles together; further, at the extreme top a Heavy Clamp, and at the
Base Block four Bolts passing through the Base Casting and through the Angles
forming the Tower Legs. When these are all drawn tight the Mill Tower is perfectly
locked, and will not sway.
14. OUR TOWERS are built of the very best Square Root Mild Steel Angles,
put together in 10 ft. sections, for convenience of packing, with Heavy Cross Stays
and Girths. In this matter of Towers we maintain we have the strongest and
most serviceable structure on the market. We guarantee our, Mill Towers to
stand any wind shock it may receive if put up according to our instructions
given.
15. THE GALVANISING OF MILL TOWERS. We have discontinued this
practice for many years, as we maintain, for the purpose of strength, a painted Mild
Steel Angle properly coated with oxide paint will carry greater weight and responsi-
bility than Galvanised Angles. The process of submerging Steel Angles into Molten
Metal, for the purpose of coating the Angle with Galvanising Metal, so crystallises the Angles that they
become too brittle. (You will not find Galvanised Girders being introduced into bridge buildings or any
purpose where weight is to be supported.) But if the locality requires Galvanised Towers, we can supply
at increased cost if short notice is given us.
16. ALL SHAFTING throughout the Mill is carefully adjusted so that each is running in a parallel line
with its fellow Shaft.
17. AS ALL PARTS OF OUR MILLS ARE KEPT IN STOCK, there would be no delay in replacing
Fittings; also you would not require the assistance of an expert for the purpose of putting in replacement
parts. In ordering any Spares please state accurately the Size and Pattern of
Mill and Hate when supplied.
18. OUR CASTINGS are not hard and brittle as in many machines. We
have a special mixture, which allows the Casting to carry a very great responsi
bility. We are manufacturers anxious to give you the best possible, and
the best possible, and,
if not good enough for you, it is of no value to us. We hope to
continue supplying your Wind Mill requirements for all time, and will
guarantee to give you replacements for any of our manufactured Mills you
may have in use.
19. LUBRICATION. This is perhaps the most important consideration in
a Wind Mill plant, as, owing to the working parts being much above the
ground level, faults are frequently not detected until after quite a lot of
BLOCK No. 125.
Metter's Special Lubricant.


Q n t I T M tv': ; K Ci l "i R N r
, v 8
7^
WEIE3 E3 BROS, "T V . L
WINDMILL MANUFACTURER
METTERS LIMITED
ADELAIDE, SYDNEY, AND PERTH.
damage has occurred. We have made quite
a number of very severe tests before deciding
to adopt the present method. Our conclusions
are that undoubtedly the Non-Fluid or
Solidified Oil has a very great advantage
over liquid oil when applied to the Wind
Motor Mill. We are now fitting up our Mills
entirely with Metal Grease Cups for the
purpose of using Solidified Oil, which we are
supplying in a handy canister. We advise
you to use Metters' Specially Selected
Lubricant, as we have proved this to be the
right thing to use on Wind Mills.
Block 156 illustrates clearly the position
for the various Lubricators. No. 1 supplies
the Bearing for the end of Wind Wheel
Spindles. Nos. 3 and 4, Gear Wheel Spindle.
No. 2 is fitted with a short piece of j-in.
Pipe so that the Lubricator is more
accessible. Nos. 5 and 7 apply to the Pitman.
No. 8, Bod Box Casting. Nos. 6 and 9, to
the Back Bocker Shaft, and No. 10 to the
Turntable. The Governor Bar is fitted into
the Furl Lever Casting at point No. 11, and
held in position with a Steel Set Screw.
We now claim to have the following
advantages:—
The Lubrication is Good,
There is no Waste.
Less Time Taken Up in Oiling.
No Dirty Mill, Tower, and Platform.
No Dust or Grit Entering the Bearings.
We ask you to go carefully into the detail
which we have here stated, when we feel sure
you will recognise we have a good grip of the
requirements of a Wind Mill plant, and have
been able to meet these requirements in our
Wind Motor.
BLOCK No. 156.
Showing all Lubricators, as supplied for 10, 12, and 14 ft.
Wind Motors. Eight ft. Mills are supplied with 8 Lubricators
only.
We have decided not to publish Testimonials, and would be pleased to give you reference to someone
near you who has our Mills in use.
Metters' Mills have been on the market for over 30 years, and in those districts which require Mills in
continuous operation Metters' Mills are in the greatest favor.
If you know of a Metters' Mill which has not been a success, we would esteem it a favor if you will
advise us of same. We are quite confident we can overcome the trouble.


(fl 'L.
ljL|i
M XKK-'V:
JIM/ vljfc/V
|5
The demand for a serviceable, up-to-date Wind
THE LITTLE TOFF Mill of smaller power than our Wind Motor was
WIND MILL, ALL instrumental in bringing about the introduction of
STEEL. our Little Toff All Steel Wind Mill, fitted with a
6 ft. Wind Wheel. We have been so exceedingly
successful with this Mill that we have now been induced to manufacture the
same type for larger Wind Wheels. Our list now includes 6, 7, 8, and 9 ft.
diameter wheels, which, during the past years, have been most readily
accepted owing to the reputation of the 6 ft. Mill. We want you to
realise that with this Mill we are offering a particularly powerful Mill
g for the least possible cost, and would ask you to compare it with
/ any other Mill for
;,-2 value.
■, -,
The Little Toff is
specially adapted for
n
pumping from dams,
wells, or bores. Is
light in construc-
tion, but strong and
i
serviceable.
is
fi n t
ifl »
-IWv|
Block 114 illustrates the
working parts of the Little
Toff Wind Mill.
sM/T 11
llJl 8 We can supply this type
/ J] J 1.10 of Wind Mill with 6, 7, 8,
|MU''| and 9 ft. Wind Wheels. In
■■■ all sizes the type and applica-
tion are the same, except
fij rl--'*" with the Spokes and Sails
''- SUfePi f for the various size Wheels,
■flfl which are as follows, viz.:
■ 1 ilia 6 and 7 ft. diameter Wheels
aB» mi I ' I are fitted with 4 Spokes of
JEPSI fei 7-W 1 • 1 ft
;• ' 2 fc ) i i,„w Angle Steel, to which attach
. 1 f fc f, 16 Wind Sails. The 8 ft.
w .W Wheel has 4 Spokes and 12
BLOCK No. 114. wind gails< The 9 ft> W lieel
Working Parts of Toff , _ Q ,
,JJ has 5 Spokes and 15 Wind
Sails. To assemble the Wind
Wheel Bolt the Steel Angle Spokes to the inside of the
Cast Hub, then attach the Wheel sections.
BLOCK No. 132. f| }
Toff 8 x 20 Wind / 1 I
Mill. I 1
f W'""
i ' /
111
Jr B
The Hub is a Strong Casing designed to give exceptional
stability. The Main Shaft of the Mill is keyed into the
Hub, passing through the Main Casting and supported by
a Long Arm.
The Main Spindie
is running in a White
passing through the Long Sleeve
Metal Fixed Bearing at either end.
• ir f i'
■ v i ■
The Sleeve Casting
Metal Grease Cups
has two holes drilled to receive
(3 and 4). The Pinion Wheel is
4
-


keyed on to the Shaft and prevented from working loose by
a Back Nut which screws on to the Shaft the reverse way
to the travel of the Pinion Wheel. The Pinion travels
3 l-7th revolutions to the Large Gear Wheel's one revolution,
thus gaining great lifting power.
The Pitman or Driving Bar is of Special Cast
with Cast Shank fitted into Large Gear Wheel and pi
with Special Oiling Facilities at Nos. 2 and 1.
Metal
provided
The Upper Portion of Pitman or Driving Bar is fitted
on to the Cross Head, which has a Cast Shaft carefully
turned and fitted to the Driving Bar, having a Washer and
Split Pin passing through the Shaft to keep the Driving Bar
in place.
The Top of Pitman or Driving Bar is fitted with Metal Grease Cup
No. 1. The Cross Head is practically the Pump Rod Head, and is
provided with Flanges, allowing the Block to travel upward between the
Steel Guide Bar and the Upright Arm of the Main Casting. The faces
of these Flanges are wide to avoid any pinching in the upward or down
upward or down
stroke of the Pump Rod.
The Cross Rod Head connects to the Mild Steel Tube passing
through the Main Casting, and joins the Pump Rod, which has a Swivel
attachment at the bottom, to which the Flat Pump Rod is attached.
The Tail or Back Vane is placed in position by passing the end of the
Tail Pipe through the Hinge Piece on Main Casting and securing by a
Bolt, then attach the Long Iron Link with loop at one end over the top
Cast Hinge Bracket. To place this in position, the Bolt holding the
Round Casting on to the Hinge Bracket must be removed and the Washer
taken off to admit the Loop on Link.
The Furling of the Back Vane or Tail throws the Mill out of action
The attachments for furling in the Toff: A Length of Chain is
attached to the Tail Pipe, passed through the two Iron Sheaves or
Pulleys, and then down through the Pump Rod Tube, and connects to
the Furl Wire passed through the round hole in Cross Bar; the Furl Wire
connects to the Swivel attached to the Loop on Furl Handle. This Furl
Handle should be so placed that it is easy of access, and when the Lever
is pulled down should lock under, placing just sufficient strain on the
BLOCK No. 133.
Wire to bring the Wheel and Tail in a parallel line with each other. Be 3 T ° ff MiU with 20 Tower
careful not to put more than this requisite strain upon the Wire. When
the Wire stretches, as it will do after being in use for a little while,
slacken off the Clamp of Furl Handle and slide it down far enough to
obtain the proper strain.
The Cross Guide and Rod Connections (see Block 114). 9 is the Cross Guide, which is held in position
by four Bolts, passing head inward and through the Tower Legs, nutted outside the Tower. 10 is the Swivel
Casting. 7is the Cast Rod Connection. These two Castings are connected by two Bars of Flat Steel


Metters' Direct Acting /''■%• 4| 0
Wind Mill "The Flirt" <
An All Steel Wind Mill, fitted with a Three-legged
Angle Steel Tower and a 5 ft. Wind Wheel. There •jWrfe£s*>-
.being a fairly strong demand for a small Mill not
geared, to pump from very shallow supplies such as p*>msj ' 'PSJj Vlf* v t v ,
from underground tanks, darns, or wells where the r I
water is near to the surface, our engineers have ; J I 19H
perfected "The Flirt" Direct Acting Mill, which has -.... \
been carefully tested, and we now have pleasure in f~T m:i - yki v\ \
offering "The Flirt" for sale at a very low price. i 1 W ' ,
We have every confidence in offering this small Mill! \ jMlr' I milk \ fes*
Being a Direct Acting Mill it should not be asked ' 1| "jr"" (
o do the work of a Geared Mill, which may be geared \.
The Wind Wheel is 5 ft. in diameter, formed of I IS
galvanised Steel Sheets with Angle Steel Spokes and 8HBH8(llp
The Tower is formed of Angle Steel with Girths and
Diagonal Stays of Angle Steel, is a Three-legged I 81 "FLIRT" WIND
Tower, and can be supplied to any reasonable height. MILL
punched as shown in the Block 114. The purpose of the extra holes is to permit of the Pump Rod adjust-
ment without such careful measurements being taken as with ordinary connections. All Bolts here are fitted
Pull details for the assembling and erection of the
Toff Wind Mill will be found further on.
with Check Nuts and must be screwed up tight
An All Steel Wind Mill, fitted with a Three-legged
Angle Steel Tower and a 5 ft. Wind Wheel. There
.being a fairly strong demand for a small Mill not
geared, to pump from very shallow supplies such as
from underground tanks, dams, or wells where the
water is near to the surface, our engineers have
perfected "The Flirt" Direct Acting Mill, which has
been carefully tested, and we now have pleasure in
offering "The Flirt" for sale at a very low price.
We have every confidence in offering this small Mill
for the requirements stated above.
The Tail or Back Vane is of Galvanised Steel Sheet
mounted on Tubular Tail Bone, swung on Hinged


Casting fitted with Flat Steel Buffer Spring, and has
a Long Coil Spring attached to govern the speed of
the Wind Wheel.
The Working Head is so constructed to give a crank
movement of 2\ in. to the Pump Bod. Castings are
strong and can be easily replaced. The Main Casting
of Head is applied to a Long Pipe Barrel, which passes
through to Top Tower, Cap Casting, through the Base
Block Casting, and is secured under the Base Block
by a Cast Bing, thus allowing the Mill Head to turn
freely on its Turntable and work without any rocking
motion.
The Main Pump Rod is formed of f in. Tube, which
passes through the Pipe Barrel and connects to the
Pump Rod Head, where it forms a Swivel Joint. At
the bottom of the Main Pump Rod a Casting is fitted
to receive the ordinary Pump Rod.
The Wind Wheel Shaft is of Polished Steel, and
is lubricated with Screw-down Cast Grease Cups.
The Furl Wire is passed up through Guide Bar and
connected to the Furl Chain, which passes through the
Tubular Pump Rod over Sheave Wheel and connects
to the Pipe Tail Bone. This Wire is operated by the
Hand Lever in Tower, which is placed 3 ft. or so above
ground level.
The principle of the Mill, put in a concise form, is:
The Wind Wheel is driving a Small Cast Crank fitted
with Pin, which has a Cast Pitman connecting with
the Pump Rod Head, thus giving a stroke of 2f in. to
the Pump Rod. The Pump Rod Head is fitted with a
Guide Bar, thus compelling the Pump Rod to travel
in a perfectly perpendicular line. Lubricators for
grease are fitted to either end of Pitman.
Remember, in arranging for a Mill plant do not overload its power, "iou want your Mill to run with
the very lightest wind pressure.
The opinion has been expressed frequently to us that our Mills, judging by the finish and general
appearances, must be costly, but a comparison of our prices with those of other makers will prove our
charges are lower, even though the standard of our Mills is of the very highest.
Metters' Mills have been erected over all the States, and are working some of the deepest holes, as well
as shallow holes, and our very strongest point is we prefer to send you to a man who is using our Mills for
reference, as we make the very best friends of all our clients. There are many unique points about Metters
Mills. We have kept them up-to-date by applying all modern ideas and employing most expert engineers
and pattern makers, and can assure the public of the very best results.
Having now described the various pattern Mills of our manufacture, and before entering into
REMARKS. details as to power and capacity, we wish to impress you with the fact that we have special-
ised in Wind Mills, and made this department of our Factory one of the most important.
We have expert knowledge in all departments of this trade, and have every confidence in our ability to give
you the Best Article. We have a most efficient plant, and employ well-trained men for the moulding and
machining of the various parts, all of which are made from perfect patterns, thus overcoming any difficulty
to give you well-fitting replacements from time to time at short notice.
Our Wind Mills are erected all over the States, and though dozens of new makes have come into the
field of competition, we are ever increasing our sales, because we have kept ahead of all others with our
quality.
We can give valuable advice with regard to well boring, and can recommend good workmen, who
undertake this class of work in most districts. :i ! •!
We have had a very wide experience covering water supplies from all sources, and are prepared to give
you the benefit of this experience.


PUMPS
We are unable in our limited space to give a complete list of the pumps we stock; here we are only listing
our most popular patterns for wind power.
Select your pump carefully, bearing in mind that the pump is quite as responsible for raising the water as is
the Wind Mill. A few useful hints will not be amiss here.
The practical limit of suction is 25 ft.; but to obtain the best results the pump should be placed as near the
water line as possible. Do not reduce the size of suction pipe; keep to the maker's sizes.
Also we advise retaining the set size for delivery pipe, should it be decided (for the purpose of keeping
down the cost) to reduce the delivery; never reduce beyond the next smaller size, and then only after
making sure you have sufficient power to contend with the greater friction.
We advise introducing an air chamber if any reduction is made in the pipe, and also when there is any
material distance to discharge the water from the pump.
When packing the stuffing box of a pump, use prepared packing; dry packing is of no value.
Select the pump according to the power you have available, with due consideration to the water supply.
Use for preference the Cylinder Type of Pump, which gives greater supply and requires less power.
If ordering a pump for replacement, state clearly the nature of your present pump rod, so that suitable
connections may be given with pump.
Metters' Pumps are heavily built and an guaranteed to give the very best results
If what you want is not shown, write to us explaining what you want, and we will
shown, write to us explaining what you want, and we will fix you up.
No. 1 All
Brass Well Force Pump
All Brass Well Force Pump.—Heavy Cast Brass throughout with inspection
cleaning doors to the retaining bottom valve and to the delivery valve. Solid brass
plunger rod with brass plunger castings, mushroom valve, and special leather. The
seating of both retaining valves is machined, thus assuring the pump against losing
its priming.
Brass gland packing box
compression bolts with brass
for plunger rod, well packed and controlled by two
nuts.
Specially adapted for deep
wells or a long delivery pipe.
Sizes Stocked.
Internal Diameter Length of
of Barrel.
Stroke. Size of Pipe. Weight, each.
3 in - 12 in. If in. 49 lbs.
3f in. 12 in. 2 in. 55 lbs.
4 in - 12 in. 2 in. 62 lbs.
No. 1


ry. t
MANUFACTURE
A i L, L
W ) iN
METTERS LIMITED ADELAIDE, SYDNEY, AND PERTH.
No. 2 Brass Well Pump
A very heavy Cast Brass Cylinder, built with brass top and bottom castings held
together with iron bolts with brass nuts. Solid brass plunger rod and brass plunger
castings with mushroom valve and special leather, cylinder fitted with inspection door
for bottom valve, and top casting supplied with heavy brass flange, having bolted to
same a twin brass flange tapped to receive the delivery pipe. Special features of
this pump are the water is discharged from the barrel with very little agitation, and
the packing leathers can be used a great many years without requiring replacing.
Brass gland packing box for plunger rod well packed and controlled with two
bolts brass nutted.
Sizes Stocked.
Internal Diameter Length of
of Barrel. Stroke. Size of Pipe. Weight, each.
3 in. 12 in. in. 37 lbs.
3i in. 12 in. 2 in. 45 lbs.
4 in. 12 in. 2 in. 50 lbs.
5 in. 12 in. 2| in. 86 lbs.
6 in. 12 in. 3 in. 106 lbs.
Extra heavy pump, suitable for hard service.
No. 4 Seamless Drawn Brass Cylinder
With Bolted Brass Top and Bottom Castings
Seamless drawn Brass Cylinder, fitted with brass top and bottom castings,
CfaJiiWk held together with heavy iron bolts brass nutted, which permits of it being
" taken apart by using an ordinapy spanner.
N 0 2 The top and bottom castings are specially machined to receive the leather
packing. Iron plunger rods with cast brass plunger fitted with mushroom
valve and special leather.
Size of Pumps Stocked.
Internal Diameter Length of
of Barrel. Barrel. Size of Pipe. Length of Stroke. Weight.
2f in. 12| in. 11, in. 9 in. 12 lbs.
3 in. 141 in. li in. in. 16 lbs.
in. 15 in. 2 in. .12 in. 20 lbs.
4 in. 15 in. 2 in. 12 in. 23 lbs.
5 in. 19 in. 2| in. 14 in. 44 lbs.
6 in. 19 in. 3 in. 15 in. 67 lbs.
Extras—Cylinders tapped other than above. Brass Piston Bods, if required.
No. 4.j
This cylinder is especially adapted
than is obtained from pumps, which are
Internal Diameter Length of
of Barrel. Barrel.
3 in. 151 in.
3| in. 15J in.
4 in. 15| in.
5 in. 18 in.
6 in. in.
Extras —Brass Piston Bods, if
for deep wells, and will give a greater supply of water-
fitted with packing glands to the plunger.
Sizes Stocked.
Length of Stroke. Size of Pipe. Weight.
10 in. 1| in. 24 lbs.
10 in. 2 in. 30 lbs.
11 in. 2 in. 35 lbs.
12 in. 2i in. 57 lbs.
12 in. 3 in. 75 lb.
required. Cylinders tapped other than above.
No. 4a Cast Brass Cylinder
Top and bottom and barrel are all heavy brass castings, held together with iron side bolts,
brass nutted; heavy iron plunger rod with brass plunger, mushroom valve, special leather. The
top and bottom castings have a machined groove in which is placed the leather packing to
receive the edge of barrel, which prevents the packing from blowing out under heavy pressure.
The barrel is provided with cleaning door.
No. 4a


1^1
'
No. 2a Brass Well Pump
Solid drawn brass barrel, top and bottom castings are brass,
built with iron side bolts brass nutted. Brass plunger rod and
plunger with mushroom valve and best quality leather; screw-down
brass stuffing box for plunger rod; brass flange bolted to top of
pump, tapped to receive the delivery pipe.
This pump is especially adapted for small plants when force
pumps are required, or for long delivery pipes when small pipe is
being used.
Made up in one size only.
Internal Diameter Length of
Size of
Pipe.
11 in.
Weight,
each.
of Barrel.
Stroke.
2$ in. 12 in.
22 lbs.
No. 3 Brass Well Pump
This Block represents the No. 3 Brass Well Pump. Solid
drawn brass barrel, brass plunger rod and plunger castings,
mushroom valve, special leather, built with brass top and bottom
castings held together with iron side bolts brass nutted. Brass
gland packing box for plunger rod, well packed and controlled with
two bolts brass nutted. Top casting tapped with male thread to
connect up pipe delivery. The top and bottom castings have a
specially machined groove in which is placed the leather packing
to receive the edge of the cylinder, which prevents the packing
from being blown out under pressure.
No. 3
No. 2a
One size only stocked.
Internal Diameter Length of
Size of
Pipe.
Weight,
each.
of Barrel. Stroke.
12 in.
in.
24 lbs.
A low-priced, good selling Pump.


Sizes
Stocked.
Internal Diameter
of Barrel.
Length of
Barrel.
Length of Size of
Stroke. Pipe.
Weight,
each.
;
i
i 1
I
■ #
i J
-
2§ in.
18 in.
12 in.
14 in.
13 lbs.
2f in.
3 in.
3J in.
18 in.
18 in.
18 in.
12 in.
12 in.
12 in.
H in.
2 in.
2 in.
17 lbs.
19 lbs.
22 lbs.
i .#
4 in.
18 in.
12 in.
2 in.
26 lbs.
1
i
1
5 in.
20 in.
12 in.
2\ in.
45 lbs.
|
Extras —Brass
plunger rod
if required
Cylinders tapped
j
other than above.
i
1
If tapped for any other size, special notice must be given.
Can be supplied with two plunger leathers or with two com-
No. 5
plete plunger valves and leathers at extra
cost,
No. 5. All Brass Flush Cap Cylinder
Solid drawn brass tube barrel with brass top and bottom caps screwed to barrel, brass plunger castings,
mushroom valves, with special leather. The bottom or retaining valve of this pump is also mushroom pattern
with caged follower. The inlet valve openings are arranged as full as possible to allow free ingress of
water supply. Steel plunger rods.
This cylinder being exceedingly compact in area is specially adaptable to bored wells, also being non-
corrosive metal, may be used in wells having water of indifferent quality.
No. 6 All Brass Draw Plunger Bore Pump
Internal Diameter Length of
of Barrel. Barrel.
Weight,
each.
Size of
Pipe.
Length of
Stroke.
12 in.
12 in.
12 in.
19 lbs.
24 lbs.
35 lbs.
2 in.
2£ in.
3 in.
If in. 18 in.
2| in. 18 in.
2f in. 18 in.
Can supply with two Leathers or with two complete Plunger Valves and
Leathers at extra cost.
Solid drawn brass barrel, brass plunger rod and plunger castings, mushroom
bronze valve with special leathers. The bottom retaining valve can be withdrawn
a with the special picking-up tool supplied with tne pump. Special provision is made
to allow full flow of water into barrel of pump by increasing the internal diameter
of the bottom casting as applied to this barrel. To enable the withdrawal of plunger
and bottom valve, pipe slightly larger in diameter than the internal diameter of
I barrel is applied.
\Mi Sizes Stocked.
No. 6


I
3m
Specii
Hand
No. 11. Brass Cylinder Force Pump
Solid drawn brass tube barrel; brass piston rod and plunger with mushroom
valve, machined and polished seat. Top and bottom castings are iron with brass
seating to top and bottom valves, and are tapped to receive the barrel, and fitted
with cleaning door.
At present only one size is available, but other sizes will be listed shortly.
No. 11a. All Brass Pump
Built to the same specification as No. 11. With Brass top and bottom castings
throughout.
Size Stocked.
Internal Diameter Length of Length of Tapped for Weight
of Barrel. Barrel. Stroke. Pipe. each.
3 in. 14 in. 12 in. \\ in. 33 lbs
Special
Hand F
.1 Attachments for
Power to be
Applied to
Ordinary
Cylinders
No. 11
This block represents Nos. 1, 2, and 3 attachments
to be applied to ordinary cylinders and operated by
hand power.
No. 1 is constructed to raise the water to the
surface only; has a cast-iron collar tapped for in.
pipe. To this the bracket and handle are applied and
held in position with a steel set screw. The rod con-
nection on handle is tapped to connect up with the
ordinary pump rod.
No. 2 is constructed to raise water overhead, is
fitted with a short east cylinder tapped for 1£ in. pipe,
to which the bracket and handle apply, and is held
in place with a steel set-screw. The cylinder is turned
and fitted with inverted bucket leather oh plunger
rod, which on the downward travel of the plunger
causes the water to be forced to the higher level.
No. 3 is constructed to raise water overhead, and
can be applied to either greater capacity pumps or
to raise from greater depths, as it is furnished with
longer and adjustable fulcrum, can be adjusted to
work in., 7 in., or 9 in. stroke; has a cast flange
tapped for 2 in. pipe, to which the cast bracket and
handle are attached with bolts. A polished plunger
rod with brass packing nut with a long hand lever
make this a most complete attachment.
Prices quoted do not include any fittings under the
arrow.
No. 2
No. 1
No. 3


I
CJ
O
2\ 2J 3 Si 4 5 6
Length of
Stroke, Gallons per Hour,
inches.
4 | 70 | 90 120 160 220 280 450 650
6 { 105 | 135 180 240 330 420 675 975
8 I 140 | 180 | 240 340 440 560 900 • 1300
- v
10 175 225 j 300 400 550 700 1125 1625
12 210 270 360 480 660 840 1350 1950
So that you may more readily realise the necessity
VARIOUS PUMP RODS AND METHODS of advising us the class of pump rod you require,
OF CONNECTING UP. we are illustrating here some of the most popular-
rods in use.
BLOCK No. 148
Different Types of Pump Rods.
The following table will give
CAPACITY OF PUMPS, barrels. The average speed
this speed:—
A. Solid Iron Rod, in., with tapped brass
connections.
B. Solid Iron Rod, f in., with tapped brass
connections.
C. Galvanised Tube Rod, \ in., with tapped
brass connections.
D. Galvanised Tube Rod, f in., with tapped
brass connections.
E. Galvanised Tube Rod, I in., with tapped
brass connections.
E. Mild Steel Tube Rod, flattened at ends
and bolted together with hexagon headed
bolts and nuts. Sizes usually or f tube.
Always measure tube rod, the internal
diameter.
G. Wood Rod, usually in. or 2 in. square,
jointed with iron plates on two sides, and
bolts passing through same.
Any other sizes can be supplied, but the
above are the most usual.
In quoting prices per foot for pump rod
we include the necessary connections
an accurate idea of the capacity of various pump
of a pump applied to a Wind Mill would be about
30 strokes per minute. We have estimated the capacities as detailed below at
Size of Pump
in inches. 2
Internal Diameter of Barrel.


f
In quoting the capacity of our Wind Mills, as set out below, we wish to
CAPACITY OF METTERS' state this chart is not to be taken as the maximum supply to be obtained
STEEL WIND MILLS. from the given depth, but as a guide to assist in deciding the size mill that
should be employed for specified supply. In every particular quantity stated
we will guarantee that the capacity is under-estimated; it is wise at all times to have a reserve of power,
as it so frequently happens during the dry months of the year several days of calm weather are experienced.
A good strong position with regard to water supply is to arrange so that you have storage capacity for three
or four days' consumption. All the supplies stated below are estimated for stock purposes, and are
guaranteed.
METTERS' WIND MILLS will give the following supply of water under the stated conditions: —
BLOCK No. 74
This cut illustrates a 12 ft. Wind Mill, built upon
a 30 ft. steel tower, raising water from a bored hole
following down a timbered shaft, and is delivering
into a 2,000 gallon tank placed upon a 10 ft. steel
stand. This mill is raising over 1,000 gallons per
hour. The purchaser of this plant has since placed
orders with us for his station properties.
To obtain the daily capacity of any of the
above outfits, we consider a fair estimate of
the working time for a mill is ten hours out
of every 24 hours. We have mills working
on bores raising water from a depth of 425
ft., giving a regular supply of water. Our
purpose here is more particularly to treat
with the every-day requirements, and not to
go into detail for the extraordinary require-
ments, which would make the matter con-
tained tedious and of apparent less value to
the average enquiry.
q. J | Depth Capacity
Size of Mill -p lze (Pattern of Pump'of Well, perhour,
ump Feet. Gallons
6 Toff or | 3J | No. 4or 5
Selfoil l
6 3 No. 4 or 5
6 .. 3 No. 4 or 5
6 2| No. 4 or 5
7 .. 3 No. 4 or 5
7 21 No. 4 or 5
8 j 3J No. 4 or 5
8 .. I 3 No. 4or 5
9 ~ I 4 No. 4 or 5
9 ~ I 3J No. 4or 5
9 ~ | 3 | No. 4 or 5
BWindMotor| 3 I No. 4or 5
or Nuoil I
8 „ 13 I No. 1 or 2
8 ~ I 3 | No. lor 2
8 ~ I 3 I No. 4 or 5
0 ) 4 | No. lor 2
0 | 4 ) No. lor 2
0 .. 3| | No. lor 2
0 ~ I 3J j No. 4or 5
2 I 6 | No. 4or 5
2 5 No- 2
2 ~ | 4 I No. lor 2
2 ~ ! 3h \ No. 1 or 2
2 .. I 31 j No. 4or 5
2 | 3 | , No. lor 2
30 300
50 240
75 150
30 700
50 640
75 420
100 340
25 1950
50 1150
75 640
100 475
150 320
200 240


mr. . I
5.4
n ''* ; V 4il2l"^
■ X >., i ,, w w. 4»J>— .• ' *v.U< - ' ~
'•'"'* ' ' ■ " v < v, - —-
» , . , . ■
Size of Mill
C. n v
3 A [
METTERS LIMITED
ADELAIDE. SYDNEY, AND PERTH.
HEIGHT FOR STORAGE TANKS WHEN
USING A CYLINDER PUMP.
show here the greatest height it is possible to raise
BLOCK No. 65
Wind Mills supplied and erected at "Tenderten," Woodville.
for the purpose of irrigating lucern. These Mills are pumping
from bored wells, and are delivering an average supply of 800
gallons per hour each, into storage tanks, from which the
distribution takes place by Rainmaker Sprinklers. The result
is a very fine crop of lucern has been grown.
If it is required to use a Cylinder Pump and force
There is a limit for height of storage tanks when
using a cylinder pump with open splash pipe.
As previously stated, we strongly recommend the
cylinder pumps to give the best results. We wish to
water above the ground level for delivery into a
storage tank with any given tower to the
wind mill —when using a cylinder pump.
The usual method of connecting up the de-
livery pipe from a well to the tank, in con-
junction with a cylinder pump, is as follows:
The delivery pipe is a vertical column of
pipe from the pump rising to a sufficient height
to allow the water to gravitate into the tank;
a tee piece is screwed on to this delivery
column, and a pipe of sufficient length to de-
liver into the tank; above the tee is a short
length of pipe, say, 2 ft. long. This forms a
head of water, and is sufficient to prevent the
water spraying over the pipe, and must not
interfere with the mill swivel on pump rod.
It is owing to this construction that the height
to top of tank is restricted to the following:—
Height of Greatest Height
Tower f°r del. very
into Tank
Size of Mill
6 ft. Toff, Doris
or Selfoil
20 ft. ! 11 ft. 6 in.
8 ft. Wind Motor
or Nuoil 20 13 ft - 6 in -
10 ft. Wind Motor j 2Q ; 12
or Nuod
12 ft. Wind Motor 20 ft , n ft _ 3in
or Nuoil j |
14 ft. Wind Motor 20 ft. 11 ft. 3 in
or Nuoil | i
Each extra 10 ft. of , tower will add
9 ft. to the above heights. If arrange-
ments are being made for an auto-
matic stopping gear to stop the mill
when the storage tank is full, the
above heights will be reduced by 18
inches.
BLOCK No. 119.
Block of Stuffing Box and Rod.
water to a higher elevation than is
stated in our foregoing matter, this can be done by introducing a Stuffing Box, as shown Block
119. Thus —by placing a tee piece of suitable size on the delivery pipe, screw the stuffing box
into the tee, and connect up the pump rod and mill rod to the brass rod which enters the stuffing
box. We can supply this fitting for all size Piping.


1 ' *
.
Is the most reliable automatic stopping gear obtainable. Works like an
METTERS' SELF ACTING alarm clock. The principle of the gear will be understood by perusing the
RATCHET GEAR. accompanying diagram. But so that no misunderstanding should arise, we
accompanying diagram. But so that no misunderstanding should arise, we
are giving particulars of how and under what conditions the gear should be
worked. The most important fact is, the pump rod must not be allowed to revolve. Arrangement must be
made to allow the mill head swivel to occur above the connections to the auto gear.
First we must have the Mill and Tower fixed ready for connecting up the
Automatic Gear. The mode of attaching is as follows, viz.: We provide a short
piece of flat steel with two holes punched at either end (for all mills except the
Toff). This applies to the swivel of Mill Head, and passes down through the Heavy
Cast Anti Swivel Bar which is placed just under the ordinary Mill Swivel; holes are
punched in our ordinary Stock Mill Tower Angles to receive two short pieces Angle
Steel which are to be bolted outside of Tower Angles. The Cast Anti Swivel Bar
is placed 011 these Angles and held in position with two Hook Bolts passing through
oblong holes in the Cast Bar. Make certain that this Flat Bar is in a plumb vertical
line with the Pump Plunger. The pipe delivery from Pump being in position (see
Block) and Tank fixed, we apply the Ratchet Gear by clamping securely to the Pipe.
Fix Wrought Iron Brackets to Tank and attach Float, having the Wire connecting
these Levers preferably in a parallel line and the top of Float about four inches
below the top edge of Tank, with the Lever B raised to near its highest point of
travel and the Lever H right down to its lowest point of travel. Now examine the
Drum of Ratchet; you find it notched to a certain point, where there is then a
blank space. The Pawl attached to Lever D operates this Drum and winds up each
stroke about the travel of one tooth only. Connect the Chain of Winding Drum
one tooth only. Connect the Chain of Winding Drum
to the Furl Wire of Mill Head, and wind up by
working Lever D. When the Wind Wheel and Tail
are pulled into a parallel line with each other
the Pawl should be in contact with the plain portion
of the Rachet Drum already referred to. Now con-
nect Wire from Arm D to the Flat Piece of Pump
Rod below the Swivel as shown. The operation
of the Rachet Gear is, when water is taken from
the Tank, Float falls and raises the Ball Weighted
Lever —thus releasing the Drum from the Pawl
Clutch and allowing the Wind Wheel to swing into
a working position.
Should the Tank be placed any distance from the
Mill, Support the Wire connecting the Float on
(preferably) Sheave Wheels and prevent any sag
in the Wire.
If the Tank is on a Stand which raises the top
, edge of Tank to a point above what may be served
with the open delivery Pipe, we can supply suitable
' Connections making a Wrought Lever Connection
which applies to the timber forming the Deck of
Tank Stand, then up to the Float Lever. This
particular Lever would be a straight Bar Lever.
When ordering to apply for our Toff Mill, the
Anti Swivel Cast Bar is not supplied, as the Toff
is fitted with Special Anti Swivel Rod Connections.
If ordering an Automatic Gear for a Mill that you
have already established, should the Mill be one
of our make please state the pattern of Mill and
correct Anti Swivel Fittings. We recommend size
BLOCK No. 118
Auto Gear.
the height of Tower, so that we can send the correct Anti Swivel Fittings. We r
1 for Mills with Wind Wheels 6,. 7, and 8 ft. diameter, and No. 2 for the larger sizes.
There are a number of other ideas for stopping a Wind Mill, but for general purposes we find the
Ratchet Gear the better purchase.
This illustration is a photographic view of Metters' Steel Stand, 10 ft. high, with Jarrah
TANK STANDS. Deck and a 2,000 gallon Tank in position. We can supply these stands to _ carry up to
5,000 gallon capacity tanks, and to any reasonable height. We do find there is economy in
arranging, say, two separate stands with 2,000 gallon tanks, in preference to one tank of 4,000 gallon
capacity and one stand.
The Steel Tank Stand, if built under the specification we employ, will be found very much more
serviceable and has a nicer appearance than a wood tower, there being no rot or decay, and are free from
the danger of fire.


. -
If the Stand does not exceed 10 ft. in height, sort out
the tower legs, girths, and diagonal stays; put one
side together first. Place the girths inside the tower
DIRECTIONS FOR ERECTING A METTERS'
STEEL TANK STAND.
jangles, passing the bolt through from inside. The
diagonal stays are placed on the outside of tower legs; follow with the side girths, then the other two
tower legs. Do not tighten up the bolts until you have all girths and stays on. Having the tower together,
you measure up for the excavations which are to receive the timber for anchoring the tower.
BLOCK No. 46
Steel Tank Stand and Tank
We supply two pieces of jarrah, about 2 feet longer than
the spread of the tower legs. These should be sunk into the
ground to such a depth that when the tower is up the first
girth will be about 6 in. above the ground line. Have these
timbers perfectly level with each other and placed upon firm
ground, that is, if you are raising either timber to the level
of the other see that you ram the soil well down. It is
most important that this should be done. Lift the tower up
and bolt on to the timbers; place the spirit level on the cross
girth at bottom of tower to test the levels.
With towers for 1,500 gallon tanks aud upward we supply
steel angle brackets to carry the jarrah fyame, which bolts on
the outside at the top of tower legs to receive the deck, i Bolt
these angle pieces in position before placing the timber. They
are applied to the bottom hole of the series of holes right
at the top of the angles. Best the heavy jarrah frame pieces
on these brackets, and mark the position for bolt holes. • We
do not bore these holes in the frame, as there is a danger that
the timber will twist slightly, and the hole would be of no
service. If a crosspiece of jarrah has been sent for this
frame, see that you place the timbers which have been prepared
to receive the crosspiece irons opposite eacfy other. See
that this frame is level on top to receive the Recking. Place
the whole of the decking on the frame before nailing down.
Our decks are cut to a circle, which gives a better appearance
than the square deck. The deck timber is placed diagonally
across the frame.
If the tank stand is of greater height than 10 feet, when
heavy tackle is not available for raising the structure, we
advise putting the bottom section together as advised above.
Get this in position on the anchor timbers, then build up the
further sections one angle at a time. After the whole structure
is together run over all bolts to be sure all are tight.


Sheep and Cattle Troughing.
There are so many different qualities and sizes for Trougliing that it is one line which should have very
close attention when purchasing. In our list we quote for Troughing 15 in., 18 in., and 21 in. in diameter
by various depths, and gauges from 22 to 12 gauge. There are also many methods of connecting up the
several parts, some more costly than others, and perhaps not much more effective. We just issue this note
of warning so that if you find we are a bit higher in price than someone else, you will ask the reason why.
We are very large importers of the raw materials, and no one should be in a better position to quote than
we are. We are illustrating some of the most popular lines.
Light Series Galvanized Troughing.
This series is made up for sheep and for cattle, and is usually supplied 18 in. wide by 10 in. deep.
For sheep the sheets are 22 gauge, and for cattle 20 gauge. Standards are supplied with this series, which,
in addition to providing a stand for the trough, also forms the connecting yoke. Sheep standards are
13 in. high and cattle standards 30 in. high. One inch angle steel longitudinal bars are provided for either
top edge of Trough to the full length, and are actually stiffening bars.
Block 42 illustrates the Light Series of Trough fitted with Sheep Standards.
BLOCK No. 42
Galvanised Sheep Trough.
Block 129 illustrates a short section of Light Series Trough
with 30 in. cattle standards, and is shown more particularly to
give the correct manner of fixing trough valves. The valve
shown is a Klewitz Pattern Valve bolted to the one end of Trough
so that practically at all times the actual valve is under water.
This is by far the best position for a trough valve.
BLOCK No. 129.
Trough and Valve
Block 43 illustrates the heavy series of Trough built, complete with ends fixed, cover and division for
ball cock, and 30 in. standards for cattle. Stock sizes are 15 in. 8 in., 18 in. xlO in., and 21 in. xl 2 in.,
and can be supplied in black or galvanised sheets 12, 14, or 16 gauge in thickness, all sections being 6 ft.
long. These knock down and pack conveniently. The most saleable line is 14 gauge. Prices you will
note are given in our lists for each part of Trough separately, and a per foot price for the body.
BLOCK No. 43. Cattle Trough


STORAGE TANK.
BLOCK No. 50. H
Squatter's * i"'~ f ! v ff We wish to bring prom-
Tank. - L* If ■
' l» W Or! inentlv before
f V " " ' ""' °
•: * . a considerable
* * period, with
* - - most satisfac-
t o r y results.
B r,
H jliL x « . ;
ft *
PIG TROUGHS,
In black or galvanized steel sheets of heavy
gauge, with ends rivetted and round stiffening
bars, makes a strong, serviceable Feed Trough.
Sizes stocked are 10 in. wide by 5 in. deep
lengths 2, 3, 4, 5, and 6 ft.
Block 152 illustrates t Cast Iron Pig Feed Trough
of heavy cast metal, with centre stays and a wide
inside flange, which prevents thelfoodstuff from being
pushed out of the Trough. Sizes stocked are 10 in.
wide, 5| in. deep, in lengths 3, 4, and 5 ft.
BLOCK No. 152. Cast Pig Trough.
So that you may get a clear understanding, we will describe the construction.
The sheets forming the various sections are supplied of black mild steel, or of galvanised sheets;
these sheets are punched to a set out template, and are clamped together with iron bars of a suitable size,
and bolted up with hexagon bolts in the following manner: Place the edges of two sheets one on top of
the other, with a narrow strip of tarred felt, say, 4 in. wide, or cotton wick, between the lapped sheets;
select an inside bar (these being about 2 in. longer than the outside bars), pass a bolt through the top
hole of bar, and through the top hole of the two sheets; then place the outside bar in position, and apply
the nut to the bolt, screwing up with thumb and finger. Put a bolt through the bottom hole in like
manner, then a centre bolt; now place any bolt until all are in position. Fix all sheets in position in like
manner, but do not yet screw the bolts up tight; leave this until you have the circle fully formed. Now
fix on the angle ring at the top of the tank, when all bolts can be drawn up tight.
In selecting the sheets you will find all sheets have a top and bottom edge; the top edge is distinguish-
able from the bottom by the holes punched to receive the angle ring. Sheets will be numbered to
correspond with numbers on the angle ring. The angle band should be applied to the outside of
the sheets.


/f
/ «. HI HI Mi \
A B (g ! @) B i\
==£=;==; £ —=j* jff \=^
r IF M 0 d J
\o /
\ 0/
\W t=-1 E'3 /
\ 9 /
\ S'
I ~ ®
\-4jjl___o___j2iL /^
If you have a large tank, we advise fixing diagonal twitching wires across the top of the tank, thus
overcoming a lot of the sway when full of water and
To pug the bottom of these tanks, from 6 in. to
the clay; reserve the finest clay for the top layer,
put in a few inches of water and leave for 24 hours;
exposed to wind pressure.
9 in. of clay is required, according to the quality of
When you have well pugged or worked the clay,
if found to be holding throughout, put in another foot
of water; let this stand for 24 hours, and continue until the tank receives its full pressure
We can supply outlets of any size. When ordering, please state whether an overflow is wanted; also
give particulars as to size and position of outlet.
Made in sizes from 5,000 to 50,000 gallons capacity. For prices and capacities see price list enclosed,
which does not include the circle of corrugated iron which forms a stand, as shown in our illustration.
Where it is difficult to obtain suitable clay for the
purpose of pugging the bottom of The Squatters'
Economic Tank, we advise establishing Metters'
Patent Tank with Metal Bottom, the whole of
METTERS' PATENT GALVANISED SQUATTERS'
TANKS WITH FIXED METAL BOTTOM.
which is bolted together and is easily assembled. We give herewith details of how to assemble these tanks,
which will also enable you to better realise how simple and effective the storage would be. We are only
manufacturing this pattern for a capacity of up to 10,000 gallons, and advise for preference installing two
10,000 gallon tanks rather than one 20,000 gallon capacity.
The method of assembling is as follows,
viz.:—
First level the ground at the site
selected for the tank.
The flat sheets forming the bottom of
the tank are marked in alphabetical letters
A, B, C, and so on (See Fig. 1).
Select the sheet A and lay it down
(marks upwards) in the position it is to
occupy, insert the jointing bolts in all the
holes along the two straight sides,
heads downwards, i.e., the heads resting
on the ground; if the ground is very soft
or sandy, means will need to be adopted
to prevent the bolts from sinking down.
Strips of hoop-iron or pieces or tin answer
very well.
Cut two strips of flat cotton jointing
material a little longer than the edges
through which you have the bolts, and
having pricked holes through to pass
over the bolts, paint under where these
strips are to go and pass them over the
bolts in readiness to receive the next
sheets.
Ffq, /
BLOCK No. 159.
Now take the sheets marked B and
proceed as before, except that the edge which overlaps the sheet A is to pass over the bolts already in
position, and so on until half the bottom is formed.
Next pick out the flat battens (1 in. x \ in.) and place them temporarily in position, being guided by
the marks 1., IL, 111., 1111., etc. (refer to chart, Fig. 1). This will enable you to see where to put in the
long bolts which are provided for use where the battens lap over each other.


iiiiiiiiiiinmiii nnuuiiij
Now put the battens out of your way, and complete putting the bottom sheets together, after which
put on the battens and screw the nuts on the bolts, but do not screw up tight until the tank is all
together.
You will now see that there is a succession of numbers, 1, 2, 3, 4, etc., in a circle near the edge of
the bottom (see Fig.-l), and corresponding
numbers will be found on the inside
bottom edge of each of the side sheets;
you will also see that a number of the
holes around the edge of the bottom
have a red ring around them; these are
the holes where the side sheets join each
other. You may now put in the circle
of bolts around the edge of the bottom
ready to receive the side sheets, and put
a ring of jointing cotton on them in the
same way as when you were putting the
bottom together.
Select the side sheet having the No. 1
near its inside bottom edge (referred to as
corresponding with the circle of numbers
BLOCK No. 160.
around the bottom) and place it in position, putting two or three of the nuts on the bolts, loosely; then
follows sheet No. 2, and so on, putting a strip of pointing cotton between the lapped edges, and securing
the sheets to each other temporarily by means of two or three bolts.
Next put on the upright battens, which are marked as shown in the chart, and in respect to which
you cannot go wrong (see Fig. 2), then follow the semi-circular battens for securing the flange of side
sheets to the bottom, and after that the top angle ring, all of which are so clearly marked as to need no
detailed directions.
Use paint on both sides of jointing cotton everywhere, and when the tank is all together go over all
the bolts and thoroughly tighten them up.
In purchasing a corrugated tank for storage purposes, remem-
GALVANISED ber the strain upon a tank when used in conjunction with a
CORRUGATED pumping plant is considerably greater than when used for
TANKS. household purposes. In the first place, it generally occupies a
more exposed position, invariably being raised to obtain
pressure through the service pipes; thus the vibration is considerable. Again,
so much weight of water is continually discharged into the tank that, unless
made well and of heavy material, you will very soon have trouble with the joints.
In ordering tanks show clearly the position required for the outlet, giving the
size of the pipe you propose connecting up, and also give the position for the
overflow pipe. We do not supply taps with tanks unless specified.
For ordinary stock and irrigation purposes we supply open-top tanks. If
covers are required, please mention this when ordering.
For prices see price
BLOCK No. 40


This Cock supplies beautifully the demand for
PILLAR COCK OR WINDMILL COCK. a perfect closing low pressure tap, which Avill
allow a full and free flow of water. There
are no loose parts, as with the usual plug cock, which is furnished with a loose key. The
valve is operated just as a high pressure tap, and is jusT as effectively closed; but it has
this advantage: Whereas with a high pressure tap, when the valve is released the pressure
of the water has to force the valve open to obtain its exit, in this pillar cock the valve
is raised in the process of unscrewing, and the water has a free exit. We stock f and 1 in.
BLOCK No. 117
only, which are tapped for hose connections
Pillar Cock.
Block 164 represents an All Brass Full
Flow Wheel Yalve of very heavy casting. For
low pressure service Ave advise this type of
valve in preference to the Globe pattern. The
price is slightly in advance, but the advantage
of obtaining the full flow and no break to the
pressure will be much in evidence. We stock
all sizes from f in. Prices upon application.
Fig. 165 represents
the Globe Pattern Wheel
Yalve. This is a close
seated valve, and is
specially recommended
for high pressure work.
All sizes stocked from
| in. Prices upon appli-
cation.
BLOCK No. 164
BLOtu J.«O. 165.
METTERS' FULL
FLOW TROUGH
VALVE.
BLOCK No. 53
This cut illustrates our new pattern All
Brass Full Flow Trough Yalve. It differs
with most all other valves in the full, straight
clearance for the water from the pipes. To
secure the perfect operation of this valve it
must be connected to the service pipe through
the end of troughing about half-way up the
trough end, thus preventing the valve leathers
from becoming hard, and also preventing any
obstruction to the valve seating. The lever
is a brass casting fitted with an adjustable
screw to regulate the height of water in the
trough —a very valve. Supplied
in all sizes from J in. to 1\ in., and fitted
with galvanised float. Copper float supplied
if requested at an extra charge.
The cheapest and one
THE KLEWITZ PATENT of the most efficient
FLOAT VALVE. on the market. Is a
full flow valve with
brass seating for valve leather, and must be applied
to the end of trough to obtain the very best results.
Is fitted with two flanges, so that by cutting a hole
through the trough end to the full size of the de-
livery pipe to which valve is to be applied and
bolting the flanges to the trough end, making a
tight joint with packing, the delivery pipe is easily
BLOCK No. 126.
Klewitz Valve.
attached to the the flange; by this means the valve is practically always under water. The lever is wrought
iron. The casting to which lever is attached is fitted with an adjustable screw so that you may adjust
the height of .water in the trough. Galvanised floats are usually supplied; if copper float required, can be
supplied at increased cost. Sizes stocked: 2, 2-J, 3, and 4 in.


Showing a light and strong full iiow valve,
"fit HIGH LOW VALVE. When a ball valve is properly protected there
is not the necessity for such heavy parts. This
' \Sp||valve operates a full flow of water with very little rise and fall of the
copper float. Manufactured in various sizes.
BLOCK No. 113.
Ball cocks will always be forwarded complete
with balls unless otherwise ordered
Made in gun metal up to 4 in. The
LAMBERT PATTERN most perfect working full way ball
BALL COCK —No. 48. valve; works equally well at high cr
low pressure.
passes right
Supplied with large copper balls. The lever bar pas
through the ball, giving a very strong and secure fastening.
Sizes stocked: —
2 in. 3 in
1| in. 14 in
Complete.
METTERS' ALL
BRASS FOOT
VALVES FOR
BORED WELLS.
BLOCK No. 49
BLOCK NO. 48.
There is an increasing demand for fittings suitable
for tubular wells or bores. We have introduced a
number of novel attachments to meet these require-
ments. The valve here shown is of considerable
importance. It is constructed of brass throughout,
will pass down a small tube casing, and will carry a
very heavy pressure of water.
Sizes stocked are as follows:
Screwed to Fit. External Diameter.
inch Pipe 2§ inch
14 inch Pipe 3 inch
2 inch Pipe 3| inch
Other sizes can be supplied upon application
This pattern valve can also be supplied as a vertical _ check valve, being screwed at either end to
receive the particular pipe required, the extra cost for which would be 2/6 each.
FOOT VALVES AND
STRAINER.
METTERS' NEW
PATTERN CHECK
VALVES WITH
CLEANING DOOR.
A valve of this description
should be used on all suction
pipes. It ensures the more
satisfactory working of the
pump by keeping the pipe full
of water while the pump is at
rest, so that it will start
pumping as soon as the mill
revolves.
We have just altered the 1
BLOCK No. 45. patterns of our patent
cleaning valve by introducing an angle
seating for the valve leather, instead of the
flat seating as previously sold. This seating
enables the valve being applied either for a
vertical lift or for a horizontal grade. We
guarantee this valve to hold water in any position.
When being used for horizontal position the door is
placed facing upwards.
BLOCK No. 51.
Sizes
stocked
2 in.
2-£ in.
li in.
H in-


L \
4-
Block 54 shows a Cast Bore Clamp in position, supporting the delivery
METTERS' CAST IRON CLAMP pipe 011 and in a steel casing. The purpose is to have the pipe firmly
FOR BORED WELLS. held so that you may ensure safe working of the plant and secure the
benefit of the full stroke of your mill or gearing. This is a three-part
casting. Looking at the illustration the side shown is in two parts; the reverse side is a one-part. The
BLOCK No. 54.
This cut illustrates our patent rain maker
THE RAIN MAKER sprinkler, which has been used very success-
SPRINKLER. fully in conjunction with our wind mill plant.
We supply this particular pattern'in various
sizes from 3 ft. 6 in. in diameter upwards. The sprinkler is specially
adapted for high or low pressure, and can be adjusted to cover a larger
or smaller area by setting the position of the outlet cuts. Very few
sprinklers are a success working under low pressure, that is, the
pressure obtainable from the ordinary storage tank. But with the
rain maker sprinkler, if the storage tank has an elevation of 10 ft., an
area of 23 to 25 ft. in diameter is covered with an even supply of
water. These sprinklers can be fitted to fixed standpipes, or supplied
attached to tripod or sledge stands. We advise the sledge stands, as
lower section is made to engage the external area of the casing pipe;
the upper engages the delivery pipe. The casting is heavy, as also are
the bolts. When ordering give the exact outside measurement of the
casing pipe and inside measurement of the delivery pipe.
Sizes stocked, from 4 in. to 6| in., and for any size pipe.
THE SURE GRIP CAST PIPE
CLAMP.
Block 56 illustrates
our Special Clamp for
wells, which, if properly
applied, will serve a
very good purpose.
Ordinary conditions in a
well allow for the main
pump bearers to bel
placed under the pump.l
In some isolated cases
water makes very slowly
and a well may have 60
Oi 7U it. depth ot water l&BEpplMi
stored should the plant BLOCK No. 56.
not be working for any
length of time. In such a case the pump would require to be
placed quite a long way under the main bearer in the well
and no fixed support under the waterline. This sure grip will
answer perfectly for either requirement, and can be adapted
under anv conditions. Sizes stocked from 11 in. to 3 in.
This cut illustrates the most economic
METTERS' CORRUGATED principle of attaching service pipes to
TANK FLANGES. an ordinary corrugated tank, and has the
an ordinary corrugated tank, and has the
advantage of being applied without calling
in the aid of an expert
inary socket, which has been soldered into a tank and
requires an expert to place in position, the area upon
which the strain is carried is very limited, but with
these corrugated flanges the strain is distributed over a
very large area.
With an ordinary
We carry a stock of the following sizes, prices for
which are complete, including a long screw with two back
nuts, also insertion for making the joint:
Sizes —
11 in. 11 in. 2 in. 21 in. 3 in.
BLOCK No. 58
this can be pulled along whilst the sprinkler is working, and no need Metters > patent Rain Maker Sprinkler
to walk over the wet ground.
Write for complete catalogue with prices.


I
|| H»Jpi
I
ffirpmmm
|
c
cradles
BLOCK No. 59.
in any position. A and B are places of
bearing, C and E connections to the pump
and to the mill. The distance at D may
be anything in reason; this portion of
the rod must be properly supported to
avoid any sagging and consequent loss in
STEPS TO BOLT cheap and very safe means
ON TO PIPE. of getting down the well to
attend to renewals for the
pump. Is formed of steel angle pieces properly
formed so that they may be bolted to give a
right and left tread. The delivery pipe in the
well forms the pillar or bearer to which the
steps are bolted; can be spaced 15 to 18 in.
apart, being shaped to the size of the pipe to
which they are to be applied, and clamped
securely. These make a tip-top ladder; no
timber is required, and can be fixed on in a few
moments.
When ordering, state the depth of well
the size of the delivery pipe.
Block 121 illustrates
WIND MILL CRADLE. our mechanical
Cradle, which we
employ with good effect on mill rods when
it is not practicable to place the wind
mill over the
pump. These
be supplied to
meet any par-
ticular eleva-
tion above
the pump, and
can be placed
Strong, safe, and serviceable, as well as
STEEL ANGLE LADDERS economic in cost. No waiting your
FOR WELLS. neighbor's convenience to lower you down
the well when the pump requires attention.
These ladders are constructed throughout of mild steel angles bolted
together in sections from 8 to 12 ft. The steps are riveted on to the
upright angles.
No well is complete without a ladder,
These are safe, and are easily fixed in the well
In ordering state the size of timber to which
the ladder is to be attached, and if possible give
the distance between each bearer.
This cut illustrates a
BLOCK No. 112.
Steps to bolt on to Pipe.
BLOCK No. 121.


■i J :"4
I
travel. The important point is that the upward stroke of the mill rod must be the upward stroke to the
pump. The brackets must be so placed to obtain this result.
The construction of our Wind Mill Tower is eminently suitable for Lookout Towers. The Metropolitan
Fire Brigade Board have adopted these towers throughout the State. The illustration No. 172 shows one
of our steel towers with steps rigged, having cast iron landing steps. This tower stands to a height of
75 feet, and is established at our Chief Fire Station. The structure is most rigid and easy to mount. We
can supply any class of tower to any height. Prices upon application.
Having described in detail the various
POINTS WORTH methods of establishing wind mill plants, we
KNOWING. wish to summarise in a concise form some of
the most important points which have been
explained throughout our catalogue, as follows: —
1. The practical limit of suction is 25 ft., but to obtain the
best results the pump should be placed as near to the water line
as possible.
2. Never reduce the size of the suction pipe.
3. We do not advise reducing the delivery pipe below what
is arranged for in the construction of the pump. But if it is
found necessary to reduce the size of the pipe, never diminish
by more than the following size, and then to overcome the increased
friction, introduce an air chamber into the delivery pipe as near
the pump as possible.
4. Use cylinder pumps for preference, because they require
fully one-third less power to operate.
5. If compelled to use a force pump, we advise establishing
an air chamber in all wells where the pipe exceeds 65 feet.
6. If delivering water from a well to any great distance for
storage purposes, better results will be obtained if one of our
patent check valves is placed a short distance from the pump.
This valve does not relieve the pump of any strain, but it prevents
the water from escaping through the stuffing box of the pump
when the mill is idle.
7. A foot valve should at all times be placed on the suction
pipe. It retains the water in the tail pipe. In the event of
placing the pump right at the botom of the pipe and without any
tail pipe, then the valve would not be required.
8. Make sure in erecting your mill that the tower is perfectly
plumb, so that all the working parts will receive only
their proper proportion of strain, and that the bearings may have
an even wearing.
9. See that the pump is in a dead plumb with the centre of
the mill swivel, more especially if the pump is a force type of
pump, with piston rod passing through a packing box.
10. Remember that the wind mill is a machine, and must be
properly and carefully oiled to obtain the best results. Do not use
light oils, as they get away from the bearings far too quickly. Use
Heavy D machine oil if Mill is fitted with Needle Lubricators, and
Medium Heavy machinery oil if for Nuoil and Selfoil Mills. This
we find best adapted for either summer or winter use. And Metters'
Special Solidified Oil if fitted with Grease Cups.
11. Bear in mind it is most important for the safety of the
wind mill that during the winter months the turntable is kept well
oiled, as this is the safety valve for the mill during a storm.
12. When it is desired to force water through a long line of
pipe into a storage tank placed on an elevated position, we advise
delivering the water through the bottom of the tank, so that the same
BLOCK No. 172.
pipes can be used for distributing the water over the intervening area. Do not suppose that if a tank has a
holding capacity of 4,000 gallons that the whole weight of this water is being supported by the pump if the
delivery takes place in the bottom of the tank. You are really only displacing the actual area of the pipe.
13. In reticulation from tanks, the height is the only factor which creates pressure. The quantity of
water stored does not influence the pressure in any way. In arranging the delivery pipes from the storage
tank you should first decide the size of your outlet taps, then how many taps you are likely to have open
at one time. From this you will arrange your main pipe so that it will be sufficiently large to allow this


~ - - • . " * VR r|
$ . \
flow. This is an example. We decide that 1 in. taps are to be used, and that four taps may be required
at one time, so we would put in a 2 in. main pipe. See the following chart for flows of water from given
SlZed T his e chart will be a useful guide in arranging for the distributing pipes, mams and bl ,anch P x P es -
The quantities estimated to flow through the given pipes are based upon a fall of 10 teet tnrougn
fc et of pipe, lntemal Diameter Velocity in feet Supply in gallons Weight of pipe
of pipe. per second. per minute. per 100 feet.
cwt. qrs. lbs.
a inch 1.16 feet 1.33 gals. 10 5
1 inch 1.37 feet 2.79 gals. 1 1 22
U inch 1.56 feet 4.97 gals. 2 1 10
x 4 rr no 1 ~ O O O
u inch 1.73 feet 7.93 gals. 23 2
2 inch 2.04 feet 16.61 gals. 40 6
2i inch 2.31 feet 29.45 gals. 5^2
3 inch 2.56 feet 46.99 gals. .6 0 8
11 Use low pressure outlet taps for distributing purposes, and full flow stop cocks.
15. The right place for the mill is directly over the well cr bore hole.
16 If found absolutely necessary to place the mill any great distance above the souice ot wa
supply, such as when pumping from a river walled in by high cliffs, we can provide attachments which we
are working successfully in several places along the River Murray which allows the mill to operate the
pump even though it is placed 80 to 100 feet above the level of the pump. These attachments are known
as cradles, and Ire practically a combination of levers. We shall be pleased to give particulars of these
upon application. See page 37 for illustration.
BLOCK No. 64.
This Wind Mill is answering a most unique purpose in pumping
bulk kerosene into raised cylindrical storage tanks, from ymwh
it is tapped off into delivery carts. This plant was erected to
the order of The British Imperial Oil Co., Ltd., at their store,
West Terrace Adelaide, and has been operating their supply
to their entire satisfaction.
When writing to us for a
WHEN MAKING- quotation to meet your re-
ENQUIRY. quirements, be very explicit
with your detail; do not take
anything for granted; remember that every mill
outfit we have sold has something which has not
been supplied or required with any other mill. This
is an example letter which enables us to quote for
every particular requirement, and will be a guide
to you filling up your particulars: —
"Please quote me for the supply and erection of
a wind mill plant to meet the following require-
ments, on trucks at-
"My well is 45 ft. deep, is a round shaft 4 ft.
in diameter, is bricked right to the surface, and
has 3 ft. of water in the well. I wish to raise
about 2,000 gallons of water per day into a storage
tank of 2,000 gallons capacity, to be placed about
8 ft. from the well on a steel tank stand 10 ft. high
from ground line.
'' I also wish to have a galvanised trough 12 ft.
long, with cover for ball cock, fitted on a stand
of sufficient height for cattle, and placed close
to the' tank stand. Please quote a suitable outfit
to meet these requirements, on trucks, at your
forwarding port.
With these particulars before us we can
give you the least costly plant to meet your
requirements.


The Mill and Pump
Tim, distance from the wat
J s * but the pump should
I than 25 ft - 1
— I'fTPOST VH<I6
rl h
■ L . i This oL atari ei Stirs given Source of Supply
"ity oe H'ell or J}o'e
dieter tha Tonsr
it II /7t by be an Tom*
/I t> 0' too O* Bu'ttiUlg
1/ \ |;
'VVpH - -- - - ------ 1.
; _L | _L_ c "' c * " a "" This distance to be jtven
I
o ■ I
a <?
T/22 source of- Supply l/\ \ _-«<ssgS^^^ 1
be a Stream or h-~* > |
W e U ujcth ujater not r 4 1
more tdari 2lf ft betom Tump T/jfekl '
I This distance. —*- -"- Thh ddsXajure to he qiven
— i E tobeqtven 0 .
| J OuppCy ft t exy
E be ex smt.ll
| t>r Bore t/icCf To*f
.5.
to be pumped,
not be fixed more
% I 3 than 25 ft. above the water.
i\X * i
a| |d FO3T VAl,,< As the Wind Motor derives its power
. solely from the wind, it should be
The <YCLtzr level of Stream , -i , n T. J. X- i *
water hole or Well not tb placed above all obstructions to ensure
be more than 29- -feet its proper working.
below the Tump or G/f, ooler £
DIAGRAMS showing some of the positions to which
our Mills are adapted, and the Accessories that may be
used.
When asking ns to quote prices for complete outfits,
send us a rough sketch as lrere shown, filling in distances,
depth of well, depth of water in well, -diameter of well,
and the nature of the soil around the surface of -well,
also height of tower required to raise the mill above
obstructions. \
may be set a
fh/s plant ecuibe
used, for ectfzer a
Tank or Dam.
"de - "
BLOCK No. 47.


To quite a number of purchasers of wind
INSTRUCTIONS FOR ERECTION OF mills the cost of erection is an item which
METTERS' STEEL WIND MOTORS. appears to give more concern than the
purchasing of the plant. We are desirous
of making our instructions clear and explicit, so that any ordinary person, with a
slight knowledge of tools and tackle, could erect these plants. We ask you to
carefully read the following particulars, paying strict attention to the building of
these parts and to the establishment of the foundations. Adhere strictly to the
list given for bolt sizes. If this is done, we are sure you will find the erection a
simple matter.
This block of our 30 ft.
*
mill tower illustrates the following parts:—
No. I—Dove tails locking tower
No. 2—Stage or platform.
No. 3- —Pipe barrel.
No. 4—Cross girths.
No. s—Diagonal5—Diagonal angle
No. 6 —Diagonal angle
stays,
stays.
These terms are applied to
the various parts throughout the instructions.
It will be noticed in building our 20 ft. mill towers that the top section of tower
angles are slightly bent to obtain a greater spread at the base of the tower.
Thirty foot towers are built with angles perfectly straight, as are all towers
of 30 ft. or any greater height. We have adopted a standard spread of one foot to
each five foot in height, thus a 30 ft. tower has a spread at the base of six feet.
METTERS' STEEL WIND MOTOR TOWERS.
This cut shows an 8 ft. steel wind motor tower put together and ready for
attaching the hauling tackle. The height of this tower is 20 ft. above the ground
BLOCK No. 77
BLOCK
No. 81.
when raised into position. We advise putting a block of some kind under the tower when bolting to-
gether, about mid-way (where marked by X) between the stage and bottom end of angle legs; it is desired
to prevent the angles sagging, so that the cross girths and diagonal stays will go into their respective
positions without straining.


BLOCK No. 79.
We here give ail illustration of a tower put together and having the tackle rigged ready for hauling
So that you may understand the use of the tackle we beg to explain the various parts as follows: —
(a) Gin poles, either of timber or two lengths of pipe, crossed at top, securely tied, and the legs
spread beyond the width of tower. These poles should be about two-thirds the length of tower.
(b) Hauling ropes. These should be strong ropes.
(c) Pulleys. The greater number of sheaves in the pulleys, the easier to move the load,
(d) and (h) Guy or guide ropes. These can be dispensed with, but are a good safeguard.
(e) Back rope. This rope is of great importance, as its use is to prevent the tower being pulled
beyond the perpendicular, and is required for pulling the tower legs to the line of the anchor
post bolt holes.
(f) Is a tie rope holding the gin poles in position.
(g) Timber bolted under the tower legs, which, coming in contact with the foremost anchor posts,
prevents the tower dragging too far forward in hauling.


Metters' Nuoil Double Geared Self-Oiling Mills.
First make sure you have received the full number of packages consigned to you.
Unwire all bundles, and lay out tower legs (these are the larger angles), stays, and girths in proper
sets and sizes; sort out all bolts in the various lengths, and check with packer's slip, which you will have
received enclosed in the package of bolts.
Now follow these instructions given below, performing the work just as it is here set out, and thereby
avoid confusion.
Putting the Tower Together. —Four of the angle legs will be found slightly tapered at one end; this
is to be the top of the tower. Take two of these legs and lay them upon the ground, flat side up; now
make these two legs up to their full length (20 or 30 reet, or whatever height tower is to be) by bolting
on the lower angies, being careful to note that these angles have the outer corners rounded off a little at
one end (the top) to allow their fitting closely inside. You will find the cross girths in sets of four, one of
which in each set having two holes punched near the centre for attaching the ladder. Take one of the
longest set (one without the ladder holes in it) and bolt it across the two legs (inside the angle) at the
third hole from the bottom, with the flat side of the angle girth to the top of the tower. Now bolt one of
each set of girths in like manner. The diagonal angie stays will be found in sets of eight. Take any two
of the longer ones (if there is only one set they will be of equal length) and bolt them together in the form
of the letter X; then with the two long legs downward bolt them to the tower legs (on the outside of the
angles, on the same bolt as the girth), beginning at the bottom of the tower. See that the stay which goes
from the bottom left-hand corner to the top right-hand corner has the angle outwards. All bolts should
be so placed with nut end of bolts outside of tower.
To guide you as to number of stays and girths required for the various height towers, we give the
following scheduler-
Eight, ten, and twelve feet Mills with 20 ft. towers have two sets of angle diagonal stays and three
sets of girths.
Fourteen feet Mills with 20 ft. towers have three sets of diagonal stays and four sets of girths.
Each additional 10 ft. of tower for all size Mills adds one set of diagonal stays and one set of angle
girths to above.
When you have completed putting this side of tower together, turn it right over, and raise the top
end of tower high enough to enable you to put on the platform. Get the platform or stage, and pass it
over the top end of tower legs with manhole upwards, and angle irons of stage towards the bottom of
tower; bolt it to the tower legs at holes which meet the holes in platform irons.
Now take away any supports you may have under tower, and allow the platform to rest on the ground.
See that tower is not allowed to sag downwards under its own weight; to prevent this place a block under
angles about half-way between platform and the bottom end of the tower.
Next place base block in position and bolt same to tower legs. Then proceed with side girths in their
proper rotation, and follow on with other tower legs, using bolts throughout as advised on packing list.
Be sure the ladder girths are placed on the same side of tower as the platform manhole. Leave all nuts
a bit slack until all are in position; put on the top tower head block, then go around and tighten all up.
Now fix ladder, using bolts as shown in packing list.
Next get the mill head, take off the bottom ring casting which is on the pipe barrel, pass the pipe
barrel through the top tower casting; and through the base block. Make sure the ball bearing and cast
cap for same are in their proper position, and do not force the cast projections which are on the top of
the ball race cover into the corresponding slots which are in the flange of the main casting; these should
fit in without any force being used. When the head with pipe barrel lias been properly placed, replace
the cast ring on to the bottom of the pipe barrel and tighten up the set screw. Next place the cross guide
in position. It is immaterial which tower legs are supporting this; the casting has the ends bevelled to
the taper of the angles and will be found to fit snug; this guide is placed diagonally across the tower.
Pass the bolt first through the guide, then through the corner of the angles. The tail or back vane is
then applied by removing the nut from the tail hinge spindle at the top end; pass the top end of tail bone
over the tail hinge spindle, and bolting the bottom end of tail bone to the bottom end of tail hinge spindle
where provision is made for a bolt, screw the top nut down hard on to tail bone. See that the governor
bar and weight are in place in the head weight lever, and connect the tail hook to the head weight lever
casting and to the top bar of tail bone. Next place the furl bar with casting attached through the
oblong hole in the rod guide, having the casting on top side of bar; pass the furl wire through the furl
bar casting so that the disc attached to the wire comes in contact with furl casting, and turns freely in
same. Pass the furl chain over the two sheave pulleys and down through the main casting into the pipe
barrel, connect the chain to the hook end of furl wire, and close the wire over same; draw the chain up
and pass the top end over the hook on tail b"ne brace. The disc bar is a flat bar of steel which passes
through the furl disc, and is attached to the inside of pipe barrel with two steel set screws.
Next take the pump rod and pass the tapped end through the round hole in the rod guide up through
the pipe barrel and attach to the rod head, screw this rod up tight, and replace cotter pin and in 10 and
12 ft. Mills tighten up lock nut. j , i


|P ANCHOR POST,
■j
k ,7
This completes the tower, which is now ready for the
anchor posts. Bolt the anchor posts to the flat side of the
6 x B in. jarrah, which should be cut in lengths about 2 ft.
6 in. long.
Take the exact spread of tower legs at the bottom of the
tower, and sink holes for anchor posts accordingly, allowing
the timber to go across the corners of the square
holes should be sunk so that the top ends of anchor posts
remain above the ground about 6 inches. Place the two
anchors nearest to the mill into their respective holes, and
with straight edge and spirit level see that these are
perfectly level at the top holes, and ram these in tight.
Place other two in the same manner, and see that all are
level. Now, to get ready to pull the mill up, use a piece
of timber 12 ft. or 15 ft. long, 5x3 in., or thereabouts.
Bolt this across the outer side of tower now resting on the
ground, pass the bolts first through the timber, then the
tower. If bolts are too long, pack up with washers, etc.,
under the head of bolt. Have the
nuts only next to the tower. Now
pull the tower up to the anchor
posts, so that the timber is in close
contact with the anchor posts. Re-
member the anchor posts fit inside
of the tower legs.
BLOCK No. 82
You now see tp your tackle for hauling. Put in a short post about 20 yards from
bottom end of tower. Have this post very secure and rammed tight; also one about 10 ft.
from the head of mill and in a line with the other post. Then get a strong rope and
pass singly over the gin poles. These gin poles consist of two supple poles or two lengths
of pipe of lengths tied securely together near the top end. Spread the other ends
apart. The gyi poles should be a trifle over half the height of tower. Up-end these
about 6 or 8 ins. from the bottom of tower, but do not secure them at ground end, as
these poles fall over after they have been relieved of the strain of the mill, and
should fall clear of the well. Fasten one end of strong rope at the top of tower just
below the main casting, but clear
hauling.
of tail pivot; the other end make fast to the blocks for
wanted at the back. Fasten this to the top of
A pioderately strong rope is
tower and then to post at the back. Now pull up the tower, allowing the tower legs
to pass over anchor posts. Bolt the opposite side first, then remove long piece of
timber, and bolt to other anchor posts, screwing up bolts tightly. Keep the strain on
ropes until you have anchor bolts in properly.
Towers may be built up if preferred. To do this assemble the bottom section, and
after digging out anchor holes you can plumb this section and ram up tightly. Then go
on building up and use a length of pipe or timber to make a derrick for raising head
and tail.
BLOCK No. 90
Next take the furl handle, fasten it to one of the tower legs (about 3 ft. from the ground) by passing
the clamp over the outer side of angle and through holes in handle. This handle should be fixed on same
side of mill tower as the furl bar, passing through the rod guide under platform. Connect the furl bar to
the loop on the handle with the galvanised steel wire. The wire to be only just long enough to allow the
handle to fit tightly against the inner side of angle when the wheel is out of the wind, and the buffer spring
on tail to rest against the main casting.
Now the wheel comes next. Take the spokes and bolt them in their places on the hub. Pass all bolts
towards outer side of hub, and put two nuts on all bolts.


, o ' jJF
\' '4IP ffi fi
Then take a section of the wheel, com-
prising three sails or vanes in 8 ft., 12 ft., === ~ ~
and 14 ft. mills, and four sails or vanes in M
10 ft. mill, and bolt this into position. The
inner rings are put underneath the cross bars BLOCK No 86
inside the spokes, and the outer ring is put
on the outside end of spoke. Do not tighten up bolts at this stage. Now turn the spokes, so that the sec-
tion just put in is at the top of the wheel. Put in two sections at the present bottom of wheel, then again
turn wheel and add balance of wheel. When the bolts are in their places, screw them all up tightly. All
wheel bolts passing through the rings and spokes
should be double nutted. With 12 ft. and 14 ft.
mills we supply two extta steps, to be placed
above stage. These are fastened with clamps
and are used in oiling mill head.
Adjust the weight governor on the weight
bar according to the speed you wish your mill
to work to. With the Bft., 10 ft., and 12 ft.
mills we advise starting the mill with the
weight about 6 to 8 in. from the end of bar, and
for the 14 ft. mill about 4 in. from the end of
bar.
Next put oil into the mill head, using medium
grade oil (not light oil), and on no account use
castor or cheap oil that will become thick in the
winter. Put oil into both wells. One will be
found at the end of main spindle, and one just
between the hub and main casting. Pill up to
be slightly under the level of the spindle. Work
the oil pump until it delivers oil into the trough
on the top of guide rods. Make sure no gravel
or dirt has entered the working parts of the
mill head during the operation of erection, as
this may interfere with the working of the oil
pump.
Put the galvanised cover on and screw the
nuts into position so that the cover is held down
tight. It is wise to have the cover removed for
erection.
BLOCK No. 84 Section of Wind Wheel.
IMPORTANT NOTICE.
1. See that mill head is free from grit before putting in oil, as otherwise you may have trouble with
your oil pump.
2. See that top tower block is level and filled with grease when putting head in positiqn on tower.


BOLTS AND NUTS REQUIRED IN ERECTING NUOIL WIND MILLS.
Please take careful notice of the following list, showing the size of bolts to be
the various mill parts. This is most important to ensure proper results from mill;
which require washers and check nuts:—
used in connecting up
and take note of bolts
BOLT
8-FT. MILL.
LIST.
10-FT. MILL.
12-FT. MILL.
Class of 8 x 20
Bolt. No.Used
Size 8x30
No.Used
10 x 20
No.Used
Size 10 x 30
No.Used
12 x 20
No.Used
Size 12 x 30
No.Used
*Spokes to Hub
Hexagon
' 12
1 A y 3
J-4 A. 8
12
| 1
12
If x 1
12
12
If X 1
12
*Outer Ring to Spokes . .
??
6
1 1 y 3
± 2 A 8
6
6
If x f
6 1
6
If x 1
6
*Inner Ring to Spokes ..
V
6
1-1- x f
6 1
6
H x f
6 1
6
If x 1
6
Lap of Outer Ring . .
„
6
1 x §
6
6
1 'TV?
1 X f
6
6
11 X 1
6
tTower Head Block . .
V
4
it x t
4
4
2x1
4
4
2x1
4
tTower Base Block ..
V
4 !
1-1 X f
4
4
i
2 x i
4
4
2x1
4
tCrossguide
V
2
If X f
2
2
21 x 1
2
2
21 x 1
2
Platform to Tower . .
yy
2
3. y 3
4 A 8
2
4
3 v
4 A "8
4
4
lxl
4
Ladder to Platform . .
yy
.
2
1 x f
2
2
1 x f
2
2
1 x f
2
Bottom End of Lower Sec-
tion Stays and Girths to
Tower
yy
8
1 x f
8 j
8
1 x f
8
8
1-1 X 1
8
Centre Section of Stays
and Girths to Tower
yy
1 V
8
11- X I
16
8
11 x -f
16
16
H x 1
24
Top End of Top Section
of Stays and Girths to
Tower
yy
8
1 X t
8
8
1 X t
8
8
li x 1
8
Centre of Cross Stays ..
yy
8
3 -v 3
4" X 8
12
8
f X f
12
12
f X -1
16
Tower Leg Joints . .
yy
32
f x |
48
i 32
|
1 2
3 Y 3
4 A 8
48
32
lxl
48
Bottom of Ladder to
Girths
yy
2
f X f
2
■
3 y 3
4 A 8
2
2
f X t
2
Centre of Ladder to
Girths
yy
2
1 X f
1 2
|
1 x |
4
2
1 X f
4
*Pumprod to Swivel . .
yy
2
H X f
2 I
2
|
1-1 x f
2
2
1-1 X t
2
Anchor Timber to Legs .
B.R.H.
8
'
4 x |
8
8
i
4x1
8
8
4x1
8
Extra f in. Nuts for Bolts
marked *
Hexagon
26
f
26
j 14
3
8
14
2
f
2
Extra 1 in. Nuts for Bolts
marked *
yy
26
3
8
26 [| 12
" ti-
ll
i
12
24
24
Washers for Bolts marked t
10
3
8
10
1 io
1
2
10
1 10
i
10
Rod Guides to Wood Stays
Coach
! Screws
.
2
If x f
4
1 2
If x f
4
■
2
If X f
4
Wooden Pipe Stay to Girth
Hooks
j
2
31 x §
4
2
31 x f
4
1 2
1
31 x 1
4
*ITse Double Nuts
on these Bolts.
tUse Washers
on these Bolts.
FITTINGS REQUIRED IF A
*Anti Swivel Pumprod . .
Anti Swivel Bar
UTO GEAR IS SUPPLIED.
2 Hexagon Bolts 11 x
2 Hook Bolts 31 x
3
8
3
Auto Gear Bracket to Tank
Washers
2
2
Gutter Bolts
# in. ..
f x
1
Extra Nuts
4
6


. I «36 °I
* «BB o jf / L CO * i
j ; £
No. No.
PARTS LIST
1921 Pattern Metters Nuoil Mill
FITTED WITH CHAIN FURLING ATTACHMENT.
When ordering please give the size of Mill Wheel, the number of the fitting as shown herewith, along
with the term we have applied to the fitting, also the date when the Mill was supplied.
1 Main Casting
02 Galvanised Cover
3 Pitman
4 Pinion
5 Gear Wheel
7 Head Weight Lever
8 Bell or Hub
9 Guide Wheel
10 Cross Head
11 Oil Trough
12 Pipe Barrel
13 Base Block
014 OiPßox Cover
015 Head Weight Lever Pin
016 Swivel and Perrule
017 Draw Bar
018 Draw Casting
019 Pipe Barrel Collar
020 Tie Bar
20 Hub Spindle
21 Guide Spindle
22 Tail Pin
23 Gear Wheel Spindle
24 Cross Head Spindle
26 Crank Pjn
27 Oil Pump
28 Oil Supply Pipe"
29 Oil Plunger
30 Oil Pump Spring
31 Brake Band
32 Brake Pin
33 Brake Spring
034 Brake Band Casting
35 Buffer Spring
36 Buffer Casting Pair
037 Tail Pin Collar
038 Ball Race Cover
39 Tail Hook
40 Head Weight and Bar
041 Turntable Ball Race
042 Chain Large
043 Chain Pulley, Small
044 Chain Guard
045 Cross Guide
45 Pump Rod
046 Oil Ring
047 Tower Head Block
048 Purl Chain
48 Tin Special Mill Oil
49 Furl Wire and Disc
50 Brake Lever
51 Brake Lever Pin
52 Brake Lever Stop Pin


Instructions for Erection
Metters Wind Motor Wind Mills
There is a very great similarity in the proceedings for the erection of the Wind Motor and the
Nuoil Mill, except in the matter of the top section of tower and the connecting up of the back vane (tail)
and the pump rod. We therefore do not propose repeating the instructions, but would ask you, if erecting
a Wind Motor, to follow instructions given for the Nuoil, except in these particulars, and for these
as follows: Putting top section of tower together for Wind Motor, four top angles will be found dove-
tailed at one end (the top), and have numbers stamped on them as a guide for putting together. Pick out
the two legs numbered 1 and lay them on the ground, flat side up, and with dovetails fitting into each
other. Further instructions for balance of tower as given for Nuoil, but use tower tie bolts and tower
clamp for drawing dovetails tight around pipe barrel.
Pump Rod. Take the small cotter pin out of the end of the pump rod inside the
swivel, remove the nut and washer, Uke off swivel and liner, remove remaining washer and
nut, then pass cast-iron rod guide over end of pump rod, and also over end of furl bar.
The rod guide is bevelled at ends to fit inside the tower angles, and goes across the tower
diagonally. Bolt the guide into most convenient angles, passing bolt through rod guide
first, then through holes in the tower legs; use a washer under the nut. The rod guide fits
snugly into its place, and may have to be driven a little to make it meet the holes. Now
replace nuts, ferrule, washers, swivel, and cotter pins on the pump rod, just as you found
them.
The Tail. Pass the small casting on tail bone over iron pin at the bottorii of main
casting, put on washer and cotter pin, bolt the tail vane to the cast tail pivot (quadrant),
pass the bolts downwards through the casting, then through the tail vane, put two nuts on
each bolt and screw up tight.
For all other detail the instructions for Nuoil Mill will suffice
Bolts and Nuts. Use the bolts for various sections of tower and wheel as described
for the Nuoil Mill.
BLOCK No. 78
You will find complete instructions for erection of mill enclosed in package of bolts.


— Jlii
20 tyii V^jFfr
\\\ 37#. fowamregBMljh <37^■■ip g
I2 — 5*^*3*
\ x gn ramai#38 Mr *> I
Duplicate Parts
for
Metters Wind Motor
fittings required for 8, 10, 12, and 14 ft. Wind Motors may be ordered from this list if purchased during
1915 and subsequent, but please state at all times when ordering the Size of the Mill and the date when
supplied. Also please give the name we have applied to the Fittings as well as the number.
BLOCK No. 143
1 Pipe Barrel
2 Main Casting
3 Brake Casting
4 Pinion Wheel
5 Gear Wheel
6 Crank Pin
7 Gear Wheel Spindle
8 Pump Rod Head
9 Furl Handle
10 Quadrant
11 Brake Rod
12 Pitman
13 Rocker
14 Tie Bar
15 Pipe Casting
16 Pump Rod Swivel
16a Ferrule for Swivel
17 Cross Guide
18 Bell or Hub
19 Bell Spindle
20 Pump Rod
21 Furl Bar
22 Furl Bar Casting
23 Furl Wire
24 Furl Wire Disc
25 Turntable Ring
26 Base Block
27 Pipe Collar
28 Furl Lever
29 Tail Hook
30 Governor Bar
31 Governor Weight
32 Tower Clamp
33 Tail Bone Casting
34 Short Rocker Spindle
35 Long Rocker Spindle
36 Dividing Piece
37 Grease Cups for Pitman
38 Grease Cups for Rocker Spindle
39 Tin Lubricant
40 Mill Spanner
41 Long Bearing for Hub Spindle
42 Short Bearing for Gear Spindle


Instructions for Erection
Metters Selfoil Wind Mills
First make sure you have received the full number of packages consigned to you. Unwire all bundles
and lay out tower legs, stays, and girths in proper sets and sizes; sort out all bolts in their various lengths
and check with packer's slip, which you will have received enclosed in the package of bolts, etc.
Select the four top section angles, having their edges cut away.
Take two of these, place same inside the square of platform, placing the
platform with manhole uppermost, and bolt the angles to platform.
Place the other angle legs in position, and bolt them inside the
square of platform. Then place tower head block and base block in
position. Then follow on with the next section of tower legs. Place
the end which has the sharp corners of angle cut away, inside the angle
forming the top section. Now sort out the angle cross girths; for 20 ft.
tower you will find three sets each of four angles. One of each length
has four holes punched on one flange of angles, and these must be
reserved for ladder side of tower. Take the short lengths and place
in position. The girths are placed inside the tower legs; proceed with all
girths in a similar manner, and note the diagonal stays are placed in
opposite positions on the various sides. The ladder side of tower requires
no diagonal stays. Bolt sections of ladder.
Tighten up all bolts throughout the tower, and next take the spread
of tower for the purpose of sinking anchor post holes. These holes
should be sufficiently deep to allow the bottom girth to come within
a few inches of the ground level; therefore sink holes about two feet
deep. If the 4x3 hardwood to be used for foundation of anchor posts
is sent in one length, this must be cut into four equal lengths, whicl
should then be about 2 ft. each. Bolt these to bottom of tower legs.
of tower legs.
Next get the mill head, take off the bottom ring casting which is
on the pipe barrel, pass the pipe barrel through the top tower casting
and through the base block; make sure the ball bearing and cast
cap for same are in their proper position, and do not force the cast
projections which are on the top of the ball race cover into the
corresponding slots which are in the flange of the main casting; these
should fit in without any force being used. When the head with pipe
BLOCK No. 91
barrel has been properly placed, replace the cast ring on to the bottom of the pipe barrel and tighten up
the set screw. Next place the cross guide in position. It is immaterial which tower legs are supporting
this; the casting has the ends bevelled to the taper of the angles, and will be found to fit snug. This


guide is placed diagonally across the tower. Pass the bolt first through the guide, then through the corner
of the angles. The tail or back vane is then applied by removing the nut from the tail hinge spindle
at the top end. Pass the top end of tail bone over the tail hinge spindle, and bolting the bottom end of
tail bone to the bottom end of tail hinge spindle where provision is made for a bolt; screw the top nut
down hard on to tail bone. See that the governor bar and weight are in place in the head weight lever,
and connect the tail hook to the head weight lever casting and to the top bar of tail bone. Next place
the furl bar with casting attached through the oblong hole in the rod guide, having the casting on top
side of bar; pass the furl wire through the furl bar casting so that the disc attached to the wire comes in
contact with furl casting, and turns freely in same. Pass the furl chain over the two sheave pulleys and
down through the main casting into the pipe barrel, connect the chain to the hook end of furl wire and
close the wire over same; draw the chain up and pass the top end over the hook on tau bone brace. The
disc bar is a flat bar of steel which passes through the furl disc, and is atached to the inside of pipe
barrel with two steel set screws.
Next take the pump rod and pass the tapped end through the round hole in the rod guide up through the
pipe barrel and attach to the rod head, screw this rod up tight, and replace cotter pin,
The tower is now ready for raising, and, being a light structure, elaborate tackle is not required. Lift
the mill forward so that the bottom legs are directly over their respective holes, then lift the mill right up
into the perpendicular position.
To make sure the tower is perpendicular before filling in the anchor holes, drop a plumb line from centre
of top of tower. Get tower level, and then ram the soil firmly in anchor holes.
Towers may be built up if preferred. To do this assemble the bottom section, and after digging out
anchor holes you can plumb this section and ram up tightly. Then go on building up and use a length of
pipe or timber to make a derrick for raising head and tail.
Next take the furl handle, fasten it to one of the tower legs (about 3 ft. from the ground) by passing
the clamp over outer side of angle and through holes in handle. This handle should be fixed on same side
of mill tower as the furl bar, passing through the rod guide under platform. Connect the furl bar to the loop
on the handle with the galvanised steel wire. The wire to be only just long enough to allow the handle to
fit tightly against the inner side of angle when the wheel is out of the wind, and the buffer spring on tail
to rest against the main casting.
Next bolt on spokes of wind wheel to hub, and put on sections of wind wheel. After all bolts are in
position, go round wheel and tighten up and see that wheel runs true.
Next put oil into the mill head, using medium grade oil (not light oil), and on no account use castor
or cheap oil that will become thick in the winter. Put oil into both wells. One will be found at the end
of main spindle, and one just between the hub and main casting; fill up to be slightly under the level of
the spindle. Work the oil pump until it delivers oil into the trough on the top of guide rods. Make sure no
gravel or dirt has entered th? working parts of the mill head during the operation of erection, as this may
interfere with the working of the oil pump.
Put the galvanised cover on and screw the nuts into position so that the cover is held down tight. It is
wise to have the cover removed for erection.
Adjust the weight governor on the weight bar according to the speed you wish your mill to work to.
We advise starting the mill with the weight about 6 in. from the end of bar.
IMPORTANT NOTICE
1. bee that mill head is free from grit before putting in oil, as otherwise you may have trouble with
your oil pump.
bee that top tower block is level and filled with grease when putting head in position on tower.


Packing List
Bolts and Fittings List for erecting Metters Selfoil Mills
So that your Mill will be established correctly we have enclosed a sheet of instructions for erecting, and
also this sheet giving a detail of the position of all bolts.
We advise you to read these lists over carefully before starting to erect, and you will then find you
will have no difficulty in establishing your plant. Sort out your bolts into their various sizes and check
with the accompanying packer's slip, and if you find any errors report to us at once, and enclose packer s slip
for reference.
No. Used No. Used
Size. Class of Bolts. . _
20ft. Tower 30ft. Tower
Where Used.
Spokes to Hub
tOuter Rings to Spoke
Outer Ring Lap . .
Inner Ring to Spoke
*Tower Head Block ..
*Base Block
"Cross Guide
Platform to Tower
Ladder to Platform and Tower
Girth only to Tower
Girth and Stay to Tower
Tower Leg Joints . .
Anchor Timber to Tower
Ladder to Girth
Pipe Stay to Girth
Washers
Extra Nuts
1J x | Hexagon | 12 12
li x § „ i 4 4
Ix -| „ I 4 4
1 x f „ i 4 4
14 x | „ i 4 4
14 x | ~ ! 4 4
14 x f „ I 2 j 2
4 x f | „ 2(2
Ixfj „ 2 2
4x | j „ 12 I 16
1 x § • „ 12 16
4x | „ | 16 | 32
4x | B.R.H. ) 8 j 8
4x | ! Hexagon j 6 10
4xl„ i 6 8
fin. ) „ I 10 10
Im. | » -I 4 1 4
Use Washers on Bolts marked *
Double Nut Bolts marked t
SUNDRIES LIST
1 Eurl Chain
Rod Guide
1 Part List
1 Spanner
1 Tin Oil
1 Grease Cup for Tower Head
1 Packing List
1 Tin Grease
1 Erecting Instructions


S8 Gb
8 iL fr '°g W a I \
V °'vvM' | 7 „ \
I ® S # ' I \
I 79 \ **• \ \ 93 W A I a_i
™
J 65 3 ,
Duplicate Parts of
Metters Selfoil Wind Mill
ordering parts please give the number and the term applied to the fittings in the following
When
assist us if you give the date about when the Mill was supplied, and the size of Wind Wheel
61 Main Casting
62 Guide Bar
63 Galvanised Cover
64 Hub
65 Gear Wheel
66 Hub Spindle
67 Washer for Gear Wheel Spindle
68 Slip for Main Casting
69 Pipe Casting
70 Pipe Collar
71 Base Block
72 Tower Head Block
73 Ball Race
74 Ball Race Cover
75 Crank Pin
76 Gear Wheel Spindle
77 Oil Ring
78 Oil Box Cover
BLOCK No. 33 i
79 Headweight Lever Pin
80 Headweight Lever
81 Tail Pin
82 Tail Pin Distance Collar
83 Tail Hook
84 Oil Pump
85 Oil Pump Lever
86 Oil Supply Pipe
87 Oil Pump Plunger
88 Oil Pump Plunger Spring
89 Furl Wire Disc
90 Draw Bar
91 Draw Bar Casting
92 Buffer Spring
93 Buffer Castings (Pair)
94 Crosshead
95 Brakeband
96 Brake Band Casting
97 Brake Band Pin
98 Brake Lever
99 Brake Lever Pin
100 Bake Lever Stop Pin
101 Tie Bar
102 Headweight and Bar
103 Pitman
104 Pinion
105 Large Chain Pulley
106 Small Chain Pulley
107 Chain Guard
108 Pump Rod
109 Swivel
110 Ferrule for Swivel
111 Crossguide
113 Furl Chain


M
| \rl<> |
jL
h 2
«4
5
Instructions for Erection of
Metters Little Toff Windmills
BLOCK No. 87. Showing Little Toff Tower put together ready for raisins
First make sure you have received the full number
of packages consigned to you. Unwire all bundles
and lay out tower legs, stays, and girths in proper sets
and sizes; sort out all bolts in their various lengths
and check with packer's slip, which you will have
received enclosed in the package of bolts.
Select the four top section angles having their edges
cut away, and numbered 1 to 4. Take two of these
with corresponding numbers, place same inside the
square of platform, placing the platform with manhole
uppermost, and bolt the angles to platform.
Next take one 5| x | in. bolt and pass it through
the top holes of angle legs. Place the mill head into
these two angles, allowing the top of angles to fit close
up to shoulder of base block. Place the other angle
legs in position, and bolt them inside the square of
platform. Put in three other 5i x f in. bolts and nuts
through top hole of tower legs, arranging two bolts
above and two bolts below the flange of base block.
Tighten these bolts with a spanner, and put on the
small flat clamp at top of tower legs, just under the
shoulder of pipe barrel.
Next place the cast-iron guide inside the angle tower
legs. Then follow on with the next section of tower
legs. Place the end which has the sharp corners of
angle cut away inside the angle forming the top
section. Now sort out the angle cross girths; for 20
ft. tower you will find three sets each of four angles.
One of each length has four holes punched on one
BLOCK No. 88
BLOCK No. 89
FIG. 2.
FIG. 1


1JY"-
W> 2
x —Ji-
flange of angles, and these must be reserved for ladder side of tower. Take the short lengths and place
in position. The girths are placed inside the tower legs. Proceed with all girths in a similar manner,
and note the diagonal stays are placed in opposite positions on the various sides. The ladder side of tower
requires no diagonal stays. Bolt sections of ladder.
Tighten up all bolts throughout the tower, and next take the spread of tower for the purpose of sinking
anchor post holes. These holes should be sufficiently deep to allow the bottom girth to come within a few
inches of the ground level; therefore, sink holes about two feet deep. If the 4x3 hardwood to be used
for foundation of anchor posts is sent in one length, this must be cut into four equal lengths, which should
then be about 2 ft. each. Bolt these to bottom of tower legs. The tower is now ready for raising, and
being a light structure, elaborate tackle is not required. Lift the mill forward so that the bottom legs are
directly over their respective holes, then lift the mill right up into the perpendicular position.
To make sure the tower is perpendicular before tilling in the anchor holes, drop a plumb line from centre
of top of tower. Get tower level, and then ram the soil firmly in anchor holes.
Next put the tail, or back vane, in position. Take out the 5-16 in. bolt in socket at the side of main
casting, insert the pipe tail bone into the socket, and pass bolt through the socket and hole at end of pipe
tail bone. Put the long link which is attached to the tail over the hinge bracket near the top of main
casting. To do this, remove the bolt and take off the top washer, slip the loop over the stud, and replace
washer and bolt. )
Now attach the chain for furling the mill, by passing the chain over pulley at top, thence through
pulley working on a swivel joint, and connect end of chain to tail bone with the in. bolt, the other end
to be hooked to the galvanised furl wire, passed through the | in. pipe of mill head, and down through
the round hole in rod guide, and connect the wire to the swivel attached to the hand lever. This lever is
to be fastened to the tower leg in such a manner that when the lever is pulled down it will lock in the
tower angle. Next bolt on spokes of wind wheel to hub, and put on sections of wind wheel. After all bolts
are in position go round wheel and tighten up and see that wheel runs true.
_ INSTRUCTIONS FOR FIXING PUMP
We supply with a 20 ft. tower three pipe braces, which are formed of angle
steel.
Before bolting the brace in position fix your plumb line to the mill head,
attaching it to the piece of square iron passing through the rod guide. The
centre of the pipe-holder should be plumb with the top of the pump rod. If
this result is obtained you will find the mill works more satisfactorily.
Before starting the mill see that lubricators are all in position and properly
charged with grease. Always bear in mind that unless a mill is properly and
sufficiently greased poor results will be obtained.
BLOCK No. 92
In the main casting a hole is drilled near the turntable. This is an
important lubricator, and oil should be regularly applied here, as in the event of the turntable being
neglected the mill will not readily respond to the wind.
Use axle grease upon the two gear wheels, but only in moderation. It is necessary, after the mill has
been working for a period of three or four weeks, to screw up all nuts throughout the mill and towers, there
being a risk that the bolts when first screwed up do not obtain a perfect seating.


Packing List
Bolts and Fittings List for erecting Metters Toff Wind Mills
So that your Mill will be established correctly we have enclosed a sheet of instructions for erecting, and
also this sheet giving a detail of the position of all bolts.
We advise you to read these lists over carefully before starting to erect, and you will then find you will
have no difficulty in establishing your plant. Sort out your bolts into the various sizes and check with
the accompanying packer's slip, and if you find any errors report at once to us, and enclose packer's slip for
reference.
BOLT LIST.
Where used
Class of 6x 20 Size 6x 30 8x 20 Size 8x 30 9x 20 Size 9x30
Bolt. No.Used No.Used No.Used No.Used No.Used No.Used
Spokes to Hub .. .. .. Hexagon
12 j 14 x |
4 11 x #
12 || 12 | 14 x-|
II I
4 || 4 :14 x f
4 || 4 | |x §
4 |f 4 | 1 x |
4 || 4 | fx f
16 || 20 | fx f
II i
16 [| 20 | 1 x f
11 1
32 || 16 | f x f
15 | If x §
5 I 14 X f
5 | f x f
5 I 1 x f
t Outer Ring to Spokes
11 v _3
J-4 A 8
Lap of Outer Ring
4 I fx -§
Inner Ring to Spoke
4 | 1 x f
1 x f
4 | |x|
Platform to Tower
4 ! f x f
Girth only to Tower
12 | fx §
20 fxf
12 | 1 x-f
Girth and Stay to Tower
20 1 x f
Tower Leg Joints
16 | fX -I
16 I fx f
8 | 4 x f
6f x f
4 X| I 8 || 8 | 4 X f
I' J
tx f [ 4 || 6 | fx|
-1 Xf i 4 II I 1 xl-
Anchor Timber to Tower B.R.H.
B[4 x f
Ladder to Girth Hexagon
6 | fx f
Ladder Laps to Girth
1 x f
Pipe Stay to Girth
6 fxf
8 |f 6 | fx f
4 || 4 |S4X -f
6 fx#
4 54 x f
Base Block Bolts
4 I 54 X f
*Cross Guide
4 | If X f
4 || 4 |lf x #
II I
4 | If x |
8 |! 8 i f
II I
4 || 4 | f
Washers
Extra Nuts
4 | f
I
Double Nut Bolts marked t
Use Washers on Bolt marked *
SUNDRIES
LIST
U Bolts
1 Spanner
1 Purl Chain
5 Grease Cups
Packing List
1 Tin Grease
1 Tower Clamp
Parts List
Erecting Instructions


Duplicate Parts
for
Metters Little Toff Wind Mill
When ordering parts please give the number and the
It will assist us if you give the date about when the Mill
the Grease Cover as supplied with the early date Mills.
BLOCK No. 327
term applied to the fitting in the following list,
was supplied, and mention if the Gear Wheel has
1 Main Casting
2 Gear Wheel
3 Gear Wheel Spindle
I Pinion Wheel
5 Wind Wheel Hub
6 Hub Spindle
7 Pitman
8 Pump Rod Head
9. Pipe Barrel
10 Base Block
11 Main Pump Rod
13 Sheaf Pulley for Head
14 Sheaf Pulley for Swivel
15 Sheaf Carrier
16 Tail Hinge
17 Tail Hanger
18 Oil Well Cover
19 Buffer Spring
20 Cross Guide
21 Cross Head Guide
22 Top Section Pipe Casting
23 Tower Clamp
24 Purl Handle Complete
25 Purl Chain
26 Spoke. Say if 6 or 7 ft. Wheel
27 Sail Clip, Small
28 Sail Clip, Large
29 Sail. Say if 6 ft. or larger
30 Inner Ring (Wheel)
31 Outer Ring (Wheel)
32 Gun Metal Turntable Ring
112 Sheaf Carrier Arm
123 Top Swivel Casting
124 Swivel Plat Guide Bars
125 Swivel Guide Cost Connection
127 Pitman Bolt and Washer


Index
ILLUSTRATIONS OF METTERS' WIND MILLS ARE SHOWN ON VARIOUS
PAGES, AS FOLLOWS :
Illustration. Page.
8 ft. Nuoil Mill on Stub Tower . . . . 13
6 ft. Toff „ „ „ 16
6 ft. „ „ 30 ft. „ 2
8 ft. Steel Wind Motor on Stub Tower . . . . . . • • • • 13
8 ft, „ „ „ 20 ft. „ 12
8 ft. „ „ „ 30 ft. „ 2
10 ft, „ „ „ 30 ft. „ 4
10 ft, „ „ „ 40 ft. „ . . 3
12 ft. „ „ „ 30 ft. 26
Steel Tank Stand, 2,000 gal. . . • ■ • ■ • • • • • • • ■ 29
Pumps, Various Patterns . • . ■ ■ • ■ • • • • • • • 20
Capacity of Pumps . . . . • • • • • • • • • • • • 25
Capacity of Metters' Mills . . . • • • • • • • • • •
Hand Pumping Attachments . . . . ■ • • • • • • -• 24
Automatic Stopping Gear
Sheep and Cattle Trough ....•••• • • • ■ • • 89
Tanks, Squatter and Corrugated
Capacity and Weight of Pipes . . • • ■ • • • • • • • 89
Valves, Miscellaneous
Clamps for Wells and Bores . . • • • • .... • • 36
Strong Points of Metters' Mills . . • • 4
Descriptive Matter —Nuoil • • ®
Selfoil 9
Wind Motor . . . . . . • • • • • • 44
v ~ Little Toff Mills . . • • • • • • • • 4 ®
Flirt 18
Instructions for Erecting Wind Motor .. .. .. •• •• • • 4^
Selfoil 50
Little Toff Mill 54
Nuoil Mill 43


>
■
Wholly set up and printed in Australia
by
DONALD TAYLOR COLLOTYPE COY.
BLOOR COURT, CURRIF. STREET
ADELAIDE, S.A,
3 1508 01204505 5


S, fflS i-. ij# '/MfijazSy?* § . f 3 : J
: - > ' - , «"# (Y» »k , ?■ I ' •' ■ •'• • H Z^gHj
, i; )j$
* - jUt
ujigyq J/^^PijB"*'i Z y*. ffru
| ' 4? ** x ' ■"
H
?l I i ■ Z ra i
- T'LI-IVVC '■ •&"&> *\• - •> •*■ TWFSBJSSL*^ "\ .1 * J ■LIIMJHRS •' , ' ■ "■ '"3R 5IQBHH
' \ , > y *f ,<> -yl
Wholly Set ap and Printed by
Donald Taylor Collotype Company,
Bloor Court, Currie Street,
Adelaide, S.A.
' : 4 :' ' • , -* ,*' ***>»" *jgt ' < ',\
J
vfc 1
I
,v ; ' EtjpfcV ' 0- ' , : $ ~ ; 4 ; J ■ '" - ■ .■"'. ,. : y', \ '■
H R" ' IP ' If % . * EK '. • !i S 'ma.. "4 l±r .t 3m *'• b
