

PETTH
5 (#0(0
f A )
%urrJV XXJ/fL.
/Pl 4)




letters written without reserve or affectation of any kind, the hopes
and thoughts and feelings which were revealed only to his nearest
and dearest friends. The man who, after such an exposure,
rises in our estimation and in our love, has stood the severest test
of greatness : nor was he more fitted by his surpassing talents to
direct the counsels of princes, arrange campaigns which extended
over half Europe, and give his orders with unerring promptitude
in the heat of battle, than by his virtues and affections for the per-
fect enjoyment of tranquillity and domestic life. Considering him
in all his relations, public and private, it may safely be asserted that
Marlborough approaches, almost as nearly as human frailty will
allow, to the perfect model of a good patriot, a true statesman,
and a consummate general.
Art. ll.— Michael Howe, the last and worst of the Bush Ran-
gers of Van Diemens Land. Narrative of the Chief Atrocities
committed by this Great Murderer and his Associates, during
a Period of Six Years, in Van Diemen's Land. From authen-
tic sources of information. Hobart Town, Printed by An-
drew Bent. 12mo. 1818.
nPHIS is the greatest literary curiosity that has yet come before
us—the first child of the press of a state only fifteen years
old ! It will of course be reprinted here; —but our copy, the copy
penes nos, is a genuine Caxton, rarissimus —nay more, it hath the
title-page. Few impressions were thrown off at the Hobart Town
Press, for the settlement does not greatly abound in readers; and
we therefore recommend the Roxburghe Club to apply early for
a copy, for this little book will assuredly be the 1 Reynarde the
Foxe’ of Australian bibliomaniacs.
Van Diemen’s Land (of which Hobart Town forms the capital)
is 'an island nearly as large as Ireland, to the south of the colony
of New South Wales, better known to our readers, perhaps, by
the name of Botany Bay ; but separated from the continent of
New Holland by a strait of sixty miles in width, called after its
enterprizing discoverer Mr. Bass,* and a dependency upon that
colony, from which it was sub-colonized. The island was first
visited by Lieutenant Flinders and Mr. Bass, at the close of the
year 1798, in a small decked boat built at Norfolk Island, of the
\ * Surgeon of the Reliance. Captain Flinders’s talents were appreciated by the Ad-
miralty, and he lived to witness the fruit of his labours ; but it is a melancholy reflection
that his companion, Mr. Bass, left Port Jackson, in the year 1802, as master of a trading
vessel, called the Venus, which has not since been heard of. She was bound to the coast
of Peru ; and there are reports that Mr. Bass is still living and settled in that country.
elegant


elegant fir of that country. The first European settlement was
made at Risdon Cove, in the river Derwent, on the south-east
side of the island, in 1803, by Captain John Bowen, of the Navy,
who was sent from Port Jackson for that purpose by Governor
King; but on the arrival of Lieutenant Colonel Collins, the au-
thor of the ‘ Account of New South Wales/ it was removed to
Sullivan Cove, where the rising town of Hobart now stands.
As this healthy and fertile island appears to us to be much
more congenial than the sultry and unwholesome back woods of
America, to such of our countrymen as possess the true feelings
of Englishmen, but are nevertheless compelled to carry that
name to a foreign land, we shall present them with an authentic
and recent picture of its actual state.
The north coast is in latitude 40° 4l', and the southern promon-
tory in 43° 38' S. Its breadth may be taken at 150 miles, and its
length at 170. The climate has some peculiarities which cause a
milder winter and a warmer summer than might be expected from
the latitude of the island, allowing for the estimated difference of
temperature between the corresponding parallels of the two hemis-
pheres. The southern part of it being hilly, and towards the ex-
tremity even mountainous, the climate of Hobart Town is variable.
Gales and hurricanes often occur, but they are generally of short
duration. During summer the ordinary course of the weather is the
alternate land and sea breeze, the former commencing early in the
morning and prevailing till noon, when it is succeeded by the lat-
ter, which usually lasts till after sun-set. Occasionally however a
hot wind blows from the north or north-west, which, though re-
sembling that of New South Wales, which there raises the ther-
mometer to 106 degrees in the shade, is greatly mitigated in Van
Diemen’s Land by passing across Bass’s Straits. The autumn is
generally a serene and delightful season, and the weather continues
fine and open to the middle or end of May. In June, rain, sleet
and (in elevated situations) snow set in, with strong southerly
gales; but even in winter fine w'eather intervenes, and neither
wind nor rains can be said to be periodical. Slight frosts occur at
night, but neither ice nor snow remains throughout the day in the
vallies and plains. In September the spring rapidly advances, and
in October the weather resembles the ‘ faithless April of an Eng-
lish May.’ During the present summer (1818) the thermometer
has not exceeded 70°, except one day, on which a hot wind raised
it to 80°. The range during the months of December and January
has been from 54° to 70°; but this was a cool season, late rains
having fallen at the beginning of it; so that the average may per-
haps be taken four or five degrees higher. The mean summer mid-
day


day range in the shade is about 6o° or 66°. These remarks were
made at Hobart Town: in the interior, the climate is more fixed
and serene. With such a climate Van Diemen’s Land must needs
be healthy: no sickness belongs, to the country; and the intermit-
tent fever peculiar to new and uncleared lands is unknown here.
Convicts, after a voyage from England, without touching at any
port by the way, recover their h ealth soon after they land. Hobart
Town has been sixteen months together without a funeral; and
in a detachment of troops var ying from 70 to upwards of 100, no
death occurred in three years.
Van Diemen’s Land is known to possess only four principal
ports.
1. At the upper end of the great Storm Bay running in from
the southern ocean, and between thirty and forty miles from the
southern capes, is the entrance of the river Derwent, which,
besides its direct outlet into Storm Bay, has a lateral one into
Storm Bay Passage, (Canal d’Entrecasteaux,) a strait about thirty
miles long, dividing the large island Bruny from the main land,
and continuing from two to five miles wide, till it opens to the
southern ocean, at Tasman’s Head. This large inlet presents
every where bold shor es and deep water, perfectly sheltered from
all winds, and forming a magnificent port. The Derwent at its
entrance is two miles broad, and takes a northerly course, which
varies in breadth from one to two miles, expanding occasionally
into large basins equally deep and safe, for the distance of twenty-
five miles, to which point ships of 500 tons burthen can navigate
with ease. Here the river begins to freshen, and continues hence
for the distance of forty miles, narrowing gradually, but affording
a safe passage for vessels of fifty tons as far as New Norfolk,
where a ridge of rocks forms a rapid, and abruptly terminates the
navigation.
About twelve miles up the Derwent, on the western bank, stands
Hobart Town, picturesquely placed under a noble mountain
called Table, from its shape, but more recently Wellington for its
honour. Its height has been ascertained to be upwards of 4000
feet, and down its side trill several rivulets, one of the most consi-
derable of. which passes through the town, and discharges itself
into Sullivan’s Cove. The town is extensive, and the streets, eleven
in number, are laid out with regularity and good taste. Several
handsome brick houses appear in the principal one, which is sixty
feet wide; but the*majority of the buildings are of wood and plas-
ter. There are very few that are not whitewashed (for lime abounds
in the neighbourhood) and glazed; and each has a garden paled in.
Several good public buildings are either completed or in progress
v —a large


—a large church of brick and stone, a government-house, a coun-
ty-gaol, a store and commissariat offices, a barrack for 100 men,
and a small hospital fenced in together, a six-gun battery, with
a guard-house and magazine, on the south point of the harbour,
and a main guard-house in the town.
The plantations or farms of the settlers extend along the banks
of the Derwent on both sides. Small farms appear even at the en-
trance of the river from Storm Bay Passage; for the shorhs of
Van Diemen’s Laud are not sandy like those of New South
Wales, but a rich black mould is often found close to the cliff ’s
head. On the Hobart side the most considerable group of settle-
ments is New Town; which stands about two miles from Hobart
Town, and is watered by a line stream from Mount Wellington.
On the opposite bank, a little below Hobart Town, is the settle-
ment of Clarence Plains, consisting of very fertile land; but
w atered only by lagoons, as is the district adjoining. Farther to
the eastward, upon the north and east sides of an extensive salt-
water inlet, communicating with what the settlers mistakenly call
Frederik Hendrik’s bay, is the more considerable settlement of
Pittwater, the chief granary of the island. It is watered by two
streams, and presents to view a vast extent of naturally cleared
ground:—it is indeed one of the characteristics of this island (in
which it has the advantage of New' South Wales) that it contains
extensive and fertile tracts free from timber, the inconvenience
and plague of all new countries. On the road from Hobart Tow n
to Port Dalrymple, there is a plain extending in one direction for
twenty miles, and clear land is frequent on that side of the island.
To the north-west of Pittwater is the Coal-river settlement. About
twelve miles higher up, are several farms; midw'ay stands Mount
Direction, (a remarkably picturesque hill of vast height,) and gives
an air of grandeur and sublimity to the surrounding scenery.
There are several scattered farms in this quarter, and on the east
bank of the Denvent, as far as New Norfolk. Above the falls at
this place the Derwent receives many rivulets; and a most beauti-
ful and fertile country lies idle on its banks. All these settle-
ments form together a county, under the name of Buckingham-
shire, comprising about half the island, the other half being called
the County of Cornwall.
2. There is a second station at Port Dalrymple, on the river
Tamar, which falls into Bass’s Straits. Launceston, hitherto the
seat of this establishment, is situated forty miles up the river, at
the confluence of two small streams, called the North and South
Esk, into which the Tamar divides itself. This town is about 120
miles across the island from Hobart Town. The Tamar not being
< practicable


practicable for large vessels farther than seven or eight miles, a
new town is begun near its entrance, called George Town, to
which the establishment of Launceston is now removing, a good
brick gaol (the sine qua. non ot colonies like these) being already
erected there. The distance between these towns is about forty
miles.
3. On the western coast of the island are two ports, the one
called Macquarie, extending in a south-east direction, and forming
a basin of about forty miles long, and from seven to eight miles
broad; but unfortunately it has a very narrow entrance. The
channel inwards, which is formed between an island and the west-
head of entrance, is very deep, but not more than thirty yards
wide: the basin is navigable, but shoally for about eight miles,
after which there is deep water in all parts. In itsclitls are veins
of coal, and on its shores abundance of useful and valuable timber,
particularly a sort of cedar called the Huon pine, much es-
teemed in the colony and in India for its peculiar property of re-
pelling insects. These productions have,attracted the attention of
government; and it is intended to form an establishment here. '
4. Port Davey, on the same coast, is more to the southward,
and is a spacious port with an open entrance; but the country
is rocky and barren, and the timber difficult ot access.
Into these two ports fall several rivers; one of them, called
Gordon’s river, has been traced along its sinuosities for about
fifty miles. Those to the westward descend from a vast range
of mountains which extends north and south the whole length
of the island, but nearer to the western than the eastern coast.
Upon these mountains, which have terraces at various heights,
there are numerous lakes—one said to be sixty miles in cir-
cumference, another thirty, a third twelve, and several two or
three. Various rivers also run from them to the eastward; as
Blackman’s river, which divides the counties, and Lake river,
Which joins the South Esk, about fourteen miles above Laun-
ceston. Several others run northerly into Bass’s Strait to the west-
ward of the Tamar, of which one forms a shoal port; and there
are some from the eastern mountains which fall into the strait to
the eastward. It is in the south-east part of this range of moun-
tains that the Derwent rises, as does the Huon, a considerable
river to the southward, which falls into Storm Bay Passage near
its entrance. Thus every part of the island is well watered.
Farming in an infant and remote colony is necessarily defective
in many points; but the wheat of Van Diemen’s land averages
60 lbs. to the bushel, and the general produce of an acre is thirty
bushels. All the grain and pulse of Europe flourish here; but the
climate


climate is not warm enough for maize. In return, that destructive
insect, the weevil, will not live in Van Diemen’s Land.
With all these advantages of soil and sun, no country appears
to have been poorer in indigenous productions of all kinds than
this island; in which respect, as in the botany and natural history
of what it does produce, it resembles the neighbouring continent.
Here also are the eucalyptus, (but by no means so large as that
of New South Wales,) the casuarina and mimosa, the kangaroo,
the opossum, the emu or cassowary, the ornithorynchus para-
doxus, venemous snakes of various kinds, the black swan, parrots,
parroquets, and cocketoos, pelicans, pigeons, quail, snipe and
ducks. Peculiar to this island, but of rare occurrence, is the
hyaena opossum, so called from its resemblance to the hyaena. It
is the only beast of prey in the island; for the native dog, which
is so destructive to the sheep of New South Wales, does not exist
here.
Of exotic animals, horned cattle, horses, and particularly sheep,
thrive and increase—the last, in a prodigious degree; the ewes
lambing twice a year, and generally dropping twins. Goats and
pigs run wild upon the islands in the Tamar and in the woods.
In the shape of fruit or vegetables nothing edible was found in
Van Diemen’s Land; but nearly all the fruits of Europe have
been successfully introduced there. The grape requires a warm
aspect, and the orange and lemon will not ripen except in very
favourable situations.
Van Diemen’s Land is not, as has been supposed, the Botany
Bay of Botany Bay—
‘ in the lowest deep a lower deep;’—
convicts are transported for further offences from Port Jackson
to a settlement called Newcastle, on the coast of New South
Wales, to the northward of Port Jackson; and it is intended to
establish a new Botany Bay at the recently discovered Port of
Macquarie on the eastern coast of New Holland. Van Diemen’s
Land has a lieutenant-governor and judge-advocate of its own,
commissioned by his Majesty; but it has not yet obtained the
benefit of a separate criminal jurisdiction, so that prisoners for
trial, prosecutors and witnesses, are compelled to make the
voyage to Port Jackson. Its civil jurisdiction is confined to causes
of .50/. value; but the Judge of the Supreme Court of New South
Wales has lately made a circuit to the island for tjie trial of causes
of greater value. The colony is peopled by free settlers and con-
victs from England as well as from New South Wales; and,
though the pamphlet before us gives a frightful picture of out-
lawry and rapine, we understand that under the skilful adminis-
tration


tration of the present lieutenant-governor (Sorell) the whole island
is now quiet and orderly. The necessaries of life are cheap, and
mere labour is paid at the rate of 7s. 6d. per day; but as there is
little specie in the island, promissory notes form the currency, and,
as in America, barter (too often of rum) liquidates the debt.
The following is an abstract statement of the population, land
in cultivation, and stock, on Van Diemen’s Land; taken from the
books of the general muster in
September,
1818:
At the Settlements on the DERWENT.
At PORT DALRYMPLE.
POPULATION
POPULATION.
Convicts.
Free. Convicts >
Men - - - 1,114
Men ... 189 Men - - - 267
Men - - - 640
Women - - 333
Children - - 483
Women - - 185
Children of do, 49
Women - 78 Women - - 55
Children - - 150 Children of do. 14
LAND,
On which are growing crops of Wheat 3,529
Barley ----135 i
Peas and Beans ... 145
Potatoes - - - -247 i
In cultivation besides gardens (acres) 4,057
LAND,
On which are growing crops of Wheat 1,520|
Barley 78*
Peas and Beans - 2>\
Potatoes ----21 i
In cultivation besides gardens(acm) 1,624
TT S Male - - 97
Korses Feiuale . . 10 6-
106 203
Horned £ Male - - 4,668
Cattle i Female - - 7,019
7,019 —11,687
t Male - - 30,680
Sheep £ Female - -62,909 93,589
STOCK,
„ i Male - - 29
Horses ( Female - - 32-
32 61
HornedJ Male - - 1,398
Cattle ( Female - - 2,271 3,669
S Male - • -13,195
Stiee P I Female - - 21,099 34,294
TOTAL ON VAN
DIEMENS LAND.
Populition (exclusive of the Civil Horses ----- 264
Officers and Military) - - 3,557 Horned Cattle .... 15,356
Land in cultivation (acres) - 5,681 Sheep --127,88 j
Th>3 trade of the island is principally with India and the Isle of
France. The Derwent offers a convenient rendezvous for the
whale fishery, and the oil would ffnd a sure market in India.
Salted meat might be sent in great quantities both to the Isle of
France and Ceylon; and the wool might be improved, as that of
New South Wales has been, for the British maket. Wheat,
which is grown in quantities considerably exceeding the con-
sumption of the island, has hitherto supplied the deficiencies of
the parent colony. Port Dalrymple affords the same assistance
to the seal fishery of Bass’s Straits as the Derwent does to the
southern whale fishery.
The


EXPORTS (exclusive of 250 Tons of Oil takm home by the licensed whaler Anne.)
Wheat.
(Bushels.)
Meat.
Horned
Cattle.
Sheep.
Seal and
Kangaroo
Skins.
Oil.
(Tons.)
Potatoes.
(Tons.)
Huon
Pine.
(Peel.)
1817.
1818.
24,000
8,000
20 tons
70 casks
92
10,000
10,000
90
150
1,200
17,500
The natives of Van Diemen’s Land are few in number consi-
dering the extent of country which they yet hold free from Euro-
pean invasion. It is probable that their extreme wretchedness
80 Van Diemen's Lund.—The Bush Ranger.
O
The following statement will shew the imports and exports at
Hobart Town for the years 1817 and 1818:
IMPORTS (exclusive of Government Stores, British Goods, and India Piece-Goods.)
Spirits. Wine. Beer. Sugar. Soap.
Gallons.) (Gallons.) (Casks.) (lons.) (Boxes.)
Tobacco. Tea.
(Baskets.) ( C bests.)
1817. 10,313 2,291 47 83 156
1818. 13,537 4,982 152 100 172
370 278
203 311
The natives of Van Diemen’s Land are few in number consi-
dering the extent of country which they yet hold free from Euro-
pean invasion. It is probable that their extreme wretchedness
forbids their increase. They have been always hostilely inclined,
and by no means avail themselves of the freedom of our streets
and houses, like the natives of Port Jackson. This feeling is
ascribed to a fatal quarrel at the first settling, in which several of
them were killed, and the memory of which has been kept alive
by occasional encounters in the interior between them and the so-
litary Europeans employed as stock-keepers. These are frequently
assaulted by spears and stones, and are compelled to use fire-arms
in their defence. The two parties live in mutual suspicion and
dread ; and time and conciliation towards such of the natives as
afford opportunities of intercourse can alone obliterate the present
impression of long cherished animosity. Some intercourse has
lately been effected with those of the western coast, and they ap-
pear free from all oppression of the colonists. Hence it would
seem that, on the other side of the island, the native hostility arises
from some ancient grudge, particularly since, from the difficult if
not wholly impracticable nature of the western range of moun-
tains, it is very doubtful whether the tribes have any communica-
tion unless by the northern extremity of the island. The savages do
not eat the cattle or sheep; but they often destroy them and burn
the carcasses. They subsist chiefly on kangaroos, opossum, and
‘ such small deer,’ down to the kangaroo-rat, migrating in times of
scarcity to the coast for fish.
The great difference between the Indians of Van Diemen’s
Land and those of New Holland, though the countries are sepa-
rated


rated by a strait not a hundred miles wide, and studded with
islands by means of which canoes might safely pass, and though
the rest of nature’s productions are nearly the same in both
lands, affords a subject of curious speculation. The islanders
resemble the African negro in physiognomy much more than the
natives of the continent; and the hair of the former is woolly,
whereas that of the latter is coarse and straight. Both races are
equally free from any tradition of origin, or acquaintance with
each other, although their barbarism seems at the extreme pitch.
Their languages are entirely different, and it is probable that
they never had any connexion with each other.
A similar phenomenon occurs in the Great Andaman island, in
the Bay of Bengal, whither the native Indian convicts are now
transported. The barbarism of the few inhabitants of this island
is said to be equal to that of the New Hollanders; and the fol-
lowing passages from Symes’s Embassy to Ava might have been
written of the natives of Van Diemen’s Land.
‘ Their sole occupation is to rove along the margin of the sea
in quest of a precarious meal of fish. In stature they seldom ex-
ceed five feet. Their limbs are disproportionately slender, their
bellies protuberant, with high shoulders and large heads; and,
strange to find in this part of the world, they are a degenerate
race of negroes with woolly hair, flat noses and thick lips. They
go quite naked, and are insensible of any shame from exposure.
Hunger may (but these instances are rare) induce them to put
themselves in the power of strangers; but the moment that want
is satisfied, nothing short of coercion can prevent them from re-
turning to a way of life more congenial to their savage nature.
Their habitations display little more ingenuity than the dens of
wild beasts; four sticks stuck in the ground are bound together at
the top, and fastened transversely by others, to which branches of
trees are suspended: an opening is left on one side just large
enough to admit of entrance: leaves compose their bed.
The reader is now prepared to enter into the little maiden
pamphlet before us, if that epithet can, with any propriety, be ap-
plied to so monstrous a birth as the ‘ Life of Michael Howe.’ He
was born at Pontefract in 1787, and was apprenticed to a mer-
chant vessel at Hull; but he 1 shewed his indentures a fair pair of
heels,’ (as Prince Henry says,) and entered on board a man of
war, from which he got away as he could. He was tried at York
in 1811 for a highway robbery, and sentenced to seven years
transportation. He arrived in Van Diemen’s Land in 1812, and
was assigned by government as a servant to a settler; from this
service he absconded into the woods, and joined a party of twenty-
eight bush-rangers, as they are called. In this profession he lived
VOL. XXlll. NO. XLV. F SIX


six years of plunder and cruelty, during which he appears to
have twice surrendered himself to justice, under proclamations of
pardon, but was both times unaccountably suffered to escape
again to the woods. It is reproachful to the government of the
colony to think that it was after the second of these flights from
justice, or at least from confinement, that he committed the mur-
der of the two men who had, as they thought, secured him. By
this means he again escaped, to be shot at last by a private sol-
dier of the 48th regiment and another man; for so desperate was
this villain, that he was only to be taken dead, and by stratagem.
Howe was without a spark of even the honour of an outlaw; he
betrayed his colleagues upon surrendering himself to government,
and he fired upon the native girl, his companion, when she became
an impediment to his flight. He was reduced at last to abandon-
ment, even by his own gang; and 100 guineas, and (if a convict
should lake him) a free pardon and a passage to England, were
set upon his head. He was now a wretched, conscience-haunted
solitary, hiding in dingles, and only tracked by the sagacity of the
native girl, to whom he had behaved so ungratefully, and who was
now employed by the police to revenge his cruelty to her. His
arms, ammunition, dogs and knapsack were first taken from him;
and in the last was found' a little memorandum-book of kangaroo
skin, written by himself in kangaroo blood. It contained a sort of
journal of his dreams, which shewed strongly the •wretched state
of his mind, and some tincture of superstition. It appears that he
frequently dreamt of being murdered by natives, ef seeing his old
companions, of being nearly taken by a soldier; and in one in-
stance only, humanity asserts itself even in the breast of Michael
Howe, for we find him recording that he dreamt of his sister. It
also appears from this little book, that he had once an idea of
settling in the woods; for it contains long lists of such seeds as
he wished to have, vegetables, fruits, and even flowers!
We are happy to hear that these bush-rangers are at length ex-
terminated. They were a heavy drawback upon the industry of a
young colony; and settlers were fain to pay them black-mail as a
composition for escape from worse plunder. It was more than
conjectured in Van Diemen’s Land that these freebooters could
not have maintained themselves so long, had not they found abet-
tors, concealers, and receivers of their spoils. They would lift
a flock of sheep from one farmer and turn it into the pasture of
another, marking the animals as his; and the destruction of this
staple stock of the colony was immense, for the outlaws were
often compelled to secrete themselves in recesses till a score of
sheep (sometimes their only fare) was devoured or wasted by
them.


We repeat our hope that this narrative (which by the way might
have been drawn up with more plainness and simplicity) will be
hereafter as merely a matter of curious history in Van Diemen’s
Land, as it is in this country; and we desire to see the next lite-
rary production of the Hobart Town press more pleasing in the
manner, and less tragical in the matter. It is natural that the early
literature of such a colony should consist of last dying speeches
and confessions; but even such literature is better than none;
and we understand that Hobart Town now publishes a weekly
Gazette, and that the government, whose organ it is, is adminis-
tered by a man of talent and reading.
Art. Hl. — Voyage dans le Levant en 1817 et 1818. Tome I.
Large folio. Par le Comte de Forbin. Paris.
r pHE precise object of the Count de Forbin’s ‘Voyage dans le
-*■ Levant’ is not quite apparent from its fruits.—lt may have
been undertaken with the view of enabling the ‘ Director General
of Museums’ to exhibit his talent as an artist in seventy or eighty
indifferent specimens of lithography, of which half-a-dozen of the
worst bear his name; —or to gratify his royal patron Louis XVIIL,
by presenting to him a volume equal at least in dimensions to the
‘ Grand Livre’ on Egypt, which the Savans of the Institute laid at
the feet of Napoleon Buonaparte: —for the purpose of collecting
information, it could hardly have been undertaken; for it literally
contains none. It would be equally difficult to discover on what
grounds an old and meritorious servant, who, like Denon, had dis-
tinguished himself by his knowledge of antiquities, by his taste and
execution in the fine arts, and by his zeal for their promotion among
his countrymen, was dismissed to make room for the present Apollo
of the Museum, who has not the good fortune to be gifted with
science, art, or taste, or even with the semblance of zeal or respect
for any of them.
If we did not happen to know Count Forbin to be the most dap-
per and the best dressed gentleman in all Paris, —the very dandy of
the Museum, —we should not have failed to suspect as much from
a hint modestly conveyed to us in the opening of his work: —-so
greatly, it seems, is he recherche in Paris, that he was afraid to give
the least intimation of ‘ the difficult and hazardous enterprize’ he was
about to undertake, lest he should find himself unable to resist the
remonstrances of his friends, or to tear himself away from their em-
braces.
When the important day arrived on which our daring adventurer
was ‘ to confide his destiny to chance,’ he set off (secretly, of
course) for Marseilles; and having collected into his train a skilful
F £ architect.


architect, a celebrated panoramist, an aspiring artist, and a clerical
cousin, embarked with them on board the Cleopatra frigate, one of
the squadron destined for the Levant. They left Toulon on the 21st
of August, and fell in with the coast of Africa on the 25th. On
the 2d September they reached Milo, where our traveller, for his
coup d’essai, scrambled to the top of a mountain which he calls
Mavrouticho, (Manroteiche , we presume,) and, from the door of
a solitary monastery inhabited by one poor Greek priest, enjoyed,
he says, a magnificent view of the whole Grecian archipelago,—
‘ tout I’archipel de la Grtice;’—and as extensive, we may add, as
‘ magnificent/ since it embraced a circuit of about 460 English
miles!
He was now transferred to the Hazard brig, bound to Athens,
where he arrived on the sth September. We know not what por-
tion of the fortnight which our author passed here, he dedicated to
the examination of the remains of antiquity in the city of Minerva,
as he terms it; nor to what specific description of them his atten-
tion was principally directed: but if he gives us little information
on these points, we have at least no reason to complain of a want
of vapid declamation and mawkish sentiment, or, as he is pleased
to call it, ‘ reverie;’ of which the following may serve as a speci-
men.
4 It was my frequent custom to walk out at night, because the hourof
darkness seemed to put me in communication with the past. It is then
that the imagination without effort reaches the most splendid edifices ;
and the dubious light of the moon aids these magnificent resurrections.
I peopled the porticoes and the public places with illustrious shades;
I agitated the multitude by the uncertainty of a defeat or a triumph ;
the temples opened, and 1 fancied that I heard the warlike spirits of the
citizens ; the impassioned accents of the orators, and the tumult of a
free people, jealous of their glory, devoting to the infernal deities all
the enemies of their independence.’ (p. 14.)
He was not, however, so entirely engrossed by these sublime
speculations, but that he found leisure (besides assisting at a num-
ber of weddings, dances, &c.) to fill his portfolio; and we have no
doubt that, when the other elephantine volume (with which w'e are
to be favoured) shall be launched, he will be ready to say, as one of
his countrymen did to a gentleman about to set out on his travels
into Fgypt, 4 Attendez, Monsieur/ —laying his hand on the great
book of the Savans of the Institute, — 4 il n’y a rien a faire, il ny a
rien a voir, soyez tranquille, ici vous trouverez tout:’—there is no-
thing to see, nothing to do, make yourself easy, here you will find
every thing!
Our readers already know' that Lord Elgin (following the exam-
ple of the French) removed several of the decaying metopes from
the


the Temple of Minerva; leaving, as it appears, no more than
twenty-eight behind him, one of which only was in a tolerable state
of preservation. This was sufficiently vexatious.—But the Count
has his revenge; and grows quite brilliant at his lordship’s expense.
‘ A Tepoque de I’expedition de Lord Elgin, on remplaga, par un
pilier de magonnerie, la Cariatidede Tangle de la Chapelle de Pan-
drose; cette statue qu’il emporta 6tait la mieux conserv6e. On
ecrivit sur la plus voisine, Opus Fhidia; et sur le pilier informe,
Opus Elgin.’ —(p. 11.)
This would have been fair enough ; but unluckily it is not true :
—the inscription on the first pillar (which the Count could not
read) is in Greek, —‘ EXyiv eTroirjoV; that on the other, (which the
Count could not see,) is in Latin—
‘ Quod non fecerunt Goti
Hoc fecerunt Scoti.’
But though we may indulge a smile at this facetious sally on
Lord Elgin, we cannot extend our complaisance quite so far as to
humour the Director General of Museums in the effusion of Iris
spleen against a most industrious and meritorious body of artists,
to whose labours we are indebted for the best models in ancient art
which time has spared to us.
‘ J’y trouvai aussi plusieurs artistes Anglais ou Allemands, dessinant,
mesurant, depuis plusieurs annees, avec Texactitude minutieuse des
commentateurs les plus scrupuleux, ces monumens, noble creation
du genie. Esclaves malheureux des regies, des moindres caprices
des anciens, ils ecrivent des volumes pour relever une erreur de trois
lignes commise en 1680, sur la mesure d’une architrave ; ils s’appe-
santissent, s’endorment, et demeurent huit ans a Athenes pour dessiner
trois colonnes.’ (p. 13.)
We can easily believe that this spruce Frenchman and his compa-
nions would have carried away in their portfolios, not only the
‘ three columns,’ but all Athens, nay, all Greece, in one-third
of the time that these 1 unhappy slaves of rules’ have been ‘ poring
and dosing, and lingering over their labours :’ but then, these labours
will bear to be examined and compared with the originals; and
when they come to be submitted to public inspection, it will not
be found that the authors of them, whether English or German,
have represented black for white, blue for yellow, red for green,
round for square, a land tortoise for a river-horse, or the inverted
heads of goats for cherubs on the wing to the abodes of bliss ! # Nor
will the members of the Institutes or Academies of their respective
countries, who may have vouched for their accuracy, need to blush
at having imposed on the world their idle conceits and misrepre-
* Quarterly Review, No. XXXVIII. page 240.
F 3
sentations,


sentations, as 1 faithful copies of ancient art, carefully traced and ac-
curately coloured from the originals.’
The vanity and self-sufficiency of the Count are mortified beyond
measure by the popularity of the English; and his imagination is
perpetually haunted by the idea of their intruding themselves into
every corner of the East. He is equally offended at the snail-paced
diligence of one set of our countrymen, and at the rapidity with
which another set are whirled round the world; —‘ des Anglais riches,
dont I’affaire importante etait de traverser la Grece le plus prompte-
nient possible.’ (p. 1 3.) We suspect however that it would be diffi-
cult to find any ‘ rich Englishman’ travelling with greater celerity, or
passing the most interesting objects with greater indifference, than
the Count himself. It will hardly be credited that this virtuoso,
who presides over the paintings, the statuary, and the vast col-
lection of antiquities in the great city of Paris, who travelled with
all the pomp and parade of artists and savans in his train, had not
the curiosity to go a few miles out of his way to visit the plains of
Marathon, the strait of Thermopylse, or the ruins of Corinth!—that
when he quitted ‘ the city of Minerva,’ (to which his researches were
confined,) for Constantinople, he blest the favourable south-west
breeze which hurried him past the shores of the Troad !—and that
he flew from Constantinople to Smyrna, and from Smyrna to St.
Jean d’Acre, without attempting to land on a single island of that
archipelago which his comprehensive vision had taken in at a
glance, or without visiting one spot of classical renown, with the
solitary exception of Ephesus!
It was a fine day (it is generally so in September) when the
Count arrived at Constantinople, and his eyes were dazzled with
the view; the passage-boats were skimming the surface of the
water, the domes of the mosques and the gilded shafts of the
minarets were illumined with the sun’s rays; and no Englishman
as yet had crossed his path to disturb his enjoyment of the grand
prospect. His heart began to sink, however, when he heard that
the plague was raging, and had found its way into the corps
diplomatique; and the impossibility of passing the narrow and
slippery streets of Constantinople ‘ without coming in contact
with the end of a shawl, or the loose robe or caftan,’ was not cal-
culated to allay the agitation of his nerves.
Other troubles assailed him in this great city. Every w'here the
Turks elbowed him, the Jew's bow'ed the head to him, the Greeks
grinned at him, the Armenians cheated him, (p. 46.) the dogs
barked at him, the pigeons alighted on his shoulders, (this requires
confirmation, as his countrymen say,) and while some light-heeled
groups were dancing around him, others w'ere dying in agonies;
find thus he constantly found himself surrounded with mirth and
mourning,


mourning, and peril of the plague. Still no Englishman * seared his
eye-balls,’ though their traces were every where visible; and he took
the favourable opportunity of speculating on the unaccountable dura-
tion of the Ottoman empire. At first, it struck him to be the title alone
that supports the sultan on the most tottering throne of Europe ; —
no, not that alone; a moment’s reflection told him it was the in-
fluence of Russia, —no, that would not do neither;—he reflects for
another moment; and the truth bursts upon him in full radiance— ‘ it
was England that protected this tottering empire, the weakness of
which is favourable to the commercial tyranny of that country!’—
The ‘commercial tyranny of England’ is a cant phrase in the mouth
of a Frenchman, which means —what he is alw’ays unwilling to
express—superior skill, enterprize, punctuality, integrity, and ho-
nour.
II avlng for our own purpose explained what is meant by ‘ com-
mercial tyranny,’ we will, for the individual benefit of Count For-
bin, tell him what we consider as an act of commercial meanness.
Is the Count acquainted with a certain person, who, when he was
sent officially to negociate an exchange of casts of the metopes and
other works of art with the British Museum, took advantage of
the circumstance, and endeavoured to make it a condition that two
hundred copies of his huge volume should be admitted into Eng-
land duty-free, which, at £‘l : Bs. 6rf. a volume, (the duty on each,)
would have put into his own pocket about live hundred pounds!
This act, of which he may be assured no English gentleman would
or could be guilty, conies under that description—the Count, per-
haps, may give it another name; but its nature will remain un-
changed.
At Ephesus, where we left our traveller, he saw several Greek
inscriptions on the gate of the Stadium, which he did not copy,
and two on an arcade in the theatre which he rvould have copied
but could not, ‘ parce qu’elles avaient ele laissees rempli de platre
par des Anglais, amis des sciences et toujours soigneux des jouis-
sances des autres.' The sneer against the hated English could
scarcely by any possibility have been so ill applied as in this place;
but it shows the utter ignorance of the ‘ man of art’ in matters in-
timately connected with his profession. Had he really been able to
copy Greek, no method could have assisted him so effectually as
that of filling up the letters with plaster: this was first ingeniously
practised by Colonel Squire while serving in Egypt under the com-
mand of Lord Hutchinson; and by it he was enabled to decypher
an inscription which had hitherto baffled the efforts of every
traveller, (including the whole of Buonaparte’s corps of savans,)
and to shew that the column vulgarly named after Pompey was in
fact erected under the reign of the Emperor Dioclesian. We fnr-
X’ 4 thee


iher infer the Count’s ignorance of Greek from his taking no
notice of the ‘ several inscriptions on the gates of the Stadium’ in
that language; but contenting himself with placing before the eyes
of his readers, one in large Roman capitals, (and it is the only
one in his book,) —Accenso Rensi et Asije, which he tells us
is Latin. We will take his word for it:—and as he modestly ab-
stains from translating this precious morsel, lest, we suppose, he
should appear to insult the understanding of his readers, we cannot
do better than follow his example.
As the south-west wind had favoured the Count with a rapid
passage through the Dardanelles, so a fresh breeze from the north-
west now happily relieved him from the fatigue of landing on any
of the islands usually visited by travellers, —Scio, Nacri, Lipso,
Patinos, Lero, Colmine, Stanco, or even Rhodes itself, —and .on
the (sth November he was safely put on shore at St. Jean d’Acre.
Many years have not elapsed since a French army sat down
before this city, and put in practice all the means that a fero-
cious soldiery, headed by a blood-thirsty commander, could de-
vise, to destroy the unoffending inhabitants, and reduce their dwell-
ings to heaps of ashes ; and European travellers, as might be ex-
pected, have heard only curses loud and deep against the unprovoked
aggression.—Not so, however, Count Forbin—his ear was soothed
with the most enchanting panegyrics of his brave and humane coun-
trymen —‘Us parlaient avec admiration des efforts de I’armeeFran-
<<aise dans I’orient!’ This is almost too much for the politicians of
the Palais Royal to digest.—What! on the very spot distinguished
(according to his own avowal) by the most sanguinary transactions
of his countrymen —are the inhabitants so lost to every sense of
feeling, that, ere the tear is dry upon the widow’s cheek, they cele-
brate the achievements of the French? We should just as soon be-
lieve that ‘ the people of Jaffa, whose plains are still white
with the bones of massacred prisoners,’ are lavish in their praise
and admiration of the prowess and bland humanity of Buonaparte.
It would be useless to follow the Count over various parts of
Palestine, or to extract any of his ‘ reveries’ in the Holy city;
where, as in Athens, he enjoys a sort of second-sight, different how-
ever from that of our northern neighbours, and more safe, as it
shews him the past instead of the future, —thus ‘ the most terrible
scenes are presented to his view—the flames of the temple mount
into the highest regions of the air, which they kindle into a blaze
—the celestial hosts behold them with a holy terror, &c.’ fp. 40.)
If he enters into any particular remarks, they are generally trite, very
often childish, and almost always calculated to give false impres-
sions: they are the less likely to mislead, however, as he generally
takes care to refute them himself.
‘ Dans


‘ Dans toute la Judee, quelques pluies seulement indiquent I’hiver ;
I’automne n’apporte point de fruits, le printempsne fait pas eclore une
fleur, et cependant les ardeurs de I’ete consument Haceldama, et ta-
rissent la source de Siloe ; on croiroit qu’il ny a plus de saisons pour
cette contree malheureuse.’ —p. 32.
‘ In all Judzea a few showers only indicate winter/ says Count
Forbin. (p. 44.) ‘ The climate of Jerusalem is frequently rigor-
ous during Winter ; snozo sometimes falls ; and the cold w'as some-
what intense when we prepared to leave it/ says the Director Gene-
ral of Museums, (p. 43.) ‘ There are no longer any seasons for
this unhappy country/ says the Count; ‘it was winter at Jerusa-
lem, and spring at Jaffa/ says the Director. (p. 40.) ‘ There are
no fruits in autumn , and no flowers in the spring in all Judaea/
Yet he found great plenty of fruit-trees, and ate also of their fruits!
Had he condescended to open Hasselquist, or to look into the pages
of any of the more recent travellers before he wrote, he might have
learned that no country in the world possesses a greater profusion
of wild flow ers than the land of Judah ; —that it is peculiarly adapted
for flocks and herds, and bees, and eminently entitled to be called,
in the language of Scripture, ‘ a land flowing with milk and honey/
But it is needless to dwell longer on the Director General’s per-
plexing description of ‘ this unhappy country, —which has no sea-
sons—no flowers in the spring, and no fruits in the autumn’—when
it appears, from his own account, that he never saw it either in
spring, summer, or autumn, but only galloped through it at a prodi-
gious rate in the month of November.
The Count left Jerusalem on the 2d December, and returned by
Jaffa, where, he says, the Aga frequently spoke of the French armies;
but he prudently suppresses the nature of the conversation. He
makes amends, however, for his silence on this subject by the fol-
lowing paragraph, which is in the very best style of sentimental gal-
limaufry. ‘ How often in this line climate have I regretted the fogs
and cloudy sky of France! How often have my eyes been turned sor-
row fully towards the west! —A young swallow' was the companion
of my chamber; it settled every evening on a peg in the wall,
and every morning at sun-rise I gave my little friend his liberty. It
is not improbable that he came from France ; and he may have
quitted a roof which sheltered the object of my tender solicitude/
(p. 47.) How rural ! as Peter Pastoral says.
From Jaffa he proceeded by Ashdad, Gaza, and El Arish, across
the desert, to Egypt. To shorten the tedious uniformity of the
way, he listened to a melting tale of love and murder told by an
Arab, which he has printed, as ‘an interesting episode’; and embel-
lished with a lithographic print, for the edification of the Parisian
antiquaries.


The unhappy Count seems doomed, wherever he turns his steps,
to meet with nothing but grievances. To say nothing of the Eng-
lish; blind men and buffaloes, processions of marriages, executions
and burials, fish-dealers and fellahs, perpetually impeded his way
‘ among the infectious canals and ruined houses of Damietta’: nor
was the passage over the plain of Massoura calculated to raise his
spirits—for here, says he, the reflection crossed me that I was on
the field where ‘ fortune proved treacherous to French valour.’ He
soon rallies his spirits, however, and magnanimously declares that,
after all, when he recollected the trophies of Buonaparte, and
traced the career of the French armies in Egypt, under the shade of
the palms which embellished the heritage of the Pharaohs and the
Ptolemies, t he should have thought himself happy to have been
one of the lowest ranks in the rear-guard.’ It is not for us to dis-
pute this point, nor to deny that our chivalrous traveller is better
fitted for the situation of a corporal in Buonaparte’s army than to
preside over the arts and antiquities of the Royal M useum of Paris;
but we cannot help thinking that he takes rather an ungracious man-
ner of repaying the patronage of Louis XVIII. by such a declara-
tion.
At Cairo, as might have been anticipated, our adventurer observed
Turks, Arabs, Copts, Armenians, Jews, asses, mules, camels,
pilgrims returning from Mecca, and hungry dogs howling after
them, and all jostling and crowding together. ‘To escape from
the press, [entered,’ he says, ‘almost all the mosques of the city with
bended knees; and protected by my Mussulman costume, mum-
bled over the formula of the faith, with my beard in close contact
with the sacred stone.’ (p. 72.) There are so many little oversights
in the Count’s narrative, so many petty sacrifices of accuracy to
effect, that he will, we are quite sure, excuse us for doubting, whe-
ther, at his devotions, or on any other occasion, he adopted the
‘ Mussulman costume,’ At Cairo, as in London, nobody cares
much about the costume of a stranger: in travelling up the Nile,
indeed, a Turkish dress is extremely convenient to prevent trouble-
some curiosity; yet at Thebes we know that the Count wore no
such dress; while his flowing beard, instead of being long enough to
touch ‘ la pierre sacree,’ had moulted; and
— ! ‘ his chin new reaped,
Shewed like a stubble land at harvest home.’
But his beard was not the only thing that did not follow him to
Thebes; he appears to have left his recollection also somewhere on
the road. ‘La chaleur (he says) etait dejd insupportable a Thebes
dans les premiers jours de Mars .’ Now we must remind him that
he arrived at Luxor, a village on the site of ancient Thebes, on the
28th of January, and left it theJirst week in February; and conse-
quently


quently could not have suffered from the insupportable heat there in
the ‘ first days of March.’ We do not know that the Count will
thank us; but some of his fair countrywomen who have ‘ trembled
at his desperate hardihood,’ may perhaps feel relieved at being in-
formed that at Thebes, (situated in about 26° of northern latitude,)
where ‘ he found the very pebbles burning hot,’ the heat is mode-
rate, and the weather perfectly delightful both in February and
March. Again—
‘ On eprouve souvent pendant le jour, d&s qu’on s'eloigne du Nil,
une fievre presque inconnue en Europe, celle de la soif. Cette souffrance
cruelle est au-dessus de toute expression ; elle a son sommeil, son de-
lire; on rhve douloureusement le souvenir desvallees les plus fraiches,
des boissons glacees; et la memoire devient le tourment le plus terri-
ble de cette maladie Africaine.’ (p. 94.)
This African malady, in which ‘ on r£ve douloureusement,’ is
not, we suspect, confined to the banks of the Nile. Surely the Count
cannot suppose that, after all the journies which have been made
through every corner of Egypt, it is not perfectly well known, that
from Cairo to Assouan, about six hundred miles, the habitable part
of the valley of the Nile extends not farther from the river on either
side than its waters can be conveyed for the purposes of irrigation ;
that it is so conveyed in canals; that there is scarcely a mile without
a village ; and that for these reasons the last solicitude that any tra-
veller need to feel, is about a supply of water.
It was not, however, the dread of a want of water which finally
arrested the progress of the Count, and prevented him from tread-
ing the soil of Meroe, and of fifty other places, which he would
have visited, and was the more desirous of visiting because unpol-
luted by the feet of any English traveller:—such an obstacle would
have been nobly surmounted by that spirit of enterprize which had
already carried him through so many other difficulties. No—it
was a Gorgon, a chimaera more formidable than—but let him tell
the dreadful tale in his own words;
‘ I had intended to visit Elephantine, Syene, Philae, Ipsambul, and
to penetrate as far as the island of Meroe, but there enters always more
or less a spirit of adventure in these distant excursions; the desire of
seeing places that are little known has a powerful tendency to support
the fatigues and privations of a long voyage. If every body has been
able to see that which we are in search of, disgust threatens us, and dis-
couragement follows it very soon.’ ‘1 no longer experienced a wish
to ascend the Nile from the moment I observed an English family arrive
at Thebes on their return from the Cataracts. Lord and Lady Belmour
had visited a part of Nubia; they had travelled in the most splendid
style ; three or four large boats followed the one in which they sailed,
Husbands, wives, children, chaplains, surgeons, nurses, cooks, —all bab-
bling of Elphantine. From this moment the illusion vanished for me—
there


there was an end of the matter. I even set off from Thebes sooner than
I had intended, finding it quite impossible to support the perpetual ap-
pearance among these venerable ruins of an English lady’s-maid —une
feinme-de-chambre Anglaise en petit spencer couleur de rose!’—
filthy hags !
Why do you shew me this?
‘ Having no longer any desire to look at any thing, I departed that very
night.’* —p. 94,.
A smart English waiting-maid in a rose-colour spencer! Well
might the gallant spirit that was so desirous of serving in the very
rump of Buonaparte’s army in Egypt be appalled.—We see him at
this moment starting back in visible trepidation, and exclaiming to
the unconscious damsel,
‘ Approach thou like the rugged Russian bear,
The arm’d rhinoceros, or the Hyrcan tyger;
Take any shape but that, and my firm nerves
Shall never tremble.’
If it were worth while to be serious upon so ridiculous a subject,
we might ask the Count what, since the Anglophobia had such an
effect on his delicate nerves, induced him to leave the purlieus of
the Palais Royal ? If he ever read at all, even the periodical jour-
nals of his own country, he must have known that every spot within
his intended voyage had already been defiled, and rendered unworthy
of his grand enterprize, by the presence of Englishmen, aye, and
English women too. But here again we have what the lawyers
call a lapse de facto : Count Forbin neither did nor could see
Lord Belmore’s family arrive at Thebes; for on the very day (the
13th of January) that his lordship reached Thebes, he was, by his
own account, at Cairo. Two English servants, a lady’s maid, two
seamen belonging to his lordship’s yacht, and an Arab procured at
Esn£, composed the whole of Lord Belmore’s suit; and two boats
only made up his formidable fleet! That the Count should mistake
blue for rose-colour, (after the example set him at home,) need not
excite much surprize, especially when his situation is considered:—
that he has done so, we can take upon us to affrm— Et nos in
Arcadia. —We happen to know that this rose-coloured spencer ,
which had such important effects on the Count’s destiny, and de-
prived France, and the world, of almost all that he ‘ rvou/d have
seen,’ is a pale blue pelisse, not much unlike the outer robe of a
* These ludicrous embarrassments of the poor Count have found a sympathizing Eng-
lish critic, who bewails the practice of sutfering nursery-maids and boarding-school
misses to tread on classic ground, and to disturb the antiquary in his profound re-
searches ; and in a high strain of mawkish affectation repines that so many of his coun-
trymen should record their names in ‘ depositories of the effusions of travelling folly and
egotism,’ or in * the police books of the continent.’
Turkish


Turkish lady, and very well adapted to the purposes of oriental
travelling.
But misfortunes never come alone.—To aggravate his distress in
the fatal neighbourhood of Thebes, he discovered, on the leg of
the colossal statue of Memnon, the name and London residence
of an 1 obscure English baronet,’ close by the side of that of Caesar ;
but not that of General Kapp,— ‘ because’ (as the Count oppor-
tunely assures us) ‘ a truly honest ambition is modest.’—Honesty and
modesty associated with the name of Rapp!—But he is right—
Rapp, as well as his master, employed his short leisure in Egypt in
plundering and cutting the throats of the unoffending natives, —a
matter far more to the taste of both than engraving their names on
granite.
The 1 unpardonable egotism of Mr. Salt,’ whom the Count,
with his usual accuracy, designates as a person employed * to make
discoveries for la Societe des Antiquairps de Londres,’ is the last
of his tirades which we shall notice.* The specific crime laid to the
charge of this gentleman is that of filling up the space round the
lower part of the Sphinx, which, under his superintendence, had
been opened by Caviglia; and not waiting for the arrival of our
learned antiquary, that ‘ an active and vigorous investigation might
have been entered upon, which could not fail to throw’ great light
on the history of the arts in ancient days.’ However well qualified
the Director of Museums may be for assisting in such an investi-
gation, he is completely ignorant of the nature of the undertaking.
Had he thought proper to inquire, he would have learned that so
difficult was it to keep out the sand, that the labours of the day
were frequently frustrated by its falling in during the night, and
that in a very few days it w’ould have nearly acquired its former
level. Before this took place, Mr. Salt caused accurate drawings
to be made of the ground-plan, the temples, the paws, and
the inscriptions upon them; (See our No. XXXVHI. p. 40Q.
41G.) but having heard, on his return to Cairo, that the Arabs had,
as usual, commenced the work of destruction, and that the women
were breaking off fragments to wear as amulets or charms, he imme-
diately dispatched, in concert with Caviglia, some workmen to
* We understand that Count Eorbin is again pricked forth in quest of adventures-in
‘ countries far away.’ He has outstript our advice on the present occasion; but we hope
to be in time to advise him, ere his next appearance, to take the opinion of some dis-
creet friend, as he was prudent enough to do on a former occasion at Parma, where he
intended to print his ‘ Travels in Sicily.’ This friend, having attentively perused his ma-
nuscript, conjured him by no means to commit his character with the literary world, as
something of history, science, or antiquity, would be expected from a man of his rank
and station: —* But,’ continued he, * your work is light and amusing enough, and you
need only add a few pretty prints, and change the title to that of “ a Sicilian Romance,”
and it will do very well as a book for the ladies;’—and as a romance it was accordingly
published; but we believe not much read even ‘by the ladies.’
cover


cover up, without delay, what the winds would have accomplished in
the course of a week. Having thus preserved this ancient monu-
ment, after ‘ an active and vigorous investigation/ it remains for the
French consul to uncover it again ; if his countrymen are not satis-
fied with the account of it which we have already given.
The situation which Count Forbin fills ought to set him above
those paltry feelings of jealousy w hich he every w here discovers.
He cannot possibly expect to gain any credit with the thinking part
of mankind for his fretful calumnies against the English. We, how-
ever, are fully capable of defending ourselves; but we observe, in
addition, an ungenerous and unmanly endeavour (for such we must
think it) to depreciate the valuable labours of an unobtrusive
foreigner, simply because he happens to be assisted by the British
Consul. In this, indeed, the Count is not singular: others of his
countrymen have manifested the same unworthy feeling, and one of
their journalists, now before us, sobs out that * it is quite painful
to think that all the discoveries of Belzoni should go to the British
Museum.’
But detraction, it would appear, is not all that Mr. Belzoni has
had to sustain from this irrational jealousy. M, Drovetti, French
consul, has, as Count Forbin informs us, two agents at Thebes;
the one a Mameluke named Yousef, originally a drummer in the
French army; the other a Marseillese renegade of the name of
Riffo, ( small in stature, bold, enterprizing, and choleric, beating the
Arabs because they had neither time nor taste to understand the
Provencal language.’ These persons are more than suspected of
being concerned in a plot against the life of Mr. Belzoni, w ho w as
recently fired at from behind a wall, while employed in his researches
among the ruins of Carnac, where these tw o fellow s were then known
to be lurking. The affair has been brought before the Consular
Court at Cairo, and we trust that M. Drovetti, for the sake of his
own character, and that of his country, will not interfere with the
judicial proceedings, nor attempt to shelter his agents from the
punishment which awaits them.
But Mr. Belzoni had committed an unpardonable offence.
A French mineralogist of the name of Caillaud had accompanied
some Arab soldiers sent by the Pasha of Egypt in search of eme-
ralds among the mountains between the Nile and the Red Sea. On
their return, this person gave out (as we learn from an intelligent
correspondent in the Malta Gazette) that, in this expedition, he had
discovered the ancient city of the Ptolemies, the celebrated Bere-
nice, the great emporium of Europe and the Indies, of which he
gave a magnificent description. Mr. Belzoni, doubtful of the accu-
racy of the story, set out from Edfoo, with one of the former party,
to visit the supposed Berenice, where, instead of the ruins of 800
houses


houses and three temples, as stated by M. Caillaud, he could find
no more than 87 scattered houses, or rather cells, the greater num-
ber of which did not exceed ten feet square, built with unhewn
stones, and without cement; and the only appearance of a temple
was a niche in the rock, without inscription or sculpture of any
kind : there was no land for cultivation, nor any water within
twenty-four miles; no communication with the sea but by a rough
road over the mountains of twenty-five miles, and the shore was so
covered with projecting rocks for twenty or thirty miles on each
side, that there was no security even for the smallest boats, much
less for ships trading to India. These, therefore, he was quite cer-
tain, could not be the remains of Berenice.
As, however, the site of this celebrated city had been fully de-
scribed by the ancient writers, Mr. Belzoui determined to prosecute
his researches ; and at the end of twenty days, he discovered, close
to the shore, the extensive ruins of an ancient city near the Cape
Lepte Extrema , the Ras el Auf of the present day; the projection
of which forms an ample bay, (now named Foul Bay,) having, at the
bottom, an excellent harbour for vessels of small burden. These
ruins, which are, beyond question, those of the celebrated emporium
founded by Ptolemy Philadelphus, were four days’ journey from
the rude cells of the quarrymen or miners, which M. Caillaud is
stated to have so strangely mistaken for the magnificent vestiges of
the ancient Berenice. Several wells of bitter water were found
among the ruins; and between them and the mountains was an ex-
tensive plain fit for cultivation. The remains of more than 3,000
houses were counted, about the centre of which were those of a
temple with sculptured figures and hieroglyphics. The temple alone
was built of calcareous stone; the materials of the houses consisting
of coral rock and other beautiful petrifications; a mixture of Greek
and Egyptian remains w 7 as observable both in the ruins of the tem-
ple and the houses.
Before we quit the subject of Mr. Belzoui, we shall just mention
that, previously to his leaving Egypt, he made a tour to El Wah (the
bushes), the northern Oasis. He found, as Hornemann had done,
the tops of the hills of the desert encrusted with salt, and wells of
sweet water rising out of a surface overspread with masses of salt;
as Herodotus related two and twenty centuries ago. He found
also the remains ot what has been considered as the Temple of Ju-
piter Ammon; but the natives were as jealous and as unwilling to let
him see this ‘ w ork of the infidels,’ as Hornemann had found them
to be. The fine rivulet of sweet w'ater, w hose source this traveller
describes as being in a grove of date trees, and which Brown was
told by the people ‘ w'as sometimes cold and sometimes warm,’
was also visited by Mr. Belzoui; who says he proved the truth of
what


what is stated by Herodotus, that this spring is warm in the morn-
ings and evenings, much more so at midnight, and cold in the mid-
dle of the day. He procured some of the water, which he means to
send to London to be analysed. Had Mr. Belzoni possessed a ther-
mometer, he would have found that it was the temperature of the
air which had changed, while that of the ‘ Fountain of the Sun’ re-
mained the same. The fact, however, of the great change of tem-
perature in the twenty-four hours, which is always the case where
beds of nitre are found, adds another to the many wonderful in-
stances adduced of the minute attention and accurate observation
of the most ancient and valuable writer of profane history.
Art. IV. 1. Report from the Select Committee on the Highways
of the Kingdom, together with the Minutes of Evidence taken
before them. pp. 58.
2. A Practical Essay on the scientific Repair and Preservation
of Public Roads, —presented to the Board of Agriculture by
John Loudon M‘Adam, Esq. pp. IS.
3. Remarks on the present System of Road Making, with Obser-
vations deduced from Practice and Experience, fyc. By John
Loudon M'Adam, Esq. General Surveyor of the Roads in
the Bristol District, pp. 47-
4. An Essay on the Construction of Roads and Carriages. By
Richard Lovell Edgeworth, Esq. F.R.S. M.R.I.A.
5. A Practical Treatise on the making and upholding of Pub-
lic Roads, with a few Remarks on forming Approaches to Gen-
tlemen's Houses; and a Dissertation on the Utility of Broad
Wheels and other Improvements. By James Paterson, Road
Surveyor, Montrose.
AMONG the various branches of rural economy which claim
the attention of the public, the state of the roads is not one
of the least important. All classes of his Majesty’s subjects,
from the driver of the barouche and four down to the humble cot-
tager who, on the Saturday evening, trudges to the nearest market-
town for her weekly supply of tea and sugar, are interested in
performing their respective journies with as much facility as pos-
sible.
The increased population and internal commerce of the country,
of course occasion an increased wear of the roads, which, in a
variety of instances, are still further deteriorated by circumstances
of a local nature. Inclosures, paradoxical as at first sight it may
appear, have, we believe, in some cases produced this effect.
While the greater part of any given district was in a state of un-
cultivated nature, the inhabitants maintained one or two formed
roads


suspicious of our general’s conduct; we have more reason to ad-
mire it, and to believe he knows a thousand times better what is
to be done than we. Submissive obedience is our duty, and I
give it heartily. If any man deserves implicit obedience I think
he does, both in respect of his capacity and integrity.’
In the face of a superior force Marlborough now laid siege to
Bouchain, the armies being so near and in so extraordinary a
situation that the besiegers were bombarded by the enemy. But
the only fruit which Villars derived from this was. the mortifica-
tion of seeing the garrison, consisting of eight battalions and
500 horse, march out as prisoners’ of war. .An anecdote of
Marlborough at this time ought never to be omitted in any account
of his life, however brief. Fenelon was then archbishop of
Cambray. The estates, of his see were exposed to plunder, and,
from respect to his genius and virtues, the English commander
ordered a detachment to guard the magazines of corn at Chateau
Cambresis, and gave a safe-conduct for their conveyance to Cam-
bray. But apprehending afterwards that even this protection
might not be respected because of the scarcity of bread, he sent
a corps of dragoons with waggons to transport the grain, and es-
cort it to the precincts of the town. He meditated next the cap-
ture of Quesnoy; the ministers at home affected to approve of
his intention, and assured him that they were making the strongest
representations to the Dutch for the purpose of obtaining their
concurrence. While these very ministers were deceiving their
general, they were carrying on a secret negociation with France,
and had actually agreed to the preliminaries of that peace by which
the interests of their allies and their country were betrayed.
We may be spared the humiliating task of following the ma-
noeuvres by which the peace of Utrecht was brought about, and
of entering into the details of that abominable transaction; a
transaction in which the agents at home felt so secure of their
power, and at the same time so conscious of their deserts, that
they jested among themselves about the gallows and the scaffold,
to which they might be exposed if they lost the protection of the
Queen, —and the ministers abroad espoused so openly the inte-
rest ot the enemy, as to provoke from Eugene the indignant
question whether they were acting as negociators on the side of
England or of France. The whole scheme of this infamous ad-
ministration could not be effected as long as Marlborough was
at the head of the army. It was impossible to make him act
treacherously towards the allies; and it was always to be feared that
by some signal stroke he might at once defeat the French army and
the schemes of the English cabinet. The removal of Marlbo-
rough therefore was necessary to the success of their plans, and
'Vol. xxin. no. xlv. e this


this alone would prove how rightly he acted in not resigning the
command. The means by which they brought about his dismissal
were worthy of the men. They accused him of peculation, be-
cause he had received the same perquisites which had always
been allowed to the commander-in-chief in those countries tor
secret service money ; which he had been privileged to receive,
moreover, and to employ without account, by the Queen’s royal
warrant, and which had been applied, as Marlborough said in his
defence, ‘ from time to time for intelligence and secret service,
and with such success, that next to the blessing of God and the
bravery of the troops, we might in great measure attribute most
of the advantages of the war in the Low Countries to the timely
and good advice procured with the help of this money.’ Upon
this ground, and upon the undeniable fact that the same allowance
had been always paid to his predecessors, Marlborough so com-
pletely vindicated himself, that though the commissioners of
public accounts, who were the tools of the reigning faction,
pronounced an opinion against him, in a report as flagrantly false
as it was malicious, and though upon that report the Queen
dismissed him from all his employments, ‘ that the matter might
undergo an impartial investigation’—his enemies, malignant as
they were, dared not pursue the investigation. When Louis
heard of this act, he added with his own hand a sentence in his
dispatches to his agent at London, saying, ‘ the affair of dis-
placing the Luke of Marlborough will do for us all we desire.’
Every means was now used to blacken the late ministry;—for
this purpose no accusation was either too absurd or too atrocious.
A cry of peculation was raised against them, as that which was
most likely to obtain belief among the vulgar, and excite popular
outcry. A deficit of thirty-five millions was charged against them,
as if they were responsible for all the unsettled accounts since
the Restoration; and this charge, as has generally been the case,
dwindled to nothing when it was examined. In those days it
was the custom on the anniversary of Queen Elizabeth’s inau-
guration, to burn in effigy the Pope, the Devil and the Pretender.
The effigies were arrested upon a pretence that the whigs intended
to take advantage of the holiday to excite an insurrection; and
this ridiculous story has found its way into historical writings at
home and abroad, with the additional absurdity, that Marlborough
was to put himself at the head of the mob, and that Prince Eu-
gene was to support him. Another fable accused them of a
design to fire the city, murder the ministers, seize and depose
the Queen, and place the Elector of Hanover on the throne!'
Slanders of this kind were too gross to deserve contradiction, nor
could the slanderer be fixed upon. At length a personal insult
of


of the grossest kind was offered to the Duke, and in the most
public manner. Earl Poulet, in vindicating the Duke of Ormond,
who had succeeded to the command, for taking the field with
Eugene, while he was at the same time in secret communication
with Villars, and had secret orders not to fight, said of him, ‘ that
he did not resemble a certain general, who led his troops to the
slaughter to cause a great number of officers to be knocked on
the head in a battle, or against stone walls, in order to fill his
pockets by disposing of their commissions.’ Marlborough heard
him in silence, but as soon as the house rose sent a message to
him by Lord Mohun, inviting him to take the air in the country.
Earl Poulet could not conceal from his lady the uncomfortable
emotions which this message excited, and the duel was prevented
by a direct order from the Queen to Marlborough, enjoining him
to proceed no farther in the affair. It is sufficient punishment
for this slanderer, that he is remembered in history for this, and
for this only; so easily may the coarsest and meanest mind pur-
chase for itself a perpetuity of disgrace !
For the sake of avoiding daily insults and further persecution,
Marlborough determined upon leaving. England. The death of
Godolphin released him from the strongest tie which bound him
to his then ungrateful country, —for he was unwilling to leave
his old tried friend, labouring under the severest sufferings of a
mortal disease.* A passport was obtained by means of Harley,
or Oxford, as he must now be called, in opposition to some of
his colleagues. Base as Oxford’s conduct was, he was not so
bad as Bolingbroke; he had not the same hatred to Marlbo-
rough, (perhaps because his obligations to him, great as they
were, had not been quite so great,) and it is not unlikely that
he may have thought it desirable for the sake of the Protestant
succession, to which he was sincerely attached, and which Bo-
lingbroke was plotting to set aside, that Marlborough should be
out of his enemies’ reach, and in a situation where he might act
in its support, when occasion should require. The restoration
of the Stuart line indeed appeared so possible, from the prin-
ciples of Bolingbroke and the favourite, now Lady Masham, and
from the irreconcileable dislike with which the Queen regarded
the house of Hanover, that Marlborough thought it prudent,
before he left England, to invest 50,000/. in the Dutch funds as
a means of subsistence in case of that event. As this great com-
mander had received the highest proofs of royal favour both
from his own sovereign and from foreign princes, he was fated
* Godolphin, the lord treasurer in those days of peculation, which had been so loudly
censured in parliament and even from the throne, was so far from having enriched him-
self, that the property which he left did not exceed 12,0001. ,
E 2 also


also to have some experience of royal ingratitude. The govern-
ment of the Spanish Netherlands had been more than once
offered to him, and pressed upon him by the Archduke Charles,
and he had been prevented from accepting it only by the jealousy
of the Dutch. When he perceived that his disgrace was im-
pending, he asked for this appointment, and the Archduke evaded
a compliance with his rcqtiest. Nor was this the only instance
of ingratitude from that thankless quarter. The principality of
JVlindelheim, which had been conferred on him after the battle
of Blenheim, -was restored at the peace to Bavaria, and though
an equivalent was promised to Marlborough, it was never granted,
nor did he ever obtain any compensation for the loss.
When he embarked at Dover, as a private individual, the Cap-
tain of the packet had sufficient English feeling to receive him
with a voluntary salute. No other honour was paid him upon
leaving his native country; but as the illustrious exile entered the
harbour of Ostend he was welcomed with a salute of artillery
from the town, forts and shipping. And along the whole road
to Aix-la-Chapelle, though he endeavoured to avoid notice by
taking the most private ways, he was entertained with the highest
marks of respect and affection, by governors, garrisons, ma-
gistrates and people of all ranks. A finer tribute was never paid
to true greatness. They blessed him as their deliverer, and
mingling exclamations against the English cabinet with their
expressions of admiration and gratitude towards him, many of
them shed tears of indignant feeling, and said it were better to
be born in Lapland than in England, for that no nation had ever
fallen so unaccountably from such a height of glory and esteem
into such contempt and degradation. He dwelt some time at
Aix-la-Chapelle; but from an apprehension that his person was
not safe there, he went to Maestricht; there the Duchess joined
him : they proceeded, to Frankfort, and after a few months re-
moved to Antwerp, as a safer place while the war continued in
Germany. From thence he corresponded with Hanover, and
with the leaders of the Hanoverian interest in England, and there
he held himself in readiness to transport troops to England on
the demise of the Queen, engaging to use his endeavours to se-
cure the fidelity of the troops at Dunkirk and to embark at their
head. The danger to which the Protestant succession was at that
time exposed is believed to have proved fatal to the Electress
Sophia, a remarkable personage, who at the age of eighty-four
retained an unusual strength both of body and mind, and used
to say, that if she could but live to have Sophia Queen of Eng-
land engraven on her tomb, she should die content. Had she
lived three months longer, that wish would have been gratified.
As


As the crisis drew nearer, it was deemed advisable that
Marlborough should return where his presence might be of great
importance. Among the calumnies with which his memory has
been loaded, is the absurd charge, that he was at this time cor-
responding with the Pretender, and intriguing with Bolingbroke
to secure his succession. This falsehood also is now effectually
refuted; and it appears from their own acknowledgment, that
the ministers who were plotting for that purpose were ‘ frightened
out of their wits’ at the news of his intended return. That return
w ould have exposed him to a renewal of persecution, and to every
mortification and every injury which it was in the power of the
Queen and her ministers to inflict, —but when the vessel wherein
he had embarked approached the coast near Dover, it was
boarded by a messenger with new's of the Queen’s decease, and
the undisputed accession of George I. Tflis monarch, though
he duly appreciated the services of Marlborough, and respected
him accordingly, never forgave him for not having communicated
to him the intended operations of that campaign in which Bra-
bant and Flanders had been recovered. He restored him to his
offices, but did not avail himself of his advice, as for his own
sake and that of the country he should have done; for had the
opinion of this consummate statesman been taken, a combined
administration would have been formed, to include some of
the moderate tQiies who had supported the protestant succes-
sion at the moment when their services were most essential.
It was a, more favourable opportunity than had ever before
occurred for bringing upright men of different parties to act
together for the general good.
Marlborough lived eight years after his return, happy in the
enjoyment of that leisure and tranquillity which he had always
desired. It is not true, as Johnson has taught us to believe, that
the tears of dotage flowed from his eyes. In the year 17 l(i he
had two paralytic strokes, but recovered both his strength and
faculties, except that there w ere a few w ords which he could not
distinctly articulate. In other respects, however, he was so little
impaired, that he continued to attend Parliament, and to perforin
the business of his office as Captain-General and Master of the
Ordnange, till within six months of his death. He wished to re-
sign those offices, but was induced by Sunderland’s intreaties and
the king’s particular desire to retain them. At length a return of
the disorder proved fatal: he lay for some days aw are of approach-
ing dissolution, and, in full possession of his senses, he quietly
expired on the 1 Gth of June 172‘2, in the 72d year of his age.
The Duchess, though sixty-two when she was thus left a widow,
E 3 still


still possessed some attractions of person, and proposals of mar-
riage were made to her by Lord Coningsby, and by the Duke of
Somerset. In her reply to the latter she declined the connection
as unsuitable to her time of life, and added, that if she was
only thirty instead of threescore, she would not permit even the
Emperor of the world to succeed in that heart which had been
devoted to John Duke of Marlborough. She survived her hus-
band two and twenty years, and lived to see the magnificent
pile of Blenheim completed according to his directions. Queen
Anne had promised to build this proud monument of national
glory at her own expense, —if Marlborough had not had it finished
at his own, it would have remained in its ruins, a striking monu-
ment of her fickleness, and of the meanness of her ministers.
If Mr. Coxe by the publication of these volumes had ren-
dered no other service to historical literature than that of clearing
Marlborough’s character from the imputations with which it has
been stained, that service alone would entitle him to the grati-
tude of all good Englishmen. Madame Sevigne has said Le
monde na point de longues injustices: it were better to say there
will be no injustice in the next world, —for that which is com-
mitted in this, is often but too lasting in its effects. During a
whole century Marlborough has been represented in books both
at home and abroad, as a consummate general indeed, but as
being devoid of honour and of principle, an intriguer, a traitor,
a peculator, and so careless of human life and of human suffer-
ings, that for the sake of his own sordid interests he wantonly
prolonged a war which, but for his ambition and his avarice,
might many times have been brought to an end. These foul
charges were urged against him by persons who knew' that they
were false—men whom he had patronized and brought forward;
and for some of whom he had exerted himself disinterestedly, even
so as to offend the whigs with whom he acted. His enemies gave
these falsehoods the sanction of authority when they were in
power, because it was necessary to sacrifice Marlborough before
they could sacrifice the interests of their country, and betray the
Protestant succession which they designed to do. And the ca-
lumnies which thus originated have prevailed to this day, because
they have found their way from libels into history, and still more
because they were propagated in the writings of Swift, a prin-
cipal actor in the moral assassination which was planned and
perpetrated by his party. Swift was beyond all comparison
the ablest writer of that age: but his conduct upon this occa-
sion, like some other of his actions, can only be explained by
supposing that the malady w hich rendered him at last so pitiable
a spectacle


a spectacle of human weakness, affected his heart long before
it overthrew his intellect.
It is no light wrong to the dead that an honourable name
should thus long have been defamed : it is no light injury to the
living. What ingenuous mind is there that has not felt sorrow
and humiliation for the obliquity and meanness by which the
character of Marlborough has hitherto seemed to be degraded ?
Who is there that has not felt that whatever derogated from the
admiration which he would otherwise have merited, was to be
regretted as a national evil ?—for the reputation of such men as
Marlborough, as Nelson, (and let us be allowed to add the
only name worthy to be classed with them,) as Wellington, be-
long to their country. In such names nations have much of
their permanent glory, and no small part of their strength: the
slanderer, therefore, who detracts from their fame and asperses
their memory commits a moral treason, —and as far as he suc-
ceeds, inflicts a wound upon his native land; but sooner or later,
truth prevails, and his infamy then is in proportion to the merit
which he has calumniated. If the spirit of faction did not de-
stroy all sense of shame as well as of honesty, and stultify men
while it depraves them, these Memoirs of Marlborough would
be more efficacious than any other history, that of our own times
excepted, in showing such calumniators what kind of reputation
they are purchasing for themselves.
Marlborough’s character is now laid open to the world, with-
out reserve, from the most unquestionable documents. His
early correspondence with James is the only blot, and for that
offence, all circumstances being fairly considered, there are few
persons who would fling the first stone. After what has already
been said upon that subject, it may suffice to observe, that
William, who best understood the circumstance, and was the
person most offended, entirely excused him ; trusted him himself,
and recommended him to the full confidence of his successor.
Mr. Coxe allows that he was parsimonious ; frugality had been
a necessary virtue during the first part of his life, and the habit
continued after the necessity had ceased, —to this and to nothing
more does the charge of parsimony amount. He was not pro-
fuse, but he never spared when it was proper that he should
spend. In his loans to government, in his buildings and im-
provements, and in transactions of a public nature, no man was
more munificent. The soldiers would not have loved a penu-
rious man, and it is certain that no general ever more entirely
possessed the love as well as the confidence of his men. A
Chelsea pensioner, at the election of 1737, was threatened with
the loss of his pension if he would not vote for Lord Vere at
e 4 Windsor.


Windsor. His answer was, ‘ I will venture starving, rather
than it shall be said that I vote against the Duke of Marlbo-
rough’s grandson, after having followed his grandfather so many
hundred leagues.’ The Duchess, by whom this anecdote is
related, adds, ‘ I do not know whether they have taken away his
pension, but I hope they will: for I have sent him word, if they
do take it away, 1 will settle the same upon him for his life.’
Even his inveterate enemy, Bolingbroke, acknowledged after his
death that he was the greatest general and the greatest minister
that our country, or any other, had produced. He was, indeed,
the main-spring, the life, the moving mind of the whole confede-
racy. The allies, with jarring views, contradictory interests, and
oftentimes with jealous and even hostile feelings also, were kept
together less by their common danger from France and their com-
mon hopes of security and advantage, than by his influence and
his matchless powers of conciliation. They had no confidence
in each other, and little confidence in their own councils; but
they had each and all a well founded confidence in him. This
was known from history. Malice and falsehood, successful as
they were, could not conceal or detract from his paramount ex-
cellence as a commander and a statesman. The purity of private
life was not so generally known, for this had not always been re-
corded, as it ought to be, for edification and example. He was
a faithful husband as well as a fond one. No indecent word or
allusion ever passed his lips, and if any person uttered an
obscenity before him, v he resented it as a personal affront and
an act of public immorality. His camp was not like Crom-
well’s, for M arlborough was neither fanatic nor hypocrite. Colo-
nel Blackader complained of the irreligion and profligacy of his
companions; and for this he may have had cause enough; but he
was a man of morbid feelings, and a puritanical rigour of man-
ners may not improbably have provoked foolish men to appear in
his company worse than they were. Another officer who served
in the same army describes the camp as resembling a quiet and
well-governed city ; and observes, as the effect of Marlborough’s
regulations and example, that 1 cursing and swearing were seldom
heard among the officers, and the poor soldiers, many of them
the refuse and dregs of the nation, became, at the close of one or
two campaigns, civil, sensible and clean, and had an air and spirit
above the vulgar.’
But it is only from the present Memoirs that a full knowledge
of this admirable man can be obtained. Here we become ac-
quainted with his habitual principles of action, and find in him a
complete example of that moral intrepidity which is the highest
and rarest of all military and political virtues. Here we behold, ia
letters




