



Registered at the General Post Office Sydney,
for transmission through the post as a book.


Dedicated
to
THE CHILDREN
MICHAEL
H'FUDGE


PRODUCING BOOKS IN
WAR TIME
This book has been produced
in conformity with wartime
economy standards.
Thinner books and smaller
books save paper, materials,
transportation and storage
space and conserve manpower.
First Impression
October .. 194^
COPYRIGHT
ALL RIGHTS RESERVED


MICHAEL
M c FUDGE
Nancy Johnston
ILLUSTRATIONS BY DOROTHY BROUN
MINGAY PUBLISHING COMPANY,
1944


Michael McFudge
Fairies and elves, and creatures small,
Michael McFudge, he knows them all.
He knows a pink snake that can dance on its tail,
An elephant that runs at the sight of a snail.
Hobgoblins and spells, a bad tempered gnome,
And a water-elf who had lost his home.
The tales he can tell of the things he has seen!
The creatures he knows and the places he's been!
He can read the secrets of the Fairy Ring,
He can sing the song that the butterflies sing.
If you ask politely, he'll take your hand,
And show you the wonders of Make-Believe Land.
The land that only the innocent know,
Where none but the young in heart may go.


C/ 77
Michael McFudge
JOCK met Michael McFudge for the first time one afternoon
during the summer of the year he turned four. He'd been rid-
ing his bike up and down the path for a long time and he sud-
denly felt so hot that he must sit somewhere cool. There was
a big hydrangea bush beside the fence, so he went over to that
and lay down in its shade.
It was beautifully cool there, and Jock lay with his head
almost under the bush and began to feel more comfortable. He
rubbed his eyes and yawned. A very big blue hydrangea bloom,
which seemed to be still wet with dew, was hanging just above his
head, and he reached up idly and shook some of the moisture
onto his face. It felt so good that he put up his hand to shake
the flower again.
"Young man," a very annoyed voice said. "Do you intend
to shake this branch often?"
Jock pulled back his hand as if it had been stung, and
stared up in amazement at the little man sitting on the branch
of the bush immediately above his head. Before he could get
over his astonishment, the little man said:
"Well, do you or don't you?"
Jock managed to stammer out, "Do I or don't I what?"
"Goodness, such stupidity," the little man scolded. "Intend
to shake the branch, of course. Because if you do, I intend
to move."
Jock collected his wits enough to say, "I'm very sorry. I
didn't know you were there. I won't do it again."
"That was very well said. I accept your apology." The
little man stood up, and Jock was able to see exactly what he
looked like. His face was covered in wrinkles, but his eyes
were very bright and very green, and not a bit old. He had on
a green jacket, and very short red trousers. One stocking
was red and one green, he wore no shoes, and on his head was
a cap, half green and half red. Apart from his odd clothes,
and the fact that he was so small, he didn't look very different
from most men, but Jock thought he must be a fairy. Anyhow,
the obvious way to find out was to ask, so Jock did.
"Please," he said. "Are you a fairy?"
The little man looked at him. "Of course, aren't you?"
Jock was so astonished at the question that he could barely
say no. It was the little man's turn to be surprised. "Well,
what are you?" he asked.
"I'm Jock."


"It's all very well to be Jock, but what kind of a thing are
you?" said the little man testily.
Jock had no idea what kind of a thing he was. So far as
he knew he was just Jock. However, the little fairy man was
impatiently waiting for an answer.
"Are you an animal?" he asked.
Jock shook his head. He didn't think he was an animal.
"Well, a vegetable?" said the little man.
Again Jock shook his head. He was sure he wasn't a
vegetable.
The little man was getting annoyed.
"What are you, then? Don't you know?" he almost
shouted.
Jock suddenly remembered hearing his mother say, one day
when he and his cousin Peter were playing, "I do wish those chil-
dren would be more quiet." He heaved a sigh of relief. That
would be what he was.
"I'm a children," he said.
"Oh," the fairy seemed quite satisfied. "Well, I don't
know much about children," he said, "but," he raised his cap,
"How do you do."
Jock said "How-do-you-do" back, and then, feeling very dar-
ing,
"Do fairies have names?" he asked.
"Of course, how could they call to each other if they didn't."
The little man was getting impatient again. "I'm Michael
McFudge."
Jock had to put his hand over his mouth quickly, to stop
himself laughing. Michael McFudge struck him as being a
very odd name. However, the little man seemed to find him
tiresome already, and he didn't want to offend him, so he man-
aged not to laugh and just said "Oh."
Michael McFudge stretched himself. "I think I'll take
stroll before I go back to the palace," he said.
Jock said quickly, because he didn't want him to go. "Do
you live in a palace?"
Michael McFudge looked at him.
"You do ask stupid questions," he said. "Where else
would a fairy-in-waiting to a King live but in a palace?"
Jock had no idea what a fairy-in-waiting was, but didn't
like to ask, so he waited to see if Michael McFudge would go on
—which he did.
"Yes, indeed," he said with an air of pride. "A very nice
palace it is, too. Why, my King—l'm fairy-in-waiting to the


•"-* 'itvw r '' ' "»


King of Nothing-Done—has the best palace in this part of the
world." He paused, and added more humbly—"That is, when
it's finished it will be."
Jock was beginning to fell dazed. Apparently this fairy
lived in a beautiful palace (which wasn't even finished) and was
a fairy-in-waiting (whatever that was) to a King with the most
remarkable name. He felt that he must, no matter how annoy-
ed the little man became, ask a few questions.
"Please," he said timidly, "What's a fairy-in-waiting?"
"Goodness gracious me," said Michael McFudge. "Are all
children as stupid as you? A fairy-in-waiting is—why, it's —
well—" his voice trailed away.
Jock said (very rudely), "You don't know yourself."
"Don't be ridiculous," said Michael McFudge, "Of course
I do. Fairies-in-waiting, why, they—they wait," he finished
triumphantly. "That's what they do—they wait. I'm fairy-in-
waiting to the King of Nothing-Done, and I wait for something
to be done."
Jock had an idea that Michael McFudge had just thought
of this explanation, but he contented himself with saying, "Oh,
is that what they do."
"Yes," said Michael McFudge, and hastened to change the
subject. "Now, I think I'll take a short walk, to work up an
appetite."
Jock tried to hide his disappointment. He was enjoying
this talking to a fairy, and didn't want to stop.
Michael McFudge turned to go, and then said, "Would you
care to walk a little with me?"
"Oh, yes, please," said Jock.
"Come along then."
Michael McFudge turned round, and Jock saw a tiny open-
ing m the hydrangea bush, and on the other side of this open-
ing he could see, stretching away into the distance, a broad white
road.
"That's funny," he said.
"What's funny?" asked Michael McFudge.
"I don't remember seeing that road before."
"It's been there since the beginning of time," said Michael
McFudge. "You can't have been looking for it. Shall we
get started?"
Jock was about to follow the little man when he realised
something.
"Oh," he said, "I won't be able to come."
"Why ever not?" asked Michael McFudge.


"I'm too big," Jock said,
that little hole."
Michael McFudge sighed
"Really, Jock," he said.
"I'd be too big to go through
"I do wish you would be more
sensible. Don't you remember shaking the dew down onto
your face?"
Jock nodded.
"Well, now you've shrunk. That dew is made especially
for the purpose of shrinking things."
Jock was awe stricken.
"How—how big am I now?" he stammered
"Just big enough, of course," said Michael McFudge. "Just
big enough. Now, do come along."
Jock started to come along. As he bent to pass
through the opening, Michael McFudge turned. "By the way,"
he said, "you know that if you come onto the road, you can't
come back, don't you?"
Jock stopped, and shook his head.
"I didn't know," he said.
"You know now," said Michael McFudge, "Are you com-
ing?"
"Wouldn't I ever be able to come back?" asked Jock.
"Certainly not," said Michael McFudge, "And I can assure
you that you wouldn't want to. Still, I don't want to press
you. Come or not, as you please."
Jock looked back towards the house. He thought of his
mother, and getting tucked into bed at night—she would be
sorry if he didn't ever come back; he thought of lovely big ice-
creams, which they probably wouldn't have in fairyland; of his
father's car, the new swimming trunks his mother had just
bought for him; and last, but by no means least, he looked at his
red Christmas bike. He slowly shook his head.
"I can't," he said, with his eyes on the twinkling white road,
which he could feel trying to draw him away, "I can't come."
Michael McFudge said briskly, "You must please yourself,
of course."
Jock looked at the road again.
"What's it called?" he said.
"The road?" asked Michael McFudge
"Yes, what road is it?"
"Getting Nowhere," said Michael McFudge.
"I beg your pardon," said Jock.
"Oh dear," said the little man, "Are we going to start that
again? It's the road to Getting Nowhere. Well—"


"Shall—shall I ever see you again?" asked Jock, wistfully.
Michael McFudge shrugged his shoulders. "It's very un-
likely," he said. "I don't come this way often."
He looked at Jock's crestfallen face, and smiled.
"Never mind," he said. "I'll tell you what to do. Come
over to this bush any time you're in this end of the garden, and
see if I'm about. I'll be looking out for you, and we could
talk."
He added, as Jock still appeared disappointed. "I could
tell you some stories about my people."
Jock smiled. "That'd be almost as good as going with
you, wouldn't it?"
"Of course it would," said Michael McFudge. "Every bit.
Well, goodbye. Remember to look for me when you're down
this way. Oh, and don't worry about the dew," he added, "it's
dry by now, and you're the same size as ever."
Jock blinked. There was nobody on the branch. He
looked into the bush for the opening to the road, but it wasn't
there. The bush was just an ordinary hydrangea bush again.
He got up slowly and went over to his bicycle. Could he
have imagined he'd seen Michael McFudge? Or could he have
been asleep? In any case, he made up his mind to go back
to the bush often, in case Michael McFudge came back, as he'd
said he would, to tell him some stories.


Beetlepuss
JOCK went to the bush often during the next few days, but the
little man was never there, until finally, just as Jock was begin-
ning to be certain that he had imagined it all, there came a
day when, as he peered into the bush, Michael McFudge was
there —sitting on the same branch in the same position as before.
And behind him Jock could see the opening in the bush and
the road to Getting Nowhere stretching broad and white as far
as the eye could see.
Michael McFudge smiled.
"I've been waiting for you," he said.
Jock was so glad to see the fairy that he didn't know what
to say. Finally, he managed, "I didn't mean to keep you wait-
ing."
Michael McFudge nodded.
"Sit down," he said, "And make yourself comfortable."
Jock squatted on the ground, and looked expectantly up-
wards.
"Go on," he said.
"Go on where," said Michael McFudge
"Tell me a story."
"Tell you a story," said the little man. "Goodness me."


"You said you would."
"I did? Oh, well, let me think."
Jock sat quiet for a moment, then Michael McFudge told
him about Beetlepuss, the elf who lives behind the elephant's
ear. And this is the story, exactly the way Michael McFudge
told it to Jock that day.
There s a village not far from the palace where I live, and
in this village lived a tiny elf called Beetlepuss. It's really a
very small village, but a busy one, because it's there that all the
paint used to colour fairyland is made. And it was in this vil-
lage that Beetlepuss was born. I don't know why they called
him Beetlepuss perhaps it was because they were making paint
the colour of Christmas Beetles on the day he was born—but
that was the name they gave him. As well as having an odd
name, there was one other thing about Beetlepuss of which I must
tell you. He was clumsy— not just a little clumsy, like you
and me—but more clumsy that anyone has ever been before.
Everything he touched, he knocked down, everything in his path
he fell over —if it were possible to do a clumsy thing, Beetle-
puss did it—and he even did clumsy things which I would have
said were absolutely impossible. All the folk in the village
were disgusted by his clumsiness—they considered that he was
a Great Disadvantage, and were always telling him so. The
other elves refused to play with him, because he was so clumsy,
and they would follow him, calling out extremely rude things,
as he went about. And the older he grew, the more clumsy
he became. It was awful.
Well, in the fullness of time, the first Spring after Beetle-
puss was born came around, and it was time for the visit to the
village of the Queen. Each Spring she came, to inspect the
colours in paint made that year, and her visit was a great occa-
sion. All the folk put on their best clothes, there was a parade
in the square, and the youngest in the village presented Her
Majesty with a silver box, in which there were little glass jars,
each filled with a new paint made in the village since her last
visit. Every year the Queen's visit was celebrated in this way,
and it was always the best time in the year.
This particular year, however, there was a worry. Beetlepuss
was the youngest in the village—and he was so clumsy. TTiey
couldn't have anybody else give the Queen the box of paints—
it was always the youngest who presented it—so they had to
make the best of it.
They told Beetlepuss what he had to do, and how careful
he must be, not once but a hundred times, so that before the
day of the Queen's visit finally dawned, he was thoroughly tired
of the whole business.


It was a clear sunny day, and the village was crowded. They
helped Beetlepuss dress in the clothes specially made for the
occasion—a striped jacket, trousers and cap, the stripes being
the same colours as the paints in the silver box. He looked
very well indeed when he was ready, and they took him to the
edge of the sky blue carpet which led up to the throne in the
centre of the square. The Queen had arrived, and was seated
on the throne, smiling at her cheering subjects. It was a charm-
ing sight.
Beetlepuss took the silver box, opened the lid so that the
marvellous colours could be seen, and slowly walked up the
carpet. There was a tense, worried silence. Surely he wouldn't
be clumsy enough to fall at this critical moment. The thought
was in the mind of everyone in the crowd. And in Beetlepuss'
mind? I'm sorry to have to tell it, but he was thinking some-
thing like this. "Serves them right if I did fall over —they
make me tired, always picking on me. As if I couldn't walk
up an old carpet without falling over. Huh, I'll show them."
I don't know if it were because he was so busy with such
thoughts or not, but, just as he reached the throne, one of
Beetlepuss' feet somehow twisted itself round the other, he
stumbled—and the glass jars of paint were hurled out of the
box and all over the Queen! Can you imagine the horror of
it? There she sat, covered in paint of all colours, her beautiful
frock ruined, her crown knocked onto the ground, her face
streaked with paint. There was ghastly stillness—everybody
was too horrified to move. And Beetlepuss? He was terrified
by what he had done. He looked at the Queen, down whose
nose was trickling dahlia red paint, which slowly dripped off its
end, one heavy red drop at a time. He stared at her, consterna-


tion and fear in his eyes —and then he laughed. Yes, in the
midst of that calamity Beetlepuss laughed out loud.
There was a scramble —some of the folk to whisk Beetlepuss
away—some to help the Queen. They rushed Beetlepuss to
the outskirts of the village, and threw him out. "Never re-
turn," they shouted. "You have disgraced us forever."
They picked up stones to throw at him, and Beetlepuss ran
—and as he ran, he cried heartbrokenly. The farther from
their stones he was, the more he cried. He hadn't meant to
do it, truly he hadn't, and they had turned him out. He had
nowhere to go. Poor Beetlepuss. He sank down onto the
grass at the side of the road, and cried and cried. He would
probably be there yet, except that, as he lay weeping, he felt
something on his shoulder. He started up. There, towering
over him, was the biggest thing he had ever seen. He was so
startled that he stopped crying.
As the tears in his eyes dried, he could see that it was an
elephant—an enormous one. Beetlepuss had seen elephants
before —although he had never spoken to one —but there was
definitely something unusual about this elephant. He had on
pink pyjamas. There's no real reason why an elephant should-
n't wear pink pyjamas if he wants to, but then, elephants rarely
want to, so you can understand Beetlepuss' amazement.
The elephant looked at Beetlepuss, and Beetlepuss looked
at the elephant (whose name was William Augustus, although
Beetlepuss didn't know that yet).
Then the elephant spoke, in a great booming voice which
made Beetlepuss jump in fright.
"What is the matter, Small Thing?'" he asked.
Beetlepuss had been so amazed by the sight of an elephant
in pink pyjamas that he had almost forgotten what was the mat-
ter, but now he remembered. His eyes filled with tears again,
and he sniffed. William Augustus was distressed. He didn't
like to see anything so tiny so upset. He said again, "Now,
now, Small Thing, don't cry. What is troubling you?"
Beetlepuss looked at him. He seemed such a sympathetic
elephant that Beetlepuss decided to tell him the whole sad story
—which he did. William Augustus listened attentively, shaking
his head at the worst parts, and, I'm afraid, being highly amused
at the picture of the Queen covered in paint. When Beetlepuss
came to the account of his being thrown out of the village, Wil-
liam Augustus waxed indignant.
"Never heard of such a thing. Goodness me, he snorted,
and Beetlepuss was almost blown off his feet by the blast of air
from his trunk. William Augustus steadied him, and said,
"Well, this is a fine state of affairs. Now, don't start crying


again," he added quickly, as Beetlepuss looked very much as if
he might, "I'll think of something. Just be still for a moment."
Beetlepuss stood very quietly, hardly daring to breathe, his
eyes on William Augustus, who was thinking very hard.
"I have it," said William Augustus very loudly. Beetlepuss
looked at him hopefully.
"Run and get a rose," said the elephant. "A pink one,
if you can," he added.
Beetlepuss couldn't imagine what use a pink rose would be
but thought perhaps he'd better get one. There were roses
growing beside the road, and Beetlepuss bowed politely to a bush
on which there were pink ones, and said, "Please, may I have
one of your roses?"
The bush bent towards him, he put up his hand and took
one of the roses.
"Thank you," he said, and ran back to William Augustus.
"Ah, you have it?" said the elephant. "Now, run up my
trunk and onto my head."
He lowered his trunk so that it touched the ground. Beetle-
puss hesitated for a second, and then climbed onto the trunk.
William Augustus held it very firmly, and Beetlepuss closed his
eyes and ran quickly up the trunk.
"Be careful," said William Augustus, "Don't put your foot
in my eye."
Beetlepuss was careful, and stood on top of the elephant's
head, feeling quite proud of himself. He looked down towards
the ground, but it was so far away that he closed his eyes quickly.
William Augustus said then, "Go round to my ear, Small
Thing, and put the petals of your rose in the little hollow, just
behind it."
Beetlepuss did as he was told, walking very carefully lest
he should fall. William Augustus held his ear —the left one
up high, and Beetlepuss saw a little hollow at its base.
Put in the petals, said Augustus once more.
Beetlepuss did so, laying the petals gently down in the
hollow, until it was completely lined with them.
"Why, it's a little bed," he said.
Of course, said William Augustus. "Curl yourself up
in it, Small Thing. It should be just right for you."
Beetlepuss was delighted. He snuggled down among the
petals, which were soft and sweet smelling. It was the loveliest
bed. William Augustus gently lowered his ear, so that it made
a roof over the bed.
"Do you like it?" he said.
"It's lovely. Is it for me?" asked Beetlepuss.
"Of course, Small Thing. Who else?" said William
Augustus.


"I won't be a bother to you, will I?" he asked.
"No, no," said William Augustus, "I told you to get pink —it
matches my pyjamas. Besides, I like pink. A bother, indeed.
I'm glad to have you, for company."
Beetlepuss sighed happily. "It's lovely," he said again.
William Augustus walked slowly along the road, swaying
gently from side to side, and poor tired little Beetlepuss went
to sleep for the first time in his new bed. And he has lived
there, behind the elephant's ear, ever since, running merrily
down the elephant's trunk when he wants to get onto the ground,
but always glad to get back to his snug little bed. He's very
happy now, and, strangely enough, he's never been clumsy
enough to hurt William Augustus."
There it is, as Michael McFudge told it to Jock. When
he had finished, Jock said, "I like that. Tell me another one.''
Michael McFudge smiled.
"You're all alike when it comes to stories," he said. "Chil-
dren or fairies, whichever you are." He got up. "I'll tell
you another one next time I see you."
And before Jock could stop him, he was gone


The Little Prince
« A ND then there was the little Prince," said Michael
/"V McFudge. It was another day, and Jock was waiting to
hear another story.
"What little Prince?" he said.
"The little Prince I'm going to tell you about," said Michael
McFudge. "Please don't interrupt."
Jock sat back, abashed, and Michael McFudge went on.
"This little Prince, whose name was Rupert Donald Clarence
Harding, but who was called "Hardie" for short, was extremely
unhappy. He lived in an unhappy family, amongst unhappy
people, in an unhappy Palace (of course, the Palace couldn't be
happy if everybody in it were unhappy—Palaces are the same
as houses in that regard).
Prince Hardie's family hadn't always been unhappy—his
father had always been a bit grumpy, but the real unhappiness
hadn't started until after the Prince's sister was born.
The Prince's sister had as many names as the Prince—she
was Princess Louisa Millicent Jane Harding—but she was never
called by any of her names. When people were speaking about
her, they referred to her as "the poor Princess" if they were men,
and "the poor lamb" if they were women. And the reason they
called her this was the same reason they were all unhappy—it
was all because of the Princess.
The poor Princess was under a spell—the most awful one.


She couldn't talk to anyone but herself! At first that may not
sound like a very bad spell, but if you think about it for a
moment you'll realise how terrible it was. She was forced to go
about, never speaking, or else just talking out aloud to herself—
she never was able to address a single word to anyone else. No-
body could speak to her, because she couldn't answer; she
couldn't ask for anything, or say "Thank you" if she were given
anything; nobody could tell whether or not she liked a thing—it
was frightful.
The poor Princess was older than Prince Hardie—who was
nine—but never since her birth had she been able to speak to
anyone. On the day she was born, a Hobgoblin had put her
under the spell. He had come to the Palace, asked to see the
baby, and when he was taken to her, had cast the evil spell over
her. Nobody knew why he had done it—he'd never before in-
terfered with Prince Hardie's family, even though his castle was
quite close to the Palace. It was very hard to understand —
and very sad.
When Prince Hardie was born the King his father had been
worried lest the Hobgoblin should put a spell over him, too,
but the Hobgoblin hadn't appeared, and hadn't worried them in
any way since casting the spell over the poor Princess.
So you see now why they were all unhappy—it was all be-
cause of the poor Princess.
She was such a pretty Princess, too, but of course no Prince
would ever fall in love with her, because she wouldn't be able to
say "yes" when he asked her to marry him. The older the


Princess grew, the prettier she became —and the prettier she
became, the more unhappy everybody else became, because all
that prettiness was being wasted.
Everybody and everything became so unhappy that it was
hardly worthwhile even trying to be anything else. One day,
when things had reached this terrible stage, Prince Hardie was
sitting in a room with the poor Princess, who was sewing. He
happened to look up from the book he was reading, and suddenly
saw that his sister was crying. She looked so sad that the Prince
felt as if he would like to cry, too. While he watched, she said
to herself,
"Oh, how miserable I am. I wish that I were dead. If only
I were dead."
She went on talking to herself like that, until Prince Hardie
couldn't bear to listen to her any longer. He got up and went
out into the corridor. He felt so sad—and suddenly he lost
his temper. Not with the poor Princess—but with the Hob-
goblin. He felt that he must do something. Somehow or
other he must make the Hobgoblin remove the evil spell.
Prince Hardie ran down the corridor to the stairs. Quickly,
in case he should change his mind, he ran through the garden
to the river. The Hobgoblin's castle was on the bank of the
river, but quite a long way upstream, so it would be quicker for
him to go by boat than any other way.
The Prince's own boat was in its shed—a very fast little
spuddle boat (a spuddle boat is just like a rowing boat, but
instead of paddles, it has spuddles, which are a little larger and
much better) —and he soon had it launched and was speeding up
the river. He wanted to get to the Hobgoblin's castle as quickly
as he could, before his anger cooled, because he knew that, once
he recovered his temper, he would never have the courage to face
the Hobgoblin in his own castle.
He kept thinking of the poor Princess, crying so heart-
brokenly, as he spuddled furiously, and the thought helped him
to go faster, so that, in next door to no time, he was level with
the Hobgoblin's castle.
It was a horrible castle, black and forbidding, perched high
up on a crag above the river, its walls made of great stones, in
which there were set spikes with long points on them. There
were no flowers growing around it, which is a bad sign, as flowers
are friendly and like to be near people.
As Prince Hardie spuddled the boat gently and silently
over to a rock to which he could tie it, he couldn't help feeling
just a little afraid. The castle looked so terrible, he'd heard
such awful things about hobgoblins in general, and this Hob-
goblin in particular—and he was only nine, after all, and com-
pletely unarmed.


However, he thought again of his unhappy sister, and
squared his shoulders. He looked up at the grim castle. There
seemed to be no way of getting up to it, but, by careful search-
ing, he was able to find a narrow path, which wound upwards
through the great black rocks.
He went up the path slowly, feeling more afraid every
second, but determined to help lys sister.
Suddenly his way was blocked by a huge door, studded with
sharp daggers. There was a notice on the door, written in blood
red letters, "Enter at your own risk."
Prince Hardie pulled the cord which was hanging from
the enormous bell at the side of the door. It had hardly stop-
ped its loud clanging when the door opened.
There was an ugly dwarf standing in the doorway.
"Well," he said.
Prince Hardie was terrified, but managed to hide it.
"Where's the Hobgoblin?" he said.
The dwarf pointed with his head.
"Inside," he said.
"Take me to him," commanded Prince Hardie
The dwarf looked at him. "You'll be sorry," he said,
"but come on."
Prince Hardie followed him through the door, which crash-
ed to violently behind him.
"I'm caught now," he thought.
The dwarf had crossed a stone paved courtyard and paused
before a small door, which he opened.
"In there," he said, and scuttled away.
Prince Hardie looked at the open door. It seemed to be
very black inside. He shrugged his shoulders. He might as


well go in—he couldn't get out of the castle now, even if he
wanted to.
He stepped across the threshold and into an enormous
room. The ceiling was so high that Prince Hardie could barely
see it. The walls were covered by great black curtains, which
fell in folds to the floor. Prince Hardie's eyes travelled slowly
around, and stopped at a table, which was as big as an ordinary
room, in the centre of this fantastic one. There was a chair,
as big as a bed, drawn up to the table—and seated in the chair
was a tiny ugly man, much smaller than Prince Hardie was him-
self. In fact, the man was so small that he was sitting on four
cushions, in order to reach the top of the table.
Prince Hardie rubbed his eyes. So this was the terrifying
Hobgoblin!
He walked up to the chair, quite unafraid now. Even
though he knew that the Hobgoblin had great powers for cast-
ing spells and such, Prince Hardie couldn't be afraid of any-
body who was so much smaller than he was himself.
"Hullo," he said loudly.
The Hobgoblin jumped, then stared down at Prince Hardie.
"Hullo yourself," he said, in a squeaky little voice. "Where
did you spring from?" (Hobgoblins are not very good at gram-
mar) .
"I didn't spring from anywhere," said Prince Hardie, "I
came to see you."
The Hobgoblin smiled.
"How nice," he said. "Nobody ever comes to see me. Do
sit down."
Prince Hardie couldn't see anything upon which to sit, and in
any case this wasn't a social call, so he said "No" loudly, and
then, more politely, "Thank you."
"No?" said the Hobgoblin. "But you will have some re-
freshment?"
Prince Hardie shook his head.
"No," he said. "I won't."
"Oh," the Hobgoblin looked disappointed. "Never mind,
though. We'll just have a pleasant little chat."
Prince Hardie frowned. The Hobgoblin seemed determined
to be nice, and it was hard to keep mad at him.
"I wouldn't talk to you," he said, looking fiercely at the
Hobgoblin, "I hate you."
The Hobgoblin's eyes filled with tears.
"You too," he said sorrowfully. "Everybody hates me. I
don't know why, but nobody loves me. It's all very sad."
Prince Hardie was puzzled. He was a kindhearted prince,
and the Hobgoblin sounded genuinely upset. However, he
remembered the poor Princess.


"I don't wonder they hate you," he said. "You put spells
on people."
The Hobgoblin shook his head.
"No, I don't," he said. "It's years since I put a spell on
anybody. Truly it is."
Prince Hardie looked at him scornfully.
"What about my sister," he said.
"Your sister?" said the Hobgoblin. "I don't think I know
her. I don't even know you. What's your name?"
Prince Hardie told him, and also, very indignantly, about
the spell over his sister. It was bad enough to go around cast-
ing spells over people, but to forget all about it —.
The Hobgoblin nodded when Prince Hardie had finished.
"Oh, yes," he said. "I remember that one."
"Well, if you'd forgotten all about it," Prince Hardie said,
"Take it away now."
"Oh, I couldn't do that," said the Hobgoblin, "Oh dear
me, no."
"Why not?" asked Prince Hardie.
"Because," said the Hobgoblin.
"Because why?"
"I see I shall have to tell you all about it," sighed the Hob-
goblin.
"I think you'd better," said Prince Hardie.
"Mm." the Hobgoblin was thoughtful. "Your sister—
she's pretty, isn't she?"
"Yes," said Prince Hardie, who, even though he was her
brother and under ordinary circumstances wouldn't have admit-
ted that she was, knew that the poor Princess was very pretty.
"I knew she would be," said the Hobgoblin, "That's why I
cast the spell over her."
Prince Hardie couldn't understand him.
"Didn't you want her to be pretty?" he asked.
"That's the whole thing," said the Hobgoblin excitedly. "I
knew she'd be pretty, and pretty princesses always grow up to
marry princes charming, and then it starts. Oh dear, then it
starts."
"What starts?" asked Prince Hardie.
"The guns," said the Hobgoblin. "They start firing the
guns to celebrate the wedding. They fire them all day long,
and I get the most awful headache. So —" he shrugged his
shoulders, "I've put spells on all the princesses who've been born
in the last few years. Then they couldn't grow up and marry
princes, and annoy me with their salutes of guns." The Hob-
goblin smiled. "Good idea, wasn't it?"
Prince Hardie was so surprised he couldn't speak for a
moment. He'd never in his life heard such a stupid reason for


doing anything. Why hadn't the Hobgoblin just asked the
various Princesses not to fire guns on their wedding days? He
was sure they would have agreed not to —it would have been
better than having spells cast over them. He managed to find
his voice, and scornfully told the Hobgoblin how stupid he con-
sidered him, and also told him what he should have done.
The Hobgoblin was amazed.
"I didn't think of doing anything like that," he said, and
then, thoughtfully, "It might have worked, too. Oh well, it's
too late now."
Prince Hardie said, angrily, "Are you going to leave the
spells on, then?"
"Goodness, yes," said the Hobgoblin. "I can't go changing
things after all this time.
"Oh, you're stupid," said Prince Hardie, who was furious
with the Hobgoblin by this.
"Now, now," said the Hobgoblin. "Don't be rude. Sit
down and visit properly with me, there's a dear boy. I get so
lonely up here."
"I will not," said Prince Hardie hotly. "I won't even talk
to you."
"Gracious," said the Hobgoblin, "Such a temper."
He looked thoughtfully at Prince Hardie's flushed face
"You must think it's important," he said. "Well, I sup-
pose I could —" He stopped speaking, and sat thinking.
"Go on," said Prince Hardie. "Please take the spell away
from my sister. And the others," he added.


"D'you promise that there won't be any guns?" the Hob-
goblin asked sharply.
"I promise," said Prince Hardie. "Cross my heart."
"Not even a little gun?" said the Hobgoblin.
"Not even a pop-gun," said Prince Hardie.
"And you'll stay and visit with me a while?"
Prince Hardie nodded. The Hobgoblin slapped the table
with his hand.
"All right," he said. "I'll do it. What's your sister's
name again?"
"Louisa Millicent Jane Harding."
"Oh, yes." The Hobgoblin clapped his hands, and the
ugly little dwarf (who wasn't, as a matter of fact, as small as the
Hobgoblin) came hurrying in.
"Black paper, and white ink, at once," said the Hobgoblin.
The dwarf nodded grumpily, and stumped out of the room.
"He doesn't like you being here," said the Hobgoblin hap-
pily. "He doesn't like visitors much." He added, "Not that
I have many."
"You might have more if you took down the notice on the
door," said Prince Hardie.
"D'you really think so?" asked the Hobgoblin. "He"—
nodding towards the door through which the dwarf had gone
"put it there to keep away Undesirables selling things. There
must be a lot of Undesirables, because nobody ever comes."
"Take it down and see what happens," said Prince Hardie.
"You could take away the spikes and daggers, too. They're
a bit discouraging."
"I'll try it," said the Hobgoblin. "Ah."
The dwarf had come back into the room. The Hobgoblin
put the black paper on the table, and dipped his finger into the
white ink. He wrote the name "Louisa Millicent Jane Hard-
ing" on the black paper, then twisted the sheet around several
times, before folding the paper neatly in some special way. Then
he said "Spell, Spell, no longer dwell, in the Princess fair." He
was silent for a second.
"There," he said, turning to the Prince. "It's gone."
"Already?" asked Prince Hardie, who was more than a little
disappointed. He had thought the removing of a spell would be
a much more exciting business.
"It doesn't take long," said the Hobgoblin a little apolo-
getically, "Not when you know how."
Prince Hardie nodded. "I'd better go back now," he said.
"You said you'd stay a while," said the Hobgoblin re-
proachfully.


Prince Hardie was anxious to get back to the Palace to see
if the spell really had been taken away from his sister, but he
like the Hobgoblin, and he had been very obliging about the
spell, so he stayed for an hour or so. He and the Hobgoblin
became very friendly and when he left he promised to come and
see him again.
Back at the Palace there was great rejoicing. The poor
Princess —who musn't be called that any more, by the way —was
running about talking to everybody, amidst enormous excitement.
Of course, they made a great fuss of Prince Hardie when he told
them what had happened, and that it was he who had caused
the Hobgoblin to take the spell away.
From that day on, all was well at the Palace, and there was
no more unhappiness. In due course, the Princess met a Prince
Charming and they were married. There were no guns fired,
in accordance with the Prince's agreement with the Hobgoblin,
who came to the wedding, in fact, and enjoyed himself very
much. The Hobgoblin had by this time removed all the spells
from all the Princesses, and had also taken away the notice,
the daggers and the spikes from his castle, and was on speaking
terms with every one of his neighbours, which made things much
more pleasant.
As I said, all was well—except for one little thing. The
Princess, perhaps because she had so much lost ground to make
up, didn't stop talking except when she was asleep. She talked
so much that Prince Hardie sometimes wished for the good old
days and felt inclined to ask the Hobgoblin, who was a great
friend, to put back the spell. However, he didn't do so. You
Can't have everything, after all.


Patrick
IT was several days before Jock again saw Michael McFudge,
but he kept on going to the hydrangea bush until, quite early
one morning, he found the little man back in his old position.
And that was the day Michael McFudge told him about the little
boy called Patrick.
"This little boy," he began, "came to live at our Palace some
time ago. He had only one name —Patrick —and he was quite
a nice little boy, except for the fact that he always knew every-
thing—or thought he did. Nobody could tell him anything, he
always knew it already, and he'd say, T know, I know,' and keep
on saying it until whoever was trying to tell him simply had to
stop. It was upsetting, to say the least of it, and by the time
Patrick had been with us for a week or two, I'm afraid every-
body was wishing he'd go somewhere else to live—anywhere at
all, so long as it wasn't too near us. However, we needn't have
worried, because something happened which stopped Patrick's
thinking he knew everything. And that 'Something' happened
like this.
One hot afternoon, the King decided he'd like to have some
tomato sandwiches with his afternoon tea, and, as Patrick was
standing nearby when the thought came to the King, he called
him over.
"Patrick," he said, "I feel I would like some tomato sand-
wiches. Will you go and pick some tomatoes for me. They
grow down—"
"I know, I know," said Patrick, "I'll get them. There's no
need to tell me where they are, I know."
The King shrugged his shoulders.
"Very well," he said. "If you're sure you know where to
find them—"
"Of course I know," said Patrick.
The King frowned.
"Don't be rude," he said. "If you're so sure, see you
don't come back without the tomatoes."
"Of course I won't," said Patrick, and hurried out of the
Palace into the garden—where he stopped short. He'd sud-
denly thought of something—he hadn't ever seen tomatoes grow-
ing—he'd only seen them when they were picked and ready to
be eaten —so he didn't know what kind of a plant he should try
to find. Anybody else in such a fix would have gone back into
the Palace, apologised to the King, and asked him where the


tomato plants were growing and. what they looked like —but not
Patrick. He wouldn't admit that there was anything about
which he didn't know everything, so, instead of asking and find-
ing out, he decided that he'd walk through the garden until he
came to the tomato plants, which he was sure he was clever
enough to know as soon as he saw them, despite the fact that he
hadn't seen any before.
So he strolled down the path, glancing at the plants growing
on either side. Although he thought that he was so clever,
Patrick was really rather stupid, because he hadn't enough sense
to realise that tomato plants don't as a rule grow in rose gardens.
At least, not in the King's rose garden, because he definitely
wasn't the kind of a man to grow roses and tomatoes in the one
garden.
Patrick came to the end of the path, and stood looking at
the green gate set in the wall. So far he hadn't seen anything
which he thought could be a tomato plant. Perhaps, he thought,
tomatoes grew wild and were to be found outside the garden
wall. Patrick stood thinking for a moment, then opened the
gate and stepped out onto the road. He walked along, stop-
ping every now and then to peer at the plants growing beside
the road, but, alas, they were all plants he knew were not tomato
plants.
Patrick sighed. It was such a hot day, and the sun gleam-
ing on the white road dazzled him, until he felt that all he wanted
to do was lie down and sleep. However, after refusing to let
the King tell him where the tomatoes grew, he knew that he
couldn't go back without them. He began to feel sorry he'd been
such a know-all.
There was a cool little stream beside the road, and Patrick
went over to get a drink of water. He bent down to plunge his
face in the blue water —and found his nose almost touching that
of a small silver fish. Patrick drew back his head, a little start-
led. The fish said, "Don't be frightened. I shan't hurt you."
As Patrick was a hundred times larger than the fish, he could well
believe this. However, he said politely, "Thank you," and went
on with what he'd been doing. The fish watched interestedly.
"Feel better?" he asked, when Patrick had finished.
"Much better," said Patrick. Then, as he remembered that
he had still to find the tomatoes, he sighed.
"What's wrong?" asked the fish.
Patrick looked at him.
"I don't suppose you've seen a tomato plant about here?"
he said.
The fish shook his head.


"Can't say I have."
"Oh," said Patrick, then "I don't suppose you know what
a tomato plant looks like?"
"Can't say I do," said the fish.
Patrick was disappointed, but remembered to thank the fish
before he went on down the hot road.
The road was pebbly and uneven, and was making his feet
very sore. He was so tired by now that he would have given a
great deal to be able to give up the search for the tomatoes and
go back to the palace. However, he remembered how annoyed
he had made the usually kind-hearted King, and trudged on.
There were all kinds of plants growing all around him, but
not, so far as he could see, a solitary tomato plant. Patrick
stopped at a big gum tree. There was a little shade at the
foot of the tree, and he thankfully sat down. A kookaburra
flew onto a branch of the tree, with a great deal of noise and
bustle. Patrick looked up.
"How do you do?" he said.
The kookaburra chuckled. "As well as can be expected,"
he said. "As well as can be expected."
"I don't suppose," said Patrick, "that you've seen a tomato
plant about here?"
The kookaburra laughed. "Don't be silly," he said, be-
tween gurgles, "A tomato plant, indeed."
Patrick looked at him resentfully. It wasn't funny.
"Well, do you know what a tomato plant looks like?" he
said, grumpily.
The kookaburra laughed so loudly that he almost fell out
of the tree. Patrick stood up and stamped his foot.
"What are you laughing at?" he demanded. "Stop laugh-
ing."
The kookaburra laughed and laughed.
Patrick looked at him disgustedly. "Jackass," he shouted,
and stamped off down the road.
He was so annoyed by the kookaburra's laughing at him that
he forgot to look at the plants growing alongside the road, and,
when he realised this, had to go back quite a long way, for fear
he had missed a tomato plant.
Poor Patrick was very sorry by now that he'd been so smart
His feet were hurting him, and his head was so hot that it felt as
if it were on fire. He stopped to take off his stockings, hoping
that would make his feet feel better, and, while he stood wob-
bling on one leg, a voice said, sharply, "Careful now, with that
big foot."
Patrick looked down. There was a large earthworm look-
ing up at him.
"It's not so big," said Patrick. "But," he finished taking
off the stocking and put his foot down carefully, "there you are."


"Thank you," said the worm.
Patrick, after his trying experience with the kookaburra,
was a little doubtful about asking for the tomatoes again, but
he had to know.
"I don't suppose," he said timidly, "you've seen a tomato
plant about here?"
"A tomato plant," said the worm. "Let me think. Yes,
I believe I did see one on the way up here."
Patrick said eagerly,
"Where was it?"
"Oh, no," said the worm. "That was a potato plant."
Patrick's face fell.
"Well, do you know what
tomato plant looks like?" he
asked.
"Of course," said the worm.
"It's not as tall as you and—
My goodness" he broke off and stared upwards. "The Early
Bird," he said. "Excuse me." And before Patrick could stop
him, the worm had burrowed down into the earth.
Patrick could have cried with disappointment. He'd been
so near to finding out what a tomato plant looked like. He
poked at the earth with his toe, but the worm had vanished from
sight.
To make matters worse, what the worm had thought to be
a bird had floated down at Patrick's feet, and proved to be only
a large brown leaf. Worms are very short-sighted.
Patrick sorrowfully turned back to the road. Slowly he
trudged along. His feet were as heavy as lead, and it was a


tremendous effort to lift them. On and on he went, going more
and more slowly. The sun had begun to sink, and it was get-
ing dark. Patrick, although he wasn't afraid of the dark, didn't
exactly like it, so he watched dismally as the sky blackened.
He came wearily around a bend in the road, and suddenly
the tears rushed to his eyes. He was facing the most enormous
hill—and he still hadn't seen a tomato plant, so he'd have to
climb it. And he was so tired.
He said, out aloud between sobs, "I'll never do it again.
I'll never think I know everything when I don't. Not ever,
I won't."
"Gracious goodness," said the big white horse, which had
come up silently to stand behind Patrick. "What's all this?"
Patrick turned quickly. He hadn't heard the horse com-
ing.
"What aren't you ever going to do again?" asked the horse.
Patrick was so tired and unhappy that it was a relief to talk,
so he told the horse what had happened—about his always think-
ing he knew everything, and being so clever; about annoying
the King, and being afraid to go home without the tomatoes —
in fact, he told the horse all about everything that had happened
on his search for the tomatoes. When he had finished, the
horse said gravely, "My word, you were silly."
Patrick nodded, gulping back his tears.
"I won't do it again," he said.
"Are you sure?" said the horse.
"Yes," said Patrick, "I'm sure."
"Then," said the horse, "there's no need for all this grief.
I know where the loveliest tomato plants grow. I'll take you
there right now."
Patrick jumped joyfully.
"Will you really?" he said. "Thank you so much."
The horse knelt down. "Up you get," he said. "And
hang on tight."
Patrick scrambled up onto the horse's back, the horse rose
to his feet, and they raced away.
They went so fast, up hill and down dale, that, before very
long, the horse was able to say, "Nearly there," and Patrick saw
a high wall. He rubbed his eyes. It was the wan of the Palace
in which he lived. The horse said, "Hold tight, and jumped
over the wall. He galloped up the path and stopped in front
of the room in which Patrick and the King had been when the
King sent him for the tomatoes.
"There," said the horse. Patrick looked down at the gar-
den, in which were growing the green tomato plants. He couid
see the red tomatoes hanging amidst the leaves, and he thought


of the horrible time he'd had, searching for them, and all the
while they'd been two feet away from his own home.
"But this is where I live," he said.
The horse nodded. "I know," he said. "So do I live here.
Patrick blinked. This was too much.
The horse went on, "When you took so long," he said "the
King guessed that you didn't know what you were doing, so he
left it until he thought you'd had time to realise how stupid
you'd been, then sent me out to look for you."
Patrick looked sulkily at the tomatoes, and wriggled his
sore feet.
"It's not fair," he said
"Oh, yes, it is," said the horse. "Serves you right for
being too clever."
Patrick thought for a moment, and then laughed.
"Gee, I'm silly," he said.
The horse looked at him approvingly.
"That's right," he said. "That's the way to take it."
Patrick slid down to the ground.
"Thank you for bringing me home," he said. He bent down
to the bush, and came up with a large red tomato in each hand.
"And, anyhow, I did get the tomatoes." He laughed and
ran inside.
"And since then," finished Michael McFudge, looking down
at Jock's intent face, "Patrick has stopped being a know-all, and
is one of the best boys in the whole Palace. Particularly as we
say "Tomatoes" to him now and then, when he's beginning to
feel clever agaifi.


Spots
ANOTHER time, when he went to the bush, Michael
McFudge told Jock this story.
"Once," he began, "there was a baby giraffe by the name of
Spots. He was a very young giraffe, who had been born in a
zoo, from which, a few weeks after his birth, he ran away.
He'd been lying in the sun with his mother, feeling quite
happy and contented, when a keeper came in through the iron
gate, and tried to give him a pill. This particular keeper was
always trying to give the animals pills—horrible green sugar-
coated pills —and, needless to say, was most unpopular because
of it.
Spots hadn't liked the look of the pill one bit—the sight of
it alone was enough to make him feel ill—so, before anyone
could stop him, he butted the keeper in the stomach, ran between
his mother's legs, and out through the half-open gate.
He ran as quickly as his rather wobbly legs would take him
—and after him ran two keepers, his mother, the Gateman, the
boy who sold icecream at the entrance, four dogs, and two small
boys who just happened to be nearby when he escaped. Oh,
yes, and one blue hat with large pink roses on it, which had


been blown off somebody's head as Spots went rushing by, and
was still following. The keeper who had been butted in the
stomach was not following. He was feeling much too odd to
follow anyone. Spots had butted him in the stomach,
the keeper had been holding out the green pill, and, somehow or
other in the confusion of being butted in the stomach, he had
managed to swallow it. So he was lying on the ground, feeling
very sorry for himself, and also feeling sorry, I hope, for all the
innocent animals he had forced to swallow those awful green
pills.
On rushed Spots, getting a little tired, but rather liking the
feeling of being free. He crawled underneath the turnstile at
the entrance to the Zoo, and raced away down a bush path which
led away from the main road. And after him crawled the two
keepers, his mother, the Gateman, the icecream boy and three
dogs—everyone who had started out on the chase, except the
blue hat, which had caught on a shrub; the two little boys, whose
mother had stopped them; and one of the dogs, which had seen
a rabbit and thought it more interesting to chase than a wobbly
baby giraffe.
Spots was going more slowly now, and realised that, if he were
not to be caught and taken back to his cage, he would have to
hide. He tore around a bend in the road. There was a big
clump of bottle brush growing nearby, and he pushed his way
as far as possible into the bushes. He held his breath as first
the two keepers, then the icecream boy and two dogs ran past
his hiding place. The Gateman, who was not so young, had
dropped out of the race a little earlier, and taken Spots' mother
back to the Zoo with him; and the other dog had gone off to help
the first dog chase the rabbit.
Spots came out cautiously from behind his bushes, and
looked down the road. The keepers, the icecream boy and the
two dogs were quite a long way away by now, but Spots wasn't
going to take any chances. He pushed through the bushes until
he came to a path going the opposite way to the one on which
he had been chased. He looked back at his pursuers. They
were so far away by now that he could see only a cloud of dust.
And for all I know, the two keepers, the icecream boy, and
the two dogs are still running, firmly convinced that they are
chasing Spots—who, by the way, had by this time started off
down the newly-found path.
He was feeling very happy and clever, and sang as he walked
along. He stopped every now and then to look at things—the
flowers growing on all sides, a bird in a tree, a little stream —
and thoroughly enjoyed himself.
He spoke to one or two rabbits he saw beside a bush
(giraffes don't make any noise that people could hear, but they


can speak to other animals, if they want to), and they were very
friendly.
"This is wonderful," thought Spots to himself. "I should
have run away long ago."
He played for quite a long time with a little wallaby which
he met when he was watching a grub crawl up a tree. Spots
and the wallaby got on very well together, and Spots was having
great fun when the wallaby said,
"Oh well, I have to go home now."
"Oh," said Spots, "Do you have to go? Can't you stay a
while?"
"No," said the wallaby, "My mother told me to be home in
time for lunch. G'bye."
Spots watched him scamper off. He felt a little sad
for a second or two. Now that he'd run away from the Zoo,
he didn't have a home to which he could go, nor a mother to
love and scold him. However, he saw a very interesting bush
a little further on, and ran up to inspect it more closely, forget-
ting for the moment all about being miserable.
And so he played about all day. He ate leaves and berries
for his lunch, and there were plenty of creeks at which he could
drink, so he was perfectly happy—until he noticed that the sun
was beginning to set.
He stopped, and looked about him uneasily. He hadn't
realised it was so late —it would soon be dark. Spots began to
think that perhaps running away into the bush wasn't such a
good idea after all. Here it was nearly night time, and he had
no place to sleep.
All around him the birds were flying into their nests, rabbits
were scuttling underground—everyone was settling down for the
night. Spots decided that he'd better find some place to sleep,
before it became too dark.
He ran over to a rabbit which was about to go down into
its burrow. The rabbit had been very nice to him when they had
played together during the afternoon, so Spots said, quite con-
fidently.
"Can I come and sleep in your place?"
The rabbit turned around.
"Sorry," he said, "this is for rabbits only."
He was polite, but Spots could see that the rabbit wouldn t
change his mind.
"Do you know where I can sleep?" he asked.
"Why don't you go and find another giraffe," said the rab-
bit. "He'd be sure to let you sleep with him."
Spots nodded.
"That's right," he said. "So he would. I'll do that."
The rabbit said "Good-night," and vanished underground.


I) if
v -5? A^
Spots turned round to go and find another giraffe with
which he could live, and then sat down sadly. He'd remembered.
It was no use looking, because Spots knew there were no other
giraffes in the bush. The only other giraffe he had ever seen
was his mother, and she was back at the Zoo. Tears came into
Spots' eyes. He wanted his mother, and his warm bed at the
Zoo—even if he did have to take green pills. Running away
was all very well in the daytime, but when night came, home was
the best place.
A large tear rolled out of the corner of Spots' eye and ran
down his neck (which was very long, even though he was only'
a small giraffe).
It was very nearly dark now, and the bush didn't look
friendly any more —it was horrible. Suddenly Spots started
back in fright. He could see two enormous eyes shining through
the trees at him.
He crouched down, terrified. The two eyes came nearer.
Spots had never seen a motor car, so he didn't realise that the
two eyes were the lights of a car, which drew up on the road at
the other side of the grassy mound on which Spots was lying.
He didn't know it was a motor car, but he did know that
it was a little girl who jumped out of the car and came running
over. He'd seen plenty of little girls at the Zoo, admiring him
through the bars of his cage.
The little girl said:
"Daddy, it IS a giraffe—a baby one. I knew it was."


A man got out of the car and came over.
"You're right," he said. "So it is. It must have escaped
from the Zoo, and lost itself. We'd better take it back on our
way home."
The little girl smiled.
"Pick it up," she said. "Be careful, it might bite."
The man bent and picked Spots up in his arms.
"Not this fellow," he said. "I'll bet he's glad to be going
home. The bush is no place for giraffes.
The man carried Spots over to the car, and they started
again. Spots lay on the back seat, wondering what was happen-
ing to him. He didn't think the man and the little girl would
hurt him —they looked kind. Perhaps they'd take him back to
his mother. He hoped so—oh, dear, he did so want to see his
mother again.
All this time the car had been taking him nearer and nearer
to her, and suddenly Spots sat up. He could smell the Zoo.
These people were taking him home. The little girl, who was
leaning over the back of the seat, smiled at him, and Spots sud-
denly stretched out his long tongue and licked herface. e
was very grateful to them for bringing him home. The girl gig-
gled, and then jumped down to help her father take Spots into
the Zoo.
They left him with the Gateman (who had recovered from
his run and felt much better) because they were very late in get-
ting home already, and drove off.
The Gateman took Spots down to his cage. He could see
his mother, standing sadly in the corner. Spots was so glad
to see her that he could hardly manage to run over. She saw
him, and cried out delightedly. Spots cuddled up to her as
closely as he could, and she began to lick his head and ears.
Suddenly she stopped.
"You bad child," she scolded, and butted him with her
head. "Running off like that. Don't you ever do that again."
Spots sighed happily. It was good to have mother
to scold him. It was wonderful to be home, and he'd never
run away again.
He hasn't either, even though he's a big giraffe now.
And while I think of it —the keeper who caused all the
trouble by trying to make him take the green pill was moved to
another Zoo, and the animals don't have to take the green pills
any longer. They have to take blue ones, which are much
nicer.


Fluff 7 s House
THE next time, Michael McFudge told Jock the story of the
water-elf. It went like this:
"There was once a water-elf named Fluff, who lived in a
small shell at the bottom of the ocean. The shell had once
been the home of a fish who hadn't liked it and had moved,
but Fluff found it most comfortable. He could get in and out
of the opening very easily, there was plenty of room inside, it
was warm and cosy —in fact, it was all that could be desired by
any water-elf. It was a pretty shell, too; a pale pink in colour,
and very nicely shaped. Fluff was very proud of his home and
delighted in bringing other creatures to see it. He wanted to
name his shell-house, and tried for a very long time to think of
a suitable name for it. He couldn't think of one which he con-
sidered good enough for such a lovely home, however, and
finally it became known, simply, as "Fluff's House."
Fluff was a very busy water-elf, and worked in the nearby
sea-weed gardens. His task was to make sure that the sea-weed
grew straight and tall—and I must say to his credit that the sea-
weed he grew was the straightest and best on the whole ocean
bed. Fluff was as proud of his sea-weed as he was of his house,
and worked very hard in the gardens all day. Then, at night,


he would hurry home to his shell-house, and rest contentedly
there until it was time for work again. You might think that
this was dull, but Fluff was quite happy, living in his pink shell-
house, and working each day in the sea-weed gardens, until, one
night, a terrible thing happened.
Fluff had finished his work in the gardens for that day, and
as usual, hurried home to his pink shell-house. He was anxious
to get home early, so hurried along the ocean bed, past the Fish
School, around the clump of coral, and to the black rock. His
shell-house rested against the other side of the black rock. He
went round the rock, then stopped. His pink shell-house wasn t
there!
Fluff rubbed his eyes. He couldn't believe it. There was
no sign of his shell-house. He looked quickly at the rock.
Perhaps he'd taken a wrong turning—but, no, this was where
his shell-house was. Or, rather, this was where his shell-house
should have been. It certainly wasn't there now. It had
vanished. The only thing left to show that it had ever existed
was a mark on the rock where the shell-house had pressed
against it.
Fluff was bewildered. Houses don't get up and walk away
—his house must be somewhere. He couldn't understand it.
He turned and looked about him. Everything was as usual on
the ocean bed. Everybody was going about his own business,
nothing had changed—except that his house had disappeared.
It was incredible.
Fluff stood staring at the place where his shell-house had
been, not knowing what to do. All his belongings were in the
pink shell-house, he would have no food to eat and no place to
sleep, unless he could find his shell-house quickly. As he stood
there, trying to make up his mind what to do, a little red fish
came past.
Fluff called to the fish.
I say.
The fish came closer.
"Have you seen my house? asked Fluff.
"Have I seen what?" said the little red fish.
"My house," said Fluff. ' "It was here this morning when
I left, but now I can't find it."
"You're kidding, aren't you?" said the little red fish (he
was always getting into bother for using slang).
"No, I'm not kidding," said Fluff indignantly. "Why would
I be kidding about such a serious matter? I tell you my house
has gone —vanished —disappeared from the ocean.
"Gosh," said the little red fish.




He was quiet for a moment, thinking the matter over, then
he said:
"But where is it?"
Fluff began to lose his temper.
"If I knew where it was," he said, "I wouldn't be standing
here talking to such a stupid thing as you are. Id go and get
it." „
"There's no need to get mad," said the little red fish, ! I
was only trying to help."
"Well," said Fluff, feeling a little ashamed of himself, "I'm
sorry. It's just that I'm very upset."
"That's 0.K.", said the little red fish (who really did use
too much slang). "I don't wonder that you're upset—losing
your house. It's nearly bedtime, too. Where will you sleep.
"I don't know," said Fluff desperately. "I must find my
house." ,
"You know," said the little red fish thoughtfully, "I've been
thinking."
"What about," snapped Fluff, who was losing his temper
. £ y-<1 /T5
"Well," said the little red fish, taking no notice ol Flutt s
bad temper. "It couldn't have gone away by itself."
"Of course it couldn't," Fluff sighed. "I know that."
"Then if it couldn't go by itself," said the little red fisn
triumphantly. "Somebody must have taken it.
"That's obvious," said Fluff. "But who'd take it. Everybody
knows it's my house. Who'd want to steal my house?"
"Is there anybody who doesn't like you?" asked the little
red fish. n ~
"Nobody who hates me enough to take my house, said
Fluff. "I haven't any enemies."
"Oh," said the little red fish. "Then whoever took your
house can't have known it was yours."
"But everybody knows it's my house," said Fluff. "All che
people who live about here know me and my house."
"That's it," said the little red fish excitedly. "That's just it.
It must be somebody new."
"What are you talking about?" demanded Fluff.
"Your house, stupid," said the little red fish. "Somebody
who has just come to live in the neighbourhood must have seen
it, liked the look of it, and not knowing it was yours, taken it.
See?" . ...
"Why, of course," said Fluff. "That must be what's hap-
pened. It's all a mistake." He looked at the fish.
"That was very bright of you, thinking of that."


"S'nothing," said the fish. "Should see me when I'm try-
ing."
They were silent for a space, then Fluff said:
"I can't think of anybody who has just moved into the
neighbourhood, can you?"
The little red fish shook his head.
"Nope," he said. "Neither can I."
Fluff sighed. "I'm not much better off, then."
"Yes, you are," said the little red fish. "It should be easy
enough to find a newcomer. Come on, we'll go and look. Hop
on my back, we'll be quicker that way."
Fluff scrambled up on the rock and from there onto the
fish's back. The fish swam slowly along, so that they could
see if there were any newcomers amongst the ocean dwellers. At
first they were unsuccessful. In fact, they had gone a long
way, and were feeling very tired, when suddenly Fluff pointed.
"There it is," he said excitedly. "There's my house, over
by that coral."
The fish swam over to the pink shell-house. Surely enough,
it was "Fluff's House." The name was written above the door.
Fluff got down from the fish's back, and hurried into his
house.
Sitting inside, in his most comfortable chair, was a water-
sprite —a very pretty water-sprite.
She sprang up, frightened, as Fluff rushed in.
"What are you doing in my house?" she said.
"Your house?" said Fluff. "This is my house. What are
you doing in my house?"
The water-sprite was dismayed. "This can't be your
house," she said. "I found it only to-day."
"It is my house," said Fluff indignantly. "You took it
while I was away working."
The water-sprite was very upset. "I'm so sorry," she said
tearfully. "I had no idea it belonged to anyone. I've just
moved into the neighbourhood, and I was looking for somewhere
to live. This little shell-house was leaning up against a dirty
old rock, and there was nobody about, so I thought it must be
vacant. It was such a pretty little house, so I took it. I didn't
know it belonged to anyone, truly I didn't. I'm so sorry."
She looked sorry, too. Fluff began to feel less annoyed.
He was rather pleased, too, that the water-sprite should have
said that his pink shell-house was pretty. He liked people to
praise his house.
"Well," he said, "All tight. I accept your apology. It
was a mistake."
"Thank you," said the water-sprite. "I really didn't do it
on purpose."


"That's quite all right," said Fluff grandly. "We'll forget
the whole thing."
He looked about him thoughtfully.
"How did you get my house right down here," he said.
"It's quite big."
"A lobster helped me," said the water-sprite. "He picked
it up in his claws and brought it here."
"Oh," Fluff nodded his head.
"I'd better see about getting it back," he said after a second.
He suddenly remembered the little red fish, who was wait-
ing patiently outside. He called the fish in, and told him what
had happened.
When he had finished the tale, the little red fish said:
"So I was right. I guessed something like that had hap-
pened. What are you going to do now?"
"I'll take the house back to the rock," said Fluff. "I can t
leave it here —it'd be too far for me to go to work each day."
"Well, what's she going to do?" The little red fish nodded
towards the water-sprite. "Where's she going to live now?
Fluff looked at the water-sprite. He hadn't thought about
that. The water-sprite said quickly:
"Don't worry about me, I'll be all right."
Fluff wasn't so sure. She was much too small and delicate
to spend the night outside. He looked up at the little red
fish for help.
"What can I do?" he said. "I have to have my house to
live in."
"It's very simple," said the little red fish. "Only you're too
silly to see it."
Fluff said humbly, "What can I do."
"There's plenty of room in this house," said the little red
fish, looking about him, "So you can let her use half your house.
It was a wonderful idea. Fluff was annoyed at himself for
not thinking of it before. The water-sprite protested, but
there was really nothing else she could do, so she finally accepted
gratefully.
The little red fish and Fluff somehow between them man-
aged to move the shell-house back to its old position against the
black rock, and then they carefully divided the little house in
two by putting in a wall of coral. There was plenty of room when
they'd finished, and the water-sprite now lives in one half of
the house, while Fluff lives on the other side of the coral wall
in the other half. It works very well, too, and both the water-
sprite and Fluff are content. The little red fish is contented,
too —he's very pleased with himself for thinking of the idea,
and takes all the credit for the success of the whole scheme.


OR many weeks, until the end of the summer,
J" every time Jock went to the hush he found \i /u y V-
Michael McFudge on the branch, and the little %i \ /X \
man told him stories. Jock loved them, and could 7~^y\ \
never hear enough of them, but, unfortunately, at [ " V V
the beginning of winter he caught a bad cold, and V )\ /L-i
was in bed for a long time. When Jock was better, V X fTv
and went to the bush again, the ->-» M
little man was not there, and ILI \ H A>
although he has gone often to 11 Ui
look for him, Michael McFudge H , Y\ ( W 3 !W
hasn't been there since. \\ 1 \y
Jock still goes to the bush \\ / N w
every day, however. He knows \\ j! •) \ I |
that one day soon Michael \\\/ / 1) 5r | j,
McFudge will be there —sitting \ \\| J ., si I j
on the same branch, waiting to v jl- W
tell him a story. So, until then, C. /'*\\ I
Jock is waiting as patiently as


Wholly set up and printed in Australia by
Radio Printing Press Pty. Ltd., 146 Foveaux Street,
SYDNEY.




mt
IB
'mm
ms^
!Il53b?$
