

MICHAEL SERVETUS
BY
WILLIAM OSLER, M.D., F.R.S.
REGIUS PROFESSOR OF MEDICINE
UNIVERSITY OF OXFORD
Price One Shilling net
LONDON
HENRY FROWDE
OXFORD UNIVERSITY PRESS
AMEN CORNER, E.C.
1 9°9




MICHAEL SERVEIVS HIS DEARAGONIA
Front.


MICHAEL SERVETUS
BY
WILLIAM OSLER, M.D., F.R.S.
REGIUS PROFESSOR OF MEDICINE
UNIVERSITY OF OXFORD
LONDON
HENRY FROWDE
OXFORD UNIVERSITY PRESS
AMEN CORNER, E.C.
1909


OXFORD : HORACE HART
PRINTER TO THE UNIVERSITY


MICHAEL SERVETUS
The year 1553 saw Europe full of tragedies, and to
the earnest student of the Bible it must have seemed
as if the days had come for the opening the second seal
spoken of in the Book of Revelation, when peace
should be taken from the earth and men should kill one
another. One of these tragedies has a mournful interest
this year, the four hundredth anniversary of the birth of
its chief actor; yet it was but one of thousands of similar
cases with which the history of the sixteenth century is
stained. On October 27, shortly after twelve o’clock,
a procession started from the town-hall of Geneva—the
chief magistrates of the city, the clergy in their robes,
the Lieutenant Criminel and other officers on horseback,
a guard of mounted archers, the citizens, with a motley
crowd of followers, and in their midst, with arms bound,
in shabby, dirty clothes, walked a man of middle age,
whose intellectual face bore the marks of long suffering.
Passing along the rue St. Antoine through the gate of
the same name, the cortege took its way towards the
Golgotha of the city. Once outside the walls, a superb
sight broke on their view: in the distance the blue
waters and enchanting shores of the Lake of Geneva,
to the west and north the immense amphitheatre of the
Jura, with its snow-capped mountains, and to the south
and west the lovely valley of the Rhone; but we may
1 This address did double duty—at the Johns Hopkins Medical
School Historical Club, and as an Extension lecture in the
Summer School, Oxford.


well think that few eyes were turned away from the
central figure of that sad procession. By his side, in
earnest entreaty, walked the aged pastor, Farel, who
had devoted a long and useful life to the service of his
fellow citizens. Mounting the hill, the field of Champel
was reached, and here on a slight eminence was the
fateful stake, with the dangling chains and heaping
bundles of faggots. At this sight the poor victim
prostrated himself on the ground in prayer. In reply
to the exhortation of the clergyman for a specific con-
fession of faith, there was the cry, ‘ Misericordia, miseri-
cordia! Jesu, thou Son of the eternal God, have com-
passion upon me! ’ Bound to the stake by the iron chain,
with a chaplet of straw and green twigs covered with
sulphur on his head, with his long dark face, it is said
that he looked like the Christ in whose name he was
bound. Around his waist were tied a large bundle of
manuscript and a thick octavo printed book. The torch
was applied, and as the flames spread to the straw and
sulphur and flashed in his eyes, there was a piercing
cry that struck terror into the hearts of the bystanders.
The faggots were green, the burning was slow, and it
was long before in a last agony he cried again, ‘Jesu,
thou Son of the eternal God, have mercy upon me!’
Thus died, in his forty-fourth year, Michael Servetus
Villanovanus, physician, physiologist, and heretic.
Strange, is it not, that could he have cried, ‘Jesu, thou
Eternal Son of God! ’ even at this last moment, the
chains would have been unwound, the chaplet removed,
and the faggots scattered ; but he remained faithful unto
death to what he believed was the Truth as revealed in
the Bible.
The story of his life is the subject of my address.
Michael Servetus, known also as Michel Villeneuve,
or Michael Servetus Villanovanus, or, as he puts in one


FIG. 2: ALTAR SCREEN AT BARCELONA
*• 4




of his books, alias Reves, was a Spaniard born at
Villanueva de Sigena, in the present province of Huesca.
When on trial at Vienna, he gave Tudela, Navarre, as
his birthplace, at Geneva, Villanueva of Aragon; and
at one place he gave as the date of his birth 1509, and
at the other 1511. The former is usually thought to be
the more correct. As at Villanueva de Sigena there
are records of his family, and as the family altar, made
by the father of Servetus, still exists, we may take it
that at any rate the place of his birth is settled. The
altar-screen is a fine piece of work, with ten paintings.
I am indebted to Signor Antonio Virgili, of Barcelona,
for the photograph of it here reproduced (fig. 2).
Servetus seems to have belonged to a good family in
easy circumstances, and at his trial he said he came of
an ancient race, living nobly.
From the convent school he probably went to the
neighbouring University of Saragossa. Possibly he
may have studied for the priesthood, but however that
may be, there is evidence that he was a precocious
youth, and well read in Latin, Greek, and Hebrew, the
last two very unusual accomplishments at that period.
We next hear of him at Toulouse, studying canon
and civil law. He could not have been twenty when
he entered the service of the Friar Quintana, confessor
to the Emperor Charles V, apparently as his private
secretary. In the suite of the Emperor he went to
Italy, and was present when Pope and Emperor entered
Bologna, and ‘ he saw the most powerful prince of the
age at the head of 20,000 veterans kneeling and kissing
the feet of the Pope.’ Here he had his first impression
of the worldliness and mercenary character of the
Papacy, hatred of which, very soon after, we find to
have become an obsession.
In the summer of 1530 the Emperor attended the


Diet of Augsburg, where the Princes succeeded in
getting Protestantism recognized politically. Such a
gathering must have had a profound influence on the
young student, already, we may suppose, infected with
the new doctrines. Possibly at Saragossa, or at
Toulouse, he may have become acquainted with the
writings of Luther. Such an expression of opinion as
the following, written before his twenty-first year, could
scarcely have been of a few months’ growth : ‘ For my
own part, I neither agree nor disagree in every particular
with either Catholic or Reformer. Both of them seem
to me to have something of truth and something of
error in their views; and whilst each sees the other’s
shortcomings, neither sees his own. God in his good-
ness give us all to understand our errors, and incline
us to put them away. It would be easy enough, indeed,
to judge dispassionately of everything, were we but
suffered without molestation by the churches freely to
speak our minds.’ (Willis.)
How far he held any personal communication with the
German reformers is doubtful. It is quite possible, and
Tollin, his chief biographer, makes him visit Luther. We
do not know how long he held service with Quintana,
Tollin thinks a year and a half. It is not unlikely that
the good friar was glad to get rid of a young secretary
infected with heresy so shocking as that contained in
his first book, published in 1531; indeed, there is
a statement to the effect that a monk in the suite of
Quintana found the book in a shop at Ratisbon and
hastened to tell the confessor of its terrible contents.
Servetus had plunged headlong into studies of the most
dangerous character, and had even embooked them in
a small octavo volume, entitled De Trinitatis Erroribus,
which appeared without the printer’s name, but on the
title-page the author, Michael Serveto, alias Reves


FIG. 3
p. 6




ab Aragonia, Hispanum, and with the date mdxxxi.
In the innocency of his heart he thought the work would
be a good introduction to the more liberal of the Swiss
reformers, but they would have none of it, and were
inexpressibly shocked at its supposed blasphemies.
Nor did he fare better at Strassburg; and even the
kind-hearted Bucer said that the author of such a work
should be disembowelled and torn in pieces.
In thorny theological questions a layman naturally
seeks shelter, and I am glad to quote the recent opinion
of a distinguished student of the period, Professor
Emerton, 1 on this youthful phase of the life of Servetus.
‘ He would not admit that the eternal Son of God was
to appear as man, but only that a man was to come
who should be the Son of God. This is the earliest
intimation we have as to the speculations which were
occupying the mind of the young scholar. It is
highly significant that from the start he was impressed
with what we should now call the historical view of
theology. As he read the Old Testament, its writers
seemed to him to be referring to things that their
hearers would understand. Their gaze into the future
was limited by the fortunes of the people at the moment.
To imagine them possessed of all the divine mysteries,
and to have in mind the person of the man Jesus as the
ultimate object of all their prophetic vision, was to
reflect back the knowledge of history into a past to
which such knowledge was impossible. So far as I can
understand him, this is the key to all Servetus’ later
thought. His manner of expressing himself is confusing
and intricate to the last degree, so much so that neither
in his own time nor since has any one dared to say that
he understood it. To his contemporaries he was a half-
1 Harvard Theological Review, April, 1909.


mad fanatic; to those who have studied him, even
sympathetically, his thought remains to a great extent
enigmatical; but this one point is fairly clear; that he
grasped, as no one up to his time had grasped, this one
central notion, that, whatever the divine plan may have
been, it must be revealed by the long, slow movement
of history—that, to understand the record of the past, it
must be read, so far as that is possible, with the mind
of those to whom it was immediately addressed, and
must not be twisted into the meanings that may suit the
fancy of later generations/
‘To have seized upon such an idea as this —an idea
which has begun to come to its rights only within our
memories—was an achievement which marks this youth
of twenty as at all events an extraordinary individual,
a disturbing element in his world, a man who was not
likely to let the authorities rest calmly in possession of
all the truth there was/
In the following year, 1532, two dialogues appeared,
explanatory and conciliatory, a little book which only
aggravated the offence, and feeling the Protestant atmo-
sphere too hot, Servetus went to Paris. Dropping this
name by which he has been known, and closing this
brief but stormy period, for the next twenty-one years we
now follow Michel Villeneuve, or Michael Villanovanus,
in a varied career as student, lecturer, practitioner,
author and editor, still nursing the unconquerable hope
that the world might be reformed could he but restore
the primitive doctrine of the Church.
II
We know very little of this his first stay in Paris.
Possibly he found employment as teacher, or as reader
to the press. At this period his path first crossed that of
Calvin, then a young student. Of about the same age,


FIG. 4
p. 8




both ardent students, both on the high road of emanci-
pation from the faith of their birth, they must have had
many discussions on theological questions. One may
conclude from the reproachful sentence of Calvin many
years later, ‘ Vous avez fuy le luite ’, that arrangements
had been made for a public debate.
After a short stay at Avignon and Orleans, we next
find Servetus at Lyons, in the employ of the Trechsels
brothers, the famous printers. Those were the days of
fine editions of the classics and other books, which
required the assistance of scholarly men to edit and
correct. He brought out a splendid folio of Ptolemy’s
Geography, 1535 (Fig. 4), with commentaries on the
different countries, which show a wide range of know-
ledge in so young a man. It is marked also by many
examples of independent criticism, as, when speaking of
Palestine, he says that the ‘ Promised Land ’ was any-
thing but a ‘ promising land ’, and instead of flowing
with milk and honey, and a land of corn, olives and
vineyards, it was inhospitable and barren, and the
stories about its fertility nothing but boasting and
untruth. He seems to have been brought to task for
this, as in the second edition, 1541, this section does not
exist. For this work he was paid by the Trechsels
500 crowns.
It is possible that Servetus and Rabelais may have
met at Lyons, as at this time the ‘ great Dissimulator ’
was physician to the Hotel-Dieu, but there is nothing in
the writings of either to indicate that their paths crossed.
The man who had the greatest influence upon him at
Lyons was Symphorien Champier, one of the most
interesting and distinguished of the medical humanists
of the early part of the sixteenth century. Servetus
helped him with his French Pharmacopoeia , and Pastor
Tollin will have it that Champier even made a home
B


for the poor scholar. An ardent Galenist, an historian,
the founder of the hospital and of the medical school,
Champier had the usual predilection of the student of
those days for astrology. Probably from him Servetus
received his instructions in the subject. At any rate,
when the distinguished Professor of Medicine of
Tubingen, Fuchsius, attacked Champier on the ground
of his astrological vagaries, Servetus took up his pen
and replied in defence with a pamphlet entitled l ln
Leonhardum Fuchsium defensio apologetica pro Sym-
phoriano Campeggio’, an exceedingly rare item, the
only one indeed of the writings of Servetus that I have
not seen in the original.
Stimulated doubtless by the example and precept of
Champier, Servetus returned to Paris to study medicine.
Fairly rich in pocket with the proceeds of his literary
work, he attached himself first to the College of Calvi,
and afterwards to that of the Lombards, and it is said
that he took the degrees of M.A. and M.D., but of this
I am told that there is no documentary evidence.
Of his life in Paris we have very little direct evidence,
except in connexion with a single incident. We know
that he came into intimate contact with three men—
Guinther of Andernach, Jacobus Sylvius, and Vesalius.
Guinther and Sylvius must have been men after his
own heart, ripe scholars, ardent Galenists, and keen
anatomists. In the Institutiones Anatomicae (Basel, 1539),
Guinther speaks of Servetus in connexion with Vesalius,
who was at this time his fellow pro-sector. ‘ And after
him by Michael Villanovanus, distinguished by his
literary acquirements of every kind, and scarcely second
to any in his knowledge of Galenical doctrine.’ With
their help he states that he has examined the whole
body, and demonstrated to the 'students all of the
muscles, veins, arteries, and nerves. There was at this


time a very keen revival in the study of anatomy in
Paris, and to have been associated with such a young
genius as Vesalius, already a brilliant dissector, must
have been in itself a liberal education in the subject.
It is easy to understand whence was derived the
anatomical knowledge upon which was based the far-
reaching generalization with which the name of Servetus
is associated in physiology.
But the Paris incident of which we know most is
connected with certain lectures on judicial astrology.
We have seen that at Lyons, Servetus had defended
his friend and patron Symphorien Champier, through
whom he had doubtless become familiar with its prac-
tice. Though forbidden by the Church, judicial astrology
was still in favour in some universities, and was practised
largely by physicians occupying the most distinguished
positions. In those days few were strong minded
enough to defy augury, and in popular belief all were
‘ servile to skiey influences ’. It was contrary to the
regulations of the Paris Faculty to lecture on the
subject, though at this time the king had in his employ
a professional astrologist, Thibault. Shortly after
reaching Paris Servetus began a course of lectures on
the subject, which very soon brought him into conflict
with the authorities.
The admirable practice for the Dean to write out
each year his report, has preserved for us the full
details of the procedure against Servetus. Duboulay,
in his History of the University of Paris , vol. vi, has
extracted the whole affair from the Dean’s Commentary,
as it is called, of the year. He says that a certain
student of medicine, a Spaniard, or as he says, from
Navarre, but with a Spanish father, had taught for
some days in Paris in 1537 judicial astrology or divina-
tion. After having found out that this was condemned


by the Doctors of the Faculty, he caused to be printed
a certain apology in which he attacked the doctors, and
moreover declared that wars and pests and all the
affairs of men depended on the heavens and on the
stars, and he imposed on the public by confounding
true and judicial astrology. The Dean goes on to
state that, accompanied by two of his colleagues, he
tried to prevent Villanovanus from publishing the
apology, and met him leaving the school where he had
been making a dissection of the body with a surgeon,
and in the presence of several of the scholars, and of
two or three doctors, he not only refused to stop the
publication, but he threatened the Dean with bitter
words.
The Faculty appears to have had some difficulty in
getting the authorities to move in the matter. Possibly
we may see here the influence of the court astrologer,
Thibault. After many attempts, and after appealing to
the Theological Faculty and the Congregation of the
University, the question was taken up by Parliament.
The speeches of counsel for the Faculty, for the Uni-
versity, for Villanovanus, and for the Parliament are
given in full. The Parliament decided that the printed
apology should be recalled, the booksellers were for-
bidden to keep them, the lectures on astrology were
forbidden, and Villanovanus was urged to treat the
Faculty with respect. But on their part they were
asked to deal with the offender gently, and in a parental
fashion. It is a very interesting trial, and the Dean
evidently enjoyed his triumph. He says that he took
with him three theologians, two doctors in medicine,
the Dean of the Faculty of Canonical Law, and the
Procurator-General of the University. The affair was
discussed by Parliament with closed doors.
The Apologetica disceptatio pro astrologia, the rarest of


the Servetus items, the only copy known being in the
Bibliotheque Nationale, is an eight leaf pamphlet,
without title-page, pagination, or printer’s name. The
friends of the Faculty must have been very successful
in their confiscation of the work. Tollin, who dis-
covered the original, has reprinted it (Berlin, 1880). It
was not hard for Servetus to cite powerful authorities
on his side, and he summons in his defence the great
quartette, Plato, Aristotle, Hippocrates, and Galen. A
practical star-gazer, he took his own observations, and
the pamphlet records an eclipse of Mars by the moon.
He must, too, have been a student of the weather, as
he speaks of giving in his lectures public predictions
which caused great astonishment. The influence of the
moon in determining the critical days of diseases, a
favourite doctrine of Galen, is fully discussed, and he
says that Galen’s opinion should be written in letters
of gold. He rests content with these great authorities,
referring very briefly to one or two minor lights. He
scoffs at the well-known bitter attack on divination by
Picus.
It took several generations to eradicate completely
from the profession a belief in astrology, which lingered
well into the seventeenth century. In his Vulgar
Errors, discussing the ‘Canicular’ or ‘Dog Days’, Sir
Thomas Browne expresses his opinion of astrology in
the most characteristic language. ‘Nor do we hereby
reject or condemn a sober and regulated Astrology; we
hold there is more truth therein than in Astrologers;
in some more than many allow, yet in none so much
as some pretend. We deny not the influence of the
Starres, but often suspect the due application thereof;
for though we should affirm that all things were in all
things; that heaven were but earth celestified, and
earth but heaven terrestrified, or that each part above


had an influence upon its divided affinity below; yet
how to single out these relations, and duly to apply
their actions, is a work oft times to be effected by some
revelation, and Cabala from above, rather then any
Philosophy, or speculation here below.’
Among the auditors of Servetus was a young man,
Pierre Paumier, the Archbishop of Vienne, who appears
to have befriended him in Paris, and who a few years
later asked him to be his body physician. The astrology
trial was settled in March, 1537.
Servetus cannot have been very long a student of
medicine, but never lacking in assurance, he came
before the world as a medical author in the little treatise
on Syrups and their use (Fig. 5). Association with
Champier, whom he had helped in an edition of his
French Pharmacopoeia , had made him familiar with the
subject. The first three chapters are taken up with the
views on ‘ Concoctions ’ or ‘ Digestions ’, of which at that
time a series, from the first to the fourth, was recognized.
He pleads for a unity of the process, and, as Willis
remarks, he makes the very shrewd remark at that day,
‘ that diseases are only perversions of natural functions
and not new entities introduced into the body.’ The
greater part of the treatise is taken up with theoretical
discussions on the opinions of Galen, Hippocrates, and
Avicenna. The ‘ Composition and use of the Syrups ’
is deferred to the fifth and a concluding (sixth) chapter.
The little book appears to have been popular, and
was reprinted twice at Venice, 1545 and 1548, and
twice at Lyons, 1546 and 1547.
11l
Whether the adverse decision of Parliament disgusted
him with Paris, or whether through some friend the




FIG. 5
T 4


FIG. 6




opportunity to settle in practice had offered, we next
hear of Villeneuve at Charlieu, a small town about
twelve miles from Lyons, where he spent a year, or
part of the year 1538-9. Here his old Paris friend
Paumier sought him and induced him to settle at
Vienne, offering him apartments in the palace, and an
appointment as his body physician. After nearly ten
years of wandering, at last, in a peaceful home in the
fine old Roman city, with its good society, and under
the protection of the Primate of all France, Servetus
spent the next fourteen years as a practising physician.
Few details of his life are known. He retained his
association with the Trechsels, the printers, who had
set up a branch establishment in Vienne. In 1541 he
brought out a new edition of Ptolemy, with a dedication
to the Archbishop. From the preface we have a
glimpse of a genial group of companions, all interested
in the new studies. Several critical items in the
edition of 1535 disappear in the new one of 1541, e.g.
the scoffing remarks about Palestine; and in mentioning
the royal touch, instead of, ‘ I have myself seen the
King touching many with this disease (i.e. Scrofula),
but I have not seen that they were cured,’ he says,
‘ I have heard that many were cured.’ Perhaps he felt
it unbecoming in a member of an ecclesiastical circle,
and living under the patronage of the Archbishop, to
say anything likely to give offence.
In the following year he issued an edition of Pagnini’s
Bible in a fine folio (Fig. 6). Its chief interest to us is
the testimony that Servetus was still deep in theological
studies, for the commentaries in the work place him
among the earliest and boldest of the higher critics.
The prophetic psalms, and the numerous prophecies
in Isaiah and Daniel are interpreted in the light of
contemporary events, but as Willis remarks, ‘These


numerous excessively free and highly heterodox in-
terpretations appear to have lost Villeneuve neither
countenance nor favour at Vienne.
For another Lyons publisher, Frelon, he edited a
number of educational works, and through him the
Vienne physician was put in correspondence with the
Geneva reformer.
A dreamer, an enthusiast, a mystic, Servetus was
possessed with the idea that could but the doctrines of
the Church be reformed the world could be won to
a primitive, simple Christianity. We have already seen
his attempt to bring the Swiss Reformers into what
he thought correct views upon the Trinity. He now
began a correspondence with Calvin on this subject,
and on the question of the Sacraments. The letters,
which are extant, in tone and contents shocked and
disgusted Calvin to such a degree that in a communica-
tion to Farel, dated February, 1546, after stating that
Servetus had offered to come to Geneva, he adds,
‘ I will not pledge my faith to him; for did he come if
I have any authority here I should never suffer him to
go away alive.’
For years Servetus had in preparation the work
which he fondly hoped would restore primitive Christi-
anity. Part of a MS. of this he had sent to Calvin.
Having tried in vain to get it published, he decided to
print it privately at Vienne. Arrangements were made
with a local printer, who set up a separate press in a
small house, and in a few months 1,000 copies were
printed. The title-page here reproduced (Fig. 7) has
the date 1553, and on the last page the initials of his
name, ‘M.S.V.’
He must have known that the work was likely to
cause great commotion in the Church, but he hoped
that the identity of the author would be as little sus-


FIG. 7




pected as that the Vienne physician, Michael Villeneuve,
was Michael Servetus of the heretical de Trinitatis
Erroribus. Intended for distribution in Germany,
Switzerland, and Italy, the work was made up into
bales of 100 copies for distribution to the trade.
Probably from their mutual friend Frelon Calvin
received a couple of copies. The usual story is that
through one William Trie as a medium, Calvin de-
nounced Villeneuve to the inquisition at Vienne. This
was the view of Servetus himself, and is supported
by Willis, Tollin, and others; but advocates of Calvin
continue to deny that there is sufficient evidence of his
active participation at this stage.
There was at this time at Lyons the well-known
inquisitor Orry, who ten years before had brought
Etienne Dolet to the stake. No sooner had he got
scent of the affair than he undertook the prosecution
with his customary zeal, and Servetus was arrested.
The preliminary trial at Vienne is chiefly of interest on
account of the autobiographical details which Servetus
gives. The evidence against him was so overwhelming
that he was committed to prison. Surrounded by his
friends, who must have been greatly shocked and dis-
tressed to find their favourite physician in so terrible
a plight, abundantly supplied with money, with the
prison discipline very lax as the jailer was his friend,
it is not surprising that the day after his commitment
Servetus escaped, greatly no doubt to the relief of the
Archbishop and the authorities. The inquisitor had to
be content with burning an effigy of the heretic with
some 500 copies of his work.
From April 7 until the middle of July Servetus
disappears from view, and we next meet with him, of
all places in the world, at Geneva. Why he should
have run this risk has been much discussed, but the
c


explanation given by Guizot is probably the correct
one. At that time the Liberals, or ‘ Libertines ’, as they
were called because of their hostility to Calvin, fully
expected to triumph. ‘ One of their leaders, Ami Perrin,
was first Syndic: a man of their party, Gueroult, who
had been banished from Geneva, had been corrector of
the press at the time when the Restoration of Christianity
was published, and thanks to the influence of his patrons,
the Libertines, he had returned to Geneva, and would
naturally be the medium between them and Servetus.
Taking a comprehensive view of the whole case and
the antecedents of all those concerned in it, I am con-
vinced that Servetus, defeated at Vienne, went to
Geneva, relying on the support of the Libertines, whilst
they on their side expected to obtain efficacious help
from him against Calvin.’ He seems to have been
nearly a month in Geneva before his arrest on the
morning of August 14.
The full account of this famous heresy trial has lost
much of its interest so far as the doctrinal details are
concerned. At this distance, with our modern ideas,
the procedure seems very barbarous. Servetus was
cruelly treated in prison, and there is a letter from him
which speaks of his shocking condition, without proper
clothing, and a prey to vermin. Mademoiselle Roch
has well depicted this phase of the martyr’s career in
her fine statue which has been erected at Anamnese,
and which is here reproduced (Fig. 8). The full report
of the trial may be followed in the account given by
Willis, and the ‘ Proces-Verbal ’ was in existence at
Geneva in manuscript.
One thing seems clear, that while at first the accusa-
tions were largely concerned with the heretical views
of Servetus, later the public prosecutor laid more stress
upon the political side of the case, accusing him of


FIG. 8: SERVETUS IN PRISON
i». 18




conspiracy with the Libertines. The trial divided
Geneva into hostile camps, and it sometimes looked as
though Calvin, quite as much as Servetus, was on trial.
To strengthen their hands the clerical party appealed
to the Swiss churches. The answer, strong enough in
condemning the heresy and blasphemy, refrained from
specifying the kind of punishment.
Accustomed in France to hear the Swiss Reformers
branded as the worst type of heretics, Servetus appears
never to have understood why he should not have been
received with open arms by the Protestants, whose
one desire was the same as his own, the restoration of
primitive faith and practice. He made a brave fight,
and brought strong countercharges against Calvin,
whom he accused specifically of causing his arrest at
Vienne. He offered to discuss the questions at issue
publicly, an offer which Calvin would have accepted
had the syndics allowed. The whole city was in a
ferment, and Sunday after Sunday Calvin and the other
pastors thundered from their pulpits against the
blasphemies of the Spaniard. After dragging its weary
length for nearly two months, the public feeling veered
strongly to the side of Calvin, and on October 27 the
Council, by a majority vote, resolved that in considera-
tion of his great errors and blasphemies, the prisoner
should be burnt alive.
Servetus appears to have been a curious compound
of audacity and guilelessness. The announcement of
the condemnation appears to have completely stunned
him, as he seems never to have considered its possi-
bility. He sent for Calvin and asked his pardon, but
there was bitterness in the heart of the great reformer
whose account of the interview- is not very pleasant
reading.
On the morning of the 27th, the Tribunal assembled


before the porch of the Hotel de Ville to read to the
prisoner his formal condemnation, under ten separate
heads, the two most important of which relate to the
doctrine of the Trinity, and Infant Baptism. It is
curious that under one of the headings he should be
denounced as an arrogant innovator, and an inventor
of heresies against Popery! The entreaty of Servetus
for a more merciful mode of death (for which, to his
credit, be it said, Calvin also pleaded) was in vain. The
procession at once formed to the place of execution.
Nothing in his life, it maybe said, became him like
the leaving of it. As Guizot remarks, ‘ The dignity of
the philosopher triumphed over the weakness of the
man, and Servetus died heroically and calmly at that
stake the very thought of which had at first filled him
with terror.’
There will be dedicated next year at Vienne a
monument commemorating the services of Servetus as
an independent spirit in theology, and as a pioneer in
physiology.
It has been said that Sappho survives because
we sing her songs, and Aeschylus because we read
his plays, but it would be difficult to explain the
widespread interest in Servetus from any knowledge
men have of his writings. The pathos of his fate, which
scandalized Gibbon more profoundly than all the human
hecatombs of Spain or Portugal, accounts for it in part.
Then there is the limited circle of those who regard
him as a martyr to the Unitarian confession; while
scientific men have a very definite interest in him as
one of the first to make a substantial contribution to
our knowledge of the circulation of the blood. His
theological and physiological views call for brief
comments.


IV
Next to theology itself the study of medicine has
been a great heresy breeder. From the days of Arnold
of Villanova and Pierre of Abano, there have been
noted heretics in our ranks. Bossuet defines a heretic
as ‘One who has opinions’. Servetus seems to have
been charged with, opinions like a Leyden jar. His
most notable ones concerned the Trinity and Infant
Baptism. Wracked almost to destruction in the third
and fourth centuries on the subject of the Trinity, the
final conquest of Ariafiism found its expression in that
magnificent human document the Athanasian Creed,
with which the Catholic Church has for ever settled the
question, in language which sends a cold shudder down
the backs of heretics. But there have always been
turbulent souls who could not rest satisfied, and who
would bring up unpleasant points from the Bible—men
who were not able to accept Dante’s wise advice: —
‘ Mad is he who hopes that our reason can traverse the
infinite way which one Substance as Three Persons
holds. Be content oh human race with the Quia ’.
The doctrine has been a great breeding ground of
heretics, the smoke of whose burning has been a sweet
savour in the nostrils alike of Catholics and Protestants.
Even to-day, so deeply ingrained is the catholic creed,
that nearly everything in the way of doctrinal vagary is
forgiven save denial of the Trinity, which is thought to
put a man outside the pale of normal Christianity. If
this is the feeling to-day, imagine what it must have
been in the middle of the sixteenth century!
Servetus wrote two theological works —de Trinitatis
Erroribus, published in 1531, followed by a supplement
in 1532. To these I have already referred. Living a
double life at Vienne, to the inhabitants he was the


careful and kind practitioner of medicine, to whom they
had become devoted, but all the while, nourishing the
dream of his youth, he had in preparation a work which
he believed would win the world to Christ by purifying
the Church from grave errors in doctrine.
I have already spoken of the printing of the Christia-
nismi Restitutio. Mainly concerned with most abstruse
questions concerning the Trinity and Infant Baptism,
it is a most difficult work to read, and, as theologians
confess, a still more difficult one to understand. Pro-
fessor Emerton, in his article from which I have already
quoted, gives in a few paragraphs the essence of his
views. 'He finds the central fact of Christian specula-
tion, not in the doctrine of the Trinity as formulated by
the schools, but in the fact of the divine incarnation in
the person of Jesus. He admits the divine birth, ex-
plaining it as in harmony with a general law of divine
manifestation whereby the spiritual is revealed in the
material. He would not accept the idea of an eternal
sonship, except in this sense, that the divine Word, the
Logos, had always been active as the expression in
outward form of the divine activity. So, in the fullness
of time, this same Logos produced a being from a
human mother upon whom at the moment of his birth
the divine Spirit was breathed. Obviously this is not
the “ eternal Son ” of the creeds, and herein lay the
special theological crime of Servetus. In his criticism
of the church order, of the papal government, of the
sacramental system, he does not differ essentially from
the more radical of the reformers. On the essential
matters of baptism and the Eucharist he goes quite
beyond the established reforming churches. In both
cases he invokes the principle of plain reason. He
rejects Infant Baptism on the ground that the infant
can have no faith, and that the practice is therefore


mere incantation. He denies transubstantiation on
the rational basis that substances and accidents may not
be separated, and does not spare the reforming leaders
for what seemed to him their half-hearted attitude on
this point. His language throughout is harsh and
violent, except where, as at the close of his chapters, he
passes over into the forms of devotion and closes his
diatribes with prayers of great beauty and spirituality.’
The Christian Church early found out that there was
only one safe way of dealing with heresy. From the
end of the fourth century, when the habit began, to its
climax on St. Bartholomew’s Day, it was universally
recognized that only dead heretics ceased to be trouble-
some. History affords ample evidence of the efficacy
of repressive measures, often carried out on a scale of
noble proportions. France is Catholic because of a
root and branch policy; England’s Protestantism is an
enduring testimony to the thoroughness with which
Henry VIII carried out his measures. As De Foe says
in his famous pamphlet, Shortest way with Dissenters ,
if a man is obstinate and persists in having an opinion
of his own, contrary to that held by a majority of his
fellows, and if the opinion is pernicious and jeopardizes
his eternal salvation, it is much safer to burn him than
to allow his doctrines to spread! For 1,200 years this
policy kept heresy within narrow limits until the great
outbreak. The very best men of the day were con-
senting to the death of heretics. The spirit of Pro-
testantism was against it; Luther nobly so. Judged
by his age Servetus was a rank heretic, and as deserving
of death as any ever tied to a stake. We can scarcely
call him a martyr of the Church.—What Church would
own him? All the same, we honour his memory as
a martyr to the truth as he saw it.
Servetus was a student of medicine in Paris with


Sylvius and Guinther, two of the most ardent of the
revivers of the Galenic anatomy. More important still,
he was a fellow student and pro-sector with Vesalius.
He wrote one little medical book of no special merit.
The works which he edited, which brought him more
money than fame, indicate an independent and critical
spirit. Vienne was a small town, in which we cannot
think there was any scientific stimulus, though it was
in a region noted for its intellectual activity.
In possession of a fact in physiology of the very first
moment, Servetus described it with extraordinary clear-
ness and accuracy. But so little did he think of the
discovery, of so trifling importance did it appear in
comparison with the great task in hand of restoring
Christianity, that he used it simply as an illustration
when discussing the nature of the Holy Spirit in his
work Christianismi Restitutio. The discovery was
nothing less than that of the passage of the blood from
the right side of the heart to the left through the lungs,
what is known as pulmonary, or lesser circulation.
In the year 1553 the views of Galen everywhere
prevailed. The great master had indeed effected a
revolution in the knowledge of the circulation almost
as great as that made by Harvey in the seventeenth
century. Briefly stated there were two bloods, the
natural and the vital, in two practically closed systems,
the veins and the arteries. The liver was the central
organ of the venous system, the ‘ shop ’ as Burton calls
it, in which the chylus was converted into blood and
from which it was distributed by the veins to all parts
of the body for nourishment. The veins were rather
vessels containing the blood than tubes for its trans-
mission—irrigating canals Galen called them. Galen
knew the structure of the heart, the arrangement of its
valves, and the direction in which the blood passed, but


its chief function was not, as we suppose, mechanical,
but in the left ventricle, the seat of life, the vital spirits
were generated, being a mixture of inspired air and
blood. By an alternate movement of dilatation and
collapse of the arteries the blood with the vital spirits
were kept in constant motion. 1 Galen had demonstrated
that the arteries and the veins communicated with each
other at the periphery. A small quantity of the blood
went, he believed, from the right side of the heart to the
lungs, for their nourishment, and in this way passed to
the left side of the heart; but the chief communication
between the two systems was through pores in the
ventricular septum, the thick muscular wall separating
the two chief chambers of the heart.
The literature may be searched in vain for any other
than the Galenic view up to 1553. Even Vesalius, who
could not understand from its structure how even the
smallest quantity of blood could pass through the
septum dividing the ventricles, offered no other expla-
nation. The more one knows of the Galenic physiology,
the less one is surprised that it had so captivated the
minds of men. The description of the new way which
Servetus describes is found in the fifth book of the
Christianismi Restitutio, in which he is discussing
the nature of the Holy Spirit. After mentioning the
threefold spirit of the body of man, natural, vital, and
animal, he goes on to discuss the vital spirit, and in
1 So firmly entrenched was the Galenic physiology that the new
views of Harvey made at first very slow progress. In Burton’s
Anatomy of Melancholy, which is a sort of epitome of medical
knowledge of the seventeenth century, is the following description :
‘ The left creek (i. e. ventricle) has the form of a cone, and is the
seat of life, which, as a torch doth oil, draws blood unto it be-
getting of it spirits and fire, and as a fire in a torch so are spirits
in the blood; and by that great artery called aorta, it sends vital
spirits over the body, and takes air from the lungs.’
D


a few paragraphs describes the pulmonary circulation.
‘ Rightly to understand the question here, the first thing
to be considered is the substantial generation of the
vital spirit—a compound of the inspired air with the
most subtle portion of the blood. The vital spirit has,
therefore, its source in the left ventricle of the heart,
the lungs aiding most essentially in its production. It
is a fine attenuated spirit, elaborated by the power of
heat, of a crimson colour and fiery potency —the lucid
vapour as it were of the blood, substantially composed of
water, air, and fire; for it is engendered, as said, by the
mingling of the inspired air with the more subtle portion
of the blood which the right ventricle of the heart
communicates to the left. This communication, how-
ever, does not take place through the septum, partition,
or midwall of the heart, as commonly believed, but by
another admirable contrivance, the blood being trans-
mitted from the pulmonary artery to the pulmonary
vein, by a lengthened passage through the lungs, in the
course of which it is elaborated and becomes of a
crimson colour. Mingled with the inspired air in this
passage, and freed from fuliginous vapours by the act
of expiration, the mixture being now complete in every
respect, and the blood become fit dwelling-place of the
vital spirit, it is finally attracted by the diastole, and
reaches the left ventricle of the heart.
‘ Now that the communication and elaboration take
place in the lungs in the manner described, we are
assured by the conjunctions and communications of the
pulmonary artery with the pulmonary vein. The great
size of the pulmonary artery seems of itself to declare
how the matter stands; for this vessel would neither
have been of such a size as it is, nor would such a force
of the purest blood have been sent through it to the
lungs for their nutrition only; neither would the heart


have supplied the lungs in such fashion, seeing as we
do that the lungs in the foetus are nourished from
another source—those membranes or valves of the
heart not coming into play until the hour of birth, as
Galen teaches. The blood must consequently be
poured in such large measure at the moment of birth
from the heart to the lungs for another purpose than the
nourishment of those organs. Moreover, it is not
simply air, but air mingled with blood that is returned
from the lungs to the heart by the pulmonary veins.
‘ It is in the lungs, consequently, that the mixture (of
the inspired air with the blood) takes place, and it is in
the lungs also, not in the heart, that the crimson colour
of the blood is acquired. There is not indeed capacity
of room enough in the left ventricle of the heart for so
great and important an elaboration, neither does it seem
competent to produce the crimson colour. To conclude,
the septum or middle portion of the heart, seeing that it
is without vessels and special properties, is not fitted to
permit and accomplish the communication and elabora-
tion in question, although it may be that some
transudation takes place through it. It is by a mechanism
similar to that by which the transfusion from the vena
portae to the vena cava takes place in the liver, in
respect of the blood, that the transfusion from the
pulmonary artery to the pulmonary vein takes place in
the lungs, in respect of the spirit ’ (Willis’s translation).
I here reproduce from the Vienna example the two
pages from which the greater part of this description
is taken (Figs. 9 and 10).
The important elements here are: First, the clear
statement of the function of the pulmonary artery;
secondly, the transmission of the impure or venous
blood through the lungs from the right side of the
heart to the left; thirdly, the recognition of an


FIG. 9


FIG. io


elaboration or transformation in the lungs, so that with
the freeing the blood of' fuliginous vapours ’, there was
at the same time a change to the crimson colour of the
arterial blood; fourthly, the direct denial of a com-
munication of the two bloods, by means of orifices in
the septum between the ventricles.
He had no idea of the general or systematic circula-
tion, and so far as the left heart and the arteries were
concerned he believed them to be the seat of the vital
blood and spirits.
It is not hard to imagine how Servetus had become
emancipated from the old views. A student at Paris at
a most opportune period, when dissection had become
popular, he had had as pro-sector to Guinther excep-
tional opportunities. But more important still, he had
as fellow worker the anatomical arch-heretic, Andreas
Vesalius, already imbued with the conviction that his
teachers were wrong in regarding Galen as inspired
and infallible. It was at this very period that Vesalius
had pointed out to his teacher Sylvius the error of
Galen about the aortic valves ; and when one considers
the extraordinary rapidity with which Vesalius reformed
human anatomy, before he had completed his twenty-
eighth year, it is not surprising that his colleague and
co-worker should have discovered one of the great
truths of physiology.
The Christianismi Restitutio was never published,
and the discovery of Servetus remained unrecognized
until the attention of Wotton was called to it by Charles
Bernard, a St. Bartholomew’s Hospital surgeon. 1 Mean-
while it had been rediscovered, and among the many
vagaries with which the history of the circulation of the
blood is marked, not the least striking is the attempt to
1 William Wotton, Reflections upon ancient and modern learning ,
1697, page 229.


rob Servetus of his credit. In 1559 there was published
a work by Realdus Colombo, 1 a student of Vesalius and
his successor at Padua, in which the circulation of the
blood from the right side of the heart to the left is
clearly described. It is impossible to say that he had
added anything to the account just given, and the far-
fetched view has been maintained that Italian students
at Paris had acquainted Servetus with the views of
Colombo. It is claimed for Colombo also that he had a
better idea of the function of respiration in the purifi-
cation of the blood, by its mingling with the air, but
Servetus distinctly states that the mixture takes place
in the lungs, not, as was usually understood at the time,
in the heart itself.
Caesalpinus (1569), for whom elaborate claims are
made, also knew of the pulmonary circulation, but he
thought part of the blood went through the median
septum. A more important claim is made for him of
the discovery of the general circulation, but it is
remarkable that any one knowing the history of the
subject could read into his physiology anything more
than the old Galenic views.
The history of the circulation bristles with controversy
and widely divergent opinions are held as to the merits
of the different observers. That Servetus first advanced
a step beyond Galen, that Colombo and Caesalpinus
reached the same conclusion independently —all three
recognizing the lesser circulation, is quite as certain as
that it remained for Harvey to open an entirely new
chapter in physiology, and to introduce modern experi-
mental methods by which the complete circulation of
the blood was first clearly demonstrated. 2
I De re Anatomica: Venetiis.
2 John C. Dalton’s History of the Circulation, 1884, gives by far
the best and fullest account of the whole subject in English.


A word about the book Christianismi Restitutio , liber
inter rariores longe rarissimus. Only two complete
copies are known, one in the Bibliotheque Nationale,
Paris, and the other in the Imperial Library, Vienna,
from which I was very kindly permitted to have the
photographs of the title-page and the pages describing
the circulation of the blood which are here reproduced.
A third copy, imperfect, with the first sixteen pages
in MS., is in the University Library, Edinburgh. The
Paris copy is of special interest, as it belonged to
Dr. Richard Mead, the distinguished physician and book
collector, by whom it was exchanged with M. de Boze
for a series of medals. In 1784 it was secured for the
Royal Library. It may now be seen in one of the
show cases of the Bibliotheque Nationale, of which it is
one of the rare treasures. An added interest is in the
fact that on the title-page occurs the name ‘ Germain
Colladon ’, the Geneva barrister, who prosecuted
Servetus ; and it is in the highest degree probable that
this was the identical copy used at the trial. In one
place the book is stained, some suppose by moisture ;
others think it possible this was the very copy
bound upon the victim himself, and snatched from the
flames by some one who wished to preserve so interest-
ing a record of the great heretic. The question has
been examined carefully by the late Professor Labou-
bene and M. Hahn, the distinguished librarian of the
Paris Faculty of Medicine, both of whom are in favour
of fire, not moisture, as the cause of the staining.
In 1791 the Vienna copy was reprinted at Nuremberg
in facsimile, page for page, but Dr. de Murr, who was
responsible for the reprint, very wisely put the date 1791
at the bottom of the last page. Copies of this edition
are not uncommon in the larger libraries. In 1723
Mead attempted to have a reprint made from his copy,


but when nearly completed the Bishop of London had
it suppressed, and (it is stated) the copies were burnt.
A few, however, escaped, and Willis says that he saw
one in the library of the London Medical Society.
I regret to say that the librarian informs me that this
no longer is to be found. A copy of the Mead partial
reprint is in the Bibliotheque Nationale, and two copies
are in the British Museum.
A last word on the attitude of John Calvin towards
Servetus. Much scorn has been heaped upon the
great reformer, and one cannot but regret that a man
of such magnificent achievements should have been
dragged into a miserable heresy hunt like a common
inquisitor. Let us not estimate him by his century, as
his friends plead, but frankly by his life, and as a man
of like passions with ourselves. He had bitter provo-
cation. Flouted for years by the persistent assaults of
Servetus, and shocked out of all compassion by his
blasphemies, is it to be wondered that the old Adam
got the better of his Christian charity? Not only is it
impossible to acquit Calvin of active complicity in this
unhappy affair, but there was mixed up with it a personal
hate, a vindictiveness unbecoming in so great a
character, and we may say foreign to it. But let the
long record of a self-denying life, devoted in an evil
generation to the highest and the best, wipe for all
reasonable men this one blot. Let us, if we may judge
him at all, do so as a man, not as a demi-god. We
cannot defend him, let us not condemn him ; let his one
grievous fault, even though we may fear he never
repented of it, be the shadow which throws into stronger
relief the splendid outlines of a noble life. In his
defence, 1 the original edition of which I have here, and
1 Defensio Orthodoxae, &*c., 1554.
E


which is concerned largely with doctrinal questions,
not only are there no expressions of regret for the part
he played in the tragedy, but the work is filled with
insults to his dead enemy, couched in the most vindictive
language. On the spot where Servetus was burnt
there stands to-day an expiatory monument (Fig. ix),
which expresses the spirit of modern Protestantism.
On one side is the record of his birth and death, on
the other an inscription, of which the following is
a translation : ‘ Duteous and grateful followers of Calvin
our great Reformer, yet condemning an error which was
that of his age, and strongly attached to liberty of
conscience according to the true principles of the
Reformation and the Gospel, we have erected this
expiatory monument. Oct. 27, 1903/
The erection next year at Vienne of a quater-
centenary monument will complete the recognition by
the modern world of the merits of one of the strangest
figures on the rich canvas of the sixteenth century.
The wandering Spanish scholar, the stormy disputant,
the anatomical pro-sector, the mystic dreamer of a
restored Christianity, the discoverer of one of the
fundamental facts of physiology, has come at last to his
own. There are those, I know, who feel that perhaps
more than justice has been done; but in a tragic age
Servetus played an unusually tragic part, and the pathos
of his fate appeals strongly to us.
These, too, are days of retribution, of the restoration
of all things, the days of the opening of the fifth seal,
when the souls under the altar see their blood avenged,
when we clothe in the white robes of charity those who
were slain for the testimony which they held, little
noting whether the martyr was Catholic or Protestant,
caring only to honour one of that great company which
no man can number, ‘whose heroic sufferings,’ as


FIG. ii
* 34




Carlyle says, ‘rise up melodiously together to heaven
out of all lands and out of all time, as a sacred Miserere,
their heroic actions also as a boundless everlasting
Psalm of Triumph.’
Note. —The Servetus bibliography is fully given to 1890 in
Professor A. V. D. Linde’s Michael Servetus, Groningen, 1891.
My personal interest dates many years back when Pastor Tollin’s
delightful sketches enlivened the numbers of Virchow’s Archives.
No one has ever had a more enthusiastic biographer, and to the
writings of the Madgeburg clergyman we owe the greater part of
our modern knowledge of Servetus. The best account in English
is by Willis— Servetus and Calvin, 1877. A German translation of
the Christianismi Restitutio by Dr. Bernhard Spiess appeared in
1895 (and edition, Wiesbaden, Chr. Limbarth). I am indebted to
Professor Harper of Princeton for an historical drama, The
Reformer of Geneva, by Professor Shields (privately printed,
Princeton University Press, 1897), which gives an admirable
picture of Geneva at the time of the trial. From Chereau’s
Histoire (Cun Livre, 1879, I have ‘ cribbed ’ the idea of the intro-
duction. The name of Mosheim must be mentioned, as his
writings were for years the common tap from which all Servetus
knowledge was derived. The Servetus portrait, of which Mosheim
speaks, has disappeared; I have reproduced the engraving from
Allworden’s Historia (1727), also the Roch statue at Anamnese.
