

MILDURA,
THE TRUE AUSTRALIA FELIX.
HOW TO GET RICH
IN VICTORIA.
LECTURE BY Mb. A. R. E. BURTON,
Delivered at the Working Men’s College.
Pdbounw :
SPECTATOR PUBLISHING COMPANY LIMITED,
270 Post Office Place.
1892.
A


With grateful acknowledgments to “ Telemachus"
and others


MILDUEA,
THE TRUE AUSTRALIA FELIX.
HOV TO GET RICH
IN VICTORIA.
LECTURE by Mr. A. R. E. BURTON,
Delivered at the Working Men’s College.
HUlbimnw :
SPECTATOR PUBLISHING COMPANY LIMITED,
270 Post Office Place.


With grateful acknowledgments to “ Telemachus”
and others .


HOW TO GET RICH IN VICTORIA.
FEW people object to getting honourably rich.
Numbers would shrink from the getting if it in-
volved peril to life and limb, or the sacrifice of
cherished principles. The majority of those people to
whom I am now speaking would be content if a position
of competency merely could be secured for middle life or
old age, and it is with such reasonable beings as these that
my sympathies lie. I find they are composed principally
of those industrious, thrifty, temperate work-people
and citizens upon whose efforts and enterprise the
future of this colony so largely depends. How re-
grettable it is that dense masses of people are
penned up in the large towns, earning for them-
selves and their families a bare subsistence, and
when asked for a reason for such a choice, they point
to the horrors of a selector’s life far away in the
country on 320 acres of densely wooded land, and his
life-long efforts to develop into a comfortable farmer
and retire on the fat of his land, leaving a goodly
heritage for his offspring. And the townsman then
reminds us that the 320-acres man has toiled and
sweated himself into premature old age, clearing,
burning, and fencing from day-dawn to sunset, and at
the close of his toilsome, cheerless life he often finds
himself still at the plough. His crops fail, labour is
scarce and dear, and half the broad acres, cleared and
made presentable at such a cost, are useful for pasturage
only, while many acres still remain heavily timbered.
His sons and daughters grow up with the conviction
that farming is not what it is “ cracked up ” to be.
They have had a better education than their parents,
and their aspirations tend citywards. Paternal love


gives way, and country youths so well fitted for de-
veloping the country’s resources become tramway and
railway employes and clerks, or overcrowd the work-
shops, until city and town life becomes burdensome.
And as the townsman brings us up to this point, it
dawns upon us that there is truth in what he says.
An Oasis.
I used to be one of those who advised my unem-
ployed friends to go to the country, and if they have not
the wherewithal to purchase a crust, and no work
is procurable, I do so still, for a hard life in the
country is far preferable to stagnation and starva-
tion in the town. The pressing need of the time
turned my attention to the various schemes for
developing the riches of the grand country around
us. I looked for an oasis. I found many. But
I found one above all. It was Mildura, the premier
irrigation settlement of Australasia. I had often
heard of it, and longed to see it. I had smiled at
the enthusiasm of those who had seen it and had a
bower in it. The enthusiasm was contagious, however,
and before seeing the place I bought a block on the
“ pig-in-the-poke” principle. Then came the eventful
day when I found myself comfortably seated in the train
en route for the land of promise. Before describing the
delights of the journey down the Murray, I would just
remark that, while Mildura is a distinctly industrial
settlement of the most successful kind, and will
gradually find employment for all who deserve it,
whether they have money or not, I would point out
that those who go there should at present be provided
with a little cash, and I will erelong show how the
little will increase by leaps and bounds into a magnifi-
cent “ pile,” so that in four or five years a holder of
twenty acres will be independent, while the selector
with 320 acres can, many years hence, barely pay the
interest on his “ monkey.” I think also that it will be
exceedingly interesting it I recount to you the story of
the “ discovery ” of Mildura as follows :
The Old Worn-out Run.
Four and a half years ago, Mildura station was one
of the largest squatting runs in the district, yet it
supported probably not more than a dozen souls the


year round. It originally belonged to Messrs. Phelps
and Jamieson, who sold it some twenty-five years ago,
just when experience was demonstrating that even in
wild-dog and scrubby country sheep could be kept at
large instead of being shepherded. It was then fenced
in, and 80,000 sheep kept on it for years. Then again
the owner wisely sold. The new purchaser expected
to do the same as his predecessor, and keep per-
manently 80,000 sheep, but the cream had been
skimmed by overstocking, and the rabbits had come.
It fell into the hands of a banking institution, and re-
mained on their hands against their will. Mr. William
Patterson was the manager.
A New Chum Arrives.
One day, about four years ago, at a neighbouring town-
ship, a quiet, middle-aged gentleman came up to Mr.
Patterson, and, without giving his name, stated that
he was on his way to Mildura, and would like to stay a
few days. He was mistaken by the manager for the
“ drummer ” of an Adelaide firm who had sent up a
case of execrable whisky, so he was told “he might
save himself the trouble, for he was not wanted.”
Half-an-hour afterwards the stranger quietly came up
again, said his name was Chaffey—George Chaffey—
and handed a letter from the manager of the bank,
which simply intimated the bearer was a “ probable
buyer of the station.” The station manager felt
awkward, decidedly awkward, but apologised, and ex-
plained, and the “probable buyer” laughingly admitted
that a case of bad whisky was amply deserving of a
rough reception. At sundown the pretty homestead
was reached, and the evening spent by the manager talk-
ing “ sheep ” and descanting upon the superior grazing
capabilities of the run, and by the probable buyer
quietly listening. It transpired during the evening
that the newcomer was a new chum, and was new to
squatting, and had money, “What a godsend!”
thought the manager. “It shall not be my fault if I
don’t shove the old worn-out run on to him.”
Next day the horses were got up, and the inspection,
which could not possibly be done under several days,
commenced. The manager took the lead, and did the
talking; the lead was over the saltbush plains and
through the straggling open mallee, and the new chum
was told of the exceeding fattening quality of all salt-


bushes, and how open mallee was equally as good as
the plains ; he was told that the absence of grass was
nothing, for that after the slightest rain numerous
saline herbs grew, all eagerly relished by sheep. The
belts of dense mallee and pine ridges, where not a
blade of grass was to be found, were carefully avoided,
and the ride home was along the river flats, where,
under the huge red gums and the stunted box, flooded
grass was long and plentiful, and the manager thought
he had made an impression.
The New Chum Asserts Himself.
Next day the new chum began to assert himself. He
had kept to the river, inquired as to how low it fell in
the summer, how long it kept in flood ; examined the
cliffs, and looked at the subsoil, and at the subsoil ex-
posed in any rain gullies; was greatly pleased with the
long anabranch or “ billabong ” ; how deep was it ?
how was it filled ? did it retain the water ? &c. The
dense mallee belts avoided the previous day were not
only visited, but critically examined as to soil and sub-
soil ; so were the pine-covered sandhills.
“ Would he not go and see the sheep ? ” suggested
the station manager.-
“No. I suppose they are what you say they are;
but how high did you think this ridge is above the
river ? That distant pine scrub must be higher. Let
us go and see it,” was the strange reply of the stranger.
The pretty garden, too, at the home station came in
for careful examination, every tree and shrub noted,
and particular pleasure expressed at the oranges and
lemons and the vines. Conversation slacked somewhat
that evening. The manager was completely non-
plussed; he had said his say, and had got a rank new
chum to say it to, but what was the good when his man
did not care whether the points of the station were
good or bad? He was asked, “ Whether there was a
theodolite on the station ?” “ Yes.” “Isit in order?”
“ Yes. We use it to run the boundary lines. You will
find them quite correct.” “ I should like to take it
with us to-morrow,” was the quiet reply of the green
new chum. The manager said nothing, but thought a
deal, as he went to his room to bed.
Next day the theodolite was taken, but not to the
boundary line. Oh, no ! only to the river bank, and
the height above water noted ; then the height of the


saltbush flats and rises, and these heights marked
down in a pocket-book ; then this, that, and the other
mallee and pine ridge had its level taken, till at noon
a halt was made for lunch. The station manager felt
himself worked up to “ ropeable ” condition. He could
not stand this toomfoolery sort of inspection any
longer. This man is no squatter, but an utter fool,
and what is the use of wasting time over him ? So out
it came.
“ Look here, Mr. Chaffey, you are a mystery to me.
Who are you ? What do you want ? Are you a bond
fide buyer? You seem to care nothing about the
quality of the saltbushes or herbs, never even look at
the grass, and will not go to see the sheep, but instead
keep poking about the river bank and taking the levels
of those barren mallee ridges. What is your game ?
I have been trying to pump you these three days. I’m
sick of this useless work.”
Then the quiet new chum smiled, and quietly replied,
“ Mr. Patterson, you are not the only one who has
considered me a mystery during this visit down the
Murray and my inspection of several stations. All
have tried to pump me, and ineffectually, but I will
tell you. I like the place and shall buy it.”
“ Why, you have not even seen the sheep ! ”
“ No, they do not matter.”
“ Good heavens ! ” exclaimed the manager aloud,
and to himself he thought, “ What a greenhorn! ”
Then the quiet man slowly unfolded the gigantic
schemes that were working in his brain; told of the
irrigation colonies he had successfully organised in
California; how he had come to Australia to duplicate
these on a still larger scale, and how he contemplated
irrigating 250,000 acres of the Mildura run ! The sta-
tion manager was as one thunderstruck.
“ Greenhorn, indeed ! ” he thought, “ why, I am the
greenhorn.”
But they were kindred spirits after all, for the manager
had been doing some experimental irrigation on 200
acres of natural grasses ; and the mystery being no
longer a mystery, a fellow-friendship ensued which
continues to this day, for Mr. Wm. Patterson is head
manager of the station, and principal representative of
Messrs. Chaffey during their absence from Mildura.


No “Half-an’-Half” in Mildura.
The 214-miles railway trip to Swan Hill by night
would be very uninteresting but for two things. Most
of the wanderers Mildura-ward experience a titillation
of excitement as they realise that every snort of the
iron horse means a step nearer the goal of hope.
There is also a peculiar significance for once in the
hurried bolting of a ham sandwich at the Bendigo
refreshment-room. One of my friends washed his
sandwich down with a pint of “ half-an’-half,” and as
he peered wistfully into the depths of the empty pot, I
ventured a reminder that it was the last time ; there was
no half-an’-half in Mildura. My voice is not naturally
sepulchral, but there might have been something wrong
with it this time, judging by the startled look of my
poor friend as he banged his mug on the counter.
From his nose, eyes, and cheeks to his feet he was a
jolly-looking fellow, every inch of him. But his broad
grin subsided into a lugubrious expression as we walked
solemnly away to the train. For some time after the
resumption of the journey he seemed to be reflecting
deeply. He had bought his land and was now going to
occupy it. Presently, however, as the conversation
turned on the absence of drinking shops in Mildura, he
philosophically remarked, “ Ah, well, I suppose we can
do without it if we are obliged,” and with evident satis-
faction, “ The money will come in useful.” Nobody
demurring to this sage remark, our friend, apparently
more at ease, settled down like the rest of us to a
snooze. At five minutes to two in the morning our
snoring is interrupted by the lusty cries of the porters
and cabmen at Swan Hill, and gathering up our traps,
we are, in a brace of shakes, on board
The Lively “Ellen,”
one of the handsomest river steamboats on any
river. As we approach the banks of the Murray from
the township, our sleepy eyes are dazzled by the
brilliant glare of the Ellen's electric lights. It is diffi-
cult to persuade ourselves that we are not at Williams-
town pier aboard an Orient liner. With the electric
light everywhere the whole scene reminds us of the
picture we, as children, drew in our mind’s eye of the
splendour of Alladin’s cave as it opened to his view.
After a recherche repast in the elegant saloon, we


reached our cabins, also lit by electricity, and, tumbling
into the snow-white linen of our berths, slept like tops
till dawn, when we awoke to find ourselves well on our
journey down Australia’s only river.
The Murray in Flood.
From the deck of our steamer is a sight never to be
forgotten by the voyageurs. The eccentric course of
the great stream is remarkable and awkward,
and it looks thoroughly perplexing to all but the
helmsman in flood time. On both sides beyond
the river banks there is a vast expanse of flood
water. As the volume increases rabbits and birds are
driven from their burrows and nests, and a swim for
life to a floating log and a perch on a disappearing
tree are the only alternatives to the usual home com-
forts of bunny and dick. Here a snag and there a
snag, a submerged miniature island, and shelving pro-
jection, and the puzzle is to find the river. Unless
the novice mounts the bridge and interviews the
“ wheel,” the conundrum usually remains unsolved.
The “ wheel-” seems to know all about it, however, and
on we go safely and merrily, only halting at night-
time. Of course it is not all flood. There are many
miles of beautiful undulating country. We pass many
snug little homesteads, and call occasionally for fire-
wood at the “ wooding ” stations en route. What is
that cry we hear—“ Man overboard ?” No ;it is the
dramatic genius of our ship’s company roaring out, “A
gun, a gun —my kingdom for a gun !” and as we hasten to
his succour with walking-sticks, umbrellas, and camp-
stools, we find him standing transfixed, with eyes agog,
and his index finger pointing landwards. We pardon
all his sins, and let our camp-stools flop on the deck,
for as we follow that finger we see within range of a
modest catapult, a mob of twenty-five splendid
emus, strolling quietly by the stream. After gazing
curiously at the group of excited human bipeds thirst-
ing for their blood, the feathered giants strode calmly
and swiftly away, apparently much mystified at the
antics of the “genius,” as he frantically flew round
in search of a shooting-iron, and impressed with the
idea that discretion is the better part of valour.
We have a heterogeneous and withal merry company
on board. The time goes quickly and pleasantly. A
concert, followed by a collection for the attrac-


tive and obliging stewardesses, is a great success,
and so is the Sunday evening service—for you
remember we started from Swan Hill on Saturday.
In reference to the motley character of our
passenger list, you will agree with me that Mildura
seems to have attractions for all classes, sorts,
and conditions of men. There was the butcher, the
baker, the candlestick-maker, the tinker, the tailor, the
soldier (pensioner), the sailor, a quiet old gent like a
Quaker, the vigneron, the cabbage-gardener, the clerk,
the parson, the pressman, and the “ genius,” as well
as a few nondescripts. They were all highly respect-
able persons, and apparently possessed of means
more or less substantial, for each person had paid £6
6s. for the trip, and intended to buy land and settle if
the place was what it was “ cracked up to be.” With
the exception of Mrs. George Chaffey, who was travel-
ling with her husband, there was no lady passenger
aboard.
And now, after a delightful journey, we are almost
in sight of Mildura. Hark ! Is not that the hum of a
saw mill—and can it be that there are ship-building
yards at hand ?—for there seems to be borne on the air
the sound of the tapping of a thousand hammers, and
the general uproar of factorydom. The mystery is
soon explained as we moor alongside the principal wharf
of the settlement. There, right before our eyes, are
commodious workshops, forges, printing offices, im-
mense engine-houses pumping up the life-giving water,
and surrounding our vessel a great crowd of people all
smiles and cordial greetings.
Arrival at Mildura.
It was early morning when we arrived, and the
glorious Mildura sun had hardly yet succeeded in pro-
claiming the dawn of day. However, by the time that
we had adjusted our walking gear and_ clambered up
the high river bank skirting the township, old Sol had
risen to the occasion. It was a magnificent sight. As
far as the eye could reach there lay to right and left of
us an undulating plain of fertile land, studded thickly
with well-kept orchards and snug homesteads, and
close at hand a prosperous township, with substantially
built and elegantly appointed houses and shops. For
width and elaborateness the streets and avenues were
worthy of a mighty city. To the promoters of this Tern-


perance Paradise the exclamations of wondering surprise
uttered by all newcomers must be very agreeable.
Many of those who visit the settlement have perhaps
been accustomed to treat the statements of the Chaftey
Company cum qrano salo. But the original widespread
objection to Yankee “ blow ” is fast giving way to
appreciation of that go-aheadedness which has made
America and Canada great, and is doing the same for
the pioneer Australian irrigation settlement.
My object in visiting Mildura was, by personal in-
spection of the orchards and by conversation with the
settlers, to see and hear what I could for myself, so
as to be able to express a true opinion of the appear-
ance and prospects of the place.
One feature alone of the Chaffey’s scheme has
always appealed strongly to my mind, i.e., the proba-
bility that it would attract eligible population from the
overcrowded towns. “There are” (says Mr. G. W.
Knight, F.E.H.S., speaking shortly before the recent
census), “in the continent of Australia 2,944,628
square miles, and the total population amounts to
2,918,890, or something more than three-quarters of a
man to the square mile. Now, the position at present
is that this three-quarters of a man is in a state of
intense alarm lest he should be crowded out by the
introduction of a few thousand people. This fraction
of a man declares that he cannot live if anybody else
ventures to trespass on his square mile of territory.
It is a rank absurdity, of course. The population of
the whole world is 1,458,151,000, and there are
52,511,004 square miles on the earth’s surface, thus
giving an average of 28.3 persons to the square
mile. In the United States tbe population averages
16 persons to the square mile, and it is not yet con-
sidered that there are more than sufficient to develop
its vast territory. There are 23 towns there with
populations ranging from 100,000 to 1,300,000 souls,
while in Victoria, outside of the metropolis, there are
about four towns worthy of the name—Ballarat
with 40,753, Sandhurst 86,020, Geelong 20,984, and
Castlemaine with 8900. The concentration of popula-
tion in a few centres is a great evil, and such schemes
as Mildura are destined to mitigate it. Thus in Vic-
toria, with its population of 1,090,869, there are clus-
tered in Melbourne and its suburbs no fewer than
419,490 people, or a matter of 15 persons to the acre.


Paris has 121 persons to the acre, and London has
gathered within its boundaries a seething crowd of
4,766,661, or nearly twice the population of the conti-
nent of Australia. The disparity in the distribution of
the world’s population is manifest, and it is by de-
veloping the waste territories, and coaxing folks away
from the crowded centres, that the problem of finding a
remedy is to be solved.”
How to Settle Labour Troubles
I think all city-dwellers will agree with Mr. Knight’s
conclusions. Is it not in Melbourne and its over-
crowded suburbs, for instance, that the “ bitter cry ”
of the unemployed and the murmurs of the precari-
ously employed are chiefly heard? The frenzied
struggle of the labouring classes for special legislation is
chiefly the result of fear of the consequences of overcrowd-
ing, and the desired exodus will go far towards causing
labour troubles to cease; or, at any rate, will make
them easy of adjustment. It is evident that the Mil-
dura enterprise is the first right step in this direction,
and, therefore, on that account alone it is worthy of
commendation. Compare and calculate, and you will
then declare that Mildura is one of the grandest experi-
ments in co-operative colonisation extant. Let me in-
dicate a few leading features :—The Chaffey Company’s
method is—(l) The subdivision of large estates into
small ones; (2) The extension of the time-payment
system to enable holders to make these small estates
absolutely their own ; (3) The application of the firm’s
capital to irrigation works, enabling the settler to
obtain the best product his land will yield.
What the Ghaffeys do for the Settler.
The Chaffeys help the small investor. They are
ready and willing to bestow their paternal care and
guidance during the early years of his settlement,
showing him what crops to grow, and how to find a
market for them.
The total area allotted to the Chaffeys was 250,000
acres. The area already surveyed covers 50,000 acres.
It is provided that no person can take more than eighty
acres or less than ten acres of horticultural land.
Partners may of course join and take ten acres
each, or their maximum, eighty acres each.


Residence on the settlement is not necessary,
and the owner can even leave his land unim-
proved. The company makes arrangements with
the non-resident landowner, if he so desires, to fence,
clear, plough, plant, and look after his block for one or
two years, till the trees are productive. This is a great
advantage to the investors, many of whom avail them-
selves of the privilege. Of course the company won’t
sell land liable to flood, or not irrigable. The price of
a ten-acre block on the time payment system is £2l per
acre; £2 per acre to be paid on application, and the
balance by monthly instalments, extending over a
maximum term of ten years, if desired.
Romantic Figures.
Figures are reputed to be invariably unromantic and
matter-of-fact things. But in the case of Mildura
there is surely a halo of romance about them, and the
facts themselves almost sound like “ fairies.” To the
question, “Have the Chaffeys fulfilled their obliga-
tions thus far, and has the subdivisions! plan yet had
a measure of success ? ” I am able to give an em-
phatic “Yes.” At the outset, let me remark that the
rateable value of the shire has risen in three years
from nil to no less than £60,000 per annum, and this
is chiefly owing to the liberal outlay of the Chaffeys,
and the thoroughness of the improvements. I will just
indicate these results as briefly as possible. In four
and a half years £380,000 has been expended in
improvements. Messrs. Chaffey guaranteed to spend
a minimum of £300,000 in twenty years, so that in
four and a half years they have spent £BO,OOO above the
minimum amount agreed to be spent in twenty years.
This is “ inflation ” of the right sort, Messrs.
Chaffey. This is the right way to show the courage of
your opinions. Nothing great is ever accomplished
without enthusiasm and money, and the Mildurites
have a right to be proud of their share of both com-
modities. This is something like keeping faith, indeed
it verges very closely upon enthusiasm of the right kind.
Moreover, it is reckoned that the settlers themselves
have improved their property to the extent of about
another £250,000, and about 7000 acres have been
brought under cultivation. If you can by the aid of
these romantically true particulars cast your mind’s
eye over 7000 acres of beautiful, healthy orchards, you


will come near understanding the magnitude of the
whole place, more especially if you ponder for a moment
longeron the stupendous fact that about 200,000 acres
altogether, out of the total 250,000, are capable of
intense culture by means of irrigation.
The Soil Teems with Gold.
Let us look at the Mildura soil. The editor of the
Mildura Cultivator, Mr, N. B. M‘Kay, stated before
the Victorian Royal Commission on Vegetable Pro-
ducts that he had passed through twenty years’ expe-
rience as a farmer in North Victoria, and having been
a resident at Mildura for over twenty months, he said
he had had abundant opportunity of noticing the capa-
bilities of mallee soil, and his unqualified opinion was
that it is ahead of any other land in the colony, and
he went on to say that Mildura is distinguished for a
rich, free soil, a long summer, and a mild winter. The
vine, the olive, the orange, the peach, the nectarine, the
pear, the fig, and the apricot all find a congenial home,
and their rapidity and luxuriance of growth are unex-
ampled. From personal observation I can fully endorse
Mr. M'Kay’s testimony, and it is no exaggeration to say
that under irrigation the soil teems with gold.
The Murray water contains a large quantity of fer-
tilising matter, and this, of course, is of value, but
more important still is the fact that there is nothing
whatever in the waters injurious to vegetation. Things
grow rapidly on such soil as this. I have on my office-
table a bunch of raisins, several tons of which have
been produced from a small vineyard of Gordo-Blanco
grapes planted only twenty-one months previously.
This is a good example of the early productiveness of
the soil. These raisins readily sell at one shilling
per lb.
Mr. Chaffey, in choosing a site for his operations,
secured a large anabranch or old channel of the
Murray, as wide as the Murray itself, and running
about ten miles along the front of the property. This
large lagoon is at present quite full with tUe waters of
the river, which is now in flood, and the water has
been impounded by damming up both ends. Calcula-
tions prove that the water in this lagoon alone would
suffice for the whole settlement for three months in the
driest possible season.


The Pumping Plant.
The most powerful pumping engines in the world
have been erected, and we cannot, at this point, do
better than make an overhaul of the engine shops and
machinery. First, let us look at the pumps in one
engine-house, which are lifting water full eighty feet
up to a channel, which embraces 25,000 acres. It has
been calculated that a quantity will be required up to
150,000 gallons per minute. The engine referred to is
the great engine on Psyche Bend. The engine-hopse
is a brick building, high and roomy. How beautiful
the machinery looks ! It reminds us at once of that
with which one is familiar in the hold of a great ocean
steamer. There are four of such engines—all bright,
spick, and span. They lift the water from the river
and send it along two gigantic tubes to the valve on
the main channel; and up then it comes bubbling and
foaming, till it rolls away down the channel and around
the land on its fertilising mission, doing for the first
time the work which through all ages has been re-
served for the enterprising Mildurites.
The Drink Question.
Whilst speaking of the water supply it may not be
out of place to refer to the position of Mildura re the
drink question. Here, again, has the of
Mr. Chaffey for the poorer portion of the population
been an untold boon. There is no publichouse or
drinking saloon for their impoverishment or demoralisa-
tion. To some minds this prohibition might seem like
an infringement of natural liberty, but the fact stands
that many a score of men in Mildura now are well-to-
do and thriving small capitalists, or actual or prospec-
tive landholders, who, if publichouses had been per-
mitted, would have been down in the depths of poverty
and misery, or humping their swags back through the
Mallee. I questioned several persons able to judge as
to the feeling among all classes in relation to prohibi-
tion, and I found there was but one opinion, i.e., that
it is salutary, and that even the “boozers” like the
drink best at a respectable distance. Most of them are
landholders, consequently shareholders, and as the
welfare of the settlement to some extent depends on
sobriety, all are united in a desire to make drunken-
ness as rare as possible.


It was the generally held opinion that it was only
necessary to remove the prohibition and there would be
a dozen drinking bars in Mildura within a month, and
“ where would we be then?”
It is not an old man who asks that question, although
many an old “ spree ” has seamed and scarred his face;
he who, when he came here, ragged and destitute, has
now an account with the bank, and an interest in the
colony. All within two and a half years ! Open a bar,
and the probability is that within three months all he
is possessed of will be signed over to the publican, and
his next week’s screw mortgaged on the slate. And is
he not one of a hundred of his class ? —a class, by the
way, which is by no means confined to the men who
labour only with their hands. •
Of course every arrangement is made at Mildura to
show visitors all that the settlement contains. A count
of heads is made, and splendidly-horsed four-in-hand
traps are waiting. There is something bracing in the
air, something which breeds or conserves the true Arab
fire in the horses, and makes stockmen bard as nails
and true as steel; something, as we shall see also
by and by, which will produce a wonderful grace of life,
of luxurious and beautiful surroundings.
Two of our horses were anxious for a bolt at the
moment. But we got fairly away, and soon have our
first good view of the work that is going on.
Clearing.
The clearing is an interesting job. It is done by a
steam plough engine with great rapidity and efficiency.
It is a treat to see one of the engines, as I saw it, on
its way along the road to pull up the scrub. Our buggy
could hardly keep pace with it at times. The speed is
fully ten miles per hour. The engine runs up to the
desired spot, and is attached to the strongest clump ;
then a steel wire rope is payed out until it embraced
several clumps of mallee and the end brought back to
the winding drum. Steam is turned on, and the
tightening rope drags down clump after clump
until all are gathered into a heap, and so the clearing
went on very quickly until every stump is extracted,
piled up, and ready for firewood.
Cultivating.
Then comes the process of breaking up the ground,


which is done by gigantic scarifiers. These tear up
the soil to a depth of from sixteen to twenty inches
without turning it over. The scarifier or cultivator is
worked by two traction engines, and is passed through
the ground twice ; the second time at right angles to
the first. In this way the soil is well broken, and the
air let into it the required depth. The treatment of a
ten-acre block in this way from start to finish is easily
accomplished in one day by means of the machinery
described.
The next step is to grade the land, that is, to reduce
it to a series of uniform slopes, so as to facilitate the
even and certain use of the water over the whole of the
surface. Then all is ready for planting operations.
The Method of Irrigating
is simplicity itself. The water is allowed to find its
way slowly down a single plough furrow, drawn on
either side of the line of trees.
If the block is only of a gentle slope, as most of
them are, the water sometimes take eight hours to run
across a ten-acre block, so it may be imagined how great
a soakage the soil obtains. Of course the water is
allowed to run down many furrows at the same time or
the job might never be done. A head ditch is con-
structed along the high side of the block, and this is
kept full for supplying the furrows. To get this supply
the irrigator cuts with a spade a nick in the head ditch
just opposite the furrows, and the water flows down as
described. As the visitor proceeds in his round of in-
spection he cannot fail to be impressed with the general
air of thrift, industry, and orderliness that pervades the
settlement. The cottages have a very English appear-
ance about them ; they are neat and comfortable look-
ing ; many are even elegant. All the houses on the
planted blocks have a profusion of flowers about them.
Agricultural College.
On my way through Deakin-avenue I passed the first
bricks of one of the future institutions. At Ontario
the Chaffeys devoted land to the value of more than
£20,000 to the establishment of an Agricultural College,
which is now in full operation. At Mildura they have
devoted one-fifteenth of the whole irrigable area to a
similar purpose. Every fifteenth block is reserved as
an endowment for the College. In a short time this


institution will probably become one of the most
wealthy and famous of its kind in the Southern hemi-
sphere. As well as professorial assistance, the students
will have around them a vast object lesson in intense
culture, and in this way scientific culture will be ex-
panded under the happiest conditions, and an impetus
be given to the industry throughout Australia.
“ Knocking-off ” Time.
We return from our long drive round the settlement,
and arrive on the outskirts of the town just at “ knock-
ing off ” time, and yet the day is not spent, and the sun
is still above the horizon. Along all the roads of the
settlement from the clearings and plantations hundreds
of men and horses are returning from their labour, all
making for the stables, for the day’s work is ended.
Ended! Yes, friend farmer, whose ploughmen will be
toiling and moiling for several hours yet. It is abso-
lutely true, it is the way of the settlement. These folks
consider that ’twixt the hours of seven and five man
and horse can do their duty. The man has attended
to his beasts, and finished his own supper by six, and
has two hours of good daylight to use as he deems best
for his own profit or pleasure. The ploughman if he
chooses can dress himself decently, go down to the
village into the athletic or concert room, play his game
at billiards or draughts, or take a walk with the girl of his
heart, and get back to bed by ten feeling better and more
manly and hopeful that his day has had a pleasant and
reasonable ending ; or, if determined to make his way
in life, he can put in two hours’ work on his ten-acre
block, and so prepare for the time when he can confi-
dently take a wife to himself, and quit the service of
any master but himself for ever. The wages paid to
these men is about seven shillings per day. They pay
their own cook and provide their own victuals, and the
cost per week averages about twelve shillings, so that
at least thirty shillings a week remains as wages. Is it
a matter for surprise that there is a fine set of
workers in Mildura—smart, capable, steady men—
rattling along with their work through the day as if
they had heart in it, and whistling cheerily as they
come in to tea, knowing that pleasure and opportunity
are ahead of them ?
Oranges and Lemons.
Among our visitors there had been some talk and


discussion re oranges and lemons, the best means of
growing them, and their chance of a profitable European
market. “ Would oranges keep till they got to Europe ?”
asked a man from Parramatta. I settled this question
for myself in the following manner :—I visited a fruit
shop in the town, where I saw some splendid oranges
and lemons grown at a place in the neighbourhood
from trees about twenty years old, yet still fruitful and
healthy. The result was that in thinness of skin,
juiciness, and sweetness these oranges were equal to
any I have ever seen, and far better than those grown
on the Darling Downs. There was no sign of scale,
and though it was many weeks since they left the
trees and then had been lying in store a long time,
they were firm and sound. It is contended by Mildura
experts that although the export of New South Wales
oranges to Europe is not always successful, those sent
from Mildura will always be successful. The reason
is found in the difference between the conditions of
growth. The Parramatta orange is grown in a humid
climate, and its frequent fate is to perish by rotting;
the Mildura orange is grown in a dry atmosphere, and
its natural end is to perish by drying up—just the
thing Mr. Chaffey, with his great fruit-drying projects,
would have advised it to do had he been consulted.
It is confidently anticipated by experts that the Mildura
orange will become one of the most marketable table
delicacies of Europe, and a great demand will set in
for it, inasmuch as it arrives in Europe when European
oranges are unobtainable.
Strikes Unlikely.
In the engineers’ and blacksmiths’ shops, the
foundry, and the machine wood-cutting establishment,
all things are manufactured and engined on the
place. Boilers and pumping machinery are being
manufactured within. Coach, carriage, and dray
building are going on, and in the carpenters’ shop
everything required for the building or finishing of a
house is turned out by machinery with scarce a human
effort. Circular and hand and fret saws whirling,
mortising and planing machines banging and grinding
away, mouldings, sashes, doors, window frames turned
out by the score under the watchful eye of the super-
intendent, assisted by a half-dozen apprentices and
workmen. And here and in the engineering shop
below almost every workman is a landholder on the


estate, while every apprentice is the son of a settler.
Hence strikes are unlikely in the future.
A Prize Plantation.
The impression one gets of the general appearance of
the place is difficult to express. It is impossible to
speak otherwise than in terms of rapturous praise of
everything. The plantations are perfectly healthy, and
so are the people. The local doctor says that but for
the incidental casualties (that occur in the best regulated
households), he would have to confine his attention to
growing fruit. The first prize (£5O) for the best irri-
gated garden, orchard, or vineyard in Victoria was re-
cently awarded to Mr. A. Monnington of Mildura, and
from the appearance of this magnificent orchard to-
day, Mr. Monnington will win again if the opportunity
of competing should be afforded him.
About 7000 acres are already planted. The principal
fruits are oranges, lemons, grapes, apricots, peaches,
pears, plums, figs, and olives.
Markets.
£900,000 a year is now paid by these colonies for im-
ported products, all of which can be produced and manu-
factured here. Within our own boundaries there is a
market ready and waiting for all Mildura can produce
for years to come. The Chaffey Company, and the
Mildura Fruit Growers’ Association, will take all the
raisin grapes any settler can grow, simply ripe on
the trees, and pay “ top ” price for them.
The Mildura fruit growers recognise that they must
ultimately look to the whole world for a market, and
they are preparing accordingly. Grapes will be made
into raisins, currants, and wine ; the apricots, peaches,
and plums will be dried, canned, and bottled; the
figs will be dried and boxed; the olives will be
preserved, and made into oil; the oranges and lemons
will be exported to Europe, and the inferior ones made
into wine, or the essential oils extracted, Ac.; and so on
with all the fruit grown.
A Co-operative Community.
The Mildurites are a grand co-operative community,
working together for mutual benefit. There is no
jealousy at new comers. “Welcome to Strangers ”is
gospel in Mildura, and the more there are in the swim
the better. A collective body like the Mildurites is all-
powerful, freights can be cheapened by chartering their


own fast vessels for whole cargoes; merchants and
agents can be employed at low commissions; many
rents, cartages, and middle profits can be saved, and
wholesale methods of advertising and disposing of
goods adopted.
Fruit Growers’ Union.
They know, too, that their produce must be of the
best quality, that it must be got up in a most attractive
form, and they are prepared to do this, for they have
already formed a Fruit Growers’ Union, of which every
orchard owner will be a member.
Chaffeys’ Paternal Care.
What an advantage it is to have the paternal care of
the Messrs. Chaff ey! They say, “You are welcome to our
experience, and we are engaging the best expert in
California to come and show you how to can and bottle
your fruits ; another expert shall instruct you in drying
them. A refrigerating storehouse is being erected for
the preservation of the fruit, and we have on the
ground all the latest wood-working machinery for the
making of fruit boxes, casks, and cases.”
There can be no doubt that the Company wishes to
encourage the residents in all individual and collective
efforts, but they have no idea of letting the settlement
suffer through want of knowledge or want of the latest
appliances. The firm will have enough to do to develop
the 225,000 acres of land still untouched, without
trying to monopolise all the various industries of the
community. For instance, if anyone would care to
invest in a first-class steam cultivating plant, and
would bring it to Mildura and take contracts with the
settlers to break up their blocks, the firm would welcome
him, although he would be competing with their own
workmen, because it would enable them to more rapidly
extend their own operations.
It is, of course, open to the Mildura settler to do all
the initiatory work of his own land himself, or if he
likes he can engage the services of the firm to do it for
him. So rapidly and efficiently do the company do
this work that the greater number of the settlers prefer
to employ them.
Messrs. Chaffey undertake for £5 a year to duly
cultivate, irrigate, prune the trees, and generally super-
vise any holdings, and this arrangement has caused
many persons to take up blocks who prefer to be
absent until the trees begin to bear. Some of these


non-residents are working men, who thus have the
opportunity of continuing to earn wages elsewhere;
then there are also many townsmen of Mildura who
cannot spare the time for personal work on the orchard;
many Chaffey workmen and officials have their block,
but are unable to give personal attention to it; thus
the Company employ a large staff of men and horses in
this undertaking alone. There are private firms, too,
who undertake this management of the young orchards
during their unproductive stage. I must say that the
Company well fulfil their engagement in this respect,
for the neatest and cleanest orchards were almost
always those under their care, and not those under
individual management.
A Big Development.
And now have I succeeded in drawing any fair picture
of this new colony, this experiment in which all good
and properly instructed Australians glory ? Do you
recognise the new life on the old river in its many
varied aspects ? The men and the women by thousands
already settled. The young blood of Victoria and the
good blood of England, the gentlemen who have already
had some scorching in Australian suns, or who have
stood the fire in India or Ceylon, the enterprising
Victorian settlers wearied of the old methods, the self-
respecting working men, the skilled craftsmen and
artisans, all labouring and living together. There are
4000 in all, nearly as we can form an estimate, and
there will be 20,000 before three years have passed.
Does it not seem to you a big development—something
out on the skirts of Victoria—which is worthy of most
serious attention, even in the heart of Melbourne ?
What Mr. Deakin Says.
As to irrigation generally, as the future outlook of
prosperity for this colony, I think after Mildura has
proved the success it is sure to be, a grand revival will
set in among the sluggish lag-behinds elsewhere.
Apropos of the subject in its general bearing, I cannot
do better than conclude by quoting the words of Mr.
Alfred Deakin, whose sagacity in such matters is
proverbial:—
“ What stimulates and strengthens us most is not
the prospect of material prosperity which irrigation
promises, excellent as that is, but I feel sure that those
who espouse the cause most ardently, and you your-
selves, when you adopt it and make it your own, will


support it, chiefly because you believe that, in introduc-
ing irrigation you are aiding in the enfranchisement
and elevation of the agricultural population. That is
an aim worth striving for indeed; to place the agricul-
ture of this country in a position to employ trained
intelligence in its work, and to have that intelligence
fairly remunerated for its exertions ; to see the present
regime under which the farmer lives in comparative
idleness at certain times of the year, and at other times
toils in comparative slavery, supplanted by a regime
in which there is an even, not excessive, need for
labour all the year round. The isolation of the culti-
vator and his family will then be removed, and with it
many of the disadvantages of life in the bush. We
shall then see the current of population flowing back
from the towns to the country. The preference will be
given to rural employment by men who, by exercising
a wise judgment, succeed in obtaining in the country
the social and intellectual advantages of town life, and
obtain them without those injurious influences which
unfortunately appear where masses of men are congre-
gated together. It is this aspiration—than which I
know none higher in politics—of having our agricul-
turists raised above the contingencies of climate, and
enabled to win the fair reward of their labour in all
seasons, which gives dignity to the irrigation cause.
Beyond the magnificent prospect which opens out to
us of material wealth for the individual, and national
wealth for the community, we have this higher
aim—of adding to those higher treasures of the
state the manliness and independence of its citizens.”
The Working Man’s Prospects.
We asked Mr. G. Chaffey whether a working man who
had enough money to pay his deposit, and for the cost
of clearing and breaking his land, could get along after-
wards ? He replied that there were now in the settle-
ment several such men who were managing to get
through very well indeed. They work in spare time on
their plantations. But the majority of Mildura people
have not to depend altogether on their own resources
of physical strength. They are the most satisfied
people it is possible to meet, and full of hopefulness.
“ I don’t think there is one dissatisfied man here,” said
Mr. Chaffey.
Road to the Markets.
Perhaps someone says, “ But what of our road to


market, our way back to our own people, kinsfolk, and
acquaintances ? There is the river way, we know ; but
as to the railway, will it ever be made?” I think the
reasonable, the absolute answer, is it should be set
about and at once. The potentialities of Mildura are
far greater than those of Broken Hill, yet did Adelaide
regret straining every nerve to reach that centre ? The
probabilities are that Mildura alone, in its full develop-
ment, will support a population of 100,000 souls. Is
not that ’enough for a head, without considering the
more or less remunerative tail stretching right across
the plains to Swan Hill, or Donald, or Warracknabeal?
Mr. Speight was once asked for his opinion about
the railway, and he said: “ I may say this. If I were-
a private speculator, I should be glad to go into a com-
pany for the purpose of making the line by private
enterprise. The Mildura Colony is growing every day,
and in two or three years there will be an immense
trade. That Mildura will be a success whether it gets
the railway or not is to my mind certain.” When
asked about the settlement generally, he said: “I
haven’t the slightest misgiving about it. With the
start it has made, and the enormous advantages offer-
ing, I don’t see any possibility of failure. The best
proof of my confidence lies in the fact that I am sending
two of my sons here to go in for fruit-raising. I don’t
know of any better held opening, or I would not take
that step. My paramount duty is to provide for the
members of my family, and I take a strictly business
view of Mildura when I invest my money in it for that
purpose. There is no sentiment about that.
Let us contemplate another feature or two in relation
to the railway question—l mean traffic and revenue.
It is hardly necessary to predict an immense traffic be-
tween Mildura and the coast markets and shipping
ports. If only half the highest measure of cultivation
reached in California is attained to at Mildura, the
completely developed settlement will show a population
of 100,000.
The Mildura contributions to the Customs revenue
will then be about £300,000 per annum. And to that
will have to be added an enormous contribution to the
railway revenue. The sanction of Parliament to the
construction, very shortly, of a line joining Mildura to
one of the nearest of the existing termini is confidently
anticipated. Such a line will become one of the best
paying railways in Australia.


HANDY FACTS TO DATE.
.March, 1892.
CLIMATE.—Semi-tropical. Mild, dry winters. Bronchial
and chest affections disappear. No openings for doctors.
SOIL. —Loose sandy chocolate loam, easily cultivable. Sub-
soil, loose marly clay and nodulated limestone. Depth, Bto 24
feet. Very porous, affording natural drainage.
WATER-RlGHT.—lnseparably incorporated with the land
by Act of Parliament. Water contains considerable fertilising
elements. Inexhaustible supply.
SOME PRODUCTS.—Vines, apricots, peaches, figs, nec-
tarines, plums, olives, oranges, lemons, limes, citrons, shad-
docks, strawberries and gooseberries, loquats, walnuts and
almonds, potatoes, mangolds, onions, beets, turnips, carrots,
cabbages, and all kinds of garden stuff. Tomatoes (in some
cases have fruited the year round). Medicinal and perfume
plants. Lucerne, clover, maize, sorghum, amber-cane, sweet
corn, Kaffir corn, Teasinte wheat and oats. Flowers of all
kinds. Melons, pumpkins, squashes, cucumbers, and gourds of
every variety.
RETU RNS, &c.—Lucerne crops finest in the country. Crop
of wheaten hay, raised by Mr. H. P. Graham,five tons per acre 1
Ensilage successful. Cereals, fodder, and vegetables grow
all the year round. Vines thrive Profits
from vines £l5 to £25 per acre, and raisins, currants,
and sultanas, £35 to £4O per acre, at least. Mature
apricot trees, two tons per acre, at least; worth £24 on the trees.
Peaches (eagerly sought for) give much higher returns than
apricots. Oranges and lemons return £5O to £2OO per acre.
Ripe in Mildura xohen unobtainable in Europe and United
States 1 All other fruits, moderately estimated, return from
£2O to £25 per acre. Sun-dried fruits immensely successful.
On Trevatt’s land this season a quarter-acre patch of straw-
berries yielded £4O, and apricots planted in 1888 returned £33
per acre !
No apparatus for artificial drying is required. The sun heat
has been found sufficient. Experts pronounce Mildura to have
the finest drying climate in the world. As the atmosphere does
not become moist at night, the drying process is always going on.
MARKETS, &c.—England imports to her own shores yearly
ten million pounds’worth of foreign fruit; the United Slates
market is only partially supplied, and there are also India, the
Cape, and the Australian colonies. The last-named import about
a million, worth of products such as are being raised at Mildura,
Lemons and oranges can hit the English and New York markets
in the hot season, when the fruit is not obtainable. It_will
probably be cheaper to land oranges from Mildura in New York
lan to carry them by rail from California,


