

Reports on City Dairies taken from the Principal
Newspapers of Sydney, also method adopted by the
FRESH FOOD & ICE CO., Limited, to ensure the
Country Milk delivered by them being pure and free
from infectious germs.
H. Solomow, Caxton Printing Office, 1141 Pitt-street, .Sydney,


33J030
•sauojs JJoqs üßiißJjsny
( ptre JEpp>pEpM Eaqjoioa '»?<!
O pjßiuag ‘.pounßpM Aa[iunj„
■g ‘Buog h H ‘-isißAEg smog
3PM ‘ueSSeq uaapg ‘a[og aisig
spnput sJOjnqupuoD [Bdputig
>) i f)jtg uioij pajaaps jemmy
iz-ozei Cq n i d fovwn
enuuy Ajjaoj üßiiejjsny
eurasoH ‘o£-6t>6l U6fr6l)
«3BW ‘X ‘lt6l |(ZX6I)
FRESH FOOD & ICE CO.’S
(LIMITED)
FRESH ROLL BUTTER.
Manufactured by ourselves at the Mittagong
Depot and to our order by the best butter
makers in the South Coast district.
DELIVERY BY SPECIAL CARTS TO ALL PARTS
OF CITY AND SUBURBS.
Orders sent to Office, 21 Harbour Street, will
receive prompt attention.


Water
87.25 per cent.
Butter
3.50
Casein
3.50
Albumen
0.40 „
Milk sugar ...
4.60 „
MILK.
PROFESSOR SHELDON, in his admirable work on
“ Dairy Farming,” has the following concerning
milk :
“We need no support when we say that only a tithe
of the milk is consumed by our people that ought to be, for
the truth of the statement is obvious to everyone. Un-
adulterated, undiluted, unskimmed, and properly treated
milk drawn from healthy cows in good condition and pro-
duced by the consumption of healthy and nutritious grasses
and other kinds of food, contains within itself, in proper
proportions, all the elements that are necessary to sustain,
human life through a considerable period of time. Scarcely
any other single article of food will do this. When
we eat bread and drink milk, we eat bread, butter, cheese,
and drink water—all of them in the best combination and
condition to nourish the human system. All things con-
sidered good milk is the cheapest kind of food that we have ;
there is no loss in cooking as with meat; there is no bone
that cannot be eaten ; it is simple, palatable, nutritious,
healthful, cheap, and always ready for use, with or without
preparation. Few kinds of food are really more nutritious
and healthful—none so complete.”
The average composition of pure milk drawn from
healthy cows is as follows:
Mineral substance ... 0.75 ,,
100.00
m 33 5s Jr<?rn
Z6-S-7?


10%
6 2-3d
15%
7 l-17d
20%
7Jd
25%
8d
30%
8 4-7d
35%
9 3-13d
40%
... lOd
The specific gravity at a temperature of 60° is 1.030 ;
if diluted with water it is less in accordance with the
amount added, except in cases where a heavier article is
added to bring the specific gravity up to the correct point.
As a rule, milk is only diluted not adulterated, but
this is done to a very large extent. Samples from numbers
of dairies supplying milk have shown that water is added
to as much as 40 %. Taking the price paid to be fid. per
quart, on the assumption that the pure article is received,
when it is diluted the actual price per quart is as under :
This at once shows that pure milk is the cheapest as it costs
less in actual money, and if dilution is necessary customers
can add water for themselves, they then at any rate know
to what extent it is diluted and that the added water is
clean.
The Fkesii Food and Ice Co. Limited, 21 Harbour
Street, Sydney, use every possible means to ascertain
that the milk they supply is pure , wholesome , and good. It is
obtained from the best districts in the Colony, and a high
price is paid to ensure the milk supplied being up to their
standard. The cows supplying are healthy, having plenty
of natural food and clean water. The precautions taken
are so numerous that it may be deemed impossible that any
inferior milk is taken into stock.
Inspectors are kept whose duty it is to see that the-
sources from which the milk is obtained are unimpeachable.
From these we receive daily reports respecting their dis-
tricts, and by these means we are kept in constant com-
munication with each of the many supplies.
Immediately the cows are milked the milk passes over
a “Lawrence” cooler. This will at once bring the temperature
down from say 98 to 60 degrees ; and all authorities on the


subject agree that the immediate cooling of miik does more
than perhaps anything else to destroy all possible germs.
It must be done immediately as the good effect is destroyed
if milk is brought any distance before being cooled.
The milk is brought to Sydney in special cans, generally
in our own trucks, so that there is little fear of its being
tampered with during transit. It is then examined by men
who have been so long a time employed that they are by
experience able to thoroughly test the milk as' regards
purity and sweetness. Should there be in any milk the
slightest sign of impurity, sourness, or taint it is rejected,
and only milk taken into stock that can in every particular
way be regarded as satisfactory.
After passing the examiners it is cooled down to a
temperature of 32°, and it must be evident that the cooling
of milk to this extremely low point does away with any fear
of infectious germs.
The cans before being returned to the country are
scrubbed out with boiling water, as are also the trucks ;
the latter are also lime-washed each time, so that in this
particular, as in every other special case, precautions are
taken.
Before the milk is delivered to the men having charge
of the carts it is again tested, and the Company are prepared
to give a guarantee that the milk leaving their works is
pure. Should any customer have the slightest doubt about
the purity of milk supplied, they are at all times willing to test
any sample that may be brought, and in this particular they
rely upon the public assisting them by bringing samples of
any milk that may be open to doubt.
Directly the cans used in delivery come into the yard,
they are rinsed out with scalding water containing a
quantity of Condy’s fluid, after which they are thoroughly
cleansed by a man employed for this special purpose. The
carts are washed daily—in fact all utensils used in delivery
receive the utmost scrutiny and attention.
The Company would add a note of warning to customers
as to the care milk requires from them. It cannot be
expected that milk kept in a close atmosphere with meat


vegetables, ttc., can keep sweet long or be free from taint.
Milk should kept where a draught of air exists, and it is
strongly recommended that when milk is required to be kept
any length of time it should be scalded (not boiled). This
scalding of milk makes assurance doubly sure, and can in no
case do harm.
The Fresh Food and Ice Company, Limited, feel
that there has been no time in the past when the milk
question could be so suitably brought before the public.
The epidemic of typhoid at present running through the
city could probably in many cases be traced to the using of
milk, which owing to its impure source, has become infected
with fever germs, so that it must be gratifying to their
customers to know that the milk they are using daily is
obtained under conditions so favorable, and that every
necessary precaution is taken.
This Company can claim a large experience seeing it is
nearly 8 years since they commenced operations, and that the
public have appreciated their efforts may be inferred from
the fact that the delivery commencing with 30 gallons daily
has gradually increased to an average of 1200 gallons, (the
present daily delivery).
The public may rely upon their continuing to use every
effort to maintain the delivery of an article free from
suspicion, and they trust by continuing their exertions in
this direction to meet with the approval of all who are
interested in the supply of good wholesome ‘pure country
milk for city consumption.
Appended are Extracts from the “ Sydney Morning
Herald,” “Echo,” “Telegraph,” “Express,” and “Tribune.”


[Letter from Dr. Douglas, Glebe.]
TO THE EDITOR OE THE HERALD.
Sydney, Wednesday, 2nd May, 1883.
Sir, —At a time when so much is being done to protect
the public against the use of spurious and injurious alcoholic
beverages, and also by the Amended Licensing Act, which,
I trust, will ere long prove a general good, I would draw
the attention of the community, through your influential
paper, to a subject of scarcely secondary importance to the
young, the feeble, and the sick, and, indeed, to all classes
and conditions. I allude to our public dairies. If our
public houses required to be improved and supervised, or
inspected by the authorities, how much more do the city,
suburban, and country dairies require to be supervised and
inspected by persons Legally appointed for that special duty 1
Just now we have typhoid fever raging in every direction
from various causes—one of the causes, I believe, to be use
of impure and infected milk, impregnated with the germs
of disease such as the public is now sufiering from. I know
of one case which can be traced to the use of milk, such as
I have above described, and I have no doubt many others
could be found. From my own knowledge I know that
there are many dairies where the accommodation is so de-
ficient that it would be impossible to supply good and
wholesome milk fit for the use of a large proportion of our
rising population.
It is full time that steps be taken at once to remedy this
evil. I believe this can only be done by legislation prompt,
and sharp. It might be enacted that no person shall keep
a dairy from which milk is sold to the public, without a
license similar to that granted to publicans, and under
similarly stringent restrictions. It should be imperative
that the place where the cows are kept should be of sufficient
space, and with proper sheds to shelter the animals. But
what is of greater importance is that the dairy or place in
which the milk and vessels required for dairy purposes are
kept, should be separated and quite distinct from all rooms
used as sitting, eating, or sleeping rooms. It would be well
to insist on the dairy being outside and separate from the


dwelling place, so that it could at all times be of easy access
to the inspector.
At present, I am informed that it is not unusual to
keep milk and the vessels used for dairy purposes under
beds, and in other close and confined places altogether un-
suited for cleanliness and pure air, which are essential for
the preservation of wholesome milk.
I could easily enlarge on this subject and needlessly
take up your space ; but I simply draw your attention to it,
in the hope that you will also direct public attention to a
subject of no small importance to the health and well-being
of the people.
I am, ibc.,
JAMES DOUGLAS.
DAILY TELEGRAPH.
Saturday, 12th May, 1883.
The Fresh Food & Ice Company Limited have issued
a warning to householders inregard to milk containing disease
germs, and the dissemination thereby of typhoid fever, and the
warning is certainly not ill-timed. Some of the dairies in
and around the city are simply hotbeds of filth, and gross
carlessness is shown in storing the milk for use, feeding the
kine, and other details. Some time ago it was disclosed
that in one dairy the milk was drawn in the evenings and
left in open pans all night in the room where the family of
the milkman slept. It is well known that milk is most
susceptible to disease, and so the Fresh Food and Ice
Company use every means to ensure the perfect purity of
what they vend. It is obtained in the best producing
districts in the colony, and as soon as the cows are milked
the product is passed over a Lawrence cooler, reducing the
temperature to below 60 degrees, thus reducing the risk
from contaminating disease germs to a minimum. The
milk is then sent to Sydney in special cans, and examined
by experts to ensure its purity. Its temperature is then
reduced to 32 degrees (the freezing point of water), milk
freezing at 28 degrees. The cans used in delivery are rinsed


out when empty with Condy’s fluid, and then thoroughly
scalded. Inspectors are kept in the country districts to
ascertain that the dairies supplying the company are kept
sweet and clean, and every effort is made to supply the public
with good milk free from germs injurious to human life.
THE SYDNEY DAIRIES.
SYDNEY MORNING HERALD.
Monday, 14th May, 1883.
On Friday last no fewer than 15 keepers of cowyards
and dairies in Sydney were fined at the Water Police Court
for having filthy premises. In only two cases was the fine
less than five guineas, and in two others it was £lO ss.
These facts indicate a very objectionable state of affairs in
relation to a large portion of our milk supply, and an
inspection of some of the places where cows are kept, and
from which milk is distributed through the city, forcibly
points to the great danger many of these dairies are to the
health of the community, and the necessity for removing
the whole of them outside the city boundaries and placing
them under constant and strict supervision. Accompanied
by Inspector Seymour, a reporter from this office visited a
large nnmber of the city dairies—or cowyards, for in most
instances there is little or no sign of a dairy to be seen —and
the spectacle which many of them presented was sufficient
to induce almost anyone to abjure the drinking of milk for
ever.
In the centre of a low-lying paddock, which is the re-
ceptacle for heaps of rubbish, part of which is taken from
the filthy open sewer that receives the drainage of much of
the southern portion of the city and that is known as Shea’s
Creek, with this sewer itself running close by and through
the paddock, and in the midst of a locality which to all
appearance is one of the favourite haunts of fever—with
typhoid fever, in fact, at no greater distance away than a
few yards—is a tumbledown structure, half yard and half
shed, where five cows are kept. The place is very old, very


much out of repair, and very dirty. Just outside the cow-
yard, and in the paddock, is a well from which water is
obtained to mix the cow’s feed and for the cows to drink,
and, it may be, at times, to wash some of the milking cans
and buckets. The well has been formed by sinking into
the ground an old barrel, and its covering is an old wooden
case. But the most noticeable thing about the well is the
water it contains, for the surface of the water is covered
with a frothy scum, which gives the well the appearance of
a cesspit. With this scum driven to the sides of the barrel,
in the desire to raise some of the fluid as clean as possible,
the water may be brought up better than it looks ; but even
then it is very objectionable ; and to make things worse,
there is, quite close to the well, and on higher ground, a
large heap of cow and horse manure, which has the appear-
ance of never being properly cleaned away, and which,
whenever rain falls, must drain into the well. In a house
a few yards away from the cowyard, a child is either very
ill or recovering from typhoid fever ; and 12 months ago
the occupant of the house lost his wife from the same
disease,
It was recently stated that most of the cases of typhoid
fever received at the hospitals during the present outbreak
of the disease have come from the neighbourhood around
Sussex and Kent streets. In a street in that quarter of the
city there is to be found one of the filthiest of the cowyards,
and in this yard there are living a young woman who has
just recovered from typhoid fever, and a child who seems to
be sickening for it. The cowshed is an old rotting structure
of weatherboards, with an uneven floor of stone flagging,
and when seen was in a very unclean condition ; but bad as
the cowshed was the cows were worse. They were so ill-
nourished that they were little better than bones with the
hide for a covering, and they were so unclean that quantities
of manure had, after days, perhaps weeks, of accumulation,
caked hard to their hides and tails, and even to their udders
—if the very scanty signs of any part of the animals from
which milk might be obtained can be called by that name.
To judge from their appearance they were in the habit of
lying down in the filth upon the floor of the cowshed, and
were never cleaned. One cow had a sore upon a portion of


its carcase, and all the cows seem to have had the habit of
whisking their tails, loaded with filth, from side to side, and
while adding to the coating on their hides, probably scatter-
ing not a little into the milk-pails. Immediately in front
of the cowshed is the closet, a patent one, but (as no water
has been laid on to it) as bad as a common cesspit. A drain
runs from the vicinity of the closet towards the cowshed,
and the drainage from the house where the typhoid fever
has been goes in the same direction. This house, is one in
the last stages of decay, where some of the people occupying
it live in small, rotting, unwholesome rooms from which
disease if it once enter is never likely to be got rid of until
the whole building is razed, and it and its surroundings
swept away. The pale, sickly, thin face and short cut hair
of the girl living in part of the house, suggested at once the
question, “ Have you had the fever?” and she said, “Yes,
sir, I had a touch of the typhoid,” and then, in response to
“ How long ago ?” “ Two months.” The cans used for the
milk obtained from these cows are kept in a house on the
opposite side of the street where the cow-owner and his
family live. The cans looked clean, but the room in which
they are kept is a musty dirty place, filled to repletion with
a heterogeneous collection of articles, including household
furniture, a large quantity of boots and shoes, and one or two
sewing machines. The odour from the boots and shoes was
very strong, and generally the place had an unwholesome
smell, and an unwholesome ill-kept aspect. The cowkeeper,
conscious of the objectionable condition in which his cow-
yard is kept, and fearing the police court, began to say that
he would not be there another three months. “ I intended
a month ago to give it up altogether, now I see the way
things is going,” he remarked, and then, as we were leaving,
he said confidently, “ I’m going out of this very soon ;if
you see anything this morning about the place, you can
overlook it this time—do you understand ?”
Another yard where cows are kept and milked is con-
trolled by a man who has undergone, it is said, 18 months’
imprisonment, besides being fined at different times for
having dirty premises. His presence at the Police Court
became so frequent that he left off paying the amount of the
fine inflicted upon him and submitted to the alternative


sentence of imprisonment, and in that manner has passed
different periods, amounting in all to Id months, in gaol.
From all appearance he is in no sense a man likely to keep
his premises clean, and his wife is no better. The cowyard
adjoins the house in which they live, and there is not even
a shed in the yard to shelter the cows. “You cannot do
everything at once,” said the woman in allusion to this, and
yet she and her husband have been keeping the cows there
for at least two years. In this place also the yard was
unclean, with an offensive manure heap in one part of it,
and scarcely the vestige of a sign of care in keeping the
place free from impurities. The cows were away, but in
their absence the house in which the man and his wife live,
presented features conspicuous enough to attract attention.
Dirty, smoke-begrimed, unwholesome, stuffed with old
furniture, bedding, and wearing apparel, which made the
atmosphere heavy with an unhealthy smell, the two small
rooms and a garret, which comprise the house, were more
than enough to very quickly destroy the health of anyone
not used to such a habitation, and undoubtedly sufficient to
seriously affect any milk that might be kept indoors. The
husband, who one would suppose .should have something to
say about the manner in which the place is kept, said
nothing, but with an iinshaven, bloated face, full of the
signs of habitual intoxication, he stolidly and monotonously
wheeled a barrow from one place where manure and filth
were to be seen, to another place where the manure was
evidently kept'in a great heap until it was removed from
the yard. Just as we were leaving, the old woman was
very anxious to know what amount another cowkeeper in
the neighbourhood had been fined on the previous Friday.
She was told ,£o or £lO. “Oh Lord,” she exclaimed, in
genuine astonishment and alarm, “ what’ll become o’ me !
Oh, murder, murder, murder !” And we left her bemoaning
the possibilities of her own fate.
One of the most extraordinary places in which cows
are kept is in the southern portion of the city. The animals
are to be seen in what cannot be called with truth a cow-
yard, for it has all the appearance of a cellar. You enter
it by means of steps which you descend, after having opened
a door which communicates with the street pavement, and


there, below the level of the street, in an old dirty irregularly-
paved enclosure foul with a stench from the uncovered
mouth of a drain and from a closet were found two diminu-
tive scraggy looking cows chained by the neck to the wall,
or to some part of the cellar or its fixtures. How the
animals live there, and it is said they never leave the place,
though this the cowkeeper declares is untrue, is a question
it would be very difficult to answer. The place is not much
bigger than an ordinary house cellar, it is situated- immedi-
ately beneath what appears to be a part of the house where
the cowkeeper and his family live ; and cows, closet, drain,
stench, and milk must be continually mixed together. Not
even the manure is taken away, but as it accumulates on
and among the irregularities of the stone flagging the man,
getting a small shovel and a bricklayer's trowel, takes it up
with the trowel as a bricklayer would take up mortar and
then throws it into the drain from which it is washed into
the common sewer. Wretched in the extreme as is the
lodging of the cows, the miserable animals are anything but
properly fed. Adjoining the place where they are is a cellar
which is more immediately under the house The floor of
that cellar was covered with a quantity of green stuff, con-
sisting of the sweepings from beneath the stalls at the
Belmore Markets. There were fragments of cabbage leaves,
carrot tops, broken pieces of carrots, and other vegetables,
bits of ferns and grass, and the whole was spread over the
cellar floor to keep it, as the cowkeeper said, from “ foment-
ing.” This mixture and dry sugar bags, apparently without
a particle of sustenance about them, are the chief food of
the cows. The sugar-bags appear to figure very largely in
the cow feed, for on asking the cowkeeper to show the chaff’
which he gave the cows to eat he put some celery stalks and
tops and a large sugar bag into the box of a chaffcutting
machine and set the knife in motion, and the proportion of
sliced sugar bag seemed considerably larger than the pro-
portion of celery. With regard to the cowkeeper and his
family they all, as might be expected, present anything but
a healthy appearance. They are sallow-faced and sickly
looking, and the wife, who seems to be in the worst health
of all, complains of various kinds of illness from which she
suffers, while she pleaded against any proceedings being


taken with respect to the premises.
Other instances not quite so bad as the foregoing, but
in many ways pointing to the very objectionable state in
which most of the city cowyards and dairies are kept, were
met with in this tour of inspection. Badly constructed, ill-
paved, ineffectually drained, small, confined, and exceedingly
dirty yards were common, and in several cases the cows were
animals which from all appearance were anything but such
as should contribute to our milk supply. In almost every
instance the cowyard is so closely surrounded by habitations
as to be seriously exposed to danger from impure drainage,
and from the outbreak of disease in unwholesome or un-
healthy houses. The milk-tins at all the dairies visited
appeared to be clean, and so far as was noticed there was
nothing more objectionable about any of them than some
stale milk. But there is no saying where at many of the
cowyards the milk is kept, and if it be kept in some of the
houses that were examined it can scarcely escape being made
unwholesome. In other instances than those mentioned
above signs of sickness were found; and in two of these
additional instances typhoid fever had existed'. The
majority of the cowkeepers appear to be people who have
no idea of cleanliness, unless it be enforced at the police
court by fine or imprisonment. Those who do keep their
premises clean—and there are some who do this, and who
keep very good cows —have not sufficient space to conduct
their operations properly, and they are always running the
risks which are inseparable from closely confined yards.
A dairy which has the name of being one of the best in the
city, well kept and possessed of a herd of very tine cows,
but which is in the midst of a populous neighbourhood, had
typhoid fever within two doors of it a few weeks ago, and
the house where the fever broke out was on a higher level
than the dairy, a circumstance that suggests an unpleasant
thought with respect to drainage. One very objectionable
feature in relation to the city dairies is the impossibility of
turning the cows into paddocks where they can find any
grass. In those cases where they are driven out of the cow-
yards for a part of the day, they are taken to some place
which is either as bare and dry as a road, or as wet and
muddy as a bog, or they depasture among rubbish heaps,


as many do about Rushcutter Bay. All the feed they get
they receive in the cowyards, when they are driven in to be
milked ; and as many of the cowkeepers cannot afford to
spend much upon feed, the cows at many of the dairies
become, lean, wretched, and unsightly looking. Outside the
town the dairies seem to improve, and the improvement
appears to be due to the circumstance of their being more
space available in the yards, and a place somewhere apart
from the cowyards for the animals to run in and find a little
grass. For the reason that they possess these advantages,
some of the dairies at Pyrmont have a very cleanly appear-
ance ; but even at Pyrmont places were met with quite as
bad as the general number of the dairies in the central part
of the city.
SYDNEY MORNING HERALD.
Tuesday, 15tu May, 1883.
Wc published a letter on Thursday last from Dr.
dames Douglas, of ihe Glebe, directing attention to the dis-
graceful way in which some of the Sydney dairies are kept,
and to the probable connection between the supply of in-
fected milk and the spread of typhoid fever. The prosecu-
tions instituted by Inspector Seymour have proved that, so
far as filthy conditions are concerned, the statements in the
letter were rather under the mark than over it. The evi-
dence was so strong that it procured conviction in thirty-
two cases, the majority of which were charges against cow-
keepers. The notes of our reporter, who accompanied the
Inspector of Nuisances on his visitation tour that preceded
the prosecutions, completes the picture, and it is in its
completeness certainly a disgusting one. If the late dis-
cussions upon the presence of hydatid and bovine tuberculosis
in the meat we eat have had a tendency to make vegetarians
of us all, we may well be led by these revelations to foreswear
milk, unless we have a clear notion and a good account of
the place it comes from.
There is something unnatural and distasteful in the
bare idea of keeping cows in close yards and confined


spaces within a densely populated city. It is at least im-
probable that, with the utmost care, the animals, deprived
of fresh air and grass, can be in a thorougly healthy condition,
or at least in a condition to supply the rich and wholesome
milk that is to be desired for human consumption. But
when, in place of the utmost care, there is an utter want of
care and a total disregard ef cleanliness, the production of
good and pure milk will be regarded as an impossibility.
The account published in yesterday’s Herald is full of
sickening details, which, if they could not be explained by
the theory of dense ignorance or gross insensibility and
indifference on the part of the people concerned, might be
supposed to indicate a deliberate design to make the con-
ditions as bad as they could be. To keep cows in an under-
ground enclosure, amidst accumulations of manure and the
stench from a closet and an open drain, and to feed them
upon market sweepings flavoured with chopped-up sugar
bags, is an act of cruelty to the animals themselves. But
what of the milk ?
The milk is to be considered from two points. There
is first its original quality or character, and then there is
the character it may acquire from its surroundings. Can it
be imagined that the milk from cows fed on garbage,
chained in a cellar, and breathing sewer gas, can be whole-
some ? But if it were, could it remain so, if kept in such a
situation 1 “ There is no saying,” remarks our reporter,
“ where at many of the cow yards the milk is kept.” But
the probability is that men who care so little under what
conditions they get their milk will not care much where
they keep it, prior to delivery. The description of some
localities goes to show that no provision has been made or
can be made for its safe keeping. Its removal from the
milking-yard to the dwelling-house of the proprietor,
subjects it to the risk of absorbing one set of bad odours
instead of another The reek from old boots and musty
clothes and furniture cannot conduce to the preservation of
purity. Dr. Douglas says he has been informed that it is
not unusual to keep milk and vessels used for dairy purposes
under beds and in other close and confined places. The
tendency of milk to absorb impurities that float in the air
with which it is in contact is well known.


The verst aspect of the case, however, is that milk
supplied for consumption is exposed to contamination, not
only from common filth and foul smells, but by absorbing
the germs of typhoid. Some of these places from which
milk has been sent forth have been found to bo in the
immediate neighbourhood of typhoid cases, and judging from
the circumstances generally, the presumption is that no
special precautions had been taken to guard against danger
from that source. Some years ago about fifteen cases of
typhoid occurred in one locality; the houses where the
sufferers lived had all been supplied from the same cowyard;
in the house of the proprietor a case of typhoid had come
to a fatal end ; a drain from the house ran near the place
where the milk vessels stood. Is the prevalence of typhoid
in Sydney, which has lately been the subject of remark and
the cause of alarm, to be accounted for by any correspond-
ing chain of facts ?
O # , , /» ,i •
It is gratifying to find that the visits of the inspector
of nuisances have had some effect. They have been the
means of teaching a lesson to some people who were much
in need of being* taught. But the question is whether any
permanent reform will follow. Experience does not warrant
confidence in that respect. J udging from what has
happened before, this will be a nine days’ wonder, and
before long things will lapse into their former condition
until there is another raid. What we need is a more
thorough and systematic treatment of the subject. We
have by law banished noxious trades from the city, and
cowkeeping in city yards and cellars might well be pro-
hibited as a noxious trade. The public health could hardly
be attacked in a more insidious manner than by the dis-
tribution of infected milk. People who are stilled by the
smoke nuisance know it, and can at least take steps to
protect themselves, but poisoning with impure milk may be
suffered unconsciously. To banish all cowkeeping from the
city would be to require all dairymen to obtain a license,
the issue of which should be subject to approval of the
situation and arrangements, and the retention of which
should depend upon the maintenance of healthy conditions,
under constant liability to official inspection. A Govern-
ment which has introduced a measure to regulate the use of


steam might well give some attention to a matter like this,
which touches the vital interests of the community.
SYDNEY MORNING HERALD.
Friday, 18th May, 1883.
Reverting to the question of infected milk and typhoid
fever, we may remark that there is an impression abroad
that the Sydney Improvement Act of 1879 makes pro-
vision for Sydney dairies. That impression is not without
cause, as a glance at the 34th and 35th sections of the
statute will show. Clause 34 provides that “if any
stable, cowshed, or other outhouse, or any closet, privy,
and cesspit, shall not be built in accordance with this
Act, and to the satisfaction of the health-officer, inspector
of nuisances, and the surveyor, or is in their opinion a
nuisance from its too close proximity to any adjoining
premises or from any other cause, or is not kept in repair or
clean, the said officers may . . . order the same to be
taken down, altered, repaired, or cleaned,” die. And clause
35 provides that “no stable, cowshed, or other outhouse
shall be erected except upon a site approved of by the
health-officer, the inspector of nuisances, and the surveyor •
and every stable, cowshed, or other outhouse already built,
or hereafter to be built, shall be drained, paved, ventilated,
and provided with a properly constructed pit for the receipt
of manure and drainage therefrom, to the satisfaction of the
surveyor.” Clause 36 also gives the officers named power
of entry for inspection under the Act. A little considera-
tion, however, will show that these provisions do not satisfy
the requirements of the public interest. It is well known
that in many respects the Sydney Improvement Act has
been inoperative ; and, seeing that it was passed four years
ago, and yet within the last few days the abominations
described in our columns were to be found in the city,
and apparently might have remained undisturbed unless the
press had directed attention to them, it can hardly be re-
garded as having exercised any influence in this matter.
But besides that, it is easy to see that the provisions quoted


above were not intended, and are not adapted, to serve the
broad purpose of reform in the management of dairies kept
for the supply of the public with milk. Their object is to
protect the public from nuisances that might arise from the
keeping of cows within the city. The use of the term
“ cowshed,” its juxtaposition with “ stable” and “outhouse,”
and the provision for paving, drainage, and the construction
of a manure pit, show plainly enough that the purpose in
view is to ensure that when anybody keeps a cow or cows
in the city—just as when he keeps a horse or horses—his
neighbours shall not be annoyed by the accumulation or
improper treatment of refuse matters. The obj ect is to
protect the neighbours from a nuisance under their very
noses, not to protect people who may reside either near or
at a distance from the spot, from the serious dangers atten-
dant upon the consumption of infected milk. Fresh legis-
lation is required for this last purpose, legislation that
would prevent, if it were enforced, the keeping of dairies in
situations and under conditions conducive to the contami-
nation of milk supplied to the public. It is not enough to
insist upon pavement, ventilation, and a manure-pit for the
cowshed. The general arrangements of the dairy should be
made subject to approval and supervision by the authorities.
At least as much care should be bestowed upon the place
where the milk is kept as the place where the cows are kept.
Let the cowshed be paved, drained, and ventilated, and the
pains will be wasted, if the milk is exposed to contaminat-
ing influences before it is carried away for sale. As Dr.
Douglas pointed out the other day, “it is of greater im-
portance that the dairy, or place in which the milk and
vessels required for dairy purposes are kept, should be
separated and quite distinct from all rooms used as sitting,
eating, or sleeping rooms.” And in the light of past fatal
experience, let us add that it should be out of the reach of
infection from drains or cesspits belonging to any dwelling-
house. In matters of such vital importance as this, private
interests are subordinate to the public interest, and although
the regulation and supervision of dairies might cause some
inconvenience to a few cowkeepers the public health de-
demands the passing and enforcement of an efficient law for
the purpose.


Tuesday, 22nd May, 1883.
Waverley dairymen are falling into the pit they have
digged for themselves, and will not he likely to find many
mourners about the brink. Eive of them appeared in the
Court yesterday to answer charges of having kept filthy
premises, and were all duly fined and admonished, but were
not prohibited from the further prosecution of their trades,
which are almost inseparable from danger and offence. Cows
in the city might of course be kept clean, might be properly
fed and housed, and live a reasonably healthy and very
comfortable life, but under those circumstances where would
the proprietors look for profits. It will not pay, they say,
to put up proper buildings ; it will not pay to purchase
proper food ; it will not pay to employ labour to clear away
the filth ; but it will pay so far as the proprietor is con-
cerned to send typhoid fever abroad amongst all the
neighbours, and sell poisonous fluid to people in a remote
part of the city who are totally ignorant as to how it is
prepared. The pay doctrine is right enough if it is pushed
right through. Let us put the other side of it. Will it pay
the public to permit some few people to torture animals and
wrong mankind in order to live in conditions of semi-idle-
ness, or even to make a little competency as the business
developes ? Will it pay to go niggling at the business and
nuisance with police court prosecutions and fines ? Would
it not be a better and a wiser course, would it not pay
better, in short, to proceed, to the attack systematically—to
call a conference over the matter, to instruct experts to
give evidence, and to call upon cowkeepers to show cause,
to examine and purify the trade right through ; or, if it
will not pay, for the sake of purification, to thrust it without
both the city and the suburbs ?


EXPRESS.
Saturday, 26th May, 1883,
Especially in a warm climate like ours, few articles of
consumption are as liable to contamination, and therefore
as dangerous in the spread of disease, as milk. Considering
the actual prevalence of typhoid fever in the metropolis,
one should take especial care that the milk provided, or any
article in the manufacture of which milk serves as the
principal ingredient, be supplied from a pure source. Any
milk companies, too, taking special precautions to guard
against taint and contamination should meet with the public
support they deserve. Advertisements in our columns
respecting the Fresh Food and Ice Company, Limited, set
forth the great care taken to secure the purity and whole-
someness of their supplies, and we have reason to know that
the particulars set forth are strictly accurate. In so cold a
country, comparatively speaking, as England local epidemics
are constantly being traced to the milk supply, and in this
city cases of typhoid fever in and about Elizabeth Bay have
been distinctly caused by infected milk. Qui habet aures
audiendi audiat.
SYDNEY AND ITS MILK SUPPLY.
TRIBUNE.
Friday, June Bth,
The further disclosures recently made concerning the
disgraceful condition of many of the small dairies and cow-
sheds in Sydney and its suburbs, have naturally increased
the misgivings which have arisen with respect to the character
of much of the customary milk supply. Medical science
has demonstrated beyond all question that impure milk is a
most insidious cause of disease, one often unsuspected until
the evil is almost past remedy. Good milk can be obtained
only from healthy cows, and even then it should be handled
under conditions of extreme care and cleanliness. In


London and other parts of the United Kingdom, the defective
state of many of the cowhouses, and consequent unwhole
someness of the milk thus obtained, has led to various
regulations being enforced by the different boards of health,
but the most efficient remedy has been the establishment of
large milk factories in the vicinity of the cities and large towns
under conditions whereby the possibility of the milk becom-
ing tainted with disease germs is prevented. The system
adopted issimilar to that of the Fresh Food and Ice Company,
described by us the other day—a company which fully
deserves the marked and increasing success which has
attended its operations—and the results have in every
instance been so satisfactory that several dairy companies on
a large scale have been formed in England during the last
few years..’ There are also extensive agencies which obtain
the milk direct from the farmers and supply it to retail
customers in all directions. Experience has shown the
advantages of this system. Out of 197 samples of milk
from such, sources purchased and analysed by regular food
inspectors not one was found in the slightest degree impure;,
while out of 111 samples obtained from the cowsheds, only
23 were pure. The precautions adopted are the same as
used by the Fresh Food and Ice Company in this country,
the milk on coming from the cow passed over a suit-
able cooler, reducing the temperature to an extent sufficient
to prevent the formation or development of disease germs,
and afterwards placed in suitable tin cans, properly fastened,
for transmission to the- city. The cans, after use, are
thoroughly rinsed with clean water before fresh milk is put
in ; indeed, the precautions adopted would appear fastidious
to those not acquainted with their necessity. It is to the
non-observance of the system so efficiently carried out by the
Fresh Food and Ice Company, that other organisations of
an apparently similar character have failed. They did not
perceive the importance of establishing a sufficiently high
character for their commodities. They went in for cheap-
ness alone. The Fresh Food and Ice Company have acted
more wisely, making purity and excellence their main object,
and in this their success has been sufficient to justify the
extension of their operations on a far wider and more
comprehensive scale.


Mill Hill 11111 l
3 1508 00333251 2
KOUMISS
(THE GREAT MILK DIET)
Is manufactured under Medical Supervision ,
from the
FRESH FOOD & ICE COMPANY’S
PURE COUNTRY MILK.
PROFESSOR DIXON REPORTS
In regard to your question about my analysis of Koumiss, in
my opinion all the Ingredients determined are of nutritive value.
Ihe Milk Sugar and the Milk Fat are the usual respiratory
matei ials found in Milk, and it is to tlt em that its fattening properties
are chiefly due. 1 hey are called “ respiratory ”as their principal
function appears to he to keep up the temperature of the body. The
lactic acid may be classed with these, hid it no doubt would at the
same, time assist digestion as it is one of the usual constituents of
gastric juice. The casein and albumen are all muscle and nerve
forming materials, whilst the ash supplies the bones and tissues with
their inorganic matter.
KOUMISS CO.,
BOND STREET.


