

MILK
-precipe
f ptcscnted with the compliments oV^
L f ARMERS' co-op. milk
\i Sydney Ph< >"';
V there s ,4 Homc-lhcfc v a Service j




Foreword
"Keep cool,” "keep clean,” "keep covered,” are three
simple rules for the care of milk in the home which
the housewife should ahvays observe, for a good deal
of hard work is done by farmers and dairymen, and
the constant supervision of the Milk Board, to see
that milk arrives in the home perfectly clean. Help
them, and yourself, by keeping it fresh and sweet.
The little extra trouble it costs is well repaid.
Milk is an extremely valtiable food, whether combined
with other ingredients or taken as a beverage. It is
therefore well worth while knowing as many interest-
ing ways as possible of utilising it in everyday dishes.
This little book has been prepared with the object of
showing its readers that milk—the best of all foods
—can be included in a variety of appetising dishes,
and thus add to their nutritive value and attractive
appearance.
The coloured illustrations have all been prepared from
the recipes, which are easy to make and do not require
expensive ingredients. It is hoped that they will serve
as an inspiration for introducing new ideas into every-
day cookery.


INDEX
Page
Soups
Milk • Soup .. .. .. 3
Cream of Oyster Soup .. 4
Vegetable Soup .. .. .. 4
Barley Cream Soup .. .. 4
Cream of Celery Sou'p .. 4
Fish
Creamed Salmon with Green
Peas .. .. .. .. 5
Fish Souffle .. .. .. 5
Fish Shells .. .. .. 5
Poached Schnaoper with Egg
and Caper Sauce .. .. 6
Tomato and Prawn Darioles 7
Meat
Fricassee of Rabbitt .. .. 8
Noodle Ring with Creamed
Chicken .. .. .. 8
Creamed Chicken Filling .. 8
Viennese Blanquette of Veal 9
Fricassee of Mutton Chops
with Green Peas .. .. 9
Creamed Sheep’s Tongues .. 9
Vegetables
Lentil Croquettes .. .. 10
Cauliflower au Gratin .. .. 11
Cheese and Vegetable Short-
cake .. .. .. .. 11
Scalloped Carrots .. .. 12
Corn Fritters .. .. .. 12
Haricot Beans and Bacon .. 12
Casserole of Asparagus .. 12
Milk Drinks
Caramel Malted Milk .. .. 13
Egg Flip .. . • .. 13
Egg Nog 13
Brazilian Iced Chocolate .. 13
Savouries
Lyonnaise Eggs .. • • 14
Savoury Boats . • • • 14
Milk Puddings, Sweets and
Desserts
Apricot Cream .. .. ■ • 17
Butterscotch Sponge .. .. 17
Caramel Bread Pudding .. 17
Chocolate Queen Pudding .. 17
Banana Blancmange .. .. 18
Orange Baskets .. . • 18
Chocolate Junket .. • • 18
Page
Custard Tart 18
Vanilla Custard Cream .. 19
Butterscotch Tart .. .. 19
Pancakes .. .. .. 19
Fruit Pancakes .. .. 19
Rice and Apple Souffle .. 20
Santiago Chocolate Pie .. 20
Vanilla Souffle .. .. .. 20
Vanilla Ice Cream .. .. 21
Apricot Nut Ice Cream .. 21
Custards .. .. .. 21
Apricot Meringue .. .. 21
Milk and Peach Shape .. 22
Foundation Butter Cake .. 23
Sponge Sandwich .. .. 23
Chocolate Cake .. .. 24
Brown Cake .. .. .. 24
Banana Cream Cake .. .. 24
Strawberry Gateau .. .. 24
Baked Alaska .. .. .. 25
Butterscotch Parfrit .. .. 25
Cocoanut Meringue Tart .. 26
Frangipanni Tart .. . • 28
Sauces
Boiled Salad Dressing .. 28
Cornflour Sauce .. .. 29
Boiled Custard .. .. 29
Good White Sauce .. .. 29
Plain White Sauce .. .. 29
Suggested Flavourings .. 29
Bechamel Sauce .. .. 30
Steamed Pudding and Varia-
tions .. .. •• -• 30
Pastries, Br-ead, Rolls and Scones
Milk Bread .. .. .. 32
Parker House Rolls .. .. 32
German Coffee Cake .. .. 32
Hot Cross Buns .. .. 33
Nutbread .. .. .. 33
Scones .. .. ..33
Soda Milk Bread .. .. 33
Invalid Cookery
Angel’s Food .. .. .. 34
Arrowroot .. .. .. 34
Creamed Fish .. .. 34
Gruel .. .. • • .. 34
Junkets .. .. •• ..35
Variations .. .. .. 35
Light Bread Pudding •. 35
Savoury Liver Custard .. 35
Milk Jelly 35
Weights, Measures and Tem-
peratures .. .. .. 36


Soups
MILK SOUP
Ingredients
1 lb. potatoes 1£ ozs. butter
2 small white onions 1 pint milk
1 stick celery Seasoning
1 quart water or 1 tablespoonful crushed
vegetable stock tapioca or cornflour
Method: Scrub, peel and slice the potatoes. Slice the onions and
chop the celery. Steam slowly in melted butter for 5 minutes.
Add the water and cook until the vegetables are soft. Rub through
a sieve, add the milk and return to the saucepan. . Sprinkle in the
tapioca and cook until the tapioca is clear. Season to taste. If
cornflour is used, blend with a little cold milk, stir in gradually
and boil for 2 minutes. Serve with croutons.
Milk Soup


CREAM OF OYSTER SOUP
Ingredients
3 pints of fish stock 1 pint of milk or 3 pint
3 dozen oysters milk and i pint cream
2 ozs. butter Salt and cayenne to taste
2 ozs. flour 1 teaspoonful anchovy
Mace sauce
Lemon rind Squeeze of lemon juice
Method: Beard the oysters, add the beards to the stock with lemon
rind and mace and simmer for I hour. Strain. Melt the butter,
add flour, cook over a low gas for 2 minutes, add milk and stock,
and stir until the mixture boils and thickens. Flavour with lemon,
cayenne and anchovy sauce. Plump the oysters with hot oyster
liquor and place in a soup tureen. Re-heat the soup with cream,
but do not boil. Pour over the oysters.
VEGETABLE CREAM SOUP
Ingredients
1 oz. butter Cayenne
1 small carrot, turnip Small bayleaf
and onion li pints of stock
1 stick celery 1 oz. flour
Salt 1 pint milk
Method: Melt the butter in a saucepan, add the vegetables which
have been previously shredded and steam for 10 minutes over a
low gas; do not allow to brown. Add the bayleaf and stock and
simmer gently for hours. Blend the flour with the milk, add
gradually to the other ingredients, stirring well until the soup
boils. Boil for a few minutes to cook the flour, remove the bayleaf,
and season to taste before serving.
BARLEY CREAM SOUP
Ingredients
lh ozs. pearl barley 1 gill cream or \ pint of
3 pints white stock milk
2 ozs. butter Pinch of sugar
Grated nutmeg Salt and cayenne to taste
Fried croutons
Method: Wash the barley in several waters, put in a saucepan
with the stock, stir over the gas until it boils, then simmer slowly
for 2 hours. Season to taste with salt, pepper and a little nutmeg.
Rub through a sieve. Return to the saucepan and bring to the
boil. Add the cream, a pinch of sugar and the butter, and stir
until thoroughly hot (do not boil). Serve with fried croutons.
CREAM OF CELERY SOUP
Ingredients
3 heads of celery 1 tablespoonful flour
1 pint milk 1 onion
1 pint vegetable stock 1 bayleaf
or water Salt
1 tablespoonful butter Cayenne
Method: Wash the celery and cut into small pieces. Cover with
water and cook with the onion and bayleaf until the celery is soft.
Rub through a sieve or colander. Melt the butter in a saucepan,
add the flour, stir until smooth, cook for 2 minutes, add milk and
stock or water, and stir until boiling. Season to taste and serve
with fried croutons. A little cream added just before serving is
an improvement.
Sou ps


Fish
CREAMED SALMON WITH GREEN PEAS
Ingredients
2 teaspoonfuls minced onion 1 small tin salmon
2 tablespoonfuls flour 1 small tin peas
2 tablespoonfuls butter \ i cupful boiled rice
Pepper and paprika to taste 1 teaspoonful salt
1 pint milk
For 4 persons.
Method: Melt butter in saucepan, stir in flour and when frothy
gradually stir in milk and make into a sauce. When boiling,
season to taste, then add flaked salmon, minced onion, and sim-
mer, stirring very lightly for 2 or 3 minutes. Add peas, and
when piping hot, pour over the hot rice, arranged in the centre
of a hot dish. Mash 6 or 7 potatoes, season and add 1 oz.
butter, arrange round edge of dish.
*
FISH SOUFFLE
Ingredients
1 lb. white fish, without skin and bone
Salt Whites of 2 eggs
li ozs. butter Yolks of 3 eggs
li ozs. flour Lemon juice
i pint milk Cayenne
Method: Melt the butter, add flour and stir until smooth. Cook
for two minutes over a low gas, add milk and stir until the mix-
ture boils and thickens. Turn into a basin to cool slightly. Add
yolks of eggs, minced fish and cream, and season to taste. Beat
the whites of eggs until stiff, fold into the fish mixture and pour
into a prepared souffle mould. Steam gently from 40 to 50
minutes and serve immediately with a good fish sauce.
FISH SHELLS
Ingredients
li lb. flaked, cooked fish oz. butter
1 egg yolk li oz. flour
1 pint milk Cheese
Method: Skin and bone cold flathead, haddock, or tinned salmon.
Butter scallop shells. Melt butter in a saucepan. Add flour, blend
well and add the milk. Season to taste, stirring quickly to prevent
lumping, until sauce boils. Boil for 5 minutes, then remove from
fire. Thicken with beaten egg yolk. Put a little at bottom of
each shell. Fill three parts full with flaked fish, then cover
with sauce. Smooth with a knife, then sprinkle with cheese.
Bake for 7 or 8 minutes in a hot oven. If you want to vary the
mixture, add a tablespoonful of chopped cooked mushrooms, 4
minced olives, 1 \ tablespoonfuls cooked peas or a chopped hard-
boiled egg to the sauce.


Poached Schnapper
POACHED SCHNAPPER WITH EGG AND
CAPER SAUCE
1 schnapper 1 cup milk
Salt and cayenne 1 tablespoonful cream
Lemon juice 1 hard-boiled egg'
1 dessertspoonful butter 1 tablespoonful capers
1 dessertspoonful flour Paprika
Method: Fillet the schnapper and cut into neat pieces. Grease a
baking dish, add about l/3rd cup of water, season with salt and
a squeeze of lemon juice. Cover with greased paper and cook in
a moderate oven (temp. 375° F.) from 10 to 15 minutes. While
the fish is cooking, make a melted butter sauce with the butter,
flour and milk, flavour to taste, and add the cream last. Add finely
chopped hard-boiled egg. Lift the pieces of fish carefully on to
a hot dish, and sprinkle with capers or chopped parsley.
Tomato and Prawn Darioles


TOMATO AND PRAWN DARIOLES
Ingredients: 1} lbs. tomatoes, 1 tablespoonful chopped onion, 2 cloves 1
teaspoonful castor sugar, celery salt to taste, ?, teaspoonful salt’ 1
teaspoonful Worcestershire sauce, 1 teaspoonful lemon juice, 2 table-
spoonfuls gelatine, i cup cold water, \ pint white sauce, I cup boiling
water, 1J teaspoonfuls gelatine, 1 cup picked prawns, 1 tablespoonful
cold water, lettuce leaves, celery curls.
Method: Place the sliced tomatoes, onion, cloves, castor sugar, celery
salt and J teaspoonful salt with J cup cold water in a saucepan and
simmer gently for i hour. Rub through a sieve and add 2 tablespoonfuls
gelatine dissolved in boiling water. Cool. Fill small dariole moulds
rinsed in cold water one-third full of this mixture. Leave untli cold
and set. Soak 1J teaspoonfuls gelatine in 1 tablespoonful cold 'water and
heat gently until the gelatine dissolves. Stir into the white sauce and
add the prawns. When the tomato puree is set, cover with a layer of
sauce. Alternate with tomato jelly until the dariole moulds are full.
Chill in the refrigerator. Unmould and serve on crisp lettuce leaves
garnished with celery curls.
Fricassee of Rabbit
Noodle Ring with Creamed Chicken
F,s/)


Meat Dishes
FRICASSEE OF RABBIT
Ingredients
1 rabbit 1 tablespoonful flour
1 onion 1 teaspoonful salt
i pint water Pepper
Few cloves and blade Chopped parsley
of mace Rolls of grilled bacon
1 pint milk Sippets of toast
Method: Soak the rabbit in warm salted water for \ hour. Wipe
dry and cut into neat joints, peel the onion, and cut into dice.
Place the rabbit in a saucepan with the cloves, mace, salt and
water, and simmer gently until tender about la hours. Remove
on to a hot serving dish and strain the stock. Blend the flour
with a little cold milk. Add the remainder of the milk to the
stock and bring to the boil. Stir in the blended flour and cook
gently 3 minutes. Pour over the rabbit, sprinkle with chopped
parsley, and garnish with bacon rolls and sippets of toast.
NOODLE RING WITH CREAMED CHICKEN
Ingredients
6 ozs. noodles 1 dessertspoonful Wor-
-3 eggs cestershire sauce
1 cup milk (warmed) 1 tablespoonful tomato
1 cup grated cheese sauce
Salt and cayenne
Method: Cook the noodles in plenty of fast boiling salted water.
Rinse and drain in cold water. Beat the eggs and add the warmed
milk. Stir in the grated cheese, salt, pepper, Worcestershire
sauce, tomato sauce and noodles. Bour into a greased ring mould
(8h inches diameter) and bake in a moderate oven (temp. 325°
F.) for about 45 minutes. Unmould and fill the centre with
creamed chicken or rabbit. Garnish with paprika and finely
minced parsley, and accompany with onion cups filled with but-
tered carrots and rolls of grilled bacon. Serves 8.
CREAMED CHICKEN FILLING
Ingredients
2 cups cold cooked chick- 1 dessertspoonful finely
en (or rabbit or veal) chopped parsley
5 pint milk Salt to taste
2 tablesnoonfuls finely 1 tablespoonful butter
cut celery 2 ozs. cooked ham
1 tablespoonful flour \ lb. mushrooms (fried
Salt and cayenne or stewed) or any
1 egg yolk other vegetable


Method: Mince the chicken and ham. Heat the butter over a low
gas and fry the celery, being careful not to brown. Add the flour
and cook 2 minutes. Add milk and stock and stir until the sauce
boils and thickens. Add the chicken, ham, parsley, salt and
pepper. Add h to the noodle ring, cover with cooked mushrooms
or other vegetables, and then the remainder of the chicken
mixture.
VIENNESE BLANQUETTE OF VEAL
Ingredients
2 ozs. butter Bay leaf
1 dessertspoonful flour Button mushrooms
1 pint white stock 2 egg yolks
2 lb. lean fillet of veal 1 gill milk
3 small white onions Finely chopped parsley
Salt and pepper Lemon juice
Method: Melt the butter in a saucepan, stir in the flour, cook
2 minutes, and add the stock or water and bay leaf. Cut the veal
into 1-inch cubes and the onion in slices. Add to the stock, stir
until boiling, and simmer gently 1 h hours. Fifteen minutes be-
fore serving, add the button mushrooms (or large ones cut into
dice). When cooked, strain and place the meat, mushrooms and
onions on a warm serving dish. Thicken the sauce with yolks of
egg and add the milk. Stir in the chopped parsley and lemon juice
and pour over the meat.
FRICASSEE OF MUTTON CHOPS WITH GREEN PEAS
Ingredients
1 lb. neck chops Pepper and salt
Warm water i pint milk
1 or 2 onions 1 dessertspoonful flour
A little nutmeg 1 teaspoonful butter
Few peppercorns i lb. cooked green peas
Parsley
Method: Trim the chops and barely cover with warm water. Add
sliced onion, peppercorns and I teaspoonful salt. Simmer for 1J
hours. Strain liquid, return half to saucepan. Add milk and flour
blended with a little cold milk. Simmer for two minutes. Add
pepper, salt and nutmeg to taste. Add butter, chops and peas
and re-heat thoroughly. Serve very hot garnished with parsley
and with sippets of dry toast.
CREAMED SHEEP'S TONGUES
Ingredients
4 sheep’s tongues 1 dessertspoonful chopped
1 pint white sauce parsley
(See Sauces) Bacon rolls
Potato croquettes
Method: Wash the tongues, place in tepid water with 6 pepper-
corns, blade mace and 3 cloves, and simmer gently until tender
(at least 2 hours). Remove the skins while still hot, trim the
roots, and cut each tongue in slices lengthwise. Re-heat in white
sauce, add parsley just before serving, and garnish with bacon
rolls and potato croquettes.
Meat Dishes


Vegetarian
Dishes
LENTIL CROQUETTES
Ingredients
\ lb. lentils 1 small white onion
1 dessertspoonful butter 1 tablespoonful tomato
1 clove sauce
1 dessertspoonful flour 1 teaspoonful Worces-
-1 gill milk shire sauce
Salt and pepper Egg glazing
Lemon juice Seasoned flour
Breadcrumbs
Method: Soak the lentils overnight in cold water, drain and cook
in boiling salted water with onion and clove until tender. Drain
and season with sauces, salt and pepper. Make a thick white
sauce with the butter, flour and milk, and mix with the lentils,
flour and lemon juice. Allow to become thoroughly cold. Divide
into 8 and shape into croquettes. Cover with flour, pepper and
salt, dip in egg and toss in breadcrumbs. Deep fry a golden
brown and serve with anchovy sauce (see sauces).
Lentil Croquettes


CAULIFLOWER AU GRATIN
1 cauliflower 1 teaspoonful mustard
3 tablespoonfuls cheese 1 tablespoonful brown
i pint white sauce breadcrumbs
Cayenne
Method: Boil the cauliflower until soft, drain and lift carefully
on to an entree dish, mix half the cheese with the mustard, add
to the sauce and mash the cauliflower. Sprinkle with the re-
mainder of the cheese and breadcrumbs, and brown lightly in
a hot oven (temp. 450° F.).
Cheese ami Vegetable Shortcake
CHEESE AND VEGETABLE SHORTCAKE
2 cups plain flour 2 \ tablesp. butter
2 teasp. baking powder 1 cup grated cheese
5 teasp. salt. I cup milk
Method: Sift together flour, baking powder and salt. Rub in
the butter and add the cheese. Add milk to make a soft dough.
Knead lightly on a floured board. Bake in an 8-inch sandwich
tin, in a moderate oven (Temp. 400° F.) for about 25 minutes.
Split through the centre and fill with vegetable filling.
Vegetable Filing
i cup chopped onion 1 cup milk
1 cup chopped celery I lb. tomatoes
1 tablesp. butter 1 cup cooked sliced carrots
2 tablesp. flour 1 cup cooked beans
Pepper Salt
Method: Melt the butter and fry the onion lightly. Add skinned
and sliced tomatoes, and cook until soft. Add flour and milk
and bring 1 to the boil, stirring constantly. Add the remaining
ingredients and simmer about 5 minutes.
Vegetarian Dishes


SCALLOPED CARROTS
Ingredients
1 lb. carrots Buttered crumbs
i lb! white sauce Grated cheese
Method: Wash and scrape the carrots and cut into rings or strips.
Cook in boiling salted water 15 to 20 minutes. Drain and season.
Make a h pint of white sauce, add the cooked carrots. Butter some
scallop dishes and sprinkle thickly with buttered crumbs; place a
quantity of the creamed carrots in and cover with buttered crumbs
and grated cheese. Bake in a hot oven (temp. 400° F.) for 7 to 10
minutes, or brown under the griller.
CORN FRITTERS
Ingredients
1 tin of corn 4 ozs. flour
1 teaspoonful baking powder 1 egg
4 tablespoonfuls milk Paprika
Method: Sift the flour and baking powder. Stir in the milk and
egg yolk. Fold in the stiflly beaten egg white. Lastly, add
chopped corn and paprika. Deep fry spoonsful of this mixture,
from 3 to 5 minutes, until a golden brown colour. Dram and
serve on a paper d’oyley. Sprinkle with sugar or grated cheese
and paprika.
HARICOT BEANS AND BACON
Ingredients
\ pint haricot beans 3 or 4 slices bacon
Pepper and salt 2 ozs. butter
1 pint milk 2 ozs. flour
2 tablespoonfuls chopped parsley
Method: Wash beans and soak overnight. Cook for two hours or
until tender, and then drain. Fry the bacon. Serve beans covered
with parsley sauce on a hot dish, and place fried bacon round.
Parsley Sauce: Melt the butter in a saucepan, and add the flour.
Stir with wooden spoon. Draw to side of stove and gradually add
milk, stirring all the time. Bring to the boil. Simmer for 5
minutes. Add parsley and seasoning.
CASSEROLE OF ASPARAGUS
Ingredients
1 tablespoonful butter Cayenne
2 dessertspoonfuls flour 1 large tin asparagus
1 cup milk cuts or 2 bunches
1 teaspoonful finely I cup fresh bread-
minced onion crumbs
3 eggs (separated) 2 tablespoonfuls grated
i teaspoonful salt cheese
1 dessertspoonful finely chopped parsley
Method: Cook the finely minced onion in boiling water for 5
minutes. Make a white sauce and add the onion and egg yolks,
and cook 1 minute. Remove from the gas and add the stiffly beaten
whites of eggs and chopped parsley. Arrange the drained
asparagus in a greased casserole and pour over the sauce.
Sprinkle thickly with breadcrumbs and grated cheese; set in a dish
of water and bake in a moderate oven (temp. 325° F.) for 35
minutes.
Vegetarian Dishes


Milk Drinks
CARAMEL MALTED MILK
Ingredients
1 cup milk 1 oz. loaf sugar
1 tablespoonful cream 1 tablespoonful water
Nutmeg 1 tablespoonful malted
Flavouring milk powder
Method: Caramelise 1 oz. loaf sugar, 1 tablespoonful water.
Blend the malted milk powder with a little milk. Heat the milk,
add 1 dessertspoonful of caramel, stir in the malted milk and
bring to the boil. Allow to cool and chill in the refrigerator.
Serve topped with whipped cream or ice cream, and sprinkle with
nutmeg.
EGG FLIP
Ingredients
1 cup milk 1 teaspoonful sugar
1 egg 3 drops vanilla essence
Nutmeg
Method: Beat the egg yolk, sugar and vanilla essence. Gradually
stir in the milk. Whip the egg white stiffly and fold in. Pour
into a glass and sprinkle with grated nutmeg. Chill in the
refrigerator.
EGG NOG
Ingredients
1 egg, well beaten 1 cup cold milk
2 teaspoonfuls sugar or 1 dessertspoonful brandy,
1 tablespoonful honey sherry or rum
Nutmeg
Method: Beat the egg and sugar, add milk and slowly stir in
brandy. Serve cold in a tall glass sprinkled lightly with nutmeg.
For a more fluffy egg nog, separate the egg, beat the white stiffly,
and fold in lightly just before serving.
BRAZILIAN ICED CHOCOLATE
Ingredients
2 ozs. unsweetened Pinch of salt
chocolate 3 cups of milk
1 cup freshly made Cracked ice
strong coffee Powdered cinnamon
3 dessertspoonfuls sugar (if liked)
Whipped cream
Method: Add the shredded chocolate to the hot coffee and dissolve
over a low gas until the chocolate is melted. Add sugar and salt
and cook for 4 minutes, stirring constantly. Add the milk and
heat thoroughly in a double saucepan. Chill. Pour into glasses
containing cracked ice. Top with cream and dust with cinnamon.


Savouries
LYONNAISE EGGS
Ingredients
1 tablespoonful flour Brown breadcrumbs
2 tablespoonfuls butter 1 chopped onion
Salt and pepper to taste \ pint milk
4 eggs
Method: Cook the onion in butter for 10 minutes. Add A° ur
cook until the mixture is smooth, stirring constantly. Gradually
pour In milk. Cook for 3 minutes, still stirring Season with
pepper and salt, and pour in a deep hot baking dish. CareMy
break into it the eggs and cover with breadciumbs. Bake foi ab
10 minutes in a. moderate oven until the eggs are set.
Savoury Boats
SAVOURY BOATS
4 ozs. good short crust pastry.
SAVOURY FILLING: I pint white sauce flavoured with aspara-
gus tips, anchovies, oysters, lobster, crab, ham, tongue, chicken or
brain and walnut.
GARNISH: Rice paper sails, prawns, sliced olives, gherkins or
red chilli strips.
Roll the pastry very thinly and line boat-shaped tins Cook in a
hot oven (temp. 400“ F.) about 10 minutes. Fill with the hot,
well-seasoned savoury mixture and garnish attractively.


The Art of Making Milk
Puddings
11 Tlif ILK PUDDINGS” is a general term applied to any pudding
IVJ, made with milk and cereal of some kind. There is, how-
ever, a very wide variety of this type of pudding. They
can be very plain, being made with milk, a little fat in some form,
cereal, sugar and flavouring. Frequently they are enriched by
the addition of one or more eggs, made more attractive by separ-
ating the yolks from the whites of egg, and topping the pudding
with a meringue made from the white of egg and a little sugar,
or they can be made even more interesting by the introduction of
fruit in some form—either dried, e.g., raisins, currants, sultanas,
figs, dates—fresh, such as apples, sliced bananas, raspberries, etc.,
or tinned. Jams and marmalades are also often introduced, and
when time is limited they take less time than is required for
preparing fresh fruit.
Of the various cereals, rice is one of the most popular, either the
whole grain or the flaked variety; the latter, by-the-bye, is not
used as much as it deserves, for it cooks far more quickly than
the whole grain, and is particularly delicious. Ground rice makes
a creamy pudding, and being in a very finely divided condition it
can be added to cakes, tart fillings, etc.
Sago and tapioca are also popular, and, again, they are obtainable
in several different forms. The large tapioca is often fascinating
to children, but plenty of time must be allowed for it to cook.
Seed pearl tapioca takes less than half as long to cook, and,
therefore, is convenient when time is limited. Sago is also very
simply prepared.
Semolina, macaroni, spaghetti, vermicelli, are all products of the
wheat grain also used for puddings. Barley, although mostly
thought of in connection with Barley Water and Scotch Broth,
makes excellent milk puddings. Bread-and-butter puddings are


also generally classed in the “Milk Pudding” group in spite of
the fact that they contain no cereal.
The Secret oi Success
That many children dislike milk puddings is an established fact,
and this is not surprising, for they are often presented in the most
unappetising form, either being so “liquid” that the pudding never
sets, or so solid that they can literally be cut with a knife. The
consistency depends entirely on the proportion of grain used to
milk, and it is always advisable to find out beforehand whether or
not a milky or a stiff pudding is preferred—personal taste varies
considerably in this direction —and it is not wise to lay down a
hard-and-fast rule as to how much grain should be used.
The following quantities can, however, be regarded as a very good
guide: 11 oz. cereal to 1 pint of milk rarely offends the average
palate, for it is not very stiff, but not unduly liquid. 2 oz. grain
to 1 pint of milk makes a stiff pudding, which when cold is defi-
nitely solid, and 1 oz. grain to 1 pint of milk makes a “milky”
pudding. If fruit, marmalade or jam are added, then the pudding
should be rather on the stiff side, and not less than lh oz. grain
to 1 pint of milk should be used.
Sufficient sugar to sweeten should be added. Brown sugar, be-
cause of its flavour, is sometimes preferred by children, but the
colour of the pudding is rather spoilt by its use.
From a food value point of view, it is advisable to use whole
cream fresh milk, but if skimmed milk is available it can be used,
but deficiency in butter fat should be made up by adding a little
cream or butter.
Other points to remember when making milk puddings are: (1)
The grain should cook slowly, and a very moderate oven should be
used. There is, however, no need to light an oven specially for
cooking milk puddings, because the grain can be cooked in a thick
saucepan or double pan, transferred to a piedish and browned
under the grill. (2) When eggs are added, a little less grain can
be used. (3) Very finely divided grain such as seed pearl tapioca,
semolina, ground rice, should always be blended in cold milk, and
cooked in a saucepan before being transferred to the piedish, to
obviate lumpy puddings. (4) Coarse grains such as whole rice,
whole wheat, bullet tapioca, flaked rice, flaked tapioca, can be made
into a milk pudding in the simplest way, namely, by placing the
raw grain and sugar in the bottom of a piedish, covering with milk,
and allowing it to cook very slowly in a cool oven.
Milk Puddings


APRICOT CREAM
Ingredients
1 dessertspoonful gela- 1 teaspoonful vanilla
tine essence
i cup cold water 1 tablespoonful lemon
1 cup scalded milk juice
3 eggs (separated) 3 cup crushed apri-
l-3rd cup sugar cot pulp
i cup whipped cream
Method: Soften the gelatine in cold water. Combine the egg yolks
and sugar, add to the milk and cook over hot water for 5 minutes,
stirring constantly. Dissolve the gelatine over hot water and,
when cool, add to the custard mixture. When slightly thickened,
fold in the apricot pulp, lemon juice and whipped cream. Chill
again until thickened. Beat well, fold in the stiffly beaten egg
whites, and turn into a wetted mould. Set in the refrigerator.
BUTTERSCOTCH SPONGE
Ingredients
3 teaspoonfuls gelatine k cup hot water
1 cup brown sugar 3 eggs
2 tablespoonfuls butter Pinch of salt
13 cups hot milk Few drops vanilla
Method: Make a caramel of sugar and butter; add hot milk and
pour over the beaten yolks of eggs. Heat until smooth and the
mixture coats the spoon. Allow' to cool. Dissolve the gelatine in
hot water, add to the custard and flavour to taste. Whisk the
whites of eggs stiffly and add as the custard commences to set.
Pour into a wetted mould. Chill in the refrigerator.
CARAMEL BREAD PUDDING
Ingredients
ll tablespoonfuls brown 2 eggs
sugar « teaspoonful salt
1 tablespoonful melted 2 slices stale bread
butter Peanut butter
2 cups milk Vanilla essence
Method: Add sugar to butter and cook over a low gas for five
minutes, stirring constantly. Scald the milk, add sugar and butter,
stirring until sugar is dissolved, then add slowly to the beaten
eggs, mixing well. Spread both sides of the bread with peanut
butter, place in greased pie dish, and pour in the custard mixture
flavoured with vanilla essence. Stand in a dish of water and bake
in a slow oven (temp. 325° F.) from 50 to 60 minutes or until firm.
Serve hot or cold with or without cream.
CHOCOLATE QUEEN PUDDING
Ingredien ts
6 ozs, breadcrumbs 2 eggs
4 ozs. sugar 1 pint milk
3 ozs. grated chocolate Vanilla essence
Method: Dissolve the chocolate in milk, bring to boiling point
and pour over the breadcrumbs. When cool, add 1 oz. sugar, the
yolks of 2 eggs, and a little vanilla essence. Pour into a buttered
pie-dish. Whisk the whites of eggs very stiffly and slowly beat in
the remaining 3 ozs. sugar. Spread over the top of the pudding
and bake in a slow oven (temp. 300° F.) from 50 to 60 minutes.
Milk Puddings


BANANA BLANCMANGE
Ingredients
1 pint milk 2 ozs. cornflour
2 bananas 2 yolks of eggs (or 1 whole)
2 ozs. sugar Vanilla essence
Method: Mix cornflour to a paste. Pour on the boiling milk
stirring hard, and boil for 3 minutes. Remove from fire, add
puree of bananas, beaten eggs and sugar. Re-heat slightly. Turn
into wetted mould.
ORANGE BASKETS
Ingredients
3 oranges H ozs. cornflour
1 pint milk Angelica, cream and crystallised
2 ozs. sugar violet for decoration
Method: Peel the rind of 1 orange thinly and infuse in three
quarters of the milk. Cut 2 oranges in half and remove all pith.
Break down the cornflour with remaining milk, strain on the
flavoured milk, return to the saucepan and boil for 5 minutes.
Pour into the 4 orange cups when cool, decorate with handles of
angelica, sections of orange and piped cream and a sprinkling
of crystallised violet. Serve very cold.
CHOCOLATE JUNKET
Ingredients
1 pint milk H tablespoonfuls cocoa
Rennet or junket powder
Method: Mix the cocoa with a little milk and add the remainder.
Make cocoa and milk lukewarm and add the rennet. Pour into
sundae glasses or into one large dish. Add whipped cream when
set, if liked.
CUSTARD TART
Ingredients
6 ozs. short or biscuit 2 eggs
pastry 1 tablespoonful sugar
I pint milk Flavouring
Method: Line a tart plate or sponge tin with the pastry and glaze
the bottom thickly with egg white. Beat the eggs and sugar well
and stir in the milk and flavourings. Pour into the case and grate
nutmeg on top. Cook in a hot oven (temp. 450° F.) for 10
minutes, then reduce the heat of the oven to 350° F. and cook
for a further 30 minutes.
VARIATIONS:
STRAWBERRY CUSTARD TART: Spread the pastry case with
strawberry conserve before pouring in the custard.
PASSIONFRUIT COCOANUT CUSTARD: Add 3 sweet passion-
fruit and \ cup of cocoanut to the custard.
CHOCOLATE CUSTARD: Dissolve 1 oz. chocolate in the milk
before mixing the custard.
CARAMEL CUSTARD: Caramelise I cup of sugar and add to the
milk.
Milk Puddings


VANILLA CUSTARD CREAM
Ingredients
1 cup milk 2 egg yolks
4 cup sugar 2 egg whites
1 tablespoonful corn- Pinch of salt
flour 1 teaspoonful vanilla
1 cup cream
Method: Mix sugar and cornflour and blend in the warmed milk.
Cook in top of double saucepan for 10 minutes. Cool slightly and
add well-beaten egg yolks. Cook slowly for 5 minutes, stirring
well. Cool and then add slightly beaten cream, and then the
vanilla and stiffly beaten egg whites. Pour into tray and freeze
in the refrigerator.
Note: 1 oz. unsweetened melted chocolate may be added before
the egg whites are added.
BUTTERSCOTCH TART
Ingredients
Biscuit pastry pie shell 14 tablespoonfuls corn-
-1 cup brown sugar flour
1 tablespoonful butter 4 teaspoonful vanilla
2 eggs 3 tablespoonfuls sugar
4 cup milk for meringue
4 cup water
Method: Boil together the brown sugar, butter and a little water
to a syrup. Separate the whites from the yolks of eggs. Blend
cornflour with water, add milk, and pour on to the boiling syrup.
Cook for two minutes, add egg yolks, and beat well. Fill the
pastry case with the mixture, top with meringue made from the
whites of eggs and sugar, and bake in a slow oven (temp. 275°
F.) until set.
PANCAKES
Ingredients
4 ozs. flour 4 pint milk
Pinch of salt 1 oz. butter
1 egg 1 oz. sugar
1 lemon -
Method: Sift the flour and salt, break the egg and remove the
speck. Make a well in the centre of the flour, pour into it the
eggs and stir gradually in the flour from the sides, adding milk
a little at a time. When all the milk is added and the butter is
free from lumps, stand aside for an hour. Place a small piece
of butter or fat in a pan, burn it and wipe dry. Place another
piece in, melt it slowly, and add a little batter. Cook slowly over
a low gas, loosen the edges with a knife, and either toss or turn
it. When slightly browned on both sides, slip on to a paper on a
sieve. Continue cooking until all the mixture is used, melting a
little butter in the pan before placing in more batter. Sprinkle
the cooked pancake with sugar and lemon juice, fold up and keep
hot until required on a plate over a saucepan of boiling water.
Serve with thin slices*of lemon and castor sugar.
FRUIT PANCAKES
Method: Just before frying a few spoonfuls of stewed or canned
fruit and a few crushed macaroons or ratafias are added to the
batter.
Milk Puddings


RICE AND APPLE SOUFFLE
Ingredients
1 lb. cooking apples 2 ozs. ground rice
3 tablespoonfuls sugar 2 ozs. castor sugar
Rind of half lemon 1 oz. butter
Clove 2 eggs
Cinnamon 3 pint milk
Method: Cook the apples with sugar, water, lemon, clove and
cinnamon until tender; rub through a sieve. Mix the ground rice
smoothly with a little cold milk, boil the remainder of the milk,
then add blended rice and simmer for 15 minutes. Add the sugar
and let the mixture cool, then add each egg yolk separately. Give
the whole a very good beating, and lastly, stir in lightly the very
stiffly beaten egg whites. Fill a well-greased souffle mould with
alternate layers of rice and apple puree, piling last layer of rice
in pyramid form. Dredge well with castor sugar. Bake in a
moderate oven (temp. 350° F.) for about 30 minutes.
SANTIAGO CHOCOLATE PIE
Ingredients
4 ozs. short crust or 12 cups milk
biscuit pastry \ teaspoonful salt
li ozs. cooking chocolate 2 yolks of eggs
i cup sugar 1 dessertspoonful of
1 dessertspoonful corn- butter
flour 1 teaspoonful vanilla
i cup cream (whipped essence
and sweetened) i cup chopped walnuts
1 dessertspoonful of \ cup raisins or
plain flour dates
Method: Line a pie plate with the pastry, glaze and prick well.
Cook in a hot oven (temp. 425° F.) from 15 to 20 minutes. Grate
the chocolate and add to the milk. Heat in a double boiler and
beat well. Combine the two flours, salt and sugar and blend with
the chocolate and milk. Return to the double boiler, stirring until
thick and then cooking 10 minutes longer. Stir occasionally. Add
eggs gradually and continue cooking for two minutes. Remove
from the gas. Add butter and vanilla and turn into the pie shell.
Chill in the refrigerator. Before serving, cover with sweet-
ened cream to which dates and nuts have been added.
VANILLA SOUFFLE
Ingredients
3 ozs. butter Vanilla essence
2 tablespoonfuls plain li cups milk
flour i cup sugar
4 eggs Pinch of salt
Method: Melt the butter and blend with the flour, add milk and
stir until it thickens, then add the sugar. When cooked, it leaves
the sides of the pan. Remove from the stove and add the egg
yolks, one by one, stirring all the time, then add the flavouring.
Beat the whites of eggs until stiff, adding a pinch of salt. If you
wish, add an extra egg white. Fold in the mixture. Bake in a
deep pudding dish or souffle case, standing it in a dish of water
in the oven fof about 30 to 40 minutes in a moderate oven (temp.
350° F.).
Milk Puddings


VANILLA ICE CREAM
Ingredients
1 pkt. Vanilla Ice Cream Mix \ pint cream
h pint milk
Method: Whip the cream in a bowl until it just begins to hold
its shape. Dissolve the Ice Cream Mix in the cold milk and beat
until smooth. Mix in the cream thoroughly. Pour into freezing
tray and place in ice cabinet. Set refrigerator control at maximum
and leave at maximum for li hours. Do not allow to become
too hard.
APRICOT NUT ICE CREAM
Ingredients
1 p 1 t. Ice Cream Mix i lb. dried apricots
i pint cream 1 teaspoonful lemon juice
h pint milk \ cup chopped walnuts
Method: Soak the apricots, stew and rub through a sieve. Add
the lemon juice and the chopped nuts. Dissolve the Ice Cream
Mix in the cold milk, fold in the whipped cream and chill. Add
the fruit and nuts and freeze. (Prunes may be used instead of
the apricots.)
CUSTARDS
Standard Proportions
2 pint milk 1 tablespoonful sugar
2 eggs Flavouring
BAKED: Beat eggs and sugar together and add milk, add flavour-
ing. Pour into greased piedish and sprinkle with nutmeg. Bake
in a slow oven (temp. 300° F.) until set, 30 to 40 minutes.
STEAMED: Prepare as for baked custard, and steam slowly over
boiling water, allowing 10 minutes for a cup custard.
BOILED; Prepare as for baked custard, cooking very slowly in a
double saucepan and stirring with a wooden spoon. Cook until
boiled mixture coats the spoon. Do not boil.
For an economical custard, cook one teaspoon of blended corn-
flour in the milk, allow to cool, and add only 1 egg.
SUGGESTED FLAVOURINGS: Heat peach leaf (almond
flavour), lemon or orange with milk before thickening. Chocolate
(1 oz. unsweetened chocolate to above) or caramel (1 oz. loaf
sugar caramelised in 2 tablespoonfuls cold water) may be added.
APRICOT MERINGUE
Ingredients
1 pint milk 1-2 eggs
1 breakfastcupful breadcrumbs 1J ozs. sugar
i lb. stewed apricots (fresh or dried)
Method: Boil milk. Add breadcrumbs and leave to soak for twenty
minutes. Separate egg yolks from whites. Beat yolks with sugar
and add to mixture. Stew fruit in the usual way, chop half and
add to breadcrumb mixture. Pour into greased piedish. Beat
whites stiffly, adding tablespoonful sugar and pile neatly on top.
Bake three-quarters of an hour in a very slow oven. Arrange
remainder of fruit neatly round dish, and serve hot.
Milk Puddings


Milk and Peach Shape
MILK AND PEACH SHAPE
Ingredients
1 pkt, lemon jelly 1 tablespoonful sugar
1 small tin sliced 1 tablespoonful gelatine
peaches Cream and cherries for
1 pint milk garnishing
Vanilla essence
Method: Dissolve the lemon jelly in boiling water and line the
bottom of a wetted mould. When almost set, arrange sliced
peaches and cover with another layer of jelly. Dissolve the
Foundation Butter Cake


gelatine in a little hot water, add to the milk and flavour with
sugar and vanilla essence. When the jellied peaches are set, pour
over the milk jelly and place in the refrigerator to set. Unmould
and garnish with whipped cream, peaches, chopped jelly, and
cherries.
FOUNDATION BUTTER CAKE
Ingredients
8 ozs. butter 1 teaspoonful baking
8 ozs. sugar powder
4 eggs Rind of 1 lemon or
4 tablespoonfuls milk vanilla
12 ozs. plain flour
Method: Cream butter and sugar. Add beaten eggs. Then milk,
lastly flour and baking powder. Pour mixture into a greased
cake tin. Bake in a moderate oven (temp. 350° F.) from 40 to
50 minutes. Turn on to a cake cooler.
VARIATIONS:
Stuffed Date Cake
Method: Stone i lb. dates and stuff with almonds or cherries.
Place half the cake mixture in the tin, add stuffed dates, then the
remainder of the mixture. Bake in a moderate oven (temp. 350°
F.) 50 to 60 minutes, or in 2-bar tins for 30 minutes.
Lamingtons
Method: Cook in a 9in. x 9in. slab tin in a moderate oven (Temp.
350° F.) 40 to 50 minutes. When cold, cut into squares, dip in
chocolate icing (see Icings) and toss in fine cocoanut.
Light Fruit Cake
Method: Add 6 ozs. mixed fruit and \ teaspoonful nutmeg and
bake in an 8-inch round tin in a moderate oven (temp. 350° F.)
50 to 60 minutes.
SPONGE SANDWICH
Ingredients
3 eggs 2 teaspoonful cream of
4 ozs. castor sugar tartar t.
4 ozs. plain flour 4 teaspoonful carbon-
-1 dessertspoonful butter ate of soda
3 tablespoonfuls boiling milk
Method: Separate the whites from the yolks of eggs. Whisk the
whites until stiff and frothy, add the sugar gradually, and continue
beating until thick. Add the yolks, one at a time. Fold in the
sifted flour and cream of tartar and, lastly, the melted butter,
carbonate of soda and boiling milk. Divide the mixture evenly
into two well-greased sandwich tins and bake in a moderate oven
(temp. 350° F.) from 20 to 25 minutes.
SMALL CAKES: Cook in well-greased patty tins in a moderate
oven (temp. 375° F.) for 15 minutes. When cold, split the top,
fill with cream or ice with warm icing, and decorate with nuts
or cherries.
Milk Puddings


CHOCOLATE CAKE
Ingredients
6 ozs. butter 2 tablespoonfuls chopped walnuts
6 ozs, sugar 3 tablespoonfuls cocoanut
3 eggs 8 ozs. self-raising flour
5 cup milk 3 tablespoonfuls cocoa or grated
chocolate
Method: Cream the butter and sugar, add well beaten eggs, beat
well, and then add the milk gradually. Add cocoa and chopped
walnuts. Lastly, the sifted flour and cocoanut. Pour into well-
greased and paper-lined chessboard tins and bake in a moderate
oven (temp. 350° F.) from 30 to 35 minutes. Note: This mixture
will be suitable for two 7-inch sandwich tins, or may be baked
as small patty cakes in a moderate oven (temp. 375° F.) for
about 15 minutes. Ice with chocolate icing and sprinkle with
chopped walnuts.
BROWN CAKE
Ingredients
4 eggs 3 teaspoonfuls cocoa
1 cup castor sugar 1 heaped teaspoonful cin-
-1 heaped cup flour namon
1 teaspoonful baking 2 tablespoonfuls butter
powder 6 tablespoonfuls milk
Method: Separate the whites from the yolks of eggs and beat
the whites until stiff and frothv. Add sugar gradually, then yolks
of eggs, one at a time. Sift the dry ingredients three times and
fold lightly into the eggs and sugar. Boil the milk with the
butter and stir into the cake mixture. Place in two well-greased
7-inch sandwich tins and bake in a moderate oven (temp. 350° F.)
from 20 to 30 minutes. Join together with fresh whipped cream.
Ice with chocolate warm icing, using 5 ozs. icing sugar and 1
dessertspoonful of cocoa.
BANANA CREAM CAKE
Ingredients
2 ozs. butter i cup milk
1 tablespoonful boiling li cups self-raising flour
water Essence
1 cup sugar Bananas
1 egg Cream
Passionfruit
Method: Melt the butter in boiling water, add sugar, then well
beaten eggs.* Mix well together. Add milk and essence. Fold
in flour and bake in a moderate oven (temp. 350° F.) from 40 to
45 minutes. This may be cooked in a recess tin, and when cold
the recess may be filled with sliced bananas, passionfruit and
whipped cream, or the fruit and cream may be arranged over the
top of any shaped cake when cold and ready to serve.
Milk Puddings


STRAWBERRY GATEAU
Ingredients
1 pint milk U tablespoonfuls gela-
-2 egg yolks tine
2 tablespoonfuls sugar 3 tablespoonfuls water
Essence J pint cream
Sponge finger biscuits Whipped cream for
Strawberries decorating
Red Ribbon
Method: Cream the egg yolks and sugar, add to the hot milk
and cook slowly until the mixture coats the spoon. Soften the
gelatine in water, dissolve, and add when cool to the custard
mixture. Lastly, add the slightly whipped cream. Line a round
cake tin or mould with finger biscuits, and pour in the partly set
custard mixture. Allow to become thoroughly set. Unmould and
decorate with whipped cream and strawberries, and finish with a
band of red ribbon around the outside of the gateau.
BAKED ALASKA
Ingredients
Sponge Cake 3 egg whites
Fruit puree or jam 3 tablespoonfuls cas-
I pint cream tor sugar
\ pkt. of Ice Cream Mix 3 tablespoonfuls icing
Vanilla essence sugar
i pint milk Fruit for garnishing
Method: Blend the ice cream mix with the milk, beating well.
Slightly whip the cream and fold in. Add vanilla essence and pour
into ice block trays and freeze very hard, 3 to 4 hours, or over-
night. Make a thick meringue with egg whites and sugar. Cut
the sponge the size of the ice cream block, place on small, thick
board. Spread with fruit puree or jam and cover with ice cream
block, and then cover completely with the thick meringue, leaving
no air holes. Bake at 375° F. for 10 minutes. Slide carefully
on to a glass dish. Garnish with fruit and serve at once.
BUTTERSCOTCH PAREAIT
Ingredients
i cup brown sugar Pinch of salt
1J tablespoonfuls butter 2 teaspoonful vanilla
3 tablespoonfuls milk essence
3 egg yolks i pint cream (whipped)
2 egg whites
Method: Melt the sugar and butter together in a saucepan, add
milk and cook until smooth. Pour into the well-beaten egg yolks;
cook over hot water until slightly thickened. When cool, add the
salt and vanilla essence and fold in the whipped cream and stiffly
beaten egg whites. Pour into trays of refrigerator and freeze
from 4 to 5 hours, with the indicator set at maximum.
Milk Puddings


COCOANUT MERINGUE TART
Ingredients
\ pint milk 1 oz. sugar
2 eggs (separated) 4 ozs. shortcrust or
1 tabiespoonful cornflour biscuit pastry
2 ozs.- cocoanut Jam
Meringue
2 egg whites 4 ozs. of sugar
Method: Combine the egg yolks, sugar, cornflour and milk and
stir over a low gas until the custard is thick. Allow to cool and
Cocoanut Meringue Tart
Baked Alaska
Milk Puddings


add the cocoanut. Line a tart plate or sandwich tin with the
pastry and bake in a hot oven (temp. 425° F.) for short-crust,
or a moderate oven (temp. 375° F.) for biscuit pastry. When
lightly browned, spread with jam and cover with custard. Make
a meringue with the whites of eggs and sugar and cover the
custard. Return to a slow oven (temp. 300° F.) until a pale
brown colour. Chill in the refrigerator before serving.
Strawberry Gateau
Milk Coffee
Milk Puddings


FRANGIPANNI TART
Cake Pastry Ingredients
3 ozs. sugar 3 ozs. self-raising flour
3 ozs. butter 3 ozs. plain flour
1 egg Flavouring
Frangipanni Cream
i lb. castor sugar 1 oz. crushed macaroons
1 oz. flour 2 ozs. butter
Pinch of salt 3 egg yolks
1 egg white 1£ cups milk
Small tin of crushed pineapple
Method: Make the cake pastry by creaming the butter and sugar,
adding the beaten egg, flavouring and sifted flour. Roll out and
line a tart plate.
Place flour, sugar and pinch of salt in saucepan, stir in beaten
eggs, and then stir in hot milk and cook over a low gas for about
6 minutes. Remove and add butter and crushed macaroons. Cover
the pastry with a layer of pineapple, and then a layer of frangi-
panni cream, and repeat this until the tart case is full. Cook in
a moderate oven (temp. 400° F.) for about 15 minutes. The
top of the tart may be decorated with meringue or piped whipped
cream.
BOILED SALAD DRESSING
Sauces
Ingredients
2 eggs 3 dessertspoonfuls
2 tablespoonfuls vinegar sugar
li tablespoonfuls water A pinch of cayenne
1 tablespoonful butter \ teaspoonful mustard
1 gill cream i teaspoonful salt
Method: Blend the mustard, sugar, cayenne, salt and water. Add
well-beaten eggs and gradually stir in the vinegar. Melt the
butter in a double saucepan. Add other ingredients and cook
slowly, stirring until it coats the spoon. Cool and stir in the
cream. This will keep for several weeks in the refrigerator.
VARIATIONS:
(1) RED MAYONNAISE: To h pint of boiled salad dressing add
very gradually i pint of tomato puree, 4 chopped olives, 4
chopped gherkins, and 1 dessertspoonful chopped capers. Stir
until smooth.
(2) TARTARE DRESSING: To i pint of boiled salad dressing add
1 teaspoonful chopped gherkins, juice of \ lemon, i teaspoon-
ful finely chopped herbs, 1 teaspoonful chopped capers, 1
teaspoonful French vinegar, and 1 tablespoonful chopped
parsley. Chill before serving.
(3) THOUSAND ISLAND DRESSING; To £ pint of dressing add
2 tablespoonfuls chilli sauce, 1 dessertspoonful ketchup, 1
tablespoonful chopped olives, 1 dessertspoonful vinegar, 1
dessertspoonful chopped capers, and 4 teaspoonful paprika.
Serve with vegetable salad.
(4) HORSERADISH MAYONNAISE: To 3 cup of mayonnaise
add 1J tablespoonfuls of prepared horseradish and mix well.
Serve with meat salads.
Miscellaneous


CORNFLOUR SAUCE
Ingredients
1 pint milk 1 tablespoonful cornflour
1 tablespoonful sugar 1 teaspoonful butter
Flavouring
Method: Blend the cornflour with a little milk, place the remainder
on to boil. When nearly boiling, pour on to the blended cornflour.
Return to the saucepan, add sugar and butter, and stir until
boiling. Cook for a further 3 minutes and add flavouring.
BOILED CUSTARD
Ingredients
2 eggs slightly beaten i teaspoonful salt
2 dessertspoonfuls sugar 2 cups milk
Vanilla
Method: Beat the eggs with the sugar, add the salt and cook over
boiling water until the mixture coats the spoon. Add vanilla and
cool quickly.
GOOD WHITE SAUCE
Ingredients
1 dessertspoonful butter Small blade of mace
1 dessertspoonful flour Salt
I pint milk Cayenne
1 clove 1 egg yolk
2 peppercorns 1 tablespoonful cream
Method: Place the peppercorns, clove and mace in the milk and
bring to the boil. Strain and cool. Melt the butter, add flour, and
cook 2 minutes. Add the flavoured milk and stir until the sauce
boils and thickens. Remove from the gas, add egg yolk, cream
and flavourings.
PLAIN WHITE SAUCE
Ingredients
1 dessertspoonful butter Salt and cayenne
1 dessertspoonful flour h pint milk
Method: Melt the butter, stir in flour off the gas then cook 2
minutes, stirring well, without browning. Add milk and stir
until the sauce boils and thickens. Season to taste.
SUGGESTED FLAVOURINGS
(1) PARSLEY SAUCE: Add 1 dessertspoonful chopped parsley to
a pint sauce.
(2) EGG SAUCE: Mince 1 or 2 hard-boiled eggs finely and add
to the sauce.
(3) ONION SAUCE; Three small white onions, cooked until soft
and finely minced.
(4) CAPER SAUCE: 1 tablespoonful chopped capers to I pint
white sauce.
(5) OYSTER SAUCE: 1 doz. plumped oysters to \ pint white
sauce.
(6) ANCHOVY SAUCE; Add 1 teaspoonful anchovy essence and
colour pale pink.
Sauces


BECHAMEL SAUCE
Ingredients
1 dessertspoonful butter 1 gill milk
1 dessertspoonful flour 2 or 3 tablespoonfuls
h gill stock cream
Salt and pepper
Method: Melt the butter, stir in the flour off the gas, cook 2
minutes, stirring well. Add milk and stock, and stir until the
mixture boils and thickens. Season to taste and add the cream
just before using.
Steamed Pudding
STEAMED PUDDING AND VARIATIONS
Ingredients
8 ozs, self-raising flour 2 eggs
4 ozs. butter 1 gill of milk
4 ozs. sugar Vanilla essence
Method: Cream the butter and sugar, add well-beaten eggs, and
then the sifted flour, milk and vanilla essence. Place the mixture
in well-greased Dariole moulds. Cover with greased paper, place
in steamer and steam from 25 to 30 minutes. Stand for one
minute on table before turning out. Serve hot with sauce or
custard.
VARIATIONS:
STEAMED DATE PUDDING: Add 3 ozs. dates and 1 teaspoon-
ful nutmeg.
STEAMED LEMON PUDDING: Add the rind of 1 lemon and 1
dessertspoonful of lemon juice.
STEAMED ORANGE PUDDING: Add the rind of 1 orange and
1 dessertspoonful of orange juice.
STEAMED HONEY PUDDING: Omit 2 ozs. sugar and add 1
tablespoonful honey. Cream with the butter. Serve with Honey
Sauce.
Sauces


Pastries, Bread and Rolls
Scones


Pastries, Bread, Rolls & Scones
MILK BREAD
Ingredients
1 \ lbs. flour 2 ozs. butter
h teaspoon salt 5 pint warm milk
I oz. compressed yeast 1 teaspoonful sugar
Method: Cream the yeast and sugar in a basin, cover with warm
milk and set in a warm place for 15 minutes. Rub the butter into
the flour, and add the salt. Make a well in the centre, pour in
the yeast, etc., and add enough warm milk to make a dough.
Knead this lightly with the hands until the dough leaves them
quite freely. Cover and set in a warm place to rise for 2 hours.
Knead lightly; divide into even-sized pieces, shape into small
rolls, plaits or twists. Set these on a greased tin for 10 minutes
in a warm place to rise. Brush over with a little milk and sugar.
Bake in a hot oven (temp. 450° F.) for 10 minutes, then reduce
the heat of the oven to 375° F. and cook for a further 15
minutes.
PARKER HOUSE ROLLS
Method: Use the Milk Bread recipe. Roll the dough J-inch thick,
cut with a floured 2-inch cutter. Brush with melted butter, fold
in halves and press lightly. Place on a greased tray 1 inch apart
and allow to stand in a warm place for 10 minutes. Brush with
melted butter and bake in a hot oven (temp. 450° F.) for 10
minutes. Reduce the heat of the oven to 375 e F. and cook for a
further 10 minutes.
GERMAN COFFEE CAKE
Ingredients
1 cup scalded milk h teaspoonful salt
1 oz. compressed yeast 2 eggs
1 dessertspoonful sugar i cup raisins
3 tablespoonfuls butter I cup currants
I cup sugar 3 cups sifted flour
Method: When the milk has cooled to lukewarm, add the sugar
and yeast cake. Add li cups of flour and beat well. Set aside in
a warm place for 1 hour until the sponge is full of bubbles. Then
add the softened butter, sugar and salt, floured currants and
raisins, and the rest of the flour and the beaten eggs. Beat for
10 minutes. Fill pans half-full and set aside to double in bulk.
Sprinkle the top with a mixture of 2 ozs. plain flour, 1 oz. brown
sugar, and li ozs. butter. Bake in a moderate oven (temp. 350°
F.) for 45 minutes. This recipe fills two pans the size of layer
cake tins.


HOT CROSS BUNS
Ingredients
1 lb, flour 2 ozs. butter
1 teaspoonful salt 2 ozs. sugar
1 oz. compressed yeast 1 egg
h pint milk A little cinnamon (if
2 ozs. sultanas liked)
Method: Set the yeast in the lukewarm milk with one teaspoonful
of sugar and one teaspoonful of flour for 15 minutes until spongy.
Sift the flour and salt, rub in the butter, add the sugar and
sultanas. Add the egg to the yeast and milk, and mix into the
flour, making a soft dough. Stand for 40 minutes in a warm
place to rise. Then turn out and knead well. Cut into about
18 even-sized pieces for buns. Knead each piece into a round
and mark a deep cross on each with the back of a knife. Place
on a greased tin close together. Set again in a warm place for
10 to 15 minutes. Bake in a hot oven (temp. 450° F.) from 15
to 20 minutes. Remove from the oven and glaze with 1 table-
spoonful- of gelatine, 1 tablespoonful sugar, 1 tablespoonful boil-
ing water. After glazing, return to the oven for 1 minute.
NUTBREAD
Ingredients
2 cups plain flour I cup brown sugar
i teaspoonful carb. soda Grated nutmeg and
4 teaspoonful salt Allspice
1 tablespoonful butter 2 cup chopped nuts
J cup sour milk 1 egg
h cup chopped dates
Method: Sift the flour, soda, nutmeg, allspice and salt. Rub in
the butter, add the sugar and chopped nuts and dates. Beat the
egg and add to the milk. Mix with the dry ingredients. Bake in
2 well-greased loaf tins in a moderate oven (temp, 350° F.) from
30 to 45 minutes.
SCONES
Ingredients
1 lb. plain flour 2 ozs. sugar
1 teaspoonful cream of 3 ozs. butter
tartar i teaspoonful salt
1 teaspoonful carb. soda 3 pint sour milk
Method: Sift the flour, cream of tartar, carb. soda and salt in a
basin, rub in the butter, add sugar, and mix to a soft dough with
sour milk. Knead slightly and roll I inch thick. Cut into rounds,
glaze with milk, and bake on a greased tray in a hot oven (temp.
450° F.) 12 to 15 minutes.
SODA MILK BREAD
Ingredients
1 h lbs. plain flour i teaspoonful salt
2 cups sour milk 1 teaspoonful carb. soda
Method: Sift the flour, finely crushed soda and salt into a basin,
add the sour milk, making into a soft dough. Turn on to a floured
board, knead well, make into two loaves. Place on floured tin,
bake in hot oven (temp. 425° F.) 30 to 40 minutes.
Pastries, Bread, Rolls and Scones


Invalid Cookery
ANGEL'S FOOD
Ingredients
h pint milk 1 egg
1 dessertspoonful 5 cup hot water
gelatine 2 dessertspoonfuls sugar
Vanilla essence
Method: Heat the sugar and milk and pour onto lightly beaten
egg yolk. Return to the gas and cook until the mixture coats
the spoon; allow to cool. Dissolve the gelatine in hot water and
add to the custard. Flavour to taste, and stir in stiffly beaten
white of egg. Pour into individual moulds and serve cold.
ARROWROOT
Ingredients
I pint milk Pinch salt
1 dessertspoonful arrow- 1 teaspoonful sugar
root Nutmeg
Sippets of toast
Method: Blend the arrowroot with a little milk. Place the re-
mainder of milk on to boil; when almost boiling, pour on to the
blended arrowroot and stir well. Return to the saucepan and cook
3 minutes after it comes to the boil. Add sugar and stir well.
Serve in a small bowl or cup with grated nutmeg on top and
small sippets of toast.
CREAMED FISH
Ingredients
2 fillets of whiting or 1 dessertspoonful butter
flathead 1 dessertspoonful flour
Salt and lemon i pint milk
Method: Fold the fillets in two, right side up, or roll neatly and
place on a greased plate. Squeeze a little lemon over, cover with
another plate and steam gently over a saucepan of boiling water,
or in a moderate oven (temp. 375° F.) from 10 to 15 minutes.
Make a white sauce with the butter, flour and milk, and mask
the fish before serving. A little finely chopped parsley may be
sprinkled over if allowed.
GRUEL
Ingredients
1 tablespoonful oatmeal Sippets of toast
3 tablespoonfuls cold I pint milk
water Little butter
Pinch salt i teaspoonful sugar
Method: Mix the oatmeal and water. Heat the milk and pour
on to the oatmeal. Return to the saucepan and cook for a few
minutes. Strain to remove the coarse grains; return to the sauce-
pan. Simmer for 10 minutes, stirring well. A little butter and
sugar may be added if desired. Serve in a bowl or cup with
sippets of toast.


JUNKETS
Ingredients
a pint milk 1 dessertspoonful sugar
I junket tablet Vanilla
Nutmeg (if allowed)
Method: Dissolve the junket tablet in 1 dessertspoonful water.
Warm the milk to blood heat and add the sugar and essence.
Stir in the dissolved junket, flavour with vanilla, pour into a
dish, and stand in a warm place to set. A little nutmeg may be
grated over. The junket should be made \ hour before serving;
long standing will produce tough curds.
VARIATIONS
CHOCOLATE JUNKET: Dissolve 1 oz. grated chocolate in 2
tablespoonfuls of hot water. Add to the milk and make in the
usual way,
CARAMEL JUNKET: Caramelise 1 oz. loaf sugar and 2 table-
spoonfuls cold water. Add to the warmed milk.
NUT JUNKET; Add 1 oz. finely chopped almonds and a few
drops of almond essence to the usual junket mixture.
FRUIT JUNKET: Add 1 tablespoonful fruit juice slowly to the
milk after warming.
LIGHT BREAD PUDDING
Ingredients
i pint milk 1 tablespoonful breadcrumbs
1 egg 1 dessertspoonful sugar
Method: Boil the milk and pour onto the breadcrumbs, add sugar,
yolk of egg and vanilla, and pour into a lightly greased pie dish.
Stir stiffly beaten whites in lightly and bake in a moderately hot
oven (temp. 325° F.) for 20 to 30 minutes.
SAVOURY LIVER CUSTARD
Ingredients
h cup finely minced liver 1 gill milk
1 egg Salt
Little butter
Method: Beat the egg and add the other ingredients. Pour into
a greased mould and bake or steam gently until set.
MILK JELLY
Ingredients
h pint milk 1 strip lemon rind
i oz. gelatine 1 tablespoonful hot water
i oz. sugar 1 tablespoonful cream
Method:
(1) Prepare mould by rinsing with cold water.
(2) Moisten the gelatine with the tablespoonful of hot water,
then place the milk, sugar, and lemon rind in saucepan and
warm slightly. Remove the lemon rind and pour the warm
milk over the gelatine and stir until the gelatine is dissolved.
(3) When cold, add the cream and pour into prepared mould and
allow to set.
(4) Turn out of the mould before serving.
In valid Cookery


Weights, Measures & Temperatures
Use standard cups and spoons for all measures.
One rounded spoonful = One spoonful
One level spoonful = One-half spoonful
One level spoonful = One American spoonful
1 tablespoonful flour = 1 oz-
-1 tablespoonful barley = 1 °z-
dessertspoonfuls sugar = 1 oz.
U dessertspoonfuls rice or split peas = 1 oz,
1 dessertspoonful butter or fat = 1 oz.
2 tablespoonfuls breadcrumbs = 1 oz >
2 tablespoonfuls chopped suet = 1 oz.
1 cup flour ozs.
1 cup sugar 6 ozs >
1 cup butter 8 ozs.
In following recipes:—
(1) Read carefully and follow measurements, method and cook-
ing directions accurately.
(2) Choose good ingredients.
(3) Assemble all ingredients; these are best at room tempera-
ture.
(4) Assemble and prepare all equipment before beginning to
mix.
(5) Light the oven if a pre-heated oven is to be used.
OVEN TEMPERATURES
(1) Slow Oven, 275° F. to 325° F. for—
Milk Puddings Rich Fruit Cakes
Custards Casserole Dishes
Meringues Low Temperature Roasts
(2) Moderate Oven, 350° F. to 400° F. for:
Biscuits Sponge Cakes
Small Cakes Baked Cake Puddings
Slab Cakes Complete Oven Meals
(3) Hot Oven, 400° F. to 500° F. for:—
Scones Pastries Meats
OVEN POSITIONS
With modern time and temperature cooking, oven positions may
be varied with the set temperature. A general guide for the
complete use of the oven may be followed.
Top Half;
Small Cakes Scones
Biscuits Pastries
Middle;
Meats Vegetables
Slab Cakes Bar Cakes
Lower Half:
Custards Casserole
Rich Fruit Cakes Dishes
With time and temperature cooking there is no need to open
the oven door during cooking.
Deaton & Spencer Pty., Ltd., Lithographers, Sydney.




