

Milliner’s Hat Mystery
By.. . SIR BASIL THOMSON
FREE SUPPLEMENT TO THE AUSTRALIAN WOMEN’S
WEEKLY. MUST NOT BE SOLD SEPARATELY. Complete BookK-Length Novel


MILLINER’S HAT MYSTERY
BY SIR BASIL THOMSON
■wmi* HE Coroner’s Court at Old-
J hfj ■ bury was crowded, for the
ij * ‘ ■ news spread that the in-
-1 A .. quest about to be held was
M/i f* concerned with a death that
illilllK was likel y t 0 P rove more
P ' A3Jj|j mysterious than any that
WwL the p° lice hacJ hadto deal
I i " within the memory of man.
The Coroner took his seat at
his table and the hum of
conversation was hushed.
He called Leslie Griffith. A young man
stood up and came forward.
“You are a clerk in the Local Government
Board in London?”
"X am.”
“And on July 31 you drove your car into
a barn for shelter from a violent thunder-
storm.”
“Yes.”
“Were you alone in the car?”
“No. my friend Douglas Powell was with
ale.”
“What did you find in that bam?”
“We found the body of a man.”
“How was it lying?”
“Parallel with the left wall. I stumbled
over it in getting out: in fact, I fell over it.
Ov’ing to the thunderstorm it was as dark
as night.”
“I picked myself up and called to my friend
and we went over together to the house
opposite and explained to the owner what
h”d happened and asked leave to use the
telephone,”
“Did y°u telephone to the police?”
“No; Mr. Howard, the owner of the house,
telephoned to Dr. Travers. He was afraid
that in entering the bam we had knocked
over his deaf gardener.”
“While you were waiting for the doctor
did anyone touch the body?”
“We waited in the house until the doctor
arrived, and then we went back to the barn
with him: we found the body lying just as
We had left it.”
The Coroner called Douglas Powell.
“Do vnu corroborate the evidence of the
last witness?”
“Were you at the wheel of your car?”
“I was,”
“Are vou ouite sure that you did not col-
lide with the deceased and knock him
down?”
“Quite sure. X was going at a foot’s pace
and I should have felt the shock.”
Dr. Henry Travers was the next witness.
“You were called by telephone to the barn
in the grounds of Hatch Court? What did
you find?”
“The dead body of a man aged between
forty and fifty: I examined the body and
found a bullet wound in the head. The
body was cooling; death had occurred from
three to four hours before I saw it.”
"Did you telephone to the police?”
“I did, and Inspector Miller came from
Oldbury.”
“John Miller,” called the Coroner, and a
man in the uniform of a police inspector
Stood up.
“You were called by telephone to see a
man who had been found shot through the
head?”
“I WEIS.”
“You concluded that he bad been mur-
dered?”
“Yes, because I found neither pistol nor
rifle In the barn, nor any bullet hole In
the walls or roof.”
“How do you account for the body being
there?”
“It might have been brought there in a
vehicle, most probably a car. The shoes
were clean as If they had only just been
put on.”
"Was a oar seen by anyone?”
“Yes, by Peter Bury, the deaf gardener.
He was sheltering from the storm in a tool
shed and thought he saw a big car enter
the barn. It was not until the storm was
over that he found the little car belonging
to Mr. Powell in the bam and thought that
the big one must have been an hallucina-
tion due to the lightning."
“Has the body been identified?”
“Not yet, sir. I searched the pockets very
carefully and made an inventory of every-
thing I found in them Besides the objects
carried by smokers I found the sum of
£lO 16d 9d. in notes and silver.”
"Did you notice anything of special im-
portance in the things vou found in the
pockets?”
“Only that everything appeared to be
brand new; even the notecase showed no
sign of wear.”
“Were there no visiting cards?”
“Yes, sir, quite a number with name and
address complete and the telephone num-
ber in the comer.”
“Did that enable you to communicate with
the deceased’s friends?”
“No, sir. I telephoned to the address
given on the cards, but the operator in-
formed me that there was no such number
and no such address.”
“Did you find any other document likely
to help in Identification?”
“Yes. sir. a passport In the same name—
John Whitaker.”
“The passport is being verified?”
“Yes. sir. we are taking every possible step
to have the bodv identified. My chief con-
stab’e has been in telephonic communi'’atlon
with Scotland Yard and has asked for help
No doubt a senior officer will be detailed
from the Yard to take charge of the in-
quiries.”
“In that case, gentlemen of the lury. I
shall have no option but to adlourn the in-
quest until the police have had time to com-
plete their inouirles. The inquest is ad-
journed. You will be notified in due course
by mv officer when It will be reopened.”
Inspector Miller spent a few minutes in
going round among the witnesses and say-
ing a word or two to each As he was leaving
the hnUdine « tnP good-looking man who
had been waiting by the door, stood up and
addressed him.
“I must introduce myself. Mr vliller —
Chief Tnsnector Vincent from the Yard. I
was told to lose no time in coming down
here and I was fortunate enough to arrive
in time to hear a good part of the evidence
given at the inquest.”
“I’m very glad you’ve come, Mr'. Vincent.
You see the difficulty that I am Up against.
This man was shot either in some other
locality or in a car—‘taken for a ride,’ in
fact, as they say in America.”
“Do you think that the man was deliber-
ately trying to hide his identity, Or that his
assailants were doing that tor him and for
themselves?”
“So far there has been nothing to give
the answer to that question. Until we know
his Identity it is useless to speculate about
the motive for the murder.”
“May I ask what steps you have already
taken for establishing his Identity?”
“The usual steps—searching the list of
missing persons in the police publications.
I have a mass of papers at the office, which
of course are at your service My car Is
here,” he made a signal to the uniformed
driver of his car and, though the distance
to police headquarters weis barely half a
mile, they jumped in
“I brought a sergeant down with me,” said
Vincent. “We shall find him at your
office.”
“Is he the man who usually works with
you?”
“Yes. Detective-Sergeant Walker.”
“Then I feel sure that he is a live
wire.” •
Miller had been taking stock of his com-
panion and had decided that he belonged
to a type of detective that was new to him.
To begin with, his accent was not that of
the ordinary police officer It was what,
for want of a better adjective, was described
as an educated accent. Miller was curious
to know what had brought a man of Uni-
versity education into the police, but of
course he could not put so personal a ques-
tion to an officer of this rank. He did go
so far as to ask him whether he knew Super-
intendent Richardson. Vincent at once
rose to the bait.
“Y
tou have deprived him
of a step In rank. He is now my Chief
Constable and he is one of the few pro-
moted from the ranks whose promotion has
given lively satisfaction throughout the
whole service I, myself, am proud to be
working under him.”
They had reached the pol’ce station In-
spector Miller invited Vincent into his room
where they found Sergeant Walker awaiting
him.
“There, Chief Inspector, that pile of papers
is for you to look through. You will find
reports from a number of my officers about
missing persons, but so far they have pro-
duced nothing.”
“When was the body found?”
“Only the day before yesterday—Saturday.
You will see that we have wasted no time.”
“The persons I should like to see first are
those two young men who found the body.
Where are they to be found?”
Miller looked a little crestfallen. “The


fact Is, Chief Inspector, that I allowed them
to continue their Journey to Cornwall, after
taking their addresses, of course. They
promised to return on receipt of a telegram
if they were wanted. You will find their
statements on the top of those papers and I
don’t think that they are able to give any
further information. That is why I let
them go.”
“Have you found any further trace of the
big car which the deaf gardener thought
he had seen during the thunderstorm?”
“No. He appears to have been the only
man in the village who saw it and I doubt
whether his evidence can be relied upon. You
know the type of witness who comes forward
with a story and then, when he finds that
the police attach importance to it, he em-
broiders it with all kinds of detail drawn
from his imagination.”
“I know the type, but I think that he
must be the first witness that I interview,
Tlie question is whether I should see him
here or, less formally, on his own ground
at Hatch Court. I think that Hatch Court
would be best because I could make an
inspection of the barn at the same time.”
•Tt’H take us no time at all to get to
Hatch Court if you will jump ino the car
again, Mr. Vincent. Would you like your
sergeant to come with us?”
"Yes, because he’s accustomed to taking
down notes as we go. What has the owner
of Hatch Court to say to the irruption of
police on to his premises?”
"Mr. Howard? Oh, he’s given us a free
hand. We needn’t even trouble to ask for
him. As long as he knows in due course
what conclusion we come to, he’ll ask no
questions.”
“So much the better. The only member
of the staff we want to see is that deaf
gardener and we can see him in ttte barn
itself.”
They had no difficulty in finding Peter
Bury—indeed, since the thunderstorm and
his supposed hallucination he seemed to have
been doing little more than watch the barn
from some secret hiding-place for some
other strange occurrence. Miller beckoned
to him to approach. He shambled towards
the two police officers with a hesitating
gait.
Vincent called him into the bam and using
his two hands as a megaphone, shouted:
“I want you to take us to where you were
standing when you saw that car outside the
bam.” He had to repeat the question in a
louder tone before Intelligence dawned in the
old man’s face. He touched Vincent on the
arm, making a gesture towards the garden.
Vincent followed him.
Arrived outside a little tool shed, the old
gardener conducted his part of the conver-
sation in dumb show, intimating that they
were standing on the very spot from which
he saw the car swing round into the bam
yani. Then he found his voice.
“An old friend of mine once got struck by
lightning and had to go all doubled up for
the rest of his life. I’ve been shy of lightning
ever since. That’s why I was sheltering.”
Vincent’s voice rang out: "Did—you—see
—the car—go—into— the bam?”
“I. saw it swing round, from the lane into
the yard and I said to myself: ‘You’ll never
get a car as big as that into the bam if
that’s what you’re after.’ And then the
lightning flashed again and I took cover.”
“And when you came out from your cover
you found a little car in the bam.”
“That’s right, though how 1 could have
made such a mistake beats me—taking a
little ear for a big one.”
“Thank you, Peter.” If we want you again
we’ll come and find you.” Turning to Miller,
Vincent said: “Now let us go to the barn.”
The floor of the bam was covered deep in
dust. It showed clearly the wheel marks of
a small car and Miller pointed out a shallow
depression in the dust which he said had been
made by the dead body and a medley of
footprints all round it.
“As you see, there are no marks here of
any big car having entered. These wheel
marks were made by the car belonging to
those two young men.”
“Yes, and of course the footprints explain
themselves. Now, assuming that Peter Bury
did see a big car stop outside the barn, let
us reconstruct the scene. The car drew up
here, but in that heavy storm all w'heel-
marks would naturally be washed away.
Peter Bury would not have seen what hap-
pened when the car stopped, but obviously
two men must have been required to carry
the dead body into the barn: their proceed-
ings were masked by the car. Then what
happened? The men returned to their seats,
the car swung round in this direction in the
act of turning to leave the yard. It was
rather a sharp turn for a big car to get
round without manoeuvring.” Vincent ap-
peared to be talking to himself rather than
to his companion, whom he left and walked
rapidly over to the low wall of the yard.
Miller could not help admiring the quick-
ness and agility of his movements. It was
as if he were on wires. He stopped at the
low wall and stooped. “Yes, here we are,”
he said over his shoulder; “it was too sharp
a turn for a big car. Look at this streak of
• black. That is car varnish from one of the
wings. The driver was in a hurry—he didn’t
stop to back—stripped the wing clean of
varnish and, no doubt, made a biggish dent
in it. That will be something, to go by in
hunting for the car.”
“None of the servants saw a big car,” ob-
jected Miller: “and, as you see, their win-
dows look out this way.”
“They do, but have you ever seen a house
full of maids in a thunderstorm? They run
to cover, preferably under a bed or in a
linen-closet. The storm was a stroke of
luck for our murderers.”
Vincent was silent as they walked back
to Miller’s car. When they had taken their
seats he asked; “Have you made any in-
quiries at garages down the Bath Road
about a car with a dinted offside-wing?
Garage hands notice these things.”
“Not yet,” replied Miller half-apologeti-
eally. “We had so little to go upon.”
Vincent relapsed into another silence and
then he said: “If the man was shot in the
car there must be a bullet mark somewhere
at the level of a man’s head. That theory
might be worth pdrsuing.”
Miller was spared from answering this
remark by the sight of a small car drawn
up before the police headquarters.
“Hallo!” he said. “What’s this?”
He was not long left in doubt. A young
man, whom Vincent recognised as having
been one of the witnesses at the inquest,
jumped out of the car and made a sign to
Miller to pull up.
“We have something that will interest
you, Inspector, and we brought it back from
a garage a few miles down the road for
you to see.”
“What is it?”
“A car window with what looks like a
bullet hole clean through it.”
TThe police officers
jumped out of their car.
“Where is this window?” asked Miller.
“We took it into the police station and left
it with your station sergeant.”
Miller hurried into the building, followed
by the others. Griffith constituted him-
self showman. The window was standing
propped against the wall.
“Now you can see what a car window looks
like when it’s had a bullet through it.”
“Yes,” said Vincent. “There’s been dirty
work at the cross-roads. Do you see what
started the fracture —that round hole with
little cracks radiating from it in every
direction. This is no ordinary break: that
window was broken by a pistol shot. Where
did you find it?”
“At a garage about four miles down the
Bath Road. Here is their card. They told
us that the window came out of a sixteen -
horse Daimler. Here’s its number. It
was quite by chance that we went into the
garage at all; one of our plugs was missing
fire badly and it was a case of any port
in a storm. While they were changing the
plug, Powell began poking about and saw
this window propped up against the wall. He
spotted at once that it was no ordinary
break and after a little difficulty we got
the garage people to let us have it for a
bob.”
“Did they give you a description of the
driver?” asked Vincent.
“N
JLvO, because we thought
that if we started questioning they might
take us for detectives and shut up like
oysters. We did find out that the car came
in on Saturday. I would offer you a seat
in our little bus if there was room and run
you down to the garage.”
"Thank you very much, but I weigh over
twelve stone and I should prove to be the
last straw for your little car. Happily In-
spector Miller has a car and if you will wait
until I’ve sent my sergeant back to London
with this broken window we can start
whenever you like.”
“If you like to give me a seat in Inspector
Miller’s car I can act as your guide to the
garage and let my friend follow us. It’ll
save time.”
“It’s very kind of you,” said Vincent.
“I’ll be ready in three minutes.”
He was as good as his word; li] three
minutes he was at the wheel and had started
up the engine. As soon as they were clear
of the traffic, Griffith began to talk: he
was prone to conversation.
“You’ll excuse my curiosity, but I don’t
think you can belong to the County Con-
stabulary.”
“No, I come from further afield.”
“I felt sure you did: you must be from
Scotland Yard. They’ve sent you down to
take charge of the case. You must be one
of the big four.”
“You mean the big four of newspaper
notoriety? I’m Chief Inspector Vincent."
“You’re starting in this case with prac-
tically no clue at all, I gathered from the
evidence at the inquest—not even the man’*
identity.”
“That is so.”
“I’ve often envied you your job when I
read of criminal cases in the .papers; it
must be an exciting kind of life.”
Vincent smiled. “It’s all right when there
are exciting episodes, but much of the work
is the dreary business of elimination.”
“Elimination?”
“Yes, because We suffer from too much
rather than too little help from the public.
In any sensational crime letters pour in
from well-meaning people, not only in this
country but abroad, and one cannot afford
to neglect any of them for fear that there
may be a grain of wheat among the chaff.
The discouraging part of the Job lies in
the sifting of this mass of information.”
“It must require a lot of patience.”
"Yes, it does. Sometimes one gets so di*-


couraged that It is all one can do to carry
on.’
“The garage is only about a couple of hun-
dred yards from here. I suppose you’d like
to conduct your inquiry alone?”
“Not at all, but you will want to stop your
friend when he arrives, and you might look
after my car while waiting for him.”
Griffith assented with a sigh and watched
the lithe figure enter the garage.
Vincent asked for the foreman, who was
found in a pit under a car busily engaged
In examining the pinions in the gear box.
“You're wanted, Harry," a mechanic called
down to him.
“Who wants me?”
“The police,” and then in a hoarse whisper
the youth added; “It’s a blooming ’tec from
Scotland Yard, so he says.”
The foreman, a youth little older than
his own mechanics, crawled out of his lair
and faced Vincent, wiping a smear of oil
from his countenance with a swab of cotton
Waste.
“I’m sorry to interrupt you in your work,
foreman, but I want some information about
that car that came in with a broken window
two days ago. How many men were there
In the car?”
“Two, I think it was. It was two, wasn’t
It Charlie?”
“Y
Jl ES: there was the
fellow with his arm in a sling and the other
bloke that kept looking at his watch.”
“Did they say where they were going?”
“Oh, they made no secret about that. They
Bald they were going to Newquay.”
Having gleaned all possible information
from the garage, Vincent returned to his
car. He found that Griffith’s companion
had arrived in his tiny overloaded convey-
ance and the two young men were talking.
“Ah, here comes the chief inspector,” said
Griffith. “Now we shall be free to go on.”
“Your discovery is going to prove very
useful to me,” said Vincent. “I found out
that those two men were bound for Newquay,
end I must go on there, although they’ve
had two days’ start of me.”
“We are bound for the west coast, too; we
are going to Bude, which is not so very far
away from Newquay, but you will travel
much faster than we do and I suppose we
must say good-bye.”
“I’m afraid so. You will understand that
I’ve no time to lose. Thank you once more
tor your help.”
His first concern on arriving at Newquay
was to make a round of the hotel garages
In search of the car which had changed its
broken window. He tried every hotel garage
without success and then visited those, which
advertised the fact that they carried out
repairs. In one of these, inconveniently situ-
ated in a narrow side street, he found what
be was looking for —a sixteen-horse Daimler,
With the number given by the garage in the
Bath Road. It had a deep dint and scrape
pn the off-side wing, exposing the metal
Vihcent called the foreman.
“Who left thjs car here?” he asked.
The man was inclined to be jocular. “That
would be telling,” he said. “You’ve heard
of the proverb. ‘Ask no questions and they’ll
tell you no lies.’ ”
“Come,” said Vincent, “I can’t waste time
bandying proverbs. I’m here to ask ques-
tions and you’re here to answer them truth-
fully.” He produced his official card, and
the young foreman stiffened with apprehen-
sion. “Now, perhaps you’ll answer. Who
left this car here?”
“Two gents who said they were leaving on
a sea trip and would call for it whe' - ' they
came back. Is there anything wron c about
them?”
“You can ask that question again when
I’ve looked over the car.”
The man stood back while Vincent made
an examination of the seats and cushions
of the interior. He was using a small square
of damp blotting-paper to soak up what he
thought might be bloodstains, when the fore-
man, who was watching him keenly, inter-
posed with a question:
"What are you looking for, sir?” he said.
“For bloodstains.”
“Funny you should say that. The gent
who left the car was fussing about the same
thing. Very fussy he was, using a sponge
and cotton waste to get it all off. He said
there was nothing that damaged the fabric
of the leather more than blood if it was
allowed to dry on. It was his own blood, he
said, from his elbow when he banged it
through the window. It must have been a
mighty bang to break triplex glass. He said
that that was why he had his arm in a
sling.”
“What did they look like?” asked Vincent
“Oh, one was a big, heavy man, between
thirty and forty, and the other a tall thin
chap, a bit older.”
“Well, I want you to put this car aside
and not let anyone touch her —not even the
owner if he turns up again—without letting
me know. I shall be at the Raven Hotel and
I’ll come down at once if you ring up. You
can’t lock it up because, I suppose, the
owner has the key, but you can stop any of
your mir'-onics from interfering with it.”
“Very good, sir; you can trust me to see
that your orders are carried out.” ,
While speaking Vincent had been trying
to open the box at the rear of the car, which
was locked.
“Do you want to get that open, sir?”
“Yes, but I suppose the owner has that
key also.”
“I daresay that I could manage to open
it.”
“What?” asked Vincent. “Have you fel-
lows got duplicate keys for the boxes of
every kind of car?”
The foreman laughed. “No, sir, it’s not as
bad as that, but I served my apprenticeship
with one of the firms that supply car manu-
facturers with these boxes and I’ve still got
the tools for making both locks and keys.
You needn’t worry about my doing any dam-
age: I’ll open it all right and lock it up
again.”
“Very good, foreman; I’ll be back again In
about half an hour.”
Vincent now decided to make inquiries at
the quay. There he found the usual knot
of fishermen and loafers in nautical cos-
tume.
“I hear you had a motor launch in here
on Saturday and it picked up two men and
■went away with them.”
A mariner nodded sourly without remov-
ing his pipe from the corner of his mouth
but chatterbox hastened to fill the breach.
“I saw those two gents: one of them har
his arm in a sling. They kept asking us
whether we’d seen their motor boat come in
and go out again. I told them that it had
been in, hanging about the best part of the
day, and had then gone out again That’s,
right, isn’t it, mates?” The rest nodded
their assent. “I can tell you that the two
gents were in a fine taking when they hoard
that she’d been in and gone out again—
friends of the skipper, I suppose they
were.”
“But she did come in again?” asked vln-
cent.
“Yes, she did, and a bloke was standing
up, sweeping the quay with his glasses. When
he made out the two gents waving to him
he brought the launch up to the steps, keep-
ing the engine running. He hardly waited
for them to step aboard, but pushed off and
went full speed ahead.”
“Do you know which way they went when
they’d cleared the harbor?”
“No, one can’t see that from here, but
when the two gents were stepping aboard I
heard the skipper say: ‘Hurry, up, Rupert,
there’s a southerly gale springing up, and if
you’re not nippy you’ll be seasick like you
were last time.’ So I suppose she was bound
for somewhere lying south-west of us.”
“What kind of a boat was she?”
“Oh, she was a smart looking craft, as
fresh as paint could make her and big
enough for any kind of sea.”
“How many hands had she?”
"I only saw a boy besides the skipper, but
the cabin looked as if there was accommo-
dation for six at least.”
“H’m! Quite a big boat,” said Vincent,
musing. “Anyway she could cross the
Channel all right. Had she a name painted
on her?”
“No, now I come to think of it she’d no
name at all. That’s funny A craft like
that generally has some fancy kind of name
like Sunbeam painted all over her, but this
one had nothing at all.”
The taciturn smoker removed his pipe
■ from his mouth, spat into the sea and
spoke for the first time. “Shouldn’t be sur-
prised if there was something crooked about
that boat—smuggling or something like that
The boy was a Prenchy—l heard him talking
the lingo that those onion boys talk,”
“And the skipper? Did he talk French,
too?”
“When he spoke to the boy he did, but
not when he took those two coves on
board: then he spoke English all right, but
it sounded funny.”
“Thank you,” said Vincent. “I think that
must be the boat I wanted: I’m sorry thdy
left before I got here.”
Having finished his inquiries at the quay,
Vincent returned to the garage. He found
that the foreman had been as good as nis
word. He was obviously pleased with him-
self at having been able to exhibit his skill
to a senior officer from the Yard.
I
IT was a job I can tell
you, sir. I had to wait until the mechanics
had knocked off work and gone home before
I started on the key, but I managed it all
right.” He slid back the catches and raised
the lid of the box. “There you are, sir,
nothing in it but an old overcoat.”
“Let me have a look at the coat.”
It was a stout cold-resisting overcoat, evi-
dently made by a good tailor.
Vincent went rapidly through the pockets,
but found nothing in them but crumbs of
tobacco. He breathed more easily when
he found an outfitter’s label sewn under
the tab of the collar.
“I’m going to take this car away with me,
foreman, because it will be required as evi-
lence in a murder case.”
“But suppose the owner comes back and
asks for it, what am I to tell him?”
“I don’t think he will come back, but if
he does you must ring up the Newquay
police. I’m going on to leave the car with
them.”
“Very good, sir. You’ll find her in good
running order. The young lady at the
desk will tell you what there is to pay.”
Vincent made for *he window where the ;
lady sat enthroned behind her spectacles.


with a ledger before her. The bill was
quite moderate, but when Vincent made
known his intention to carry off the car,
she demurred.
“You see,” she explained, “I gave the
gentleman who left her here a receipt and
if he comes back and finds his car gone,
well . . .”
“You think he might make himself un-
pleasant.”
“I won’t say that. He seemed a nice
well-mannered gentleman, but he might
threaten an action at law, if you know what
I mean,”
“You mean that if you let her go out
after giving a receipt for her, you might
lose your situation?”
“Well, Mr. LUtyens is a funny sort of
gentleman: he might think that I was
right, but he’s just as likely to find fault
and tell me that I ought to have rung him
up before I let the car go. If you’ll stop
a minute I’ll get on to him.”
Vincent stopped a minute; the minute
multiplied itself by five before the operator
assured the speaker that there was no
answer to her call.
Hearing this Vincent declared his inten-
tion of driving the car to the police station
and invited the lady to ring up the New-
quay police to prepare them. On this she
removed her ban and the car was driven
out.
In consequence of this telephone message
Vincent found the station sergeant waiting
for him on the steps of the police station.
To him Vincent explained the position. An
inspector was called out and the car was
formally handed over to be kept by the
police until the Chief Constable received a
communication from New Scotland Yard.
“Have you no clue at all to the Identity
of the murdered man?” asked the inspector,
“Five minutes ago I should have answered
your question in the negative, but I have
now one clue —a London tailor’s name in the
collar of an overcoat —Mendel, in Sack-
ville Street. Luckily the manager of that
firm is a personal friend of mine.”
“I suppose you’ll be going back to Lon-
London to-morrow?”
“Yes, and I shall be starting at a god-
less hour in the morning. I have another
car on my hands, a car lent to me by
the Berkshire police, and as I’ve never
learned to drive two cars at the same time
I’ve got to leave this one with you.”
Vincent returned to his hotel on foot. He
spent the evening after dinner in marshall-
ing his knowledge of Ihot wounds from
cases in which he had helped police sur-
geons in their examinations of bodies that
had met their deaths from revolver shots.
He knew that there must have been at
least two men in the car besides the mur-
dered man, since the body had been lifted
and not dragged into the barn. It was the
body of a heavy man.
How had they been sitting. That was
easy to determine. He had examined the
body. There were two orifices in the head
—one on the right side which was obviously
the orifice of entrance, because its edges
were torn and lacerated and blackened as
if they had been burned by the heat and
flame of the explosion. The orifice of exit
on the left side was larger with its skin
edges turned outward, and it was from
this side of the car that the broken window
had been taken, so the murdered man must
have been sitting on the back seat of the
car and his assailant must have been sit-
ting beside him. The seat beside the driver
might have been vacant. There was noth-
ing to show this one way or the other.
According to gangster phraseology, there-
fore, the victim must have been “taken for
a ride.”
But was suicide to be ruled out? A sul-
cide practically always directs his weapon
at what he knows to be a vital spot—the
head or the heart—because he wishes to
die swiftly and with the least possible suf-
fering after the wound is inflicted. The
pistol is either dropped or, in one case that
he remembered when he Was a junior patrol
in Soho, still grasped in the hand. But
even if the pistol had been fired by the
victim himself holding it in his right hand
and pulling the trigger with his forefinger,
the bullet Would have had an upward ten-
dency and the glass window would not have
been shattered at the same horizontal level
as the victim’s head. All these facts went
to show it was a case of murder and not
suicide.
''Vincent was on the
road by five minutes to six the next morn-
ing, free to plan his next move. Clearly
the first thing to do was to take Lindsay,
the manager of Mendel’s outfitting shop,
down to Oldbury to identify the body of the
murdered man if he could. There ought to
be little difficulty about that, blit there was
another question. What would his superiors
and his colleagues say about the escape from
justice of two men who might have been
detained on suspicion if he had arrived at
Newquay in time. At the Yard there were
always critics of Chief Inspectors who had
climbed over the heads of older men and
these would, of course, be busy. They
would be saying that a more energetic and
experienced officer would have done some-
thing towards getting the boat followed.
That kind of critic doesn’t bother himself
about dates or time-tables: all he looks to
is success or failure. The boat had had two
days’ start when he took over the case:
never mind, the critics would say, he ought
to have found out more about her; he ought
not to have left Newquay without discover-
ing to what port she was going. But Vin-
cent was not the kind of man to become a
prey to misgivings. His own mind was clear
about the course he should follow. The
best thing to do was to get the identity of
the murdered man established by some wit-
ness who knew him and Lindsay might turn
out to be that witness.
As he had hoped, Vincent reached Lon-
don in time to catch Lindsay on his return
from lunch, having sent a message to Ser-
geant Walker to meet him near the out-
fitter’s shop.
His sergeant was pacing up and down,
stopping at intervals to gaze at works of
art displayed in a shop window, but he
was quickly aware of the arrival of his
superior. Vincent also seemed to be at-
tracted by the statuary and the engrav-
ings. He pulled up opposite the shop win-
dow and jumped out to look at them.
“Follow me discreetly into the shop I’m
going to,” he said in a low voice as if he
Were addressing a bust of William Shake-
speare
He had previously telephoned to Lindsay
to announce himself. He ran up the
stairs to a little glazed office, from which
his friend passed all his customers in re-
view, and tapped on the window. Lindsay
threw open the door and shook hands with
his friend warmly,
“I’m always seeing your name in the
papers, Vincent, and it’s a pleasure to meet
you again in the flesh.”
“I’m afraid that when you hear the nature
of my errand you will wish that you’d
never seen or heard of me. I’ve come to
ask you to run down with me to Old-
bury.”
“What for?”
“To identify. If possible, a murdered man.
It may prove to be a wild goose chase,
but here’s an overcoat found in a ear in
which a murder was committed and it
bears your firm’s label.”
Lindsay took the coat and became alert."
“I sold this coat myself to a man whom we
know quite well —a Mr. Bernard Pitt, one
of our regular customers. Do you mean to
say that he’s been murdered?”
‘‘Well, either that or he has murdered
someone else.”
Lindsay was shocked. “Bernard Pitt
couldn’t have been a murderer: he could
only have been the victim,”
“Can you describe him?”
“He was a biggish man, taller and broader
that I am—between forty and fifty and
growing bald; at any rate his hair was
thin.”
“That description fits the body exactly,"
said Vincent, “but so it would many other
people. Can you tell me what was Mr. Pitt’s
profession?”
“As it happens, I can. He was the chief
accountant of the Asiatic Bank at its head
office in Lombard Street. He let it out in-
advertently one day.”
“Have you his private address?”
“Yes, I have it noted somewhere. Here It
is—7 Leicester Avenue, Hampstead. I’ve
dined with him there more than once. It’s
a large house standing in its own garden,
with a staff of manservants mostly foreign.”
“That strikes me as peculiar—a bank
cashier living in a style like that.”
“I think he must have private means. Shall
I ring up and ask whether he’s at home
now?”
“I wish you would.”
Lindsay went to a telephone in another
room and returned a few minutes later, say-
ing: “The answer is that he left home on
Saturday and hasn’t yet returned. The
servants don’t know where he has gone.”
“Saturday was the day of the murder. X
fear that you’ll have to come down with me
to Oldbury to identify, or otherwise, this
murdered man I’ve tola you about. His
body was discovered in a barn at Oldbury.”
“When do you want me to come?”
“Immediately, if you can arrange it.”
“Very well, in a case like this I must
arrange it, if you’ll wait five minutes while
I put the baby to bed. You’ll find news-
papers on that table.”
Vincent scorned the newspapers and
moved restlessly about the tiny room dur-
ing the five minutes, while Sergeant Walker
wrote stolidly in his notebook. Lindsay re-
appeared attired for a motor journey.
Vincent’s driving, careful though It was
at cross-roads, occasionally exceeded the
speed limit for built-up areas. On reach-
ing Oldbury they drove straight to Hatch,
the village in which the bam was situated.
The body had been removed to the village
hall for identification.
“You’d better jump down, Walker, and
get the key to the hall from that cottage
opposite.”
The sergeant returned two minutes later
with the villaige constable, who carried the
key in his hand. He stopped only to shoo
off a bevy of small boys who were collecting
to enjoy whatever spectacle there might be
to boast about to their less fortunate
schoolfellows.
The body was lying on a trestle table
covered with a sheet borrowed from the
local joiner and undertaker. The sheet was
turned back and Lindsay recognised with a
shock his former customer, Bernard Pitt,
chief accountant in the Asiatic Bank.
They drove on to Oldbury to see Inspector
Miller, to whom Vincent reported the
identification.
“This is going to save us all a lot of work.


Mr. Vincent. Let me congratulate you,”
said the inspector.
“Thank you, but I can’t help thinking that
the work is only just beginning. We have
to lose no time in trying to head off these
rascals when they land in Prance or what-
ever country they may have been making
for.”
“The reporters have been worrying my
life out. I suppose that now that the body
has been identified we can give it out to
the Press. It would be very kind of you,
Mr. Vincent, if you would draft out some-
thing that I can get run off on a Roneo and
give to the reporters.”
“Certainly, Mr. Miller. I should make the
announcement quite short, yet sufficiently
informative to justify you in saying that
you have nothing to add to it —something
like this.” He tore a page out of his note-
book and pencilled on it: “The police have
now succeeded in identifying the body of
tire man which was found in a barn at
Hatch during the thunderstorm last Satur-
day. It was the body of Mr. Bernard Pitt,
of 7 Leicester Avenue, Hampstead.” “There!
How will that do?”
"Excellent from my point of view, but not,
1 fear, from that of the reporters.”
“Well, that’s all they’ll get for the pre-
lent.”
“I suppose that you yourself will lose no
Sme in going there.”
“My sergeant and I will go to the mana-
ter’s private address this evening, so I shall
>e obliged if you will hold over your inform-
itlon to journalists until after the late
rdltions are out and on sale.”
“Certainly. The announcement shall not
.ppear in the Press until to-morrow morn-
ng.”
“Good! If you are not in need of your
lar to-morrow it may be very useful to me.”
"Certainly, you must keep it. It is a great
elief to me that you have taken over the
;ase and I have my Chief Constable’s
uithority to lend you the official car for as
ong as you need it. For my part I shall give
rou every assistance that lies in my power.”
The two officers shook hands warmly and
Vincent resumed his seat at the wheel.
“Where shall I drop you?" asked Vincent.
“At that shop of yours?”
“No; I’ve put the baby to bed. Why
shouldn’t we dine together and make a
night of it?”
“Nothing doing. I’ve my hands full this
pvenlng.”
“W™ a man! I tell
rou, I wouldn’t take on your job for four
times my present screw. No, give me the
guiet, regular life of a shop-keeper with no
watches to keep . . .”
“I haven’t forgotten that you were once a
naval officer and that presumably you must
know a good deal about motor boats. Given
a motor boat about twenty-five feet over all,
could she safely cross the Channel to the
French coast from North Cornwall?”
“That depends on the weather. In a calm
sea of course she could. But why these in-
triguing questions?”
Vincent explained what had happened at
Newquay and his companion frowned when
he heard that the launch had no name.
“That longshoreman with the foul clay pipe
wasn’t far wrong when he said that there
was something crooked about that boat. I
wonder what it was. But don’t worry.
You’ll get to the bottom of it all right. You
might put me down in St. James’ Square.
You’ll know where to find me to-morrow if
you want me.”
As soon as Vincent had set down his pas-
senger, Sergeant Walker took the vacant
seat beside him, and he asked: “What did
they say at the Lab about that broken
window?”
“That the glass was perforated by a pis-
tol bullet,”
“As we thought. Well, now we have got
to see the manager of the Asiatic Bank.
We have his name from Lindsay, but it is
after closing time. Here’s a phone box. Jump
down and look up his address in the direc-
tory.”
Sergeant Walker found the address with-
out difficulty and they were fortunate
enough to find the manager at home and
at liberty to see them. The poor man lis-
tened gravely to what Vincent told him.
“I’ve been expecting this,” he said. “I
think that you will find that it was a case
of suicide. For some time past the auditors
have been working late hours at the bank
—in fact they are there at this moment—
and they have reason to believe that they
have found evidence of extensive defalca-
tions in the accounts, very cleverly carried
out, but none the less capable of proof.”
“Have you had suspicion about him for
long?”
“No, only for about ten days or a fort-
night, The discovery came as a great shock
to the directors and to myself. He was en-
tirely trusted and no doubt he had greatly
extended the bank’s business.”
“What first made you suspect him?”
“I received an anonymous letter.”
“Do you know anything about his private
life?”
“No, not very much. He seemed to be
living on a scale within his salary. He had
a small flat in Bloomsbury.”
“I may tell you confidentially that his
tailor gave me a different address —that of a
large house standing in its own grounds In
Hampstead.”
The manager stared at him aghast. “You
mean that he was leading a double life?”
“Certainly the house of which 1 speak was
costing him far more than his salary as
your cashier would run to. He had a staff
of menservants —mostly foreigners.”
"Good Lord! . . • This will be a shock to
the directors when they hear of it and I
suppose that most of the blame will fall on
me. Still, you’ll have to tell them of course,
unless you leave me to do it and so save
my face a litttle.”
“I’ve only just started my Inquiries; prob-
ably I shan’t see the directors myself for a
day or two and if you like to prepare them,
I shall have no objection at all. In any case
it will be in all the papers to-morrow that
he’s been found murdered. It may even
be In the stop press news to-night.”
“Have you established the fact that it
was a murder and not a suicide?”
“Only to my own satisfaction; the inquest
has been adjourned.”
Although it was obvious that the manager
was bursting with questions to which he
wanted answers, Vincent firmly took his
leave.
His next visit was to the house in Hamp-
stead. Hi waited in the car while Walker
rang the bell; a deferential foreign butler or
valet opened the door. The man had a
startled look and Vincent caught a glimpse
of a knot of other menservants huddled
together at the top of the back stairs, lis-
tening. He guessed that they had already
seen the stop press news in their dead
master’s evening paper.
Walker’s first question was: “Can we see
Mr. Pitt?”
“He is not at home, sir.”
“Indeed? When did he leave home?”
“On Saturday, sir.”
“For long?”
“I do not think he will come back ever.
If you wish I will show you the evening
paper.”
“You mean that he Is dead?”
"Yes, sir.”
Walker turned towards the car. “It did
get out in the stop press news; these people
all know about it.”
Vincent alighted quickly and addressed
the man at the door. “Are you Mr. Pitt’s
butler?”
“Yes, sir.”
“Well, I am a Chief Inspector from Scot-
land Yard and I have come to lock up and
seal the rooms containing his property and
also to take down the names of you and
your staff."
“Will you come in, gentlemen?”
“Where is the dining-room. I will see
you all in there.”
The man threw open a door on the
right, “This is the dining-room, sir,”
a sign from his chief,
Walker sat down at the highly-polished table
and took out writing materials. The room
was very expensively furnished: it was ob-
viously far beyond the means of a bank
cashier.
“Your name, please,” said Walker.
The man gave a name that sounded like
a sneeze and Walker asked him to write it
down. Instead he produced the envelope
of a letter on which the name and address
were clearly inscribed. While Walker was
copying this the man said: “You need not
call me by those names. Everybody know
me as 'Anton.' The postman also, he know
me by that name.”
“Well, Anton, how long have you been
here in Mr. Pitt’s service?”
“About ten months. I come in September
last year.” »
“When did you enter the country?”
Just after the war. I was treated as an
ally. I served many distinguished noble-
men. I have all my references upstairs.
Shall I show them to you?"
“Later we will see them, but now I want
you to bring in the other servants one by
one and act as our interpreter.”
“Very good, sir.”
Anton proved to be an efficient master
of ceremonies, though his manner of pro-
ceeding might not have satisfied a Master
of the Household. His summons to his
subordinates was a snap of the fingers, rein-
forced by a whistle through the teeth and
the hissing of a name. One by one his
myrmidons were brought in. Their names
and duties were recorded by Sergeant
Walker, and not one of them omitted to
mention the amount of wages due to him.
When the list was complete this question
of wages became acute.
“The police cannot pay your wages, nor
provide you with lodgings for the night.
You may remain in the house for the time
being, but you must not attempt to enter
any of the rooms that are locked.”
Vincent then dismissed all the servants
except Anton, telling them that they were
free to come and go and to seek other em-
ployment. To Anton he said: “I’m going to
leave you in charge of the house. You must
not admit anyone without first ringing me
up at Scotland Yard—Whitehall 1212. Now,
I want you to answer a few questions. Did
your master leave this house alone, or had
he a friend with him?”
“He went alone, just as he did when going
to his office, and at the same hour.”
“Did he go by car?”
“No, sir: he went never to his office in,
the car. That stop here till the evening,
and he did not take it out often in the eveu


ing and never on Saturday,'because the
chauffeur always had the day off."
“Did he ever drive himself?”
“No, sir; he always had the chauffeur;
you have seen him.” ,
“When your master left on Saturday did
he say that he would be away for some
.time?” ■
“No, he said nothing. Always on Satur-
day he give dinner party and Francois he
did the marketing on Saturday and prepare
as usual.”
“Now, Anton, I want you to think care-
fully before you answer my next question
Did any lady or gentleman call here and
ask to see mm last rnday—the day oeiun
he left home?”
“Yes, two Englishmen dined with him
here.”
“Were they English?"
, “Oh. yes.”
“Had they ever been here before?”
“Oh. yes; often.”
"What were their names?”
“Mr Blake and Mr. Lewis.”
“Can you describe them?”
“Mr. Blake he was very big and heavy,
and Mr. Lewis he was tall too, but thin, and
he looked older than Mr Blake.”
“Now, Anton. I want to see every room, ,n
the house. We must see that there is a
key to every room, and we must put a label
on each key.”
“I have no labels, sir.”
“No, but this officer has them. He will
go with you round the rooms lock them up
label the key and bring, it down to this
room. As you are ah an ,ious about voui
wages. I advise you to apply to the Home
Office to-morrow morning, and there you
will find that I have reported your case, too
Thev will tell vou what to do ”
When all the rooms were locked and the
keys stowed in Sergeant Walker’s bag, Vin-
cent gave Anton his final instructions.
“You quite understand, you must admit
no one before I come here to-morrow morn-
ing. They can wait if they please until I
come but they must not move beyond the
hall, if you have any trouble with one of
them ring up the number I have given you
and ask for me—Chief Inspector Vincent.”
V
Vincent and Walker
arrived at the house in Hampstead at nine
o’clock the next morning. Anton admitted
them. I’e had the appearance of a man
who had slept ill.
Walker produced his bag of keys and the
officers began their search in the library
Not a single letter or paper of any kind
was found ip the desk or in the drawers
Vincent rang the bell and Anton appeared
“Go and bring me the man whose duty it
is to clean this room, and stay here with us
to act as interpreter.”
“Yes sir but that man speaks English
verv well.”
“B tng him in then.”
Anton returned with an upstanding young
man with an open face He was a Serbian
and a fluent linguist.
“You clean this room every morning?’
“Yes, sir ”
“Before your master left the house on
Saturday did you find burnt papers in the
grate?”
“Yes, sir, for many days last week the
grate was full of burnt paper.”
“Just letters or bigger documents?”
“Both, sir, but mostly letters.”
“Did you notice anything else remarkable
in the room when you cleaned it on Saturday
morning?”
“Only that I think my master had been
studying late on Friday nlsh* There w°c e
books everywhere—on the table, on the
chairs, and even on the floor. Some were
open, some closed.”
“And you put them all back tidily in their
shelves? Can you remember which books
they were?”
“Some of them, sir I will show you some
that I remember.”
He brought down frdm the shelf three 01
four books which Vincent examined with
curiosity. They were all in quarto size, bu
they varied greatly in their subjects—history
biography, travel and science. In one re-
spect they were alike, there was a note in
figures on the flyleaf—a DenciU°d note such
as (to quote the first three) 797, 1325, 410
Having dismissed the manservant. Vincent
turned to Walker. “What do you make of
these figures? They must mean something ”
“A code do you think?”
Vincent shook his head.
“You think, then, that these figures rep-
resent amounts of money hoarded in each
book. But they are such odd numbers.”
“Not if the greater part of them con-
sisted In Treasury notes which cannot be
traced.”
“Then you think that the owner was ab-
sconding with a large sum?”
“I think it is very probable. This is a large
house; probably Pitt entertained friends
here a good deal. We’ll get Anton in again
and ask him. Call him, will you?”
Anton crossed the hall almost at a run.
“Yes, sir?”
“Did Mr. Pitt entertain friends here to
dinner or lunch?”
“Not to lunch, sir, but to dinner—oh. ves
He had very important people to dinner —
people with titles And Francois, the cnef
here, is very noted for his cooking.”
“How often did your late master give
dinner-parties?”
“Quite once a week, sir, and sometimes
oftener —always on Saturdays.”
“Were there ladies among his guests?”
“No, sir; only gentlemen.”
“They played cards, of course, after din-
ner.”
“Yes, sir, always. There were four card
tables set out ups’airs.”
“Mr. Blake and Mr. Lewis —were they
always present at these parties?”
“Yes, sir, always, and I think they used
to wto a good deal of money.”
“Why do you think that?”
“Well, sir, Mr. Pitt used to come down
with them to the door, while I held it open
and helped them to put on their coats and
I heard Mr. Pitt say: ‘You’ve been lucky
again to-night. I hope vou won’t frighten
all my guests away!’” Anton seemed to
plume himself upon having given some use-
ful information.
“Did your master dine out in the evening
sometimes?”
“Oh, yes. sir, very often.”
“And the chauffeur will remember where
he went for dinner?”
“Yes. sir Shall I call him?”
“Yes, please.”
The chauffeur was an Englishman, speci-
ally chosen, thought Vincent, for his taci-
turnity, He stood to attention with his cap
in his hand waiting to be questioned.
“How long have you been in Mr. Pitt’s
service?”
The man appeared to be embarked upon
mental arithmetic, using the fingers of his
left hand for his calculations.
“About ten months.”
“Was the car a new one when you took it
over?”
“Yes. sir, I took it from the makers and, of
course, it had to be run in.”
“Did your mas er use it much?”
“Not very much: he used it in the evening
for short runs in the town to take him out
to dinner and sometimes on a Sunday to
take friends to Brighton.
“Where did he usually dine when he went
out?”
“At different houses.”
“And clubs?”
“Only at one club—the Ace of Hearts to
Piccadilly.”
“Did you have to wait for him to bring
aim back?”
“No, he would tell me the time to fetch
aim, and generally he did hot keep me wait-
'ng.”
“Can you remember the addresses of any
jeople with whom he used to dine most
frequently?”
“Mr. Brooklyn in Jermyn Street, number
seventy-one—that was one place.”
“Do you mean that he went there more
frequently than to any other house?”
“Yes, he never missed a week without
going there.”
“rn
XhanK you. This one
address will do for the present. On Satur-
day morning when he went away had he
given you no orders?”
“He told me I could take the day off.”
“Did you always have the day off on Sat-
urday?”
“No, not always. He often went out on
Saturday evening.”
“But Anton tells me he always gave din-
ner-parties on Saturday.”
“Oh, sir—these foreigners they lose count
of days.”
Having dismissed the chauffeur, Vincent
rose. “Now, Walker, I think that our
next visit should be to 71 Jermyn Street.
At this hour probably we shall find the
gentleman at home.”
As Vincent had surmised, Mr. Brooklyn
proved to be a gentleman of leisure, and as
far as he was able to judge from the fur-
nishings of his flat, a gentleman of ample
means. Vincent sent his card up by the
manservant who opened the door. Mr.
Brooklyn appeared to be tickled at receiv-
ing a visit from a prominent officer of the
Criminal Investigation Department and he
received Vincent with cordiality.
“The blow has fallen at last." was his
greeting. “I knew that some day mv sins
would find me out and I was wondering
which of them would first bring me into the
meshes of the law.”
He sank his voice to a portentous whis-
per. “Is it about that woman I threw
into the canal? Or the gentleman in
Battersea Park from whom I demanded
money with menaces? I shall plead guilty
to both of them You’ve brought the hand-
cuffs with you, of course. I should not
like my manservant to miss any of the
fun.”
The man was good-looking and younger
than Vincent had expected. He smiled.
“On this occasion. Mr. Brooklyn, I have
only a question or two to ask you with, of
course, the usual caution that vour replies
will be taken down in writing and may be
used. But seriously, I have come to ask
for any information you can give me about
the late Mr. Pitt.”
“The late Mr. Pitt?”
“Surely you have read in the paper about
the finding of Mr. Pitt’s body in a barn at
Hatch in Berkshire?”
“To tell you the truth. I haven’t opened
the paper yet; I breakfast late.”
“Well, it was in the stop press last night.
Do you know the Christian name of your
friend?”
“No, I don’t. All I know is that he
signed his letters ‘B. Pitt.’ ”
“Well, we have strong reason to believe
that your friend was the cashier of the


Asiatic Bank, Had you any idea of that?”
Brooklyn drew in his breath with a whist-
ling sound. “He was leading a double
life, you mean—the man about town in his
lighter moments, and the hard-working bank
official when he felt like work. I should
never have thought it, nor would you if you
fcad known him.”
“When did you see him last?”
“I dined at his house one day last week.
He was in the best of health and spirits
then.’ - ’
“Were you his only guest on that oc-
casion?”
“No, there were half a dozen of us.”
“And among them a Mr. I.ewls and a
Mr. Blake?”
“The two Americans, you mean? Yes.
they were there.”
“They were Americans? And after din-
ner you played cards?”
“We did. 1 shan’t easily forget that
card party. Those two Yanks skinned me
Alive.”
“Really, It is about those two men that
lam trying to get information. Can you
by any chance tell me their address?”
“When I last saw them I gave them a
Jilt home to their hotel—the Carlton.”
“Thank you, Mr. Brooklyn, that Is what
I wanted —their address.”
"At the risk of seeming indiscreet I con-
fess that it would interest me to know
what sort of crime they are wanted for.
Cheating at cards would be my guess.”
Vincent laughed. “I’m afraid that it
would be premature to say whether your
guess is right or wrong. Thank you very
much for seeing me.”
It was but a step for the two police officers
to reach the Carlton. There they drew'
blank; neither of the two names were
known.
“I’m not surprised,” said Vincent to his
colleague. “This Is not the kind of hotel
they would affect. If it had been the
Globe . . .”
“Do you think that Mr. Brooklyn was
lying?” asked Walker.
“No. I think that they were putting him
off the scent. Now, Walker, you took down
from the bank manager the address of
the rooms in Bloomsbury which Pitt had
given as his lodgings.”
Walker took out his notebook and read;
*l2 Redcliff Street, W.C.2.”
“Come along then. We’ll pick up the
ear and try our luck there.”
A.T 12 Redcliff Street
they had better luck than they expected,
Mr. Pitt, they learned, had occupied rooms
there, also his two American friends, Mr.
Lewis and Mr. Blake.
The landlady received them in a little
room which she called “my office.” She
seemed quite glad to exercise her tongue
and not in the least anxious lest It should
carry her too far.
“Of course I read this morning about the
murder of a Mr. Pitt, but I didn’t know it
was my Mr. Pitt, although it set me won-
dering; you see it gave the dead gentle-
man’s address in a big house in Hampstead
but I suppose the police do sometimes make
mistakes. You’re sure it was my Mr.
Pitt?”
“Quite sure.”
“Then I’ll tell you something. If you
ask me, Mr. Pitt’s body isn’t the only one
you’ll find. There are two more of my
lodgers missing. Ah! 1 see you didn’t
know that.”
“You mean Mr. Lewis and Mr. Blake?”
“How did you know? Have their bodies
keen found already?”
“No."
“Oh, you’ll find them all right if you
look about. They all went off together
last Saturday and not a word heard from
them since.”
“Did they say they were coming back?”
“Oh, yes, they were as happy as school-
boys going on a holiday—all went off In the
car together.”
“Did they take much luggage?”
"Mr. Blake and Mr. Lewis did, but you
see Mr. Pitt didn’t have any here since
he had to sleep at his old mother’s house
to keep her company.”
“Do you know where his mother lived?”
“Out North, I believe, but I couldn’t tel)
you the address.”
“How long has he lived here altogether?’
“About four years, and it’s only for the
last twelve months or less that he hasn’t
slept here."
"Why did he still keep on his rooms?”
“Well, he had lunch here every day and
had letters sent here and was always think-
ing his mother would get better and that he
would come back.”
“Well, now, Mrs. Briggs, we want to look
round the rooms of these three missing men
beginning with those of Mr. Lewis and Mr.
Biake,”
"They had a nice little flat on the second
floor —two bedrooms and the sitting-room
they shared. Perhaps you’d like to start
with those.”
“Well, we needn’t trouble you now any
longer. We have to make it a rule to do our
•searching alone. In ten minutes or so we
will call you.”
The search they conducted was as
thorough as long practice could make it.
The underside of every drawer was scruti-
nised and the paper linings were taken out;
but nothing was found.
“It is quite evident that these fellows
meant to bolt,” said Vincent. He opened the
door and found Mrs. Briggs hovering about
on the landing outside, bursting with curi-
osity.
“I suppose you, won’t tell me whether
you’ve found anything,” she said archly. ■
“No, Mrs. Briggs; I can tell you quite
truthfully that we’ve found nothing, but
you’ll find that we’ve put everything back
tidily in its place.”
"You’ll find that I can be trusted, gentle-
men. Just now while you were in that room
a reporter called and I never Jet on that you
were here.”
“Quite right, Mrs. Briggs. Who did the
motor car belong to that your lodgers went
away in—Mr. Blake or Mr. Lewis?”
"I understand from what they told me
that they’d hired it for a week.”
“Do you know what garage they hired it
from?”
“No, I don’t, but there are three or four
round here where you can hire a car.”
“Well, now we would like to see Mr. Pitt’s
rooms.”
"Yes, they’re on the first floor—a sitting-
room and bedroom opening Into one an-
other.”
She led the way downstairs and opened
the door facing them. “You’ll excuse their
not being quite tidy, but we were leaving it
till the day before he was to come back.
There’s a lot of burnt paper in the grate
“So I see,” said Vincent. “Well now I fear
that you must leave us to our work. We
shan’t be any longer over It than we can
help.”
Walker went first to the fireplace and
turned over the carbonised paper. “The
ashes have all been chawed up,” he said;
“it’s no good saving any of them for expert
examination.”
A search of the drawers in the writing-
table produced nothing. There remained
only the wardrobe in which were hanging
three suits of clothes, not bearing the name
of the Sackville Street tailor. They bore
signs of hard use.
Vincent went through the pockets with a
practised hand, but found them empty until
he came to the third jacket, This also he
was about to restore to its hanger when
he thought that he heard rather than felt
the crackle of paper. Again he plunged his
hand into the breast pocket, which he had
already explored without result. This time
his fingers came upon a thin sheet of paper
pressed close against the pocket lining. He
took it out. It was a milliner’s bill from the
Maison Germaine in the rue Duphot, Paris.
It was charged to Monsieur Pitt. There was
but one item, “Chapeaux, 100,000 francs.”
“What,” asked Vincent, “could Mr. Pitt be
doing with a hundred thousand francs’
worth of ladles’ hats?”
w
T T ALKER was aston-
ished to see his chief suddenly take three
rapid turns round the room, kicking the
furniture impatiently out of his way: then
he halted and handed the bill to his
sergeant.
“What do you make of that, Walker?”
Walker shook His head in token that the
solution was beyond him.
“It seems to me,” said Vincent, “that a
visit to Paris by one of us is foreshadowed.
Hats might mean anything except hats. Yes,
one of us or both will have to cross the
Channel and make the acquaintance of
Madame Germaine in the rue Duphot.”
It was Vincent who first found the garage
that owned the car, and when the young
women in the glazed box learned the nature
of the inquiry she seized her telephone and
rang up a number in excited tones.
“If you’ll wait a minute, sir, tin proprietor
himself will come down. He was just think-
ing of acquainting Scotland Yard, because
the gentleman that signed for the car has
been found murdered; we read it in the
paper.”
A man whose gait indicated haste entered
the garage with a proprietary look about
him.
“What’s all this?” he asked the young
woman.
“This gentleman ’is from Scotland Yard.
He’s called about that sixteen-horse Daim-
ler hired by Mr. B. Pitt.” •
“What 1 want, to know Is where is my
car and how can I get it back?” he said
to Vincent anxiously.
“I can answer your first question. It Is
in the hands of the police at Newquay, and
your best plan would be to ring them up
on the telephone. The window was broken
by a revolver shot and a new window was
put in at the expense of the men who hired
it. And now that I have answered your
question I will ask you some of my own.
What were the men like who hired your
car?”
“There were three of them. Mr. Pitt, who
signed for the car, said that he was cashier
in the Asiatic Bank, Lombard Street, and
I verified this on the telephone. He had
two men with him; I think they were
Americans by their accent,”
“Was one of them broad and heavily built
and the other an older man, tall and thin?”
“Yes, you’ve described them exactly."
“How long did they hire the car for?”
“They said they wanted it for the Inside
of a week and so I let It to them by the
day.”
“Well, I should lose no time in telephon-
ing to the police at Newquay to find out
when you can have your car back. I sup-
pose you made them pay a deposit?"


“ Did I not? : That’s the rule with everyone
who hires a car, unless he’s personally
known to me, and Mr. Pitt was not.”
“In what form did Mr. Pitt make his de-
posit with you?”
“In treasury notes. Thirty pounds was
the amount of the deposit. To tell you the
truth I didn’t much like the look of those
two Americans. They seemed to be slip-
pery customers somehow, and if it comes to
that, Pitt himself was a queer fish. What
had a bank cashier to do with a big house
full of foreigners in Hampstead? I suppose
you could tell me something about that.”
“What I’m concerned with is to find the
murderer,” said Vincent, ignoring the last
remark. “Can you remember anything that
would be likely to help me—for example
any conversation between the three men?”
“No, but after they’d gone a man. came
in; he said that he had a garage and that
the three men had been round to him but
that he diln’t have a car smart enough for
them. He asked me what kind of car I’d
lent them and I told him; that was all.”
“He didn’t say where his garage was?”
“No, he didn’t. I’d never seen him be-
fore, but there are lots of little garages
about here.”
Vincent decided that for the moment it
was not worth while to hunt up this second
garage. He thanked the man and left,
hoping to head off his sergeant. To his
relief he saw him coming down the street.
“It’s all right, Walker; this is where the
car was hired and the description of the
men tallies with the description of the fel-
lows who embarked from Newquay. I shall
have to see Richardson at Head Office, and
let him decide the step that ought to be
taken. While I’m at the Central Office you
might make it your job to find out whether
those two rascals have registered as aliens
The landlady gave you their Initials.”
“Yes, I have them: G. Lewis and R. Blake
I’ll be off now”’
C HIEF - CONSTABLE
RICHARDSON was startled when his mes-
senger announced that Chief Inspector Vin-
cent wanted to see him.
“I thought that the Chief Inspector had
been lent to, the Berkshire Constabulary
Well, show him in.”
Vincent presented himself and Richard-
son looked up. “I thought you were down
in the wilds of Berkshire, or was It Corn-
wall?”
“Both, sir,” replied Vincent, with a smile,
“but my inquiries indicate two Americans
as having been guilty of murder in this
country. In order to get further evidence
I am asking your leave to go over to Paris.”
“To Paris? I’m rather out of touch with
what you’ve been doing. Before I authorise
you to go so far afield I think you had better
give me a verbal resume of the case as far
as you have got in it.”
Vincent had a gift for terse narrative. He
omitted nothing from his story and yet he
reduced it to reasonable length.
“You didn’t yourself see the motor launch
at Newquay?”
“No, sir.”
“And yet you are satisfied that it could
cross the Channel even in rough weather
without danger?”
“I had to depend on what the sailors at
Newquay said about her, but they satisfied
me that she was a safe sea boat and I
gathered that they were competent judges
I recommend that I should leave immedi-
ately for Prance, in pursuit, sir,” Vincent
concluded.
“Ope has to be careful or the Receiver may
get on his hind legs. All the expenses you
have Incurred for the Berkshire Constabu-
lary now come out of the Metropolitan Police
Fund, and if we add your expenses abroad
without special authority, he may have a
good deal to say. Why not go and explain
the case personally to him, saying that I
have sent you.”
“Very good, sir, I will.”
“You may quote me as saying that per-
sonal inquiry in the country itself is a secret
of success in cases like this. He will re-
member that it was in this way that I suc-
ceeded in clearing up two of our biggest
cases.”
The man who had come from the Lome
Office as Receiver was no dry-as-dust ac-
countant. On the contrary he was keenly
interested in police work and ready to make
any concession that seemed likely to bring
about success. In the hands of Vincent the
story was convincing; it is evident that
without this visit to Paris the ship would
be spoiled for a ha’p’orth of tar, but when
Vincent suggested taking a subordinate
with him he drew the line.
“I can quite understand your case. Chief
Inspector, that when you are making in-
quiries you must have someone with you
to do the fetch and carry Jobs in a big case,
but to take a sergeant, ignorant of French,
across the Channel would be, in my opinion,
an indefensible waste of money. If you find
it necessary to go, you’ll have to go alone.”
“Very •'ood, sir,” said Vincent with a sigh.
He returned to Richardson’s room and was
fortunate enough to find him alone.
“Well?” asked his chief, looking up with
seen eyes. “Did .you melt the hard heart
of the Receiver?”
“No, sir, but he was very nice about it
I’m sure that he would have given way if
he could. I can go over to Prance myself
but I cannot take a junior officer with me
Happily, I’m on very good terms with an
officer of the Surete with whom I worked
during the war.”
“That’s all right then. You can go ever
to Paris as soon as you .ike: in fact, the
sooner the better. While you are there you
had better call upon two friends of .line,
M. Bigot and M. Verneuil, both of them
members of the Paris police. They will
remember having worked with me and I
trust you to give them the usual friendly
messages.”
Vincent found Sergeant Walker waiting
for him at the basement entrance. There
was an expectant look on his face which his
chief dispelled by a shake of the head.
“Nothing doing for you, my friend. I have
to go alone to save expenses.”
“That’s all right, Mr. Vincent. I was
never one for foreign travel. You look such
a fool in a country where you don’t even
know how to ask for a light for your pipe.
The good old Metrop. is where I belong
I’ve made inquiry about those two men;
they didn’t register.”
“All the better for us, because if they
show up here again we shall have something
to hold them on.”
“Another thing I’ve found out is that
the passport carried by the dead man had
been tampered with. According to the
Foreign Office records it had been issued
to Bernard Pitt and the name had been
obliterated with chemicals and ‘John Whit-
aker’ had been substituted.”
“I know the stuff they use; they employee
it a lot during the war. It will take out
ink from any document without leaving a
trace. Well, keep your eyes open while
I’m away and if you hear anything that I
ought to know, write to me at the Hotel du
Louvre. I’ll write it down for you. I ought
to be back at latest in two days.”
It chanced that during the war Vincent
had had to work with a very Intelligent
and well-educated French Commissary of
police named Goron, who had lately mar-
rled They had since kept up a desultory
correspondence and the Gorons had Invited
Vincent to come over and enjoy their hos-
pitality. It was certainly an opportunity,
since a ladies’ hat shop in the rue Duphot
which demanded 100,000 francs for a hat
was new to his experience. He telegraphed
to his French friend to expect him on the
following morning, and he crossed the Chan-
nel by the night boat. Arrived at St. Lazare
Station, he took a taxi to the little apart-
ment in the rue St. Georges and found a
warm welcome from Goron and his wife,
a lively little woman from Normandy, who
spoke a pretty broken English. Goron spoke
no language but his own.
“To what are we indebted for the pleasure
rf seeing you. my friend?” asked Goron.
“It’s a long story,” began Vincent in French
that was fluent but not impeccable.
“Pardon,” interrupted Jacqueline Goron:
‘we can have no long stories until you have
been fortified by a cup of my coffee after
your journey.”
“I must explain,” said her husband In a
whisper that was Intended to be overheard,
“that the salic law does not hold good in
this flat; it is mled exclusively by a female
sovereign.”
“D
L>E careful, admonished
Jacqueline, shaking her forefinger at him;
“or I will tell Monsieur Vincent home truths
about you that you will not be able to con-
tradict because you are too lazy to leam
English. As for example . . .”
“Enough! I capitulate.” He held up both
hands above his head.
“Take care what you say, my friend,” put
in Vincent. “We must do nothing to offend
madame when I am so soon to beg her help.
This is the only clue I have for solving the
problem that has brought me over to Paris.”
He showed them the milliner’s bill from
the Maison Germaine.
Goron knitted his brows over it. “What-
ever this is for it is not a hat,” he said em-
phatically.
“Don’t be so positive, Edouard," protested
his wife. “I have seen hats for which I
would willingly give a hundred thousand
francs if I had had them to give.”
“The question is,” said Vincent, “whether
madame will consent to go to that hat shop
and see who is running it and what dieir
real business is.”
“I can answer for her that she will,” said
her husband. “The only danger is that
Madame Germaine mav bribe her with a
new hat.”
Jacqueline made no answer to this gibe:
she was in deep thought. “Ecoute,” she
said suddenly; “my plan is made. You,
Edouard, will be loitering, on the opposite
pavement looking into shop windows or
what you will. Monsieur Vincent will be
standing irresolute at the comer of the rue
St. Honore. I shall enter the shop boldly
to investigate and shall choose a hat—l
need one —but before buying it I shall
have to seek the approval of my husband
who is waiting for me outside. He will
accompany me to the shop to pay for my
hat and draw his own conclusions about
the saleswoman. This concluded, we shall
walk together to the rue St. Honore and
Monsieur Vincent, posing as an English-
man exploring Paris, will ask us the way
to the Invalides. We shall then show him
the way and walk with him down the rue
Gambon and give him our impressions.
Does my plan please you?”
She was evidently so pleased with it her-
self that Vincent would not have dared to
pour cold water on it, but her husband
had something to say.
“Your plan is admirable with one excep- '
tion. It is not necessary to buy a hat;


you could take me over to the shop and I
oould declare that the hat doesn’t suit
you.”
“But that would be a manifest state-
ment. The hat I shall choose will be most
becoming. We will start Immediately.”
They shared a taxi to the Boulevard Made
lelne, where Jacqueline left the two mer
and walked down the street by herself look-
ing for the Maison Germaine. She stopped
for a moment to look in the window and
then went in. The opening of the shop
door rang a bell. The little shop itself wa?
empty, but the persistent ringing of the
bell until the door was closed brought from
an inner room a tall, good-looking woman
in the thirties, beautifully dressed and
groomed. Jacqueline proceede 1 to business
at once and pointed to a hat in the window
and asked its price. The modest sum quoted
convinced her that this was not the shop
where vast sums were spent on hats. She
detected a slight foreign accent in the sales-
woman and asked whether she were Eng-
lish.
“I myself am learning English and I love
to practise it.” she explained.
“No,” said the lady pleasantly. “I am
Austrian and I speak no English.”
By this time. Jacqueline had fitted the
hat on her head before a glass and was
given up to the strange ecstasy which takes
possession of every well-dressed woman
when she tries on becoming headgear with
a competent saleswoman at her elbow She
felt a prick of conscience when she thought
Of her husband and his English friend wait-
ing for her to come out full to the brim
with information, and put a tentative ques-
tion:
“Surely, you have not been here very long
madame. I have often passed down this
street and I could not have failed to see
the ravishing hats displayed in your win-
dow.”
“I have been here six months.”
"With such talent as yours, I feel sure
that you will succeed—unless this lament-
able crisis affects you.”
"On the contrary, madame, the crisis aids
me, for clients accustomed to pay five hun-
dread francs for a hat are glad nowadays to
come to te and be supplied with hats to
their taste at a far more moderate figure.”
Jacqueline was so much interested that
she continued the conversation for her own
satisfaction until the sight of her husband
pacing up and down on the opposite pave-
ment brought her back to realities with a
start
“A
vJh, * there’s my hus-
band!” she exclaimed. “I cannot finally de-
cide on a hat without his approval.”
She ran down the street to Goron.
"Madame Germaine herself is serving me.
She’s an Austrian and her hats are a reve-
lation and so inexpensive. I’m quite sure
she must be all right, but come and see
for yourself.”
They spent about twenty minutes in the
Shop, finally buying a hat at a quite moder-
ate price, and Jacqueline walked proudly out
wearing the new hat and leaving the old
one to be sent home.
“Well,” she asked her husband eagerly,
“am I not right about her? Such an artist
could not be a criminal.”
“In my career,” said Goron, “I have had
to deal with ladies quite as disarming as
your Austrian friend and found them
steeped to the lips in duplicity. I agree with
you that it is hard to believe that this one
Is not up to her face value, but we must
Join our English friend who is waiting for
ns yonder.”
Having acquainted Vincent with the ex-
perience of Jacqueline in the hat shop, Goron
made a suggestion.
“I propose,” he said, “that we send Jacque-
line home in a taxi and that you and I visit
the police of the Bth arrondissement to in-
luire about the status of Madame Ger-
naine.”
Vincent jumped at the suggestion and tht
.wo men betook themselves to the police
office in the Exhibition building They had
me disappointment. Monsieur Bigot, the
thief, was absent on holiday but Monsieur
Verneuil. who was acting for him. could
be seen if the business was in any way
argent. They were ushered into the acting-
thief’s room, who rose to receive them.
Goron introduced Vincent as a Br.ash
olleague who had come to the French
Surete for help.
“You are perhaps a colleague of my
esteemed friend. Monsieur Richardson.”
“Monsieur Richardson has climbed high,’
said Vincent. “He is now one of the chief
officers of Scotland Yard.”
“I am not surprised; he was one of those
marked for promotion.”
“I hear that your comrade, Monsieur Bigot
is absent. Has he also achieved his promo-
tion?” asked Vincent.
“You have employed the exact word-
achieved, monsieur He has Indeed achievec
it, but if you think that it has made him
happy and contented you will be mistaken
He has become a slave and a beast oi
burden.”
Vincent smiled without committing him-
-elf to i reply.
“Now, Monsieur Verneuil. let us talk busi-
ness. We have come to ask to have the
dossier of Madame Germain, the Austrian
milliner in the rue Duphot. examined.”
“Nothing easier,” replied Verneuil: “if
those rascals of mine have kept tl)eir files
up to date.” He stamped on the floor with
his heel. A hang-dog police clerk stood
wilting in the doorway. “I want the dossier
of an Austrian milliner in the rue Duphot
a woman named Germaine.”
“Very good, monsieur.”
When the dossier was brought. Verneuil
scanned the pages with a whimsical air
of surprise. “Tiens!” he said; “not a word
recorded against her Madame Germaine
is of course her professional name—she is
Praulein Kofler—an Austrian from Vienna.’
"We on the other side of the Channel
have nothing against her unless it be that
she is selling hats on an almost incredible
sca ie_to the tune of a hundred thousand
francs to a single customer.”
“You think that she was smuggling them
into England? That, surely would be a
matter for your Customs Officers, not for
us.”
“The man who had the bill which 1 am
going to show you was not at all the type
of person who would be trading in women’s
hats.”
“But can you say of any man that he
would not trade in women’s hats if he had
a pretty woman friend?”
“Not to the tune of one hundred thousand
francs.”
Verneuil shrugged his shoulders. “Not
being married I have no first-hand evidence
to go upon, but I understand that if a
woman were condemned to change her hat
ten times a day she would gladly forfeit
her chance of eternal salvation. May 1
see this bill for one hundred thousand
francs?”
Vincent put the bill into his hand. Ver-
neuil scrutinised both the handwriting and
the paper.
“Here is a bill my wife received from
Madame Germaine this morning,’' said
Goron.
Verneuil spread both bills out upon the
table and compared them. “They are not in
the same handwriting Tenez. my friend,
r myself will call on Madame Germaine
and ask her the meaning of this large
quantity of ha‘s sold to England Unless
f am much mistaken, she will tell me that
she knows nothing about it. If you gentle-
men have no objection I will go alone and
report to you afterwards the result of my
hquiry.”
“There is one o'her service that you
might do for me, monsieur,” said Vincent.
‘lt is to ascertain whether two Americans
—G. Lewis and R, Blake—have taken put
cards of identity at any time.”
“Nothing easier; I can give you that in-
torma ion from the telephone.” He picked
up his receiver and called a number “Ver-
neuil speaking. It concerns two Americans
G. Lewis and R: Blake.” He spelt out the
names, ‘Have they taken out cards of
identity at any time? Ring me when you
have the information.”
He replaced the receiver and looked tri-
umphantly at Vincent as if to say:
‘You see how wonderfully things are or-
ganised on this side of the Channel.” While
the telephone was being used Vincent had a
brain wave. He knew that the road to a
Frenchman’s heart was down his throat He
would ask Verneuil to meet him and Goron
for lunch and let him choose his pet res-
taurant. As he had expected, the ex-petty
officer turned detective accepted with alac-
rity.
“m
J.HIS falls well mon-
sieur. I shall have seen Madame Germaine
and can make my report to vou over the
hors d’oeuvres.”
The ‘elephone bell began to tinkle Ver-
neuil took up the receiver and then turned
to Vincent and said, not without pride in
his tone: “Two Americans —Rupert Blake
and George Lewis—took out cards of iden-
tity in the fifteenth arrondissement last
January Their address at that time was
9, rue Violet. There, my friend, our system
may not be perfect but at any rate it
works,”
“Thank you, monsieur; that information
may be very useful to me And now we will
say ‘au revoir’ until twelve-thirty, when we
meet at your pet restaurant near the Qual
I’Orsay.”
As the two friends left the office. Goron
said: “We are in luck, my friend That
restaurant Verneuil is taking us to is kept
by the ex-maitre d’hotel of a cardinal famous
for his cuisine Now I must go and make
my peace with Jacqueline and get her per-
mission to lunch out.”
“And I must return to my iio'eJ to make
myself fit to be seen I came straight to you
this morning from the boat train.”
Vincent, looking immacula e, was the first
to arrive at the restaurant, where he was
received with ceremony by the proprietor
who. as he remarked later, treated him, as
he would have treated a foreign diplomatist
with a string of titles before his name.
Goron, with meticulous punctuality, was
close on his heels: Verneuil was ten min-
utes late and they sat down at their reserved
table to wait for him He came bursting in
full of apologies.
“You will forgive me when 1 tell you the
cause I was right when I said that in my
opinion that milliner knew nothing about
that extravagant bill.”
“You mean that someone must have stolen
one of her bill heads?”
“So she said. She assured me that she


had no export trade with England, that
being a great admirer of your country she
often wished that she had, though not to the
extent suggested by this Invoice because
that would mean employing hands in a fac-
tory to cope with it.”
“Had she any suggestion to make about
how one of her bill heads could have been
abstracted?”
“She said that nothing could be easier.
The customer would merely ask to see a
model from the window and while she had
her back turned, an invoice could be taken
from the desk where there are always sev-
eral lying ready. She said that none of her
customers spend that amount of money even
in a year.”
“The question before us,” said Goron, “is
what could have been the object of sending
a bogus invoice to England if the hats were
not to be supplied.”
Vincent pondered. “Two possibilities sug-
gest themselves to me; the first that the
invoice was Intended to cover a sum of
money that had been used for other purposes
than hats; the second that it was to conceal
the true nature of merchandise of another
kind.”
eyes nar-
rowed. “I think that the second of your
explanations will prove to be the true one.”
“But we have not yet dismissed the first
possibility,” said Goron; "that the invoice
was Intended to cover a sum of money that
had been used for other purposes. My
wife has a Spanish friend, a lady with a rich
husband. She told her that Spanish hus-
bands, however well-to-do, dislike handing
over money to their wives, but that such is
their love of outward show that they like
their wives to be better dressed than other
women and will cheerfully pay extravagant
sums to their wives’ dressmakers and mil-
liners. The wives require money to indulge
their little weaknesses, so they enter into an
unholy alliance with the dressmaker or mil-
liner, who charges the husband an exorbitant
price and when he settles the bill the two,
that is the wife and her milliner, divide
the surplus between them.”
“Tiens!” said Verneuil; “I did well to re-
main a bachelor. All the same, Madame
Germaine has all her goods plainly priced
and it would be difficult to deceive a French
husband. What is the position in your coun-
try, Monsieur Vincent?”
“You must not ask me, for I, too, like
you, am still a bachelor and know nothing
about the expedients of married ladies who
are kept short of cash.”
“Well,” said Goron; “as the meeting has
decided against the first proposition by a
majority, let us turn to the second; that
this invoice covered other merchandise than
hats.”
“Now,” said Verneuil; “we are upon the
fringe of the truth. What merchandise can
run into those figures? There is only one ”
Goron, with a quick movement of his
thin, lithe body, turned upon him. “You
mean drugs?” Vemeuil nodded significantly
without speaking. “Then, Vincent, my friend,
I must warn you that you have before you
the most difficult case in your career?”
Goron’s excitement was infectious. Vin-
cent, himself on wires, caught some of it.
“Then all the more fun in solving it.”
“That’s the spirit! We’ll have the fun of
solving it together.” They shook hands.
An amused smile curved Verneuil’s lips.
"It is easy to see that you two have pre-
served your youth.”
“You see,” explained Goron: “we were
opposite numbers as Intelligence officers on
the French and British General staffs dur-
ing the War, and my friend will agree with
me that we worked together like brothers.”
“Ah. Then you had what you call your
fun even in those tragic days?”
“Yes, if you call it fun to be obsessed with
the weight of responsibility for every bit of
information we supplied to our chiefs.”
For the rest of the meal Vemeuil was con-
tent to remain a listener as the two younger
men “swapped yarns” about their service
nearly twenty years before. When they had
no further excuse for lingering, Vincent said:
“I think that as Monsieur Verneuil has
been good enough to find me the former
address of those two Americans, I ought to
go to the rue Violet this afternoon.”
“Then I’ll come with you,” said Goron; “in
a case like this, when American gangsters
—is not that the word?—are concerned, two
are better than one.”
Having arranged to report the result of
their expedition to Vemeuil a little later,
the two friends hailed a taxi.
“Tell me,” said Goron when they had
given the address to the driver, “what type
of man was this in whose room that invoice
was found.”
“He was the cashier of an important bank
in London It is now known that for many
months he had been robbing his employers,
and the day came when the thought it more
prudent to abscond abroad, but he was
murdered on the journey.”
“Tiens! Then you have indeed a problem.
Hats and bank securities. At first sight they
seem ill-assorted. It will be a problem after
my own heart.”
“And according Ur Vemeuil, drugs must
not be ruled out.”
“Ah! Vemeuil has been working at the
drug business a good deal and it threatens
to become an obsession with him. It is well
that we go together to the rue Violet, be-
cause I shall be able to extract more from
the concierge and the chambermaid than
you would as a foreign police officer.”
The concierge proved to be a woman who
had a constitutional dislike of betraying her
lodgers to the police.
Goron had drawn conclusions from her
accent, though her colloquial French was
fluent.
“You are not a Frenchwoman?”
“Sir, I have lived here for the greater
part of my life; my sympathies are French
to the core.”
“That may be, but you have your card of
permission to work in France?”
“I can show it to you, monsieur: there is
not a mark on it against me.”
“That may be, but let me remind you that
a foreigner who declines to give necessary
information to the police runs a risk . . .”
The woman’s manner changed; she began
to cringe. “Will you gentlemen give your-
selves the trouble of passing into my little
room?” She threw open a door at the back
of her glazed box and ushered them into a
tiny cubicle of a room spotlessly clean and
neat.
“Doubtless monsieur has come to make in-
quiries on the part of some husband, or it
may be of some wife.”
Vincent was about to make a disclaimer
when Goron touched him on the sleeve.
“These two gentlemen did not stay here
unaccompanied, I think?”
“Oh, no; each of them brought his wife,
or at any rate a lady companion.”
“Were the ladies known as Madame Lewis
and Madame Blake? I presume they had no
letters, but they may have received parcels
from shops. Were these parcels addressed
‘Madame Lewis’ and ‘Madame Blake’, re-
spectively?”
"Certainly, monsieur.”
Vincent had been a little Impatient of his
colleague’s line of questioning, since tha
women seemed to him negligible, but now
he began to see whither they were leading.
“Now,” pursued Goron. “Let me have a
description of each of these ladies. Madama
Lewis, was she a Frenchwoman, smart and
well dressed?”
The woman became voluble and assured
them that both ladies were beautiful and
very smart; their husbands were generous;
that one could judge; probably they were
not Frenchwomen, at any rate one of them
was reading a Russian newspaper one day.
“I myself am a Russian, monsieur, and so
I know.”
“When were they last here?”
“Tn February.” (She consulted a ledger.)
“On February 23rd.”
“Did you hear where they were going
when they left?”
“No, monsieur, they all went away to-*
gether in the same taxi. I can give you the
address of the taxi driver, it was the man
whom I always employ for my lodgers.”
“Has he a particular rank for his taxi?”
“No. monsieur: he plies for hire privately
and when he is not out with a fare one finds
him at home.”
Vincent put his first question: “When
ladies leave your rooms there are cardboard
boxes and wrapping paper to clear away.
For example, did these ladies leave hat-
boxes?”
"Every kind of box; as I tell you, the
husbands were generous.”
“And you put the boxes with the rubbish
of the house to be cleared away?”
“Not at all, monsieur. Here is a box
superior to the ordinary run and I've kept
it for storing my papers.” She brought
forward a cardboard box.
Goron took it from her and pointed sig-
nificantly to the address printed on the lid.
Vincent read the words; “Germaine, rua
Duphot, Paris.”
G ORON looked at the
address of the taxi driver and pronounced
it to be within easy walking distance.
“That interview was not entirely barren,
I think,” he said as they walked.
“Indeed it was not. Either of those
women might have been a customer of
Madame Germaine and might have ab-
stracted the bill head of the note for one
hundred thousand francs. I suppose that
it will be possible to trace them?”
“If they registered as the law requires,
it would be a matter of only a few minutes
but with foreigners engaged in shady busi-
ness it may not be so easy. Some of them
are very clever and we have only the names
of their reputed husbands to go upon. If
they were not legally married they would
have registered under their maiden names
which we don’t know.”
“The next question is whether a taxi
driver would remember the address to which
he drove people last February: it will be
surprising if he does.”
The taxi driver, as it appeared, lived on
the fifth floor of a house without a lift.
The concierge explained that orders for his
taxi were telephoned to her and that she
received a small commission on the .fares
he charged, for his taxi was to all intents a
private carriage which did not ply for hire
and was therefore not registered with the
police; the proprietor charged what he liked.
Fortunately the man was at home and ha
was gifted with a remarkable memory. He re-
called without having to consult any diary
that at the beginning of the last week in
February he drove the American gentle-
men and their wives from the Rue Violet


to St. Lazare Station. They had with them
suitcases, but no heavy luggage. He was
glad to note this because they had been
good clients of his and the absence of heavy
luggage implied that they were crossing to
England only tor a few days.
"Did they return?” asked Goron.
“No, monsieur. They talked of return-
ing, but they cannot have come to this
district, otherwise they would have em-
ployed me.”
“You say they were good clients?”
“Yes, monsieur. Not a day passed with-
out their telephoning for me. All the
shopping by the ladies was done with my
vehicle.”
“They were light-hearted people then?
They dined out every evening. Had they
a favorite restaurant?”
“Yes, monsieur. Most frequently they
drove to the Restaurant Russe in the Rue
St. Honore.”
“If they come back to this neighborhood
and employ you again you would find It
worth your while to communicate with me
This is my card. Put it in a safe place and
don’t forget.”
“Very good, monsieur.”
They ran down the
flve flights into the street and there Vincent
took up the direction of their next move.
“The time has now come,’ he said, “for
an Interview with Madame Germaine, and
in order to save time I suggest that we take
a taxi as far as the corner of the Rue
Duphot. There we Will pay off Our taxi
and proceed on foot to the lady’s shop
We will come out Into the open and tell her
what our mission is Monsieur Verneuil
has already told her about the stolen bill
head so she will not be unprepared.’
As Goron nodded his agreement, they
hailed a taxi and carried out the first part
Of their plan.
They entered the shop together: Madame
Germaine recognised Goron immediately
She smiled diffidently Showing a row of
beautiful teeth.
“Is Madame already disillusioned with
her hat?”
“Not at all. She thinks it charming
But we are come to you on official busi-
ness. This gentleman is a British col-
league from Scotland Yard I think that
Monsieur Verneuil has already seen you
about that bill head printed with your
name.”
“As, yes! the gentleman called on me this
morning. I am shocked that ablll head
of mine should have been stolen and used
for criminal purposes.”
“Criminal purposes?” queried Vincent
with a puzzled expression that he could
assume at will
“Well, when three police officers from
two different countries come on the same
day to question me, it is natural to assume
that it has become a criminal affair.”
Vincent registered an inward conviction
that if the lady proved to be not all that
she pretended she was the finest actress
off the stage that he had ever encountered
Nothing seemed to disturb her calm serenity
“We have called to inquire the addresses
of two of your customers, madame,” he
said. “Two ladies who are American by
marriage, but probably not by birth—
Madame Blake and Madame Lewis.”
"I fear they are no longer in Paris—at
any rate they have deserted my shop for
some months.”
“They were good customers of yours?”
She made a becoming little grimace, "Yes,
up to a point they were, but as customers
one has to admit that they were exacting,
always demanding little alterations in the
hats they bought. . .”
“But they were willing to pay good prices
lor them?”
“Yes, monsieur, they did not quarrel with
the price, and on my side I was careful to
be moderate in my charges.”
“Will you permit us to enact a little comedy
in your shop, madame?” said Goron. “My
friend, impersonating you, will go to the
window arid make believe to take out a hat;
I will take the liberty of abstracting one
of your bill heads.” He turned to the desk
“Ah, the stage is not properly set for the
comedy There should be a pile of bill heads
lying on this desk.”
“They are in the drawer, monsieur, and
it is not locked.”
“Are they always kept In the drawer?”
“I will not be sure of that, monsieur. It
is very possible that on busy days one or two
or even more may have been lying on the
desk.”
“Will you put them as they might have
been lying?”
Madame Germaine took out a sheaf of bill
heads and laid them on the desk. Goron,
acting as stage manager, signalled to Vin-
cent to go to the window. Then while his
companion’s back was turned he snatched up
a bill head which he stuffed ihto his pocket.
“Eh bien! my friend. Did you see my
felonious act?”
“I saw it perfectly in the mirror on the
right.”
There was a light laugh from Madame
Germaine, “It was a neat little comedy,
monsieur. All the properties Were in their
places and this gentleman was looking in
the mirror. Now, if I had been going to
the window for a hat I Should not have been
looking in the mirror; all my attention
would have been centred on the hats.”
“Madame laughs at the antics of two
clumsy men in a hat shop,” said Goron.
“We must crave pardon for having taken up
so much of your time, madame, and take
our leave.”
When they were out of sight of the shop
Goron remarked: “Charming woman, that
Don’t you think so?”
“Clever also,” agreed Vincent; "and that
makes it all the stranger that she should not
have Seen what was taking place under her
nose.”
“You mean?”
“I mean that I SaW you, in the mirror,
abstracting a little book as well as a bill
head.”
Goron laughed. “Yes. I have it here, and
I propose that We study it together, but I
won’t Swear that she didn’t see me take it.
Let us go round the corner to the Cafe Veil
and look through it together.”
It was an ordinary address book, not a
commercial ledger. When they had given
their order to the waiter, Vincent asked
leave to look for an address in the book
He turned to the letter H and pointed
triumphantly at Hedouin Belfort. “This
name convicts Madame Germaine. They are
the great manufacturers and exporters of
drugs to the East, but their time is nearly
up. The French Government is on their
track.”
“How do you come to know so much about
the drug traffic, my friend?” asked Goron.
“Because I happen to be the officer at
Scotland Yard who is in charge of the drug
question, and in consequence of this I am
sent as the British representative to these
periodical International meetings in
Geneva.”
“Not only on account of your special
knowledge of the drug question,” suggested
Goron; “but because of your fluency in our
language.”
Vincent dismissed the compliment with a
gesture and said; “I cannot speak too highly
of the behaviour of the French authorities
in Syria, which was one of the plague spots
of the world in the matter of narcotics. As
soon as your government became aware of
what was going on they completely de-
stroyed the hew crop of hashish which was
coming to maturity, and you know that
sixty thousand kilograms of hashish a year
were being grown in the Lebanon. The
Hoessler factory of Mulhouse was hot the
only offender. A certain Dr. Hefti had
started a flourishing business in Zurich to
manufacture dionyl, which was not against
the Swiss law. though It is a derivative of
hashish.”
“X have heard people say that an un-
necessary fuss is being made about nar-
cotics; that if the rich choose to indulge
in them, no particular harm is done.”
“That is the trouble. Let me give you a
figure. In Egypt it is estimated that out
of a population of fourteen millions, over
half a million addicts are to be found, not
only among the rich but even among the
peasants and laborers. Every village in
Egypt, if one may accept the statement of
Russell Pasha, who ought to know since he
is a chief officer of police, has its heroin
addicts and they are the youth of the Coun-
try. It has been calculated that these are
as a rule men between twenty and thirty.
Happily so far, the women are free from the
vice. But this is only a digression from the
business in hand; we have to see whether
we can trace any of our friends. To me,
of course, the most important one is Pitt
Let us turn to the P’s.” He turned the pages
and shook his head. “No, the name is not
here.”
“And yet Germaine’s bill head was found
on his premises, I believe you said.”
“Yes, we found it in the pocket of one
of his coats. Then it is evident that Ger-
maine did not deal directly with him, but
with an intermediary—probably Blake or
Lewis. Let us look for our friend Blake.
Why, here he is as large as Blake, Hotel
Medusa, Cannes. There is no initial: prob-
ably it is Madame Blake, acting as a com-
mercial traveller for her husband. Let us
see whether Madame Lew's is
He fluttered the pages. “Yes, here we are—
Lewis, Hotel Medusa, Cannes. They hunt in
couples and go to the same nest.”
r
VJ’OOD! Then we must
pursue them without losing a moment.”
“Not so fast, my friend. It’S the hus-
bands that X am concerned with—not the
wives—and I doubt whether the men could
have reached Cannes unless they berthed
their boat at the nearest Breton Port and
took a train southward to the Riviera, How
does this idea strike you—to send a tele-
gram addressed, Madame Blake. Hotel Me-
dusa, Cannes. Has monsieur arrived?
Reply Poste Restante, Rue Cambon, Paris.
Germaine?”
Goron nodded his head. “It can do ho
harm. If you extract a reply that Blake
is there you will follow him up, and if there
is no reply I suppose that you will turn the
matter over to us and return to England?
Is it your Intention to apply for a warrant
of extradition for murder? It would make
our task easier if we had that?”
“That was my idea. If I car. leave the
question of hunting down these men in yoUr
hands, I will go back and obtain the ne-
cessary warrant.”
The waiter supplied them with a tele


graph form and they wrote out their mes-
sage on the little marble-topped table, paid
their account and crossed the Boulevard to
the Rue Cambon.
"While we are waiting for a reply, I sug-
gest that we go to Monsieur Verneuil and
tell him what we have done,” said Goron.
“Yes. I confess that the ex-petty office)
inspires me with confidence I don’t know
where he picked up his knowledge of police
Work, but the French Navy was his school
for knowledge of human nature. He must
have had curious experiences in his career.”
“Yes,” said Goron dryly. "I’ve heard
Some of them If you want to lose your
appetite for dinner, get him to tell you of
his adventures in Saigon.”
Having sent their telegram, they went on
foot to the Exhibition building, along the
road that borders the Champs-Elysees as
far as the Rond Point Verneuil received
them with a sardonic smile.
"I see that your case Is already solved
gentlemen.”
“We hope that we are on the way. Mon-
sieur Verneuil; that is if we may continue
to count upon the help you’ve so freely given
us.”
Verneull’s eyes narrowed to the merest
slit: one might almost say that he winked
at the compliment.
“May I assume then.” he said, in his gut-
tural southern accent, ‘‘that you have come
to ask me for further services?”
“It is always better to lay one’s cards on
the table,” said Vincent “Your conclusion
Is correct, monsieur' we have come to ask
you for further help The Information you
gave us about the two Americans, Blake and
Lewis, was valuable They had two women
with them, presumably their wives; one was
seen reading a Russian newspaper: they
were passing under the name of Madame
Blake and Madame Lewis Would it be
possible for you to trace them?”
Verneuil was toying with a pencil and
Vincent was glad to notice that it was no
longer being employed in drawing diagrams
but was writing,
“You may count upon me to do my best
messieurs If it were not for the tiresome
complication of this attack upon the car ol
our worthy Socialist leader I should havi
more time, but you know what it is with
the Paris journals Some of them love tt
have a stick with which o belabor the
police I will put youi inquiry into com-
petent hands and I suggest that you cal
upon me again to-morrow ”
“Yes, Monsieur Verneuil. but before we gi
I have something to give you. This litth
book contains a number of names and ad
dresses.”
“Where did you get it?”
“Out of the desk of Madame Germaine .
that hat shop ”
“You mean she didn’t see you take it?
“I won’t be sure of that, monsieur Then
is not much that misses the rndy’s rovini-
eye But in any case she must by this time
have noticed that the notebook has disap-
peared In the meantime we suggest that
nothing should be done to alarm her, because
she may be acting as a magnet for our two
men But you may care to look through'
these names and addresses in case they link
up with your speciality—the drug traffic
Turn to the page with the letter H, for
example, and see whether you recognise a
name on that page.”
Verneuil ran his eye down the page and
stiffened suddenly in his chair, “Hedouin
of Belfort. Ah! par exemple! Here we
have it. The people that I’ve been trying to
trip up for months. We have practically all
the evidence that is required, but this
woman must be watched.”
“Yes,” observed Vincent; “when she dis-
covers that her notebook has vanished she
may take to flight.”
“If she fancies that she will escape from
my observation of her, she will deceive her-
self. You will leave this book with me.
gentlemen? I may find other names.”
“Certainly; keep it as long as you think
necessary. We do not propose to restore it
to the lady.”
As they left VerneuiTs office Vincent said.
‘lf we go to the rue Cambon on foot would
there have been time for a reply to our
telegram?”
“It was marked ‘priorite’; It’ll be a neai
thing; we can but try.”
The magic word priorite had done the
trick; they found a telegram in the Poste
Restante also marked priorite and ad-
dressed to Madame Germaine. Goron asked
to see the chief of the telegraph bureau and
explained to him that he was in fact, for
the moment, Madame Germaine, though
the postmaster might find it difficult to
believe It, Men charged with the dreary
round of postal work are always agog for
sensation, and here essentially was a case
that bristled with drama. Accordingly, as
soon as he was satisfied about Goron’s
identity, he allowed him to have a Copy of
the telegram.
The telegram read; “Monsieur still absent
ibroad. Blake.”
“Good,” said Goron; “they have fallen into
jur trap and think that that telegram was
sent by Madame Germaine.”
“It Is possible,” said Vincent; “but we
must not forget that Germaine is a very
clever woman. She may have missed her
little book and, assuming that vve stole it,
may have spent the afternoon calling up
her dubious 'customers' on the long-dis-
tance telephone, warning them that thsir
addresses are known to the police, who are
making inquiries about them.”
They had finished
dinner; Goron had produced for his guest
a bottle of age-old brandy to drink with
their coffee Jacqueline had withdrawn to
mperlntend the woman in the kitchen
“To return to a question of shop,’ saio
Vincent; “there is one point that I should
ike to study from the map We will assume
for the moment that that telegram was
genuine and that Madame Germaine hao
not put these people on their guard Have
■mu a map?”
“I have,’ said Goron. jumping up and
aying a motoring map on thl table “You
vant the coast towns, no doubt.”
“Yes,” said Vincent “We may, I think
rule out all ports east of Cherbourg These
men were crossing in a motor boat from
Newquay You will see from the map that
there was not much difference between the
voyage to Brest or to Cherbourg In which
jf these two towns do vou think it would b<
easier for a motor boat whose papers were
not quite in order to make a landing with
out exciting remark?”
“Personally, if I were engaged in any illicit
ousiness. I should choose Brest It is a big
town traversed by docks and waterways An
idea strikes me. I have a friend who acts
as Intelligence Officer te the Customs at
Brest and is well in with a : l the port officials
If you think of going down I will come with
you and introduce you to him.”
“That is certainly an idea As you see, it
I stay on in Paris I shall merely be twid-
dling ray thumbs with nothing to do, and
when I get home I shall be asked why I
stayed so long In Prance with nothing to
show for my expenses. The port officers in
Brest will know something of this mysterious
boat if she went there, and my reason for
being in Prance is to trace that boat and
the people who were in it.”
“Then let us have a look at the time-
table There is a morning train - •”
“I must take the night train this evening.
It is imperative that I lose no time, but why
should 1 drag you off to me West?”
“Oh, that’s all right. I travel free when
I’m on duty, and this is duty I am ac-
customed to night travelling, and I can
always’ sleep in the train.”
The train they chose left them but a bard
hour for preparations. Both men were for
quick action at all times, nor was their
keenness blunted when they alighted on the
Brest platform in the early morning
In response to a telephone message over-
night from Goron, Monsieur Andre Lalage
met them on the platform and the introduc-
tion was made. Lalage proved to be aft
alert little man with close-cropped hair
standing on end and a huge moustache He
was a Breton born and bred in Brest, who
had outshone all his colleagues in the Cus-
toms’ Service by his intelligence and alert-
ness.
“We have much to ask you,” said Goron;
‘and we are trusting to ybu to find us some
bistro where we can talk in private.”
The little man laughed sardonically. “If
you don't mind a bistro frequented by
dockers, I know of one where we can engage
a private room on the first floor.”
“Lead on then,” said Goron, “we can drink
our morning coffee there, I suppose.”
“There the coffee is ,’’ he pivoted his
nand with fingers outstretched, meaning
that he did not answer for the quality of
the beverage, “but the bread and the butter
are good.”
Lalage appeared to be a power at the
dockside: the groups of dockers made way
for him; one or two of them saluted; he
had a kindly word for each
When the wife ol the proprietor of the
little cafe had served them with breakfast
and had clumped down the stairs, Goron
made a sign to Vincent to explain his busi-
ness There was something about the per-
sonality of the Englishman that com-
mended itself to Latins He found his French
listeners strongly Impressed with his manner
of relating the story he had to tell Even
Goron. who had heard it all In Paris, was
keenly alive, and Lalage could scarcely keep
still He made Vincent repeat the descrip-
tion of the motor boat and nodded his head
after each sentence,
“You did well, gentlemen, m come to Brest.
It is a port peculiarly adapted to smuggling
of all kinds, and as for that motor boat
without a name I will tell you how they
work. A ship comes in and is examined by
the Customs officer, who finds the manifest
and all the other papers in order Good!
That nirht a motor boat steals noiselessly
up to the seaward side of the ship and
throws a parcel or two to the deck hand.
Who is to know it. except the deck hand,
who, of course, is in the swim? Some
owners employ sworn watchmen, but what
is an oath against the flutter of a few notes
slipped into his hand on the gangway?”
“You mean that the motor boat is owned
by somebody in Brest?”
“Yes, there are three or four private motor
boats of that kind in the port.”
“Without names?”
“Oh, they have a name on their papers,
but not always painted on the hulls, A
favorite trick is to have alternative names
painted on little boards which are hung over
the sides and the taffrail.”
“The boat we are Interested in brought


two American passengers to Prance. Sup-
posing that they landed In Brest, could that
be done without the knowledge of the port
officers?”
“If it were done at night I think it could.
I am speaking to two police officers, so I
can speak openly. Money talks and it talks
not only to the man who accepts it, but also
to his superiors in the Service. That is why
I have been busily employed these last few
weeks. A Customs’ officer—we will call him
‘A’—is living in a house above his means,
or he has purchased a car to give his wife a
taste of country air on Sundays. The
money must come from somewhere, and it
is my job to follow the scent of it to its
source. Generally I succeed, but it entails
trying work, I can tell you.”
“Then,” said Vincent, “if we examine all
the motor boats that you have registered in
Brest, we shall come upon the craft that we
are in search of. The captain speaks Eng-
lish.”
Lalage’s eyes narrowed. “I know a shorter
way than that, monsieur. I have in my ser-
vice an Intelligent young man who made one
false step a year ago which merited dis-
missal. I did not dismiss him: I did not
even report the case. I told him that dis-
missal still hovered above his head like the
sword of Damocles, but that as long as he
made himself useful to my department the
sword would not be permitted to fall.”
“He acts then as a spy?”
Spy is an ugly word,
monsieur; we prefer to call him an in-
formant. I can get in touch with him by
telephone and in ten minutes he will be
here.”
The message from the chief of his de-
partment had had a nerve-shaking effect
upon the informant. Evidently he had
feared that another of his sins had found
him out. His attitude as he stood in the
doorway of that upper room was cringing,
and his breathing was labored as if the
steep stairs had been too much for him.
“Jules,’’ said Lalage, “you never reported
to me that on Sunday last two Americans
landed from a motor boat.”
“No, monsieur, I did not report it because
their papers were all in order and I told
them how to get their passports stamped.”
“Whose boat did they come in?”
“The Rosamonde, Captain Duprez.”
“Is the Rosamonde still in the harbor?”
“She is. The captain lives on board
always.”
“That will do, Jules; if I want you again
I’ll send for you.”
It was with a light-hearted step that
Jules descended the stairs from his chief’s
presence.
“It is possible,” said Lalage, “that these
two men left the town by train; if they are
still in Brest I can find them for you if you
will give me the morning for the job. I may
even be able to find, if they did leave by
train, where they booked to.”
“That’s very good of you. Meanwhile can
we interview the captain of the Rosa-
monde?”
“I was going to suggest that course my-
self. I will set my men to work and if you
will come with me you shall have an inter-
view with the captain: I know where the
boat is tied up.”
He was as good as his word. In less than
a quarter of an hour he returned and con-
ducted them to the quay at which the motor
boat was moored.
“There is the Rosamonde,” he said, point-
ing to a dark-painted motor boat of con-
siderable size. A boy was swabbing down
the deck. Lalage hailed him.
“Where’s your captain?’’
"He’s gone ashore, monsieur.”
“So you’re back from England.”
The boy looked confused and made no
inswer.
“Come,” said Lalage sternly, “it’s no good
pretending to be dumb. You were in Eng-
land on Saturday and you brought back two
passengers.”
The boy remained silent.
“I can tell you more than that: you
anchored in Newquay to pick up those
passengers. We know all about it, so it’s
no good for you to deny it.”
“It’s not for me to answer: you must
ask my captain.”
“Where is he?”
“Probably he’s in the market. That’s
where he goes for his provisions.”
“How long does he generally take to do
his shopping?”
“About half an hour."
"Then we’ll come on board and wait for
him.”
The three police officers had no desire
to advertise their presence. They went
down into the cabin and Lalage sat down
in a position where he could observe the
proceedings of the boy. They had not long
to wait. Five minutes later the boy con-
verted himself into a human semaphore,
pointing significantly to the cabin. On this
Goron ran swiftly up on deck and was in
time to see a thick-set bearded man stop
irresolute on the quay and then turn on
his heel and walk away with a seaman’s
rolling gait.
Goron overtook him and tapped him on
the shoulder.
“Good morning, Captain.”
The man turned savagely upon him. “What
do you want with me?”
“A few minutes’ conversation. We have
taken the 'liberty of going on board your
little vessel to wait for you. Two of my
friends are in your cabin at this moment.”
For a couple of seconds the man’s eyes
gleamed.
“Do you want to charter me for a pleasure
cruise, or what?”
“I want to discuss business with you.”
“Freight?”
“In a sense, yes.”
. “I don’t run freight for anybody that I
don’t know.”
“But you’ve just been over to England.”
“How do you know that? And what
else do you know?”
“I know that you picked up a couple of
passengers in Newquay on Saturday.”
“What if I Aid? Is it any business of
yours?”
“No, but I thought that you might give
me an idea of what you charge for a run
across the channel.”
“I’ll come on board and see your two
friends before we talk business.”
They returned to the spot where the
launch was tied up and jumped on board.
At the sight of Lalage, the captain gave
a sardonic grin.
“I see that I’ve been honored,” he said.
“I suppose you’ve searched my little craft
from stem to stern, Monsieur Lalage? You
look a little downcast so I presume that you
found nothing compromising. I’m sorry
to have disappointed you.”
“I did, not come to search your vessel,
but only to ask you a question or two about
your late passengers. I have their names,
of course, but only you can tell me why
they chose to come over in your little
vessel Instead of by one of the ordinary
cross-Channel boats.”
“How can one guess why these eccentric
English and Americans choose to cross in
a launch; they wanted a new experience,
I suppose. But their papers were quite
in order.”
“Yes, but who told you that they wanted
to cross the Channel in this way. Did
they write to you, or what?”
“I took them over to England last May,
and they enjoyed the voyage so much that
they took my address and wrote to me,
giving the day for their return passage.”
“When you were at Newquay,” put in
Vincent, “you had no name on your boat.
Why was that?”
The captain laughed. “I see that you
know very little about the vagaries of holi-
day-makers. If they have ladles with them
it is a game among them to name the boat.
Look, monsieur,” he opened a locker and
showed little boards with names painted on
them. “If a majority of the ladies is in
favor of Rosamonde then I hang out these
boards and the boat becomes Rosamonde
as she is registered, but if they prefer the
name of Iris, well, here are the little boards
to hang out.”
Lalage became stern. “Your boat Is re-
gistered as Rosamonde, and you change
the name at your own risk. The whims
of lady passengers do not count in a mat-
ter like this. See to it that the name
Rosamonde is painted on the boat or there
may be trouble in store for you,”
“Very good, monsieur,” replied the cap-
tain in a surly tone.
Vincent Interposed with another ques-
tion. “Where is the letter you received
from these Americans asking you to meet
them at Newquay?”
“I never keep letters; they go overboard
when I’ve read them.”
“What address did they give at the head
of the letter?”
“None that I remember.”
“And, of course,” suggested Lalage sarcas-
tically, “you don’t remember the name of the
hotel they went to in Brest.”
“I never knew where they went to. They
just took their handbags and walked oft.”
When they were on shore again, Lalage
remarked: “I never expected to get any ad-
mission from that rascal, Clearly, he has
been squared by the gang, but this inter-
view may make him think twice before he
accepts those Americans as passengers
again .
A telegraph boy was approaching. He
was scrutinising the names on the small
craft as he went . . . Lalage stopped him,
“Who’s your telegram for?”
“Captain Duprez, of the Rosamonde.”
“T
X’VE just come from
the Rosamonde. You know me, my lad. I
will take charge of this telegram.
“Yes, I know you, monsieur, but . . .“
“That’s all right. You can tell the post-
master that I took charge of it.”
The boy handed over the telegram and
required Lalage to sign a receipt for it. He
went off whistling some kind of tune. As
soon as he had turned the corner Lalage
tore the confining strip of blue paper and
read aloud:
“Bring boat to St. Malo. Urgent.”
“Good!” exclaimed Vincent. “We’ll go
to St. Malo. What’s the quickest way?”
“If you come to my office the timetable
will tell you. I don’t carry all the cross-
country trains in my head We will also see
whether my men, who have been out tracing
these men, have brought in any report.”
They found a man in plain clothes wait-
ing in the office.
“Any news, Henri?”
“Yes, monsieur, those two Americans were
slaying at the Hotel des Cloches and left


early this morning—in haste. Fortunately
their room had not been touched since their
departure and in the empty fireplace we
found this.” He brought out a piece of blue
paper screwed into a tight ball.
Lalage smoothed it out. “Tiens! Yet an-,
other telegram. Ah! you must read this
monsieur: it is in English.” He handed it tc
Vincent.
Vincent interpreted the telegram intc
French. It ran:
‘‘Caution. Scent is strong. Germaine.”
“Ah! Madame Germaine assured us that
she understood not a word of English, yet
she writes her telegram in that language."
T
JLF I might make
a suggestion,” said Vincent, “I think
that the best rou,e for us to St. Malo
would be by motor boat —the boat oi
Captain Duprez.”
Goron threw up his arms and brought
his palms , heavily down upon his snees
“You’ve hit It, my friend.- The sea is
calm, and during our little voyage there
would be time for conversation. . Who
knows but that our sturdy sea-captain
may experience a change of heart in the
course of the voyage We could leave it
to our English friend here to apply the
necessary mental treatment.”
“Do you suggest that I should give him
the telegram?” asked Lalage.
“On no account,” exclaimed Vincent. “II
he had that teleg.am he would not take
us. But which of us is going to chattel
the boat?”
“1 think that Monsieur Lalage is the
obvious person,” said Goron “There is no
time to lose. Will you go back alone and
make the necessary overtures?”
“I will,” said Lalage, “and I’ll appij
pressure il necessary. Give me ten min-
utes and then you can come along to the
boat to hear what is decided. If all goes
well I wJI make an unobtrusive signal to
you by lifting my hand to my face and
rubbing my right eyebrow.”
In ten minutes by Vincent’s watch the
two police officers sauntered along the
quay towards the launch. When they
came in sight of the Rosamonde, Goron
murmured: “Keep your eye on Lalage.”
Almost as he spoke both saw Lalage
bring his right hand to his eye and begin
a vigorous rubbing of his eyebrow.
“Good!” said Vincent; “we’re over the
first fence,”
“The second offence will be your affair;
I am curious to see how you will set about
it,”
The first part of their voyage was quite
uneventful They stopped to take in motor
fuel and then continued on their way along
the coast towards St Malo.
Vincent was regarding the cartain with
a fixed stare The mar had his hand on
the tiller and it was obvious that the
scrutiny disconcerted him.
“You seem to be uneasv. my friend. You
think that I am looking at you more closely
than is consistent with good manners. You
must excuse me I was speculating how vou
would look in the striped overall that they
wear at Cayenne,”
The man stifled an oath and the boat
lurched dangerously towards the rock-bound
shore. Vincent made a lean towards the
tiller and seized it firmly, bringing the head
of the launch parallel to the coast.
“Your steering is erratic, my friend. Let
me remind you that we are bound for St.
Malo, not for the next world. You had better
leave the steering to me.”
The Breton captain sail kept his hand on
the tiller for the sake of appearances, but
he allowed Vincent to control the steering.
“I am always sorry when I see a man
oacking the wrong horse at the races and it
grieves me when I think of a man accus-
tomed to the wild fresh air and liberty ol
Tie seas heading towards a narrow little
cubicle In a cell of corrugated iron, deprived
of such amenities as tobacco They tell me
that that deprivation is the worst part ol
imprisonment; that men would sell then
souls for a twist of tobacco leaf. The pity
of it is that if you were working for the
lawful authorities you would have a quiet
life and an easy conscience.”
“X don’t know what you’re talking about
I’m a plain sailor.”
“Then let us talk in plain language as
man to man,” retorted Vincent. “You have
been carrying passengers from England
with dangerous contraband about their per-
sons.”
“I know nothing about that. People take
their passage and that’s all that concerns
me.”
“Then why not prove your Innocence by
lelping the police to do their duty?”
“What do you want me to do?"
“I’ll tell you. We hold a telegram sent to
you by those two men. telling you to come
to St Malo for them. They are expecting
you. What we want you to do when you
catch sight of them on the quay is to signal
.hat all is well. Probably you have a code
of signals.”
“You are an Englishman. You couldn’t
irrest me ”
“I might have to denounce you to the
French authorities and they have a short
way with their nationals who engage in the
drug traffic You migh find yourself lan-
guishing in a prison cell for months before
being brought to trial, and all that time you
would be on a prison diet, with nothing to
rmoke and aid digestion. Why, man! your
realth would break down under the s-rain.’
“Do those gentlemen in the cabin, who are
French officers, want me to do this”
“They do, and they will tell you so.” He
ignalled to Goron and Lalage to come out
of the cabin. The captain now proved to be
imenable and their plans were made.
As they neared the quay at St. Malo, Vin-
cent’s heart beat fast when he saw two men
waving. They answered the description ol
those of whom he was In search. It was
possible that they were armed and would
resist capture, but that was a risk that
every police officer had to take. He was
relieved to see that there were other people
on the quay. The presence of so many wit-
nesses might restrain the two criminals
from using their revolvers.
The three officers remained out of sight
m the cabin as the captain steered his
launch to the steps The two men advanced
confidently and Vincent leaped for the
lowest of the granite steps, followed by
Goron and Lalage. The men had not a
:hance to make off.
Goron laid his hand on the shoulder ol
the nearest, saying; “You are wanted at the
police station.”
“What for?”
“They will tell you that at the station.'
“I demand first to be taken to the Ameri-
can consulate,” said the man. "You have
no right to interfere with American citi-
zens.”
“You are now on French soil, monsieur
and you may both have to answer charges
of breaking French law, but you shall have
an opportunity of telephoning to the Ameri-
can consulate from the police station.
“What is the charge? We have a right
to know that.”
Vincent caught a quick glance in the
eyes of one of the men towards one of the
little streets that debouched upon the quay.
He was measuring his chance of escape.
It was the moment for a word of warn ng
in English. “You had better not try to
do a bolt,” Vincent said, “They have a
ihort way over here with prisoners who resist
rrrest. I advise you to go quietly.”
“You hear that?” shouted the man to
nis companion. “This guy is a cop from
Scotland Yard. These Britishers won’t let
the French do their own dirty work with-
out interfering. 0.K., we’ll go with you,
but you’ll get trouble from the State Depart-
ment in Washington when they get to hear
of it, I warn you.”
Vincent interposed quietly. “There ar»
charges pending against you in England,
and there may be extradition proceedings.
I can tell you no more than that at this
stage.”
The men now appeared to accept the in-
evitable and followed Lalage without an-
other word. Vincent did some rapid think-
ing. He drew Goron out of earshot.
“I shall have (o get into communication
with my chief at Scotland Yard."
“By telephone, you mean?”
“No, I think it best that I should return
to England if you can assure me that the
men will be held safely in custody here until
their extradition is arranged.”
“Have no fear,” responded Goron. “You
:an safely leave them with us.”
“Then I will lose no more time. X must,
nake inquiries about the boats.”
“I must accompany M. Lalage and these
men. If you don’t get a boat for this even-
.ng come round to the little bistro and
we’ll meet again there.”
“I will. In case we don’t meet again,
please accept my warmest thanks for your
help ”
He shook hands with both his French
colleagues and made his way to the steam-
ship office. He was just in time to get a
passage on a boat that was leaving within
an hour.
On arriving in London,
Vincent reported himself to his immediate
superior, Chief Constable Richardson, who
listened patiently to his story and said that
the proper course was to go over to the
Director of Public Prosecutions to lay the
whole case before him.
The Director himself was in his room and
disengaged. He was a curious product of
the departmental machine. His name had
been prominent in the newspaper reports
of most of the important criminal cases as
Prosecutor for the Crown: his appointment
as Director of Public Prosecutions had there-
fore occasioned no surprise and very little
heartburning from those ol his profession
who aspired to the appointment.
He had been knighted; he was now a per-
manent official like any other Civil servant
but he had retained the forensic manner-
isms ol his earlier days at the Bar being
neither fish nor fowl, since he had not been
through the Civil Service mill that grinds
all men to something of the same pattern.
Sir John Manning wore a fringe of grey
hair about the conical dome of his skull;
otherwise his skin was naked, not, it was
alleged by the subordinate members of his
staff, through the attentions of the razor,
but because Nature, in designing him, had
taken the hen’s egg for the model to work
upon and had denied him the hirsute adorn-
ments that decorated his fellow men. But
lest anyone should think that there was
anything feminine in his make-up, she had
endowed him with the deepest of bass voices,
at which timid solicitors’ clerks introduced


without warning into the presence had been
known to leap three inches from their
chairs.
It was not the first time that Vincent
had been required to undergo the ordeal,
indeed he found that he was a persona grata
with the great man.
“Well, Mr. Vincent, what are you bring-
ing us to-day?—something interesting, I
feel sure. Some one told me that you had
gone abroad on a confidential mission.”
“Yes, Sir John, and I am just back.”
"Did your travels take you as far as
Geneva? I was there the other day and I
was Immensely struck with that great
building they have erected for the League
of Nations. You have seen it, of course?”
"Yes, Sir John, and I have attended little
international conferences in one of the
rooms there.”
“On criminal questions, I suppose?”
“Yes, Sir John. On the drug traffic and
on the question of the form of cheque which
would be proof against forgery. The in-
terest lay in the fact that even the Ameri-
cans had deputed their expert police officers
to attend.”
“I am glad to think that the League of
Nations is serving some useful purpose;
otherwise there will be nothing for it but
to convert that building into a hospital for
incurables.”
“I am not sure, Sir John, that it has not
already gone some way in that direction,
judging from the curious long-haired people
that one meets in the corridors.”
"But we are gossiping about international
politics when we ought to be talking busi-
ness. You have something to tell me.”
Thereupon Vincent gave him a succinct
account of the problem that was facing
him. When he had finished, the finger-
tips of the Director came together. “If I
understand you correctly you suggest that
there are grounds for applying for extradi-
tion on the charge of wilful murder. Is that
correct?”
"Yes, sir, it is.”
"The evidence, as I see it, is purely cir-
cumstantial—the hiring of a car, the break-
ing of one of the windows by a revolver
bullet, the finding of the body of a mur-
dered man by a witness who can be pro-
duced, and this coat that was found in the
tool-box of the hired car. I confess that I
have known stronger cases; but when I
have your report I will go very carefully
through it and send for you again. In the
meantime I understand that the men in
question are being safely held by the French
authorities.”
"That is so, sir. Thank you very much.
I will go and write-my report at once.”
On his way to the Chief Inspector’s room
Vincent knocked at his Chief Constable’s
door and was at once admitted.
"Well,” said his chief, “what did the Direc-
tor say?”
“He told me to go and write my report,
sir, and he would consider whether there
were sufficient grounds for charging these
men with murder. In that case he did not
anticipate any difficulty in obtaining an
extradition warrant.”
“Very well,” said Richardson, “you had
better lose no time in writing your report,
but let me see it first.”
To Vincent, writing a convincing report
was child’s play. He was a strict economist
in words, but that was so refreshing a con-
trast with the reports of many of his col-
leagues that he had no fear about the ver-
dict of the Director, nor did his Chief Con-
stable find any fault with it.
"Right. You can take that round to the
Director and tell him, If you like, that I
have seen it.”
All this had eaten away the morning and
Vincent was beginning to feel the pangs of
hunger. He was about to make his way up
to the floor where dinners were served when
a telegram was put into his hands. He
tore open the envelope and felt on reading
the message that all appetite for food had
deserted him. The message was signed
‘Goron.” It was quite brief.
“Both men escaped from custody during
the night.”
There was nothing for it but for Vincent
to take the telegram to his chief and ask
for further instructions. For once, Rich-
ardson betrayed Impatience. “Thank
Heaven,” he said, “that our men know how
to hold their prisoners without giving all
this trouble. You’ll have to run over to
France again.”
“To Paris, sir?”
“Yes, because by this time Goron must
have returned to duty in Paris and rascals
of this kind would find Paris their safest
hiding-place.”
“Very good, sir; I’ll cross by the night boat
to Dieppe—unless you think that it would be
better to take St. Malo on the way?”
“No. You must go to Paris. Get into
touch with Verneuil again, as well. He
is not very quick in the uptake but when the
scent is strong he never abandons the chase.”
On arriving at the Gare
St. Lazare, Vincent’s first objective was the
Ministry of the Interior. He went straight
to Goron’s room and was fortunate enough to
find him alone.
“Come in, my friend. I am very glad to
see you. I thought it not Improbable that
my telegram might bring you again to Paris,
where you are always welcome.”
“Thank you. The atmosphere of Paris is
always exhilarating to the jaded Londoner
but, on this occasion, it has been your bad
news that has brought me. Those rascals
have escaped?”
“Yes. I can scarcely contain myself when
I think of the laxity of these provincial police
officers, if Indeed it was slackness and not
bribery.”
“I should not have dared to make that
suggestion myself, but since you have made
it . . . One must remember that the profits
in the drug traffic are so considerable that
bribes can be offered on quite a liberal scale.
M. Verneuil may have found some corrobora-
tive evidence in Madame Germaine’s address
book showing that our surmise that drugs
are concerned in this case was correct.”
"Then let us go and see M. Verneuil.”
By this time they had become familiar
figures to the doorkeeper, who saluted them
with a forefinger and indicated the lift.
Verneuil received them with his usual bluff
welcome and inquired after their health. As
usual, in the public offices in France, min-
utes were expended in the perliminary cour-
tesies.
“Pleased as I am to see you, my friend,”
said Verneuil, “I feel sure that it is the
laxity of those miserable police in St. Malo
in allowing those rascals to escape that has
brought you back to Prance.”
“It Is,” put in Goron, "but I have assured
our English colleague that they shall be re-
captured if they are still on French soil.
Orders have been given to all ports and fron-
tier towns to stop them. And now, to turn
to another phase of the case, did you find
that little book of any use to you?”
“Yes. The most important bit of evidence
it contains Is the name of that suspected
factory In Belfort. As you were averse from
alarming the lady by direct interview, I
put her premises under observation and my
man is instructed to make notes of every
visitor to the shop. He is one of my most
trusted officers, so you need have no misgiv-
ings.”
He had scarcely finished speaking when
there was a tap on the door and a young
man with deep anxiety graven on his fea-
tures exposed his head to view and at once
withdrew it on seeing that his chief was not
alone.
“Ah, this is the man I posted to watch
:hose premises. Come in, Andre,” he shouted.
‘What have you to report?”
“Monsieur, in some mysterious way, that
woman in the rue Duphot has disappeared.
Yesterday afternoon and this morning a
number of people came and tried the door
of her shop. Some of the more impatient
thumped on the door. This morning the
baker called with bread but could get no one
to take it in.”
“But there are no back entrances to those
old shops in the rue Duphot.”
“That is true, monsieur.”
“ And yet you are satisfied that she did not
leave by the front door?”
' “Quite satisfied, monsieur.”
A flush began to suffuse Vemeuil’s wea-
ther-beaten countenance as a horrible sus-
picion assailed him.
“Did no vehicle stop at the shop door
while you were on duty?”
“No, monsieur, except of course the baker
this morning, who tried the door and went
away.”
“And yesterday?”
"Only the laundry van, late in the after-
noon.”
“And the driver carried into the shop an
empty basket —a basket large enough for a
week’s family washing?”
“Yes, monsieur, it was a large basket: it
required the driver and another man to
carry it.”
“And after a few minutes they came out
again with the basket and loaded it into
the van?”
“Yes, monsieur,” replied the watcher, sur-
prised at the intuition of his questioner.
“Great Scott that any Parisian should be
so lacking in intelligence as to let that
basket pass unopened.”
“Why, monsieur? It was an ordinary
laundry basket.”
“A
I IND I suppose that
you would describe yourself as a man of
ordinary intelligence? But if you had raised
the lid of that basket you would have had
the shock of your life. It had a woman
in it.”
The poor constable looked as If this last
remark was all the shock he needed.
“Well, you will say that you were only told
to watch for people who came and went on
their two legs—not for ladies who chose to
be carried out in laundry baskets. But there
it is. The harm is done. Can you give me a
description of the people who tried the door
after the laundry man had gone?”
“Well, monsieur, now I come to think of
it, I remember only one; a tall, thin man,
with a face like a hatchet.”
“Come, you can give me a better descrip-
tion of him than that. What age was
he?”
“Between thirty and forty, I should say.
He was dressed like an Englishman.”
“You mean that he went to a good tailor
for his clothes?”
“Yes, monsieur, the clothes were certainly
not sold to him ready-made.”


“Thank you, Andre. I shall want nothing
more for the present,” said Verneuil.
The man’s air was crestfallen as he went
out: he knew that there would be more to
come about his lack of intuition.
“Mon Dleu!” said Verneuil. “We seem
'tube distinguishing ourselves in this affair,
but it may not be so difficult to find the
lady as you suspect. We have first to trace
that laundry van.”
“Her uneasiness is not difficult to explain,”
said Vincent. “She must have missed that
little book of hers and the man on observa-
tion was not cancealing the fact that he
was posted to watch her. She thought an
unobtrusive disappearance was the safest
card to play. Now I’m wondering if the
tall, thin man who called at the shop could
have been Lewis.”
“Would he be such a fool,” said Goron,
“as to run his head into the lion’s mouth
by calling at the shop?”
“Well, Germaine had warned the wives,
but the women could not pass on the
warning to the men, as apparently they were
not in touch with them.”
“Listen,” said Verneuil. “I mean to get to
the bottom of this escape from St. Malo. In
this little book,” he fluttered the pages of
Madame Germaine’s notebook, “there is an
address P.H., 9, rue de la Couronne, St.
Malo. Who can P.H. be?”
"Whx not telephone to
the St. Malo police?” suggested Vincent.
“I was on the point of doing so when you
gentlemen came in.”
The telephoning did not take long. Within
ten minutes they were in possession of the
fact that the address was that of the Mayor
himself, Philippe Henriques.
“Things are beginning to warm up,” mur-
mured Goron. “In a Port such as St. Malo
the Mayor has opportunities—very profitable
opportunities—and if those two criminals
could get into friendly touch with him we
need be surprised at nothing.”
“Well,” said Vincent, “assuming that
money has passed and that the Mayor was
at the bottom of the escape, what is to be
our next step? My only concern in this
matter Is to get hold of those two men and
see that they are safely held in custody in
Prance, leaving me free to go over to London
and get extradition warrants signed. As I
had to return on receipt of your telegram
there was no time to get them.”
“You can rest assured,” said Verneuil
grimly, “that the next time they are caught,
they will not escape.”
“If one of them, as we believe, called on
Madame Germaine as late as yesterday
evening, probably both the men .are in Paris
at this moment. It seems to me that the
obvious step is to call upon that concierge
in their old lodgings and the driver of the
taxi which they were in the habit of using.”
“I could get these inquiries done at once
in the arrondissement, but I don’t think
that we had better spread this business too
widely,” said Verneuil.
“My main interest,” said Goron, “is in the
drug traffic now that the connection of
these men with drugs is established. You,
my friend, are concerned only with getting
these men arrested on charges of murder.
Is that not so?”
“I feel that we are all sailing in the same
boat, gentlemen,” said Vincent, “for we are
all concerned —deeply concerned—in the
arrest of these two rascals, Blake and Lewis.”
“I think we may safely leave the inquiries
in Paris to our friend here, who, when once
he undertakes a delicate inquiry, never lets
go until he gets what he wants,” said Goron.
Verneuil acknowledged the compliment
with a curl of the lip, intended to indicate
that he did not accept compliments at their
face value. He knew his own value—none
better—and he knew where he was likely
to fail in inquiries that required the delicate
touch of a trained diplomatist, but he could
well Imagine what a mess most trained
diplomatists would make of police inquiries.
In private conversation he was apt to de-
scribe the Foreign Office clerks as “those
young ladies.”
“Well, Vincent,” continued Goron, “I think
that you and I will take one of the official
cars to St. Malo and engage in a friendly
conversation with his Worship the Mayor.
I suggest that messages should be sent to
the Port officers and the officers on all
frontiers to exercise very special vigilance.
I will get that done. If you’ll come with me
to the Ministry of the Interior we’ll com-
mandeer our car and start as soon as pos-
sible.”
When the other two had gone, Verneuil
resolved to leave nothing to subordinates.
He would undertake the business single-
handed. His Inquiries at the lodgings and
of the taxi-driver met with no result. Neither
the concierge nor the chauffeur had seen
either the men or their wives since February,
Verneuil knew how to extract the truth
from people like this and was satisfied that
they were not lying. His next visit was to
the rue Duphot. He was well provided with
all that was needed for dealing with locked
doors. In this case the door was furnished
with a Yale lock that snapped to. But what
Verneuil did not know about Yale locks and
and the manner of bringing them to a
friendly understanding was not worth know-
ing.
He was going to make a thorough search
of the premises, but he turned first to the
letter-box. Empty? No. One letter. And
there was no need to steam it open, for the
addressee would never come to know of the
outrage to her correspondence perpetrated
with the grimy thumb of an ex-petty officer.
The letter was quite short and would have
puzzled an unauthorised reader who did
not know the facts with which Verneuil was
acquainted. It was signed “P.H.’’ and it
read as follows;
“the carrier pigeons have been released
and if their instinct guides them aright you
may find them roosting on your window-
ledge even before you receive this letter.
They will need food and drink and a little
kindness from you.”
Verneuil’s comment was terse. “ ‘Pigeons,’
he calls them! Why stop at ‘pigeons’ when
he might have said ‘doves’? Oh, these pro-
vincial mayors, they make me tired.”
Would there be time to catch Goron and
Vincent before their departure for the
North? He did not stop to search the rest
of the premises but hailed a taxi, directing
the driver to the Ministry of the Interior.
He was in time: a car was taking in petrol
in the courtyard of the Ministry when his
taxi drew up.
Goron was about to take his seat when
Vincent touched him on the arm.
“Here comes Verneuil. I think he wants
us.”
The ex-petty officer, a little out of breath,
came hurrying up.
“I have brought you this letter, gentle-
men. You may find it useful when inter-
viewing his Worship the Mayor.”
“Where did you get it?”
“Out of Madame Germaine’s letter-box.
She was not there to receive her own corre-
spondence; that is the obvious objection to
leaving home in a laundry basket. Good
hunting!” said Verneuil. “I need not detain
you longer. 1 have my work cut out in
tracing the laundryman who received
Madame Germaine in his basket."
He turned on his heel and was gone.
The journey to St. Malo was uneventful.
They arrived at the chief police office at
half-past four, for Goron had a bone to pick
with the police officers. He made himself
known to the inspector in charge as Com-
missaire Goron of the Surete Nationale.
As when <a sudden gust of wind stirs the
growing corn the announcement of his rank
produced consternation among the men in
the police office. He asked to see the prin-
cipal Commissaire, who made his appear-
ance unshaven, in an unbuttoned tunic.
There was a hunted look in his eyes, the
look that a man wears when his sins have
found him out.
“So the men that I handed over to you,
monsieur, for safe custody contrived to es-
cape? In order that I may be in a posi-
tion to make my report to the Minister, I
should like to be shown the cell from which
the escape was made and hear your ex-
planation of how it occurred.”
“Very good, monsieur; if you will give your-
self the trouble of following me, I will take
you down to the cells.”
The door was unlocked and a recalcitrant
Norwegian sailor, who had been sampling
French wines too lavishly, was removed into
the corridor while Goron inspected the win-
dow bars. He could find nothing wrong
with them. He turned upon the police officer
and demanded how he explained the es-
cape. “Those window bars were intact?”
“Yes, monsieur, I am even now inquiring
from my staff how the escape ould have
been contrived.”
“I think I can tell you,” said Goron dryly,
“how it was contrived and who contrived it,
but let that pass. Tell me, M. le Commis-
saire, did the Mayor visit the prisoners on
the evening of their arrest?”
“He did, monsieur. You had said that
they might telephone to the American Con-
sul, so naturally I allowed them to telephone
also to the Mayor when they asked.”
Goron drew Vincent a little aside and said r
“You see, I was not far wrong. These men
hold their appointment from the Mayor.
It would serve no good purpose for us to
drag out the details of this discreditable
proceeding. It is the Mayor whom we
want.”
T
■ HE Mayor lived In a
flat on the second floor, filled with a hetero-
genous mass of second-hand furniture of
various ages and styles picked up at sales.
In private life he was an advocate, though
his practice in a place like St. Malo could
not have been remunerative. It was ob-
vious that he depended on other sources
for his income. All this Vincent an,. Goron
took in at a glance while they were waiting
for the Mayor to make his appearance.
When he did appear he was obviously ner-
vous and ill at ease. Goron’s card was suffi-
cient to account for this, fo:' any communi-
cation from the Ministry of the Interior
always sent cold shivers down his spine and*
this card indicated that Goron was a police
functionary.
“We have taken the liberty of calling on
you, Monsieur le Maire,” said Goron, “In
connection with the escape of two prisoners
from the cells in the police station.”
“Yes, monsieur; it was a most lamentable
occurrence.”
“So lamentable, that the Minister of the
Interior will want to know from me exactly
how it happened. I am told that you had
an interview with these two men while they
were in the cells. May I go so far as to in-
quire what was the object of this interview?"


The Mayor gulped and swallowed. It gave
him time to prepare the answer to this em-
barrassing question. “X was doing my bare
duty, monsieur: the police of the munici-
pality being under my control, I felt that 3
should be failing in my duty if I did not
satisfy myself that the prisoners were being
properly treated.”
“I am pushing my inquiry a little furthei
than I should have done were it not for a
letter signed ‘P.H.’ found by the Paris police
in the letter-box of a lady whose conduct
I fear, leaves something to be desired. It
occurred to me right to show this letter to
you, since it bears your initials, and ask you
whether it was typed on your machine?”
The Mayor took the letter with tremblin,
fingers and made as if to read it. Vincent
watched him narrowly the while and satis
fied himself that his eyes were not follow-
ing the lines and that his mind was engaged
in speculating about the reply that would
be most likely to find acceptance.
“It is most unlikely, monsieur, that any-
one should have had access tc my machine
It is used occasionally by my clerk, but she
could not have written a letter of this kind
For one thing, I have no carrier pigeons, noi
have the police.”
“I don’t think we need trouble you fur-
ther, Monsieur le Maire,” said Goron; “I
have sufficient material for my report to
the Minister, X will only trouble you fur-
ther in asking you to let me use your type-
writer for a moment. My case will then be
complete.”
The Mayor stammered an inarticulate
reply, but Goron maintained his bland at-
titude. “You will not refuse to allow me
to use your machine?”
It was useless to attempt concealment, foi
the machine was standing in full view in
a corner of the room. Goron swept off the
cover and proceeded to type with unexpected
agility a copy of the letter signed “P.H.’
found in the Germaine hat-shop in the
rue Duphot.
He compared the two, noting all the de-
fects in the typescript of both and marking
them with a blue pencil.
The poor Mayor was not made of cast
steel. The Day of Judgment had come upon
him without any preparation. The power of
speech had abandoned him; he could only
bleat inarticulately.
“You wish to tell us something confi-
dentially, I think. Monsieur le Maire?” said
Goron.
“Yes, monsieur. There is much to tell, and
if I have a solemn promise from you two
gentlemen that I shall be exempt from
prosecution, and that nothing that I say will
be disclosed to any journalist, I will tell you
everything that I know.”
The Mayor hesitated. He appeared to be
putting a strain upon what he would have
described as his brain. But once he had got
under way the information which he vouch-
safed was of absorbing interest to Vincent
To begin with, he admitted quite frankly
that he was in league with drug traffickers
and that Madame Germaine, in Paris, was
mixed up with those chartered to distribute
the poison. A few tactful questions brought
out further admissions. His special duty
was to keep watch on the ports of the
northern coast through colleagues who were
concerned to some extent in :,he same traffic,
and to give facilities to boats entering or
leaving. Moreover, he had agreed to be at
the disposal of foreign drug runners—such
as Blake and Lewis, whose names were well
known to him.
Goron had taken charge of the questions
up to this point, but now Vincent broke in.
“When these men escaped, where did they
TO?”.
The Mayor hesitated. “I do not know.”
“Think again. Monsieur le Malre. You
mew that they were going to Paris because
ou wrote to Madame Germaine to warn her
is that not so?”
The Mayor inclined his head. He seemed
o be beyond articulate speech.
“You could not be doing all this unless you
lad some influential person in Paris to cover
ou in case of trouble.”
“You are perfectly right, monsieur; I am
old that there is no less a person than a
Deputy who will protect us when things go
7rong.”
“His name?”
“That I cannot tell you. I have never
eard his name.”
“At present I shall not insist: but it will
iave to come out. He is your protector.”
“Yes, monsieur, he is more than merely our
irotector; he gives us advice.”
“You mean advice for nothing?”
“Oh no, monsieur, the advice, I believe,
.s very expensive, but that does not concern
me. The gentleman has access to Ministers,
he is a person that counts in the political
world; occasionally he visits the Prime Min-
ister, if not the President of the Repub-
io.”
“And who provides the money for oiling
ris palm?”
“I understand that it comes from America,
ut in shch a form that it cannot be traced.”
“Who brings it?”
“These men Blake and Lewis were ex-
acted to bring quite a formidable sum.”
“Apart from this important person whose
rarne you do no. know, who would you say
s the centre of the organisation?”
“Perhaps Madame Germaine —1 do not
mow. I assure you, gentlemen, that I am
not told names: I receive orders to carry
out from time to time and when these two
men telephoned to me from the prison cells
I knew that my duty was to let them escape,
and they dictated the message to Madame
Germaine. X thought, of course, that the
Deputy in question would protect me.”
“You will understand. Monsieur le Malre
chat my action m this interview has been
entirely guided by a sense of duly; that I
have no kind of animosity cowards you and
that you may count upon me to keep your
name out of the business as far as possible
We will now take our leave of you.”
As they went down the stairs Vincent
observed: “You were very polite and friendly-
cowards the Mayor, considering the part he
las played in this business.”
“One never knows what one of these
Mayors may some day become in the coun-
cry. I might encounter him as. Ministei
of the Interior and my chief.”
“It is easy to see why they do not trust
io stupid a man with names. He would
olurt them out and ruin the whole organi-
sation on the slightest hint of trouble to
aimself.”
“We shall have to use a broom and sweep
out all the doubtful characters in these
northern ports. What would I not give for
the name of the Deputy, but it’s obvious
that the Mayor was not entrusted with it.”
T
1. T took an uncon-
scionable time to get connected with Chiei
Constable Richardson at New Scotland Yard
Apparently half the population of Prance
was eager to telephone to half the popula-
tion of Great Britain, for, according to the
operator, the line remained occupied and
there were others before Vincent waiting
for their turn. At last Vincent heard the
voice he knew. He gave a succinct account
of what he had done and asked for instruc-
tions whether he should go to Paris to pur-
sue his inquiries or leave the French police
to carry on. The reply was emphatic.
“Now that you’ve gone so far, it would be
foolish to throw up the sponge. You must
go to Paris and I will cover your expenses
with the Receiver.”
Goron was waiting outside the telephone
booth.
“It’s all right,” said Vincent. “We are
to travel to Paris together.”
were busy with their own thoughts
on the journey to Paris; they exchanged
scarcely a syllable. At the Commissariat
of Police they met Verneuil coming down
the stairs, thinking that he had finished
work for the day, but on recognising his
visitors he insisted on taking them up to
his office.
“But you were just going out.”
“Only to consume an aperitif at the Rond
Point —a bad habit into which one so easily
fails. Besides, I have some news that may
interest you. We have located the laundry
in whose basket we believe Madame Ger-
maine escaped.”
“Have you done anything about it?” asked
Vincent, rather eagerly.
“N
HOT yet. monsieur, be-
yond putting that laundry under observa-
tion The fact is, I was keeping any fur-
ther steps until your return to Paris. Need-
less to say I am having every basket that
oasses in or out examined by one of my
officers.”
“Is the laundry doing any genuine busl-
less?” asked Vincent.
“Oh, yes. its van goes round collecting
work from the best residents in the quarter,
ft has a considerable staff of laundry women
and the proprietor lives with his wife in s
Bat above the laundry itself I have made
inquiries of the concierge and have ascer-
tained that no strange lady is staying with
the proprietor and his wife.”
“I suppose we could visit the working part
if the laundry?”
“Certainly, if I go with you, but at this
hour of the day the work-people have gone
home and the place Is locked up.”
“I should like to see these work-people
arrive in the morning." said Vincent.
“You think that Madame Germaine may
have converted herself into a laundry
woman?” asked Goron.
“I think that possible; at any rate It
would be easier to make a recognition when
women are dressed for the street than when
they are in working kit,”
“You are quite right, my friend. The
working kit of a woman is a good disguise.”
“It will mean an early start.” said Ver-
neuil. “You will have to meet me here
not later than eight if we are to see them
all come in.”
“Eight o’clock sharp then,” said Vincent
after comu'ting Goron. “And now, my
friends I have a proposition to make. It is
that we find a quiet restaurant to dine in
and that you should become my guests for
this evening. We have a great deal to talk
over.”
“The resolution is carried with acclama-
tion,” said Goron. “Monsieur Verneuil must
be an unrivalled guide for this part of Paris.
I suggest that we place ourselves unreserv-
edly in his hands.”
It was not surprising that the conversa-
tion at their table should have turned to the


subject of drugs. Goron recounted to Ver-
neuil their adventures at St. Malo.
“That’s the worst of our provincial police
system In France,” said Verneuil. “The
Mayor is responsible for the municipal
police and if someone buys him over ■ .
Then you must remember that these drug
traffickers can afford to bribe heavily.”
“You must know,” said Goron, “that our
English friend here is a walking encyclo-
paedia on the subject. He is the personage
who is in charge of the traffic at Scotland
Yard and he is sent out to Geneva to
represent his country whenever the subject
is discussed.”
“Indeed! Then perhaps he can solve a
good many of our difficulties in Paris.”
“I take no credit to myself for knowing
something about it, monsieur,” said Vin-
cent. “It chanced that the Central Nar-
cotics Intelligence Bureau came across a
certain Monsieur Voyatsis and took the
liberty of making a search of his baggage
In this certain papers were found which
were handed over to me. They included a
pocket-book and a code-book. The code-
book was a compendium of all the persons
in China and Japan to whom Voyatsis was
in the habit of sending telegrams. On the
first page was a list of names of the mem-
bers of the gang, together with the names
of the factories which supplied the poison,
for example the Societe Industrielle de
Chimle Organique and Roessler of Mul-
house.”
Verneuil wrinkled up his eyes until they
were the merest slits.
“Then it was due to your information that
we were able to close those two, which were
the most active of our drug manufacturers.”
“And what about Hedouin—the name that
was in Madame Germaine’s book.”
“That has been under suspicion for some
time, but it is difficult to get direct evidence
against the firm. Now, perhaps, we can get
a move on.”
“Were there no European names?” asked
Goron.
“None: probably these were contained in
another book which has never come into our
hands. In my belief these two Americans
about whom we are so much concerned are
merely runners—that is they carry the drugs
between France and England and Prance
and America.”
“And what do you think are the duties of
Madame Germaine in the business?”
“She supplies the means of transport. In
her case it is hats. Every kind of ingenious
device has been pressed into the service For
example, a considerable quantity was con-
cealed in millstones, hollowed out and plas-
tered up so that the stones had to be broken
before the drugs could be discovered.”
Now I understand the
part played by the wives of the two men:
they were employed to buy the hats,” said
Goron.
“Yes, and I doubt whether their parts
were important enough to justify us in fol-
lowing them and searching their rooms. The
main thing is that we now have the sources
of the supply: what we want to find out is
th-! headquarters of the organisation in this
country,” said Verneuil.
“And I,” said Vincent ruefully, “am less
concerned with the drug traffic than 1 am
with locating and procuring the arrest of
those two men, not on the charge of drug-
trafficking, but on that of murder.” His
forehead was wrinkled: he had something
on his mind. “Let me be quite frank, Goron,
In England, as you know, we cannot arrest
peopL unless we have more than a suspicion
that they are concerned in a felony, but in
Prance you are not so strait-laced in your
view of these powers. You can arrest on
suspicion.”
Verneuil’s anatomy was disturbed by an
eruption of silent laughter. Before Goron
could reply he had supplied the answer. “In
practice, my friend, and it is only practice
that counts, we can arrest anyone. The
only risk is that if he’s entirely innocent, he
may make a fuss, but generally he is so well
content to be set at liberty that he says
nothing.”
A waiter behind Vincent’s chair was show-
ing signs of impatience. The other clients
had departed a full quarter of an hour
earlier. The two French guests took the
hint and rose to take their leave. •
“Au revoir until eight o'clock to-morrow
then,” said Verneuil.
Goron and his English colleague met ac-
tually on the stairs of the police post at
the Grand Palais next morning.
"What a gift is punctuality!” exclaimed
Goron, looking at his watch. “We are on
the stroke of eight, and here, if I mistake
not, comes our colleague Verneuil himself.
I recognise the light footfall.” It was thus
that he described his colleague’s heavy tread
on the stairs above.
After the usual morning salutations, Vin-
cent inquired how they were to go to the
laundry..
“As time presses we will take a taxi,”
said Verneuil. “There are not many to be
found at this hour, but I have rung up the
depot.”
He had scarcely finished speaking when
a taxi drew up beside them: it had come
in response to the telephone message. Ver-
neuil gave the driver the address and they
all bundled into it
On arrival at their destination, by
a friendly arrangement with the con-
cierge the three police officers were ac-
corded a position in the courtyard which
gave them a view of everyone who passed
into the building A number of women
passed in; none was in the least like
Madame Germaine They waited still a few
minutes, and as there were no new arrivals
Verneuil crossed over to a little window
at which he had seen all the women record
their arrival. The woman behind the glass
he recognised as the proprietor’s wife. It
was no moment for finesse. He asked her
bluntly whether all her employees were now
in.
"Yes, monsieur,” she replied in a sullen
tone.
“Then my colleagues and I would like to
see them at work.”
“You people seem to do whatever you
like,” grumbled the woman as she led the
way into the sorting-room. There, there
were only two women, but in the ironing-
room there were ten. None of these
corresponded in the least with the descrip-
tion of Madame Germaine.
Meanwhile Vincent was quietly counting
the women in each room. He whispered
to Goron at the door of the next room
in which nine women were washing; “I
counted only twenty women who came in
and there are now twenty-one at work.”
The women at the washtubs had their
hair tucked into mob caps and large coarse
aprons enveloped their figures. It would
have been an effective disguise for the
beautifully-groomed milliner of whom they
were in search. Vincent was concerned not
with their faces or figures, but with their
hands. He noticed one whose hands were
not wrinkled. He stopped in front of her
and made an unobtrusive signal to Goron
and Verneuil.
Verneuil addressed the woman: “You must
be finding this work hard and distasteful,
madame.”
The woman behaved as if sire had not
heard him and went on with her worlc
with redoubled energy.
“You can now drop this disguise,
Madame Germaine, and come with me. t
am, as you know, an officer from tlio
Prefecture of Police.”
She dried her hands on her apron amt
said with dignity: “I think you will agree,
gentlemen, that we cannot discuss things
in this room. I suggest that we ask tho
proprietress to lend us her office for our
interview.”
She led the way and the three officers
followed her. The proprietress was still in
the office.
“The curtain has fallen on our farce,
cherle,” said Madame Germaine; “perhaps
you will allow these gentlemen to come in
and make their explanations.”
Once inside the room she removed first)
the coarse apron and then an overall, re-
vealing a graceful figure in ordinary morn-
ing dress. Lastly she removed the mot)
cap and then all doubts about her identity
were removed.
“Are you taking me far?” she asked in
polite tones. “Because, if so, I must run
upstairs for my hat.”
w
T T E’LL send for your
hat,” said Verneuil, bluntly. “You may not
want it for some time.”
“You mean that I am to be taken to
prison?”
“You will be taken to a place where they
supply coverings for the head.” '
She flushed. “This is an outrage. Of
what am I accused?”
“I understand that the charge is traffick-
ing in drugs, but all that can be discussed
at the place to which you are going.”
“You have no right to take me. No doubt
you have searched my shop and, naturally,
without result. I have never had drugs
there.”
“May I suggest, madame,” said Goron,
‘than an innocent woman does not escape
from her shop in a laundry basket.”
“That was a theatrical joke on my part.
You were having my shop watched, al-
though you had no grounds for suspicion.
I knew you expected a denouement and so
I gave you one. Also it gave me an oppor-
tunity for showing that your subordinates
are not from the top drawer in Lie matter
of intelligence.”
“I fear that you will have now to pay
for the fun you have had,” said Goron.
Turning to Verneuil he said: “We will
leave you to escort this lady, comrade.”
He and Vincent walked to the rue Duphot
and Goron engaged the watcher in conversa-
tion. He said that no one had visited the
shop except the little employee who came
each morning to see if her employer had re-
turned and couldn’t understand her ab-
sence.
“I suppose that Verheuil is satisfied that
the employee knows nothing,” said Vin-
cent.
“Yes, and if Verneuil is satisfied we can
take that as proved. It takes much to
satisfy Verneuil: he has a distrustful
nature.”
The man who was keeping observation
opened the shop door for them, telling
them that the postman had dropped a letter
in the box.
The letter bore a London postmark and
was addressed to
“ ‘Madame Lewis,’
“chez Madame Germaine, Modiste,
“rue Duphot.”
Goron did not scruple to tear the envelope
open. The letter was in French, written i»
an uneducated hand. It ran as follows;


“Dear Maaa—
“Please ask yom nusoana to bring a
double supply when he comes on August
Ist.
“Accept, dear madame, the expressic
of my most devoted sentiments
“ALICE DODDS.’
“What address does she give?” aske
incent eagerly
“None.”
“Then give me the envelope." He ex
mined the postmark which was not ver;
•lear. but he was able to make out W.li
‘I must get back to London at once. August
I is the day after to-morrow.” •
“But not without seeing Verneull?”
“No I’ll make my preparations and b<
at his office at two o’clock Will that bf
convenient to you?”
“Quite You take the letter. Au revolt
at two o’clock.”
When Vincent arrive)
at the rendezvous he found Goron waiting
at the bottom of the stairs; Vemeuil had no'
yet returned from lunch.
“I should be glad if you’d give me ar
expert opinion on this letter.” said Vincent,
“as you see it is written in an llllteratf
hand, but the composition of the text strike;
me as being anything but illiterate, con
sidering that French is a foreign languag-
to the writer.”
Goron studied the letter and handed j
back “The handwriting is certainly lllit
erate. but I judge that the letter has beet
Copied from a text supplied to the write’
by a well-educated woman.”
“That coincides with my opinion At an;
rate I will try to locate Alice Dodds as soor
as I get to London and get from her somt
Information about Lewis ”
“Alice Dodds may not be easy to find
suggested Goron; “you have only a postmarl
giving the postal district.”
“Quite true, but there is a division of polici
in each of these postal districts and througl
them I shall find the woman.”
Verneull entered the lobby at this momeni
and greeted them in his usual petty officer’;
manner They climbed the stairs to hi;
office and when the door was shut Goron in
qulred without preamble “Did she talk?”
“Yes, at great length She gave me in
formation but I doubt whether any of i
Was true According to her version she dii
nothing in this business but supply hats t<
the wives of those two men They wen
exacting clients —returning ovet and ove
again tor trifling alterations in the trim
mings. When I pointed out that their re
quirements amounted to converting ribbons
she said that she had nothing to do witl
the eccentricities of her customers Sht
admitted having received letters at her shop
for them but it was natural for her tc
oblige customers in this way Finally, m\
friends, I decided that if we were to get anj
further a short sojourn at La Roche woulr
be the only method of persuasion.”
“Your method was an inspiration,” saio
Goron, “but we are to lose our British col-
league almost immediately.”
“Impossible!” said Verneull: “just at this
moment when our efforts are so soon to be
Crowned with success. Surely your chiefs
can spare you a little longer.”
“It is that I have another clue to follow
in London. This drug business seems to
have wide ramifications, but as you know my
main task is to discover the whereabouts of
those two Americans. This clue may help.”
He handed the letter found in Madame Oer-
malne’s letter box to the ex-petty officer
who read it with growing excitement.
“A double quantity on the first of Au-
ust? I suppose that you will take step;
n your side of the Channel to intercept this-
rerchandise.”
‘lndeed we will.”
‘Of course, we have given orders to ah
he French ports about these two men, bu
hat is not to say that they won’t slip
hrough Duprez is not the only man who
ras a fast motor boat.”
“I shall arrange for orders to be circu-
ited on our side of the Channel, but, as yov
say, these motor-boats can slip in any-
vhere.”
“Well," said Goron, “your plans are settler
and while you’re away we shall not be in-
active on our side You remember that th<
Mayor of St Male told us of a Deputy who
was protecting these young people, for a
consideration that is well understood. Wr
must make it our business to find this gen-
tleman and hear what he has to say on thr
subject.”
“That will be a task for you, my friend,’
aid Verneull. “Deputies are quite outsldr
ny province: they require delicate handling
“Very well,” said Goron; “I will occup;
nyself with the search for him and also 1
will send instructions to the Surete office)
stationed at Cannes to Interview those twe
women and see what he can get out ol
hem.”
“If you should come across the tracks o)
heir husbands I hope you will not fail tr
send me a telegram,” said Vincent: ‘and h
I find them I shall, of course, let you know
it once,”
They parted with mutual expressions o
goodwill Vincent, who had already booket
his passage by air. was in time to catch the
afternoon plane to Croydon He har
telegraphed to Sergeant Walker asking hirr-
to meet the plane at Croydon and bring witl
him the latest reports bearing on the cas;
n which they were interested
“I have a car here,” said the sergeant.
‘Very good, then we will talk as we go
‘Well. I haven’t been idle while you wer
.way I have been interviewing the bant
)flficials Pitt’s defalcations amounted t(
i large sum The inquiries are not yei
■omplete. but he had certainly made awaj
vith a good many thousand poi ids On
he other hand, the amount was not large
■nough to cover the expenses ne incurred in
ils way of living and we’ve been wondering
vhether he had not got some other source
>f supply.”
“He had,” said Vincent. ’I discovered tha
-hlle I was abroad He was dealing in
Irugs.”
Sergeant Walker whistled “That ex-
•lains a good many things In following
ip the tracks of Bernard Pitt, of Hamp-
stead, I found that he had another banking
account at the National Insurance Bank
which account he closed on the day before
ne was murdered.
“The money was paid to him in Bank oi
England notes, of which the numbers were
known, and one of these notes of ten pounds
was brought into a Hammersmith bank and
changed for treasury notes. The woman
who brought it was made to sign her name
on the back—Alice Dodds.’
It was now Vincent’s turn to whistle. “This
is a lucky coincidence. lam hunting that
woman at this moment. Have you found
her?”
“No, not yet; the information reached me
only half an hour ago. Why are you in-
terested in Alice Dodds, Chief Inspector?”
Vincent gave him a brief account of his
own doings In Paris. “This woman must
be found and made to account for the
possession of that note A C.I.D, officer
at Holland Park will do that tor us; you
see the postal district is W.ll. Will you
attend to that part of the inquiry while I
am seeing Chief Constable Richardson?
You can take this letter.”
“I’ll drive you straight to the Yard and
then go on to Holland Park You’ll be in
ime to catch the Chief Constable. He
very seldom leaves his table before eight
o’clock.”
On being admitted to his chief’s room,
Vincent delivered all the polite messages
from Prance with which he had been
charged by Verneull.
“My friend Vemeuil is a rough diamond,
jut he has a warm heart and an unrivalled
tnowledge of the French criminal, parti-
cularly the Parisian variety. How did he
strike you?”
“Well, sir, I can’t imagine how he would
jehave in a drawing-room, but he is a good
man for a British police officer to know.
He can oe very useful."
When Richardson had heard his chief
nspector’s report he said. “Of course, you
lid quite right in coming over, but I don’t
,hink that those two men that we want
vill venture to set foot in this coun ry.
t agree with you that the woman Dodds
nust be found' she may prove to be very
useful to us Have you any other plan
.0 work upon now you have come back?”
“Yes, I thought of rounding up the friends
it the murdered man —that is the Bernard
Pitt, of Hampstead He must have been
supplying some of them with drugs and
they might very well give shelter to Blake
ind Lewis now that the country is getting
oo hot to hold them.”
“You have, of course, warned the Port
ifficers?”
“Yes, Sergeant Walker is doing that, but
hey won’t try to come in in the ordinary
vay; they will come in a motor boat and may
and anywhere.”
“What about the coastguard?”
‘Sergeant Walker is seeing to that also.’
‘Yes. because it is quite possible that one
>t the coastguard may spot this motor boat
md report the landing of these people They
vould, of course, be passed on to the police
s having landed illegally, but we ought to
e told of it.”
“np
HE Newquay police
tot into touch with theli local coastguard
about the motor boat that the two men
escaped in but so far no information has
come in.”
“You have seen Sergeant Walker and he
nas posted you in the developments on this
;ide of the Channel?”
“Yes, sir, he has My present idea is to
get hold of the servants who were at the
Hampstead house- the man Anton for
choice and the chauffeur ”
Richardson consulted the file ot papers
.ying on his table ‘This is the file of the
Bernard Pitt case and it gives all the in-
formation we have You had better run
through it.”
“Very good, sir, I will The dead man’s
chauffeur is the person most likely to be
able to give me the information I want—the
names and addresses of Pitt’s associates. X
did interview one of his friends at the begin-
ning of the case, but in the light of the
drug traffic information I ought to see
others.”
“That’s the right line of Inquiry. See if
we have his address in that file: X haven’t
yet had time to go through it.”
Vincent took the file and ran through


it with a practised eye. “I see by this that
Anton has been allowed to reihain in the
Hampstead house as a kind of caretaker,
I suppose we shall have to pay him some-
thing out of ‘lncidentals.’ ”
"Yes, he can’t live on air."
“I don't see the chauffeur’s address in
this file, but no doubt Anton will be able
to give it to me when 1 see him, I shall
go straight out to Hampstead now.”
Vincent did not stop to pick up Sergeant
Walker. He took a taxi straight out to the
house in Hampstead and rang the bell.
Antbn, who answered it, was wearing a
worried look.
“The telephone has been ringing many
times to-day,” he said. “Some ask for Mr.
Blake and some for Mr. Lewis. X tell them
they are not here, but, oh, sir, it is anxious
work for me all alone in this big house.
This was not what I came to England
for.”
"No, but you will have to endure it for a
little longer, my friend,” said Vincent.
“I ask myself why these people ring up
Mr. Blake and Mr. Lewis when it is known
now that my master, their friend, is dead.”
“Probably they think that these men,
Blake and Lewis, may be hiding in this
house now that it is empty. I suppose that
none of these people would give their
names?” a
“No, sir, though I always ask them:
some of them were ladles."
“You told me the other day that your
master never entertained ladies. Are you
quite Sure of this?”
“Quite sure, sir. If he entertained ladies
It must be at some restaurant.”
“I suppose the chauffeur will be able to
tell me more about these visits to restau-
rants.”
Anton gave a short laugh. “That chauf-
feur could tell you, sir, Hut he will not
speak. He never speak to anyone and he
has no friends. He hated all of lis.”
“Do you know where he is now?”
“No, he told no one where he was going.
All the others. X know where to find them,
but not that chauffeur.”
“The car is still in the garage?”
“Oh, yes, sir; nobody take the car out:
the police have the key of the garage.”
JUST then the tele-
phone bell began to ring persistently. Vin-
cent quickly made up his mind on a course
of action.
“Answer the call and if they ask for
Mr. Blake or Mr. Lewis, say that you will
call them and come for me.”
He listened to the half conversation.
“I can call Mr. Lewis to the telephone,
madam, if you hold on.” With frantic
dumb play Anton signalled to Vincent, who
among his other accomplishments could talk
American.
He went to the instrument and cried;
“Hallo!”
A woman’s voice answered: “Is that you?”
It was a quavering voice, shaken with
emotion of some kind, and without waiting
for the answer she went op eagerly: “Have
you got it?”
In his best American accent Vincent re-
plied: “I must know who you are.”
“Oh, you know, I’m Dodds —Alice Dodds.
I want it for myself, and her as well.
Heaven knows we want it badly enough.”
Vincent realised that this woman was in
a state in which drug addicts throw caution
to the winds. He answered: “Come round
to this house right now.”
“It’ll take me a good part of an hour to
make the journey.”
“Never mind: “I’ll wait for you.”
He put down the receiver and turned to
Anton. “A lady is coming to see me. If
the telephone bell rings again do not
answer. Let them go on ringing.”
“Very good, sir."
“Meanwhile I am going to look over the
house again.”
Having made a perfunctory second search
of the house without result he went down
to the ground floor and rang the bell for
Anton.
“AS I told you, I am expecting a lady.
When she comes, go to the door, and if
she asks for Mr. Lewis show her into the
dining-room and fetch me. 1 shall be in
that little knoking-room opposite.”
He had not long to Wait. His visitor had
been better than her word. When the bell
rang Anton followed his instructions, showed
the visitor into the dining-room, and fetched
Vincent.
She was a walking example of what ad-
diction to heroin will reduce a self-respect-
ing woman to. It was obvious from her
speech that she belonged to the upper ser-
vant class, but she was ill-dressed and un-
tidy in her person and there was an air
of entire indifference to her appearance.
ShS did not rise when he entered the
room, but looked at him with lack-lustre
eyes.
“Where’s Mr. Lewis and who are you?”
“I’m here to see you Instead of Mr. Lewis."
A dark cloud of distrust and suspicion
Was evident in her expression. “Has he
let me down?”
“You mean, has he failed to bring what
you expected?”
"He’s got it all right, but he wants to
frighten me into paying more than the
regular rate. He thinks that she will always
pay anything he chooses to ask.”
Vincent realised that this lack of cautr n
was characteristic of the addict in the later
stages. She had taken it for granted that
he was one of Lewis’ associates. He de-
cided to drop all play-acting, together with
his assumed American accent.
“Mr. Lewis is not here, madam, but now
that you have come I have some questions
to ask you.”
Her attitude changed: she shook with
fear, not the fear of being questioned, but
the fear that she was not going to receive
what she had come for.
“When do you expect him here?” she
said With a kind of wail In her tone.
“We’ll talk about Mr. Lejvis later on.
First I want you to answer my questions.
Why did you expect Mr. Lewis to be here?”
“Because he answered the telephone.”
“Why did you telephone to him here?”
“Because his letter said this house on
August 1, and to-morrow is the first. She
said he might arrive earlier.”
“Who is she?”
“I’m not going to answer your questions.”
she said rudely.
“Very well, just as you like, only unless
you do you’ll have to come with me to the
police station.”
“No, don’t take me there,” she said, cring-
ing with alarm. “They took her there once
when she was put on probation and she’s
never forgotten it.”
“Is she your mistress?”
“She was once, but I’m not in service now.”
She assumed a boastful air “Tin a lady
living on my own now.”
Vincent desided to adopt another method
of attack. “Who gave you that ten-pound
note which you changed for treasury notes
at the bank in Holland Park?”
“Oh, I picked It up in the street, and
finding’s keeping, you know.”
Vincent decided that the proper course
was to take her to the police station and
let the police surgeon deal with her. She
was a typical addict. He went to the door
and signalled to Anton,
“Ring up a taxi,” lie whispered, “and
when it arrives, come in and announce it.
I shall take this lady away, but I shall
come back because I intend to spend the
night here.”
To Vincent's great relief the woman fol-
lowed him to the taxi without demur He
gave the address of the nearest police
station and they drove off together.
J.HE police surgeon
was sent for and while the Woman was in
charge Of the matron Vincent explained the
situation to the doctor.
“Of course, you know all about the symp-
toms of drug addicts when they have been
deprived of their favorite poison.”
“1 ought to; if I don’t tt is not from
lack of practice.”
“Well, I have questions to put to this
woman and f can get nothing out of her
in her present state. She can be held for
the present on another charge; she was in
possession of a stolen ten-pound note.”
“Very good I’ll see to her and I’ll ring
you up as soon as she is in a state where
she can usefully be questioned. I suppose
if I ring up the Yard you will get the
message?”
“Yes.” -said Vincent. “I’m going back
there immediately, but I may not be able
to stop there long,"
“Oh, that’s all right. The woman will
sleep here to-night and I shan't want you
until the morning."
Vincent found Walker, in the sergeants’
room at the Yard and called him into Hie
v,nie’ inspectors’ room.
‘Y on and I have got a busy night before
us. We’ll have to take it in turns to keep
wad a in that house at Hampstead, because
it is (uite possible that our American friends,
thinking the house empty, will take the
liberty of breaking in: it will save a deal of
trouble if they do. Anton tells me that the
telephone bsll has been busy, and I think
that the clients are expecting those two, and
that they have been given that address.”
“Unless they’ve already landed, I think
they’ll have difficulty in getting through. I
have warned the coastguard people as well
as the Port officers and there’ll be a sharp
lookout everywhere.”
“Then We’ll be off and trust to Anton to
provide us with some kind of meal."
Anton proved himself to bs a skilled chef.
He provided them with a meal worthy of
a first-class restaurant. The two officers
kept alternate watch during the night, but
it passed off uneventfully. Police officers
are accustomed to disappointments of tins
kind: neither was depressed by the failur ;
of their hopes. Anton provided them with
hot baths and breakfast before they made
for the Yard.
On Vincent’s table lay two telegrams, one
from Goron to say that the two women had
left Cannes and. not improbably, would at-
tempt to enter England: the other from
the coastguard at Newquay saying- that a
motor boat had landed two men and two
women in Pulsey Cove in the early hours
of the morning, and they were being de-
tained by the Newquay police on the charge
of landing illegally.
Vincent leapt from his chair and made
a dash for the door of the sergeants’ room
to find Walker. The sergeants, engaged in
writing up their reports, were accustomed
to th§se sudden irruptions: Vincent had a
reputation throughout the service of being
a man who could not take life easily.
“I want you, Walker. Come along to my
room.”
They were alone in the chief inspectors'


room and Vincent was free to Indulge his
instinct for quick movement. He paced
up and down.
“Here, Walker, read these.” He handed
him the telegrams. “There'll be no mayor
to connive at their escape on this side of the
Channel, thank the Lord. But you and I
will have to go down to Newquay imme-
diately; otherwise the local beaks may dis-
miss them with a caution.”
“Won't the Aliens’ Department at the
Home Office have something to say?”
“They may, but they’re funny people at
the Home Office. It depends upon whose
hand the papers fall into. While you are
getting the car round and filling her up
I'll telephone to the doctor at Hampstead
about that woman, Alice Dodds.”
The police surgeon at Hampstead had a
callous manner of dealing with such cases.
"We've got the woman in cold storage,
but you know what it is with addicts when
the supply is suddenly cut off. She has all
the symptoms of reaction, vomiting, sneez-
ing, sweating and palpitation of the heart.
It will be some days before she will be fit
to be questioned.”
“Wkm any papers
found in her handbag, or concealed about
her person, because I've reason to believe
she has been acting for a person in a much
higher social position.”
“Nothing was found on her, except her
name and address and a sum of eighty
pounds in treasury notes.”
“Will you give me her address and I’ll
have inquiries made about her in the Divi-
sion.”
He made a note of the address and before
Sergeant Walker returned he had time to
send a note to the Division requesting that
a report should be made to him on the
woman’s mode of life. By that time the car
was waiting for him. Vincent took the
wheel himself; it was to be a long run and
a fast one.
At Newquay police station they saw In-
spector Harrowby, the officer who was in
charge of the car in which Bernard Pitt
had apparently been murdered.
“You are holding four people on a charge
of landing illegally,” said Vincent.
“We are—two men and two women. They
have told us the usual kind of fairy tale,
that the captain was a personal friend and
that it seemed to be the cheapest way
of coming. We’ve submitted the case to
the Aliens’ Department at the Home Office
and are awaiting Instructions. If it is de-
cided not to prosecute, they will be taken
in custody to the nearest port and pushed
out.”
“I want them for something else. It may
interest you to know that they were the
men who left that motor car behind when
they left Newquay a few days ago.”
, "Do you think they were coming back for
the car?”
"No. I think their plan was to make for
the nearest railway station and take the
train to London. Have they been searched?”
“They have. They were carrying personal
luggage but nothing contraband.”
“An excessive amount of luggage?”
“Nothing out of the way. Would you like
to see them?”
“Yes, I should—one at a time and the
women first. Let each one bring her lug-
gage in with her.”
Mrs. Blake was the first to come in carry-
ing a suitcase of moderate size. She was
tall and rather handsome. Vincent judged
her to be a little on the wrong side of thirty.
She spoke English with a very slight foreign
accent.
“You are the Customs’ officer, no doubt,”
she said, with a charming smile. “We did
not know that we were committing a grave
crime in landing as we did. We happened
to know the captain of the motor boat and
begged him to give us a passage, but you can
examine everything we brought with us. just
as If we had landed at Dover or Folke-
stone.”
She opened her suitcase with alacrity.
"You see there is nothing here, but one
change of clothes, which any woman would
need.”
“I see,” said Vincent, dryly; “and of course
a second hat.”
“Of course,” she agreed.
“I am particularly interested in the hat,
also in the one you have on your head. May
I ask you to remove it and let me look at
it.”
She looked a little disconcerted, but she
did as he asked with the best grace she
could muster.
“You see,” he explained with a smile, “I
happen to know your milliner in Paris.
Madame Germaine.”
"Ah! Madame Germaine is a modiste of
talent.”
“I must ask you to step into this room,”
lie said, politely opening the door for her,
“while I see your friend. Your hats will be
safe in my keeping.”
He closed the door behind her and put
her hats In a cupboard before sending for
Mrs. Lewis.
Mrs. Lewis was a contrast to her friend
She was small and slight and her foreign
accent was more pronounced. She said that
she had been born in Austria and began a
voluble explanation of her reasons for com-
ing into England in a motor boat.
Vincent stemmed the flood by putting up
his hand firmly. She seemed to think that
he was going to stop her mouth with a large
hand and she subsided into a few broken
sentences.
“I know exactly what you were going to
tell me,” he said. “Your friend has already
given the explanation which you made up
between you. It is your luggage that in-
terests me. Kindly put it down and remove
your hat. Thank you.”
Vincent’s rough and ready way of dealing
with her dried up the springs of eloquence.
Tears came into her eyes and here again
Vincent opposed the cold douche of brutality
which he had assumed.
“If you wish to cry. madam, I would ask
you not to do it in this room. You can cry
on your friend's shoulder.” He threw open
the door and motioned her Into the next
room. It was as if he had swept her out
with a broom.
He opened the door into the passage and
called in the Inspector. “I have a job here
which only a woman can do,” he said. “You
see these hats—four of them. I’ve reason
to believe that the trimmings are tubular
and contain drugs. Have you anyone who
can unpick them carefully and put the con-
tents of each trimming into a separate en-
velope for analysis?”
The inspector wrinkled his brow. “I doubt
whether the police matron would be up to
a job like this; she has a fist like a prize
fighter, but we’ll try her, if you like.”
But when the matron was called she tossed
her head at the idea that there had been
any doubt about her competence. Any
woman, it appeared, could do what was
wanted, and she took from her bag the scis-
sors and other tools necessary and then and
there began to dissect a hat.
“I’m sure the inspector will provide you
with some stout envelopes for the job, if you
will take the hats downstairs with you.”
The next task was to Interview the two
men separately. Blake was called first. He
was a stout, thick-set man with a protruding
under jaw. His manner proclaimed the fact
that he was an American who feared neither
man nor devil and who had a contempt for
the legal machinery of a foreign country.
Vincent knew the type.
“I suppose you haven't come back for your
car?” he said.
“What’s that?”
Vincent repeated his question, which ap-
peared little to the man's taste.
"Why ..."
"You needn’t trouble to think out a reply.
It would tire your brain to make up a
plausible story, but X can save you the
trouble. We know what has brought you
here; you were bringing merchandise for
people in London which would not have
passed the Customs. Unfortunately for you
in landing it like this you have broken the
law' doubly, but X have a few questions to
ask you about the car you left behind on
your last visit.”
“You’ve got the wrung man, mister. I
know nothing abfmt a car and I defy you to
find anything in my baggage that you can
hold me on.”
“No, the contraband was carried by the
ladies in their hats, but I must warn you
that you may have a more serious charge
to answer—a charge of wilful murder. I
must caution you that anything you say will
be taken down and may be used in subse-
quent proceedings.”
“See here, bops, you’re barking up the
wrong tree. I want to save you trouble
hereafter. What the women were carrying
was no concern of mine. They happen to
know the captain of that boat and he offered
to run us all over and land us. As to a
motor car and wilful murder, you're talking
through your hat.”
“m
I HE garage foreman
here in Newquay with whom you left the
car and the owmer who hired it to you
and your friend, Mr. Bernard Pitt, will be
able to identify you.”
The man proceeded to make the American
eagle scream. Vincent cut him short by
rising and opening the door. “You can
finish the rest of your harangue downstairs.
I have no time to listen to it. Inspector,”
he called, “take this man downstairs and
send up the other.”
The second man, Lewis, was of a different
type. He was older and less blatant. More-
over, he had a story to tell at the end of the
first five minutes. He did not deny having
left the car.
“See here,” he said quietly, “we didn’t
come back for that car and you know why.
There had been murder done in it.”
“I’d better warn you that you are sus-
pected of murder and that anything you say
will be taken down and may be used here-
after.”
“Oh, I know all about that. You needn't
worry yourself. We didn’t commit that mur-
der, but I know we shall have a job in get-
ting you guys to believe it.”
“If you would like to make a statement,
I’ll call my sergeant and get him to take it
down in writing and then you can sign it,”
"O.K. Call him in.”
As soon as Walker was in his place with


his notebook and pencil, the man began As
he Us ened to the story Vincent reflected
that it was the most incredible story that he
had ever listened to and that it did credit
to the imagination of the man who told
It.
“I guess that you know , a good deal oi
what I’m going to tell you. but there it is
I’ll ell you the truth and you can make
what you like of it It was a week ago last
Saturday when my friend Blake and I
started off with Bernard Pitt for Newquay
in a car that he’d hired for the Journey;
we were to meet a motor boat belonging to
a friend of ours which was to take us ovei
to France. We hadn’t gene far out of town
when a man jumped out Of a car ahead and
stuck out his arms to stop us. He was got
up to look like a regular bandit as you see
in the flicks Pitt was sitting at the back
alone; the bandit got in beside him, fired
and jumped out again It was all so sud-
den. that we hadn't time to do anything
We didn’t realise at first that Pitt had
been killed At that moment a terrific thun-
derstorm started It got so bad that we
couldn’t go on We saw a barn a little way
off the main road and made up our minds
to shelter in it, but the car was too big to
get in It was then we discovered that Pitt
was dead, and Blake said; ‘lt won’t do foi
us to be found with a dead man in the car;
we’d better take him out and dump him
nobody will see us in a storm like this ’ Then
we wen on to Newquay ”
“But vou stopped on the way to get thi
broken window taken out.”
“Yes that was Blake’s idea He’s always
getting brainwaves like that He nearly lost
us the boat through that one.”
“Why didn’t you give information to the
police at the time? Your story was more
likely to be believed then than it is now ”
“I know it, but you see in my country the
cops are out to make a bit on every deal
and a quick get-away is the safest.”
Ju> ERNARD PITT was
escaping from the country with a large
sum of stolen money on him What became
of that?”
“It was taken by the bandit I told you
of.”
“You said that he was in a car What
sort of car was it?”
“Sure I can’t tell you that I’ve told you
that it all happened so quickly that it
took our wits away 1 could swear it
was a dark color and that’s all.”
“What happened to the bandit?”
“He jumped back into his car and got
away He drove like fury.”
“Well you are now under arrest for im-
porting narcotics into this country.”
“We were fools to come back here we
were safe! In Prance "
“In Prance vou had powerful protec-
tion ”
“Why. certainly, but th. protection was
paid for.”
“It was no less a person than a Deputy?”
“You mean Monsieur Laurillard?” Why,
yes, bul I guess he can do nothing for us
in this darned country.”
“Surely you’ve squared someone over
here?”
“We thought we had squared the New-
quay coastguard, but thev were pulling our
leg £’
“Thank you That’s all I have to ask
you for the moment You must consider
yourself under arrest. Now, Walker,” he
said, as soon as the door was closed, “get
this wire sent off to Goron, Ministry ol
the Interior Paris. Name of the Deputy
is Laurillard and sign it Vincent.”
I i was ten o’clock thf
following morning when Goron rang tht
bell at the Laurillard flat and handed hit
card to the manservant He had time to
observe that the flat was expensively fur-
nished in the modem style
He had not long to wait probably nc
mnger than sufficed for the gentleman to
decide upon the replies he was to make it
he was questioned about his connection
with the drug traffic, because a man who
was engaged in risky transactions such as
his must always feel that the axe was hang-
ing over his head. -
“1 have called to give you. a hint, mon-
sieur; some friends of yours in this country
and in England are in danger and may re-
quire you to use all the influence you
oossess in their behalf."
The flabby complexion of the Deputy took
on a--sicklier shade. “I do not understand
to whom you are referring,’ he stam-
mered
“No? Then let me make things plainer
Persons concerned in illegally introducing
narcotics into England and this country
nave been arrested and they are counting
ipon you to restore them to liberty ”
“You speak as if I were a Court of Appeal
l have no power to have them released .” He
drew himself up with dignity and con-
tinued ‘Really this is an outrage I must
bring it to the notice of ay friend, the
Minister How dare you suggest that I
a Deputy in the Chamber am linked with
scoundrelly trafficKers in drugs ”
T fear that you must blame your tnena.
rather than me. and if I may be permitted
to give you a word of advice. 1 suggest that
you would be making a mistake in appealing
for protection to the Minister. lam merely
carrying out my duty in calling upon you.’
Laurillard had been doing some rapid
thinking; his manner changed. “It is not
worth troubling the Minister with so
trumpery a charge. I will interview these
people who dare to abuse my name.”
“Unfortunately two of them named Blake
and Lewis have been detained in England
by the British authorities.”
“The mistakes made by the British police
have nothing to do with me. Who is there
in Prance that I can deal with?”
Goron decided that for the time at least
it would be prudent to withhold the name
of the Mayor of St. Malo. “There is a
milliner in the Rue Duphot named Madame
Germaine . ”
“A woman? Send her ,o me and let me
deal with her."
“If you will come with me to the police
station at the Grand Palais I will‘have her
brought to vou."
“I cannot come at once I have to bt
at the Chamber ”,
“We will make any time you choose con-
venient. Shall we say this evening at
hah-past five?”
“Very good That time will do I will
come to the Grand Palais.”
Goron’s text objective was the office ol
his friend Verneuil, To him he narrated
his receipt of the telegram and his inter-
view with Laurillard.
“Ah! So M. Laurillard was the protector
and friend of this little gang.” He began to
chuckle. The tremor began low down in
his anatomy and worked its way upwards
until it culminated in laughter, “One finds
them everywhere, these eager gentlemen
who snatch at Illicit profits, but most of all
among the politicians, for their harvest
may be a short one and they make their
hay only when the sun is shining.”
“Have you loosened the tongue ot that
woman Germaine?”
Verneuil screwed up his eyes Not yet,
mt I think that an interview between
M. Laurillard and her may produce some-
hing.”
“Then we must contain our curiosity until
ualf-past five, when this intriguing in-
.erview is to take place."
Goron spent the next few nours in making
jonfidential inquiries about M Laurillard
and his friends and relations As it proved
his time was not ill-spent He had gleaned
some facts that were likely to be useful
when the interview took place
He arrived at the Grand Palais a few
.nlnutes before the appointed hour and
climbed the stairs to Verneull’s room There
he found Madame Germaine in her full
panoply of make-up, beautifully dressed
and groomed and bristling with the self-
confidence that women enjoy when they
feel themselves to be well turned out
Verneuil, whose whimsical expression
Goron knew so well, observed. “Madame
Germaine is looking forward to her inter-
view with her old friend. Monsieur Lauril-
lard.”
“Yes, indeed,” burst out the woman; “now
1 shall see justice done.”
Ve neuil bowed obsequiously ’And we
-hall make our humble apologies for any
neon enience that madame has suffered.”
It was at this moment that M Laurillard
was announced Madame Germaine rose
from het chair and approached him with
outstretched hand He drew back.
“I have not the honor of raadame’s ao-
iua.ntance," he said
“Oh,” said the lady, ’so that is to be the
-me, is ,t? It is well to know how we
stand I will give you one chance, mon-
sieur. before laying all my cards on the
table before these gentlemen Is this
the first time that we have met?”
There was a cold light in her eye which
Laurillard could not fail to see His in-
stinct was to compromise He turned to
the others, saying: “Can X see this lady
alone?”
G ORON replied; “1
cannot see why a private interview should
be necessary on the mere question whether
vou and this lady are acquaint*,”
“It is possible that this is not the'first time
that I have met this lady She might recall
the incident to my memory if we could
talk tete-a-tete.”
Before either of the men had time to
reply, Madame Germaine burst forth with
blazing eyes: t
“I have borne much and I can bear no
more I am free to tell these gentlemen
all that they are anxious to know ”
Laurillard made a last attempt to save
his face “Of course, vou two gentlemen
are free to take down any cock and bull
story that a detractoi chooses to make.
When the time comes I shall defend my
honor At the moment I have important
business to discharge in another part of
Paris and I cannot stop to hear her.”
Goron placed his back against the door.
“You will pardon me, monsieur; I, too have
questions to put to you before you go.”
“By what right? I am a Deputy. I
have my parliamentary duties to attend
to . . .”
“Quite right, monsieur but my question*
will have nothing to do with your parlia-
mentary duties.”
“1 shall have to make a complaint to my


friend, the Minister of the Interior, about
this insult on the part of one of his func-
tionaries. You know that as a Deputy I
am Immune from this form of petty per-
secution.”
“I merely wanted to ask you whether M
Charles Laurillard, one of the directors of
the Hedouin chemical laboratory in Belfort,
is your son.”
“He is,” burst out Madame Germaine, un-
able any longer to contain herself. “And
this factory turns out the stuff which the
Blake and Lewis women have been dealing
in.”
drew
himself up. “My son’s factory is engaged
in important government work.”
“Yes, and what about the secret room
behind two steel doors? What goes on
there?” said Madame Germaine vindictively
“That,” said Laurillard, sinking his voice
almost to a whisper, “is the room in which
the famous anti-gas product is being made
for the masks. She has no right to know
about It.”
Goron now played his trump card. “What-
ever goes on in that secret room is already
known to the Surete Rationale, who were to
pay a visit to it this afternoon.”
Laurillard made a final attempt to re-
treat with dignity. “If it is proved,” he said,
with lips so dry that they scarcely enun-
ciated the words, “if my son is proved to
have done anything contrary to the interests
of his country, I shall be among the first to
vote for his punishment.”
Neither Goron nor Verneuil did more than
bow him out. When the door was shut be-
hind him, Verneuil’s attitude was trying to
Goron’s gravity, for half unconsciously he
was mimicking the dignified carriage of their
late visitor. In fact, thought Goron, my
friend Verneuil is a positive loss to the
French stage.
“Well now,” said Madame Germaine; “you
have begun to realise some of the truth,
namely, that I am guiltless and that the
real malefactors are that gentleman and his
son Charles.”
Goron left Verneuil to answer. “I fear,
madame, that the hospitality that I pro-
vided for you at La Roche has not been
entirely to your liking; you would prefer
the comforts of your own home, and if I
felt sure that you would stay there without
having recourse to a laundry basket, we
might come to terms."
“You are going the best way to ruin me,
gentlemen, idy shop has been closed for
days and all my customers will desert me for
rival establishments. Surely you’ve done
enough.”
“We shall have done enough as soon as
you have done something on your side by
making a clean breast of your connection
with this affair of drug-smuggling.”
“Very well; I’ll tell you. My connection
with the affair began when those two ladles
came to me to buy hats and insisted that
the trimmings should be made tubular. They
explained laughingly that they wished to
smuggle perfume into England. Later they
brought to me some coarse white powder
which I was to introduce into trimmings in
such a way that it couldn’t leak out. I
guessed that something was wrong and de-
murred. After some discussion . ,
“And something passing from hand to
hand.” murmured Verneuil. “After some
discussion you consented?”
“Yes, to oblige the ladies.”
The ex-petty officer’s eyes narrowed to a
slit. “It is always worth while to oblige
customers, isn’t it?”
“Well, of course, that’s how commerce
goes forward.”
“In what other way did you oblige your
customers?” asked Goron.
“I did receive letters at my shop for
hem.”
“What did you do with the letters?”
“I had instructions sometimes to forward
hem, sometimes to hold them till they
tailed.”
“But you warned these people when we
first made inquiries at your shop. Under
whose instructions did you do that?”
“The instructions of M. Laurillard.” Sht
brought out the name almost triumphantly
“When did you first meet this distinguished
Deputy?”
“Some months ago. I was Introduced to
aim by Madame Lewis. He assured me that
I should be safe from molestation by people
like you if I consented to act as their post
office.”
“You knew that they were trafficking in
drugs,” said Goron.
“To be frank, I guessed it.”
“And your friends at the laundry. How
come they to .be mixed up in this busi-
ness?”
“Oh, they had no part in this at all. They
helped me to escape for old friendship’s
sake. I had been able to help them in build-
ing up their business.”
“Well, madame,” said Verneuil; “for the
time being you shall be set at liberty, but
it is right to warn you that your correspond-
ence will be supervised.”
She shrugged her shoulders. “You may
not believe me, gentlemen, but my profes-
sion is more to me than this wretched busi-
ness into which I was dragged. If people
write foolish letters to me and you intercept
them, it will concern them, not me. I shall
do nothing but read the letters which you
allow the postman to bring to me. All I
ask is that you do not expel me from France,
the country that I love.”
They allowed her to go and Verneuil seized
the opportunity for asking how Goron had
discovered the identity of Laurillard’s son.
“That was simpler than you think. ‘Laur-
illard’ is not a very common name. As you
know since this affair started, my depart-
ment has been getting together all possible
information about chemical factories in
Prance, I searched through the lists of
directors and in one of them I found the
name of Laurillard, a director of the Hedouin
chemical laboratory in Belfort. As you know,
that address was in Germaine’s notebook.
During my investigation of the Laurillard
family I have to-day learned something
that may interest him. The daughter of the
Deputy married an Englishman named
Pearson and is now living in England. The
last letter found in the box Of Madame
Germaine had a London postmark. It in-
trigued our English colleague because the
writing was illiterate, but the text, which
was in French, and the spelling were im-
peccable. This marriage I speak of may be
the explanation. At any rate I shall send
him this information and he may hunt up
Madame Pearson. I leave you now, my
friend, in order to write this letter.”
CHI E P Constable
Richardson had been listening to Vincent’s
report.
“Where are these two men now?” he
asked.
“I presume that they are in prison. They
were brought up before the Newquay magis-
trates who, when they heard how the
men had landed and that drugs had been
found on the two women, remanded them
and refused ball.”
“You . have not yet charged them with
murder?” •
“No, sir, it is about that that I have
come to take your instructions. Their, story
is fantastic.”
“During a long career, Mr. Vincent, I
have found that even fantastic stories can-
not be dismissed with a shrug of the
shoulders.”
“Circumstantial evidence is all against
them. The window of the car was shattered
by a bullet; they stopped to have the win-
dow replaced, which would have been the
nstinct of guilty people.”
“We must not forget that the first in-
stinct of these drug-traffickers is to avoid
any contact with the police. Have you any
further evidence?”
“Yes, sir, I have. A note stolen from the
murdered man was changed by a woman
named Alice Dodds. This woman is a drug
addict and we have a letter signed by her
proving that she was in contact with these
people.”
“Then she is an important witness. Have
you found her?”
“Yes.” He explained his meeting with
the woman in the Hampstead house. “But
she is not in a physical condition to be
charged or questioned. She has been taken
to a cottage hospital, where the matron
and the medical superintendent have agreed
to notify us as soon as she is fit to be dis-
charged.”
“But you have made inquiries about her?”
"I have sir. She lives in a comfortable
little flat in Holland Park and apparently
has private means. The housekeeper of
the flats could say nothing about her ex-
cept that she was very delicate and often
prostrated by illness. I have told you about
the mysterious ‘she’ whom she frequently
mentioned. The housekeeper said that a
lady often came in a big car driven by a
chauffeur to see Alice Dodds, but she did
not know her name. From Information I
have just received from the Paris police X
am inclined to think that the mysterious
lady may be a Mrs. Pearson—a French-
woman married to an Englishman, the
daughter of the Paris Deputy, M. Lauril-
lard.”
“The man mixed up with the drug-traffick-
ing gang. You have not yet located her. I
suppose?”
“No, sir, but we have the name and we
know that she has a Lanchester car. We
are making inquiries at the London County
Council office for licensing cars. I hope
to have her address this afternoon.”
“Very good, but in view of the story told
by Lewis and Blake, you ought to find out
whether the murdered man had ever been
threatened. Have you questioned the ser-
vants again?”
“There is someone who might help me—
a Mr. Brooklyn—in Jermyn Street. I’ve seen
him once and he seemed quite ready to
help us if he could. He may be able to
furnish the names of people who used to
play at these parties.”
“Then you had better see him again.”
“Very good, sir. I should probably find him
at home now.”
On leaving his chief’s room, Vincent made
straight for Jermyn Street. He found Mr.
Brooklyn home, but their conversation led
to nothing useful.
“None of the people that I met at those
card parties would have been at all likely
to resort to murder to get rid of a gambling
debt, except, perhaps, those two Americans,
but they did not lose: they won.”


“I may tell you that we suspected those
Americans and I have questioned them.
They told me a fantastic story of having
been held up hear Oldbury by a masked
bandit.”
Brooklyn burst put laughing. “You don’t
mean to say that you, a hard-boiled officer
from Scotland Yard, believed a cock and
bull story like that. Why, man, it Was
hatched at Hollywood.”
Vincent joined in his laughter and took
his leave. His next visit was to Hamp-
stead to see what news Anton could give
him. The news was important. The chauf-
feur had called to know whether the ca;
had been disposed of and Anton had got hr
address from him.
“Has he another job?” asked Vincent.
“Not yet,” he said. “He asked me if anj
ladies had telephoned. I said: ‘Why do you
think ladies should telephone?’ and he said:
‘To take up his reference when he applied
for a new job.’ ”
“Did you tell him about the woman who
came here?”
“No, sir. 1 think you would wish no one
to be told about that.”
“Quite right, Anton. No one else has
telephoned, I suppose?”
"No, monsieur.”
“Well, give me the chauffeur’s address
and I’ll go and see him.”
Anton scurried off into the back regions
and returned with a slip of paper torn off
the margin of a newspaper. Vincent copied
the address into his notebook. It was in
the neighborhood of Palmer’s Green. As
Vincent had the car he drove out there.
It was a small house with a tiny garden
in front. A middle-aged woman opened
the door.
“Does Mr. Arthur Green live here?”
“Yes, sir, he is my son. Do you want to
see him?”
“Yes, I won’t keep him long.”
“Come in and I’ll call him.” She went to
the bottom of the stairs and called: “Ar-
thur, you’re wanted,” and Vincent heard
the clatter of boots on the stairs. It’s a
gent in the dining-room,” explained his
mother.
The chauffeur looked worse for wear since
Vincent had seen him last. He apologised
for a three-days’ growth of beard by say-
ing: “One gets mouldy out of a job. There’s
nothing to shave for if you understand what
I mean.”
“You,” began Vincent, “used to drive your
late master out in the evenings. I want you
to give me the names and addresses of
people he went to see—to spend the even-
ing with.”
“I gave you one—Mr. Brooklyn of Jermyn
Street.”
“Yes, but only one. I want you to give
me others. Did you know any of these
friends by sight?”
“Yes, some of them.”
“Were any of them youngish men?”
“Yes, some of them—Mr. Brooklyn, for in-
stance.”
“Can you think of anyone else?”
“Mr. Thelusson in Arkley Street—number
41.”
Vincent jotted it down In his notebook.
“Anyone else?”
The chauffeur gave quite a string of names
and Vincent noted them all.
“When you were with Mr. Pitt did you
live in the house?”
“No, I couldn’t stick the servants, so Mr.
Pitt let me have my own rooms over the
garage.”
“Why didn’t you like the servants?”
“Well, they were all blooming foreigners,
and I don’t trust foreigners.”
-Were the keys of your quarters over the
garage handed over to the police with the
keys of the house?” ’
“Yes, your sergeant took them when he
took all the other keys.”
“You have seen a lady recently about a
new job?”
“No, I haven’t.” .
“Think again.”
The man looked a little uneasy. “Well,
t’ve seen quite a lot of people, but nothing’s
-,ome of it.”
“What made you give the address of you:
ate master as a reference when you knew
ie was dead?”
“Well, I had to give some address.”
“But you knew a dead man couldn’t give
i reference.”
“I said that I’d worked at that address
vhen Mr. Pitt was alive.”
“I see. Well, if you do get a job you
;an give me as a reference.”
“Thank you, I will.”
“Well, thank you for this list of names.
I must get on and see the people.”
“Have you found the murderer of Mr
Pitt yet?”
“Not yet. When we do you’ll see it in the
papers.”
Vincent was studying the list of names
as he left the house, but he did not visit
any of them; he drove back to the Yard to
find Sergeant Walker and get from him the
key of the garage and the chauffeur’s quar-
ters over it.
XoU’D better Jump up
and come with me, Walker, bringing the
keys with you. I have a feeling that that
chauffeur knows more than he’s told us. I
didn’t take to the man at all.”
They drove straight to Hampstead and
without communicating with Anton they
stopped the car and walked to the garage,
which stood out of sight of the house. The
car was still there. They made a methodical
search of all the pocket/ but found only an
expired insurance policy and a road map.
Upstairs the rooms were neat and fairly
clean. There was a little stale food in
the kitchen cupboard and in the table drawer
there were a few papers relating to motor
cars and accessories.
“Nothing much here,” began Vincent, and
then he stopped with a sharp exclamation.
“This is Interesting! A car licence for a
Lanchester car owned by Mrs. Pearson.”
“It’s a common name,” observed Walker.
“It is; it would be strange if it turned
out to be the Mrs. Pearson we are looking
for, and, by Jove! it has the lady’s address.
We may as well call on her at once. This
is one of those expensive flats in Picca-
dilly. I know them. We’ll park the car in
Berkeley Square and walk.”
It was a service flat. The uniformed porter
directed them to the third floor and they
were admitted to Mrs. Pearson’s flat. She
proved to be a woman in the thirties, and
Vincent judged from her surroundings that
she had ample means. Although plain in
feature, she had a fair share of the chic
of her countrywomen and bore no out-
ward signs of being a drug addict.
“I am sorry to trouble you,” he said; “but
I have to get some information about a
chauffeur who was formerly in your em-
ployment, named Arthur Green.”
“Arthur Green? Yes, he was a good driver
and he knew the West End of London fairly
well.”
“Why did you part with him?”
“He left me of his own accord, saying that
as I had told him that I might want him
to drive me in France, he would prefer to
leave.”
“Of course, madame being French would
naturally wish to visit her own country.”
“I am English by marriage.”
“But M. Laurillard, your father, is
French.”
“The service to which you belong seems
to be loaded with unimportant details. My
parentage has nothing to do with my former
chauffeur, about whom you have come to
hquire.”
Vincent smiled enigmatically. “How long
■.go did he leave you?” he inquired.
“About a year as far as I can remember.”
“When he left you I understand that he
vent to a Mr. Bernard Pitt. Did you know
Mr. Pitt?”
She hesitated for a moment; her hesita-
tion was not lost upon Vincent. “Pitt is not
an uncommon name in England.”
“I mean Mr. Bernard Pitt.”
“I knew a Mr. Pitt who was cashier at
my bank, but not socially.”
“Mr. Pitt had a large circle of friends
who did not know that he was employed in
a bank, but you knew him only as a bank
cashier?"
“That’s all.” Behind her apparent In-
difference Vincent marked an undertone of
anxiety.
“I think you know a woman named Alice
Dodds,”
The lady appeared to search her memory.
“Alice Dodds? No. I don’t think I’ve ever
heard that name before.”
“Was she never employed by you?”
“No, because in that case I should re-
member her name.”
“But your Lanchester car is seen not in-
frequently at the door of her lodgings.”
“Oh, then all I can think of is that my
chauffeur drives there occasionally without
my permission.”
“You would have no objection, I’m sure,
to my interviewing your chauffeur.”
“Not at all, but it will take some minutes.
I have always to call him by telephone When
I want him.”
“Never mind. I will wait.”
“Very well, then I will telephone to him.
I will leave the*door open; you will like to
listen,” she added with an arch smile.
She spoke in French very rapidly and Vin-
cent failed to catch anything that might
have been construed as a warning. She re-
turned to the room.
“You will like to assure yourself that I
have no communication with him before you
see him.”
She handed him an illustrated magazine
and picked up some unfinished embroidery.
Ten minutes passed before the chauffeur
made his appearance. He was a Frenchman
and their conversation was conducted in
French. Pressed by Vincent, he made a
shamefaced acknowledgment that he had
occasionally used his mistress’ car without
her permission to visit Alice Dodds, Whom he
had met casually in a little restaurant. He
apologised for this breach of decorum to his
mistress, who with dignity replied that she
would discuss the matter with him at some
future time.
Turning to Vincent, she said: “Do you wish
to question him any further?”
Vincent shook his head: he had decided
not to press either of them any further at
this juncture, and took his leave.
As he took his seat in the car beside
Walker, Vincent said: “I think that an inter-
view with that bank manager might be use-
ful. It struck me that the hesitation of the
lady’s manner showed that her connection
with Pitt was closer than that which sub-


Blsts between a lady and her bank cashier.
Also she and her chauffeur both lied about
her visits to Alice Dodds. We mustn’t tor-
get that she is Laurillard’s daughter."
“And I suppose it’s her brother Charles
W ’o runs tha; drug factory in Belfort," said
Walker “Things seem to be fitting in, don’t
they? Youil go to the bank manager’s pri-
vate address I suppose The bank closed
hoars ago,"
Yes. we may have to drag him from hit
(3. ner-table but I’m sure he’ll give us all
tl aelp he can "
As soon as Vincent sent m his card, the
irald retu ned to show him into the
morning-room Close upon her heels came
the bank manager with his table napkin still
to his hand
“I’m sorry to trouble you at this hour,’
eaid Vincent: “but 1 won’t keep you more
than a minute.”
"It’s about the Pitt case again, I suppose,’
Bald the manager
“It relates to that case. What I want is
any information you can give me about one
of your customers, a French lady by birth—
a Mrs. Pearson.”
The manager pondered a moment. “Mrs
Pearson? A French lady? 1 can’t tell you
very much beyond the fact that she has
never overdrawn her account and that she
gives us very little trouble.”
“Can you tell me whether the late Mr.
Pitt transacted any business for her outside
the ordinary banking business?”
“I can’t answer that question offhand,
but I can see some of the junior clerks and
let you know what they say.”
“It might be very helpful if you did. Per-
haps you would send me a note addressed to
Scotland Yard.”
“I will with pleasure. You will, of course,
keep my name out of the business?”
.“Most certainly.”
As they left the bank manager’s house,
Vincent said: “I think we’ve done enough
for to-day. We haven’t discovered much,
but we have opened up fresh lines of in-
quiry.”
O N the following morn-
ing a letter maraed “Personal” was de-
livered to Vincent by hand. It was from
the bank manager, informing him that re-
gistered letters from abroad in stiff en-
velopes used to arrive at the bank addressed
to Mrs. Pearson, c/o B Pitt, Esq., Asiatic
Bank. The clerk who gave this information
could be seen by Chief Inspector Vincent
If he cared to come round to the bank
Vincent lost no time in setting out for
Lombard Street. He was shown into the
manager’s room and the clerk was sent for
He was an intelligent young man with a
good memory
“Now, Mr. Carruthers,” said the manager
“I want you to answer any questions which
Mr. Vincent puts to you. You need not
regard any of the bank business as con-
fidential in the matter which Mr. Vincent
has in hand.”
The clerk smiled and turned towards
Vincent to invite his questions.
“I understand that you saw the letters
that used to come addressed to Mrs. Pear-
son, c/o Mr Pitt. Will you describe what
they looked like.”
“Well, they were in thick foolscap en-
velopes and addressed as you say. but they
■were marked ‘Personal’ and ‘Confidential,
•o they were delivered to Mr. Pitt.”
“Do you know how Mr. Pitt disposed of
them?”
“Only that he took charge of them to
deliver personally to the lady.”
“Did it strike you that- they contained
papers only?”
“Well, now you come to mention it, they
seemed to me to be rather more solid than
papers would be Mr Pitt gave me to
understand that they contained French
notes and certainly there was paid into hei
account, after one of these letters had ar
“ived, a certain sum of French money."
“When Mrs Pearson called at the barn
lid she ask for Mr Pitt?”
“No, sir, never She cashed cheques
over my counter because I deal with cus-
tomers whose names begin with a 'P ' That
vas all the business that she did.”
Vincent thanked the manager and madt
nls next call at the National Insurance
Bank, where Pitt had had an account. Here
he had the task of persuading the manager
to allow him to Inspect Pitt’s account.
“You will understand, of course, that your
customer is dead and that I am charged
with tracing the cause of his death by the
police authorities. Otherwise I should not
have ventured to ask you to allow me to
inspect a customer’s account.”
The manager touched an electric bell on
his table. The uniformed messenger ap-
peared. To him was handed a slip of paper
to be given to the chief cashier and a
minute later the messenger returned bear-
tog a huge ledger.
“You will understand, Mr. Vincent, that
Mr. Pitt closed his account here on the
day before his death and his passbook was
handed to him. Would not his cheque
butts give you all the information you
require?”
“No doubt they would if we had them,
but they have either been destroyed or
stolen from his house. There was a mass
of burnt paper in the fireplace of his lib-
rary. In any case, it is the credit side
of his account as well that we want.”
The manager turned over the leaves ol
the ledger until he came to the name he
was looking for and then pushed the book
over to Vincent, who ran his eye down the
page.
“You will permit me to make notes, I
suppose?” he asked the manager.
“Certainly.”
Vincent made rapid notes to pencil in
his notebook The manager watched him,
hoping that something would be said to
satisfy his curiosity, but when Vincent
closed his book and rose to take his leave,
he told him nothing.
“Have you got all the information you
hoped for?”
“I think so, thanks to your kindness.” re-
plied Vincent, and made his departure.
Vincent looked at his watch There was
Still time tor his visit to Brooklyn before
lunch He made his way to Jermyn Street
Mr. Brooklyn, he learned, was at home,
but was shortly going out to lunch at his
Club He sent up his card and was at once
admitted to the flat. He found the gentle-
man in a more serious mood than on the
occasion of his last visit. “Come in. Mr
Vincent,” he said; “you are always welcome.
What can I do for you?”
“I have come to bother you again about
that Pitt case, Mr, Brooklyn. I see that a
good deal of money seems to have passed
from Pitt to a Mr. Thelusson. Was this in
settlement of gambling debts, do you think?”
Brooklyn wrinkled his brow to thought.
“It can scarcely have been that,” he said
“Pitt was a careful sort of bloke and no
gambler There was some funny business
going on between those two men which I
have never been able to make out.”
“What was Thelusson’s profession?”
"I bad always understood that be dealt
in f?~cy soaps and women’s beauty appar-
atus- cosmetics and such like."
“But the sums that passed would have
oeen sufficient to keep the beauty parlors
of all London in cosmetics for years. The
address which I have for Thelusson is 41.
Arkley Street Do you know if he has his
>eauty parlor there?"
“Oli, no. That is his private flat P I’ve
een there to play cards."
“Does he play foi high stakes?”
“He did. sometimes —like the rest of us.
f that’s a crime I shall plead guilty and
ake the consequences,”
“Did you ever hear a quarrel or a dts-
igreement at any time between Thelusson
tnd Pitt?”
“m
1 HEY had a minor row
on one occasion I fancy Thelusson had
reproached Pitt about the kind of friends
he entertained and called them ’a lot of
■hieves’l”
“Was that at Pitt’s house or at Thelusson’s
flat?”
“At Pitt’s house in Hampstead.”
“Was it the kind of row that might have
led to something more serious—you can tell
me confidentially.”
“No. If you mean was it enough to cul-
minate in murder, the suggestion would be
absurd. Thelusson is rather a gay dog. He
has plenty of money and he takes life easily;
but why don’t you call and size him up
yourself?”
“I mean to when the proper time comes,
but I mustn’t take up any more of your time
and make you late for lunch.”
“That’s all right. Come and see me
again if you think 1 can be of any use
to you. Good-bye.”
Vincent resolved to have one more inter-
view with Anton He drove himself to
Hampstead.
He found Anton restored to his usual polite
calm. Peace had been unbroken since
Vincent’s last visit There had been no
disturbing telephone calls The sensational
Press had ceased to be interested Vincent
went to the point at once.
“Among the visitors to your late em-
ployer, do you remember a Mr Thelusson?”
“Oh, yes, sir. Mr. Thelusson was a very
good friend of Mr. Pitt. He came often.”
“And they never had a quarrel.”
“Mr Thelusson never quarrelled with Mr.
Pitt. No, but there were quarrels.”
“Who quarrelled?"
“Well, sir, there were loud voices between
Mr Blake and Mr Thelusson one night.
You could not help hearing.’ he added
apologetically. as if to excuse himself for
eavesdropping.
“Of course. I understand that vou couldn’t
help hearing the quarrel Now think care-
fully and tel) me what you did hear.”
“Well, Mr. Thelusson, he say Mr Blake
is a cheat.”
“He meant that he cheated at cards?”
“I suppose so. but they did not mention
cards. Mr Thelusson say: T have paid
you twice, you cheat,’ and Mr Blake say:
‘You never paid me for last time You are
a worse kind of cheat, a miserly cheat.’
They say other words, very bad words.”
“Was this long ago?”
“Oh, no Only just before my master went
away.”
“Did you hear quarrels between Mr Pitt
and anyone else?”
“No, Mr Pitt never quarrel There were
never quarrels In this house except that
one; that Is why I remember it.”
“Well. Anton, I’m glad you have a good


memory. By the way, has the chauffeur
been to see you since?”
“No, he hasn’t been again.”
“You and the rest of the staff didn’t like
him?”
“No, sir; no one like him.”
“Did Mr. Pitt like him?”
“Mr. Pitt must have liked him very much,
because he let him do what he liked.”
“Thank you, Anton. It I think of any-
thing else that you can tell me I will come
round here again, and if anything unex-
pected happens you ring me up imme-
diately.”
After a light lunch in the mess-room
at headquarters, Vincent went downstairs
and looked into the sergeants’ room. He
narrowly escaped collision with Walker in
the doorway.
“I was Just going out again, Mr. Vincent.
X looked in to see if you had left a message
for me."
“I want you to come down to Newquay
with me. As you know, the local bench re-
manded those two rascals in custody and I
want to interview them again about some
further evidence that has come to hand.
They are to come up again to-morrow, and,
unless something fresh transpires we shall
have to ask for another remand, so we
must get down to Newquay to-night. I.
suppose you’ve found nothing compromising
about those payments?”
“Only in one case, Mr. Vincent, but it’s
an Important one. Among the payments
was a cheque drawn by a Miss Hellier for
seventy-six pounds. This woman has been
up before the court quite recently on a drug
charge and she was reported to the bench
as being a drug addict. The magistrates
put her on probation, and she is under the
care of friends.”
"Where can we find her? I should like
to have an interview with her before we go
down to Newquay."
"I have her address here. Her friends
are very well-to-do. You see, their house
Is only twenty miles from Charing Cross.”
“Have you had your lunch? Yes? Then
come along; We’ll start at once.”
The house proved to be an old Georgian
one. They were shown into a library and
a few moments later a very charming elderly
lady came in, holding Vincent’s card in her
hand.
“I suppose that you’ve come to see Miss
Hellier. Unless it’s absolutely necessary, I
would rather give you the information you
require myself. This is her hour for rest-
ing and we must if possible keep any dis-
turbing influence away from her.”
“I’m afraid you may not be able to give
me the information I want. It concerns
the payment by her of a cheque to the late
Mr. Bernard Pitt, and I want to know what
this payment was for.”
She smiled sadly. “I suppose you sus-
pect that it was a payment for drugs.”
“Well, to be quite frank, we do.”
“Is that the man who was murdered
recently?”
“Yes.”
“Well, I can tell you that she was greatly
upset when she read of the death in the
newspapers. In fact, she took to her bed
for a couple of days.”
Vincent saw’ that she was ready to help
him if she could. “I don’t want to upset
your establishment in any way. The fact
is that I have to trace this connection
between Miss Hellier and Mr. Pitt, and if
I am able to dp it indirectly through you it
Will be quite sufficient.”
“I will tell you frankly what I have
learned from her during the past fortnight.
I must tell you that she is the daughter of
a very old friend of ours, and that she was
left a considerable income at his death.
She was headstrong and Insisted upon living
her own life without advice from anyone.
I can’t tell you when or how she first
came to take drugs, but I do know that a
few months ago she took into her employ-
ment a maid who was herself a drug-
taker.”
“A woman named Alice Dodds?”
“Exactly. You seem to know a great deal
about the case.”
“As a matter of fact this woman, Alice
Dodds, is now detained by the police, and
is seriously ill in hospital. I wanted to
trace the connection between Dodds and a
lady who is French by birth and British
by marriage.”
"I can help you there, I think. The woman
was recommended to Miss Hellier by a Mrs,
Pearson. I must add that the woman Dodds
seemed able to obtain as much of the drug
as she wanted.”
"Thanks to the Information you have
given me, I need not see Miss Hellier to-
day. I hope that under your care she will
continue to improve."
"Thank you and for my'part I am grate-
ful for the help and forbearance shown
to us by the police.”
soon as they were
-in the car Walker spoke. “So Mrs. Pear-
son was lying when she said that she had
no knowledge of Alice Dodds.”
“She was, but the important’ feature is
that she should think it worth while to lie
over such a trivial matter. She must have
had a strong reason: she may have been
afraid that Dodds would give her away as
a purveyor of drugs.”
As they were approaching Newquay Vin-
cent remarked: “We cannot see any of the
prisoners to-night; that must wait until to-
morrow morning, but we can have a talk
with the police inspector, who may have
something useful to tell us.”
The car drew up at the police station. The
station sergeant relieved them by saying
that the Inspector would be found upstairs;
if they would take the trouble to go up to
the first door on the left, he would announce
their arrival on his house telephone.
There was an air of relief about the in-
spector when he shook hands with them.
“I fear,” he said; “that you can’t see any
of the prisoners to-night: they will be
brought in under escort to-morrow morning
in ample time for their appearance in the
Court, but it may interest you to know that
the two women assert that they are not
legally married to the men, and each woman
is demanding to be represented by her Con-
sul—in the one case the Austrian and in the
other the Russian Consul. Whether these
gentlemen will instruct solicitors to repre-
sent them at the hearing to-morrow I do
not know.”
“How did they communicate with their
Consuls?”
"The Governor of the prison allowed them
the use of his telephone for the purpose this
afternoon. He rang me up to tell me.”
Vincent smiled. “I suppose they are count-
ing upon being tried in this country. If
they thought that their trial would take
place in Prance they would begin running
round in circles.”
At nine the next morning Vincent found
himself standing over the telephone operator
who was ringing up Paris. There was the
usual delay, but at last the answer came in
the strangulated accent of a far-off French
voice trying to pronounce English.
When Vincent was satisfied that he heard
Goron at the other end of the wire, he ex-
plained briefly the kind of defence that the
women were relying upon; “They are throw-
ing the entire blame on to that milliner in
the rue Duphol; of course they know that
she will not come over to give evidence
against them.”
“Have no fear, my friend. I want those
two women here, and with your permission
I will come over and fetch them. I have
also other fish to fry—is that not what you
say? Mr. Laurillard, the Deputy of whom
you know, is taking a holiday in England at
the house of his daughter, we believe. You
have her address. It is a holiday demanded
by his state of health, since at this moment
the air of Prance would not be conducive
to the recovery of his peace of mind.”
Vincent laughed. “You have a very neat
way of putting tiiese things, my friend.”’
"So you see. 1 have two missions to per-
form in England. First to question M. Laur-
illard, who has taken himself off to avoid
me, secondly to bring back with me those
two women. I shall bring with me a female
officer of the Surete to escort them.”
“But will they go with you?” asked Vin-
cent. “Drug-trafficking is not an extradit-
able offence.”
“Quite true, but theft is. They stole bill
heads from Madame Germaine, who is pre-
pared to swear if necessary that they have
stolen hats from her also. Have no fear, if
they will not come willingly, then I shall
bring with me extradition warrants.”
“Well, you know your own business best.
In this country I should not dare to go so
far, but our courts never question an ex-
tradition warrant. When will you arrive in
England?”
“This afternoon I shall leave by air.”
“Then I may be back in time to meet you
at Croydon Aerodrome."
The thought of meeting his old friend
Goron was a great solace to Vincent, who
had been inclined to gird at the legal cir-
cumlocution prevalent in his own country
as compared with Prance, where the liberty
of the subject was in many directions less
consulted than in England. He told the
inspector the result of his telephone con-
versation.
“In that case,” said the inspector, “if the
women will not go voluntarily I will get the
magistrates to back the extradition war-
rant and we shall be rid of these two crea-
tures, which will be a great relief to every-
body concerned. When do you count upon
being able to hand me the warrants?”
“Early to-morrow morning, before the
Court sits, I hope.”
“Very good, Mr. Vincent; I’ll get the
magistrates to remand the women until to-
morrow. Will you want to see them before
they appear?”
“No, not the women; only the men. I
suppose that they have not expressed a
wish to make statements since I last saw
them.” !-
Vincent had barely time to dictate to
Walker notes of his telephone conversa-
tion, when the arrival of the prisoners was
announced. Lewis was brought into the
room by the station sergeant.
“Sit down,” said Vincent, who knew the
value of having a man’s eyes on the level
with his own when questioning him. “You
made a statement the other day to account
for the murder of Mr. Pitt. On the face of
it your statement was difficult to believe and
it is now up to you to modify it or strengthen
it by giving additional particulars. Did you
know Mr. Pitt well?”
“I guess I knew him as well as the other
people who played cards with him did.”


“When and how did you first meet
him?”
“That’s quite simple. My friend and 1
engaged rooms in lodgings in Bloomsbury
end he had rooms in the same house. We
used to pass each other on the stairs and
pass the lime of day as you say in this
country.”
“How long ago was that?"
“Getting on for two years ago.”
“When did you first become mixed up
with him in selling drugs?”
I’ve told you before that I’ve never been
mixed up in the drug traffic.”
Vincent held up his hand. “I’d better tell
you at once, Mr. Lewis, that the French
police have just raided the factory in Bel-
fort from which you obtained your stock-
in-trade, so lying about it will not help you.
We know more than you think. Let me re-
mind you that in this country the punish-
ment for murder is death, while the punish-
ment for traffic in drugs may be as low as
imprisonment for a month with deportation
at the end of it. You can only help your-
self out of a charge of murder by telling
me the plain, unvarnished truth.”
“Well, I guess you have me cornered,
so get on with your questions and I’ll
answer them.”
“I
X HAVE already asked
you how long ago it was that you got mixed
up with Mr. Pitt in selling drugs.”
“Well, I’ll tell you, and you can believe
me or not, as you like. We lodged in the
same house and one night I and my friend
needed a corkscrew. I set out to borrow one
from Pitt. I tapped at his door and pushed
it a little way open, and there he was sitting
at his table with a heap of accounts before
him and a camel hair brush in his hand.
There was a little cardboard box with two
bottles in it. I knew the stuff. It takes out
ink without leaving a trace. He turned green
and swept a newspaper on to the table to
hide everything and asked me what I wanted
in no very polite manner. He said he hadn’t
got a corkscrew and got rid of me quick. I
consulted my friend, who said that he’d
been told that the man was cashier in a big
bank, so we thought it our duty to tell him
where he got off. It wasn’t what you would
call a pleasant interview with smiles and
handshakes, because we put it to him straight
that he was robbing his employers and al-
tering the books to hide what he was doing.
Of course, we took the high line with him—
the Sunday school line—and talked of ac-
quainting his employers. That brought him
down with a bump. So we struck a bargain.
We told him that we had stuff to dispose of
and if he found us customers for it, which
was easy for a man in his position, we’d
say nothing about what we’d seen, other-
wise we’d feel it our duty to put his directors
wise.”
“How did you think that a bank cashier
could find customers for drugs?”
“We had a better plan than that when
we found that the guy thought of nothing
but making money. We got him to take that
big house in Hampstead.”
“Did you pay the rent?” asked Vincent.
“No fear. The guy had made thousands
already out of the bank and we persuaded
him that he could make thousands more.
When we got the house in Hampstead going
we introduced one or two people to him
and they introduced others, and what with
his card parties and peddling the dope and
his winnings at the card tables, he was a
warm man.”
“Why did he decide to run away?”
“He got the wind up, because the bank
were getting nosey.”
“And so you offered to provide him with
a passage to Prance in a motor boat.”
“Of course, we couldn’t desert a pal when
he was in trouble.”
“Well, that’s clear as far at it goes, but
you introduced a number of people to him
and they introduced friends of their own.
You knew them all and I put it to you that
you would know if someone owed him a
grudge sufficiently strong to induce him to
commit murder.”
“Well, I don’t know that, and you may
feel sure that if I did I’d have told you
before to bear out our statement.”
“You guessed that he would be taking a
big sum of money with him when he re-
solved to bolt.”
“Why, certainly.”
“Did anyone else know that he was leaving
the country?”
He hesitated a moment. “Certainly there
was one person, but it was a lady.”
“You mean Mrs. Pearson,” said Vincent
quietly.
“You guys from Scotland Yard seem to
know everything. That lady was giving him 1
letters of introduction to her friends in
Prance.”
“You mean her father, M. Laurillard.”
“I do,”
“She used to receive the dope from her
father in stout envelopes by registered post
addressed c/o. Mr. Pitt.”
“She did. But that doesn’t give her a
motive for having Pitt done in. He was
more use to her alive than dead.”
“Was she the only person besides your-
selves who knew that he was leaving the
country?”
“Well, he had one friend who might have
known it.”
“You mean Thelusson?”
“Why should you think of him?”
“Pitt was paying large sums of money to
him.”
“But they had no quarrel.”
“I suppose Thelusson is mixed up in this
drug business.”
“Up to the neck.”
“Did Thelusson know that Pitt would be
taking a large sum of money away with
him?”
“He was likely to make a pretty good
guess.”
“Well, my sergeant has taken down your
answers to my questions and that is all I
have to ask you for the present.”
The second man, Blake, proved to be less
amenable to questioning, but the answers he
did give corroborated his companion’s state-
ment in every particular. Vincent ques-
tioned him further about Thelusson.
“You were not always friendly with him?”
“We had words once or twice."
“About payment for dope?”
“Why, yes.”
“Your quarrel didn’t lead to blows?”
“No, only to mudslinging. That guy had
no stomach for fisticuffs.”
"I have another question to ask you. What
do you know about a woman named Alice
Dodds?”
“Oh, that woman. She was just running
errands for someone else.”
“You used to supply her with heroin. You
wouldn’t have supplied it unless you thought
that you were safe in doing so. Who guar-
anteed her to you?”
“Well, as you seem to know such a lot,
I don’t mind telling you. It was Laurillard’s
daughter, Mrs. Pearson.”
“I thought as much. Mrs. Pearson used
to employ the woman as her maid. She
also employed at one time Arthur Green,
Pitt’s chauffeur. Was Green ever used by
you or Pitt in distributing dope?”
‘‘Not to my knowledge. He wasn’t the
kind of man that any of us would care
to trust.”
“Do you think Pitt would have employed
him without your knowledge?”
“I guess we should have known it if he
had.”
“Well, my sergeant has taken down your
answers and I’ve no more questions to put
before you appear in Court.”
As soon as they were alone Vincent said
to Walker: “You and I have seen some
crooks in our time, but this little gang would
be hard to beat.”
was fortun-
ate enough to reach Croydon in time to
receive the afternoon plane from le Bour-
get. The great plane circled above the
hangars and came to rest exactly on the
spot which her pilot was aiming for. The
passengers descended the ladder and were
shepherded into the shed where landing per-
'mits and passports are Inspected, but Vin-
cent had been permitted to approach the
plane to receive his friend Goron. They
shook hands warmly and strolled together to-
wards the barrier. Vincent’s car was stand-
ing outside.
“I’m glad you’ve come,” said Vincent: “I
don’t know what powers you’ve brought with
you to compel these women to go with you
to Prance.”
“That’s all right,” said Goron, tapping his
breast pocket. “In case they should dig in
their toes and refuse to come with me, I
have a couple of extradition warrants to
shake in their faces. Women, as you know,
can be obstinate devils, but a piece of blue
paper shoved under their noses is apt to put
fear into them. Madame Germaine is in a
vindictive mood. She alleges that these
women had promised her protection and yet
she was taken off and Immured at La
Roche. The women have not paid for the
last hats they ordered from her and she
alleges that they stole a handful of her bill
heads from the shop. It was on this that
she obtained the extradition warrants.”
“I see,” said Vincent dryly. “You can
do things in France that would be difficult
for us in England. But tell me about a
much more influential person—M. Laurillard,
the Deputy.”
“Ah! there you have touched upon a
thorny subject. In fact you have stamped
upon a hornet’s nest. Prom that small be-
ginning of yours in the hat shop of the rue
Duphot, you have dragged in another Euro-
pean country, Belgium. That factory at Bel-
fort was supplying many kilogrammes of
dope to the Belgian pedlars, always, of
course, with the connivance of railway of-
ficials. I believe that if we were to make
a simultaneous arrest of all men concerned,
the trains would cease to run between Paris
and Brussels.”
“Have you an extradition warrant for
Laurillard?”
"Alas! no. As a member of the Chamber
he could claim immunity, and so I did not
apply for one.”
“Well, I am driving you straight to
Madame Pearson’s house for this momen-
tous interview, and I myself will accompany
you as I have questions to put to the lady.


Have you brought any female escort with
you?”
“She is crossing by boat and will find her
own way by rail to Newquay.”
For the rest of the drive Vincent tried
to satisfy Goron’s appetite for information
about his own work in the hunting of Pitt’s
murderer since they last met.
“You think that this wild story about a
bandit on an English high road can be
true.”
“I do, but I have a big task before me in
getting proof of my theory. But here we
are. This is the street where Mrs. Pearsbn
lives.”
The maidservant who opened the dooi
appeared surprised when they asked foi
Monsieur Laurlllard “Yes,” she said; “he
is here, but he only arrived this morning
and he’s been resting in his room evei
since.”
“This gentleman has come all the waj
from Paris to see him. We will wait inside
while you explain this to your mistress. Here
is my card.”
She showed them into the dining-roon
and ten minutes later the door opened tc
admit Mrs. Pearson They rose as she came
in.
“My father is resting,” she said, ‘and 1
cannot disturb him now.”
“You might take me to his bedside
madame,” said Goron, diplomatically. “A
few minutes of conversation is all that 1
require.”
“He’s not in bed; he is resting in an arm
chair. He may even be asleep, but as yot
insist even after I have told you this I must
take you up to his room.”
“And perhaps when you have introducer
this gentleman to your father’s room yov
will return here. I have one or two ques-
tions to ask you,” said Vincent,
“Are you still concerned about that for
mer chauffeur of mine—Arthur Green?”
“Yes, and about one or two other matter. 1
in which you can enlighten me.”
There was no undue delay about her return,
to the dining-room. She entered holding
her head high, hoping perhaps to induce
in her visitor a sense of shame at intruding
on her privacy.
She made no motion towards a chair
and the interview took place standing, she
retaining the door handle in her hand
These were not the conditions under which
friendly meetings are conducted, but Vin-
cent felt himself quite equal to measuring
weapons with her.
“When we last met, Mrs. Pearson, I asked
you a question about a woman named Alice
Dodds and you told me that you had never
employed a woman of that name. May 1
ask why you thought it proper to tell me an
untruth. You must have had some reason
because a lady in your position would
naturally tell the truth in answer to a
direct question.”
She hesitated scarcely an Instant before
making her reply. “If I misled you it was
In the interest of the woman herself. I
did not care to take away her character and
so—naturally . .”
“And so, naturally, you told me an un-
truth?”
“If you like to put it that way, I have no
objection.”
“You feel, no doubt, that there is no
harm in deceiving a police officer; in fact
that it can be a meritorious act to do so
I suppose this explains why you told me an-
other untruth.”
“Indeed?” said the lady with the sweetest
smile.
“You told me that your only knowledge
of Mr. Pitt was Just the slight acquaintance
which a customer has of a bank official
when they stand with the counter between
them.”
“Did I?” smiled the lady.
“You forgot to mention those registered
packages that Mr. Pitt used to receive foi
you.”
“Registered packages?”
“Yes. Packages containing heroin.’
Vincent was determined to drag the ladj
from the saddle of her high horse, but it
was not a very easy manoeuvre.
“Mr. Pitt is dead. You are trying to
fabricate dramatic evidence. I don’t knov
why.”
“The evidence I have is not fabricated
i assure you, madame. If you ever havi
to meet it in court I fea. that your counst
vill have his work cut out for him.”
“You are trying to frighten me.”
“I must have the truth and you will d>
/ourself no good by giving me false answers
VOu keep a wages book. I suppose. I warn
to know from your wages book the exact
dates when Arthur Green and Alice Dodd
were in your service In fact, I should liki
o see your wages book .or myself.”
She shrugged her shoulders. “If you w
ait here I will go and get the book.”
the book wa;
orought and opened at the appropriate pag<
she said; “It is lucky that I did not destroy
this book as so many people do. You wil
see that it relates to last year, not thi;
me.”
Vincent studied the pages, making note;
.n his pocketbook. “I see from this book,
he said, “that these two people were in youi
service at one and the same time That I. 1
what I wanted to know.” He shut the
book and handed it back to her.
“One more question before I go. Did Mi
Pitt ever pay you for goods with which yo:
supplied him?”
Her surprise at. this question was sc
genuine that Vincent could not think tha :
she was lying when she said: “Never.”
"Did you ever ring up the late Mr. Pitt’ 1
souse in Hampstead?”
“Never.”
“Not even after his death, when you
thought that Mr. Blake and Mr. Lewis might
be hiding there?”
“Never.”
“Did Arthur Green, the chauffeur, evei
ict as messenger between you and Mr
Pitt?”
“Certainly not. When Arthur Green left
ny employment I had nothing more to do
with him.”
“Thank you, Mrs. Pearson,” said Vin-
cent, taking up his hat. “You will per-
haps permit me to wait here until my friend
has finished his business with your father.”
“Certainly,” she replied coldly before she
withdrew.
Five minutes later Goron Joined him
with an air of elation. “I made him talk,”
he said, “and he gave me everything I
needed.”
“Names?”
“Oh, yes, he’d no scruples about giving
away his friends. There may be honor
among thieves, but honor does not rank high
among drug traffickers.”
“Well, as we both have gained our points,
we are free to leave the house.”
At the door Vincent drew the uniformed
porter aside and asked him: “Do you know
where Mrs. Pearson garages her car?”
“Yes,, sir. It’s that Plimsoll’s garage
round the comer.”
As they walked to their own car which
had been parked a few doors away, Vincent
explained to Goron that he wished to Inter-
view the French chauffeur of Mrs. Pearson
and suggested that they should go together
to the garage. They were lucky enough to
And the chauffeur at work on the car.
“It might be useful if you asked him in
French what has gone wrong with the car.
He will be startled by being addressed sud-
denly in his own language.”
In reply to Vincent’s questions they drew
from him the admission that he had lied
about Alice Dodds. He himself had never
seen the woman He drove his mistress to
the house and was paid by her td keep his
mouth shut about it. If he was ever ques-
tioned he was to tell the lie that he had
told Vincent. They were satisfied that they
lad extracted all the material truth from
rim, and ,ney returned to their car.
“Now,” said Goron; “I must ask you to
md me a hotel, for I don’t propose to go
lown to Newquay until to-morrow morn-
ng.”
“You will come with me to my lodging;
ny landlady will give you a bedroom and
it will delight the poor soul to be allowed
,o provide us with a meal; she is no mean
‘.ook. If you don’t mind making a little
letour in the car. I want to catch my ser-
vant and then we shall be free.”
Vincent devoted the rest of the evening
o entertaining his friend Goron whose
isits to London had been rare At break-
ast on the following morning Goron re-
narked: “If I’m going down to Newquay
o-day I shall need an interpreter.”
‘‘Certainly. I’ve arranged for that al-
eady. You will take one of our French-
peaking officers. Sergeant Campion with
ou. He has been warned to be ready ”
Having seen Goron safely off to New-
tuay with his detective interpreter, Vincent
• decided that it would not be too soon to
call upon the tenant of 41 Arkley Street.
The door of the flat was opened by a man-
servant who exuded discretion from every
pore. Prom him Vincent learned that his
employer was at home and he was shown
into a sumptuously-furnished room. Like
all detective officers, Vincent was quick to
appraise the financial status of the man
he had come to see. The flat was roomy
and well but not over-furnished, in the labor-
saving modern style in which there is
nothing to catch dust. Its owner bustled in
holding Vincent’s card in his hand. He was
a man not much over thirty, rather thick-
set, and he looked overfed—certainly, in
Vincent’s opinion, not the type of man who
would hold up a car in the road and act as
a bandit. Vincent plunged into business
at once.
“You knew the,late Mr. Bernard Pitt."
The man hesitated a second before reply-
ng: “I did.”
“You had certain monetary transactions
vith him.”
“We played cards together sometimes.”
“Did Mr Pitt lose heavily to you?”
“No, sometimes he won and sometimes he
lost a bit, as always happens with cards.”
“But the money transactions that I’m
thinking of were for large sums and always,
from Mr. Pitt to you.”
“That’s quite possible. We transacted
business together. I sold him goods and he
always settled on the nail.”
“What kind of goods?”
"Fancy soap, principally. I import this
soap from Prance and retailed it to Pitt
and others.”
“Can you tell me what Mr. Pitt did with
the large quantity of soap you supplied to
him?”
“I always understood tv- v ,d it
to other people.”
“I suppose you’ve no object. v look-
ing through your books?”


“Not at all, but they are not here. You
would have to come to my place of busi-
ness.”
"It must be nearly time for you to be
starting. Couldn’t we go together?”
“If you like.” The tone was not cordial,
but Vincent thought it better to appear as
if he were accepting an invitation. Thelus-
son refused a lift in Vincent’s car on the
ground that his own was waiting for him.
“Then,” said Vincent blandly; “perhaps
you’ll give me a lift in your car and I’ll
leave mine in the car park here and come
back for it.” He was not going to allow
Thelusson to escape from his sight.
The car set them down at the Beauty
Parlor, which was as sumptuously furnished
as its owner’s flat.
Thelusson conducted him into the office
and laid a pile of books before him with
an air of polite boredom.
Before opening any of the books Vincent
asked: “Where is your store-room?”
Thelusson pointed to a door leading out
of the office. Vincent opened the day
book and ran through the names: there was
nothing suspicious about the entries in this
book or in the others that he examined.
There were names of well-known hair-
dressers with invoices of goods, but the
name of Pitt was not among them.
“Where did you keep Mr. Pitt’s account?”
asked Vincent.
T destroyed his invoices when he died
to avoid the risk of my clerk sending an
account to a dead man.”
Vincent turned over the pages of the
ledger. “I don’t see that any pages have
been taken out of this book. Did you keep
st, special ledger for Mr. Pitt?”
“I did. He was my most important cus-
tomer.”
Vincent made notes of the names and ad-
dresses of the firms who had been supplied
with soap and other requisites. Thelusson
watched him contemptuously, as who should
Bay, “this is how public money is wasted.”
But when Vincent turned to him for per-
mission to enter the store-room he observed
that the expression changed to one of con-
cern. The permission was given, however,
and Vincent found himself in the presence
of dozens of boxes of soap. There were a
few packing cases nailed down and
addressed ready to be delivered. One case
was not addressed nor was it fully filled.
Vincent dived his hand into it and took
out a cake of soap.
“I’ll take this away if you don’t mind,”
he said, as he put it into his pocket. Thelus-
son gave an inarticulate grunt. It was
clear from his expression that he minded
very much indeed.
Vincent hailed a taxi and drove to the
park where he.had left his car; thence he
made for police headquarters and ran up
the stone staircase that led to the labora-
tory. He explained to the white-coated
officer in charge what he wanted. The
man shook the cake of soap close to his
ear.
“It seems' all right in weight, Mr. Vin-
cent,” he said. “What do you think is
wrong with it?”
“I can’t say until you have got to work
on it with your dissecting knife, or what-
ever surgical Instrument you use.”
The laboratory assistant smiled. “That’s
Boon done, Mr. Vincent.” He took the
Boap to a table which he covered with white
paper and used a boring tool. At first
flakes of soap were detached, but presently
the tool encountered something less solid.
A few grains of white powder escaped from
the orifice and were lost among the soap
flakes.
“Why, the cake’s hollow.” exclaimed the
assistant. “You didn’t warn me of that,”
“I did not because I didn’t know it, until
you made that hole in it.”
T
IN his way down from
the laboratory a detective patrol stopped
as he was stepping out of the lift.
“Sergeant Walker has been looking for
you and Instructed me to let him know
as soon as I found you. I think he has
something important to tell you.”
“Very good. Tell him to come to my
room.”
A few minutes later there was a tap on
the door and Walker came in, shutting the
door carefully behind him.
“You’ve something fresh to tell me?”
“Yes, sir. When I got out to Palmer’s
Green last night I found a notice ‘To Let’
on the gate of Green’s house. The next
door people told me that the Greens left
the day before and they did not know
where they had gone. So I dropped into
the local pub and got into conversation
with the barman over my beer. He was a
forthcoming kind of man. He said that
he knew Arthur Green well. ‘Often in
here?’ I asked. ‘That’s right he’s been
one of my best customers. If he carries
on the same way in the place he’s gone
to, all his profits will go down his throat.
I never knew such a chap for putting it
away.’ ‘Got his own place now, has he?’
1 asked. ‘Yes, a motor garage down at
Alton, in Hampshire. He bought it from
me and paid a good price for it.’ I asked
him whether he’d paid for it in cash. ‘Lor,
bless you, no. He paid for it with a cheque.’
‘Oh, then Arthur Green has gone up in
the world—runs to a banking account of
his own,’ I said, ‘No, the cheque was signed
by the gentleman who’s financing him.’ ‘An
old employer, I suppose,’ I said. T think
so. ‘Was the name Pitt?’ I asked. ‘Oh no,
he said. ‘lt was a long name and I
can’t pronounce it, but I’ll spell it for you.’
And then he spelt the name of Thelusson,”
said Walker.
“You did very well in getting all that in-
formation out of the barman.” said Vin-
cent. “Of course, you got the address of
the garage that the man's gone to.”
"Oh, yes, I’ve got that all right.”
“Well, if he’s just taken a garage of his
own, he’s not likely to give us the slip.
I must see Thelusson again and hear his
version of how Green came by that cheque.”
“Do you want me to go down to Hamp-
shire and look him up?”
“Not yet. Have you dug out those state-
ments of Pitt’s servants that we took from
them in the beginning?”
“Yes. I have them here.”
Vincent read the statements and then
gave a satisfied click of his tongue.
“Ah! Perhaps yoti’ve noticed the discre-
pancy between the statements of Anton
and the chauffeur as to what happened.
The chauffeur said he was given special
leave on that Sunday and Anton said that
the chauffeur always had Saturdays off.
The chauffeur said that Pitt often dined
out on Saturdays and Anton said that he
always gave a dinner party at home. You
know the lie of the land. It would have
been quite possible for the chauffeur to
take the car out without the other servants’
knowledge. While I’m visiting Thelusson
I’d like you to slip round to the garage
and make a note of the last day’s run of
the speedometer. Green may have for-
gotten to change it to zero. There was a
heavy thunderstorm that morning;’ you
might see whether the wheels are muddy.”
Vincent wondered whether Thelusson had
already taken to his heels in consequence
of the cake Of soap that had been taken
from his store-room, but to his relief he
found him sitting in his little office ap-
parently without a care on his mind.
“You import a remarkable kind of soap,”
Mr. Thelusson.”
“You think so. It is very much in request
on account of its nutritive properties for
the hair.”
“I can well believe that there is a sale
for it, but I haven’t come to see you about
that now. That will be gone into by the
proper authorities. What I have come
for is to know how you came to give a
cheque for a fairly large sum to the
chauffeur of the late Mr. Pitt?”
“Well, Pitt was a friend of mine and
the chauffeur came to me with a hard-
luck story about not being able to get a job
and said that a small outlay in capital
would put him in possession of a valuable
motor garage and so 1 advanced him the
money.”
“I see,” said Vincent dryly. “It would be
quite incorrect for anyone to say that
you paid him that as hush money?”
“Hush money? What do you mean?”
“Perhaps my next question will make my
meaning clear. Did you sign or did he
sign any agreement for repaying this loan?”
“No. It was a verbal agreement between
us that he would repay it at some future
time.”
“A - rather curious way of doing business,
wasn’t it?”
“Well, of course, I knew the man and that
makes all the difference.”
“You knew the man and that made all the
difference? And you knew, of course, that
a man in that position might talk and so
you thought that you would put him under
an obligation. Evidently you do not know
the ways of blackmailers as well as I do.”
“Blackmailers!"
“y
XES, that is the word
I. used, because Green was blackmailing
you. He knew something about you that
might be very compromising If it came
out.”
"I don’t know what you’re talking about."
“Well, let me put it a little more plainly.
You know, of course, that Pitt was mur-
dered. The car in which he was travelling
was stopped by a man who entered it and
shot him through the head. This man
may have been someone who wished to get
rid of Pitt, or he may have been hired by
someone else.”
Thelusson sprang to his feet. “This is
outrageous. Do you dare to suggest that
I hired Green as an assassin to shoot Pitt?”
“That theory had crossed my mind,” said
Vincent calmly. “Of course, if you can sug-
gest any other reason why he should be
blackmailing you, I shall be glad to listen
to it.”
Thelusson took two turns up and down
the room and then stopped opposite Vincent.
“I suppose the game’s up. You have that
cake of soap and you’ll have it analysed, and
so I may as well own up.”
“I must caution you that I shall take
down what you say in writing.”
“Never mind that. It’s better to come
before a court for drug-trafficking than for
murder. Green was demanding hush money
because he knew that I was importing drugs.
He had been blackmailing Pitt also.”
“Are you sure of that?”
“Quite sure, and Green himself told me
that Pitt had promised him two thousand
pounds to clear out of the country, but it was


Pitt who was trying to clear out without
keeping his promise.”
“Did Green tell you that he knew that
Pitt was going to leave the country?”
“1 gathered that he knew because he said
that instead of helping him to leave the
country, Pitt was clearing out abroad him-
self.”
“You are quite sure that he put it in that
way?”
“Yes, quite, and he talked a lot about
Pitt’s meanness as he (Green) was anxious
to leave the country and Pitt knew it.”
“Did he say why he wished to get out oi
the country?”
“He told me that there was a woman who
had taken to drugs and he wanted to get
her abroad to lead a new life. I don’t know
if the woman was a relation. X didn’t ask
him any more details, but he blamed Pitt
and his associates for her downfall.”
Vincent sprang an apparently irrelevant
question upon him. “Do you know a Mrs.
Pearson?”
"I do. and as I’m making a statement I
may as well tell you that it is through her
agents that I imported that stuff for Pitt.
All the other soap and cosmetics that I
import are pure. The special soap of which
you were able to secure a sample was im-
ported tor Pitt. X have no personal customers
for it and I don’t know who his customers
were.”
“Wasn’t it risky leaving the case open in
your store-room?”
“Not at ail I give out all goods from
the storeroom and none of my assistants is
allowed to help herself.”
n
.L/TD Arthur Green
mention Mrs. Pearson as one of the people
who had helped to ruin this woman?”
"As a matter of fact he did.”
“Now, Mr. Thelusson. you are in the un-
authorised possession of dangerous drugs
and are liable to prosecution, but if you
show yourself ready to help the authorities
a prosecution need not necessarily follow I
need not disguise from you that the people
we want to get at are Mrs. Pearson and her
little gang. I shall recommend you to my
colleagues as a useful informant. Person-
ally, I am engaged in hunting down the
murderer of Pitt. Do you know of anyone
in this band of drug-traffickers who had a
motive for getting rid of Pitt?”
“Frankly, I can’t say I do. You know, of
course, of the case of Miss Hellier. I believe
that Mrs, Pearson was badly frightened over
that case, thinking that she would be dragged
into it as purveyor of the drugs, but I don’t
think that Pitt’s share in the drug traffic
was known to many people He was so
clever.”^
“Well, thank you, Mr. Thelusson. That’s
all that I have to ask you now.”
“So I have to sit here wondering when
the axe will fall on me. It’s not a pleasant
position for a business man to be in.”
“I can well understand that, and I’m afraid
I can say nothing at this juncture to relieve
your anxiety. I must leave you now to get
on with other pressing work.”
On reaching the Yard, Vincent found that
Sergeant Walker had already returned from
his visit to the garage in Hampstead.
“Well, what about that speedometer?”
“It’s all right; the record of the last run
had been left untouched; It would Just have
accounted for a nm to Oldbury and back, but
the car had no mud on it except a little on
the underside of the wings.”
“Of course, he would have cleaned off the
mud. Now I’ve discovered that Pitt had
promised that chauffeur two thousand
pounds and was leaving the country without
paying it. That gives us a motive for the
crime.”
“But if the chauffeur waylaid Pitt and
Killed and robbed him. what can he have
done with the money, because he got the
cheque out of Thelusson to pay for that
garage?”
“Oh, I think that he’s taking no risks; he’s
afraid to change any of the notes for fear
that they may be traced. Besides establish-
ing a motive for the crime I think I’ve found
a closer connection between Alice Dodds and
Green; the only note that has come to light
out of the sum which Pitt withdrew from
his bank was changed by Alice Dodds. I
wish to heaven that woman would get well
enough to be questioned.”
“Have you seen the doctor’s report upon
her this morning: it was pretty bad.”
“Yes, it was; there’s some doubt as to
whether she’ll recover. I’m wondering if
that accounts for the purchase of that gar-
age by Arthur Green.”
“You mean that he doesn’t intend to bolt
out of the country?”
“According to Thelusson’s story he had
some young woman who had taken to drugs
and whom he wanted to rescue by taking her
abroad. I think you’d better slip down to
Alton and find out what you can on the
spot. We are going to have difficulty in
bringing this crime home if he is the guilty
person. There comes a moment in every
case when one has to rely upon luck and 1
thinK that that moment has come. I feel
quite sure that Green knew that his master
intended to leave the country on that Satur-
day morning. You get off to Hampshire as
quick as you can. I’m going round again
to that garage where Pitt hired the car.”
On arriving at the garage in Bloomsbury.
Vincent sought out the proprietor.
“Have you got your car back from Newquay
/et?” he asked.
“No, not yet, but I know it’s safe down
there so I'm not worrying.”
“You told me when I was here before
that after you had let out that car an-
other garagist came in and told you that
they had been to him first. What was
he like?”
“He was a youngish man pretty ordinary
looking of about my height, but stouter
built than I am. He had a very gruff
sort of voice and was what I should call
a grouser.”
"Can you remember what questions he
■isked you?”
“He asked me very particularly what car
I was lending them.”
“Did you show it to him?”
“I did and he looked it well over. Then
he said, ‘Oh, well, that’s a smarter car
than I could have lent them.’ ”
“Can you remember whether he asked you
at what time they wanted to take the car?”
“Yes, he asked me that, and though 1
didn’t see what business It was of his, I
told him that they wanted it at eight
o’clock. He made some excuse about being
so inquisitive and said: ‘Oh, I couldn’t have
got them the kind they wanted in time.’
I can’t remember any more that he said.”
“I may want you to pick him out from
a dozen men a little later,” said Vincent.
“I hope you’ve got a good memory for
faces.”
“Pretty good, I fancy.”
When Vincent got back to his office
table he found cause to remember what ha
had said to Walker —that there comes ft
time in every case when one has to rely
upon luck. Lying on his table was a note
from the telephone room.
“For Chief Inspector Vincent from In-
spector Collins, of Hampstead. The woman
Alice Dodds is now lucid, though still very
ill. The doctor certifies that .she is fit
to reply to questions.”
Carrying the message with him, Vincent
set out for the hospital
"When Vincent arrived
at the Cottage Hospital the police doctor
from Hampstead met him in the corridor.
T must explain why you find me here. The
woman Alice Dodds is extremely ill and not
ikely to recover.”
“You, think that she cannot recover?”
“Yes, I doubt whether she will last out the
day; she is beyond all medical help, II
you will follow me into the ward 111 intro-
duce you to the nursing sister.”
Vincent would have found it difficult to
recognise the patient if she had not been
pointed out to him. He shook hands with
the sister, who warned him not to say any-
thing to excite the patient if he could help
it.
“She keeps asking for a person named
Arthur Green,” said the sister, “but she Is
unable to indicate where he can be found.”
“I can soon find Arthur Green,” said
Vincent. “Has she said why sire is so
anxious to see him?”
“She is quite conscious that she is dying
and she wants to give him something—
some paper I gather that it is.”
“It is important that I should be present
when she hands over this paper. I sup-
oose that this can be arranged.”
The sister looked round the ward. “1
;ould put you behind that screen so that you
muld hear what passes between them.”
“Very well, then I will ask the matron
iuperintendent to allow me to use her
telephone before I see Alice Dodds.”
He asked the matron to put through ft
call to the police station at Alton, and in
a very few minutes the connection was
made
“Is that the superintendent at Alton?”
“Who is speaking?”
“Chief Inspector Vincent from Scotland
Yard. I want to speak to Sergeant Walker
from the Yard if you know where to find
him.”
“He’s in the office at this moment. If
you’ll hold on I’ll call him to the phone.”
Vincent felt immensely relieved when he
heard the voice he knew. He asked: “Have
you located Arthur Green yet?”
“Yes, I have, but I haven’t had time to
see him yet. I’ve only just arrived Luckily
the local police knew where to find him.”
“I want you to bring him back to Lon-
don as soon as you can. You can tell him
that Alice Dodds is dying in hospital, and
keeps asking for him. That ought to
make him come willingly.”
“Very good. I’ll get hold of him at once.
Where shall I bring him to?”
“To the Cottage Hospital ",t Hampstead.
I shall be there.”
“Very good, but I can’t be up in town
in much under two hours.”
“That will bring us to about seven o’clock.
That will do all right. You can be as
lavish as you like in taking taxis because
every minute counts.”
“Very good. I’ll start off at once.”
Vincent returned to the ward and ap-
proached the sister.
“Is the woman still conscious?”
“Yes.”
“Then I can speak to her now.”
The sister surrendered her chair by the


bedside to Vincent, and took her stand
behind him to watch the patient.
Vincent bent over the pillow and asked
softly: “You wish to see Arthur Green?”
“Yes,” she said faintly.
“I’ve sent for him. He will be here in
an hour or so. You know Arthur Green
well?”
“Yes, very well,” she murmured with the
ghost of a smile.
“In fact he wanted to take you out of
the country and make you well.”
“But there was his mother. He had to
get her settled first.”
The sister looked warningfy at Vincent.
“I’ve only one more question to ask,” he
said. “Arthur Green gave you a ten-
pound note not long ago.”
“Yes.”
Vincent rose and patted the wasted hand
of the patient, "That’s all I wanted to ask,
eister.”
On leaving the hospital he told the mat-
ron that he would return in time to meet
his sergeant and Arthur Green. He had
nearly two hours to dispose of—time to
go back to the Yard and put through a
call to Newquay and exchange views with
his friend Goron. It took some little time
to put the call through but in the end he
learned that Goron was actually in the
police office and would be summoned to
the telephone.
After the usual greetings that French
officials consider essential, Goron came
to business.
•T have brought those two women to
reason. They will cross to Prance to-
morrow.”
“Then shall I not see you again?” asked
Vincent.
“Oh, yes. I shall bring them with their
female escort up to London by the nine
o’clock train which gets in early to-mor-
row morning. Then 1 can spend a short
time with you before taking them across:
we shall have quite a lot to discuss. How
are you getting on with your end of the
case?”
“I am on the right trail, I feel sure, but
my difficulty is to get proof of what I know
to be the truth. I will meet your train
to-morrow morning and you will come
back to breakfast with me.”
Vincent had plenty of occupation in writ-
ing up his report of the case while he was
waiting. He left again for the hospital
In good time.
It was seven o’clock when Walker arrived
with his man—more than an hour after
the hour when visitors are turned out. As
Vincent had expected, Green was in a sul-
len mood. He had been persuaded to come
against his will. By arrangement with the
lady superintendent he was taken straight
to the bedside of Alice Dodds.
Vincent was already in his place behind
the screen. The nurse had told him that
Alice Dodds refused to be parted from her
handbag. Her voice was so weak that from
his listening post he could not catch her
words, but he was in a position to see what
passed. Her lips moved and Green leaned
forward to listen. She handed her bag
to him: he opened it and took out from
it an envelope which he put in his breast
pocket.
After a very short exchange of whis-
pered words between the two the Sister in-
tervened and turned both Green and Vin-
cent out of the ward, arranging screens
round the bed.
The two men met in the corridor.
“I want that envelope that Alice Dodds
has just given to you,” said Vincent firmly.
“I’ve no doubt you do,” was the surly
reply. “You police can’t even respect the
wishes of a dying woman.”
■'Unless you hand over that envelope it
will be my duty to arrest you as an acces-
sory to a felony.”
“All very pretty and nice, but you can’t
scare me with your legal police terms.”
“You refuse then to hand over that en-
velope?”
“I invite you to come and take it.”
“Very well, then I arrest you as an ac-
cessory to a crime. You’ll come quietly to
the station, or would you prefer me to call a
uniformed constable to help me take you
there?”
Vincent could see that the other was
measuring his chances of using violence
and making his escape after delivering a
smashing blow in the face. Prudence pre-
vailed, however. “We don’t want a row in
a hospital,” the man said. “I’ll come quietly
with you to the station.”
- Vincent was taking no chances. Walker
was at the other end of the corridor and
he signed to him to approach.
“Slip down to the telephone and ask the
superintendent to send up a couple of re-
serve patrols to lend us a hand.”
T
XHE show of force had
apparently led Green to drop his inten-
tion of resistance or escape, for he fell into
a sullen silence and accompanied them to
the police station. There he was charged
with having been in possession of the
stolen banknote which he had given to
Alice Dodds.
“You think yourselves very clever,” he
said: “but Mr. Pitt gave me that banknote
on the day before he went away.”
The reply was taken down and Vincent
proceeded to search him. In the envelope
taken from his breast pocket he found a
safe deposit receipt for a box deposited with
Messrs. Wrench and Company.
"Keep this man in custody until we re-
turn from Wrench and C 0.,” said Vincent.
“We shall bring back the box with us.”
Green broke out into noisy protests
against what he called interference with
his private property, but Vincent replied
courteously that provided that all the pro-
perty in the box proved to be his he had
nothing at all to fear.
Walker accompanied Vincent to Wrench’s
emporium and there, after some delay in
convincing the managing director that he
must hand over the box in return for an
official receipt from the police, they were
allowed to take it away. It was a white
wood box fortified with iron angle plates.
On arriving back at the police station,
Green was asked for the key. He said that
he had left it at his home in Alton and
that in any case the police had no right to
open it.
“It will be opened in your presence,” said
Vincent; “and you can see that everything
taken out of it is replaced provided that
there is nothing in it to which you have no
right. Get a hammer and chisel, Walker.”
The tools were brought and at the second
blow of the hammer the lock gave way.
The box contained nothing but a leather
cash-bag such as bank messengers use. That,
too, had to be opened forcibly, since Green
declined to supply a key. It was packed
with Bank of England notes of varying de-
nominations and at the bottom lay a pass-
book of the National Insurance Bank in
the name of Bernard Pitt.
Vincent turned towards Green, from whom
all truculence had now disappeared. “Ar-
thur Green, I arrest you for the murder of
Bernard Pitt by shooting him through the
head. You are not obliged to make any
statement.”
Goron and Vincent breakfasted together
half-an-hour after the arrival of the train
from Newquay,
"So you have arrested the man you be-
lieve to be the murderer of Pitt,” said
Goron; “and that fantastic story told by
those Americans is true after all.”
"Yes.”
“What Interests me keenly is the differ-
ence between criminal procedure in Eng-
land and its counterpart in my own coun-
try. There is a refreshing finality about
your English procedure. But tell me, how do
you regard your case as watertight?”
“Well, the story that Blake and Lewis
told was that their car was held up in the
road by a masked bandit who killed Pitt
and made off with a bag of money. That
money, consisting of notes that could be
Identified, was found in Green’s possession,
and what is more, a search of his room
revealed a black mask hidden in a drawer,”
“How strange that criminals should so
often preserve objects that bring the crime
home to them! Was his motive only rob-
bery?”
“Partly revenge, I think. It appears that
at one time he was a fellow employee of a
woman named Alice Dodds; they were in
the service of Mrs. Pearson, Laurlllard’a
daughter. She employed Dodds over the
drug traffic, with the inevitable result that
Dodds herself took to drugs. After that
Green took service with Pitt and black-
mailed him. Pitt promised to give him two
thousand pounds to clear out of the coun-
try with his young woman, Dodds, but
Green discovered that Pitt was on the point
of leaving England himself without re-
deeming his promise. That, in my opinion,
supplied the motive. Prom inquiries I have
made, Green found out the make of car
that Pitt was hiring and his time of de-
parture. He lay in wait for him In the
open road and shot him.”
"And so while you were hunting for the
murderer in France he was here under your
very nose.”
“Had Pitt’s companions been just ordin-
ary law-abiding passengers they would have
denounced the murderer and he would have
been run to ground sooner, but they were
criminals with much to hide, and Pitt him-
self was no flower; he was bolting with
money stolen from his employers.”
“A pretty nest of rascals. But why didn’t
Arthur Green make his escape while there
was time?”
“To do him justice I think he was trying
to persuade the woman to go with him and
she was in such an advanced state of ad-
diction to drugs that she hung back. Then,
apparently, he was afraid to use the money
because the numbers of the notes were
known.”
“It seems to me,” said Goron; “that the
person who deserves the heaviest punish-
ment is Laurillard’s daughter, Mrs. Pear-
son.”
“Yes, the sinister part of it is that she
will escape scot-free.”
“Never mind, my friend, in hunting down
your murderer, you have rendered a signal
service to us in France. You have enabled
us to close down another of these poison
factories which were sapping the strength
of our youth. These young people began
poisoning themselves from a sense of ad-
venture, the sense that assails most young
people at some time of wishing to defy the
law.”
“Yes, if the sacrifice of Alice Dodds and
of this young fool, Green, could be a warn-
ing to others, their deaths will expiate their
follies.”
THE END.
(All characters In this novel are fictitious, mj
have no reference to any living person.)
Printed and published by Consolidated
Limited, 168-174 Castlereagh St., Syetoe*.
