

MINDOLOGY,
OR THE
Development of the Human Character.
“Man becomes a star when he understands himself.”
INTRODUCTION.
Mikdologt, or the development of human character, is a
combined study of all the branches of knowledge dealing
with man and nature —embracing the head, face, hands, and
temperaments, in which are to be found the outward mani-
festations, also dealing with the brain, nervous systun, the
latent spiritual forces, and the Mind or universal principle.
I shall endeavour to make this little pamphlet as simple as
possible, for it is not my intention to bewilder or puzzle any-
one but rather the opposite, and I am sure if my readers
are of a studious nature and like to do their own thinking,,
this little treatise will give them valuable assistance to find
out their weaknesses and strong points; also their capacity
in a given line, their possibilities in life by strict cultivation
and development.
"LIBRA,”
Mindologist.
“Man should always strive to better his condition—spiritually,,
mentally, and physically—and should never be satisfied to remain in any-
one position too lonsr, for by so doing, his intellect becomes crusted, and
his ideas old and obsolete ; his brain becomes more coarse, it being worked
only in one particular groove, producing childishness, early decay, and
premature death; so it will be plainly seen that by a proper cultivation
of himself, man becomes more a man and less an animal, for he will know
thatiis duty is to seek well within his own self to see that his daily actions
are in harmony with the truest parts of his nature.—“ Grains <-f Wisdom.' r


INDEX,
■'CSifoii's I.
The Brain, Nervous System, Heart, Diet, Brain Troubles
Chapter 11.
Tie Head, Formation, Faculties, Measnrenietits.'
Chapter 111.
The Pace, Nose, Mouth, Eyes, Wrinkles.
Chapter IY. (
The Hands, Types, Thumbs, Lines, Mounts, Nails.
Chapter V.
The Temperaments, Mental, Motive, Vital.
Chapter VI.
Character in Motion.
Chapter VII.
The Mind and its Powers.
EXPLANATION.
Many readers may not comprehend the reason I have
taken upon myself to make the word “ MINDOLOGY,” the
title of this little work, and therefore I shall endeavour to
explain. First, the word really means a discourse and study
of the Mind and its working through humanity and nature
in an individual and collective sense, as so, it covers all
knowledge bearing upon the development of human character
natural and spiritual, leaving all students thorough indepen-
dent of dogmas, creeds, and so-called sciences, being perfectly
at liberty to study each or every part according to their
developments without rules or regulations of earthly constitu-
tions or societies, following only the golden rules of Truth,
Tolerance, and Love.
“LIBRA,”
Mindologist.
Pub. 5, 3899.


MINDOILOGY,
OR
The Development of Human Character.
“Man becomes a star when he understands himself.”
CHAPTER I.
THE BRA IN.
“ Even minded Tolerance and Love are the very Essence of all
human development and progress, without which no being can be happy,
useful, or successful”—“Grains of Wisdom.’’
’/, . ■
The Brain is the organ. is acted' upon by the
Universal Mind, just as .a delicate' telegraph instrument is
acted upon by the electric current, and it is according to its
formation and composition that the susceptibility is obtained
to record ideas and thoughts from the very fountain of
consciousness. Therefore we find in history men, of genius
who have, without doubt, got in touch with the “ Great
Principle,” being born with the capacity and abilities to attain
that greatness which all men can rise to in their own par-
ticular lines, if they will aspire, and endeavour to take
themselves in hand, commencing to work out their own
salvation.
■ This susceptibility of the brain-has been termed Imagi-
nation, and often these men have’ been ridiculed • and even
murdered for bringing out any ideas which have been beyond
the hard and fast doctrines of their time. ’ But to-day we
live* in the brighter Light of Intellectual and True Spiritual
Development. “ Man has risen from the' dead.” So we
can expect marvellous developments in art,' science, machinery,
music, and Governments, which will brighten the’path of
future inhabitants upon this old planet of ours, .carrying on
the progress under the banner of Truth, Justice, and 'Love.
(‘The Grains of Wisdom’ say "Imagination is the


window of the soul, all men of ideas possess this faculty,
more or less, some let it run riot while others control it, and
by so doing it becomes useful and beneficial.” “
We wish te ask what would have been our state to-day
if we had not had men of ideas, who died for their truths,
stood all the ridicule and sarcasm of the world, being called
mad, derided and stoned to death? Why, it would be^im-
possible to say.
“ The peoples of the earth desiie and require great souls to help
and aid them, so the internal Father sends them to fulfil His 'Will
and promise.”—“ Grains of Wisdom.”
The brain is divided into three lobes—frontal, middle-
and posterior. Through the frontal and middle lobes which
fill in the front and top parts of the cranium the intellectual
and higher faculties function, through the posterior which
is connected to the spinal column, the desires, passions and
senses manifest themselves. Now, if the brain is confined
or held down by a bad formed cranium, of course it is
impossible for it to act and function as it would in a well
formed one, so it is not to be wondered at that many men-
have not the ideas and abilities that others have, but it is
wonderful what the mind can do by good steady healthful
work, —Intellectual as well as physical—for by that activity
the brain uses up all the substance sent to it by the system
instead cf allowing it to be formed into bone ; thus the
faculties all become brighter, the light of the Universal mir d
begins to shine through, and the result is health, intelligence,,
energy, and progress, which is the very foundation of all
nature. We can easily see the opposite result! for if a man
has a fairly well formed cranium, good brain power, and he
does not use it to its utmost capacity, his cranium becomes
thicker, his brain more compressed, and consequently he is


not so easily affected or worked into activity. Not only doe*
it affect the brain, but also the nerves and general system, for
all parts of the human body are closely united, without a single
flaw, and if you deaden the princ pie agent it simultaneously
affects every organ, atom, nerve, and fibre of your body, creat-
ing disease, morbidness, melancholy, shortening your life, stunt-
ing your intelligence, thus you become a slave to your baser
brain, for it is an actual fact that if the intellectual and higher
portions are not kept active to their fullest capacity the animal
brain will get entire mastery. All men are naturally animal
bom, and the earth is the home of animal life, therefore if the
“ Great Mind ” cannot bring out the Higher faculties, to take
control of the animal nature in this stage of evolution, rest as»
sured you will sink back to a 1 >wer state even than you now
occupy, for all men must rise above their lower nature, if not
now, then they must in future states of life, which is only pro-
longing their misery and chastisement. Far better to take
yourself in hand now and strive to do your best, which must
bring good results.
“Man’s life should be a persistent development of his higher nature
spiritually, mentally, and physically. As this small span of human ex.
istence soon runs its course, evolving into a higher state if prepared, and
if not, sinking even lower than this mortal state, which makes the task
much heavier, for all must develope, being eventually absorbed in the
Absolute from whence they came.”—“ Grains of Wisdom."
THE NERVOUS SYSTEM.
« Unity is Divine Law, and all beings that can work with unity will
live harmonious and happy lives.”—« Grains of Wisdom.”
The nervous system is centred in the brain, and if that
organ is fine and susceptible in man, a lively imagination must
be the result, and he will also have a fine system of nerves
which comunicate and carry the vital fluid from the brain centres
to all pans of the body, being permeated wi r h a beautiful health-
giving magnetism, and providing other developments are up to
the same standard, will be a great power for good wherever he
gees. And that will account for certain differences in people he
may come in contact with —some will at once be in harmony
with him, others the reverse. It is in the first place because
vital fluid, or magnetism, is not in harmony with his own, it
being generally of a lo ver nature when antagonistic, and in the
other case it shows harmony of natures. We would impress
students that those feelings are a splendid guide to understand


the nature of the'persons ‘they are continually meeting in daily
"life, bit it is not -wise to he ‘oo quick at forming conclusions as
it may'be from other cause's than the person himself. Therefore
att Ohfrvtird study of Mindqlogy will assist them greatly to cpn-
Vihfce therhselves-that their feelings hare not misled them, for by
certain indications in the face; hands, manner and temperament,
combined v.dth the formation of the head, they will soon be able
,t'6‘ comd to a' convincing conclusion.
THE HEART.
“ Nature is no respecter of persons, for all men equally inherit her
'gifts, amt all’ean - gain hoi - secrets by study, development and high
aspiration.”—“Grains o( Wisdom.”
The heart is a great centre of action, forcing the blood
through the veins and arteries, supplying each atom of the
,hpdy with vitality necessary for its progress and evolution. It
is in direct sympathy with the brain, and if that organ is not
•kept in active service the 1 heart becomes affected generally re-
sulting in peSsimisig, biliousness, heart affections and dissatisfac-
tion with life. The llrain' being the centre of activity, if kept
well employed, it affects the heart in a healthy manner, produc-
ing an active circulation of—hk>«4—through the system, causing
the breathing organization to he kept up to the uniform stan-
dard necessary to supply all parts with, pure air, which must
help to produce, ‘Health, happiness, and knowledge. It is the
Hattie of brain activity that causes- childishness in old age, for if a
man has used Bis brain through life to its fullest capa uty, it will
have the power to draw sufficient blood and nourishment from
.'the system to- keep up its conscious development, but if not used
■to the fullest, and best advantage through this life, the arteries
and nerves, as old age comes on, become clogged and blocked,
then the brain is not able to get the nourishment it requires, so
the result is childishness, enfeebled intellect, and premature
death. Therefore, Man’s study of himself, is the elixir of life
the-ancient alchemists-sought, .-for it takes away the sting of
death and disease, as he becomes conscious by his development
that this life is bnt a stage of the everlasting which is ever
moving on.
“Nature requires us to become balanced so as we can work ,in
harmony with the divine laws of nature's web and progiess, to beceme
one with the eternal and everlasting force, which is all in all with’one
beginning or end.”


THE DIET.
' “ Health of mind and. body is gained by right food, right thought
and action* harmonising and obeying' narture’i divine Grains of
Wisdom.”
• It is most necessary for man to study bis diet and investigate
for himself to find out the foods and liquids which agree with his-
general 1 organisation the best* The cause of much physical*
disease is due to the non-observing of diet. The physical body is-
composed of Pour-Temperaments, namely, the Nervous, Lym-
phatic, -Fibrous, and Muscular, each one playing an important
part in the human body. Too much cannot be said of tho study
of these Temperaments, for all diseases, it matters not what you
call them, are due either to over-feeding or under-feeding of the-
same, and if they are not properly fed with the food best suitedl
to them, they either become inactive or too active, hence, fever,
colds, or consumption are the result. ■ .Many children only suffer
from a Temperamental disease, yvhen itis technically pronounced,
by many Lung disease, or by other names which-are not correct.
Now if men would, when feeling out of sorts, sickly, or melan-
choly, look back, and bring to their mind w.hat they have been
eating or drinking, we are confident they will find in nearly
every case the cause of the trouble, therefore their plan is then
to discontinue taking that kind of food or stimnlent, no matter
what the desire 1 for it may be, but we nearly always find that the
things people should not eat dr drink they generally -havo a great
appetite for, and gratify it to the full, always submitting io-it&.
influence and never using their will power to try and overcome
the craving. We might here say, and it is a distinct fact, that no
matter what lodges yon join, or pledges you take, they are
totally useless without you take a pledge to your divine, nature,
that you will use its influence in harmony with your will power
and by the help of all that’s intelligent within you, combined
with the Universal mind, strive to overcome your craving appe-
tites, desires, and morbid thoughts, for then you will get on the
foundation, and eventually you will overcome them, and the
result must be peace, happiness, health, and knowledge, as the
physical construction and development is regulated a good deal
by the diet, which jl properly attended to, produces a sound
body, clean and refined, and a bright mental and progres-
sive spiritual combinatiommuet necessarily follow.


BRAIN TROUBLES.
Much trouble arises through the non-understanding of the
Brain, and any, person attempting to treat inhumation or disorders
of that organ -without a perfect knowledge is dangerous. To
commence at the stomach is good, yet often it is direct from the
scalp alone the disease should be treated, for the cells are very
often found hermetically sealed as a bottle, and herein lies the
origin of so much brain trouble found in women, and the correct
name of this malady is Scalp disease. Dandruff and scurf lying
upon the exterior of the head is the true and, almost, only cause,
and to remove this the scalp requires to be washed every day,
which would be the means of securing perfect Brain health.
Day by day the effeat matter wants to pass away, and the scalp
{being unwashed) causes much internal trouble of the Brain;
then added to this we find plenty of microbes contained within
the combs and brushes which adds a larger microbe field for the
destruction of the scalp producing in many cases brain-fever.
The head should be washed very often and the hair slightly oiled
to produce elasticity of the scalp, and also to strengthen the
hair and beautify its appearance it should be carfully brushed
every night, thus adding to its strength and beauty. It is good,
also, to dip the hair at the ends into cold water before retiring,
and it would be well to understand that many children’s hair
looking so thin is due to clipping the ends before Nature has
completed her work, hence no child’s hair should be cut at the
ends until its seventh year, if this is regarded the hair harvest of
childhood will be well developed and much admired, which will
give mothers the satisfaction of seeing their children with
beautiful hair.
“ Man should keep the reins of his lower nature and desires well in
hand, and by his will command their powers to his well-being.”—“Grains
of Wisdom.”


CHAPTER II.
THE HEAD.
“ The Head is the seat of knowledge, and according to its formation
and development, so does the Universal Mind act or manifest itself,”—
“ Grains of Wisdom.”
FORMATION.
There are many shapes of heads—no two are to be found
alike, and according to their formation, so are the
characteristics to be understood. Yet that in itself is not
sufficient to gain a true knowledge of any individual nature,
for all other parts of Mindology must be considered before
coming to any conclusion. If it is an ill-shaped head, as No.
3 shows in Fig. 2, there is nothing better expected than
idiocy, as it is so constructed that the frontal and middle
lobes of the brain are entirely suppressed or held down,
therefore we find in that type, idiocy, animalism, and
sensualism according to the control or power of the posterior
or animal lobe. Sometimes it is really a blessing in disguise
that idiots are more or less paralysed in their physical
organisation, for if it were not so they would only be greater
slaves to their animal passions and desires, but by a
derangement of the nervous system brought oh by the Mind,
not being able to exert its powers through the brain, their
physical organisation suffers in the manner described, Which
prevents them from gratifying their baser instincts injuring
themselves and others. The question often occurs to the
thinker that in a case as above it seems hard that a poor idiot


should be born in the world and suffer all through life, for
that which it had no control over. Yet it must not be
forgotten that if we traced the parents or grandparents of
such a child we can come very near to the real cause, and,
therefore, by all men understanding that their children are
more or less a reflex of themselves, regulated by the Eternal
Law of Cause and Effect, and if they do not want idiots and
criminals born to them, then in all sense and reason they will
cultivate themselves, suppress their animal desires, lift up
their spiritual aspirations, think good and noble thoughts,
and never allow anger or passion to overcome their
will-power.
“Anger, jealousy, and sensual love are veritable demons when
allowed to take control of man, burning and poisoning his body, mind,
and spiritual nature, causing disease, suicide, and very often murder
and death.”—“ Grains of Wisdom.”
THE FACULTIES.
“By abusing the faculties of the mind, man heaps hot coals upon
his own head, and by putting them to their rightful use, he makes them
beneficial to himself and all mankind.”—“Grains of Wisdom.”
Now we will first divide the head into Three parts—the
spiritual, (No. i, Fig. 3), which takes up the top or crown of
the head. The Intellectual, (No. 2), in the front or forepart,
and, (No. 3), the Animal or Domestic which is placed at the
back and over the ears.
Those are the principal divisions of the head, but we
may here state that there are numerous organs to each
portion which the faculties manifest through, and each of
those faculties is an expression of the One Great Mind, the


■organs being the instruments it uses. We shall not go into
an elaborate detail of the faculties, for our object is to make
a short and simple line of unity through this little work, and
any student that would like to go into detail we would advise
them to get any of the standard works upon Phrenology,
which will give them the necessary information upon that
point.
We will again divide the Spiritual, intellectual, the
animal and domestic into ten different smaller divisions,
mentioning the faculties operating through each separate
part. The spiritual, (No. i Fig. 4), is divided into four parts
—(No. 1), intuition and agreeableness; (No. 2), benevolence,
veneration, and firmness; (No. 3), conscientiousness, hope,
spirituality, and imitation ; (No. 4), wonder and ideality. The
intellectual, (No. 2, Fig 4), is divided into three parts, which
include the following faculties: (No. 1), individuality, size,
form, weight, colour, calculation, and language; (No. 2),
memory, locality, time, mirth, causality, and compression;
(No. 3), tune and construction. The animal or domestic (No.
3), is divided into three parts; (No. 1), self-esteem, ambition,
concentration ; (No. 2), caution, secretiveness, destructive-
ness, vitativeness, combativeness, aliment ativeness and
acquisitiveness; (No. 3), inhabitiveness, friendship, conjugal
love, parental love, and amativeness.
The spiritual developments give the person a love of the
unseen, strong religious feeling, a kind benevolent nature
with high aspirations. They will generally be fond of the
wonderful and mystical, and would, if properly balanced in
other directions, with good language, become fluent and
inspirational speakers, also if combined with large
individuality, form, weight and intuition, it would give them
a deep insight into nature and science, being specially adapted
4.0 study Mindology, evolution, and involution, or any of the


occult sciences. They will generally be free, kind, and liberal,,
doing what they could to help others, also honest and straight-
forward in their actions, always having the highest regard for
truth and right. They are generally of a cheerful and
buoyant nature, and will never despair, for the light shines
through their organisation, giving them a glimpse of the
Eternal, therefore they are really never alone, for if properly
balanced and cultivated, their spiritual faculties can pierce
the realms of Nature, exploring the fields and pathways of
the Universe, for to the height of their knowledge all is clear
and open to their inner sight and consciousness.
“ The single eye seeth the workings of Hidden Nature, a field so-
vast in proportions to our physical surroundings as to be most astounding
but it gives man Hope and Heart to tread the paths, which lead to
Immortality.”—“ Grains of Wisdom.”
The intellectual development gives the Person, order
and harmony of reason, also comparison and analysing powers.
They will like to know the why and the wherefore, the
“ Cause and Effect ” of all things that come under their
notice; they will have keen foresight, great originality of
thought, and energetic power of mind, they will easily
acquire and retain knowledge, and with large language and
construction show good literary abilities. Their ideas-
regarding forces and weights will be found correct, and they
would spend much time investigating the physical manifesta-
tions of Nature, trying always to found their deductions upon
a solid and material basis. Their memory will be good of
places visited, having also perception of outline, and good
sound judgement.
When a combination is found in any person of the:
spiritual and intellectual faculies, very well developed, we
ha\e then the keenest desires for searching and investigating
all forms ana conditions of Nature’s manifestations, and they
will not stop at the material phenomena, but would go on
into the realms of ether to the mind and its powers, working
through matter and all branches of physical research. . Such
men as Professer Crookes, Rontgen, Edison, Tesla, and
Lombrosa will all have the combination referred to above,
for their works show to any student of Mindology that such
must be the case.
“Nature’s beauties are ever showing themselves to those who can
see, and he who desires can learn, step by step, her wondrous laws, which
will fit him to take his place in the march of evolution and progress to
the immortal goal of eternal happiness, peace, and love.”—“ Grains of
■Wisdom.”


We find men of the materialistic nature that wish to
prove every point by the senses is generally deficient in the
spiritual development* but are fully developed in the
intellectual region, and if the spiritual is fully developed
and the intellectual not so, then we have the bigoted and
sentimental Christian ; while if their animal and domestic
faculties are strong, it also adds Regressive force to their
natures. This class of men would force down your throats
that you are to believe not to investigate, being ever ready if
they had the power to burn or torture any person who would
not subject themselves to their narrow-minded views. Thus
students can see the necessity of throwing off all fads,
cultivating a broad mind and intelligence, which is the death-
blow to ignorance and superstition.
The animal or domestic development gives strong so:ial
feelings, stimulating the brain generally, providing the force
and energies necessary for the actions of the physical
movements, animal wants, desires, passions and propensities.
A person with this region fully and evenly formed will have
ardent affection, a strong degree of parental love, patriotism
and feeling for suffering humanity, love of home and country,
also good concentration, being able to fix their attention on
one particular thing, good friendship' and strong affection.
They will have great courage and resolution, energy and
love of action, health appeiite, fairly secretive, smart in
business, generous, prudent and cautious. Now if the lower
animal faculties are developed ,to a very high degree, with the
spiritual and intellectual small, the if the animal desires and
passions will overcome and control those higher faculties
leading to criminalism, sensualism, and destructiveness. But,
providing we have a fairly equal development of the three
different parts, the Spiritual, intellectual, and animal, then we
. a splendid combination, for those persons will be active,
energetic, good business men, with a strong intellectual
capacity, ingenuity, cause and effect and construction.
Acquisitive to acquire knowledge and experience more than
houses or landed estates, as they can clearly see by
1 their nature that the former is the most enduring and lasting,
for Knowledge is, Eternal, and physical possessions disappear
with the physical body. They will be naturally kind and
benevolent, with good judgment, having a keen insight into
human nature, therefore will not abuse their benevolence by
extending their assistance to loafers, drunkards, and men
unworthy of it. They will study the higher life and
involution, the inner meaning and forces of things, which are
covered in the material or physical matter, also delighting in


art and music and would seek to investigate the wonderful
and beautiful in nature. Thus we have a true man, working
for all that is good in human nature on the high: road to
become a God.
“Wilt thou become a Qod? Yea, master!, Then give thy talents
and labour for humanity, and thou shalt have thy wish.”—“ Grains of
Wisdom.”
THE MEASUREMENTS.
“ Measurements are the means by which Man arrives at the relative
size of different objects, but in the Great Eternal there is no size or differ-
ance, all being one without beginning or end.”.—“ Grains of Wisdom.”
In measuring a person's cranium, we have found the
following method to be very effective in striking off the
general aspects of character, yet it must not be forgotten that
no single one of these particular indications are sufficient to
give an accurate delineation, but as before mentioned all the
outward manifestations of Mindology are necessary, as well
as the inner study of the mind’s operation, which we will
deal with further on. Take the first measurement (No. i
Fig. 5) with your tape across the perceptive, circling the
head, just over the tops ot the ears which will give a fair idea
of the foreseeing, perceptive and observing faculties. (No. 2)
should be taken across from comparison for that will take in
the reflective and intellectual capacity. Take (No. 3), from
the centre of the ears, over the top of the head, between
firmness and veneration, which gives the capacity of the
spiritual nature. Now if the measurements, (No. 1), is 22^0,


(No. 2) aajio., and (No. 3) 13m., you will have, generally
•peaking, a well-balanced nature, and a good combination.
If, on the other hand, (No. 1) measures ztfin., and (No. 2) is
2oin., and (No. 3) 13m., you will have a keen perceptive and
observing nature, but more intuitive and impulsive than
reflective, with not sufficient reasoning power, and if the
animal or back part of the head is abnormally developed,
then you will have a type of the instinctive criminal. Again,
if (No. 1) measures 2o£in., and (No. 2) 22|in„ and (No. 3)
rsin., then you will have a type that is inclined to live in the
clouds, and would be more theoretical than practical, he
would be a man of ideas and theories, but when it comes to a
practical part he would assuredly fail, persons with such a
combination should always strive to cultivate the practical
part of their nature.
“Practical reforms only come from practical qualified men, withja
desire to benefit humanity and all creatures, and never from self-seeking,
vain, and empty-headed men of words and foolish wit.”—« Grains o f
Wisdom.”


CHAPTER III.
THE FACE.
<■ The manifested is but an expression of the unmynifesfed we see
ourselves in a mirror quite different from what we are. A woman’s face
inay be a mirror in which we see what we desire to see, but, as by the
closer inspection of ourselves, we see our failings and good qualities, to
by a closer inspection of the woman’s face and life, by our reason and
intuition, the veil of sentiment and passion is lifted and the true nature
is laid bare.”—“ Grains of Wisdom.” ' ‘ '
“The face is the mirror of the soul,” being without
doubt a great tell-tale, as it shows man’s abuses, cultivation,
intelligence, likes and dislikes, and any student of Mindology
that looks at a person’s face, can see by its expression, colour,
or shape, a great many of the characteristics of his nature.
There are Three different types, and then, like all other parts
of the man, they mix, blend, and differentiate. We shall deal
only with the three to give students a principal to commence
from, for that is our only object in this little pamphlet.
First we have the round, plump ruddy face, full cheeks’
dimpled, and called pretty. Persons with that type will be
bright, witty, kind, fond of dancing, coquettish, being guided
in all things by their impressions or intuitions, looking nearly
always on the bright side of nature. The second is the pear-
shaped face, wide across the top-part, and tapering down to
the chin. A person with a face of that description will be a
deep thinker, intellectual and artistic, looking more at the
inner life of nature and its surroundings, being fond of the
mysterious and wonderful, also religiously inclined, but with
a good broad forehead, they will generally seek into the
realms of the metaphysical as well as the material. We find
men with this particular face, inventors, up-to-date scientists,
and earnest investigators because they wish to prove the
surrounding phenomena of nature before searching into the
realms above. Women with literary abilities, school teachers,
lady doctors, will all have more or less the pear-shaped face.
A person with wide and high-cheek bones, heavy jaw, and
square chin, will be an active, energetic, physical worker,
more or less intuitive, not given too much to study, having
strong likes and dislikes, animal desires and passions; he


will, if not developed mentally, be likely to go to extremes in
the gratification of his desires. We find miny murderers,
butglars, and sexual offenders with the above type of face.
THE NOSE.
The nose is the principal organ of the face. It is a very
interesting member, and a great deal can be learned of a
person’s characteristics by its size, shape, and development.
There are many different kinds, so we will only deal with
three of the principal types—the Roman, the Intuitive, or
mixed, and the Pug or celestial. The first, (No. i, Fig. 6), the
Roman we generally find on men who are aggressive,
commanders in battle, with great energy and shrewdness,
they will acquire and make wealth, being very fond of power,
possessions, and influence. (No. 2) : The Intuitive or mixed
nose, is generally a blend of the Roman, Celestial, and
Grecian. They will be sharp and intuitive, always coming to
quick conclusions, also having fair combativeness or aggressive
force necessary to stand up for their rights. They will have
a keen intellect and good mental capacity, artistic tastes,
and musical ability, fond of flowers, and all the beauties of
nature, not over-pleased with too much hard work, but will
not grumble at a fair share. This type is dominant in woman
and gives the reason for their prophetic natures and spiritual
developments. (No. 3), the Pug, or Celestial, is the unde-
veloped nose, and is to be found on criminals, idiots, fighting
men, and all low organised individuals. When a child is
born its nose is generally a celestial, but as the intellect and
character developes into manhood, then the nose likewise


correspondingly changes, so that if a pug or celestial is found
on a grown-up person, students will know that there is some
deficiency in their intellectual Capacity and give their decisions
accordingly. They are of an excitable disposition, jumping
too quickly at conclusions, stubborn (or in a vulgar term
sometimes pig-headed), and it is useless to try and change
their opinions, they will be governed more by instinct than
reason, and it would be just as easy to argue with a lump of
wood as to argue with a person having a pug or celestial nose.
If you want to find out a person who is especially fond of the
opposite sex, put your finger on the end of their nose and feel
if there is a distinct division there, if so, you can safely say
they are extremely loving and fond of being loved.
THE MOUTH.
The mouth is also a good indicator of character, its
formation, lips, and general appearance, must be taken into
consideration, which shows the amount of feeling, love,
sensuality, coldness, firmness, and weakness of the individual,
&c. (No. i, Fig. 7): If the lips are thin and pale, with the
mouth always closely set then you have a cold, firm, and
sometimes brutal nature, and on the other hand (No. 2) if
both lips are red, thick, and full, always parted, even when
the month is shut, then you have a weak, lustful, sensual nature
easily led and controlled, no stability of character combined
with a weak intellect. (No. 3) shows a fairly formed mouth,
which will give firmness and self-reliance, love of the opposite
sex, good language and eKpression, and a fairly well-balanced
nature. If the mouth is turned down at the corners towards


the chin, it shows a gloomy, melancholy disposition ; if on the
other hand the corners turn upwards, it gives a jovial, buoyant
and merry nature. If neither one or the other is shown, they
will be of a balanced nature, going to neither one side or the
other. I might here mention that I have found in the course
of my investigations that if the two front teeth in the top jaw
are well formed, large, and not close together, it generally
indicates a sound constitution, good brain power, energy,
psychic force, and powers.
THE EYES.
The eye has very rightly been termed the window of the
soul, for by its expression we can readily read the feelings
and emotions of the true man that inhabits the body. It is
through the eye that the.soul or magnetic force streams, and
the dancing delight and pleasure, pain and misery, are all
shown in the different expression of the eye.
If a person is guilty of an act of injustice, and feels that
he has done wrong, the eyes will generally be turned down-
wards, having a meek and humble look. On the other hand
if he has been wrongly accused, and knows he !s innocent, he
will look straight-forward at his accusers with a defiant and
steady gaze ; again, if in deep religious reverie, he will gaze
upwards, having a far-away expression in his eyes, so students
will see how this principle of the Three Phases shows itself
all through human nature. First the lower organised beings,
criminals, &c., will have shifty, restless eyes, like the animal,
and if you are speaking to a person and he shows the above
peculiarity, and cannot look you in the face, then it is high-
time for you to watch him. They will, one and all, have a
tendency to look upon the ground. The intellectual will look
at you straight and square in the face, unless guilty of some
misdemeanour, then they will become like the lower
organised beings and look upon the floor. And thirdly, there
is the spiritual, who look upwards, and when this phase is
carried to extremes we find them on the street corners,
uttering long prayers from the lips, and singing psalms and
hymns.


(No. i, Fig. 8), shows the eyes of the shrewd, deep
thinker and close observer, and we would advise readers that
when you come in contact with a person with deep set eyes
of a steel grey colour, rathfer small, with heavy eyebrows
overhanging them, never try and deceive him, for if you do,
!rour chance of success is very small. (No. 2) shows the
ntellectual and spiritual eyes, they are very expressive, being
of a hazel, light brown, or steel blue colour, being well set
apart, leaving a good distance between each other, showing
good individuality, keen analysis, size, form, weight, and good
language. (No. 3) is the ordinary eye, it is generally found
to be of a light blue, or black eye, as it is sometimes termed,
being a very dark brown, they will be set close together,
leaving very little space between each other. The eyebrows
will be elevated, sometimes meeting across the top of the
nose, when the eyes will be dark and which shows decidedly
a bad and vindictive temper. When the eyebrows do not
meet, and are always held in an elevated position, the eyes
will be light blue and shows a weak intellect, narrow-minded-
ness, no moral courage, cowardice, and vanity.
THE WRINKLES.
All faces, no matter of what type, will have wrinkles
more or less upon them, which are of importance to the
student of Mindology, therefore we will deal with them in
brief. First upon the round plump and ruddy face; full
cheeks, wrinkles will be very few, and mostly striking upward
and outward, especially from the corners of the eyes, caused


more or less by their merry laugh. Also underneath the eyes
will be found two or three running parallel, which indicate
expression and language. They will also have a deep wrinkle
running from the side of the face, which shows kindliness,
benevolence and good nature. The second, the pear-shaped
or intellectual face, will have two or three wrinkles running
across the forehead, indicating an active mind and mentality;
also one or two small wrinkles, starting from the top of the
-nose shooting upward to the forehead, sometimes about an
inch long, which indicate perceptiveness and keen observa-
tion ; and from the corner of the eyes, down the side of the
nose will be found two or three strong wrinkles which indicate
deep thought and study, strong personality and will power,
also great capacity for intellectual advancement. They will
generally be teachers of men who have those particular
wrinkles in harmony with other faculties and characteristics.
Upon the third or square type of face there will sometimes
be numerous wrinkles, but all will have a tendency to point
downwards, and instead of those at the corners of the eyes
spreading outward and upward/like the sun’s rays, they will
•all droop, the same will be found with those at the corners
nf the mouth, showing a melancholy, morbid, and perverted
nature.


CHAPTER IV.
THE HANDS.
“ The hand is the principal auxiliary of the brain, as it puts Into
active and practical form all the ideas which emanate from it.”—
“ Grains of Wisdom.”
Now in dealing with this branch of Mindology, we wish
it to be perfectly understood that we do not presume to tell
futurity, but this we can say, that hand-reading separated from
all silly lies and fraud is worthy of the student's strict and
earnest study. In the first place nature never works without
an object, so far as our reason and intelligence can grasp.
That being so, why has the human tamily been endowed with
hands so differently constructed, some with short fingers,
some with long, likewise broad palms and narrow, knotted
joints and smooth, broad nails and long, narrow and fluted.
All these different characteristics must have a scientific and
reasonable explanation, and it has been proved to be so by
practical experience and inxestigation. Regarding the chance
lines we are not in a position to refer, as we prefer to
commence at the foundation, or root, which must be in the
general formation, type, and principal lines. But we are
convinced thsre are a class of people claiming to be educated
and civilized, who always lop off the branches instead of
getting to the cause of things, as it is much easier to puzzle
the general mass of people by such a method, and it is this
class that always try and choke the honest opinion of any
earnest investigator who has studied and verified certain
truths by his observation and experience.
Even in holy writ we find the hand referred to, and also
it plays one of the piost important parts in our lives. Then,
naturally, the more perfect the hand the better the results,
for no sane person would expect a coarse, gross, mis-formed
.hand, able to manufacture a most delicate piece of machinery,
so, according to the type, texture, formation, nails, lines, &c.,
different characteristics of a persons nature can be understood.
Therefore, hand-reading, combined with all other phases of
human nature which constitute “ Mindology,” gives hope to
those who need it, teaching them to learn their faults and
failings, strengthening those wanting in self-confidence, that
they may be better able to fight the battle of life (knowing all


mea are equal, whether rich or poor, according to their
development), as each has his place in the mighty link of
Nature’s great manifestation, for though a man has talents and
gifts which are far above the average man, still he is just ,as
far behind others in the march of progress. Therefore, he
cannot be anything but humble, more so even than those
below his station of progress.
There are as many different hands as there ure different
people in the world, but we intend making this interesting
portion of Mindology a brief study, endeavouring to treat the
subject to the simple point in all its branches. First, there
are seven different types of hand which are named as follow :
the Elementary, the Square, the Spatulate, the Conic or
Artistic l , the Knotted, the Psychic, and the Mixed. Now we
will deal' with three types only, they are the Elementary, the
Mixed, aad the Psychic.
(No. r, J?ig 9) is the Elementary type, the gross material
hand, it will hawe short, thick fingers, being long, broad, and
fleshy, and is generally found on the lowest types of the
animal man, giviing strong desires, passions and animal
feelings. If the thuflib is short, thick and stumpy, then the
person will be carried away by his passions, and we find that
the case in many criminals of the brutal order, butchers, and
men in occupations requiting them to use all their brutal
propensities. (No. 2) is *Jhe Mixed, which will be a
combination, more or less, of tf\e whole seven types which is
most essential for progress. If w'e And the mixed hand with
knotted joints, it shows reason, cause and effects, material
order, harmony and arrangement, witlh good business talent
and practical mechanical ability. Watchmakers, engineers,
philosophers, investigators, teachers, public men, all will have
this type of hand with the knot well developed, and when


accompanied with a well-formed thumb, long and strong, it
shows will-power, and executive ability to carry out their
ideas and plans. (No. 3) is the psychic or the spiritual,
which is the most beautiful, but in many cases the most
useless tye. It gives a dreamy impressional nature likely to
go to extremes, one moment in the seventh heaven of delight,
and the next as miserable and melancholy as it is possible jto
be, always pandering to their whims and fancies, and all that
they do will he spasmodic. Good Pysical exercise and
development is the best medicine lor such persons, combined
with a determined mental study, cultivating the mind and
body which will modify all the evils of this particular type of
hand. When we have (No, il, the Elementary, with knotted
oints and fingers the same length as the palm, we have a
hard matter-of-fact practical man, and when also the tips of
the fingers are broad it gives energy, force, organisation, and
practical business ability, and if combined with a strong
thumb they will have capacity to command and be leaders
of men in the battle-field, explorers, captains, and sailors. If
(No. 2), the Mixed, has smooth joints, they will be guided
more by intuition or impression than by reason, but they
will 1 always more or less hit the right nail on the hfe£d, and
we would advise those people with this development'-'-to
always follow out their first impressions, guided by tptjst
experience, which will be of great advantage.
t
j “ Intuition, when connected with reason and experience, is the grea
gift, especially when entirely obeying the highest ideals an.ti truths.”—
"Grains of Wisdom.” • ' • *
Now, if (No. 3) and (No. 1) are mixed it. gives the hand
a conic appearance, when it is open and the fingers tlosed,
and the characteristics will be artistic, musical, poetic,
impressionable, sensutl, and given -to strong appetites and
passions, but if accompanied by a strong thumb they will be
able to control themselvtes to a cerfsdn degree, but if a weak,
short thumb, they will be like a cork on the ocean, for they
have no balancing power bo restrairr their'passionate nature,
yet we can confidently say ih«t by a study of themselves and
the forces of the mind i change can be wrought in
their natures, ‘


THE THUMB.
“A. man deficient of a well-formed thumb is like a ship without
a rudder.”—"Grains of Wisdom”
The Thumb is a very important member, being a great
index to a man’s general -characteristics, such as “ Will,
Reason, Love,’ which is distinctly shown in the formation,
length, and development of its particular parts, In the first
place we will divide it into three. (No. i, Fig, 10) shows the
“ Will” which is the top portion, and a person with a good
t6p thumb will be determined,, self-reliant, and firm, born
more to command than to obey, and if you wish to lead them
it must be by for dominating force would always fail.,
(No. 2) shows the “Reason,” weich, when developed, gives
“ Cause and Effect,” comparison, love of science, and literary
abilities. (No. 3) “ Love,’’ takes in the ball of the thumb, and
is partly surrounded by the, lifeline. When this portion is
fully developed it gives love, energy, force, amativeness,
strong or weak, according to formation, thickness, &c. If
(No. 1), the “ Will,” is very short, and (No. 2), the “ Reason,”
long, you will then have a person reason their own reasons
away, and would not put in action their ideas, for they lack
the Will-power or the necessary self-reliance to do so, and if
the top of the thnmb and fingers are pointed they will be
quick-tempered, irritable, and impulsive. When (No. 1), the
“ Will,” is clubbed, long and thick, it is a sure indication of a
self-willed, egotistical, and sometimes brutal nature, especially
if the whole of the thumb is short, close, to the hand and will
not bend back, with a thick base, fleshy and very much
crossed with lines. A well-balanced thumb would have (No.
1) full and nicely rounded on the top. (No. 2) would be a
little longer than (No. 1), and when looked at from the back


of the hand it will have the appearance of a lady’s wrist,
(No. 3) should be full but not too fleshy. Thumb must stand
well away from the palm when open and the first joint
should bend well back. A person with this type of thumb
could either command or obey, and will be entirely controlled
through their reasoning faculties. They will be independent
in thought or action, with great firmbess. and will be able to
adapt themselves to any circumstances or positions in which
they may be thrown, generally having a resourceful nature,
plenty of ideas and splendid energies. The thumb of an
idiot is a very mis-formed affair, and it is a scientific fact that
when a man loses his reason he loses the use of his thumb.
Also when persons take fits the thumbs turn inwards, and a
child, when it is born its thumbs are turned inwards, and
gradually as it grows in strength and power into maturity, so
does the thumb develope according to the mental, moral, and
physical conditions. These little facts should be taken notice
of, and when a child has not a well-formed thumb the parents
should commence and develope its mind by education and
moral influences which will act upon the braiprand physical
organisation, producing a more even-balanced nature,
benefitting the child in every way.
fJcSwThe Man who keeps all his undertakings within his own control
must succeed in life, and the man who alldws others to control his under-,
takings and himself also, must fail, hut the man who succeeds never steps
beyond his powers, but he who fails gets out of his depth into the waters
of muddle, chaos, and mismanagement.”—“Grains of "Wisdom.”
THE LINES.
« There are marks and lines in man’s hand which are drawn by the
action of the brain, and sealed by Nature’s cygnet.”—“Grains of Wisdom.”


The lines in the hand are a very interesting study and the
parts we shall deal with has proved to be very accurate by
our investigations, and in delineations of character,, where the
person has had the capacity according to the cranium, brain
power, temperament, &c., we have seen by the lines that he
has not had the opportunity of developing those particular
faculties.
There are three principal lines in the hand which are
named as follows (No. i), the Life-line, (No. 2), the Head,
(No. 3), the Heart. When the lines are placed as in (Fig n)
there will be a very harmonious development, success, and
ability in life, showing confidence in themselves, good
ntellectual capacity, kindly and benevolent nature, with good
health, energy, and vitality.
If (No. 2, Fig. 12) joins (No 1) at the cross, and slopes
away to the bottom part of the palm, it shows lack of confi-
dence in their abilities, sensitiveness, and great imagination.
And again, if the head-line (No. 2) starts at the circle shown
in (Fig. 12) then you have the other extreme, which is too
much confidence, impulsive, or jumping too quick at
conclusions, Such a person will make many efforts, but fail
more or Jess because of their want of stability, foresight, and
proper mental balance, and the headline being placed close
to the heart shows that they will be governed more by their
feelings than by their reason. (No. 3, Fig 12) shows the
heart line very much broken up, which indicates trouble
through affections, weak heart, &c., and when (No. 4) the
Girdle of Venus shows, it gives extreme susceptibility to pain,
love, and passions. Persons with (No. 4) in both hands will
be mediumistic, clairvoyant, and very impressionable,
especially when accompanied by the mystic cross, (No. 5).
If (No. 2), the headline, starts from the triangle, and is broken


or faint, it gives nervous susceptibility, headaches, brain
affections, worries, &0., and when (No. 1) the lifeline, is
broken, that indicates ill-health, want of vitality, force, and
energy. Persons that have the developments as shown in
the last few lines should cultivate more activity with outdoor
and physical exercise, keeping their mind from troubles and
worries as much as possible, which will work a wonderful
change in their natures, giving more pleasure to life and its
surroundings, for if you make tip your mind that all is bad,
then it will be bad; but if you think the opposite, so it will
have the opposite effect, which will be most beneficial, prolonging
life, giving good health, peace and happiness.
“■Worry is most retarding to our progress and should on no-
account he indulged in, for it wastes away the energies of life which,
are required for man’s welfare.”—“ Grains of Wisdom.”
THE MOUNTS.
There are seven different mounts upon the Hand which
show differences by their fullness or flatness as the case may
be. (No. 1, Fig 13) is the Mount of “ Venus,” and when full,
high, and well-developed give love, vitality, energy, and
amativeness. (No. 2) “Jupiter,” gives ambition, confidence,
intuition, and power of command. (No. 3) “ Saturn,” when
full, gives a tendency to morbidness, melancholy, seriousness
of thought and religious sentiments. (No. 4) “ Opollo,” gives
warmth of feeling, artistic tastes, spiritual aspirations, and an
impressionable nature. (No. 5), “ Mercury,” indicates love of
science, business capacity, and intellectual development. (No.
6), “ Mars,” shows power to combat difficulties, to stand up.


€or their rights and aggressiveness. (No. 7), “ Luna,” when
foil, is always a sure sign of imagination, poetic nature, love
■of travel, and natural progressiveness. According to the
mounts, developments, so will the above characteristics show
strong, medium, or weak.
THE NAILS.
There is also something to say of the nails which indicate
character. If they are filbert and beautifully shaped they give
artistic ability, musical talent, and an impressionable nature.
When short and broad the person will be quick, active, with good
business tact and ability. When extra short and rather narrow
towards the flesh it gives an irritable, teasing, and excitable
nature, fond of getting others out of temper if possible, also they
will be very critical in their general conclusions. If long and
broad then we have detail, intelligence, broad views, rather slow,
hut still, nevertheless, progressive.


CHAPTER V.
THE TEMPERAMENTS.
“It matters not in what'sphere a man is born, so long as he has
strength of character, good heartedn»ss, and is unselfish, for he will rise
to his position)'as one of nature’s scholars, self-reliant, firm,, just, and
tr-ne.”—rG-rains of . Wisdom.”
There, are - three -.principal temperaments,,; but many'
blendings qf the same, so we shall deal with the- three—Mental,
Motive,. and, Vital. The first.is the “Mental,” winch, is-the
temperament found in, ■ all men of. a keen- active, intellectual
combination. They will.be; rather slim, medium, height, .wiry,
anfhmqst susceptible to,-nervous diseases,...headaches, &,c.,: Such,
men are well adapted to work with.the head.as they are capable;
of great mental studies, and would make good students of
nature and nature’s laws.
The second is the “ Motive.” This temperament is found
in all men of an active and energetic nature. They will be tall
and bony, rather slow in changing their ideas, are best adapted
to work with their hands generally being engineers, fitters,
mechanics, etc., they will be subject more or less to rheumatics
and all kinds of acute diseases.
The third is the “ Vital.” The round, plump fat man is
being of medium stature,, full cheeks, fond,
of the good things of*the table, enthusiastic, genial, love of life
and company. And'^fe^/generally blood diseases,
biliousness and of the heart, brought on in many cases
by gluttony and over-indulgence.


CHAPTER VI.
CHARACTER IN MOTION.
“ Every action of Man’s Life, asleep or awake, every movement of
his body, every look upomhis facets indicative ofi his character ’.’—Grains
■of Wisdom.
We will just deal with a few phases or indications which
•.are necessary to be,understood by..students. ~When, we see
a man walking along with his head; swaying .about to all sides,
otben you will know, there is a want of stability and-balance.
If.the head is carried,erect, and steady upon the shoulders,, it
indicates firmness, self-reliance and a.well-balanced nature.
■Again,; if itisalways carried ..on the one side he sure that the
person is vain, and given, to -self-agrandisement,. narrow-
-mindedness and bigotry. When a person walks with a quick,
-firm'step, bringing the. heels down-hard.upon thepavement,
you then have firmness, intelligence, self-reliance, philosophy
iand a progressive if a qifick, short, step, ifshows
( |W.it, huipour. fondness’of, dancing, arpjisements, ancl suph a
person would no( be/ippljned for too muph study. Then we
thaye the slow, awkyyard, walk, taking up, all, the pathway,
7 yyjtfyp.o certain .step winch indicates a sloyy,. noh-progresgiye
»nat.ure, indolent, lazy, and, fn.ananyiqapes, igporanpe.j There
, k js algo much to be the hapd : shake.of a person, the
.firm, warm grip, indicates warmth, feeling,. Jbye', friendship,
and sincerity;, the haltand-half touch,, the fipger’s.,hand-
shake indicate the, opposite, and so on, accopjlipg; to. .the
.nature and characteristics which show themselves in every
actjlop of our lives..
“To deceive is impossible, it is,only yourself you deceive, whioh.
the, greatest of Human Errors.”—“ Grains of Wisdom.”


CHAPTER VII.
THE MIND.
“The Universal Mind is in reality the word, and the Word was
<God the All-Conscious, the Absolute, the Eternal.”—“Grains of
Wisdom.”
Man is an expression of the Universal Mind, having
numerous faculties, which are created by the action of the
•mind on the brain, and when he has applied those faculties in
the proper direction for truth and goodness “ He becomes a star,”
-or a faculty of the great Universal Mind, for he has become one
with the Father, all his faculties are one pointed, and just as
man’s faculties are numerous in an earthly sense, so are the
Eternal faculties in an Eternal sense, for each man that becomes
a Divine Faculty, becomes indeed a God, for his knowledge is
without beginning or end to the extent of his development.
Man should be able to understand himself to the exac*
power and consciousness of the principal which works through
and in him, and when that is understood he sees by bis develop-
ments, talents, and capacity, just where he is in the Eternal
■evolution, and from that point he places his feet on the path that
leads to Eternal knowledge. Now, to-day, man has lost sight
of the one great source of Light and Love,” and by that loss he
is in the shadows of darkness and mystery, which can only be
■obliterated by the Divine Spark (Truth) which is within all men.
There is no evil in a Universal sense, it is only a shadow created
by man himself, and the following illustrations will show the
truth of what we here put forth. If yon put a match to a gas
jet in a dark room, the result is the darkness disappears as the
light burns brighter and brighter, for that shadow has been
produced by the enclosed walls which had shut out the light of
the sun’s rays, so man has shut out the Divine Light, and closed
themselves in walls of superstition, ignorance, and bigotry, which
can only be dissipated by the light (the Truth) within all men.
Much that man suffers from to-day is the cause of his
ignorance through the teachings that have been inculcated
into his nature from childhood, and they have taken root like
a poisonous plant, killing all true ideas and knowledge which
he should inherit, keeping him in the bonds and fetters of


prejudice and fear. Why does man “ Fear ? ” It is becauae-
he cannot understand that his Godly powers can rule as king-
over all the earthly phases and conditions of life, and that he-
has lived without commencement, and will still live on without
end, gaining experience and knowledge, eventually being
absorbed in the Absolute from whence he came. Those are two
of the reasons, but there is still another, and that is, no man on
earth or in Eternity can regulate or give absolution of sins (or-
in other words) frailties, it is between man and his Creator tha
forgiveness is obtained, and he must bring his will in harmony
with the Divine Will, for all men are fallible, and will be so-
forever. The Eternal law of Cause and Effect must be obeyed
and if any digression is made be assured you will reap the-
penalty, “ For as yon Sow, so also must you Reap.” Think not
you will creep into Eternal Bliss without paying your just debts,,
for you will be sadly mistaken, and to a more terrible extent
will be your chastisement, because you have made your mind
easy that you have escaped by giving so much to the church or
to charity. Oh, what fool’s paradise you are in, and what a
dreadful awakening awaits you when the Eternal Law puts in
its just and holy claim, then you will be poor indeed. Still it is
only justice, as any man must know in the inner recesses of his-
conscjousneis that by continually committing vile actions against
himself and his fellow men he cannot be doing that which is
right, therefore must necessarily deceive himself, which is really
the greatest of all human frailties.
“Measure for measure is the Divine Law which governs the-
universe, therefore those beings with talents, faculties, and divine gifts-
will be expected to bring equal percentage to the One Divine Eternal,
who is giver and receiver of all.’’—“ Grains of Wisdom.”
POWERS OF THE MIND.
“ The brightest rays of the sun’s light is like the deed of the true-
man; and the poisonous gases confined in the bowels of the earth are-
like the bad deeds of the selfish evil man.”—“Grains of Wisdom.”
The powers of the mind are manifested in hundreds of
different ways, but we will be brief as possiple, giving just
sufficient to connect the link of unity, and stv dents will be
able to investigate for themselves in their own way, coming
to their own conclusions which will prove the truth of what


we herein state. We have fpund, in a}l ages, men who have
had an unusual development of which have been,
more or less misunderstood by the general mass of mankind,
in the time they have lived, but we with the wonderful
advancement made by the new scientists and students of
human nature, who have commenced at the bed-rock of
knowledge —the basic foundation —for hpjv impossible is it for
man to understand the heavens above, or the earth below, or
the waters beneath, before he understands- his own natuve and
unity with all the different manifestations of the Causeless
Cause, the Eternal, which.is God in t, -Majesty and Love.
These men have understood the powers of the mind and
Eternal unity which operate throughout nature, and by having
that knowledge and understanding they,.can accomplish many
wonderful things and have written marvellous works, which
have been termed miracles. By a study of nature and nature’s
laws we find no effect can possibly be in existence without
a cause, so by that knowledge the first thing that .presents
itself to man’s mind is how were those manifestations, called
miracles, caused, and how were the so-called ignorant men so
learned. We will give three illustrations which shoujd be
sufficient to make our ideas clear to any searcher for truth.
The first is simple and to the point —“ Water must find its own
level.” If a canal is cut tapping a large lake, which would carry
the water into the sea on a lower level, the lake would soon
beceme dry if not supplied by water from a still higher elevation.
So it is with the man’s powers of mind for by his knowledge
and development, he becomes a canal tapping the Universal
mind which is an Eternal Fount, and can never run dry. Like-
wise he gives through his organisation those powers and know-
ledge to the great sea of humanty, for their good and Eternal
progress, but we find earthly teachers who, instead of relieving
humanity, only trouble them by their mysteries and lies, for
they have no outlet, and so-.give the -same thing over and over
again until their teaching has become a stagnant pool of lies,
tilth, and iniquities. In them there is no progress. Therefore,
they work in total opposition to the foundation of Nature’s law
which is Progress. The second illustration is most easily
demonstrated. If we take the X rays, which is a state of light
or matter that will penetrate the grosser forms of matter, so
these Divine Men developed in Nature’s university, used the
finer and healthful magnetic forces, penetrating tbe gross or
diseased stagnant, and poisonous gases, which men of a low,
iirnoraut type are permeated with thus curing their ailments
iud diseases (when they had made thems Ives susceptible to
the life-giving forces, by being contrite and humble). The
third we shall again show natural phenomena to bring to your


mind how it operates in unity and progress. We will take
the Ether or air which surrounds this planet of ours, when
the heat is very strong in one part then the air is more rapidly
rarified causing a sudden rush of air from another direction
resulting in winds, storms, cyclones, accordingly thus accom-
plishing an equilibrium of the atmosphere, so it is with the
Thoughts of mankind, which are a reality and power, for by
men thinking bad thoughts, they produce storms and cyclones
in the minds of mankind, causing suicides, murders, plagues, and
wars, but these Divine men who work with the Eternal Father,
thinking always good thoughts, working for all that is good and
true for humanity, overcome and destroy the ill effects of the
black or bad thoughts, thus establishing an equilibrium in the
Minds of men, saving them from Eternal destruction.
It is written: “If it were not for my Select’s sake there
would be no flesh left.” -C* • r
TO STUDENTS.
Let each one of you who has gained any benefit from reading this
little work promise to an all future operations be “TRUE TO YOUR-
SELVES,” which will make you “ TRUE TO YOUR FELLOW MEN,”
trying always to enlighten and elevate those you may come in contact
with, then we are sure the -seed will-be’sown in good soil, and an
abundant harvest of “ GOOD DEERS, GOOD WORKS, and GOOD
THOUGHTS” must be the result, which will make future generations
BLESS and LOVE you, adding joys to your treasures in this and
future states of life and existence in Nature’s work and progress Libka.


1902.
WM. HO WITT Printer and Publisher,
525 Geobgk Si, Sydney.
