

,1
i
>
4 ’ 4, t
. V ?
t
<*•






MOUNT ALEXANDER
COLD FIELD
to illustrate Mineral Veins.
THO* BELT.
i 2
Lower Silurian
Tertinry
Clay & Ora rels
Crarule
Tubular Jiasalt
Cnarlz Veins
Sha/es ScSaruf stones
15
I
4s)
Co
£
£
I
S
i
s
Section A 73
Printed ltl Colors by j4..P*icL. Newcastle


MINERAL VEINS:
AN ENQUIRY INTO THEIR ORIGI
FOUNDED ON A STUDY OF
THE AURIFEROUS QUARTZ VEINS
AUSTRALIA.
THOMAS BELT.
LONDON: JOHN WE AL E, HIGH HOLBORN.
NEWCASTLE-UPON-TYNE: A, REID, 40 & 66, PILGRIM STREET.




CONTENTS.
CHAPTER I.
Introduction—Description of Mineral Veins of Victoria—
Adoption of a Theory of Origin 5
CHAPTER 11.
CHAPTER 11.
Connection between Mineral Veins and Intrusive Rocks—
Relative Age of Granitic, Porphyritic, and Mineral
Veins—Origin of Plutonic Rocks—The Production of
Fissures—Their Filling with different Groups of Mine-
rals . 15
CHAPTER 111.
CHAPTER 111.
Consideration of Objections to the Igneous Theory: —lst.
That Quartz and Gold could not exist together in a state
of Fusion, 2nd. That Fluid Matter could not be pro-
jected far into Minute Fissures. 3rd. That Quartz has
not overflown like Basalt. 4th. That Quartz Veins have
not strengthened the Fissured Rocks. sth. Chemical
Objections to the Igneous Origin of Quartz 23
CHAPTER IV.
CHAPTER IV.
Consideration of the Secondary Agencies that have affected
the Mineral Contents of Veins—Percolation of Water
charged with Carbonate of Lime—Solution and Re-
deposition of the Ores—Re-opening of the Fissures and


Introduction of Rolled Pebbles and Organic Remains—
Passage of the Waters of Hot Springs through the
Lodes—Chemical Reactions of Minerals —Action of Elec-
trical Currents 36
The Initial Forms of Ores readily produced by Heat—Their
Occurrence in Volcanic, Basaltic, and Granitic Rocks.. 36
CHAPTER V.
CHAPTER V.
Distribution of the Ores through the Lodes of the Baser
Metals—Not such as would be produced by Aqueous
Deposition —Influence of the Strata traversed on the
Production of the Ores —Similarity of Basaltic Dykes
♦
and Mineral Veins —Points of Difference explained .... 46
Conclusion 51
%


MINERAL VEINS:
AN ENQUIRY INTO THEIR ORIGIN,
FOUNDED ON A STUDY" OF THE AURIFEROUS QUARTZ
VEINS OF AUSTRALIA.
CHAPTER I.
INTRODUCTION—DESCRIPTION OF MINERAL VEINS OF VICTORIA—ADOPTION OF A
THEORY OF ORIGIN.
There are some features in the gold-bearing 1 quartz veins of
Australia that entitle them to the particular attention of the
geologist. In Europe, where mineral veins have as yet been
mostly studied, secondary influences have often obliterated or
confused the signs of their original formation. The substances
they contain are of a nature easily affected by the action of water,
and their forms have often been changed and re-arranged. The
strata they traverse contain beds of limestone, and water trickling
through from the surface has become charged with the carbonate
of lime and re-deposited it in the cavities and crevices of the lodes,
so that in what way soever the veins were originally filled, we
find them now in a changed and abnormal condition.
In the auriferous districts of Australia, on the contrary, cal-
careous rocks are of rare occurrence, and, further, the principal
contents of the veins are not affected by the action of water —
the veinstone is pure quartz, the metal native gold, and there is
every probability that we have both presented to us in the form
in which they were originally deposited.


It is evident that veins so filled will afford a much more secure
and simple basis for an investigation into the origin of mineral
veins than those lodes in which a secondary arrangement must
have taken place ; and I propose to give a description of the
auriferous lodes of Australia, and to bring my theoretical views
concerning their origin and connection with other rocks before
the scientific public.
In April, 1851, Mr. Hargreaves wrote to the Colonial Secretary
of New South Wales, stating that he had discovered gold in
certain districts of that colony, having been induced to search
for it by the resemblance the physical features of the country
bore to those of California, where he had for some time been
engaged in mining pursuits. In May the discovery had become
generally known, and great excitement prevailed in consequence
of a report that a solid piece of gold weighing thirteen ounces
had been found in auriferous drift at Summerhill Creek, A
general prospecting of the country followed, and other gold fields
were opened. Mercantile and agricultural pursuits were almost
deserted, numbers throwing up their employment and joining in
the search for the glittering metal.
The gold discoveries in New South Wales were speedily
followed and completely eclipsed by those in the sister colony of
Victoria, wdiere, for a time, the amazing riches of Ballarat,
Bendigo, and Mount Alexander, overturned and convulsed the
usual order of society, and attracted to the shores of Australia
many thousands of eager and adventurous emigrants from Europe.
The search was at first confined to the beds and banks of
creeks conveying- the watershed of ranges of highly inclined and
crystalline schists, traversed by numerous veins of quartz. The
gold was found amongst the waterworn debris of the older rocks ;
in beds of gravel, clay, and sand, that filled the bottoms of the
valleys and fringed round the hills. When this auriferous drift
was traced to its source, it was invariably found to commence in
the neighbourhood of the quartz veins cutting through the older
rocks; and specimens of gold still adhering to pieces of quartz


also pointed to the latter as their original matrix. Although,
therefore, it was well understood that the gold in the alluvial
deposits had been derived from the disintegration of the quartz
lodes, it was long before they came to be systematically worked.
For the proper separation of the gold from the quartz, extensive
machinery was wanted, and those who had the means were
deterred from entering upon the speculation by the knowledge,
generally diffused, that in Russia and South America the working
of the lodes had not proved profitable. Gradually, however, the
richness of some of the quartz veins was forced upon the attention
of the miners. At first the quartz next the surface was pounded
up with hammers, but in 1854 machinery from England had
been introduced, and improved methods of reduction and amal-
gamation adopted. Quartz mining* rapidly advanced. The
miners who had before been so indifferent, now went to the
opposite extreme, and commenced operations on almost every
quartz vein, even where no gold could be perceived in the quartz.
Most of these adventures failed, but although it was proved that
every quartz vein did not contain gold, many were found that
yielded more than the most sanguine could have expected. The
amount of gold obtained from the lodes promises soon to equal
the supply from the alluvial deposits, an immense capital being
now employed in the prosecution of quartz mining.
Having thus merely glanced at the history of the g'old dis-
coveries of Australia, I turn at once to the geology of the gold
fields, and more particularly of the quartz veins from whence the
whole of the gold has been derived.
Running down the whole length of the eastern side of the
continent of Australia is a chain of mountains that have been
aptly styled the Australian Cordillera. Nowhere having a greater
altitude than seven thousand feet, it has yet, in a remarkable
manner influenced the physical features of the continent. It
rises within a hundred miles of the coast, and all the waters that
fall on its western side are turned inland towards the basins of
the Victoria and the Murray, and have in some cases to traverse
upwards of two thousand miles before they reach the ocean.
Mount Wilson is the southern termination of the Cordillera in


Australia, but it crosses Bass’ Straits, its path being marked by
numerous islands, and in Tasmania its highest peaks reach to a
height of five thousand feet above the sea. On the continent it
throws off numerous spurs at right angles to its general course;
the most important of these, whether we regard its extent or
the metallic deposits found on its flanks, is that which, branching
off from the main chain near to the sources of the river Yarra,
extends right across the colony of Victoria, almost to its western
boundary. This minor chain has received the name of the
Victorian Great Dividing Range, the creeks and rivers on its
northern side flowing towards the Murray, whilst those to the
south find a direct course to the ocean. Everywhere the axis of
the chain is granite ; it is not continuous, but often interrupted,
and, like the main Cordillera, it has its minor branches, and here
and there, on either side, isolated mounts, also of granite, are
thrown up, as if at one time the whole country had been under-
laid by fluid matter that had burst out along one great line of
fracture, and through minor cracks and weak points in its solid
envelope. It is the auriferous quartz veins and their accompany-
ing rocks on the flanks of this minor chain, to the westward of
the 145th meridian, that I propose to describe. The districts
that I have visited and studied include the important mining
centres of Mount Alexander, Bendigo, Mount Korong, Mount
Moliagul, Maryborough, Ballarat, Mount Ararat, and the
Pyrenees.
Throughout the whole of this country, granite is seen to
underlie the upedg’ed paleozoic strata, forming everywhere the
centre of the disturbance to which they have been subjected, and
often rising in rounded hills, from two to six thousand feet above
the level of the sea, generally forming the grandest feature in the
landscape, and giving names to the adjoining goldfields ; as for
instance, Mount Alexander, Mount Moliagul, Mount Ararat, and
others. To the east of Maryborough, and on the Moorabool near
Lallal, I observed granite exposed in valleys of denudation; so that
it is likely that it underlies districts where it is not found piercing
through to the surface. It is composed of white quartz, red or
white felspar, and black or yellow mica.


In the frontispiece I have given a plan and section of the gold-
field of Mount Alexander, from which a general idea may be
obtained of the geology of the mining districts of Victoria, as I
have found the same arrangement of rocks to prevail in every
gold field that I have visited. The strata through which the
granite has hurst are analogues of the lower Silurian rocks of
Europe. Graptolites, trilobites and other typical fossils have
been found in abundance, though in the immediate neighbour-
hood of the granite their traces have been obliterated by intense
plutonic action. Near to the granitic centres the strata are
most highly indurated, and traversed by joints and planes of
cleavage. Their strike is nearly true meridional. They are com-
posed of shales and sandstones of great variety in colour and
texture, all more or less indurated. Calcareous rocks are almost
entirely absent.
Veins of quartz varying from a few inches to several yards in
width are numerous. They are most abundant where the strata
have been most shattered and disturbed, and they conform
generally with the strike of the rocks through which they pierce.
That these veins have once been rents or fissures in the rocks,
may be presumed from the fact that bosses on one side of a vein
have corresponding depressions on the opposite, and the rapid if
not immediate and sudden filling of the fissures is evident, from
the scarcity of any fragments or boulders of the including rocks.
We cannot imagine a fissure remaining long open, either at the
bottom of the sea or on land, without being filled with debris,
yet in Victoria we have veins of quartz, several feet in width,
without the admixture of any foreign substance.
When the rocks through which the veins run are soft, the
lattter are generally very irregular, varying in width from a few
inches to several feet or yards, often broken up and seldom ex-
tending far in their length. On the contrary when they traverse
a solid and compact rock they are generally regular and extend
to a considerable distance.
A very small proportion of the quartz veins are auriferous, and
different parts of the same vein will yield the most opposite


results. In most cases when an auriferous vein varies much in
thickness, the narrower parts carry the most gold; but this rule
does not apply when the vein is very thin. Then, the greatest
deposits of gold are generally found in bulges or thickenings of
the lode. Quartz is the only veinstone, and the gold is dis-
seminated through it in a nearly pure metallic state. The most
usual mineral accompanying it is iron, occurring in the solid
quartz as pyrites, or lining its fissures as peroxide, which has
probably resulted from the decomposition of the pyrites by the
infiltration of water. Copper, lead, tin, arsenic, and other mine-
rals are occasionally met with in small quantities.
A most noteworthy feature in the quartz veins of Victoria is
the Assuring of the quartz. Fig*. lis an exact representation of
a portion of the Kangaroo Reef at Gordons.
The irregular fissures cannot be confounded with the slaty
cleavage or the jointing of altered sedimentary strata, for the
quartz is divided into irregular multiform pieces. Nor is this
structure connected with any fracture or dislocation of the sur-
rounding strata. It prevails in every quartz vein and through
all parts of the veins. The partings vary from a mere crack to
several lines in thickness. When the quartz contains much iron
pyrites the cracks are generally filled with oxide of iron, which
cements together the stones, but in veins where there is little
iron, the fissures are open, and allow the quartz to be easily
worked.


At Mount Egerton, the quartz vein, thirty feet in width, is in
some parts so broken up that the miners give it the name of the
“ rotten vein,” yet there has been no movement or apparent
dislocation of the rock; indeed, the prevalence of this structure
throughout the whole of the vein discountenances the idea of such
an origin; neither can it he confounded with breccise, for each
piece fits accurately to its neighbour. There has evidently been
a shrinkage of the whole mass after its consolidation. The
passing from a pasty to a solid state, accompanied with the evo-
lution of water, or the cooling of the quartz from a very high
to a normal temperature, might induce such shrinkage. I have
seen a somewhat similar structure to prevail in trap dykes in
England.
I sought in vain for any evidence of the lodes having been
filled by the successive deposition of layers of quartz on the
walls of the fissures. The laminated structure that might then
have been expected I never met with. It is true that many
veins are divided into different bands, but there is always some
indication that these have been produced by the repeated enlarge-
ment and filling of the original fissure.
Fig, 2 •
Thus a plan, fig. 2, of the kangaroo vein before referred to,
shows three bands of quartz at A; but, as we proceed north-
wards, they separate into three distinct veins, two of which
gradually thin out. As the fissures would naturally be first
formed in the weakest strata, they would likely give way again
at the same points, if subjected to further tension, the shrinkage
of the quartz after the filling of the fissures preventing the
strengthening of the strata that might otherwise have taken place.


The fissured and open nature of the quartz allows water to
percolate freely through it, so that the veins serve as channels
for water from the surface down into the bowels of the earth; and
there are few mines in Victoria, two hundred feet in depth, that
do not contain water. That it is held in the veins themselves,
and not in the adjoining sandstones and slates, is proved by the
fact that in sinking a shaft outside the lode, it will be quite dry
until the lode is cut, or leaders from it fallen in with, when the
water will immediately pour in. Yet, although for ag’es the
water from the surface must have percolated through the veins,
there is little chang*e in them that can he traced to its action.
Where iron is abundant, its oxides fill the fissures; but the
quartz itself has effectually resisted the action of water. If pure
quartz were capable of solution by water, at normal temperatures,
the fissures must long ago have been filled with silicious sinter.
But anhydrous quartz is perfectly insoluble in pure water, and
it is probably only by the decomposition of the compound sili-
cates that soluble silica is obtained.
The “ casing” of an auriferous vein (C, fig. 1) is an amorphous
mixture of alumina, silica, oxide of iron, and more or less of the
various minerals contained in the quartz. It sometimes contains
a larger proportion of gold than the quartz itself. It appears to
me to be the altered walls of the original fissure, mixed with the
impurities thrown off from the quartz during its consolidation.
This view is in some measure confirmed by the fact, that in
every case the quartz next to the casing is more auriferous than
the interior of the vein.
Gold is distributed throughout the quartz in three different forms.
In the first, it occurs as solid grains or ramifying filaments in the
body of the quartz ; in the second, as coating cavities or fissures
in the quartz; and in the third, as loose grains in the cavities or
fissures. The first is its most usual mode of occurrence. It is then
generally most abundant in the upper side of the vein—that is,
next to C 1 in fig. 1, and in some mines only that side of the
vein is worked. It appears to have been deposited along with
the quartz. In the second form, it is found coating the faces of


some of the pieces of quartz with a thin film of gold, often so
fine as to reflect the prismatic colours. This form is seldom
found many feet below the surface. I consider it to have been
caused by metallic fumes rising through the fissures of the quartz,
and being condensed thereon; and I will show, in the sequel,
that there are reasons for supposing that such sublimations did
occur immediately after the consolidation of the superficial quartz.
Such are the main features of the occurrence and distribution
of auriferous veins and their metallic contents in Victoria. Other
points of interest will be referred to, in discussing their probable
origin.
It struck me, early in my investigations, that the generally
adopted hypothesis of the filling of mineral veins by sublimation,
first started by Necker, was not applicable to the quartz veins of
Victoria. I found them filled with a homogeneous mass of
anhydrous quartz, bearing no evidence whatever of gradual
deposition on the sides of the fissures. I could not believe that
silica, gold, iron, copper, lead, arsenic, sulphur, and other mine-
rals could be deposited from solutions without giving rise to a
single instance of a ribboned structure. In every vein I found
proof of the contraction of the quartz after consolidation, and
also that the contraction had not taken place until after the
fissures had been entirely filled. Often the nature of the
including rock rendered it essential that the fissures should be
filled immediately after their formation; for how could they
possibly remain open sufficiently long for the gradual deposition
of several feet of quartz, when passing through strata so soft
that the miner has to timber every foot of his shafts as he de-
scends 1 and what, if such were possible, has obliterated all signs
of such deposition ?
The veins I examined appeared to be in their unaltered,
normal condition, and I was forced back upon the old and now
nearly discarded theory of their having been filled with fluid
molten quartz. I well know the difficulty of reviving the
igneous theory of the origin of mineral veins, especially now


when even the igneous origin of granite is questioned bj able
mineralogists and chemists. But its solution of the phenomena
has appeared to me so conclusive, that I fully believe its adoption
only depends upon the perspicuity with which I can lay my
evidence and arguments before the scientific world.
Before, however, considering the question, how far the various
phenomena observed in the quartz veins of Victoria are explained
by the supposition that they were fissures filled by fluid molten
quartz holding intermingled metallic vapours f I will show that
mineral veins throughout the world are connected with centres
of igneous disturbance, and that the production of fissures and
their filling* up with molten and volatilized matter is a natural
and necessary consequence of plutonic action.


CHAPTER IT.
CONNECTION BETWEEN MINERAL VEINS AND INTRUSIVE ROCKS—RELATIVE AOE
OF GRANITIC. PORPHYRITIC AND MINERAL VEINS—ORIGIN OF PLUTONIC ROCKS
—THE PRODUCTION OF FISSURES—THEIR FILLING WITH DIFFERENT GROUPS
OF MINERALS.
“ The presence of metallic veins seems obviously connected with
the presence of intrusive rocks, and with the degree of meta-
morphic action which the different districts of Chili have under-
gone. Such metamorphosed areas are generally accompanied
by numerous dykes and injected masses of andesite. I have in
several places traced the metalliferous veins from the intrusive
masses into the encasing strata.” *
The connection of metalliferous veins with intrusive and me-
tamorphosed rocks prevails not only in South America but
throughout the world. Where the strata have been most con-
torted and altered by plutonic action, there we find mineral
veins most developed. So constant is this connection and the
effect it has on the physical aspect of mining districts, that
merely the external aspect of a country has been sufficient to
lead to the development of its mineral resources.
A gold seeker, wandering from one country to another, re-
members, whilst mining' in California, that in another hemisphere
he had observed rocks, similar to those amongst which he
worked; and returning, straightway discovers the gold fields of
Australia—a discovery that the geologist had foretold, reasoning
likewise from analogy—the philosopher from the mineral cha-
racter of cabinet specimens of the rocks—the miner from the
bolder features of the country.
Mr. Necker, of Geneva, has traced the connection between
mineral veins and igneous rocks, and has shown that the former
• Darwin’s Naturalists’ Voyage, p. 207.


are developed either in the immediate vicinity of the latter, or
where there is strong proof of their existencej and it has seemed
to some that the Assuring of the strata might he ascribed to the
convulsions attending the intrusion of the igneous rocks. The
labours of the Government Geological Survey have shown, how-
ever, that in the mining districts of Cornwall and Wexford not
only had the intrusive granites been consolidated before the
production of the mineral veins, hut that in both cases a remark-
able sequence of events had occurred, having at one end the in-
trusion of the granite, at the other the formation of mineral
veins. The relative age of the veins to the accompanying intru-
sive rocks is so important to the matter in hand, that I shall
briefly refer to the evidence by which it has been demonstrated.
In Wexford, upedged Silurian strata are underlaid by granite,
which is invaded by tortuous veins of a finer grained granite,
that penetrate also the adjoining metamorphosed schists. Next,
both granite and granitic veins are cut through by straight dykes
of porphyry, called elvans by the miners j and after this series of
events had occurred and not until then, were the mineral veins
produced. They not only penetrate the granite, but cut through
the granitic and porphyritic dykes. We may presume that this
series was completed during the same geological age, for the
adjoining Devonian strata are neither altered by the granite nor
penetrated by the granitic or mineral veins.
In Cornwall we are presented with an exactly parallel case to
the above. First granite, then granitic veins, then elvans, and
lastly mineral veins were developed in a regular and progressive
series. In Auvergne, M. Fournet has shown that quartz veins
containing various minerals cut through g’ranitic veins, which
penetrate the granite, and Darwin has described a similar sequence
of events in South America.
In Canada “ the gneiss in the western part of Lake Nipissing
is intersected by quartzo-felspathic veins. It was observed that
the fine grained veins cut through the coarser ones, and that both
were frequently intersected by veins of white quartz.”*
* Geo. Survey of Canada, page 141.


• “In another part of the same district the slates are cut through
hy the intrusion of compact flesh-red felspar, and this dyke is
penetrated by veins of specular iron ore. Yeins of semi-translucent
white quartz, holding yellow sulphuret of copper, intersect both,
displacing the veins of iron ore.”*
And in Australia it is most likely that the auriferous lodes will
be found to conform to the general law that obtains in other
mining countries, although this result has not yet been worked
out. In 1855, 1 traced near to Maryborough a porphyritic dyke,
running parallel with the auriferous lodes for nearly a mile, and
in New South Wales the Rev. W. B. Clarke speaks of porphyritic
elvans and bands of hornblendic rock observed at Conobolas, in
connection with lodes of copper and abundance of iron ore.
This universal connection of mineral lodes with granite and
other intrusive rocks, and the regular order of their development,
cannot be accidental, and in searching for an answer to the
question —how have mineral veins originated ? it behoves us to
consider if the circumstances attending the production of the
intrusive rocks will not furnish the answer required.
I will not embarrass the subject at present, but will leave to
the sequel the discussion of the objections that have been urg’ed
against the igneous production of the crystalline rocks, and I
proceed to show, that if we admit the igneous origin of granite,
and British geologists at least have admitted it, the conditions
under which it must have been intruded and consolidated are
those that would also give rise to rents or fissures, and fill them
with metallic and mineral substances.
Hutton was, I believe, the first to suggest that all volcanic
and plutonic rocks were sedimentary strata melted down along
with their included water,f and geologists have now generally
adopted that opinion. We know that sedimentary strata formed
at the bottom of the sea have been raised many thousand feet
above its surface, and unless we suppose that the earth is growing
larger, or that immense cavities have been formed in the interior,
we must infer that other strata have sunk down to supply their
• Geo. Survey of Canada, page 173.
f Sec Illustrations of Hutton-Playfair’s Works, vol. 1., page 34.


place, and when we notice in our own times the earth’s crust rising
in some parts, sinking in others, and trace throughout all geolo-
gical records the same oscillations of level, oscillations that have
again and again submerged broad continents, and again in the
course of ages brought them up from the depths—oscillations so
slowly moving that the whole of the human period will not fill up
a single beat; we must conclude that every portion of the earth’s
surface may in its turn sink below the sea, be covered with fresh
sediments, subjected to subterranean heat, and, finally, molten
up into a homogeneous mass. Our granites may once have been
sedimentary strata —our sedimentary strata may yet appear in
the roll of ages as granite. If molten matter has been raised
from the depths and consolidated, solid rocks must have sunk
down and been subjected to plutonic action.
It is foreign to the object of this work to enter into the dis-
cussion, whether the internal heat, which we know does exist, is
derived from an incandescent nucleus or from electrical or
chemical agencies. The great variety in the composition of our
plutonic rocks is not, however, favourable to the former hypothesis.
I must refer the reader to Sir Chas. Lyell’s celebrated Principles
of Geology for an able consideration of this question.
I think it probable that the greater part of the plutonic rocks
now exposed on the surface of the earth, have been intruded at
the bottom of the ocean. If the fused mass underlay a vast con-
tinent, no other effect might ensue than gradual oscillations of
level during the heating and refrigeration of the mass —the strata
next to the fused rocks would be metamorphosed without being
contorted or upedged. But if the molten area partly underlay
land, and partly an adjacent profound ocean, from the bottom of
which it was separated by a comparatively small thickness of
sedimentary strata, these strata would offer but a feeble resist-
ance to the expansive force of the fused mass, and might be
broken through, upedged and contorted: the mobility of the su-
perincumbent ocean allowing of, and its pressure assisting in,
the folding of the strata. Only shattered strata can be perma-
nently upheaved; areas sufficiently strong to withstand the ex-
pansive force will press the fused matter towards the strata


already broken through, and the successive determination of the
molten mass towards lines of least resistance may cause the up-
heaval of mountain chains. The plutonic rocks developed at the
bottom of the sea, are more likely to be brought to the surface
and exposed than those formed beneath dry land; for the fused
mass will have occasioned opposite effects in the two cases. In
the one it will have broken up, shattered and loosened the strata
lying immediately above it; in the other, it will have indurated
and crystallized its rocky envelope.
When we attempt to follow in imagination a mass of sedi-
mentary strata sinking down during the changes of the earth’s
crust, being gradually subjected to plutonic action, molten up,
and finally, after the lapse of ages, re-consolidated into a crystal-
line mass, we are met on the threshold of the enquiry, by the
difficulty of reasoning on the changes to which matter, solid and
molten, might be liable under the enormous pressure of the
superincumbent strata or profound ocean. We have no reason,
however, to expect more than a modification of the laws that
regulate the consolidation and crystallization of masses of molten
matter on the surface.
According to Mr, Nasmyth, all substances with which we are
familiar are, when molten, more dense or specifically heavier
than the same substances unmolten. He tested this law in the
case of lead, silver, copper, iron, zinc, tin, antimony, bismuth,
glass, pitch, resin, wax, and tallow, and also with the alloys of
metals; and in every instance found it to hold good. It has
long been known that water expands near the point of congela-
tion ; but it was supposed to be an exception to a general law,
according to which all matter contracted in volume as it de-
creased in temperature. In Mr. Nasmyth’s experiments, pieces
of solid metal at a normal temperature floated in the same metal
molten, so that the expansion at or near the point of congelation
must be greater than the subsequent contraction during the
cooling of the metal, from the point of fusion to the normal
temperature ; or, in other words, the metals would permanently
occupy more space solid than when fluid.
These experiments are not, however, in unison with those of


Deville, who states that granite suffers a reduction of 10 per
cent, in passing from an elastic to a solid state; and Bischoff
says, he has proved that basalt contracts at the moment of con-
gelation, so that a vein of basalt, one foot in width, would leave
a fissure on each side 2‘6 lines thick. Merely premising that
the latter experiments are attended with much greater difficulty,
and are more liable to error than the former, we will consider,
what would be the behaviour of an immense basin of molten
matter, derived from the fusion of sedimentary strata, during the
progress of its refrigeration and consolidation.
Such a basin of molten matter would commence to solidify
from the surface downwards, and, according to Nasmyth, the
first thin crust formed would expand at the moment of consoli-
dation, and then contract gradually as it parted with more heat;
but it would permanently occupy more space than it did when
fluid. As the consolidation progressed, the upper solid parts
would be contracting, whilst other portions below would be
expanding as they congealed, and the operation of these two
forces could not fail to rend the solid crust, and to fill the fissures
so formed with fluid matter from below; for, even if the super-
ficial layers were free to dilate upwards, it is evident that those
subsequently solidifying would he confined by the rigidity of the
first, and that the pressure of the expansion would be exerted
dowmvards upon the still fluid nucleus until the force became
sufficient to rend open the solid envelope, and any stratified
rocks lying above it. The fissures so formed would he injected
with molten matter from the compressed fluid mass below. Or
if we suppose, with Deville and Bischoff, that granite would
suffer a considerable reduction in volume in passing from an
elastic to a solid state, a series of rents would, in like manner,
mark the progress of refrigeration produced by the contraction
of the mass ; and as long as any part of the mass below remained
fluid, it might he forced into the openings of the fractured rocks
by the elasticity of its contained gases, or by the immense pres-
sure of the superincumbent strata; so that it matters not for our
argument whether the molten matter would contract or expand
at the moment of congelation,—in either case we are furnished


with a power capable of rending’ open the solid rock •in either
case we are able to account for the production and filling of
fissures in connection with the intrusion of plutonic rocks. We
have yet to explain the g’reat dissimilarity in the composition of
the veins formed at different periods.
If we fuse together two minerals of different specific gravities,
they will combine in certain proportions according to the value
of their chemical equivalents. If the heavier mineral is in excess
the excess will sink to the bottom. Trachytic lavas are mostly
older than basaltic, and as the component parts of trachyte are
specifically lighter than basalt, Mr, Scrope has suggested that if
a mass of rock were fused in the bowels of the earth, the lighter
portions would rise to the surface and be first irrupted,* and if
an area of sedimentary rocks, containing a great excess of silica,
were molten up under circumstances favourable to the production
of granite, it is probable that the formation of the compound
silicates and the grouping with them of part of the silica in
excess, as crystalline quartz would ensue, and that the remaining
silica would sink to the bottom of the fused mass, along with
any metals spread, perhaps, in imperceptible particles throughout
the rocks now brought under plutonic action. The specific
gravity of granite is 2’3—27, of quartz 2*65—2’8, and though
the difference is not great, it is sufficient, if time is allowed, to
cause the partial separation supposed. The specific gravities of
other minerals th»t usually appear as vein stones in England are
calc spar 2’6—2’B, fluor spar, or fluate of lime, 3T—3’2, and
heavy spar, or sulphate of barytes, 4*44.
During the heating of the rocks the metals, from their great
specific gravity, would sink to the bottom, and when the heat
became so intense as to volatilize them, they would be diffused
throughout, and might be entangled amongst the quartz like
the fixed air in water. Thus the first formed veins would differ
little in composition from the great mass of granite, whilst those
subsequently produced would vary more and more, until, at last,
Lyell’s Elements of Geology, page 400.


mineral veins filled from the residual matter at the bottom of
the plutonic basin would close the series.
There may not in every district be a gradual passage from the
granitic to the quartzose veins, for between each rupturing of
the crust will intervene a period of repose, during which a fresh
internal layer of matter will be consolidated, and each set of
fissures will extend to a lower zone than the preceding ones.
But even on this point we are not left without some evidence.
At Forth Just, near Cape Cornwall, granitic and quartzose
veins are largely developed. Some of these veins resemble the
most perfectly crystallized granite, consisting of crystals of
quartz, felspar, and mica, others abound in quartz at the expense
of the other constituents, and there are examples of intermediate
gradations up to those filled with pure quartz. Mr. John
Phillips, in his excellent memoir on the Malvern Hills, has given
an example of a felspathic vein, in the centre of which were
irregular masses of quartz, “ the excess of that substance beyond
what was absorbed in the trisilicate compound of felspar.”*
I have thus shown that the connection between intrusive
rocks and mineral veins is intelligible, if we admit the igneous
origin of the former. We then perceive that quartz veins are as
naturally produced by granitic irruptions, as the acorn by the
oak, or the swing of the pendulum by the laws of gravitation
and inertia.
As the refiner sweeps up the dust from the •floor of the gold-
smith’s shop, fuses the mass and obtains from the bottom of his
crucible a button of glittering metal, so nature in her laboratory
melts up a vast area of strata; gathers together the metals dis-
seminated through them, and finally projects into receptacles
accessible to man, those substances so requisite for his comfort
and necessities. In the economy of nature, nothing is wasted,
nothing lost: buried coins and chalices, relics of man’s avarice
or misfortune, may, in the roll of ages (by the operation of
existing agencies, now acting), be again brought to the surface,
distributed through a quartz vein.
* Memoirs of Geological Survey of Great Britain, Vol. 11., Part 1, page 43.


CHAPTER 111.
CONSIDERATION OF OBJECTIONS TO THE IGNEOUS THEORY :—lst. THAT QUARTZ
AND GOLD COULD NOT EXIST TOGETHER IN A STATE OF FUSION. 2nd. THAT
FLUID MATTER COULD NOT BE PROJECTED FAR INTO MINUTE FISSURES. 3rd.
THAT QUARTZ HAS NOT OVERFLOWN LIKE BASALT. 4th. THAT QUARTZ VEINS
HAVE NOT STRENGTHENED THE FISSURED ROCKS. sth. CHEMICAL OBJECTIONS
TO THE IGNEOUS ORIGIN OF QUARTZ.
For the present confining 1 ourselves to the quartz veins of Vic-
toria, we will next enquire, how far the various phenomena there
presented to us, are explained by the theory, that the veins are
fissures which have been filled from below with fluid molten
quartz, holding intermingled metallic vapours. The entire com-
pleteness with which the theory satisfies this enquiry may per-
haps be best brought out, by an investigation of the various
objections that have been raised against it.
And first, it has been urged that quartz and gold could not
exist together in a state of fusion, on account of the great heat
required to fuse the former, which would be more than sufficient
to volatilize any contained metals. From the preceding remarks,
it will have been gathered that this is not only admitted, but
that it is precisely on these conditions that the igneous theory of
quartz veins is based. It is only by supposing that the gold was
diffused through the molten quartz in a gaseous form that we can
account for its present position in the lodes, for if simply in a
state of fusion, its specific gravity would have prevented its dis-
tribution. The more sudden cooling of the molten matter, in
the higher and the narrower parts of the fissures, explains the
concentration of the metals in special parts of the lodes, for
where rapidly cooled, the quartz would not only retain its own
metallic contents, but its fissures and cavities would offer recep-
tacles for the condensation of the vapours arising from the still
fluid matter below. Large lumps or nuggets of gold are only


now found in the alluvial detritus formed from the denudation of
the upper parts of the lodes, and, according- to this theory, such
nug-g-ets would likely be formed at the top of the lode, for any
fumes rising- through the heated quartz would there be condensed,
and would find space for their collection into lumps.
In South America it has long been known that the upper parts
of auriferous lodes are much richer than the lower. Many mines,
once worked with great profit near the surface, are now aban-
doned as worthless. In Victoria, although a few mines might
be pointed out, such as the Mariners’ Reef on Maryborough, and
Poverty Reef at Sandy Creek, where rich deposits of ore have
been found at a depth of from two to four hundred feet, yet the
general experience of mining enterprize must lead to the same
conclusion. The opposite opinion which was long held and en-
couraged in Victoria, led to the most mischievous results.
Thousands of pounds were expended on lodes that had been rich
at the surface, in the expectation that as rich or richer deposits
would be met with at a greater depth. In nearly every instance
the adventurers met with disappointment.
Instances are innumerable of veins of
quartz, highly auriferous in their upper
parts, containing none of the precious metal
below. I have represented in figure 3,
a form of lode, which has received the
name of a “Floating Reef.” Here a
promising vein will be discovered near
the surface, some feet in width, but be-
low it will suddenly contract to a few
inches. The thin continuation of the
vein has been followed to the depth of
Fig. 3.
two hundred feet, without changing its character.
I am aware that Mr. Selwyn, the excellent Victorian govern
ment geologist, considers that although the lodes are likely to
decrease in richness as they descend, yet that they may be ex-
pected to prove remunerative to vastly greater depths than those
to which they have yet been worked. He urges that the rich


deposits found in some lodes, at a depth of from two to four
hundred feet below the surface, when considered in connection
with the fact of the immense denudation to which they have
been subjected, point to the very gradual deterioration of their
metallic contents as they descend. Now, it is impossible to
calculate the amount of the degradation or wearing down of the
ancient surface of the upedged strata, but it has possibly been
some thousands of feet; and if it could be shown that the lodes
must have reached to the ancient surface and suffered denudation
with it, I would admit that the gold could not have been con-
centrated in their upper parts. But what proof have we that
the lodes ever extended right through the upedged strata ? It
may be said that quartz pebbles are mixed throughout the drift,
and that gold is found at the very bottom of the alluvial beds ,*
but it is evident that the valleys and troughs in which these
alluvial beds lie must have been scooped out before the auriferous
drift was deposited in them; in other words, that the principal
degradation of the surface was accomplished before the deposi-
tion of the auriferous drift commenced. The improbability of
the molten quartz ever reaching to the top of the fissures is
manifest, if it was projected from a molten mass at a vast
depth into rents between comparatively cool rocks, and, may
be, had to contend against water rushing in from the tops of
the fissures. Under such conditions the quartz veins would stop
short at various heights, according to the peculiar circumstances
of each case. The upper parts of the fissured strata would be
fractured, but not indurated by the injection of molten quartz,
and would rapidly be worn down, until the hardened rocks below,
with their metallic veins, were uncovered, like as the slicing of
an apple will at length expose the core; so that, although the
Silurian strata may have lost thousands, and many of the lodes
hundreds of feet, others may have been barely uncovered.
The value of the teachings of science was never more verified
than when, in the reaction that followed a long neglect of the
quartz veins of Victoria, the colonists, disregarding the well
known fact, that throughout the world, auriferous lodes were


only rich near to the surface, a fact that had been insisted upon
by one of the most eminent of European geologists, hastily
adopted the opinion; based on two or three exceptional cases of
veins continuing to yield gold to a depth of from two to four
hundred feet; that, like copper and lead lodes, they would not
only continue, hut in some cases might even he expected to get
richer as they descended, and acting on this opinion, commenced
extensive works on nearly every lode that had proved rich near
to the surface, for the prosecution of deep mining. Let the
mining experience of 1859-60 answer whether science was not
right. Not a tithe of the mining companies formed in 1859 are
now in existence, and yet most of them were formed to work
veins from which large quantities of gold had been obtained
within a hundred feet from the surface. As the miner pro-
ceeded downwards, the quartz became gradually poorer, until, at
a depth of from one hundred to two hundred and fifty feet, the
veins ceased to be remunerative. There are not six quartz veins
in the colony of Victoria, in which a sufficient quantity of gold
has been obtained, at a depth of four hundred feet, to pay for
the cost of extraction, whilst on every gold field instances could
be pointed to of mines, once worked with great profit, now
deserted on account of the poverty of the deeper parts of the
lodes. Hence we may safely conclude that the same rule holds
good in Australia, as Sir Roderick Murchison has shown to pre-
vail in other auriferous countries —that the working of gold-
bearing quartz veins is not remunerative excepting near to the
surface, the ore being concentrated in the upper parts of the
lodes.
M. Bischoff affirms that it is impossible that granitic veins
could have been injected from a fluid mass, on account of the
thinness of many of the veins. For example : at the Rehberger
Graben there are veins of fine grained granite which become as
thin as writing paper. He describes some experiments with
molten lead, tin, and zinc, poured into channels cut in sandstone
slabs. The greatest depth to which the molten metals penetrated
in a channel 4 lines broad and 2*5 lines thick was eight feet.


M. Bischoff deems that these experiments prove beyond doubt
the impossibility of the filling- of minute fissures with molten
matter.* In reality they have a very small bearing on the
question, for three most essential conditions were not fulfilled in
his experiments—'immense pressure, intense heat, and a high
temperature of the rocks, into the fissures of which the molten
matter was forced. If wood is sunk to a great depth in the
ocean it will not afterwards float, its finest pores being filled
with water forced into them ; and Mr. Sorby’s experiments show
that granite has probably crystallized under a pressure of at least
six thousand feet of superincumbent strata, so that we have
ample force for the injection of the minutest fissures with molten
matter. We may also reasonably suppose that the heat developed
in the bowels of the earth is infinitely greater than any attained
in our laboratories, and the fissured strata would be heated not
only by the proximity of the molten mass, but also from having
been exposed in a lesser degree to the influence of the agencies
that caused the complete fusion of the rocks beneath them. The
non-vicinage of masses of plutonic rocks should not he assumed
from their non-appearance at the surface. I have shown that in
Victoria, valleys of denudation have in some places exposed
granite underlying the metamorphosed schists in places where
its existence might have been disputed excepting for such acci-
dental evidence.
Other objectors have urged against the igneous theory that
quartz has not overflown and formed sheets and round topped
masses like basalt. I have already shown the improbability of
the fluid matter ever reaching to the surface of the fractured
rocks. Mineral veins have been filled from greater depths than
trappean dykes. Their present exposure is due to the great
denudation to which the rocks above them have been subjected,
M. Bischoff considers it an objection to the igneous theory that
veins have been filled to so great a distance; the present
Bischoff’s Chem. and Phys. Geology, English edition, vol. 111., page 52.


objectors think that the fluid quartz should not only have filled
the fissures, but have overflown. Quartz veins belong- to the
same series as granitic and porphyritic dykes, and in this respect,
as in others, they agree with them.
There are many instances proving that the fissures must have
been opened again and again at the same place, and re-filled
with fresh depositions of vein stones, as in figure 2, and this
feature, which is common to all mineral veins, has been advanced
as an argument against their having been filled in the same
manner as basaltic dykes, as such dykes, it is said, “ can rarely
fail to strengthen the rocks at the points where before they were
weakest, and if the upheaving force is again exerted in the same
direction, the crust of the earth will give way anywhere than
where the first rents were produced.”* My examination of basal-
tic dykes has led me to an opposite conclusion to that of the
eminent geologist I have quoted. Though trappean dykes have
indurated, they have seldom strengthened the rocks through
which they pass, their contraction during cooling having left open
fissures at their sides, and there are numerous instances where,
like mineral veins, they have been re-opened. Where the fractured
and uplifted strata were supported only by the injected basalt,
as the latter contracted in cooling, the former would settle down
against it; but wherever the fissured rocks were prevented from
coming together again by the falling into the rents of fragments
of solid rock, or by bosses on the sides of the fissures being
brought opposite each other by the faulting of the strata, the
contraction of the basalt would leave open cracks between it and
the walls of the rent, and if further strained the crust would be
re-opened at the same places as before. The celebrated dyke
called “Lady O’Cahan’s Bridge,” in Londonderry, is six feet
nine inches broad, formed of several layers.f In the Newcastle
Museum, Nicholas Wood, Esq., has deposited an instructive
section, accompanied by specimens, of the whin dyke and adjoin-
♦ Lyell’s Man. of Geology, pag*e 494.
t Portlock’s Report on the Geology of Londonderry, page 106.


ing strata, at Lawson Main Colliery, (fig. 4,) where we have
repeated widenings and re-fillings of the same fissure strictly
analogous with the re-opening of metalliferous veins.
Fig. 4,
Section of whin dyke , and adjoining strata, at Lawson
Main Colliery , near
Newcastle-on-Tyne . By Nicholas Wood, Esq ,
<3
£
8
I
jus
SL
! ? i
« _
Sandstone .
I
h\
'I
-S
Charred coal.
-S |«
I o
J fli
«/
If ! e
* .§
M «
i' i
8
1
(« &
I 4
Charred coal .
jo
I
f
\)
£
<M CO
lO CO t»
The total width of this dyke is thirty-three feet. The small
fissures, 1 and 7, filled with fragmentary sandstone and basalt,
have probably resulted from the shrinkage of the basalt after
consolidation. A dyke twelve feet in width, cutting through
the cliffs at Tynemouth, has a soft decomposed core in the centre,
seven inches wide. The Cockfield dyke, which changes the coal
next to it to cinder, is separated from the horizontal strata on
each side of it by a fissure six inches in width, filled with clay.
Yon Buch states that in Teneriffe, a basaltic dyke, twelve fathoms
thick, traverses beds of red capilli and pumice stone, and has at
each side a layer of scoriaceous fragments a foot thick; and I
noticed in Anglesea that, in the trap veins near Beaumaris, there
was a clear divisional line between the igneous and the sedimen-
tary rocks.
Even in the narrowest quartz veins of Victoria there is
evidence of their shrinkage. Thus, at the Bolinda mine, twenty
miles to the north of Melbourne, a narrow vein of auriferous
quartz traverses compact metamorphosed sandstones (fig. 5).
The average width of this vein is only half an inch, yet it has


been traced for upwards of a mile in length, and at the deepest
part of the workings it continues unchanged. It is an instance
of the great regularity of veins when passing through hard
compact rock. On its eastern side the quartz is divided from the
sandstone by a thin parting of clay, and in an open shaft the
clay has been washed out by the running down of rain water
from the surface, leaving an open fissure or crack, about an
eighth of an inch thick, sufficient to show that, as in the basaltic
dykes I have noticed, the fissured rock had not been strengthened
by the injection of the quartz. The weakest points remained still
where the strata had been first rent, and there they would again
give way if further strained.
The Bolinda quartz mine is one of many that might be ad-
duced to prove that the fissures have not been filled by the gra-
dual deposition of minerals on their sides. We have no ribboned
CJ
-m3 -m 3
OO O Q
g % a a
O c« 3, H 04
OCQ <y O
Fig. 5.
structure, no line of division in the
centre to mark where the two sides
came in contact when the vein was
filled. The quartz is fissured, but
the fissures are transverse, not lon-
gitudinal, and in this small vein
pieces of the quartz extend right
across the vein. Such a structure
is not uncommon in bodies that
have been suddenly cooled, and
which contract greatly in cooling.
It is characteristic of basalt, both in
dykes and in tabular masses. It was this peculiar Assuring
of the quartz that first led me to adopt the igneous theory.
No other has explained it; with no other is it even recon-
cileable; whilst its identity with the structure of natural
veins, that have undoubtedly been filled with fluid matter,
is prima facie evidence that it originated in a similar manner.
Professor Erman, in a paper on the structural divisions of ice,
observed on Lake Baikal, in Siberia, mentions the dull noise
emitted from the ice cracking under the increasing severity of the


frost. He describes one of the fissures produced:—“ It ran
from where we were stopping-, to the north-east and south-west,
with little deviation, to the horizon. It had throughout a uniform
width of four inches, and was filled with new ice, which gave it
the look of a vein or dyke in rock. What added to this resem-
blance was, that the ice filling the crack was always much
whiter than the surrounding —it was in fact traversed by fine
cracks or fiaws, in a very irregular and remarkable manner .”
Eminent continental chemists and mineralogists have lately
contended with great vigour that quartz can only have been
produced in the wet way. They have shown that pure silica
exists in nature in two distinct varieties —as crystalline silica,
having a density of 2-6, and as amorphous silica, with a density
of 2-2. To the first belongs the crystalline quartz of granite,
flint, agate, and the silicious woods; to the latter, opal, infuso-
rial silica, &c* All attempts to obtain crystalline quartz
from simple fusion have been unsuccessful. Quartz has several
times been fused, and has invariably become amorphous and
vitreous, with a density of 2-2. It is argued that crystalline
quartz can, therefore, only have been produced from watery solu-
tions, or by the influence of water. The presence in granite of
minerals, whose points of fusion are extremely different, and
whose reciprocal penetration leaves no doubt of their simulta-
neous formation, furnishes another argument against the igneous
theory. To the first objection, it may be answered that the
inability of chemists to obtain crystalline quartz in their labora-
tories is a negative argument of little value. All attempts to
obtain crystalline felspar, by fusing its component parts, have
been equally unsuccessful ; yet, that it might be so formed, was
accidentally proved by finding it in the remains of a copper fur-
nace at Sangershausen. This very argument was used sixty
years ago, against the igneous origin of basalt; for when fused,
it was found, on cooling, to become vitreous or glassy, and so
the neptunists affirmed that crystalline basalt could not have
* See M. C. Sainte Claire Deville, Annalla de Chimie, Vol. LIX., p. 74.


resulted from fusion, but Sir James Hall’s experiments proved that
the difference was entirely due to the rapidity with which the
artificially fused rock had been cooled.
M. de Senarmont and M. Daubree obtained crystalline silica,
the former by heating- in a closed vessel a solution of silicic acid
in water acidulated by carbonic or hydrochloric acid, to 300°,
the latter by the action of vapour of water on chloride of silicium
at red heat, and also in distinct crystals by the action of water
upon g-lass with an elevated temperature and hig-h pressure.
Now, it is most probable that water assisted in the fusion and
crystallization of granite. It is found in the cavities of quartz
crystals, and has been detected in granitic micas. The igneous
theory admits the presence of water in the sedimentary rocks
melted down. It is impossible that it could have been absent,
and admitting its presence overthrows at once the chemical
objections. Mr. Sorby finds both liquid and stony cavities in
granitic crystals, and concludes that they have resulted from
fusion with the presence of water. The name of aqueo-igneous
has been proposed for this theory, but as water is only one of
the elements brought under the action of heat, and its influence,
though of consequence, is entirely subsidiary to the latter, I see
no good reason for the adoption of the name.
That chemists, with the limited heat, pressure, and time at
their command, have been unable to obtain various substances,
in a crystalline state, from fusion, ought never to have been put
forth as a proof of the impossibility of their natural production
in like manner. Such an argument would apply with equal
force against the igneous origin of many lavas, such as those of
Arso, in the island of Ischia, full of crystals of felspar, or the
micaceous lavas of Vesuvius, or the trachytic lavas of Ischia,
Monte Nuovo, Campi Flegrsei, and Iceland, throughout which
are disseminated crystals of quartz.*
As to the simultaneous solidification of minerals differing
greatly in their points of fusion, and especially the crystallization
Biechoff’s Chem. and Phys. Geology, English edition, vol. 11l , page 50.


of quartz after the more fusible felspar, it may be remarked that
the theory of the superfusion of the quartz first started by M,
Fournet, and which even Bischoff states his experiments have
tended to confirm, satisfactorily accounts for the apparent
anomaly. M. Deville considers, that as Mr. Faraday has been
able to retard the solidification of sulphur 100° below its point
of fusion, there is nothing’ improbable in the assumption that
quartz might be kept in a soft state down to 2000° Fah. Here
again modern lavas come to our assistance, for in those of
Vesuvius we often find crystals of leucite deposited on nuclei of
the more fusible augite. When we are able to produce in our
laboratories, or to explain the formation of the minerals consoli-
dated almost under our eyes, we will be better prepared to
grapple with the difficulties attending the investigation of the
plutonic rocks.
Instead of classifying the varieties of silica according to their
specific gravity, which has been shown to be affected by the rate
of solidification, they may be much more naturally divided into
two groups, characterized by the presence or absence of water in
their composition. The hydrous group will contain the varieties
of opal, flint, hyalite, and silicious sinter —the anhydrous, the
quartz of granite, of some lavas, and of mineral veins.
There are many examples of the formation of silica belonging
to both divisions, where there is also evidence of the agency by
which they have been developed, and we will now consider the
evidence so available. To commence with the first, or hydrous
group. —To it belongs the whole of the silicious deposits, from
hot springs; and I know not of a single instance of anhydrous
quartz being so produced; which is remarkable, when consi-
dered in connection with the opinion of some eminent geologists,
that the contents of mineral veins have been deposited from hot
springs. The circular reservoirs of the geysers of Iceland are
coated with silicious sinter, containing six per cent, of water.
Duffenbach and Hooker found in New Zealand a large number
of volcanic springs, of a high temperature, which deposited stony


substances like chalcedony. Thomson analysed these deposits,
and found they consisted of:—
Silica 77-35
Alumina ----- 9'70
Peroxide of Iron ----- 3‘72
Lime ------ 1-64
Water ------ 7-66
The hot springs of the Valle das Fernas, in the island of St,
Michael, precipitate vast quantities of silicious sinter, which
also encrusts the sides of crevices in a crater at Lancerote, one of
the Canary Islands, through which crevices Von Buch, in 1815,
found hot vapours ascending.* It is also deposited on the walls
of fissures, through which issue steam at Monte Vico, in the
island of Ischia, and at St. Calogero, in the largest of the
Lapari islands. All these are hydrates of silica, containing from
3 to 8 per cent, of water, and no instance is known of anhydrous
quartz having been so deposited. A red heat is required to
expel the water from hydrate of silica, and in some cases the
heat of intrusive rocks has changed the hydrates into crystalline
quartz, as in the Appenines, where the secondary strata, accord-
ing to Lyell, are in many places altered by the intrusion of trap-
pean and plutonic rocks. Limestones, containing nodules of
flints, have been changed into a granular marble, in which there
are no flints; but in their place silicious matter distributed
through the mass in prisms of quartz. f I know of no more in-
structive example than this of the production of quartz by heat,
and of the hydrate of silica, from solution occurring in the same
strata. The sandstones in Skye are converted into solid quartz,
in several places where they come in contact with veins or masses
of trap.! Crystals of quartz are found in undoubted igneous
rocks, as in many trachytic lavas.|| M. C. Deville found consi-
derable tracts in Guadaloupe and Martinique, covered with a
* Lyell’s Principles of Geology, page 438.
f Lyell’s Elements of Geology, page 483.
t Ibid. 383. (I Ante. 32.


reddish earthy crust, full of innumerable fragments of transpa-
rent quartz, derived from the decomposition of the volcanic
rocks.* These examples are sufficient to show that there is both
negative and direct evidence in favour of the igneous origin of
quartz.
The philosophers who contend against the agency of heat in
the production of crystalline rocks, must be reminded that even
their watery solutions owe their fluidity to the agent they
contemn, for, strictly speaking, water is hut fused ice. The
plutonist has as good reason to call his theory a chemical one as
he who contends that crystallization must have taken place in
the wet way, for no one will deny that chemical forces are con-
tinually brought into action, and intensified by the agency of
heat. The most that the advocates of watery solutions can
prove, and what their opponents may readily admit, is, that
during the liquefaction and crystallization of the plutonic rocks
water was present, and that, since their consolidation, changes
may have taken place, through the percolation of the same
element. Those who, taking their stand behind the admitted
difficulty of judging of the effects upon rocks of intense heat
under great pressure, ask us to explain the crystallization of
quartz after the more fusible felspar, and remain unsatisfied
when they are shown that quartz retains its plasticity far below
its point of fusion, may well be asked to explain the non-pro-
duction of anhydrous silica from silicious springs, and the
presence of crystalline quartz in igneous rocks.
* M. C. Deville Phil. Mag., Yol. XX., page 183.


CHAPTER IV.
CONSIDERATION OF THE SECONDARY AGENCIES THAT HAVE AFFECTED THE MINE-
RAL CONTENTS OF VEINS—PERCOLATION OF WATER CHARGED WITH CARBONATE
OF LIME—SOLUTION AND RE-DEPOSITION OF THE ORES—EE-OPENING OF THE
FISSURES AND INTRODUCTION OF ROLLED PEBBLES AND ORGANIC REMAINS—
PASSAGE OF THE WATERS OF HOT SPRINGS THROUGH THE LODES—CHEMICAL
REACTIONS OF MINERALS—ACTION OF ELECTRICAL CURRENTS.
THE INITIAL FORMS OF ORES READILY PRODUCED BY HEAT—THEIR OCCUR-
RENCE IN VOLCANIC, BASALTIC, AND GRANITIC ROCKS.
Are, then, the quartz veins of Australia of igneous origin ? and
have the mineral lodes throughout the world, containing the
baser metals, been filled in an entirely different manner ? If we
merely take into consideration the present arrangement and
composition of the minerals in many of the latter, the answer to
the second question would assuredly be in the affirmative —for in
them we have the true ribboned structure 5 hydrated minerals
are not uncommon, and many of the phenomena observed could
not be produced by igneous agency alone. But in these
lodes, may not the minerals have been affected and re-arranged,
by the influence of secondary forces coming into operation
after the original filling up of the fissures ? Are there not
changes now in progress in many mines, occasioned by the
action of the atmosphere, the percolation of water charged with
carbonic acid, or carbonate of lime, and by other agencies, che-
mical and mechanical, which may, in the course of ages, have
caused a great, if not an entire departure from the original type ?
And is it not on the veins that contain minerals most liable to
these secondary agencies, that have been founded the strongest
arguments against the igneous theory ? These are the questions
that must be answered in speculating on the original filling of
lodes, and we will first seek to eliminate from the discussion, the
phenomena fairly traceable to the action of secondary influences.
The percolation of water containing carbonate of lime in solu-


tion is a fruitful source of change in subterranean rocks. In
the excavations at Herculaneum, the formation of stalactite is
continually going on, in the underground galleries ; from the
trickling through of water charged with carbonate of lime ,• and
Lyell remarks that such mineral waters must, in the course of
ages, create great changes in rocks, filling the pores of lavas
with calcareous spar.*. At the veins of Courgoul and Saurier,
S.E. of Monto Bores, ferruginous and calcareous deposits are
now taking place, in open spaces in these mines, and thus the
broken rubbish has been cemented together ag’ain by compact
calciferous hydrates of iron, the mammillated surfaces of which
have sometimes the appearance of the hydrates of iron of older
dates, f
If the narrow auriferous quartz vein at the Belinda mine,
figure 5, had cut through limestone rocks instead of traversing’
sandstones, and a succession of earthquakes had widened the
fissure at long intervals, the crevices so formed might have been
filled with carbonate of lime, and the mine would have presented
a narrow strip of auriferous quartz, between bands of calc spar,
and the presence of the latter would have been pointed to, as a
proof of the aqueous deposition of the whole. But we must
bring our vein into still closer relation with the conditions that
prevail in many of the mining districts of Europe, to understand
the changes that may there have taken place. If, instead of
gold, it contained sulphuret of copper, or other ores soluble in
water containing atmospheric air—the metals might be taken up
and re-deposited along with the calc spar, and all signs of their
igneous origin obliterated. There are few of the baser metals
and their ores that are not liable to alteration by the percolation
through the lodes of mineral waters. On the surface, water is
continually wearing down, and modifying the inequalities pro-
duced by subterranean forces; and below, in the crust of the
earth, it is not less actively employed in effacing the traces of
igneous action.
* Lyell’s Principles of Geology, page 391.
t Fourier, Etudes sur les Depots Metalliferous, &c., page 543.


All the cupreous salts are soluble. Some Roman coins, found
a few years ago, at Aberystwyth, Cardiganshire, were changed
on the surface to the red oxide of copper, beautifully crystallized,
by the action of water containing common air and carbonic acid.
In some of the coins the further change into the carbonate had
been effected, so as to present the usual mammillated character
of malachite.* Ure gives instances of the deposition of
crystals of red copper in the hollow of the leg of a bronze horse,
that had lain in the earth some centuries, and in an old copper
statue found in the Soane in 1760. The metallic sulphides are
sparingly soluble in pure water, hut all surface water contains
atmospheric air, and by its action the soluble sulphates are
formed. The waters of copper lodes generally contain sulphate
of copper ; that of the Paris mines, in Anglesey, is so impreg-
nated with it, that the water is collected in reservoirs, into which
are thrown scraps of iron, to precipitate the copper. Large
heaps of refuse from the old workings lie on the surface, and
rain water passing through these, takes up so much sulphate of
copper that it also is economised.
The silicates of zinc, copper, nickel, and silver, are soluble in
water.
The carbonic acid contained in water from the surface is a
notable element in furthering chemical changes in lodes. Sul-
phuret of lead is often converted into the carbonate. The
underground refuse of the old workings of the Derbyshire mines
is still turned over for the ores it may contain. Some of these
workings extend back to about seventeen hundred years. Small
pieces of sulphuret of lead are found wholly changed into the
carbonate, and the larger pieces are thickly coated with the
same substance. Where there has been most water the alteration
is most marked and complete.!
At the Orange Grove Gold Mine, in Virginia, the associated
minerals are sulphurets, oxides, and hydrates of iron. The sul-
phurets are auriferous, and are encrusted with the hydrates.
♦ De la Beebe’s Geo Observer, page 69U
t Ibid, page 692.


In all cases the sulphides are the initial forms of the compound
metals, and I shall show in the sequel that they are readily pro-
duced by heat, and that there are also many instances of their
natural igneous production.
Even organic remains may often be brought into contact with
igneous veins. In Cornwall, and in all mining districts, we find
fissures often filled with clay, crossing and displacing the mineral
lodes ; and at Cwm Ystwyth the principal lodes are cut off by a
vein filled with disintegrated slate and with water-worn pebbles.
If, instead of across, this fissure had opened alongside of the
lode of lead ore, we might have found the metallic deposits
associated with water-worn pebbles, and the remains of animal
or vegetable life.
There are other agencies that have tended to complicate the
inquiry into the origin of the baser metals. Many of the lodes
must have served as channels for the passage of heated waters
and vapours from the interior to the surface of the earth.
Mineral springs are observed to burst forth along great lines of
fracture, and hot springs are abundant in regions of recent
igneous disturbance.* The fact of these springs containing
minerals in solution has been adduced as favouring the sublima-
tion theory of Necker, who argues that lodes have been filled by
the deposition of substances on the sides of the fissures through
which such waters have passed. But it is only along lines of
fracture and upheaval that springs can find a passage from great
depths through sedimentary strata, and, instead of depositing
minerals in the lodes, it is more likely that, from the lodes
through which they pass, they obtain the substances with which
they are impregnated when they reach the surface, even as the
rain water, after passing through the heaps of cupriferous refuse
at the Paris Mount, is charged with sulphate of copper.f The
quartz veins of Victoria now serve as channels for the convey-
ance of water from the surface into the bowels of the earth ; and
if the converse were the case, the springs could not fail to bring
• Xyell’s Man. of Elementary Geology, p. 496.
t Ante, p. 38.


to the surface, any soluble substance met with in the lodes. The
passage of heated vapours or waters through the veins, although
they may not bring into them minerals, yet must often greatly
alter those already there; and one of the most important of
these changes may have been the formation of the many varieties
of pseudomorphous crystalline quartz. I have shown that
anhydrous quartz is not deposited by natural springs holding
silex in solution j and, on the other hand, we cannot suppose the
crystals of quartz on fiuor spar to have been formed from molten
silex ,* but it is quite possible that, during the passage of super-
heated vapours through the veins, conditions may have obtained,
exactly similar to those under which M. Daubree was able
artificially to produce crystalline quartz.*
The decomposition of one mineral may be effected by the
chemical action of another present in the same vein : as in the
Derbyshire lead mines, where the oxide and sulphate of zinc,
when accompanying the crystals of carbonate of lime, some-
times decompose them and form other compounds.f
We are indebted to Mr. Robert Were Fox, for many valuable
experiments shewing the part that electricity may have played
in modifying and re-arranging the contents of mineral veins. He
found by examination that water taken from different mines, and
from different parts of the same mine, contained various salts in
solution, sufficient for the excitation of electrical action when
the native sulphuret and bi-sulphuret of copper were plunged
into it, and the voltaic circuit completed. He proved by experi-
ment that, if the bi-sulphuret of copper be placed in a cell con-
taining’ a solution of sulphate of copper, and the sulphuret of
copper in a cell containing acidulated water, the two cells being-
separated by clay and the circuit completed by copper wire: after
some weeks, the bi-sulphuret will be covered by a thin coating
of the sulphuret. “ When zinc or iron was substituted for the
sulphuret of copper in the water cell, the bi-sulphuret of copper
became coated with a considerable crust of the sulphuret, or
* Ante, p. 32.
t White Watson, Geol. of Derbyshire, p. 51.


rather it was changed into the latter to a greater or less depth,
according to the duration of the experiment, in consequence of
the abstraction of a portion of the sulphur, and probably, also,
of some of the iron it contained; and beautiful crystals of pure
copper were abundantly deposited on it, and likewise, in some
instances, red oxide of copper,”
“When chloride of tin in solution is placed in the voltaic
circuit, part of the tin is deposited in a metallic state at the
negative pole, and part at the positive one, in the state of per-
oxide, such as it occurs in our mines.*
M. Becquerel obtained the oxides of copper and zinc, and the
sulphurets of copper, silver, tin, lead, iron, &c., in crystalline
forms by means of slow secondary electrical action, induced by
feeble currents acting for a long time.f Hence there can be no
doubt that most important changes have taken place, and are
now in progress in mineral veins, by electrical currents being
established between different parts of the same lode (or even
between contiguous lodes, separated by porous moist rock) ; by
means of which a partial interchange of their contents may
ensue, and various pseudomorphs may be produced.
When we have summed up the various changes in lodes, due
to mechanical, chemical, and electrical agencies, we will find
that it is possible that every feature of the original filling of some
lodes may have been obliterated, that the arrangement and forms
of their contained minerals may be of aqueous origin, and yet
that the introduction of the metals may have been an igneous
injection. The inquirer must, therefore, turn to those mines
whose contents are least liable to change, and to the initial forms
of the minerals when they can be determined.
Having separated from the enquiry the facts due to secondary
agencies, we find the residual phenomena strictly such as might
be produced by igneous action. The sulphides are shown to be
the oldest compounds of metals, and they are not only easily
* Report of the Cornwall Polytechnic Society for 1836.
t Becquerel Traite de I’JSlectrioite, tom, hi., p. 298.


produced artificially by the action of fire, but they are continually
met with in undoubted igneous rocks, and some of them are
even now being formed in active volcanoes.
The facility with which lead combines with sulphur under a
high temperature, was well shown during’ the g-reat fire and ex-
plosion at Gateshead, in 1854. Large quantities of pig lead and
sulphur were stored in one of the warehouses consumed, and
after the fire, the lead was found changed into the sulphuret, so
that it had to be re-smelted. Pieces that I examined varied
little from natural galena, excepting in being more porous; they
differed only, as the cellular scoria on the surface of a lava
stream differs from the more solid rock, in the lower parts of the
same bed. Lead is largely produced in connection with trappean
and volcanic rocks. In Derbyshire, Cumberland, and Northum-
berland,, the lodes occur in districts where the strata are shattered
and upheaved, and where trap rocks are largely developed.
There are specimens in the Whitby Museum of galena and
sulphate of barytes found at Egton Bridge, in the casing
of the great basaltic dyke, running through Yorkshire.
In the islands of Coll and Isla, Jameson found veins of galena,
in connection with basaltic veins, in the latter island accompanied
by small quanties of copper pyrites.* Lead is also found in
slips or faults traversing the coal measures, as at Measham.
Oxides of lead occur in the ravines of two volcanoes in Mexico.f
Professor Palmieri, in a letter to M. Ch. St. Claire, says that
since May, 1858, Vesuvius has not ceased to throw up lava, and
that the crevices in the crater have yielded ammoniacal salts, and
salts of lead and copper in abundance.
Zinc occurs in similar situations as lead: it is associated with
it in Derbyshire. Mr. Hausman notices the crystallization of
oxide of zinc in iron blast furnaces, and the sulphurets of zinc
and lead in the walls of lead, silver, and copper furnaces,! At
Colling’wood, in Victoria, native zinc was found embedded in
tabular basalt.
•Jameson’s Geo, of the Scot. Isles, pages 25 and 152.
tßischoff’s Chem. and Phys. Geology, Eng. ed., vol. 3, p, 533.
t Jameson’s Ed. New Phil. Jour., January, 1838.


Copper pyrites in small quantities was found associated with
galena near a fault in the Hutton Seam at Haswell Colliery.
Splendid specimens of crystalline native copper are obtained
from anygdaloidal trap in Siberia, and in the island of Nalsoe in
Faroe. Cotta describes a fissure in the bed of a reverberatory
furnace filled with galena and copper pyrites. By the lava of
1794, copper coins and brass candlesticks, at Torre del Greco,
were converted into crystals of the red oxide of copper, and in
other cases the zinc and copper have separately formed translu-
cent blende and octohedrons of red copper.* A mass of
magnetic trap rock, north of White Fish River, in Canada,
contains magnetic iron ore, titaniferous iron ore, and
iron pyrites, with two to three per cent, of copper, and one per
cent, of nickel.f At Keweenan Point and Isle Royale, native
silver occurs disseminated through trap rocks, accompanied by
native copper.!
We seldom find the metals pure : they mostly occur as alloys.
Thus, the native gold of Australia always contains an appre-
ciable quantity of silver and other metals. An analysis gave—
Gold 99 283
Silver ----- '437
Iron - - - ‘203
Copper ----- ‘069
Bismuth - - - - ‘OOB
And it is a remarkable fact, and one unaccounted for by the
opponents of the igneous theory, that only heat is known to
produce the alloys.
The examples I have given of the occurrence of the ores of
metals in igneous rocks, which might easily be multiplied, are
sufficient to prove the possibility of their igneous production,
and they form the most conclusive answer that can be given to
those who assert that such production is u inconsistent with
analogy, and contrary to facts.”§ I may also add the following
* lire’s Geology, p. 127.
f Geo. Survey of Canada, p. 189.
i Bischoff Chem. and Phys. Geology, Eng. ed., vol. 111., p. 536.
§ E. Hopkins’ Geology and Magnetism, p. 20.


instances of tlie occurrence of metals in the plutonic rocks, as
another proof of the strict analogy of metalliferous veins with
granitic, syenitic, and porphyritic dykes.
I will here remind the reader that the metals are, at first.
supposed to he disseminated throughout a mass of sedimentary
strata, and that, through the movements of the earth’s crust,
these stratified rocks are carried deep below the surface and
exposed to great heat, by which they are gradually molten up.
That during the melting of the rocks, the metals whilst in a
liquid state sink to the bottom of the mass, and the intensity of
the heat increasing’ are vapourized and distributed through the
lower parts of the viscid molten matter ; and are finally carried
towards the surface by being- projected into fissures produced
during the cooling of the plutonic basin. Now, whilst we
assume the retention of the greater part of the metallic vapours
in the lower region of the viscid mass, they must also have been
distributed though more sparingly, throughout the whole of the
molten matter, and hence, in nearly all granitic rocks, some
traces of metals have been found, more especially near their con-
tact with stratified formations where they have been concentrated
by the more sudden cooling of the molten rocks in such parts.
Lyell, in his excellent “ Manual,” gives a section of the junction
of granite with oolite strata in the Alps, near Champoleon, and
says : —“ It is an important circumstance, that near the point of
contact, both the granite and the secondary rocks become metal-
liferous, and contain nests and small veins of blende, galena,
iron, and copper pyrites.* Mr, Clark has described a peculiar
variety of felspathic granite in New South Wales, as being per-
meated by small particles of gold ; and in Russia, the syenite of
the Peschauka mines, near Bogoslofsk, is also impregnated with
gold.f In Mexico, the once celebrated gold mine of Guadalupe
y Calvo was in porphyry,! and in Transylvania, the auriferous
matrix is sometimes a soft white argillaceous porphyry.§
* Lyell’s Man. of El. Geol., p. 456.
t Murchison’s Siluria, p. 481.
t Ibid, p. 488.
§ Jour. Geol. Soc., Lon., 1852, pt. 2., p. 8.


In Servia, ores of copper, lead, and iron, are worked in a vein
of syenitic porphyry traversing- mica schist in the mountain
ranges of Staritza and Pomont Valalb; and below the village
of Kuczama is a deserted mine, which was worked for argen-
tiferous lead ore, in porphyry, traversing syenite and lime-
stone.* Nearer home, we have at Tomnadashaw, on the
south side of Loch Tay, ores of silver, copper, and iron, with
molybdenum, in dykes of porphyry.f And at Polgooth, in
Cornwall, a porphyritic elvan contains nests of the bi-sulphuret
of copper, apparently isolated and varying from several tons to
a few ounces in weighty
♦ Jour. Geol. Soc. Lon., 1853, pt. 2, p. 14.
t C. G. Thost Kept. Br. Ass , 1859, p. 125.
t De la Beche, Geol. Kept, on Cornwall, Devon, and W. Somerset, p. 182.


CHAPTER V.
DISTRIBUTION OF THE ORES THROUGH THE LODES OF THE BASER METALS—NOT
SUCH AS WOULD BE PRODUCED BY AQUEOUS DEPOSITION—INFLUENCE OF THE
STRATA TRAVERSED ON THE PRODUCTION OF THE ORES—SIMILARITY OF BASAL-
TIC DYKES AND MINERAL VEINS—POINTS OF DIFFERENCE EXPLAINED.
CONCLUSION.
Most of the remarks made in the third chapter, when consider-
ing- the objections raised against the igneous origin of quartz
veins are equally applicable to mineral veins in general; and so
also some of the points now to be discussed, though appertaining
more especially to lodes of the baser metals, have reference to all
metallic deposits in fissures. They have been kept apart, be-
cause I wished the argument, in the first place, to he confined
to the quartz veins of Victoria, of which I had had most expe-
rience, and where the evidence of their original formation was
less obscured and more conclusive.
Throughout the lodes of the baser metals, the ores are seldom
distributed with any regularity. In some parts they nearly fill
the fissure; in others, though the veins may not have decreased
in width, they are found filled with veinstones, the ores either
absent or ramifying through the gangue in thin strings. Nor do
their position in the lodes favour the opinion of their gradual
deposition on the sides of a fissure. W. W. Smyth, in a memoir
on the mining districts of Cardiganshire and Montgomeryshire,
after enumerating the minerals filling- the veins, says, u Such
being the substances that fill the veins, we find them very rarely
disposed, with so great regularity, as to lead to the conclusion
that the deposition of any one substance ceased before that of
another commenced, as may sometimes be inferred elsewhere;
on the contrary, they occur in strings or spots, sometimes parallel
for small distances, but more commonly ramifying irregularly.


and often forming- a perfect network.”* This description ap-
plies with exactness to the lodes of lead in Northumberland, and
of copper in North Wales, that I have personally inspected.
Some mines show a true banded structure, caused by the succes-
sive widening- and filling- of the fissures; in others, a pseudo-
banded structure is presented in particular parts; but when fol-
lowed upwards or downwards, the bands thin out or ramify
irregularly. Special parts in many lodes of the baser metals
show a true banded structure, with evidence of aqueous deposi-
tion. These have probably been crevices or cavities in the ori-
ginal lode into which minerals have been broug-ht and deposited,
by the trickling- down of water charg-ed with the soluble sub-
stances throug-h which it had passed; but it is as illogical to
argue from the ribboned arrangement of the minerals in such
parts (as shown in sections in many geological works), that the
whole vein has been filled by aqueous agency, as it would be for
a writer, speculating on the formation of a mountain chain, to
adduce the stratiform deposits at its base, composed of its debris,
as a proof that the whole chain was of alluvial origin. I believe
it will yet be found necessary to classify the contents of lodes,
like the sedimentary rocks, into primary, secondary, and tertiary
groups; not, however, according to their geological age, but
according to the changes they have undergone since their ori-
ginal deposition in the veins.
In Derbyshire, veins containing ores of lead, copper and zinc,
traverse alternate layers of limestone and greenstone. The ores
are plentiful in the limestone, but in the greenstone they are
reduced to mere threads. In South Wales, when the lodes pass
from a hard to a soft bedding rock, their mineral contents de-
crease; and in Cornwall, the veins are richest in some mines
when the including rocks are soft, whilst in others the reverse is
the case. The varying heat conducting powers of the strata
traversed by the lodes may have caused the development of the
ores in particular parts, for where the including rock was a good
• Memoirs of the Geological Survey, Yol. 11., Part 2, page 662.


conductor, the molten matter would be more suddenly consoli-
dated, and its metallic fumes retained. Nor does it militate
against this supposition that in some mines the veins are richest
in the soft, in others, in the hard ground, for the rocks which,
when dry, would be the worst conductors of heat, would, when
moist, conduct it most readily. Solid and hard stone is a better
conductor of heat than soft and porous j hut the latter absorbs
water with greater facility than the former, and heat will be more
quickly transmitted through the moist soft rock, than through
the solid, hut dry.
The “ riders” in mines, which are fragments of the including
rocks that have fallen into the lodes, and are generally surrounded
with ore, have also caused the metallic richness of such parts,
by their refrigerating effect. And the occurrence of a few in-
stances in Victoria of auriferous quartz, at a depth of four
hundred feet, contrary to the general law of the concentration of
the gold in the superficial parts of lodes, I also ascribe to special
circumstances, that have in these instances caused the sudden
consolidation of the quartz in the parts where the gold is found.
The similarity of origin, claimed for basaltic dykes and
mineral veins, could not be upheld if there were not many features
common to both; or if the points in which they varied could not
he explained by a reference to the different conditions under
which the same general principle had operated. Both mineral
veins and basaltic dykes have been formed by the filling of fis-
sures with molten matter, forced up from a liquid mass below ; but
the source of the veins was much deeper seated than that of the
dykes, and whilst the latter often overflowed, the former seldom
or never reached the surface.* 1 In the one case the molten matter
had a more powerful effect upon the walls of the fissures than in
the other, for the dykes must often have been the channels
through which was poured a continued stream of molten matter,
so that the sides of the rent were brought into contact with suc-
cessive portions of incandescent lava.f The veins, on the contrary,
* Ante. 25.
f Lydl’s Man. of El. Geo. p. 384.


were simply the receptacles for single portions of fused rock,
and the same degree of alteration should not he expected in
rocks intersected by mineral veins as in those cut through
by trappean dykes; but it has been too readily assumed by the
opponents of the igneous theory, that lodes have not altered the
strata through which they pass. On the contrary, their indu-
rating effect is patent in the physical configuration of every
mining district. We do not find metallic lodes in a flat country,
but where the surface has been worn into a series of hollows and
hills and not in the hollows but on the hills do we find the
lodes. In Australia, the upedged paleozoic strata, traversed by
quartz veins, presents on the surface a continued series of ridges
and troughs. Standing on Mount Alexander, and looking down
towards the valley of the Loddon, the view is that of a dark,
tumultuous sea, transformed to stone, with its crested waves and
its deep troughs. The ranges rise tier behind tier, decreasing
in height as they recede from the granitic centre ; and when we
descend and examine them in detail, we find that each crest has,
as it were, a back bone of quartz veins (see frontispiece), which
conform with the strike and dip of the strata they traverse.
Subsequent to the production of the quartz veins, the whole
country had been subjected to great denudation, and valleys
were scooped out in the softer strata, leaving the harder rocks,
with the quartz veins, in ridges. Now, it would be fatal to the
theory of fissures if it could be shown that the rocks had not given
way at their weakest parts when wrenched asunder. The parts
where the ridges attest the present hardness and solidity of the
strata, must have been their weakest points at the time the rents
were formed •, and to what shall we attribute the strengthening
and indurating of the rocks at these places, but to the produc-
tion of the quartz veins ? If their intrusion had not hardened
the strata through which they passed, we would have found
them now, not on the summits and sides of the ranges, but in
the bottoms of the valleys. The same argument may be applied
to the hills and mountains of Europe. The very idea of a
mountainous country is associated with that of metallic deposits.


Take, for instance, the highest of the British mountains. Snow-
don contains veins of copper ore, but, instead of producing them,
it is rather the intrusion of the mineral and other igneous dykes
that has produced the mountain, by enabling it to resist the
denudation that has worn down the surrounding rocks, and left
it standing, a monument to the indurating powers of mineral
veins.
The proof of the hardening of the strata next to lodes, need
not he left to inductive reasoning, however strong, but can be
established by direct testimony. Thus we have the authority
of Phillips, that in Cornwall, in some instances, the walls of a
vein are highly indurated in the same manner as the strata in
contact with trap rocks in the north of England, and that he
has witnessed the fact of limestone, usually a blue or grey cri-
noidal rock, burnt, as the miners term it, that is, converted into
a brown granular crystalline rock.* In Victoria, the induration
of the strata next to the quartz veins is well known to the
miners, and in driving cross-cuts to intersect lodes, the hard-
ening of the rocks is usually considered an indication of the
vicinity of a vein. Professor Ansted has given an instructive
instance of the metamorphism of the rocks adjoining the Cobre
and Santiago de Cuba copper lodes, the analogy of which,
with the effects of many trappean rocks, is very great.
Fig. 6.
The Cobre and Santiago Copper Lodes at Santiago de Cuba. —Professor
Ansted , Pro . Geol. Soc., Vol. XII., p. 148.
Here the conglomerate C is changed into greenstone porphyry,
in the vicinity of the copper lodes, and is quarried for building
* Phillips’ Manual of Geology, pag*e 547.


purposes. This is another instance of the metamorphosed rocks
being- left in huge bosses, whilst the surrounding unchanged
strata were worn down by denuding agencies, even as we see
rocky isles and bold headlands braving the fury of the ocean,
and find that the nuclei of resistance are basaltic or granitic
dykes.
There are many mines where no perceptible alteration of the
adjoining rocks can be perceived, but this is the case with trap-
pean dykes of the most recent date. Lyell says that “in many
of the dykes which intersect the tuffs and lavas of Etna, there
is scarcely any perceptible alteration affected by heat, on the
edges of the horizontal beds in contact with the vertical and
more crystalline masses.”* Some experiments of Mr. Nasmyth
have shown the very slight conductibility of a thin layer of dry
sand and clay. He poured eight tons of molten iron into a
cauldron of iron one-fourth of an inch thick, lined with sand
and clay five-eighths of an inch thick. Twenty minutes after-
wards the hand might be applied, without inconvenience, to the
outside of the cauldron; and, after forty minutes, there was not
sufficient heat to singe writing paper.f We must not, therefore,
be surprised, if a thin casing be the only evidence of metamor-
phism caused by some narrow lodes, or even if within a short
distance of others organic remains should be found unaltered by
heat.
CONCLUSION.
I have thus shown that the production of fissures, and their
injection with fused matter, are the natural results of plutonic
action, and that the igneous theory is sufficient to account for
the primary forms and the arrangement of minerals in lodes.
The following is a brief summary of the conclusions arrived at: —
Ist. That the auriferous quartz veins of Australia are filled
• Lyell Prin. of Geol., p. 401.
f Ibid,, p. 413.


with minerals, which are not liable to he decomposed by the
action of water, and which apparently now exist in the same
state as they were originally deposited.
2nd. That in these veins the distribution of the gold, and
the structure and arrangement of the quartz, are explained by the
theory that they are fissures that have been filled with molten
silica, containing entangled metallic vapours.
3rd. That mineral veins are constantly found in connection
with igneous rocks, and that in some cases, as in Cornwall and
Wicklow, a regular sequence of events have followed the intru-
sion of molten granite, by which granitic, porphyritic, and mine-
ral veins have been successively formed.
4th. That the fusion of rocks in the bowels of the earth, and
their subsequent consolidation, supply the requisite conditions
for the rending open of the superincumbent rocks, and the
filling of the rents so formed with fluid matter, varying in com-
position according to the comparative depth from which it has
been projected.
sth. That the objections raised against the igneous theory of
quartz veins and of granite are not tenable, being based either
on a misapprehension of the theory, on a misinterpretation of
observed facts, on experiments where the natural conditions were
not fulfilled, or on the obscurity in which certain delicate che-
mical questions are still involved.
6th. That the investigation of the origin of the lodes of the
baser metals in Europe has been impeded by the confusion arising
from the mixing up of the results due to secondary agencies,
with those referrible to original deposition.
7th. That mineral veins and trappean dykes have many fea-
tures in common, and that the points in which they vary may
be explained by a reference to the different conditions under
which the igneous matter has been developed.
Printed by A. Reid, Pilgrim Street, Newcastle.




