

Minembah Estate
Valley of the Hunter
NEW SOUTH WALES


Minembah Estate
IN THE HUNTER RIVER
VALLEY
The Property of SYLVESTER BROWNE, Esq.
SYDNEY:
Printed by W. E. SMITH LIMITED, 22 to 30 Bridge Street
191 1


Looking North-East, Hunter River Flats in distance


Minembah House
Looking across Stud Paddocks towards Baroona


House Dam and Crossbred Sheep


FOR PRIVATE SALE
Minembah Estate
12,511 Acres Freehold
CIT'TT A TTOM This Estate is situated in the Hunter River Valley, New South Wales. The house is five miles
from the town of Singleton, i| miles from Whittingham Railway Station, and four miles from
Minembah Railway Station, which is situated on the north-east corner of the Estate. All three stations are on the
main trunk line between Sydney and Brisbane. Two expresses run each way daily, besides other passenger and stock
and goods trains. Whittingham Railway Station is a trucking station, and is 146 miles from Sydney by the present
route via Newcastle, but when the line (which must come) goes from Minembah or Singleton direct to Gosford or
Morrisett, at least 30 miles will be saved, bringing the Estate within 116 miles of Sydney.
TM 42 Paddocks, large and small. 5 Silos, capacity about 600 tons.
11 lri\W V Cl 1CIN I D 27 Dajns 5 Sheep-drafting Yards.
2 Wells, 17ft. deep; good stock water.
DWELLING HOUSE with outhouses and stabling.
C A OTGf LJf'JTTCp One mile from dwelling, having implement sheds, bull paddocks, cattle yards, shearing
shed with Wolseley machines for eight shearers.
A AT pV Comfortable 6-room Cottage, bails, yards and styes, separating plant, milking from 100 to 140 cows
with four L. K. G. machines, driven by oil-engine. The cows originally came from the well-known
Bodalla Company’s Dairy Herd, formed 60 years ago by T. S. Mort, Esq. All on the dairy now are Bodalla bred, or
their descendants by pure pedigree sires — Shorthorn, Guernsey and Holstein, imported or from the Government Stud
Farm at Berry.
AGRICULTURE f res growing uccrne .
100 Acres growing Corn, on shares
400 Acres fallowed for Wheat, on shares.
ATER -^ lK *' es an d Immigrants Creeks, which run right through the Estate. Permanent water and good
fishing in summer. Mudies Creek runs most of the year. The water is ample and permanent,
and if a couple of weirs were put in the creeks the flats could be irrigated at little cost.
TiPPCRTPT'TOM OP rOTTMTPY The very best grazing for cattle, sheep, or horses. Prince Foote was
UEiOCilVir 1 1U1N Uf LUUHIKI bred and reared on the stud Estate of Mr . j ohn Brown,
which adjoins Minembah. Every acre when cleared for the plough is agricultural, and Lucerne and Corn grow
on the flats and rolling downs equally well. Last year, for the first time, the owner put in 150 acres of wheat, getting
a good return, one sample of 100 bags of Bobs selling at 4s to 4s 3d for seed. There are some 6,000 to 7,000 acres
cleared and Yankee grubbed for the plough, on different blocks. There is no stony land, gravelly, or waste ground on
the Estate. Ample fencing timber and some good mill logs for further improvements.
r PLip PT P) \4 p CT 1 p A T) I® one °f finest country houses in Australia, well situated, about 400 ft.
above sea level, with charming views all round. The house cost originally
and is this day as sound and in as good condition as when first built. All modern plumbing, thorough drainage,
septic tank ; hot and cold water throughout. A 60,000 gallon tank (underground) for rain-water, which is raised by
windmill to a level reticulating the whole house. The home paddocks, about 2,000 acres, adjoin the Estates of Mr.
A. A. Dangar of Baroona, and Mr. R. H. Dangar of N'eotsfield.
C'T'ptp'T/' At present there are about 14,000 sheep—merino and crossbred —and 500 cattle, dairy herd, which can
be t a k en w hoie or part at a valuation.
ANALYSIS OF SOIL by the Agricultural Department, Sydney:
PERCENTAGES OF FERTILISING SUBSTANCES
GENERAL VALUE
Nitrogen : .168 per cent.—Good; equivalent to 2,281 lb. (equal to .204 per cent. Ammonia) in an acre of
soil 6 inches deep. Soluble in Hydrochloric Acid, specific gravity i.r.
Lime (C,(D) ; .730 per cent.—Very Good ; equivalent to 9,911 lb. in an acre of soil 6 inches deep.
Potash (KjO) ; .132 per cent.—Satisfactory ; equivalent to 1,7921b. in an acre of soil 6 inches deep.
Phosphoric Acid (P 2 0 3 ): .115 percent. —Satisfactory; equivalent to 1,561 lb. in an acre of soi!6inches deep.
R A IMP A T T The avera 8 e ann ual rainfall recorded at Singleton, only five miles from Minembah, is 29.54
I\iVlIN rY\.LiL/ i nc]les for a period of 26 years.
PR TCP AND TFRMS Price for tlle who,e I2 o rl a cres, £6 per acre
rlNlLiE. 1 UAI U Price for the house and about 2,000 acres £25,000
Terms can be arranged for part cash, and balance at 5 per cent.
For further information or offer to inspect the property, apply to —
WILKINSON £r LAVENDER Limited, SYDNEY


View looking South from Balcony of House


Silos at Minembah Farmhouse
Milking Shorthorns in Stud Paddock ; Homestead in distance


MINEMBAH —Showing Flats and Farm Buildings on Mudies Creek, one mile from Homestead, looking South-East
