

T f - 1 >l ■ !
j|jy| %
USING AND MINERAL
STATISTICS.
R. BROUGH SMYTH, F.G.S., London;
HONORARY CORRESPONDING MEMBER OP THE SOCIETY OF ARTS AND
SCIENCES OF UTRECHT;
SECRETARY OP MINES FOR THE COLONY OP VICTORIA;
&c., &c.
FACIES NON OMNIBUS UNA,
NEC DIVERSA TAMEN; QUALEM DECET ESSE SOROBUM.
glHlmtnu:
BLUNDELL & FORD, COMMERCIAL & GENERAL PRINTERS.
Steam Printing Works, 51 and 53 Flinders Lane West.


‘


ISSgOa.
co vo« uL
Mb ' s
MINING AND MINERAL
STATISTICS.
R. BROUGH SMYTH, F.G.S., London;
HONORARY CORRESPONDING MEMBER OF THE SOCIETY OF ARTS AND
SCIENCES OF UTRECHT;
SECRETARY FOR MINES FOR THE COLONY OF VICTORIA;
&c., &c.
- FACIES NON OMNIBUS UNA,
NEC DIVE USA TAKEN; QUALEM DECET ESSE SOROEUM.
IMclboumc:
BLUNDELL & FORD, PRINTERS, 51 & 53 FLINDERS LANE WEST.
1 8 6 6.


BLUNDELL AND FORD,
COMMERCIAL AND GENERAL PRINTERS,
FLINDERS LANE WEST.


MINING AND MINERAL STATISTICS.
In the prefatory Essay on Mining in the Colony of Victoria, which was
published with the Catalogue of the Victorian Exhibition in 1861, it was
stated that the labours of the miners were confined almost exclusively to
the working of, and the extraction of gold from, the auriferous rocks. It
was observed that the extraordinary richness of the goldfields, absorbing
nearly all the available labour in the country, had to some extent prevented
the exploration of the deposits of tin, antimony, iron ore, and coal; and
a hope was expressed that in a -short time other minerals and metals as
well as gold would attract the attention of the capitalist, and that new
fields would be explored and fresh sources of industry opened up to the
intelligent miner, which would afford employment to a great number of
persons. This hope has not been disappointed. Whilst the yield of gold
per annum has not fallen off, if we make proper allowance for the reduction
in the number of miners, other minerals have been eagerly sought for, and
large areas of country have been prospected, and in some parts thoroughly
explored.
From St. Arnaud we have obtained silver ; from Beechworth and the
heads of the Latrobe, fresh supplies of tin; from the Elver Thomson, in
Gipps Land, copper; from Heathcote, large quantities of antimony ; from
Cape Paterson, coal; from Lai Lai, near Ballarat, lignite ; from Omeo,
bismuth; from Yackandandah, molybdenite; from Pleasant Creek, the
Upper Yarra, and other localities, manganese ; from Bulla and Dunolly,
clays suitable for the manufacture of the finer kinds of porcelain; from
Castlemaine, magnesite; from Maldon, Castlemaine, and Meredith, roofing
slates ; and from Beechworth, diamonds.
If all these are not fully represented in the tables, it is not less certain
that they occur; and that in due time they will add greatly to the wealth
of the country. Gold mining, however, continues to be profitable ; and it
is not probable that experienced miners will forsake the search for gold,
in order to engage in other mining operations which do not offer sure
prospects of success, so long as rich quartz reefs and auriferous alluvions
lie neglected.


The following estimate of the value of the metals and minerals raised in
the colony, from the first discovery of the goldfields to the 31st December,
1865, has been compiled with care :
Gold Quantity raised from the date of the first discovery
to the 31st December, 1865, 30,993,071 ozs.,
ft.™ 2£J •SSSfer £123,992,28*
Silver Ore raised, 5880 tons. J ’
Produce of Silver from Ore smelted,lo,l6s l-sth ozs.,
@ ss. 6d. per oz ’ p 795
Tin Ore exported, 2380| tons, @ £75 per ton, £178,556
Tin exported—say 3 tons 12 cwt. 3 qrs.
12 lbs., @ £l4O per ton gp)
179
Antimony.... Ore raised, 2114 tons and 26 lbs., at £l2 per ton 25’368
Coal 1933 tons, @ £1 10s. per ton 2 899
Lignite 235 tons, @ 17s. 6d. per ton ’205
Kaolin 1757 tons, @ £4 per ton y 028
Flagging 1500 square yards, @ Bs. per square yard ’fifio
Slates 1000 No., @ £8 per 1000 £8
1000 No., @ £8 per 1000 £8
43 tons, @ £4 per ton 172
- 180
Diamonds.... About 79 carats, @ £1 per carat 79
Sapphires.... Numbers cannot be estimated—say 150
Total £124,210,654
Note.—No estimate has been formed of the quantities of gold which have been sent
out of the colony privately, nor of the quantity used and manufactured in the colony.
The prices of the several ores, &c., have been obtained from persons best acquainted
with the market value of them.
MINERAL DISTRICTS.
It is necessary to a proper understanding of the mineral resources of the
colony to give some account of the areas occupied by the more important
rock formations. It is, unfortunately, impossible to give accurate dataj
but a statement sufficiently near the truth for practical purposes has been
carefully compiled from a manuscript sketch map. Rough measurements
give the following results :
1. Granites and other plutonic rocks, 2500 to Square jniles.
2. Sandstones, claystones, and slates belonging to the Lower Devonian ’
and Upper and Lower Silurian ages 25 000
3. Carboniferous rocks, including schists likely to yield petroleum and ’
rock oils o p™
j —i • .
4. Basaltic and volcanic rocks 10 000
5. Tertiary rocks, including the Murray tertiaries and those occurring ’
on the seaboard 90 oqq
on tne seaboard 28 000
6. Country of which but little is known at present relative to the rock *" ’
formations _ 17,831
86,831
The total 86,831 square miles is the area of the colony. One-third of the
total area may safely be considered as occupied by gold-bearing rocks. In
all places, the schists and claystones, with the intersecting veins of quartz.
are not exposed to view; they are covered with thin strata of alluvions
and tertiaries; but, having penetrated these, we come at once on the old
bed rocks.
But a small portion of this vast area has been properly explored. There
are 18,523,947 acres open to the miner, over nearly every part of which
occur auriferous quartz veins and auriferous alluvions; but at the end of
the year 1865 only 464,000 acres, or little more than one fiftieth of the


A.
XI.
p.
Held and worked “claims” under the
bve-laws of the Mining
Boards
79,025
2
32
Protected by certificates, &c
89,731
2
15
Leases for years—1043 for
15,779
1
17
Total
134,536
2
24
whole, had been opened up. The areas actually occupied by the miners
for mining purposes, in December, 1865, were as follow :
Gold is found to occur not only in tbe quartz veins and the alluvial
deposits derived from these and the surrounding rocks, but also in the
claystone itself (specimens are exhibited); and, contrary to expectation,
flat bands of auriferous quartz have been discovered in dykes of diorite,
which intersect the Upper Silurian or Lower Devonian rocks. Quartz of
quite extraordinary richness has been obtained from these bands, and
the new experience of the miner is leading him to look for gold in
places heretofore neglected. It is probable that some time may be lost,
and that his labours may not always be well directed or successful;
but it is commendable that he should not be deterred from exploration by
warnings and remonstrances founded on surmises often baseless. If he
had closely followed the older precepts, we should at this moment have
been dependent for our yield of gold on the shallower alluvions and the
surface only of the veins of quartz. The miner is, however, prospecting
the deeper tertiaries, with well-grounded hopes of success; and some of
the shafts which have been sunk to penetrate the veins are as deep as 590
feet.*' From these levels very rich quartz has been obtained.
The approximate area occupied by granites and other plutonic rocks, it
has been stated, is 3000 square miles. Patches of irregular form appear
in numerous places, but mostly within the boundaries of the older schists.
These and the schists have been greatly denuded. In some places the
granite is decomposed in situ, and from such spots we get kaolin. In
other parts veins of granite, projected from the larger masses, intersect
metamorphosed slate and quartz, and the auriferous quartz veins and the
granite are so intimately associated that the granite itself is quarried out
and sent to the mills to be crushed. It is not strictly correct, perhaps, to
say that gold is found in the granite, but some specimens are so rich in gold,
while the thin veins of quartz are so small and insignificant, that without
careful examination it would not be easy to determine the mode of occur-
rence of the gold. At Nuggety Reef, near Maldon, the granite abuts on
the slates and claystones, and the larger quartz veins are cut off abruptly
at the junction. Where the granite is decomposed, it is easy to shovel
away the loose clay and expose the end of the vein. Pyrrhotine and
other forms of iron pyrites are found in these veins, and at every step one
sees proofs of the crystallogenic forces which have been exerted here during
long periods, and are probably, at some depth below the surface, as energetic
now as at any other time.
The appearance of a granite country is pleasing, Masses of projecting
and weathered rock on one side of the hill, and fine, smooth, -well-grassed
slopes on the other, with just sufficient timber to give the whole the
* Specimens of quartz from this depth yielding 2 ozs. of gold per ton, are
exhibited.


appearance of a well-kept park, and here and there a stream of pure water
flowing over large masses of smooth rock, present pictures which are
rudely broken by the ugly poppet-heads, the weatherboard engine-house,
and the hard outlines of the brick chimney, which form the establishment
of the more prosperous miner.
The sandstones, claystones, and slates belonging to the lower palaeozoic
age appear on the map as a great band some fifty or sixty miles in width,
stretching across the colony from east to west, and situate mostly between
the parallels of 36 deg. 30 min. and 37 deg. 30 min. The outline is
ragged, and islands of schist rise out of the basalts and tertiaries, both on
the north and on the south; and if the basalts and tertiaries were removed,
more than seven-eighths of the surface of the colony would be occupied by
rocks of the lower palaeozoic age. Over the whole of the area we find
veins of quartz, and it is not possible to say that any one of them is not
auriferous. Goldfields, such as Castlemaine and Sandhurst, which are
situate in basins in the schists and sandstones, were once thickly-timbered
forests. The alluvions rest immediately on the older rocks. Steep,
narrow ridges run almost at right angles to higher and more precipitous
ranges of hills; the watercourses, nearly parallel to each other, trend from
the sides to the middle of the basin; and the uniformity of the hills, and
their sharp outlines, give harshness to the landscape, which is not improved
by the character of the timber. At the sources of the Goulburn and the
Thomson the country is wild and broken, the hills are lofty and very steep,
and for many weeks during the winter they are covered with snow. At
Ballarat we find on the east side of the creek a low range of hills composed
of the older rocks, with numerous thick veins of quartz, and on the west
a basaltic table-land. The valleys trending westward from the palaeozoic
hills were first opened up by the miner. Here he found moderately-deep
alluvions, which were rich in gold; and, following their trend, they carried
him under the basalt, and finally developed the richest gold workings,
perhaps, in the world. The basalt itself has been denuded, but not
towards the west to a depth sufficient to cut the tertiary deposits; and the
miner consequently has to explore the surface of the older sedimentary
rocks without help from surface indications. He does not know the
course of the gutter, the trend of the tributaries, nor the situation of the
low-lying flats, where are concealed rich deposits of auriferous earth. He
sinks a shaft 300 or 400 feet in depth, and thence makes explorations,
guided sometimes by the trend of the ancient surface, until the gutter is
struck.
Some twenty miles north of Ballarat the denuding forces have operated
energetically. Hear Daylesford the modern streams have scooped out
valleys clean through basalt, tertiary, and schist. The existing water-
courses are in some places sixty feet below the level of the beds of the old
streams, and high and almost perpendicular cliffs of great height, rugged
and yet very beautiful, meet the eye at every turn of the road.
The leads or gutters in this locality are penetrated by tunnels. On the
side of a high cliff, and at a point some sixty or seventy feet above the bed
of the existing watercourse, the miner finds a shelf on which, by building
walls, he can make room for a puddling machine and a hut. Here he drives
a tunnel, 1000 or 1500 feet in length, to reach the auriferous earth. The
vertical section overhead is palaeozoic sandstones and shales, capped by
basalt, and until he penetrates far into the hill he does not touch the


auriferous drift.* But it is there ; and if is somewhat remarkable that the
bed of the old stream everywhere runs nearly parallel to the modern water-
course. When the latter cuts the old lead, as in some places it does, the
recent drift is rich in gold—derived partly from the wearing and waste
of exposed quartz reefs and partly from the old alluvions. Fossil wood,
lignite, and mud shales, with fossil leaves, are abundant in the old leads at
* The following extract from the Geology of California, 1865, by J. D. Whitney,
State Geologist, is descriptive of the tunnelling operations under lava, on the
western slope of the Sierra Nevada. Speaking of the country in the vicinity of the
Table Mountain of Tuolumne County, he says :
“ The table mountain of Tuolumne County is a flow of lava originating in the
lofty volcanic region beyond the Big Trees of Calaveras ; ... it comes
down on the north side of the Stanislaus, forming a nearly-continuous ridge,
elevated more than 2000 feet above the river. ... As seen from a distance.
this Table Mountain reveals its origin at once in the contrast between the long straight
line of its upper edge and the broken and curving ones which the eroded hills of
the auriferous slates everywhere exhibit On approaching Table
Mountain, and examining the material of which it is composed and the position
which it occupies, it is seen at once that it is a vast lava flow, of which the upper
surface remains very nearly at the level and with the form which it originally had
at the time of its consolidation, while its edges and the surrounding country have
been denuded and washed away, so that the topography of the region is entirely
different from what it once was; in fact, it is almost the reverse of it
There must have been an amount of denudation during the period since this vol-
canic mass took its present position of not less than three or four thousand feet of
perpendicular depth, and yet this was all done during the most recent geological
epoch. ...
“Underneath the lava is a heavy deposit of a detrital material, very distinctly
stratified, and lying nearly horizontal or with a slight dip each way towards the
centre of the mass. These sedimentary beds are of variable characters, bub are
chiefly made up of a rather fine-grained sandstone, not very closely compacted, and
which rapidly disintegrates on exposure. Interstratified with this sandstone, and
especially near the bottom of the deposit, are fine argillaceous shales and clays,
nearly white and often beautifully laminated. With these are beds of gravelly
materials, strongly cohering together, and called ‘cement’ by the miners, and at the
bottom the ‘pay-gravel’ or the ‘channel,’ a body of coarse gravel, exactly like
that seen in the bed of an ordinary river. The entire thickness of the detrital beds,
directly under the centre of the lava, is, in one locality at least, fully 200 feet.
. . , The auriferous gravel in the channel is from four to five feet thick. It
will give some idea of the cost and time for opening a deposit of this kind when it
is stated that this tunnel was commenced in October, 1855, and that the pay-gravel
was not struck until March, 1860, the cost of the work up to that time having
been about 38,000 dols.
“ The stratified materials under the lava are frequently found to contain masses
of wood, and even entire trunks of trees. These are very commonly found under
Table Mountain, although not as abundant here as in some of the hydraulic wash-
ings in other parts of the State In the layers of finer sediment,
called ‘pipe-clay’ by the miners, which are very thinly and evenly bedded and
made up of the finest particles of clay, impressions of leaves are occasionally found.
Neither the wood nor the leaves from this and similar localities have as yet been
minutely examined.
“ A few specimens of the leaves from the Buckeye Tunnel were forwarded to
Ur. Newberry, who made a preliminary investigation of them, and furnished us with
some notes of his results, from which we are authorised to draw the conclusion that
these stratified deposits underneath the lava of Table Mountain are of tertiary age,
and that in all probability they belong to the later pliocene epoch. Dr. Newberry
remarks that the leaves submitted to him are quite different from those of any
trees now growing in California, and that they are specifically distinct from those
of the miocene tertiaries of Oregon, Nebraska, or any other part of the Continent.
They include tertiary and recent genera, such as Acer Carpinus, and are, therefore,
not older than the miocene. They most resemble the species found in the later
European tertiaries.”


Daylesford. At Castlemaine, still further to the north, the old leads are
seen to occur only in patches ; the basalt and tertiaries have been worn
away, and what exist at Ballarat as old leads, 300 feet below the surface,
stand out here as low rounded hills.
The carboniferous rocks occupy an area of about 3000 square miles, or
1,920,000 acres. They are found in Gipps Land, in the counties of Grant,
Polwarth, Mornington, and Bourke, and in the Portland Bay district. Two
large areas are well worth prospecting. One extends from Moonlight
Head to Portarlington, and the other lies to the north and north-east of
the line of coast between Griffith’s Point and Anderson’s Inlet.
As regards the first—the Cape Otway district—it is confidently
asserted that seams of coal crop out at the surface at some distance from
the coast; and it is certain that numerous seams of coal and bituminous
shale are to be found between Cape Otway and Point Eoadknight. Near
Cape Paton there is a bed of bituminous shale which burnt for nearly twelve
months, A large area sunk considerably, and ultimately a lake of bitter
■water was formed. The shale was ignited, it is said, when the country was
on fire on Black Thursday (6th February, 1851). On the north the coal-
bearing rocks are covered by basalt, but it is probable that they do not
extend far in a northerly direction. On the west the older palaeozoic rocks
occur, and gold has been found in one or two places. The discovery of
gold at this point, so far from the centres of mining industry, lends
probability to the theory that the deeper leads will be found underneath
the basalt close up to the boundary of the carboniferous rocks ; and
auriferous tertiaries may perhaps overlie these in some places. To find a
bed-rock of mesozoicage and full of fossils might puzzle the miner, but the
geologist would at once understand the relation of the rocks, and perceive
how detritus from auriferous quartz veins could be carried away and
deposited in valleys in the carboniferous formations. On the east—at
Cape Paterson—the seams of coal vary in thickness from a few inches to
3 feet 9 inches. Several gentlemen interested in the development of our
coalfields have energetically explored this tract of country, and well-
grounded hopes are entertained that they will in a short time be able to
supply Melbourne with coal. It is true that they have some difficulties
before them, but none so great, it is said, as to be insurmountable, A
large area of land is held under lease from the Crown ; and, according to
returns made by the lessees, it appears that 1933 tons of coal have been
raised. The new Griffith’s Point Coal Company have put down a bore
to the depth of 830 feet, and they propose to increase the depth. Discoveries
of thin seams in other parts of the colony are reported from time to time,
and it will not be the fault of the miners and capitalists of this country if
we are long dependent on a neighbouring colony for supplies of coal.
The surface of the country where the carboniferous rocks prevail is in
some places rugged and harsh, with dense forests of large timber, and in
other parts the hills are well rounded and the valleys wide. This formation
has been largely denuded, and it is probable that it once occupied a very
considerable area.
The basaltic country extends from the Eivcr Plenty on the east to
Mount Gambler on the west. A great deal has been carried away ; and
if the schists and tertiaries had not in many places been denuded of their
covering of basalt, some of our richest goldfields would have remained long
undiscovered. The great western plains are occupied by basalt; the


country is low and level, and it is well grassed in many parts, but there is
very little timber —one may travel for miles and see scarcely a bush. The
lake district, on the south, is very beautiful. Crateriform hills and cones
rise on every side; the foreground is rocky and rugged, and the light wood
and tall shrubs give a fine colour to the landscape. Some of the lakes
are fresh, and some brackish, or salt. From the latter a good deal of salt
is obtained for home consumption.
This country would not be entitled to more than a few words of
description if it were not of the highest interest to the miner. Already
the gold-workings have extended to a point not far north of Lake
Korangamite (the centre of a great depression in the basaltic country,
forming an independent system of drainage), and persons are now
continually asking why the great plains are not explored. Many believe
that we shall find deep leads and the same under-surface as at Ballarat ;
and when the small cost of putting down bores is considered, it is indeed
remarkable that so little has yet been done. It is due, no doubt, to the fact
that we are richer in energy than in unemployed capital. The miner, with
a bundle of blankets and a very small supply of provisions, will fearlessly
explore the lofty ranges in Gipps Land, and tear his way through thick
scrub, half blinded with sleet and snow, in search of new goldfields; but the
capitalist naturally hesitates to venture his money in an uncertain specu-
lation when many profitable avenues are open to him.
The area occupied by tertiary rocks —28,000 square miles—does not
include the thin alluvions in valleys and creeks within the boundaries of
the palaeozoic strata, nor the basalts of this age, A large extent of country,
lying between the northern boundary of the old sedimentary rocks and the
Eiver Murray, is occupied by tertiaries, which are in all probability auriferous
throughout; but whether everywhere containing gold in such quantities
and so distributed as to admit of being profitably worked, is not certain.
It is said that north of St. Arnaud they are being explored, and that a
considerable quantity of gold has been obtained from a thick bed of
auriferous gravel.
In Gipps Land a large area west of Lake Wellington is covered with
tertiary strata, but they have not yet been properly explored.
In the Murray basin, towards the north-west, the tertiaries are covered
with recent sand, and in some parts with powdered sulphate of lime. The
country is uninviting; and the dense scrub, and the absence of fresh water,
greatly hinder exploration.
It is within this area that we may hope to find beds of salt, sulphate of
lime, and deposits of lignite.
The unexplored country, respecting which nothing certain is known of
the rock formation, is very large. The highlands at the sources of the
Murray, and a considerable area east of the Snowy Elver, are almost
unknown to the miner. They lie far from towns. The cost of exploration,
and not the hazard or difficulties, deters men from seeking in these remote
localities new fields; but the occupation of the adjacent country will
shortly afford facilities for prospecting which do not now exist, and it is
probable that we shall soon know something of the physical character and
the resources of these parts of the colony.
But a short time ago the country at the sources of the Eiver Goulburn
and the Eiver Thomson, and ail along the Great Dividing Eange as far as
the Eiver Tambo, was utterly unknown to the gold miners; and now it is


inhabited by great numbers, who have built towns, made roads and streets,
and erected valuable machinery for reducing quartz, in ravines and on
plateaux which by men with less energy would have been considered
unapproachable.
GOLD.
DISCOVERY OF GOLD IN VICTORIA,
It is said that gold w 7 as found in the Pyrenees by a shepherd in 1849, but
long before this it was known to the settlers that gold was to be obtained,
for their servants collected it and sold it. Little attention was given to
the matter. Men’s minds were directed, in the early days of the colony, to
the finding of good sheep and cattle country ; they knew nothing of gold-
fields; and the discovery from time to time of small pieces of gold was
not enough to induce them to turn from their own pursuits. But for the
miners of California we should have remained ignorant of our wealth.
The discoveries in that part of America turned the attention of practical
men to the search for gold in New South Wales and Victoria, and profit-
able fields were very soon developed. Gold was found at Clunes, it is said,
in March, 1850; on the 10th June, 1851, it was discovered near Burnt
Bank, on a tributary of the River Loddon; on the 20th July, at Mount
Alexander; on the Bth August, at Buninyong; and on the Bth September,
in the same year, at Ballarat. The conflicting claims of discoverers render
it very difficult to fix the dates with any degree of accuracy.
Licenses to dig were first issued on the Ist September, 1851, and such
great yields were reported that the colonists very soon left their ordinary
occupations for the exciting work of searching for gold. In 1851 the total
male population of the colony was only 46,202, and the sudden withdrawal
from their usual pursuits of nearly half of these produced a change in the
social condition of the country which eye-witnesses describe as wonderful.
Lawyers forsook the courts, merchants the counting-houses, clerks their
desks, and artisans and labourers fled precipitately from houses but half
built and foundations but partly dug. Even clergymen were drawn to the
exciting scene, and not in every case did they confine themselves to their
calling. The price of labour increased enormously, provisions of all kinds
rose to unprecedented prices, property in Melbourne was seriously depre-
ciated, and it was only after the great and sudden influx of immigrants
from Europe and the neighbouring colonies that society regained in some
measure its normal state.
In works on physical geography, and geology, published in England,
frequent reference is made to the goldfields of Victoria. The writers
assume that gold occurs in shallow alluviums, that these are all but
exhausted, and that the colonists generally are now engaged in farming,
in trade, and in manufactures. They say that the rich deposits served to
induce persons to emigrate, and now that the colony is peopled, the good
end has been accomplished and the gold will soon disappear altogether.
The tables appended to this paper, and the descriptions of our mines, will
serve to convince those who hold such a belief that they are wrong. Our
goldfields are practically inexhaustible. Our deep auriferous tertiaries and
our quartz veins are not half prospected ; and day after day fresh
discoveries of auriferous alluvions are made. We have room for four


times the number of persons now actually engaged in mining ; and if the
yield of gold has fallen off, it is because the numbers engaged in mining
have decreased. Gold mining is laborious, often uncertain, and frequently
involves hardships and suffering which none but the strongest are capable
of bearing without injury; and it is not surprising that many persons who
left their professions and trades in the hope that they would rapidly
acquire a fortune on the goldfields have resumed their former pursuits.
AURIFEROUS QUARTZ VEINS.
Numerous quartz veins are found in all those parts of the colony where
the schist rocks appear at the surface; and they are met with also cutting
the older sedimentary rocks, under the tertiaries. The strata in which they
occur present generally a low degree of metamorphism, and in many places
are unaltered. The veins vary in thickness from an eighth of an inch to
fifty feet; and some, almost as thin as the paper on which these words are
printed, intersect rocks containing palaeozoic fossils, and in such a manner
as almost to cut the fossils, but the delicate structure of the casts is not
altered, nor are any of the inter-spaces filled with quartz.
If we collect the magnetic bearings of all the known auriferous reefs, we
find that the northerly and southerly veins, with rare exceptions, follow
the strike of the rocks which they intersect, and are confined within the
lines of oscillation of the magnetic declination. The easterly and westerly
veins seem to conform to the same law. This is true of the quartz veins
intersecting the palaeozoic rocks ; but there are auriferous quartz veins in
granite, where this rock abuts on metamorphosed slate, which appear to be
of more recent formation; and lately veins of quite remarkable richness
have been discovered lying as flat and nearly parallel bands in dykes of
syenitic diorite.*
* The following extract from a report on the gold workings in these dykes, by
C. D’Oyly H. Aplin, Esq., Acting Director of the Geological Survey, will be read
with interest. The report is dated 26th January, 1864 :
“ On this spur, at Wood’s Point, at a short distance above and overlooking the
township, is the celebrated 4 Morning Star Reef,’ from which for months past
returns appearing to be almost fabulous in amount have been derived.
44 This so-called ‘reef,’ but to which the term is manifestly inapplicable, includes
a series of three, and possibly more, horizontal and approximately-parallel veins of
auriferous quartz, traversing a dyke of syenite about 100 yards broad at the
surface, and widening downwards. The direction of this dyke is about N. 55 deg.
W., the general direction or strike of the sandstones and slates of the district H. 45
deg. W. (magnetic). Their dip, as seen at the eastern wall of the dyke, is about
80 deg. to the west; the general dip of the beds, wherever I could see sections,
being at very high angles from 75 deg. to vertical.
44 The rock constituting the dyke is a mixture of hornblende and felspar, with
but little quartz, and occasionally mica; it might, perhaps, be more correctly termed
a syenitic diorite. From the surface downwards, as deep as the workings extend,
it is in a decomposed state, and no great difficulty is experienced in sinking or
driving in it. A good deal of slabbing, however, is required for both. In the
lowest tunnel (Hurley and Co.’s), this rock where first struck, and for about fifty or
sixty feet beyond, is found to be very hard, and in an almost unaltered condition ;
this is the case also with large boulders that are found loose in the soil on the flank
of the spur. The soil derived from its decomposition is of a very rich character,
and vegetables of all kinds are said to grow luxuriantly in it.
44 Crossing this dyke at different levels, some sixty or seventy feet apart, are
three horizontal bands or veins of quartz, each of which is at present being worked
by different parties, whose claims are all registered as being on the same reef the


The surface of the colony, it has been stated, has been but imperfectly
explored; and it is probable that gold -will be found here, as in America,
in places where, if the old theories relative to the modes of occurrence of
gold were correct, it ought not to exist.
Many theories have been advanced relative to the mode in which veins
have been impregnated with gold. An eminent geologist, Sir E. I.
Morning Star. This may hereafter give rise to some difficulty in the application of
the mining by-laws, should they ever require to be appealed to in case of dispute.
“ The quartz veins, though horizontally traversing the dyke, are more or less
undulating in their course. They vary in thickness in different parts of the
workings from one or two feet to as much as twelve, but in the latter case are split
up into a mass of thin ramifying and reticulating veins, enclosing between and
amongst them portions of the syenitic mass through which they have penetrated.
The whole thickness, however, is sent to the mill to be crushed. They abound in
crystals of quartz, many of them very perfect in form and beautifully grouped
together. Iron pyrites is also abundant, and in Drysdale and Co.’s claim sulphide
of antimony had been met with. In tracing the extension of the veins they are
working into the adjacent schist rocks.
“As the quartz veins approach the walls of the dyke, they seem to have a
tendency to split up and become attenuated; they can, nevertheless, be seen
passing obliquely downwards into the slates, but, except in Drysdale and Co.’s
claim, do not appear to have been followed further. In Hurley and Co. ’s claim I
noticed, however, that the quartz, in a solid mass two feet thick, continued its
course horizontally, cutting directly across the slates, but had only been followed
as yet about three or four feet into them. Mr. Hurley informed me that at this
spot the character of the quartz was rather improved than otherwise, and in
Drysdale and Co.’s claim the quartz traversing the slates, though much attenuated
in thickness, was exceedingly rich in quality.
“ The richness of the quartz may be judged of from the fact communicated to me
by Mr. Colin M‘Dougall (a partner in one of the claims on which machinery is
erected and in the prospecting claim), that from quartz crushed since June last in a
small machine of eight stamps, and driven by water power, a return of between
.£40,000 and £50,000 has been realised; 1200 ozs. was the return from the same
machine for the week preceding my visit, and 1272 ozs. for the week following. In
Drysdale and Co.’s, M‘Dermott and Co.’s, and the Hope Company’s claims, all
situated adjacent to each other on the before-mentioned dyke, the quartz has proved
to be exceedingly rich, but M ‘Dougall and Hurley are the only parties who have
crushing machinery erected and at work ; their claims, therefore, are the only ones
that may be said, at present, to be producing returns.
“About two and a half miles from Wood’s Point, along the spur dividing the
left-hand branch of the Goulburn from some small tributaries of the right-hand
branch, a new reef, called the Waverley, had been discovered about a fortnight
before my visit; and before I left no less than fifteen claims in succession, occupying
a linear extent of more than a mile, were reported to have struck gold. This reef,
so far as I was able to judge from the shallow depth to which any of the workings
had reached, presented features still more singular than those of the Morning Star.
The shaft which I examined (No. 1 North) exhibited the following descending
section : —First, about twenty-six feet of a decomposed rock (more trappean than
granitic)„of a reddish or reddish-brown colour, mottled with spots of pale dirty
yellow, and containing crystals of white mica; then followed a seam or bed of
auriferous quartz, six feet thick, and about four or five feet wide (the breadth of the
reef) ; this was succeeded or underlaid by twelve feet of a brown-coloured rock of
the same texture and appearance as the first-mentioned, but more micaceous ;
beneath this was auriferous quartz, which had only been penetrated to a depth of
two feet, and in which gold was plainly visible, though in fine particles. The
quartz terminated, like the decomposed trappean rock, abruptly at the walls, and
thus presented even more strikingly than the Morning Star the appearance of a
horizontal bed."


Murchison, has suggested that the rocks were impregnated with it after
the miocene period, and but “ a short time before the epoch when the
powerful and general denudations took place which destroyed the large
extinct mammalia.” It is presumed, therefore, that all the drifts formed
previous to the miocene period would be non-auriferous, and that during
immense periods of time the denuding forces would be operating on veins
which contained no gold. It is not possible in a short paper to discuss
this theory, but to neglect it altogether would be to deal unfairly with the
material interests of the country. There are large areas in this colony
occupied by miocene and mesozoic rocks; and if there are any grounds for
believing that these strata are not barren, they should be stated.
With the knowledge of Sir R. I. Murchison’s labours —devoted almost
exclusively to geological investigations for a great many years—the writer
believes he is not wrong in supposing that that geologist will reconsider an
important question if new facts be stated in regard to it.
If we examine the quartz veins at Castlemaine and at Clunes, we find
that very minute particles of gold—quite invisible to the naked eye, and
hardly to be seen with a powerful microscope—are disseminated through
masses of hard, dense quartz, showing conclusively, it is suggested, that
the gold and the quartz were deposited in the vein at the same time. Are
there any forces known to the chemist which would be adequate to effect
the dissemination of metallic gold in such a medium ?
It is certain that these veins were formed long prior to the mesozoic
period, and the proofs are to be found in the granitic districts.
This statement is, however, in one sense unsatisfactory. Geologists at
a distance may conclude that inferences have been wrongly drawn from
facts accurately stated.
In strata which it is believed are of miocene age, gold has been found.
At Tea Tree Creek, not far from Steiglitz, some 350 feet below the
auriferous pliocene gravel, fine gold has been obtained. The well-known
mining engineer, Mr. R. M. Serjeant, of Ballarat, thus states the fact.
“ Two°days after I wrote to you we came on a floor of compact sandstone
grit about one foot in thickness, and then fine drift with flattened well-
washed boulders or pebbles of quartz. This drift contained large
quantities of pyrites. We sunk in it eight feet and again struck black clay,
with large pieces of trees, &c., and a little fine gold.”
Gold has been found, it is well known, in Nova Scotia in rocks of
carboniferous age.
The Rev. W. B. Clarke —whose opinions on. all questions relating
to gold-bearing rocks are received by every geologist with respect and
confidence —has stated, in a letter addressed lately to the editor of
Dicker's Mining Record, that gold has been “ detected at the Mint
from even secondary rocks of Queensland;” and he says—“l conceive that
there is nothing extraordinary in urging the possibility of gold being
found in the miocene drift.”
As already stated, there is not space here for discussion, nor even for a
complete statement of- facts; but it may not be entirely without interest
to know the opinions of the writer on these questions. Abundant
opportunities of acquiring information, and careful thought, have led
him to take a practical view of these questions. The results may be
stated thus :—Our quartz veins were formed prior to the mesozoic epoch.
Gold was deposited, in the greater number of veins, contemporaneously


with the quartz; but all the veins were not formed at the same time, nor
in the same way.
Gold will be found in all drifts and strata which have been derived
from the palaeozoic rocks; those strata of marine origin, however,
from the nature of their formation, will rarely contain gold in such a
form as to remunerate the miner—the gold will exist in very fine particles,
and will be so distributed in the rocks as to be with difficulty recovered.
Gold is found plentifully in modern drifts, because the rocks forming the
drifts have not generally been much moved.
Gold is deposited every day in all rocks, of whatever age, which are below
what is called the “water-line.”
In obedience to laws which are not understood, gold will be
accumulated in veins and fissures, rather than in the lines of bedding
of the boundary rocks.
Gold exists as an ore.
foe yield of gold will increase with the depth below the “ water-
line but not probably to a great degree.*
It is satisfactory to reflect that, whether these opinions are well-founded
or not, we have abundant sources of gold in our quartz veins at a
moderate depth, and the quite recent alluvions and tertiaries are so
rich, and occupy such great areas, that it is not probable the labours of
the miner except, perhaps, because of some accidental discovery of rich
and easily-worked gravels of the mesozoic or miocene age—will be
devoted to explorations in rocks which, at the best, probably will be
expensive to work.
In the early days of the goldfields the quartz veins were neglected. The
miners directed their attention alone to the alluvions, and when they dis-
covered small particles of gold imbedded in quartz they looked upon them
with surprise. So little was known of the modes of occurrence of gold,
that pieces of quartz containing only small quantities of gold, and worth
only a few shillings, were sold for £lO or £l5. When, finally, they came
upon a rich reef cropping out at the surface, and saw large fragments of
quartz thickly studded with gold, they commenced to break it up. With
the aid of a hammer they pounded the quartz, and obtained the gold either
by washing or by amalgamating with mercury. So rich was the matrix
that many miners earned in this manner from £6 to £lO per week. Gradu-
ally the character of the reef became apparent, more extended explora-
tions were made, better appliances for crushing and grinding the quartz
were obtained; and at length, when experienced miners (acquainted with the
use of stamps and the dressing of ores) came to the colony, quartz mining
* The way in which gold is distributed in rocks has led to many mistakes.
If it were as plentiful as the ores of copper, or lead, or iron, and not more
valuable, or if it were as easily traced as a bed of coal or lignite, we should
hear of few controversies regarding its mode of occurrence. Gold in great
quantities is not found every day in certain strata; the fact of its existence in
connection with them is not forced on the mind; and many persons, obliged to
hold some belief, are unable to admit the possibility of its occurring at all, or
in any form, in these strata. They are incapable of judging of evidence, and
do not seek for proof. This condition of mind has always operated as the most
serious obstacle to the progress of science. The result is seldom so plainly
shown as in this colony and in America, where, but for apparent! v rash explo-
rations, undertaken through ignorance, the geology of gold would* ot have been
made known to the world. “


began to engage the attention of a great number of persons. Few believed,
however, that it would continue to be profitable, and none guessed how
important this interest would become. At the present time there are
17,730 miners engaged in quartz mining ; more than 2000 distinct reefs
have been discovered and named; and 522 steam-engines, equal to 9079
horse power, and 62 engines, driven by water or horse power, are employed
in crushing, winding, pumping, <fec. In place of small machines driven
by engines of ten or fifteen horse power, we have batteries of stamps and
large establishments, the like of which it is believed cannot be
found in any other gold-producing district in the world. Energy
and skill and capital are now employed successfully in the extraction of
gold from the matrix, and day after day very important additions are made
to the engine-power on the goldfields. At the same time, fresh discoveries
tempt the quartz miner to abandon the old mines. At Wood’s Point,
Stringer’s Creek, Donnelly’s Creek, Crooked River, Tambo River, and
numerous localities in and around Beechworth, valuable reefs are being
prospected; and if it were not for the great cost and difficulty of carriage,
as large establishments for reducing quartz would be erected at these places
as at Chines, or Ballarat, or Sandhurst.
From estimates made very carefully—which, however, are not absolutely
correct—it appears that the quantities of gold obtained from quartz veins
were, during the three years undermentioned, as follows :
ozs. dwts.
1863 493,499 0
1864 . 503,618 5
1865 450,000 0
In -working a quartz vein, a shaft is sunk either on the crown of the
hill where the vein is found, or the reef is penetrated by an adit; and as
the dip of the reef is commonly at a high angle, lateral excavations are
made from the shaft or adit at various levels, from which the auriferous
rock is excavated. The quartz brought to the surface is broken into pieces,
and passed through inclined spouts to the stampers, which resemble the
ordinary stamps used in other countries for dressing ores. They weigh
about seven hundredweight each, and one stamp strikes about sixty blows
per minute. A ten-horse power engine will give motion to eight stamps.
The crushed quartz is carried by water over copper ripples, where the
gold is brought in contact with mercury. Once a week, or oftener, the
ripples are cleaned out and the amalgam retorted.
A great many inventions for the extraction of gold from quartz have
been brought from time to time under the notice of the public. Where
sulphides occur in considerable quantities, a good deal of gold is lost if care
and skill are not employed, but a thoroughly-competent manager never
fails to extract the greater part of the gold. It is not new inventions that
are wanted so much as ability and a faithful and honest use of known
appliances ; and this truth is illustrated at Clunes, where the difficulties
are many and the quartz by no means very rich.
The following brief- statement of the operations of the Port Phillip
and Colonial Gold Mining Company, who have a large and valuable
property at Clunes, has been compiled by Mr. R. H. Bland, and it
will be read everywhere with interest by those who are engaged in
quartz mining.


“ There are five reefs included in the workings, and the length of drives
in each is as follows :
Western vein 4^o
Bobinson’s vein '***
Old Man vain
Tso
Eastern vein s 9Qf ,
Welcome vein i non
. ~ . 20,410
Add crosscuts 5 180
Giving a total of 25 590
which is equal to 4| miles.
“ Tll e depth of the main shaft is 464 feet; but little quartz has, however,
been taken out below the 374 feet level. The length of the claim in the
direction of the strike of the reefs is 440 yards, or a quarter of a mile. The
thickness of the reefs varies very much, and may be stated as follows :
Foot
Western vein about g'
Robinson’s vein, varying from 3 to .I!.”!!!!"""" 30
Old Man vein „ ~ " 150
<jia man vein „ ~ 2gQ
Eastern vein, about a
vein, aoout 4
Welcome vein, varying from 6 inches to SO
“ These veins are larger in depth, as well as more irregular in size.
“ The length of tramways on the surface for the conveyance of quartz
and mullock amounts in the aggregate to about 2500 feet of single track.
The engine power used in hauling and pumping at the two shafts is about
85-horse power.
“Character of the Fares.—There are five principal veins, the middle one
being for the most part hard barren quartz, and on each side of this non-
productive mass there are two veins running nearly north and south in
the direction of the cleavage of the slate. The westernmost veins underlie
west, and those on the eastern side east. The quartz occurs in these veins in
large shopts dipping north and south in opposite directions from the summit
of the hill. These shoots of quartz are in some places thirty feet wide,
while the continuation of the vein immediately above and below them is
small. The quartz in three of the veins is of a more or less brown compact
character, and not generally hard ; but in the two middle veins it is white,
and more associated with raw pyrites and of a harder nature. The pyrites
occurs in veins and patches, and when accompanied by galena is generally
rich. The gold mostly occurs in the lines of fracture in the quartz, but
it is sometimes seen at the side of the quartz in the slate, and the most
auriferous quartz dips north and south with the shoots above alluded to.
This is more particularly the case as the mine gets deeper.
“Cost of Raising Quartz. —This may be set down at an average of about
13s. per ton, including cost of machinery and dear work in the°mine, and
delivery at the reduction works. The contracts for breaking out the
quartz underground average from 4s. to 9s, per ton.
“Surface Operations. —The quartz when brought to the surface is
separated into two lots. The small size is tipped into a large hopper, and
from thence drawn and delivered direct to the stamps : and the larger
lumps are sent to the stone-breaking machines to be reduced to a stze
- J O ~ ~ ~ VK/ CV IDX/jKj
suitable for the stamps. Two of these machines are in constant use, working
an average of about ten hours per day. Each machine will break about


tons per hour when in good order, at a cost, including wear and tear,
ofabout lOd. per ton. They are driven by a shaft from one of thebattery
engines, and take about 12-horse power to drive the two.
“ The number of stamps at work is eighty, as follows :— Fifty-six heads
of about 6 cwt. each, including lifter and tongues, driven by one 24-inch
engine, giving about seventy-five blows per minute, taking about 1-horse
power per head, and crushing an average of about 2 tons 4 cwt. per head for
twenty-four hours; twenty-four heads ofabout 8 cwt. each, including lifter.
&c., driven by a 24-inch engine, giving seventy-five blows per minute, taking
in the aggregate about 30-horse power. These stamps crush about 4 tons
per head per diem, and they have a larger proportion of the small material
sent to them. The average quantity of quartz crushed per week of five
days is about 1130 tons.
“ The following is a return of quartz crushed for the twelve months
ending September, 1865 :
54,413 tons 20,596 ozs. 10 dwts. 12 grs 7 dwts. 13 grs.
“ The gold above mentioned was collected in the following way :
Stamp beds 66 - 08 p. c.
r ctn.nz _ „
Mercury boxes 22 - 95 p. c.
Blankets 10 - 97 p. c.
“The quantity of water required to work the stamps efficiently is about
eight gallons per head per minute, which is 921,600 gallons per diem.
“ Method of Separating Pyrites from the Tailings. —The tailings, on
leaving the stamps, run into settling-boxes, where the current is checked
and the heavier material settles. These boxes are cleaned out every few
hours, and the material sent to the huddle, where it undergoes a further
concentration, and is dressed up to an average of 3 ozs. or 4 ozs. of gold
to the ton of material. This is then sent to the roasting furnace, and
afterwards ground in Chilian mills with mercury; and an average of about
85 per cent, of the assay contents of the gold is thus extracted. The
cost of operating on the pyrites, including the huddle, roasting, grinding,
loss of mercury, &c., averages about £2 14s. per ton, or about .£1 per ounce
of gold obtained. The expense will diminish as the quantity of pyrites
increases and it improves in richness.
“ Gold Crystals. —These are obtained from a mercury-box placed at the
foot of the blanket strakes, which is placed there to catch stray particles
of mercury, occasionally driven out of the upper boxes, as well as any fine
gold that may have passed the blankets. These boxes are cleaned out
about once in four or six months, and it is found that the gold contained
in them has become crystallised. The largest crystal we have noticed was
the size of a pea. The crystals would no doubt increase in size if left
for a longer period.*
“ Quantity of Quartz Crushed. —The quantity of quartz crushed and
yield of gold, from the commencement of the company’s operations
in 1857 to the 31st July, 1866, is as follows ;
Quartz crushed. Yield of gold.
308,661 tons 180,723 ozs. 15 dwts. 10 grs.
Equal to 6 tons of 2000 lbs. each.”
* These crystals are of the highest interest to the mineralogist. Mr. Bland has
given me some, which will be exhibited.


The statement made by Mr. Bland should be perused and carefully
considered by every one who is interested in quartz mines. It shows what
can be accomplished by good management and the use of well-devised
appliances; but even skill and knowledge, and the aid of good machinery,
will fail to give satisfactory results without honest and faithful super-
vision.
The usual course pursued, when a rich vein is discovered by those who
are in haste to make money, is to form a company, and to put machinery
on the ground at great cost, and to crush enough of the rich quartz to give
notoriety to the mine. The original proprietors sell out when this is accom-
plished, and the propertyis left, in many cases, in the hands of men who are
not well acquainted with mining. After a time the reef is probably lost,
the machinery comes to a standstill, and the adventure is abandoned. The
proper and honest course is to test the vein, to raise a great quantity of
quartz and to ascertain the probable yield of gold from it (which is easily
done, and with great accuracy by any one of experience), before incurring
the expense of erecting crushing mills.
Fortunately for the colony, there are many able men engaged in the work
of extracting gold from quartz; they possess the requisite knowledge, and
exhibit, too, very often, perseverance and energy which are truly surprising.
Those who have seen their establishments in the centres of mining industry,
and in the more remote parts of the colony, must admit that we are not
behind any gold-producing country in the world.
Many districts are, however, neglected. Very rich reefs have been
opened up in the neighbourhood of Beechworth, but little has been done
to develop them. Capital, it is said, is wanting; but why capitalists should
hesitate to engage in mining speculations in places where the stone yields
on the average as much as 1 oz. 7 dwts. and 1 oz. 3 dwts. per ton, on
quantities exceeding 150,000 tons, is inexplicable.
If any proofs are required of the value of onr auriferous quartz veins,
they are to be obtained from the records of the Mining Department. From
returns made by the mining surveyors and mining registrars of the yield
of gold from parcels of quartz crushed during a period of seven years (from
1859 to 1865), it appears that 3,110,328 tons have yielded on the average
12 dwts. G‘375 grs. of gold per ton. These figures represent only the
“ crushings” respecting which the officers of the department have been
able to obtain information, and do not show the quantities of quartz put
through the mills; but there is no reason to believe that the average yield
would be less if all the raillowners had furnished returns.
In the report of a commission* appointed to inquire into the mining
resources of the colony of Victoria, which is without date, but appears to
have been laid before Parliament sometime during the year 1857, the
miners were told that they must not expect to find gold in quantities to remu-
nerate them beyond a certain depth—and this is fixed at forty or sixty feet;
and capitalists were cautioned against the erection of great permanent
mining buildings on a gold quartz reef. Sir R I. Murchison had predicted
that rich veins would not be found at any but small depths below the
* It is right to state that one of the members of the commission stands in
the foremost rank of scientific men in Europe, and it is oniy from a sense of
duty that I refer to the report. Learning, and zeal, and great ability
are not always sufficient to prevent error, and one should be careful not to
surrender one’s reason to mere authority.


surface, and to support Lis theory (which some practical geologists had contra-
dicted) a few cases of reefs growing poorer as the depth increased were cited.*
* In order to show that in other countries this theory has done harm, and
that what has been termed a “ scientific induction ” is a mere guess made after
a not very careful examination of a small area of country, I would direct the
attention of the reader to the following extract from Dicker's Mining Record.
The paper was published, originally, in the Alta California ;
“ The great quartz mines of the State are now attracting earnest attention, -
since long and persevering experiment has at last divulged the true nature of
the ledges and the most effective mode of developing them. The quartz dis-
trict, having a breadth of from fifteen to one hundred miles, commences in the
south-east or Mariposa district, runs north-westerly along the foot-hills of the
Sierra Nevada five hundred miles longitudinally through the centre of the State,
until it passes into Oregon, and melts away on the Pacific shores. The ledge
has generally an eastern dip, and at different angles, from nearly horizontal to
perpendicular. The veins, of varying lengths, range from a few inches to some
twenty-five feet or more thick. Throughout this, ridge-holes have been punc-
tured with more or less success according to the skill, sagacity, perseverance,
and capital of the operators. These have, indeed, been misled by various
theories of inexperienced science as to the nature of the deposits, by ill-founded
opinions as to the depths to which the ore extends; and many shafts have been,
abandoned for various reasons. Numbers have, however, been very successful.
But the great exemplar of quartz mining, not only for wealth or production,
but as shedding more light upon the real nature and condition of quartz mining
than most others, seems to be that of A. Hayward, Esq., at Sutter Creek,
Amadar County. His mine is 1200 feet perpendicular descent from the surface,
probably 300 feet below the ocean. It is by all odds the deepest gold mine in
the world, and also the most productive. Yet the conditions of its yield are
such as to indicate that its powers are barely developed, that it settles the
question of deep mining, and that the wealth of gold contained in that moun-
tainous ridge is far beyond the wildest dreams of the most sanguine Californian
hitherto. Mr. Hayward, a lawyer by education, having had some experience
in the lead mines of the Upper Mississippi, pushed across the Plains early
in the gold excitement, and reached California in 1850. After much
exploration, his attention was fixed at Sutter Creek, Amadar County, in
1853. A mine had been commenced which satisfied the conditions that his
sagacity and experience had laid down. He became interested one-fifth, and
went to work with that indomitable will and perseverance which, like faith, move
mountains. The vein was but eight to ten dollars rock, but broad, and with
difficulty was worked, at a time when flour was sixty dollars per barrel, wages in
proportion, and living very high. With those high expenses and poor rock he
struggled for years. In 1857 he was heavily in debt, but, having bought out all
the partners, he had become sole proprietor. While he had carried on this
desperate struggle, many around him dropped out of the race. They had been
frozen out, and were forced to abandon their shafts, overwhelmed with debt.
Mr. Hayward was not to be baulked. He had not spent a dollar uselessly, and
he observed that the ore improved as the shaft grew deeper. The vein was
broad, so that in following it down the shaft formed itself. Not a shovelful was
taken out that was not reduced. The east wall of granite went down nearly
perpendicular, and that was closely followed. At some hundred feet in depth
the ore paid from twelve to fifteen dollars. The expenses being kept within the
closest limits, this began to pay, and each succeeding year it has given greater
results, until at the depth of 1200 feet the ore averages twenty-five dollars, with
a breadth of twenty-two feet, and widening as it leaves the shaft in both
directions, north and south. At this depth the present writer picked out samples
of ore from masses of probably fifty-dollars rock. The smooth granite wall rises
nearly perpendicular 1200 feet to the surface, and the timbering is done between
the walls. The logs are hauled some six miles at a cost of six dollars each. Th
gallery runs north and south along this wall. The 1000 feet level is some 500
feet in length, communicating with three shafts, giving perfect ventilation
from this the ore has been mostly removed. The lower level is some forty fee
long, and at either end is the beautiful quartz with its blue and white vertical


One instance to the contrary is sufficient to destroy the theory, but perhaps
it may be more satisfactory to give many.
A crushing of 865 tons from the claim of the Sisters Company, at Little
Bendigo, near Ballarat, obtained at depths from 474 to 520 feet, yielded
nearly half an ounce of gold to the ton.
The Victoria Company, at Clunes, crushed 3700 tons of quartz from
which 1654 ozs. of gold were obtained, being nearly 9 dwts. per ton, and the
quartz was won at a depth of 550 feet.
The Victoria Company, Clunes, crushed 3365 tons ; the greatest depth
from which it was taken was 500 feet, and it averaged 6 dwts. 15 grs.
per ton. A subsequent crushing by the same company of a lot of 3920
ribbons glittering with' the metals. At this depth the value of the ore at the
north end improves faster than that of the south end—rather reversing the
process above. Some of the ore here is forty-five to fifty dollars, and some
ranges probably to nearly a hundred. The ore above in the galleries, and that
here in sight, is equal to three years run, say 2,000,000 dollars. Into this
depth drop iron buckets, suspended by strong ropes of continuous length,
manufactured by San Francisco works. These ropes, passing over swifters
at the top, wind over drums worked by a hundred-horse engine of the
most approved pattern for service. This operates night and day. Three
sets of hands relieve each other every eight hours below, and sixty tons
per day are sent to the surface, dumped into a rail car, which descends
by its own weight to the mill, a short distance on Sutter Creek, so named
from the fact that Sutter once mined there. The mill runs forty stamps
of 450 lbs. each, at a speed of some eighty strokes per minute. The rapid
trituration of ore and sulphides is found much more effective than the slower
strokes of heavier stamps. The mill is driven by water in the wet season. This
is brought by a flume from a very substantial dam above. A powerful engine is
also at hand; and at this season, when water runs low, it assists the water-
wheel, gradually increasing in power until, later, the water is taken off altogether
and reserved for washing. The “ clean-up” every fourteen days varies slightly
in results, the tendency being always to increase. The ore is not selected, but
always that is taken which most facilitates the operations of the miners. No
day’s work is thrown away, and no stroke of the pick made that does not tend
directly to the main point of getting ore. This is the secret of success. From
this mine, which has been worked for the last thirteen years by Mr. Hayward—
himself a most experienced and skilful operator in every branch of the business
—assisted by three able men (Messrs. Hazlehurst, Morgan, and Hunter), there
has been extracted probably six to seven millions of dollars. This is a great
fact; but, what is more important to the public, a still greater fact presents
itself, viz., that quartz veins increase in width and value in proportion to depth.
The mine in question shows a true fissure—an injection of gold-bearing quartz
from below, and which tapers off in size and value as it approaches the surface.
Following it down a distance of 1200 feet has demonstrated this fact. There
are no other mines that approach this in depth. The Eureka mine, in Grass
Yalley, is 300 feet down, but is of richer rock than was the Sutter Creek mine
at that depth. The ore is of the same appearance in both. Considering all
these circumstances, the public will have to look forward to a gold production in
this State of a magnitude compared to which all that has gone before is nothing.
It is to be borne in mind that miners now have not to encounter the fearful
trials that beset Mr. Hayward’s early struggles. The cost of living is barely
one-fourth; wages are less than one-half; transportation is greatly reduced;
steam and rail now bring both Sutter Creek and Grass Valley, 190 miles each
from San Francisco, within twenty hours’journey without breaking a night’s rest;
and lastly, money, instead of being 10 per cent, per month, is 10 per cent, per
annum. Capital is now so abundant and so employed, that no
man who has a good mine need want capital to work it. The facilities of travel
into Nevada and Amador countries will soon embrace every important section,
and tap every reservoir of wealth.’ ,


tons, taken from depths up to 570 feet, averaged 6 dwts. 20 grs. per
ton.
Thirty tons taken from a vein in the Mariners Reef, Maryborough,
which at the depth of 560 feet was ten inches thick, yielded 160 ozs.,
being at the rate of 5 ozs. 6 dwts. 16 grs. per ton.
The Sisters Company, Little Bendigo, near Ballarat, crushed 200 tons,
obtained at a depth of 567 feet, which yielded 96 ozs. 18 dwts., being an
average of upwards of 9| dwts, to the ton.
At depths of from 400 to 500 feet.
In the claim of the Albion Company, at Steiglitz, the stone obtained at
400 feet averaged 9| ozs. of gold to the ton. The manager in his report
sa y S ; —“ The yield of gold has been steadily increasing with the depth of
the vein, and at the above depth the average yield is more than at any
crushing since the formation of the company.”
The Victoria Company, Clunes, crushed 2898 tons from a depth of
406 feet, with a yield of nearly 6 dwts. per ton. Between this and 460
feet, 2814 tons yielded an average of 4 dwts. 11 grs. per ton.
The Sisters Company, at Little Bendigo, near Ballarat, crushed 2763
tons from depths varying from 429 to 470 feet, and the yield of gold
was 6J dwts. per ton of quartz crushed.
Campbell’s Reef at Moyston, proved to be very rich at from 400 to
450 feet. Various companies crushed 4512 tons of stone, which yielded
an average of 1 oz. 2 dwts. 16 grs. per ton. Two lots, of 224 tons and
402 tons, included in the above, yielded averages of 2 ozs. 2h dwts. and
1 oz. 12 dwts. 19 grs. respectively.
The Gross and Flat Reefs, at Pleasant Creek, yielded stone at depths of
from 400 to 460 feet from which -gold was obtained averaging 1 oz. per
ton from over 4000 tons crushed.
A parcel of 482 tons from a depth of 400 feet at Thornhills Reef,
Maldon, averaged 15 dwts. per ton.
The Homeward Bound Company obtained from the Rocky Point Reef,
Stanley, 550 tons, yielding 18 dwts. per ton. It was raised from a depth
of 400 feet.
A crushing of 80 tons from the same depth on the Rose, Thistle, and
Shamrock Reef, Buckland, averaged 3 ozs. per ton.
At depths of from 300 to 400 feet.
At Thornhills Reef, Maldon, a lot of 146 tons of stone was obtained
from a depth of 310 feet, which yielded 221 3 ozs., or an average of
about 1| oz. per ton.
At Nuggety Reef, Maldon, from a depth of 300 feet, 1212 tons were
obtained, which yielded 902 ozs., or nearly an average of f oz. per ton.
Johnson's Reef Company, Eaglehawk, obtained from a depth of 325 feet
116 tons of stone, which yielded an average of 18 dwts. per ton.
During the two latter quarters of 1864, the Port Phillip Company, at
Clunes, crushed a total of 26,354 tons of stone, obtained from a depth of
300 feet to 374 feet, and which yielded a total of 10,119|- ozs., or an
average of more than 1\ dwts. per ton.
The Hit or Miss Company, Redcastle, obtained from a depth of 300
feet a lot of 35 tons of stone, which gave an average of nearly 5 ozs. to
the ton. Another lot of 56 tons was obtained from the same depth at


Clarke's Welcome Reef, in the same locality, which yielded nearly 3 ozs.
to the ton.
The Albion Company, Steiglitz, obtained from a depth of 320 feet 80
tons of stone, which yielded an average of 2| ozs. of gold.
The Homeward Bound Company, Rocky Point, Stanley, produced from
a depth of 300 feet a lot of 45 tons, which yielded an average of 3f o ozs.
per ton. The reef at this depth is 2 feet thick.
Five hundred and sixty-seven tons from a depth of 340 feet were
obtained by the Band of Hope Company, Little Bendigo, which yielded
422 ozs., or nearly | oz. per ton.
A lot of 410 tons of stone, from a depth of 385 feet, was obtained from
the old prospecting claim on Poverty Reef ’ Tarnagulla, which yielded
when crushed over 1 oz. per ton.
The Moonlight . Company, Pleasant Creek, obtained 808 tons from a
depth of 360 feet, which yielded more than oz. per ton.
At the depth of 320 feet, 1510 tons of quartz were obtained from
Bluchers and Ironstone Reef, at Maryborough, which yielded an average of
nearly \ oz. per ton.
The Britannia Company, Carngham, obtained an average yield of
upwards of 5| ozs. to the ton from 3198 tons of stone, taken from different
depths reaching to a maximum of 340 feet. It is reported that the quality
of the stone does not vary in any material degree at the different levels.
The Energetic Company, Victoria Reef, Long Gully, obtained from a
depth of 305 feet 105 tons of stone, which yielded an average of more than
14ozs, per ton. Also the Comet Company in the same locality obtained
2039 tons from a depth of 360 feet, which yielded upwards of per ton.
The Eaglehawh Union Company, Maldon, obtained 1295 tons of quartz
from a depth of 300 feet, which yielded an average of upwards of 3-i- ozs.
per ton.
The Alabama Company, Caledonia Gully, Heathcote, obtained a lot of
374 tons of quartz, raised from a depth of 300 feet, which yielded an
average of upwards of 1| oz. per ton.
Energetic Company, Long Gully, had a crushing from the
Victoria Reef of 1294 ozs, from 55 tons of quartz. This stone was
obtained from a depth of 305 feet. The last reported crushing (for the
first quarter of the current year) of the same company gives an average of
upwards of 14| ozs. to the ton of stone.
At depths of from 200 to 300.
The Bolivia Reef, at Castlemaine, at 200 feet averaged over 1 oz. to the
ton. One crushing of 140 tons averaged 5| ozs.
Tyson's Reef, Sandhurst, has yielded a large amount of gold. One lot of
stone from a depth of 200 feet yielded 1 oz. per ton.
The Reef named “ Poverty," at Tarnagulla, has proved to be one of the
richest in the colony. At 200 feet depth it yielded 600 ozs. of gold
weekly. At 300 feet, in claim No. 5 north, the reef was 6 feet thick, and
averaged from 6 to 7 ozs. per ton.
The Sclavonian Reef, at Redcastle, proved very rich at a depth of 250
feet; four crushings of 33, 32, 22, and 30 tons yielded 11, 6£, 15£, and
12i ozs. per ton respectively.
The New Chum and Cross Reefs, at Pleasant Creek, at depths of from
270 to 300 feet, averaged nearly 13 dwts. per ton.


The Britannia Reef, at Carngham, has yielded a large amount of gold.
At a depth of 250 feet the stone averaged about 7 dwts. per ton.
Two lots from Fenteman’s and Perkin's Reefs, Tarrangower, each of
6 tons, yielded respectively an average of 1 oz. 10 dwts. and 3 ozs. per
ton. It was obtained at a depth of 240 feet.
Twenty-three tons from a depth of 200 feet on the Catherine Reef,
Eaglehawk, yielded 341 ozs. of gold, or nearly 15 ozs. per ton.
The Yankee Company, Clunes, in 1860, crushed about 120 tons weekly,
obtained at a depth of 230 feet, which yielded at the rate of 1| oz. per ton.
The Albert Reef, at Whroo, was 2 feet thick at 245 feet deep. The
gold was uniformly diffused throughout the stone, and averaged about
12 ozs. to the ton.
The Hicks Reef, Gordon’s, at 210 feet, was about 18 inches thick. A
crushing of 30 tons yielded 30 ozs.
During the first three quarters of 1864, the Port Phillip Company,
Clunes, crushed upwards of 30,000 tons, obtained at depths of from 230
to 300 feet, which averaged nearly 7 dwts. per ton. Since that date
they have attained a depth of 370 feet, and the yield is stated under the
head of quartz obtained from over 300 feet.
The Cornish United Company, Ballarat, crushed 1000 tons, from a
depth of 200 feet; average, 4 dwts.
Bow and Co. obtained from a depth of 200 feet, out of the Rose, Thistle,
and Shamrock Claim, a lot of 800 tons of stone, which yielded an average
of over 1| oz. per ton.
Two separate lots of 3000 tons each have been obtained by two
different companies on the Oriental Reef, which were raised from a depth
of from 200 feet to 250 feet, and which yielded an average of 10 dwts.
and 6 dwts. respectively when crashed.
The Prince of Wales Company, Cobblers, obtained from a depth of 380
feet below the surface, but only a few feet below the level of the bed rock,
2007 tons of stone, which averaged when crushed over 12 dwts. per ton.
The reef from which the stone was taken at the above depth was 12 feet
thick. Subsequently it is reported as 17 feet thick, at a lower depth.
The Surveyor for the St. Arnaud Mining Division reports as follows of
a reef, named the Jerejaw, lately discovered near St. Arnaud :—“lt differs
from most reefs by taking a remarkably straight course for three-eighths
of a mile ; its bearing is 29° east of south ; it is about a foot and a half
thick, and has very little underlay. Two cmshings from it of 24 tons
and 35 tons have yielded respectively 72|- and 20 ozs. of gold. Besides
gold, there are found in it sulphurets of lead and iron, also grey sulphuret
and green carbonate of copper; and chromate of iron has also been seen
in it. There is an elvan underlying flatly across it, which, with the metals
found in it, give indications of its depth and permanence.” 7 "
The figures here cited are sufficient to convince even the most sceptical
that theories formed on insufficient data are likely to be dangerous and
* More than 300 specimens of auriferous quartz have been collected from the
mines in all parts of the colony, and these will be exhibited. They have been
taken out of the veins at various depths ; and the stataments in this paper will
be strengthened and confirmed, if persons who are interested in this question
will peruse the catalogue and carefully examine the blocks of quartz.


injurious to science, as well as to retard the progress of a country, A man
who had examined the goldfields at Sandhurst, and who had known no
other, would probably form theories which would prevent him from seeking
for gold at Ballarat or Daylesford ; and in like manner the geologist who
has made a hasty survey of the Ural may not be in the best position to
direct the miners of Victoria and New South Wales. We should receive
his hints with respect, but his theories should not be blindly accepted, nor
should we make the grave mistake of accepting as laws governing the
distribution of gold those rules which are applicable only to limited areas.
A person possessing local knowledge, and with the power to observe, is a
better guide in the bush than one who has gained a knowledge of the
country from maps and books; and, in the same way, one who has worked
in a deep lead, and found gold in it, is able to dispute with the most learned
man who may have predicted that gold would not be found under basalt.
AURIFEROUS ALLUVIONS.
There are 65,484 miners engaged in getting gold from the auriferous
alluvions; and 4131 machines of various kinds, and 5835 sluice boxes,
and 621 sluices and toms, are used exclusively in this kind of mining.
The quantities of gold obtained by the alluvial miners during the past three
years are, as nearly as can be ascertained, as follows:—1863 1 133 567
ozs.; 1864, 1,041,8311 ozs.; 1865, 1,093,801 ozs.
The deposits of gold are found at various depths; in some places in the
soil at the surface, and at,others as far down as 300, 400, and 500 feet.
The strata are of different ages, and their character and position determine
the mode of operations.
Gold is obtained in many places from the shallow gullies and the aurife-
rous soils in the vicinity of quartz veins by the old-fashioned methods.
The tub and cradle are still used by the poorer miners, even on the old
goldfields, and the prospector who finds a new goldfield is glad to avail
himself of these. The Chinaman may be seen everywhere scraping the
earth from the hill sides, or laboriously draining old excavations in the
shallow alluvions, in order to get at the washdirt; and if he is not able to
purchase a horse and a puddling machine, he washes the earth in boxes
and cradles. When the goldfields were first discovered, very large quan-
tities of gold were obtained by the simple process of washing the earth in
a tub, and nuggets of large size were unearthed from quite shallow pits.
The picture of the digger in a red shirt, stooping over a pool of water and
washing the sand taken out of the tub or cradle in a large shallow tin dish,
was twelve years ago familiar to every colonist. Then the hill sides were
clothed with grass, and lofty trees gave a pleasant shade. The ponds and
waterholes were not everywhere filled with mud ; and the parrot and the
cockatoo, and perhaps a startled kangaroo or an emu flying from its ene-
mies, reminded the immigrant that he was in a strange land. Now the
scene of his labour is changed. The forest in the vicinity of the older
workings has disappeared; the hills, dug over and over again, are white
and yellow, and red and brown ; railways, macadamised roads, well-made
streets, and large and lofty buildings, have entirely altered the aspect of the
once well-known creeks and gullies.
Where the position of the strata admits of it, gold is separated from the
earth by the operation of sluicing , and in a few places by the hydraulic


method. The latter is not common, owing to the expense attending the
collecting and conveying of the great quantities of water necessary for its
proper performance. By means of a hose, the under strata are washed
away and the bank is excavated without the aid of the pick or shovel.
The water is used at the same time to separate the gold from the earth,
proper channels being cut for the purpose. When a plentiful supply of
water is available, this plan will find favour amongst the miners ; and large
areas, which cannot be profitably worked in the ordinary way, will no
doubt be made to yield the gold which they contain. In ground sluicing
a narrow excavation is made in the alluvium down to the bed rock, and
the stream of water diverted into this channel at once aids in the work ot
excavation and washes the soil, leaving the gold in the hollows and
crevices of the rock. From time to time these are cleaned out, and the
gold freed from adhering clay and earth by washing in a pan Box
sluicing is performed in the following manner Narrow boxes of sawn
wood, inclined at a low angle, and from twenty to forty feet in length, the
one delivering into the other, are fitted with ledges of wood winch act as
ripples, and into these boxes the auriferous earth is thrown. The stream
of water running through the boxes is mixed with the soil by a workman
who rakes the box continually with an iron fork, and the earth is thus
washed olf, leaving the gold in the ledges formed by the wooden stops or
ripples. A perforated iron plate at the end of the upper box separates the
coarse gravel from the earth washed down into the lower boxes. At the
close of the day’s operations the wooden ripples are lifted and all the gold
and fine sand are made to fall into a large bucket, after which the metal is
washed off clean in a tin dish. As much as £7, £lO, and £2O per week
are earned by the industrious miner by this method where the earth is
rich and the supply of water sufficient. Many of the races are some miles
in length, and in the Beechworth district large sums of money have been
expended on works for the conducting of water.
As little as four grains of gold to the load of earth will remunerate the
miner where this method can be applied with facility.
Those who have stated that the shallow alluvions are exhausted have
made a mistake. Even the old drifts at Ballarat, Castlemame, and
Sandhurst yet offer profitable employment to a great many miners ; and
they will for a long time continue to yield great quantities of gold. At
the old diggings at Dunolly heavy nuggets are found nearly every day,
and large areas of auriferous ground there, and in other parts of the
Maryborough District, have not yet been touched by the miner, in the
shallow alluvions in the Gipps Land Ranges, and in tie nor casern,
angle of the colony, at the sources of the Murray, we may expect to find
hundreds of tons of gold, without penetrating the deeper tertiaries ; and
in these tracts a plentiful supply of water will admit o e groun eg
sluiced, or worked, by the hydraulic method.
When we leave the quite recent deposits which are due to forces now in
operation, and where we can trace the gold to source (ei ler o* e
auriferous reef on the hill or to the older gravels which t e mo ern s ream
has cut into and transported), and proceed to consider ie c mrac er,
position, extent, and age of the auriferous tertiaries, we mee wi i niany
difficulties. It is not possible to do more than guess at the age ; and the
evidence most often has to be sought for, not in the fossils which they
contain, but in the relation which these tertiaries bear o o er a jacen


formations. But though it is true that the geological age cannot yet be
hxecl with that precision which is desirable, the limits are sufficiently well
defined for all practical purposes. The deep leads which up to this time
have been explored are not older, it is supposed, than the Pliocene : it is
m/V marme P roduction has yet been found associated with
gold drifts, and miners are nowhere employed in getting gold from drifts
underlpng fossibferous strata. All these statements may appear to accord
with the old theories, and thus satisfy the indolent mind, but they must be
received with caution. Negative evidence is sometimes rudely destroyed.
Thus it has been affirmed that marine fossils have been found in the deep
Uads at Creswick but whether truly or not it is impossible at present to
say. Gold has been found, it is alleged on the authority of a person
whose character is above suspicion, in the Geelong tertiaries, but gold
dust may have been lost and scattered at the point from whence he took
the earth Moreover the deep leads and other strata have been but
imperfectly explored, and at any moment all the old theories may be
upset by the finding of gold in fossiliferous rocks of the tertiry or
secondary age. J
In order to reach the older auriferous deposits it is necessary to sink
deep shafts; and in consequence of the course of the lead not being
apparent on the surface, it frequently happens that the shaft penetrates the
bed-rock at a considerable distance from the gutter. In such a case the
shaft is sunk through the schist to a sufficient depth, and exploring drifts
are carried as far as 1200 feet or 1500 feet before the auriferous gravel
is touched _ The quantity of auriferous drift overlying the palaeozoic rocks
at Ballarat is very considerable. It is found not only in the main leads
but also in the numerous tributaries of these, and in isolated patches
. vanes in thickness from 1 to 12 feet, and the average
yield of gold is from 10 dwts. to 21 ozs. per cubic yard. The mines at
Ballarat are rapidly extending southwards; and, travelling from the Dividing
Bange towards Rokewood, one sees everywhere tall chimneys and engine-
houses, and vast spoil heaps. The shafts vary in depth from 50 to & 500
le . e f- Tll l e y are J ined and supported by wooden slabs about 8 inches in
width and inches in thickness, and there are two compartments fitted
with slides in which cages run. Many of the mines are extensive and well-
conducted, and they are under the control of managers who are fully
competent to undertake large and important works. J
Ihe auriferous earth is composed of quartz-gravel, sand, and clay, and
the gold occurs in small grains, scales, and occasionally in large water
worn pieces, weighing sometimes as much as 1000, 2000, or 3000 ozs
Ihe mode of extracting the gold from the earth is simple, and the
machinery employed is inexpensive. The puddling machine consists of a
wooden box forming the circumference of a circle, within which two
harrows are made to move either by a horse travelling round the circle or
by steam-power driving a shaft. A sufficient quantity of water is made
to flow into the box or channel, and the earth is slowly washed. The box
is cleared from time to time, and the resulting rich sand is passed through a
cmdle, and the‘gold finally washed clean in a tin dish. In some districts
where the washdirt is composed of water-worn quartz pebbles strongly
bound together by iron oxide and argillaceous and siliceous cements, it is
crushed under stamps, and the gold extracted by amalgamation with
mercury, exactly as is done with auriferous quartz obtained from veins.


Deep leads are found at Ballarat, Creswick, Daylesford, Smythesdale,
Moorabool, Raglan, Ararat, Sandhurst, Malmsbury, Taradale, Indigo, in
the valley of the Ovens near Beechworth, Maryborough, Carisbrook,
Talbot, Avoca, &c., &c. The cost of sinking shafts varies, of course, with
the character of the rock to be penetrated and the amount of water to be
contended with. At Ballarat, where the drift is covered with a great thick-
ness of basalt, the cost of sinking is great. It is difficult to give an
average, but perhaps 30s. to 40s. per vertical foot for a shaft measuring
5 feet by 3 feet would be an approximation. Some idea of the nature of the
operations may be gained from an examination of the following sections :
White Horse Lead, Ballarat.
Feet.
Surface soil 2
Basalt, clay and soil 10
Basalt 54
Clay 37
Basalt 79
Clay 46
Basalt 45
Black clay 12
Brown clay 16
Drift and gravel 7
Washdirt 11
Total depth 319
Koh-i-Noor Company, Golden Point,
Ballarat.
Basalt HI
Light brown clay 10
Gray clay 15
Basalt 70
Brown clay 11
Schist rock* 154
Total depth 371
When the first difficulties are
Tnkermann Lead, Ballarat.
Feet.
Surface soil 4
Basalt 85
Blue clay 4
Drift 4
Bed sandy clay, with water 36
Slate reef* 77
Washdirt 6
Total depth 216
Indigo Main Lead, Beechworth
District.
Bed and white clays.., 30
Gravel 30
Bed and brown clays 40
Bed sand and drift 20
Bed gravelly clay 5
Gravel 4
Washdirt 0%
Total depth. 129^
overcome—when the miner reaches the
washdirt —his reward is great. For years he may have been contending
with hard rock, with loose wet drift worse than rock, or spending his time
uselessly in driving galleries in the wrong direction, but when at last he
touches the gutter lie finds wealth. Gold which has been hidden for
perhaps millions of years—-gold which has been purified by contact with
water and air, whereby the base metals have been oxidised and carried
away—is presented to his view. Every shovelful of earth is valuable, and
not a handful of it but gives evidence of the great forces which, during
the lapse of ages, have ground down and washed the detritus of quartz
reefs and slates.
The following return of the yield of gold from a few claims at Ballarat,
which has been compiled by Mr. Harrie Wood, District Registrar, is
instructive :
Value of gold obtained.
Sir William Don Company—From Nov., 1865, to 6th Sept., 1866 £62,375 6 8
Great Extended Bedan Gold Mining Company—From June, 1861,
to 6th Sept., 1866; 438,289 7 11
United Extended Band of Hope Company—To 6th Sept., 1866... 387,138 8 5
Albion Gold Minins: Company—From Dec., 1861, to 6th Sept.,
1866 175,420 5 0
St. George’s United Gold Mining Company—To 30th Aug., 1866 69,948 18 4
Koh-i-Noor Gold Mining Company—From 1859 to 6th Sept ,1866 390,990 0 0
* Bedrock sunk through to attain the level of the gutter.


The block claims of the above-named companies comprise an area of
1400 acres, but only 232 acres of ground have been worked out. The
average yield of gold per acre, therefore, is nearly £6570. It is not
surprising that mines of such value should be well managed, and that
all modern improvements, including the lighting of the galleries by gas,
should be eagerly adopted and fairly tried.
It is impossible, in a brief statement such as this is, to give any accurate
account of the several strata found on the goldfields. At Ballarat, Cres-
wick, Raglan, Yandoit, Daylesford, and other places, fossil wood, wood
almost unchanged, soft mud enclosing leaves so little altered as to preserve
their fragrance, as well as fossil bones belonging to the marsupialia, are
frequently found. The leaf shales from Daylesford are very interesting.
If the fossils are slightly rubbed with the finger the distinctive odour of the
Eucalyptus is at once perceptible.
Rolled fragments of sulphide of antimony have been found in the deep
leads at Ballarat, by Mr. R. M. Sergeant; and Mr. E. J. Bateman, of Talbot,
and Mr. Newman, of Avoca, have forwarded a large collection of specimens
of native lead, which have been taken out of the deep leads in those
localities. Many of the specimens are richly studded with grains of gold.
Some of the pieces are a little water-worn, and others apparently not much
changed in form. There is no reason to believe that these specimens are
not genuine, but they have not yet been analysed. Mr. Newman was good
enough to inspect the washdirt, and he says he is convinced that the lead
occurs in considerable quantities in the Avoca main lead.
NUGGETS FOUND IN THE ALLUVIUM.
The number of large nuggets which have been found in the colony, and
respecting which information is available in the records of the Mining
Department, is 98, and the aggregate weight is 36,218 ozs. 2 dwts. 22 grs.,
showing an average of 369 ozs. 11 dwts. 11 grs. Some of these weighed
nearly 3000 ozs., and some as little as 5 dwts. It must be surprising to
those who have carefully considered the question that the number is so
small, but it must be remembered that a great number of nuggets have
been found which are not included in this statement, and respecting
which nothing certain is known. The formation of nuggets, strange to
say, has been accounted for in various ways. Numerous theories have
been invented to account for their origin. Some suppose that they
have grown in the alluviums, getting larger day by day, and that they
have increased by successive layers of gold being imposed on a solid
nucleus ! This may cause the reader to smile, but nothing affecting such
subjects which is advanced by persons of intelligence is fairly a subject
of ridicule. The fact that nuggets in general are almost free from
impurities is, in the minds of some, an argument against their origin in
common with small particles of gold in quartz veins ; and, again, it is
suggested that large pieces of gold are not usually found in veins.
Mineralogists state that the purity of alluvial gold is due to its having
been exposed for long periods to the action of water and atmospheric air,
whereby the silver, copper, iron, &c., which are alloyed with the gold in
the veins, have been decomposed and removed. This explanation is so
reasonable, having regard to the constituents of the minerals usualty
associated with gold in the alluviums, that it is almost startling to find
any person bold enough to doubt the sufficiency of it.


Large pieces of gold have been found in quartz veins, and scarcely any
large nugget has been unearthed which has not had a great quantity of
quartz adhering to it or intermixed with it ;* and surely it is but reason-
able to conclude that nuggets have been formed in the veins in the same
manner, and probably at the same time, as other smaller pieces of gold.
That we have not found as many large pieces of gold in the veins as in the
alluviums is just what might have been expected. Every superficial foot
of auriferous drift represents many thousand feet vertical of veins ; and
until we shall have explored the existing veins completely, and ground
them down and worked them to a depth equal to that operated on by the
denuding forces in past ages, we cannot say whether or not the proportion
of nuggets found in the alluviums is in excess.
MANAGEMENT OF THE GOLDFIELDS.
The Mining Statute, 1865 (Act 29 Victoria, No. 291), came into
operation on the Ist January, 1866.
The enactment enters into all subjects connected with mining, almost
to the most minute detail. Under its provisions a document is issued,
termed a “ Miner’s Right,” which is in force for one year, and it empowers
the holder thereof to mine for gold on Crown Lands, on the payment of ss.
Under the former Act this charge was £l. This document can be
taken out for any number of years not exceeding fifteen. There is also
power for a Company to take out a Consolidated Miner’s Right for all
ground held by them under the Mining Board By-Laws. A holder of a
Miner’s Right may take up a quarter of an acre of land for residence
purposes, which he is at liberty to assign to any other holder of a Miner’s
Right; and the “ right ” itself may be assigned. The extent of ground
that may be held for mining purposes is determined by the local Mining
Boards, and it varies in different districts.
Persons requiring to carry on business upon the goldfields are
permitted to occupy an area not exceeding a quarter of an acre of Crown
Lands, upon payment of £5 per annum. This license may be transferred
to another person, who can, upon payment of a fee of 10s. and
the surrender of the original licence, obtain a new one for the unexpired
term. The value of all buildings held under Miners’ Rights, or business
licenses, is allowed to the owners in the event of the land being put up
for sale; and the ascertained value is added to the upset price.
No person can sue before a Warden or in any Court to recover possession
of any land, claim, share, &c., held by virtue of a Miner’s Right, unless he
* The hundredweight of gold discovered on Dr. Kerr’s station, in New Sout
Wales, was taken from a vein which cropped out on the surface. “ The largest
of the blocks was about a foot in diameter, and weighed 75 lbs. gross. Out of
this piece 60 lbs. of pure gold were taken. Before separation it was beautifully
encased in quartz.” The “ Blanche Barkly” nugget contained 2 lbs. of quartz,
clay, and oxide of iron. The two large nuggets found at Dunolly, which
weighed 2952 ozs., presented gold distributed through a rust-coloured matrix.
The “ Lady Hotham” nugget contained much quartz and sulphuret of iron. The
large nugget found at Canadian Gully, Ballarat, showed gold finely intersected
with quartz. Every nugget, whether large or small, which has not presented
indications of having been very much worn, has borne with it proofs that it had
been broken out of a vein. The most careless examination of any large piece of
gold would satisfy the observer that it had not been formed differently from
smaller pieces; but whatever is uncommon is, in the minds of some, marvellous.


was himself in possession of such a document or included in a con-
solidated right at the time his alleged title first accrued.
The Governor is empowered by the Act to grant leases and licenses
for mining purposes.'
The rents for gold-mining leases are fixed by the Eegulations at £1
sterling per acre per annum ; for mineral leases, at 2s. per acre per annum ;
and two per cent, on the value of the mineral or metal at the mouth of
the mine ; and the fee for searching licences is at the rate of £lO per
annum sterling for every square mile so taken up.
Special leases for gold-mining purposes may be granted of an area not
exceeding 100 acres, at a nominal rent, to discoverers of new goldfields.
The colony is at present divided into six mining districts, viz., Ballarat,
Sandhurst, Castlemaine, Beechworth, Maryborough, and Ararat, and in
each there is a legislative body termed a Mining Board. The members
(ten for each board) are elected by ballot ; and each male holder of a
miner’s right is entitled to a vote. The members hold office for twelve
months, and are paid at the rate of £5O per annum each. These boards
possess large powers, which are named in the Act.
Each district has its separate Court of Mines, which is a court of
record and is presided over by a district Judge, who must be a barrister of
not less than eight years standing. There is also one of the Supreme
Court Judges appointed to act as Chief Judge of the Court of Mines.
The Courts of Mines have jurisdiction to hear and determine “ all suits
cognizable by a Court of Law or by a Court of Equity wffiich may arise
concerning any Crown Land claimed under miners’ rights, leases, or
licenses,” mining partnerships, boundaries, contribution to calls, and
generally all questions and disputes which may arise between miners in
relation to mining upon Crown Lands. These Courts possess the necessary
staff of clerks and bailiffs, whose several duties are defined by the Statute ;
and under its provisions minors and representatives may sue and be sued,
and the Court can make an order requiring a Warden, Surveyor, or other
officer to perform the duties of his office, and may obtain the assistance of
accountants, engineers, and other scientific persons.
The Wardens on the goldfields, of whom there are forty, receive their
appointment from the Governor-in-Council. The duties are mostly of a
judicial character, and they act generally also as Police Magistrates.
As Wardens they hear and determine all suits cognizable by a Court of
Law which the Courts of Mines are empowered to hear, and also they may
proceed summarily to settle any dispute concerning any Crown Land,
share, or interest in any claim.
The mode of procedure before a Warden in the first instance is to take
out a summons (cost 2s. 6d.); this brings the case on for hearing, which
is conducted in a manner very similar to cases brought before Justices in
Petty Sessions. The Warden has to keep a register or record of all
complaints and decisions, a copy of which must be furnished to persons
interested, if demanded. Cases may be tried before assessors if desired,
upon payment of two pounds (£2) for assessors’ fees.
The Wardens forward to the Mining Department monthly reports of
their districts, and receive, investigate, and report upon all applications for
leases. The Mining Surveyors, fifty-three in number, survey the ground
applied for under lease, and report to the Minister of Mines.
Officers are appointed by the Governor-in-Gouncil, called Mining


attention.
About 750 acres of land are held under lease for silver mining purposes
at St. Arnaud : and it is probable that, if the operations of the lessees be
successful, a very large area will be occupied and worked.
According to the returns received it appears that the following quantities
have been raised and smelted: —
Silver ore.
Silver.
Tons.
ozs. dwts.
Previously—Up to 31st Dec., 1865 4,480
6,786 4
From 1st Jan, to 3lst Dec., 1865 1,400
3,379 0
5,880
10,165 4
Registrars, of whom there are fifty ; they keep a record of all claims held
under miners’ rights, and issue certificates of title, make all transfers of
sales of shares, and report quarterly to the Mining Department on the
condition of the mines in their several divisions.
The mines of the colony are placed under a Mining Department, whose
head has a seat in the Legislative Assembly and in the Cabinet.
SUPPLY OF WATER TO THE GOLDFIELDS.
In 1860-1, and subsequently, sums of money were voted by Parliament
for the construction of water reservoirs on the goldfields, and several works
were undertaken. Many of these have proved of great service to the
miners, and to the inhabitants of the towns. During the late droughts
they were the means of keeping employed great numbers of persons who
were dependent on the mines for their support, and they furnished also
good water for domestic purposes in places where formerly water in such
seasons was not to be obtained.
The contour of the country is such as to admit of the construction, at
no great cost, of very large reservoirs ; and though the rainfall is irregular,
and the evaporation very great, these are easily filled, and, even in what
are called dry seasons, moderately well supplied.
Of late more than usual attention has been devoted to the subject of water
supply, and extensive surveys have been conducted by Mr. H. 0. Christo-
pherson, under the direction of the Honourable the Minister of Mines,
and several carefully devised schemes have been submitted for consideration.
The twenty-one schemes which have been proposed would cost about
£1,161,700, and not one of them, it is believed, would not prove of
permanent value to the country for gold mining, for irrigation, and for
domestic purposes. Contracts have been entered into for some of the
works to supply Geelong, and Sandhurst and Castlemaine, and it is
probable that in a short time other extensive schemes will be undertaken.
METALLIFEROUS MINERALS, COAL AND LIGNITE, CLAYS,
SLATES, AND MISCELLANEOUS MINERALS.
Silver.
The ores of silver are found and worked at St. Arnaud. They occur as
embolite (chloro-bromide of silver) and as sulphides with iron pyrites,
argentiferous galena, native silver, native copper, the ores of copper, anglesite,
mimetene, zinc-blende, arseniate of iron, native sulphur, brown iron ore,
ores of manganese, &c. The deeper the shafts the more encouraging, it is
said, are the prospects. A fine specimen of silver in the Intercolonial
Exhibition—obtained by Mr. Masters, of St. Arnaud —is worthy of


Year.
1861 ..
Silver ore.
tons. cwt.
Silver,
ozs. dwts.
1864 ...
1865 ...
Totals
10 6
9.161 16
The following statement of exports has been received from the Customs
Department:—
9,161 15
Gold and silver alloys occur at Reedy Creek, a tributary of the Goulburn
din many quartz reefs on the goldfields. The ores of silver are found’
is said, at Pleasant Creek. Until the eye of the miner becomes
accustomed to the ores, and until he is able to recognise them at sight, it
is not likely, however, that any new discoveries will be made.
Stream Tin (oxide of tin) occurs in many places in the mining district of
Beechworth, ana in the beds of the tributaries of the River Yarra, the River
Thomson, and the River Latrobe. It has been found also at Taradale and
Strath bogie. It is believed that veins have not yet been discovered ; but
those who are acquainted with the character of stanniferous vein stones
will not be surprised to learn this. It is not easy to recognize these ; they
might be found and thrown away, again and again, by men who have some
pretensions to a knowledge of mineralogy—and it is not to be expected
that the gold miner, if he discovered a vein, would know its value '
Considerable quantities of stream tin have been obtained from the
Woolshed Creek and its tributaries, near Beech worth. It is not possible
to orm an estimate of the number of tons procured by the miners previous
to 1864, but about 120 tons were raised during that year.
During 1865, 150 tons were raised and 30 tons were smelted.
The following statement of exports has been obtained from the Customs
Department:—
Tin Ore. fnjio
Previously—Up to 31st December, 1864 2364 7 ’
From Ist January to 31st December, 1865,"‘‘biack sand’’ *" 16 8
2380 15
Tin.' lbs.
Previously—Up to 31st December, 1864, 160 ingots, say 4800
From Ist January to 31st December, 1865 3360
Ilmenite, pleonaste, tourmaline, zircons, quartz, &c., are found with the
oxide of tin in the Yarra basin.
Copper.
Native Copper occurs at St. Arnaud, Specimen Gully, Castlemaine, and
on the River Thomson, associated with other ores of copper. Blue and
green carbonates of copper, and copper pyrites, occur in small quantities
at Steiglitz, Castlemaine, Blue Mountains, Bendigo, St. Arnaud, Ingle-
wood, Dunolly, Gipps Land, &c. Cuproplumbite is found at MTvor.
Though two leases of land had been granted for copper mining at
Heathcote up to the 31st December, 1864, it does not appear from the
returns furnished that any copper ore has been raised. One of the leases
as been declared forfeited ; the other is still in force.


Antimony.
Sulphuret of antimony and oxide of antimony are found at Ileatlicotc,
Whroo, Anderson’s Creek, Rutherglen, Maryborough, &c. Nearly all the
antimony ores which have been raised have been obtained from the mines
at Heathcote. A large proportion of gold is mixed with the antimony ores
in these veins. According to the returns received it appears that the
following quantities have been raised : —
Antimony Ore. tons. cwt. lbs.
Previously—Up to 31st December, 1864 ••••■• ®
From 1st January to 31st December, I860 u
2114 0 26
*Mr. Dardanelli has been ill communication with Messrs. Johnson, Matthey and Co.,
assayers, of Hatton-garden, London, in reference to this ore. He forwarded a sample,
and it was assayed with the following results :—
Metallic Antimony 54'35 per cent.
Gold 8175 ounces 1 r {. on 0 20 cwt. of ore.
Silver . )
The vein of copper found near the River Thomson, in Gipps Land, has
been to some extent explored, and it is said that in some places’ it is
eighteen feet thick. Sulphides, black oxide of copper, and native copper
have been obtained from this locality. A very large collection of fine
samples of copper and the ores of copper, forwarded by Wm. Pearson,
Esq., M L.A., are exhibited. The attention of mineralogists is directed
particularly to the specimen of native copper.
Luring the year 1865 nine licenses to search for the ores of copper, for
an aggregate area of 5760 acres, were granted, and some of the licensees
have applied for leases, in order that, under a secure tenure, they may open
up the mines, and ascertain the value of them. One of the licenses was
for land at Stringer’s Creek, which is distant about seven miles in a south-
easterly direction from the copper mines on the River Thomson.
Twenty tons of copper ore are returned by the Customs Department
as having been exported ; but this was not the produce of Victoria.
Bismuth.
Two searching licenses, each for 640 acres, have been granted for
Bismuth, which is said to occur at Wombat Greek, in the Mining Division
of Omeo. Mr. Howitt, the Warden at Omeo, forwarded samples of the
metal, and has promised to visit the locality and furnish a report.
Molybdenum.
Molybdenite —Sulphuret of Molybdenum— occurs at Yackandandah in
considerable quantities, and fine hexagonal plates have brought to
Melbourne. No attempts have yet been made to work the vein.
Previous to 1865, 682 \ tons of mixed oxides, sulphides, quartz with
gold, and refuse were raised and crushed, for the purpose of extracting the
gold only; and 8 tons 10 cwts. of crude antimony, and 5 tons of regulus,
were reduced from ores smelted promiscuously as experiments.
During 1865 five tons of ore were smelted on the land leased by Messrs.
Coster, Field and Martin.
Ten lessees have failed to make returns for the past year ; but there is
reason to believe they have not raised any ore.


One searching license, for forty-two acres at Blackwood, was granted in
1865. The following statement of exports has been obtained from the
Customs Department:—
Antimony Ore.
. , TT , Antimony Ore. tons. cwt.
Previously—Up to 81st December, 1865 1215 0
From Ist January to 31st December, 1865 153 5
153 5
1368 5
Interesting specimens of oxide and sulphide of antimony have been
forwarded from Whroo by Mr. H. B. Nicholas, Mining Surveyor; and Mr.
B. M. Serjeant, of Ballarat, obtained a good many rounded specimens of
sulphide of antimony from the gutter of the Koh-i-Noor claim, at Ballarat.
The last-named contained a little lead.
Mercury.
One searching license for quicksilver was issued in 1864, but no disco-
veries have yet been reported.
Lead.
Native lead is found in small quantities in the auriferous tertiaries at
Talbot and Avoca. Argentiferous galena, cerusite, anglesite, pyromorphite,
mimetene, and other ores of lead, are found in the mineral veins throughout
the colony.
Coal.
The area of the coal-bearing rocks is about 3000 square miles, or
1,920,000 acres. These rocks occur in Gipps Land, in the counties of
Grant, Bourke, Mornington, and Polwarth, and in the Portland Bay
District.
Pour leases of land have been granted for coal mining purposes, for an
aggregate area of 1827 a. Or. 2 Op.
The localities are near the sea coast, extending from Cape Paterson to
Griffith s Point, in the County of Mornington, Three leases were in force
on the 31st December, 1865, for an aggregate area of 1598 a. 2r. 30p.
According to the returns received from the lessees, it appears that the
following quantities have been raised ;
-d • i tt Coal, tons.
Previously—Up to 31st December, 1864 1933
From Ist January to 31st December, 1865.
The New Griffith’s Point Coal Company report that they have increased
the depth of their bore to 830 feet, and that they have entered into a
contract to put it down to 1000 feet.
The lessee of the block lying to the west of Coal Creek states that he
has not raised any coal during the year 1865; and the Victoria Coal
Company, Cape Paterson, report that they have not raised coal since June
1863. *
The cost of transporting the coal to the place of shipment is very great ;
and this, no doubt, has prevented the proper exploration and working of
the mines.
Ten searching licenses for coal were granted during the year 1865, for an
area of 6367 a. 3r. lip.; and three remained in force on the 31st December,
for an aggregate area of 1319 a. 3r. lip.; two of these were for blocks of


land near Cape Paterson, and one at Geelong, where a bore has been, put
down to a great depth by the ISTewtown and Chilwell Coal Mining Company.
A discovery of coal shale has lately been made about ten miles north-
west of Traralgon, in Gipps Land, and an application has been lodged for a
lease.
Lignite.
Extensive deposits of lignite, some of great thickness, are found at Lal-
Lal, Daylesford, and in Gipps Land.
Four leases of land for mining for lignite were in force on the 31st of
December, 1865, for an aggregate area of 669 a. Or. 24p.
The “ Victoria Brown Coal” and “ Australia Lignite” Companies state
that they are waiting for the results of experiments, which are being made
in Europe, for the purpose of ascertaining the best and most economical
method of cornpressing the material and preparing it for use. They are
making inquiries in Bavaria and Saxony, and the Australia Company say
they have an agent in Prussia for the same purpose.
The Victoria Patent Manure and Chemical Company have raised about
35 tons since the 7th of October last.
The leases of the two former companies are situated near the Lal-Lal
Railway Station; that of the last-named company between the White
Horse and Frenchman’s Leads, at Sebastopol, near Ballarat.
According to the returns received it appears that the following quantities
have been raised :
Previously—Up to 31st December, 1864 200
From Ist January to 31st December, 1865 35
Kaolin and Other Clays.
Thirteen leases of land have been granted for mining for kaolin and
other clays, for an aggregate area of 424 a. Ir. 26p. The localities are Bulla-
Bulla, Lal-Lal, and Dunolly. Two leases were in force on the 31st
December, 1865, for an aggregate area of 24a. 2r. 18p.
The lessees of the block at Dunolly stated, last year, that they proposed
to bring Chinese potters from Canton ; but they have not yet, it appears,
commenced operations.
Some attempts have been made lately to work the clays which are found
to occur near Melbourne ; but, as the lands are not held under lease, no
information has been received from the company.
From returns received it appears that the following quantities have been
raised at Bulla-Bulla :
Previously—Up to 31st December, 1864 1695
From Ist January to 31st December, 1865 62
Flags and Roofing Slates.
Seven leases for quarrying slate were in force on the 31st December,
1865, of an aggregate area of 379 a. 2r. 24p.
The Chewton Flagging and Slate Company commenced operations in
June, 1865, and by the end of the year had raised about 1200 square
yards of flagging.
The Golden Point Flagging and Slate Company, whose lease is also
situated at Chewton, report 300 yards as having been obtained during 1865.


The Victoria Slate Mining Company, Gisborne, have only just com-
menced operations. They state that they have taken out about 1000 slates.
The Penrhyn Slate Quarrying Company, at Wombat, near Creswick,
report that they have got out about 43 tons during the year.
The Moorabool Slate Mining Company state that they have expended
about £2OOO on their leased ground. They are erecting sawing and planing
machinery, and expect that they will be enabled, in a short time, to place
flagging and roofing slates on the market.
Five searching licenses, for an aggregate area of 2090 acres, were granted
in 1865.
Carbonate op Magnesia, or Magnesite.
No report has been received from the licensees, to whom three searching
licences were issued.
Diamonds.
Locality : Beechworth. Diamonds have been obtained, it is said, from
Reid’s Creek, Wooragee, Upper Woolshed, Sebastopol, and El Dorado.
According to a statement prepared last year by Mr. Barnard, who was
then Warden at Beechworth, it appears that forty* diamonds had been
found, from one-eighth of a carat to two and a half carats ; and the
Mining Surveyor reported, on the 31st December, 1864, that a China-
man had found a diamond at Sebastopol, weighing 17'64 carats.
Mr. Gaunt, the Warden at Beechworth, reports that fifteen diamonds
have been found in a claim belonging to Mr. Finn, at the Woolshed,
during the year 1865 ; they weighed from half a carat to one carat.
The numbers, as reported, therefore stand thus :
Previously—(Jp to 31st December, 1864 41
From Ist January to 31st December, 1865 15
Sapphires, &c. 56
No important discoveries have been made during the past year. One
fine sapphire, said to have been found at Donnelly’s Creek, was lately
offered for sale in Melbourne. The sapphire, spinel ruby, topaz, and
zircon, are found in the auriferous drifts; and it is probable that many
valuable stones are thrown away every day. At Tubba-Rubba Creek,
Mornington, and at the Blue Mountain (Trentham), very fine blue
sapphires are found with crystals of zircon and powdered quartz. Fine
specimens have been found also in the Yarra Ranges, where occur also the
onyx, agate, &c. The topaz is found near Pleasant Creek, and some fine
specimens have been brought from that locality.
TABLES.
Table No, 1 shows the quantities of gold obtained in the colony from
the first discovery of the goldfields in 1851 to the 30th June, 1866. The
total is 31,731,344 ozs., equal to £126,925,376. The yield of gold per
man per annum has increased, and in 1865 it was greater than in 1862 ;
the figures being for 1865 £74 4s. 2 - 09 d., and for 1862 £67 14s. sTld.
From an analysis of the yield it appears that, while the quantities of gold
obtained by the alluvial miners as compared with previous years have
increased to £66 16s. 3d. per man per annum, the average earnings of
the quartz miners have decreased to £lOl 10s. s£d. per man per annum.
* The owners of twenty-two of these are known.


This is occasioned by the increase in the number of quartz miners. The
reefs present great attractions to the miner, and numbers have turned their
attention to quartz mining ; but in the earlier stages their labours were
mostly devoted to prospecting and to the opening of new mines, and
consequently the quantity of gold derived from veins is not in proportion
to the numbers employed.
Since the first publication of the mining statistics, information has been
obtained respecting the yield of gold from 3,110,328 tons of quartz
which have been crushed in the colony. The average per ton was 12 dwts.
6-375 grs., and the price per ton of crushing ranged from 2s. 6d. to £1 10s.
It is remarkable that the average earnings of the miners during the past
two years should be so high. We have had a succession of dry seasons,
and the labours of the miners have been often interrupted. With a plentiful
supply of water, it is probable that the yield of gold will greatly increase.
Table No. 2is instructive. It shows the increase of machinery on the
goldfields from 1859 to 1866 ; but a comparison of the figures in the table
without some explanation would probably lead to wrong inferences. The
value of all the machinery in 1859 was £1,155,923, and in 1866
£1,914,712 ; but, owing to the high price of carriage and the difficulty
and cost of procuring machinery in 1859, the value as set down in the
table is exorbitant. A better view is presented by comparing the figures
which relate to the kind and character of the machinery employed.
Whereas in 1859 we had 581 steam engines, representing an aggregate of
8196|- horse-power, we have now (in 1866) 973 steam engines, equal to
18,417 horse-power.
Taking the mean number of miners employed during the year 1865
(83,214), it appears that for each man there was an average of £23 Os. 2|d.
invested in machinery ; or, putting it in another form, for every acre
actually occupied for mining purposes, £l4 4s. 7|d.
The area actually occupied for mining purposes, including land held as
claims, protected by certificates, and leased for gold mining, when
distributed amongst the total number of persons engaged in mining, gives
an average of only la. 2r. IBp. Of course, a great quantity of land not
included in this estimate is from time to time occupied by miners; they
forsake one piece to take up another, and the figures represent the condition
of the goldfields at one period only. Moreover, large areas, but not in
the aggregate exceeding 464,000 acres, are either occupied as claims or
rendered useless for many other purposes by the nature of the mining
operations ; but still the gross area so occupied or withdrawn from other
occupation is very small when compared with the large extent of the
colony, the great number of miners employed, the enormous wealth which
their labours produce, and the amount of the contributions of this class to
the general revenue of the country.
The value of all the “ claims ” throughout the country, as estimated by
the registrars and surveyors, is £8,498,924. These officers were directed to
arrive at the value of the claims by consulting the quotations in the share-
lists in cases where these would apply ; and in cases where the mining
properties were not included in the published lists, to make inquiries, and
to use their judgment, guided by local knowledge and experience, in
arriving at a fair valuation. From a careful examination of the figures
furnished by them, it appears that they have discharged their duty with
care and fidelity.


Table No. 7 shows the number of Miners’ Rights and Chinese Protection
Tickets issued in Victoria from the Ist June, 1855, to the 31st December,
1865. The number of Miners’ Rights issued in 1865 was 24,495.
The next table gives an account of the water-races constructed in each
mining district of the colony. The total length is 1936 miles 26 chains,
and the total approximate cost £267,171, equal to £l3B per mile. The
quantity of water carried by these races per diem in ordinary seasons is
459,281,124 gallons. Many new races have been made in Gipps Land
during the past year ; and it is expected that, with the security of tenure
afforded by the water-right licenses, a great number of larger reservoirs and
races will be constructed by private enterprise in future years.
Tables Nos. 9, 10, and 11 do not need explanation. They give an
account of the number of leases and licenses for mining purposes which
were in force on the 31st December, 1865, and abundantly testify to the
energy and enterprise of our miners.
With a climate which is admitted to be the best in the world for out-
door work, and with immense areas of rich land but imperfectly explored,
it is certain that Victoria will always stand high as a mining country,
and that her supplies of gold and silver, and copper, and tin and iron,
will continue to add to the wealth of the world.
Table No. I.—Yield op Gold per Annum.
1851 —For 3 months
1852
1866—For 6 months
Per Escort. Exported. Val “ e j ;f z BoS - 4rnin|spermao
' per annum.
ozs. ozs. £ £ s. d.
104,154 145,146 580,584 30 1 760
2,277,026 2,218,782 8,875,128 262 11 6'66
2,065,903 2,676,345 10,705,380 202 15 0-81
1,482,697 2,150,730 8,602,920 130 16 4-08
2,132,397 2,751,535 11,006,140 100 7 275
2,625,968 2,985,991 11,943,964 103 11 0
2,481,020 2,762,460 11,049,840 83 7 959
2,371,268 2,528,478 10,113,912 68 12 839
2,202,012 2,280,950 9,123,800 72 10 11-27
2,008,843 2,156,660 8,626,640 79 9 3
1,832,887 1,967,420 7,869,680 74 15 11
1,520,518 1,658,207 6,632,828 67 14 571
1,420,302 1,626,872 6,507,488 70 9 0-42
1,544,694 6,178,776 74 1 9-29
1,543,801 6,175,204 74 4 209
733,273 2,933,092
31,731,344 126,925,376 ~
line, Sandhurst, and Ballarat were discontinued on the
;hat date the only escorts arriving in Melbourne are those
bod’s Point districts ; therefore, the returns being
inclusive, the gold obtained is estimated as divided
f the goldfields; since 1859, amongst only those persons
Ttain amounts, which were stated in a note to the table
aer Essay in 1861 as having left the colony by overland
in the above return been included in the yield for those
ted by inquiry at the Customs Department that thev
Qi ® SCOrts from Castlemaine, Sandhurst, and Ballarat were discontinued on the
31st of March, 1864, and since that date the only escorts arriving in Melbourne are those
from the Beechworth and Wood’s Point districts : therefore, the returns being-
incomplete, are omitted. s
NoTE.—From 1851 to 1858, inclusive, the gold obtained is estimated as divided
amongst the entire 'population of the goldfields; since 1859, amongst only those persons
actually engaged %n mining. Certain amounts, which were stated in a note to the table
of the yield of gold in the former Essay in 1861 as having left the colony by overland
escort during 1802-„ and 4, have in the above return been included in the yield for those
y ® ar ®’ J u fc haVln l j 6 ®,' l ascertained by inquiry at the Customs Department that they
should be so included. It is stated in a return made by the Registrar-General, that (in
addition to these amounts) 1,267,241 ozs. were produced by Victoria in 1852-3-4 and 5
but passed through the Customs of New South Wales, Tasmania, and South Australia!
and not recorded in Victoria ; therefore, to arrive at the gross yield of gold, this
quantity should be added to the figures in the table. The small remaining difference in
the two returns, as made up to June, 1866, is attributable to the table in this paper
being drawn up from returns recently amended by the Customs Department.


Table No. 2.—lncrease of Machinery on the Goldfields.
In 1859 the machinery was as follows : —285 Steam Engines employed in alluvial mining,
winding, pumping, &c., of the aggregate horse-power of 3821 ; 8982 Horse Puddling
Machines, 396 Whims, 101 Wheels, 91 Sluices, 77 Toms, 113 Whips, 3 Hand Machines,
19 Horse Pumps, 8 Water-power Pumps ; 296 Steam-engines employed in quartz mining,
winding, crushing, &c., of the aggregate horse-power of > 7 Water-power Engines,
69 Whims, 1 Windmill, 4 Horse-gear Whips, 8 Horse Crushing Machines. —Total ap-
proximate value of all mining plant estimated at £1,155,923.
In 1866* the Machinery is as follows4sl Steam Engines employed in alluvial mining,
winding, pumping, &c., of the aggregate horse-power of 9,338; 2799 Horse Puddling
Machines, 400 Whims and Pulleys, 110 Whips, 621 Sluices and Toms, 159 Waterwheels,
30 Hydraulic Hoses, 179 Pumps, 5335 Sluice Boxes, 3 Boring Machines ; 522 Steam
Engines employed in quartz mining, winding, crushing, &c., of the aggregate power of
9079 ; 62 Water and Horse-power Crushing Machines, 55 Waterwheels, 210 Whims and
Pulleys, 6 Derricks, 74 Whips.—Total approximate value of all mining plant estimated at
£1,914,712.
Table No. 3.—Number of Miners Employed in the several
umber of Miners Employ
'S DURING THE QUARTER EN
Alluvial Miners. Quartz Miners.
European, Chinese. European, Chinese.
10,113 3,856 3,195 6
5,067 5,074 4,617
5,250 1,427 3,876
8,728 3,592 2,455 2
9,455 5,087 2,345 20
2,613 1,869 810
41,226 20,905 17,298 28
Mining Districts during the Quarter ending 31st December,
1865.
Totals.
Grand
Total.
MINING DISTRICTS.
European. Chinese.
Ballarat District
13,308
17,170
Beechworth District .
Sandhurst District ....
Maryborough District.
Castlemaine District .
Ararat District
14,758
10,553
11,183
14,777
11,800
16,907
Totals.
58,524
20,933
79,457
Table No. 4. —Number of Machines Employed in Alluvial and
Quartz Mining in the several Mining Districts during the
Quarter ending 31st December, 1865,
ALLUVIAL mining.
Steam Engines
employed in
Winding, Pumping,
Ballarat District
Beechworth do.
Sandhurst do.
Maryborough do
Castlemaine do.
Ararat do
Totals
employed in ”
nding, Pumping, =
&c. 3
s ,0 !■
,0 * “ u 0) g S
S 6C |(E ■§
<iKp< Pn
267 4925 55
51 676 8
27 363 80
45 715 83
60 1263 79
23 266 14
473 8208 322
650
82
803
8-71
79S
144
u
a
Ph
13
Cj
|
2
£
92
55
1
180
79
20
3228 127
I
H
a
1
33
2
190
4
34
182
236
648
S
I
rt
'S
w
s
s
bn
n
y
B
£
I
.c
1
s
to
a
■S
o
m
4
MINING
p.
s
p
*
e
o
K
•3
rS
P,
a
rt
SO
73
•a
is
ps
8
180
1
*7
DISTRICTS*
I
fi
3
o»
2
14
35
in
49
7
115
♦ Quarter ending 30th June, 1866.


tv Mill XXN Ur AIN U MiiNliJKAL OlAllSlil/O.
Table No. 4 — continued.
QUARTZ MINING.
MINING DISTRICTS.
Steam Engines
employed in
■Winding, Crushing, &c.
| Crushing Machine.
Stamp-heads.
[ Whims and Pulleys
Water Wheels.
Derricks.
Q.
3
Quicksilver Cradles.
Aooroximate Value
of all Mining Plant.
Number.
Aggregate
Horse-
power.
Ballarat District
117
2370
11
1090
18
ii
15
2
£
573,350
Beechvvorth do
33
498
39
733
35
260,631
Sandhurst do
129
2288
4
1220
i(i
25
362,715
Maryborough do
75
1073
7
639
46
53
182,500
Castlemaine do
116
1889
29
1127
125
16
15
304,145
Ararat do
21
488
9
310
26
3
i'6
89,930
Totals
491
8606
99
5119
231
56
15
98
10
1,773,271*
Table No. 5. — Number of Distinct
Quartz Reefs actually proved
to be Auriferous, and
the Total
Extent,
IN
Square Miles, of
Auriferous Alluvial
and Qw
iRT/
Ground
ACTUALLY
■WORKED
Beech worth District
Sandhurst District
Maryborough District
Castlemaine District
Ararat District
Auriferous Alluvial and Quartz Ground actually worked
UPON, IN THE SEVERAL MINING DISTRICTS.
Number of distinct
Quartz Reefs proved to
be Auriferous.
Extent in Square Miles
of Auriferous Alluvial
and Quartz Ground
worked upon.
MINING DISTRICTS.
Ballarat District
Beechworth District
Sandhurst District.
Maryborough District
Castlemaine District
Ararat District
691
196 19-30
185*4
76 1-20
137|
63 11-24
Totals.
725 77-120
Note. —The number of “ distinct ” quartz reefs cannot be strictly correct, as parts of
the same reef, in some localities, are held to be distinct reefs, and named accordingly.
As the reefs are further explored it is found, too, that what were supposed to be separate
reefs are not really distinct.
The return of the area of auriferous ground actually worked on for 1864 is in excess of
that for 1865. As now set down, it is but a rough approximation, and indeed cannot be
otherwise. The area is less, in consequence of the Surveyors and Registrars having been
instructed to make the computations on an uniform plan, and with great care ; and it is
believed that the figures given this year are not Very far from the truth. But large areas
of non-auriferous ground are included in some claims ; and in other places, ground
which was formerly held and worked by the miner is now under cultivation.
Table No. 6.—Estimated Value of the Claims in the Several
Mining Districts on the 31st December, 1865.
MINING DISTRICTS.
ESTIMATED VALUE OP CLAIMS.
Ballarat District
£2,392,751
1,875,267
2,016,806
632,604
1,333,146
248,350
£8,498,924
* The approximate value of the Mining Plant on the 30th June, 1866, was £1,914,712.
Mining Districts.


Table No. 6 — continued.
Note. —The instructions issued to the Mining Surveyors and Registrars, for the pur-
pose of guiding them in forming an estimate of the value of claims in their divisions,
were to the effect that they should consult the quotations on the share lists in cases
where they would apply ; and, in cases where the claims were not included in any share
list, that they should endeavour, by their local experience, and by inquiries, to arrive at
as fair an estimate as possible. It is believed that they have carefully followed their
instructions.
Table No. 7.—Return of Miners’ Rights and Chinese Protection
Tickets issued in Victoria from Ist June, 1855, to 31st
December, 1865.
Chinese Tickets.
Miners’ Rights
£l.
PERIOD OF ISSUE.
£I . | £2.
Ist June to 31st December. 1855....
Ist January to 31st December, 1856.
Ist January to 31st December, 1857-
Ist January to 31st December, 1858.
Ist January to 31st December, 1859
Ist January to 31st December, 1860.
Ist January to 31st December, 1861.
Ist January to 31st December, 1862.
Ist January to 31st December, 1863.,
Ist January to 31st December, 1864.,
Ist January to 31st December, 1865.
50,899
54,655
53,822
49,314
48,152
44,571
36,640
35,078
28,564
28,718
24,495
11,101
12,199
22,341
28,179
55,810
31,368
20,058
Table No. B.—Length op Water-races Constructed, and
their
31st
Approximate Cost, in the several Mining Districts, to
December, 1865.
MINING DISTRICTS.
Length of Races
Approximate Cost
Ballarat District.
Beechworth District.
Sandhurst District—
Maryborough District.,
Castlemaine District..
Ararat District
Miles. Chains.
395 4 £36,375
206,047
1084 40
32 60
147 8
191 34
85 40
11,319
Totals.
1935 26
£267,171
Table No. 9.—Return of the Number of Gold Mining Leases in
force on the 31st December, 1865, together with the Extent of
Ground Leased and the Proposed Capital to be Employed in
WORKING THE GROUND.
Ballarat District
Beechworth District ..
Sandhurst District.....
Maryborough District
Castlemaine District..
Ararat District
Totals
Extent Total Ca P ital
Extent. Proposed.
A. R. P. £
2,890 3 14 422,400
5,326 3 20 1,384,200
2,303 0 28 650,190
3,495 0 24 612,850
1,095 3 14 414,980
667 1 37 57,250
15,779 1 17 i 3,541,870
MINING DISTRICTS.
Note. —The total number of gold mining leases granted since the commencement is
1815, containing 27,737 a. 3r. 24p. Many leases have expired, have been forfeited, &c.,
during 1865. The above table shows those only which were actually in force on the 31st
December, 1865.
1
906


Number of
Licenses.
1
2
3
10
9
5
1
31
Table No. 10. —Return of the Number of Leases in force on the
31st December, 1865, for the purpose of Mining for Metals and
Minerals other than Gold,
Number
of
Total Capital
proposed
to be invested.
NAMES OF METALS AND
MINERALS.
Leases.
A. K. P.
265 0 10
1598 2 30
Antimony.
Coal
£33,950
60,000
Copper .’.
Kaolin and other Clays
Lignite
50 0 0
24 2 18
669 0 24
763 0 23
379 2 24
Silver.
87,300
Slate and Flagstone.
20,900
Totals.
3750 1 9
£210,950
Table No. 11. —Return showing the Number of Licenses to Search
for Metals or Minerals other than Gold issued during the
Year 1865.
Antimony
Bismuth ,
Carbonate of Magnesia, or Magnesite
Coal
Copper
Flags, Roofing, Slate, &c
Limestone
Totals
A. R. P.
42 0 0
1,280 0 0
340 0 0
5,367 3 11
5,760 0 0
2,090 0 0
58 0 18
14,937 3 29
Extent of
Ground
held under License.
NAMES OF METALS OR MINERALS.
Note.— The following “Notice to Applicants for Licenses to search for Metals or
Minerals other than Gold, under the Order in Council of 15th October, 1862,” was
published in the Government Gazette of the 2nd December, 1864 :
Referring to the third section of the regulations under the Land Act, 1862, respecting licenses
to search for any metal or mineral except gold, the following scale of fees payable for licenses
issued under the said regulations is published for general information:—
For an area exceeding 320 acres but not exceeding 640 acres ;£lo 0 0
160 „ „ 320 5 0 0
80 „ „ 160 10 0
>■ 64 ~ „ 80 15 0
And for any area not exceeding 64 acres i o 0
15 0
1 0 0
BLUNDELL AND FORD, PRINTERS, FLINDERS LANE WEST, MELBOURNE.




BLUNDELL & FORD,
COMMERCIAL & GENERAL PRINTERS
. Axtmmt §ooh |s<nrafcitterns,
51 & 53 FLINDERS LANE WEST,
PRINTERS
The Journal of Commerce
Goldsbrough’s Wool Circular
Robertson & Co.’s Tea Circular
Heinecke’s Tobacco Circular
Everard’s Tea Circular
Monthly Prices Current (for
Mail)
Customs Weekly Bill of Entry
Dicker’s Mining Record
Weekly Insolvency Register
Daily Law List
Melbourne Punch
Christian Review and Messenger
Temperance News
Monthly Timber Circular
Hood’s Prices Current.
De Beer’s Shipping Circular
STEAM PRINTING WORKS;
51 & 53 FLINDERS LANE WEST,
MELBOURNE,
