

' * -S,
f'il
' i gyS (|i '■'
MINISTERS OF THE QROWN |
Axn a
QTHER PEOPLE’S pROPERTY. I
®li( fltiist of Ui'iluip and (fthrns. I
I
THE BltirrS'T LAW.
his official position to
from obtaining justice,
i have carried out the lip
oroceeds thereof or not.




M33SS | rtaUß'l
JUS T I
C E
IN THE
BRITISH COLONY OF VICTORIA,
AUSTRALIA.
The Case of Bishop and Others,
BEING a brief account of the robbery of the Freehold
Estate and Gold Mine known as the El Dorado, Guildford, by
officials of the Bank of Australasia: The issue of a Certificate
of Title to that bank upon a forged deed of conveyance, mort-
gage, etc. ; The persecution of the owners of the estate by the
Crown Law officials implicated in aiding the bank, and imprison-
ment of the original purchaser, Mr. George Bishop, as a lunatic ;
Sham actions before the judges of the Supreme Court, and the
wholesale abstraction and stealing of documentary evidence by
the Crown Law officials. The evidence given before the Select
Committee of Parliament shows that a deliberate attempt was
made to bury 22 men and two horses in the mine by flooding its
entrance.
The undersigned, with others, having been defrauded and
dispossessed of a valuable freehold estate and gold mine by
officials of the Bank of Australasia, with the assistance of offi-
cials of the Crown Law and Titles offices, have no other means
of redress in the colony than to publish the means by which they
have been defrauded as a warning to others. The Grand J ury
system of the colony being vested in a few officials of the Crown
Law Offices, whore justice has been dispensed to the highest
fei v d
■ . «- * •• ■ ■ . - I
•• ‘.5
■ " -4 fti, Jr'' 1


George Bishop, Guildford, British subject
im ***,
(2)
Welder, they ask the assistance of every person who desires to
see justice honestly administered to compel a public investigation
into the case, for the life, liberty and property of no man is safe
who may own property sufficiently valuable for the monied power
who may choose to steal it.
They appeal particularly to the foreign population of the
colony to aid them in bringing their case before the British
Government and Press for redress; for although aliens may
purchase property in all bona Odes , they may find themselves
dispossessed in the name of the Crown of Great Britain, by
persons styling themselves Ministers of the Crown, as we have
been.
(Signed)
Edward N. Kitchen, 46 Moor-street, South Yarra, a
citizen of the United States of America
G'lOVanni Gallicari, Drummond-street, Carlton, a subject
of the King of Italy
Gottardo Gtovanetti, Strangways, a citizen of the
Republic of Switzerland
John Hayes, Redfern, Sydney, N.S.W., British subject
Alfred Rowbotham, Leadworks-lane, Melbourne, British
subject
J. Kingsley, Guildford, British subject.
The other owners being scattered about the colony, and some
being dead, it is impossible to obtain all the signatures.
In answer to this mass of crime and corruption the Minister
of Justice writes on the 19th January, 1887 —“ Suffice it to say
that nothing whatever is advanced to warrant or call for any
interposition by the Government.” Signed Henry Cuthbert,
Minister of Justice. Thus proving conclusively that the Bank
of Australasia is a power superior to the Government, and that
all the supposed machinery for the administration of justice,
together with the judges and courts of law, for which the public
of the colony are called upon to pay an enormous sum yearly for
maintenance, have been simply institutions at the disposal of the
banks, and that the so-called administration of justice is a fraud
and an imposture upon the world at large.
(Signed) E. IST. Kitchen, 46 Moor-st., South Yarra.
VC*, v • ■ r ■' ■*
- y %M -a . A ijjr ,
M 4* ’MI


THE CASE
r #jOISHOP and Others were the owners of a valuable Freehold
Estate and Gold Mine known as the El Dorado, the estate
being allots. 17 and 31 sec. 6, parish of Guildford, county of Talbot,
consisting of 103 acres 1 rood 1G perches, held in 25 undivided
shares, for which they paid £2OOO, and spent a further sum of
£lO,OOO upon permanent improvements, which property was an
independence to them. Of this estate they have been defrauded
by a series of forgeries and frauds carried out by officials of the
Bank of Australasia. The said bank claims, as per searches in
the Registrar-General’s office, that the estate in question 7oas sold
by one of the owners for the sum of TEN SHILLINGS to a public
company, no such company being in existence at the time, the
bank’s solicitor, George Merrilield, being witness to the deed..
They further claim that the so-called public company mortgaged
the estate to them for the sum of £2OOO, the same solicitor
executing the mortgage deed, and giving them the day previous
a bill of sale over the plant, etc., to the value of £OOOO. There
is no record in the Registrar-General’s office of any corporate-
deed of the alleged public company to show in whom the land
was vested. The bank then sold the estate to one M‘Donald for
£255, the conveyance bearing the signature of D. C. M‘Arthur*
with J. B. Goulstone as witness. The bank then hurriedly
removed the machinery, buildings, etc., and the shareholder,,
John Merrilield, who had uttered the forged conveyance, placed
in possession under a pretended lease. The case was brought
under the notice of the Crown Law officers by the advice of Mr.
George Smyth, barrister-at-law, who obtained the searches, and a
sworn information against George Merrilield, John Merrilield,
Francis Yolney Bickley, and Thomas Randle, placed in the hands
of the Minister of Justice, at his own request, and who, after
I much evasion and delay, notified the owners to commence pro-
ceedings in the Castlemaine Police Court. The case was placed
in the hands of Superintendent Winch. After several weeks,
during which time he was continually in company with the bank
officials and the parties charged, he returned the documentary
evidence saying that “ As the Crown Law officers had declined to
deal with the case, he, as a government officer, would decline to
deal with it also.” The police magistrate, Mr. Heron, refusing
to sign summonses, and the clerk of petty sessions, Mr. Campbell,
treating Messrs. Bishop and Kitchen in a most insulting manner,
causing the subject of complaints to the Minister of Justice


■without avail, the owners, were advised by their lawyer, Mr.
Smyth, to go to Me bourne, as there evidently was no justice for
them in Castlemaine. The banks assign then obtained a number .
of mortgages over the estate and demanded from the Govern-
ment the sum of £lOl2 10s. for a portion of an acre required
by the Railway department for the erection of the station at
Guildford, and applied to bring the estate under the Lands
Transfer Statute. The owners then instructed their solicitors,
Messrs, Malleson, England and Stewart, to lodge a caveat, and
the Minister of Railways, Mr. D. Gillies was duly cautioned
against negociating with M‘Donald, and through Mr. Inglis,
M.P., succeeded in getting their case in the hands of the detec-
tive police, Mr. J. M. Christie having charge, and he, obtaining
ing the most conclusive evidence, impounded the deeds.
The Union Bank (from whom the deeds had been stolen),
together with the Bank of Australasia, then offered a settlement
of the matter through Messrs. Malleson, England and Stewart,
Mr. Stewart alleging that the banks had been deceived by the
forgeries, but the Bank of Australasia demanded the condonation
of the forgeries, which was refused, and John Merrifield was
permitted to leave the colony.
Mr. J. C. Stewart sent for detective Christie, with Messrs.
Bishop and Kitchen, and stated that the case would have to be
settled in Equity. Immediately after, their attention was called
to a notice in the Mount Alexander Mail, 20th July, 1874, viz.
—“ Supreme Court.—Before Mr. Justice Bellows. —Bishop v.
ABDonald. —Settled out of Court.” As neither Mr. Bishop or
the other owners had any knowledge of such action, a complaint
was made to the Attorney-General, Mr. Kerferd, and Detective
Christie found the case had been brought by Messrs. Malleson,
England and Stewart. In the meantime the whole of our evi-
dence had been submitted to the Crown Law office officials and
the Registrar-General. Detective Christie was awaiting instruc-
tions from the Attorney-General to proceed when Mr. Bishop
received a letter from Mr. Kerferd stating that after an investi-
gation by the police we had failed to substantiate our charges.
As this statement was utterly untrue, Mr. Kerferd having
admitted previously to Mr. R. S. Inglis, M.L.A., that it was the
clearest case of forgery he had ever known in his experience,
the owners, acting under instructions from Detective Christie,
demanded a re-hearing of the case. This was refused, and they
were informed by the Registrar-General that a Crown title had
been issued by the Deputy-Registrar, Mr. Sunderland, under
instructions from the Attorney-General, and were advised to
bring the matter before Parliament.
Shortly after, the Attorney-General Mr. Kerferd appeared at
a public dinner at Castlemaine in company with George Merri-
field, and the local manager of the bank, and the forger, F. V.
Buckley was appointed bailiff of the County Court, the Govern-


merit holding a sworn information against him, which has never
been heard up to the present time, April, 1888.
As allotment 17 sec. G parish of Guildford was not included
in the bank’s conveyance to M‘Donald, the compensation was
demanded from the Minister, Mr. Gillies ; but the owners were
informed that the whole of their property had been covered by
the Crown title, Mr. Examiner Snowden stating to Mr. Bishop
that The Bank’s Interest Had to be Considered.
Previous to this an attempt had been made to get the owners
to take £3OO each for their shares, which was refused. This
otter was made by F. Y. Bickley, who had been appointed to
represent the two shares of Turner by George Merrifield, who held
a power of attorney over them, and which shares the owners
believe were the property of the Bank of Australasia, although
this is denied by the bank ofiicials. This individual is the utterer
of the forged Consent , Scrip and Minute Book (the owners of the
property having still in their possession the only minute book
they ever had) and numerous other minor forgeries. He was
provided with a letter from the local manager, Mr. Gibson,
stating that the bearer was in the employ of the Bank of Aus-
tralasia. In the offer lie stated that the bank intended to have
the property at all hazards and risk ; that they cared for neither
law nor justice, hut depended upon their money to carry them
through. He has since admitted that he was only hired to carry
out the affair; that if he had to suffer it would be in company
of the big men who employed him ; and a few months back
caused an otter to be made to the owners that, for the sum of
£lOO, he would place in their hands a statement which would
enable them to recover their property or obtain restitution. Sub-
sequently an offer of £750, made to E. N. Kitchen by John
Merrifield, on the condition that he would immediately return
with his family to the United States, was declined.
The case was brought before the Legislative Assembly on the
3rd November, 1874, by Mr. E. J. Dixon, the member for St.
Kilda, together with a petition signed by 110 residents of
Guildford, praying the Assembly to investigate the case. A
committee was appointed, Mr. E. J. Dixon being chairman, and
took evidence up to the adjournment of the House in December ;
but by a trick they were unable to bring up a report, and the
evidence was suppressed. Mr. Webb, the government shorthand
writer, informed the owners that the only way in which their
case would ever be settled was by “ approaching Mr. Harriman,
the Secretary of the Crowm Law Department, in a proper
manner.” Mr. Dixon, and other members of the committee,
applied to Mi’. Kerferd for a Royal Commission to conclude
the enquiry; this he promised but never performed. And
several other attempts were made by Mr. Dixon to continue the
work of the committee, but were always prevented by the Go-
. vernment.


Tim owners then appealed to the Governor, Sir George Bowen,
through whose influence they obtained an inspection of the deeds.
The Minister of Justice, Dr. Madden promised that the Crown
title should he withdrawn, as a mistake had been made; subse-
quently he said that he found that a Crown title, once issued,
could not be withdrawn ; that the owners would be compensated
out of a fund set apart for that purpose, and promised to give his
decision in writing, but never did.
Sometime after, Mr. Bishop was sent to Castlemaine upon an
information supplied by Dr. Madden and Mr. Harrirnan, under
the pretence of prosecuting George Merrifield, they assuring him
that everything had been prepared for him and no lawyer would
be required. Only live witnesses were permitted to see the deeds,
and each one threatened with perjury. Some of their docu-
ments refused, and other most important documents placed before
the court, have never been returned. Bishop was ordered to find
bail to appear and answer to a charge of perjury. As he refused
to find bail, the police magistrate, Mr. Heron, left the court, and
Bishop was requested by the police to go home, they stating that
in all their experience they had never seen anything like if before.
The owners employed Mr. F. L. Smyth, and, although they had
the most overwhelming evidence (George Merrifield swearing
he did not know who altered the date of the 7rh June deed)
Bishop was committed for trial, Mr. F. L. Smyth s’ating that it
was the most disgraceful business he had ever known, and that
the Crown evidently meant to pot Bishop. He was tried before
Judge Fellows, when upon a concocted case, every statement
being false, no witnesses examined, nor evidence of any kind
permitted, carried out by Mr. C. A. Smyth, they swore that
Bishop was a most respectable man, but was a lunatic. Judge
Fellows immediately ordering Bishop to be imprisoned as a luna-
tic, the late Judge Dunn, being in court, openly said—“ Mr.
Smyth, I have seen many a disgraceful case in court, but I never
before saw such an infamous business as this.” The unfortunate
man would in all probability been imprisoned to this day but for
the honesty of the chief medical officer, Dr. M'Crea, who, after a
long interview with Bishop in the presence of the individuals
who had sworn him a lunatic, and who then denied the very
statements they had sworn, certified—“ That Mr. George Bishop
was of perfectly sound mind, and that there was no reason for
detaining him in gaol.” Notwithstanding this he was still kept
prisoner, when Mr. Inglis, M.L.A.. saw E. N. Kitchen, and said
he had seen Messrs Kerferd and Harrirnan, who had desired him
to see him, and inform him that if he, Kitchen, and the other
owners would sign a document not to prosecute their case any
further they would release Bishop. This was refused, and as the
owners again appealed to the Governor, Bishop was released, the
governor of the gaol saying “ I am glad to tell you, Mr. Bishop,
that I cannot keep you any longer. We don’t have many men


of your stamp here, but these fellows had to put you in or come
in themselves ; mind what you are about, as they are a powerful
lot of scoundrels who stand at nothing.”
Detective Christie received orders from Mr. Secretan that he
was not to be seen in the streets with either Bishop or Kitchen,
who were both in Melbourne fighting their case. This he refused
as the case had never been officially taken out of his hands. He
was then ordered to proceed to a distant part of the colony, when
he resigned ; and at the presentation of a testimonial to him at
the Town Hall, Melbourne, he publicly stated that “to stay in
the police force meant demoralisation.”
After most determined opposition on the part of Mr. Harri-
man, the Attorney-General, Sir Bryan O’Loughlin, permitted the
owners’ solicitor, Mr. James M‘Kean, an inspection of the whole
of the documents upon which the title had been issued, in the
presence of as many of the owners as could be got together
seven being present, owning nine shares—-when a document was
produced purporting to be The Consent of the Owners. This
document had been uttered by F. Y. Bickley, and was admitted
by Mr. Harriman to be an undoubted forgery. It not only con-
tained the signature of persons who owned nothing in the pro-
perty, but several were in the handwriting of one man. The
name of E. N. Kitchen was amongst the list, whilst he did not
purchase his share until 19 days after the date of the bogus con-
sent.
Finding every avenue to justice closed against them by the
Crown Law officials, the alien owners brought their case before
their respective governments, viz., the United States, Italy and
Switzerland, but have been informed that owing to British sub-
jects being co-partners with them and receiving the same treat-
ment, they cannot, with the information then before them, inter-
fere, as under the existing treaties they can only claim the same
protection as British subjects—no matter how unjustly the
British Government mny choose to treat its own subjects.
For a considerable time the owners were subjected to a system
of espionage through the Post-office, nearly every letter showing
signs of being tampered with. A letter of the Italian Minister
of J ustice at Home, addressed to G. Calligari, poste rest ante, was
detained one month, although repeated applications had been
made for it, a private letter which had been posted at Rome with
the official letter having been duly received. When this letter
was given up it had evidently been tampered with, and bore the
stamp of the mail a month previous. A complaint was made,
but only met by evasion.
An offer of settlement was then made from Mr. Harriman,
the overture being contained in a letter to a gentleman uncon-
nected with the estate, but known to be friendly to some of the
owners. In this offer it was distinctly laid down that no crimi-
nal prosecution would ever be permitted, the conditions being


that two of the owners, Messrs. Kitchen and Giovanotti, should
apply to a judge in Chambers to be placed upon the deed of 17th
December, 1861, as a co-trustee with George Bishop, in place of
John Merrifield who had absconded, and Thomas M'Grath, who
had sold his interest to Kitchen prior to the forgery of the 7th
June, 186 b ; the Crown title over the estate would become null
and void ; the bank would then restore to them the value of the
machinery, buildings, &c., they had taken, and make other recom-
pence to the trustees, who would be required to sign a document
absolving the bank and all other parties from further liabilities
in the matter. A relative of Mr. Harriman—Mr. Webb, bar-
rister-at-law—was named as the legal gentleman who would carry
it through, and the sum of £3OO was demanded to be paid down
before the preliminaries could be entered upon. The offer was
made in the presence of the gentlemen alluded to and Messrs.
Bishop and Kitchen. The offer was refused at the request of the
consuls. They were then told that no other offer of any kind
would ever be made.
The case was then brought before the Governor, the Marquis
of Normanby, by the alien owners, and subsequently before the
British Secretary of State for the Colonies, and referred back to
the Crown Law offices, where Mr. Harriman reigns supreme,
and is thereby enabled to protect himself and all concerned, by
answering that successive governments had refused to deal with
the case, and forwarding his precis on the matter, which is a tissue
of falsehoods and misrepresentations of facts from beginning to
end. So frightened is Mr. Harriman of it that both the copies—
the Crown Law office copy and the copy which was in the Go-
vernor’s office have both been made away with.
The case was kept upon the Notice-paper of the Legislative
Assembly from the 3rd November, 1874, to the end of the session
of 1884, by Messrs. E. J. Dixon, Mr. James M'Kean, and the
late Hugh M‘Coll, M.L.A., but was always kept back on the list,
showing the fear on the part of those concerned of public ex-
posure.
On September 5, 1881, an attempt was made to bring the
conduct of Superintendent Winch and Inspector Secretan for
using their official position to defeat the ends of justice before the
Police Commission, but it was not permitted. Again, in 1883,
another attempt was made to bring the case before the Royal
Commission on the Titles Office, being recommended to do so by
the Governor’s Private Secretary, and being told in letter by the
chairman, Mr, Wrixon, “any statements you desire to submit to
the iitles Board will be duly considei'ed.” The owners were met
by Mr. Harriman with a positive refusal, he stating that it was
against the Governor’s instructions, which statement was posi-
tively denied by the Governor’s private secretary. Mr. Wrixon,
however, refused to allow the case to come before the board, as it
was a case of crime, and the law was open to us.


An application was then made to Mi’. James Service, by Air.
Richardson, M.L.A., and other gentlemen for a Royal Commis-
sion, but was refused on the ground of Mr. Harriman’s report.
An attempt was again made to bring the matter before the pre-
sent session by Mr. Wheeler, M.L.A., but that gentleman con-
sidered it useless, as from inquiries he found that he would have
the whole power of the Government against him.
On the -22nd November, 1886, a petition setting forth the
facts of the case was presented to His Excellency Sir H. B. Loch
by one of the owners, E. N. Kitchen, a citizen of the United
■States, accompanied with the following affidavit.
[Referred by direction of the Governor to the Hon. the Minister of
Justice. —G. Seymour Fort, Private Secretary. 23/11/86. 6341.]
AFFIDAVIT OF EDWARD NICHOLSON KITCHEN,
To accompany Petition to Sir Henry Loch, Governor of Victoria.
“I, Edward Nicholson Kitchen, a citizen of the United States of
-America, now residing at forty-six Moor-street, South Yarra, in the
British Colony of Victoria, make oath and say :
Ist. That I did, on the thirty-first day of May, 1865, purchase an
undivided twenty-fifth (25th) share in a freehold estate, used by the
owners for gold mining purposes, from Thomas M'Grath, doctor of medi-
cine, the said estate being’Allots. 17 and 31 sec. 6 Parish of Guildford,
County of Talbot, in the Colony of Victoria, containing 103 acres 1 rood
and 16 perches. 2nd. That I have never sold, alienated or conveyed, or
authorised any person to sell, alienate or convey my right, title and inte-
rest in and to the said estate. 3rd. That I have been defrauded and
dispossessed of the said estate by officials of the Bank of Australasia,
through forged and fraudulent deeds and documents, upon which they
•obtained a Certificate of T itle in the name of the Crown. 4th. That the
deeds of the estate were lodged by the owners in the Union Bank, and
were feloniously taken from the custody of the said bank. sth. That all
deeds, conveyances, and mortgages, subsequent to the 31st May, 1865,
together with all erasures and alterations which have been, or purport
to have been, effected upon deeds executed on the 31st May, 1865, are
forgeries. 6th. That the Certificate of Title in the name of the
Crown issued over the said estate to the assign of the Bank of Austra-
lasia, Matthew M‘Donald, on the 11th September, 1874, was obtained by
fraud and collusion on the part of the said bank with the officials of the
Crown Law and Titles Office, in conjunction with the owners’ solicitor,
James Cooper Stewart, of 24 Queen-street, in the city of Melbourne.
7tin That 1 did, with George Bishop and Alfred Rowbotham (two of the
original purchasers of the estate) on the 2nd September, 1873, employ the
firm of Malleson, England and Stewart, of 24 Queen-street, Melbourne,
to lodge a caveat against the application of Mathew' M‘Donald, for a
Certificate of Title under the Lands Transfer Statute, the said caveat
being drawn up and signed in our presence by their clerk, Mr. W. G.
Robertson, instructed by Mr. James Cooper Stewart. Bth. That recent
searches in the office of the Registrar-General show that no caveat had
ever been filed. 9th. That an action in the Supreme Court, Melbourne,
before Judge Barry, the 2nd October, 1873, Bishop v. M‘Donald, and an
action in the Supreme Court, Castlemaine, before Judge Fellows, the 20th
July, 1874, Bishop®. M'Donald, withdrawn, settled out of court, were
both brought by James Cooper Stewart, aforesaid, without the knowledge


<of myself, Bishop, or Rowbotham, and were frauds to cover the issue of
the title to the Bank of Australasia. 10th. That the existence of the
forged deeds was first discovered by Mr. George Smyth, barrister-at-law,
in the year 1870, and I at once placed a sworn information in the hands
of the Minister of Justice, against the parties uttering the deeds, which
information has never been permitted to be heard in court.
“And I make this solemn declaration conscientiously believing it to
be true, and by virtue of the provisions of an Act of Parliament of Vic-
toria rendering all parties making a false declaration punishable for wilful
and corrupt perjury. (Signed) Edward Nicholson Kitchen.”
“Sworn before me this 22nd November, 1886.
„ , . ~ „ | James M. Morgan,
ea u°S. 10 I Consul General United States.
Consulate. I Witness—J. H. Bush.
Mr. Harriman, however, returned the petition and affidavit
with the stereotyped statement that it has been investigated, and
His Excellency the Governor and the Consul-General of the
United States are referred (amongst other documents) to the
very voluminous report of the Secretary of the Law Department,
Mr. Harriman, upon the case. In consequence of this, Messrs.
Kitchen and Calligari waited upon the Minister of Justice, Mr.
Cuthbert, and demanded that if the affidavit was false Kitchen
should be prosecuted by the Crown for perjury. Mr. Cuthbert
promised to investigate the case, and on the 10th May, 1887,
after carefully going through the documentary evidence submitted
to him, returned the documents, Mr. Harriman being present,
and who, after examining some of the papers, professed to return
them. Mr. Cuthbert expressed himself perfectly satisfied with
the bona tides of the case, and that a great wrong had been done,
and requested Kitchen to write him a letter asking him to use
his influence as a Minister of the Crown with the Government to
obtain a Royal Commission. This was done, but the Govern-
ment refused, placing the blame of the transaction upon the firm
of Malleson, England and Stewart.
The sworn charges against James Cooper Stewart were then
placed before His Honor the Chief Justice, but were returned by
his honor, stating that he could not deal with the matter in that
form. An application was also made to the Minister for inspec-
tion and permission to take a copy of Mr. Harriman’s report on
the case, but was answered by Mr. Harriman that the Minister
of Justice had no jurisdiction in the matter as the document had
been sent to the Governor in 1881. An application was then
made to His Excellency for the required permission, and after
considerable delay an answer was returned dated 3rd October,
1887—
“lam directed by the Governor, Sir H. B. Loch, to inform you that'
His Excellency has ascertained that no copy was retained either on the
books of this office or on those of the Law Department.
G. Seymour Fort, Private Secretary”
How, the information supplied to His Excellency is obviously


false. The Law Department copy was obtained in May, 1884 r
by the late Hugh M‘Coll, M.L.A., and Kitchen inspected it at
the Parliament House and made a few exti’acts, but sufficient
time was not allowed to take a copy.
The late Mr. M'Coll also wrote to Kitchen, April 30th, 1884 :
“ I am to see the copy of Mr. Harriman’s report, which was pre-
pared for the Governor, and need not say but before it leaves my
hand I will get it copied.” But the best of care was taken not
to give anyone the chance of copying it, and it has now disap-
peared finally.
On the 13th September, 1887, the late Superintendent of the
Bank of Australasia, Mr. D. C. M‘Arthur, referred E. N.
Kitchen to the present Superintendent, Mr. John Sawers, the
late Mr. Parkes having informed Kitchen, both by letter and
verbally, that the bank had long ago settled the matter with the
firm of Malleson, England and Stewart, they believing them to
have been the owners’ solicitors, and professed great indignation
at the conduct of Mr. J. C. Stewart. Mr. A. B. Malleson was
also interviewed, and the only answer that could be obtained
from him was—“ We were working for the bank and not for you.”
He subsequently, by letter, retracted, and stated he knew nothing
of the matter, alleging that it had been carried out by Mr.
Stewart alone, and referred the owners to him. Mr. Stewart’s,
only answer was—“ You are talking Greek.”
Mr. Sawers saw E. N. Kitchen, and expressed his regret at
the transaction, claimed that the bank was not criminally impli-
cated, and did not own (as the owners believed) the shares in the
name of Turner over which their solicitor, George Merrifield,
held a power of attorney, and were the shares by which the frauds
were carried out. He further stated that they would settle the
matter, but that it would take a few days, appointing another
interview on the sth October, when Mr. Sawers said, “ I don’t
understand how the bank came to lend money upon such docu-
ments, and I don’t care. The experts of the Governfnent gave us
a title to the estate, and the Government are liable to you,” at
the same time producing a scrip of John Hayes, in the private
company. Now, this scrip had been taken by Kitchen and Calli-
gari to Mr. Cuthbert, on the 10th of May previous, as evidence..
Upon examining the parcel of documents which had been taken
to the Crown Law offices on that date, this important document
was found to be missing, and as it was last seen by Kitchen and
Calligari in the hands of Mr. Harriman, a demand was made by
Kitchen to know how Mr. Sawers obtained it. Kitchen holding-
a power of attorney over it; and it was a diz-ect proof of com-
plicity and collusion between the bank officials and the officials of
the Crown Law office. Mr. Sawei’s refused to state how he ob-
tained it, but offered to return it to Kitchen, who refused to take
it unless Air. Sawers would say who he obtained it from—hence
the Police Court case on 17th November, 1887, Kitchen v. Sawers.


Mr. Cuthbert had in the meantime been interviewed, but denied
all knowledge of the matter, stating that he believed he had
returned it. A letter was also sent to the Crown Law officers,
asking for an explanation, but has never been, answered. In the
Police Court Mr. Sawers attempted to make it appear that he had
obtained it from his solicitor, George Merrifield, who admitted by
letter that the scrip was Kitchen’s, but did not know how he had
obtained it—believed he must have got it from the Parliamentary
Committee who sat upon the case, and hoped his name would not
be used in the matter. [George Merritield died suddenly a few
days after, and before the Police Court case.] Mr. Sawers volun-
teered the statement to the court that “ George Merrifield had
been employed by the bank in the matter.’’ Merrifield’s death
prevented Kitchen from taking proceedings against him, which
would have shown the fallacy of the whole matter.
Since December, 1870, the date on which Kitchen, Bishop
and others swore the information against George Merrifield, they
have had no dealings with him and have not seen him for some
years. He was not present at any of the committee meetings of
the Legislative Assembly, who were sitting upon charges of fraud
and forgery against himself and the Bank of Australasia; and
for Mr. Sawers to make such a statement in a public court to
screen the real thief is at the same time to slander the character
of the members of that committee, viz., Messrs. J. Woods, Thos.
Bent, William M‘Lellan, E. J. Dixon, and R. S. Inglis, M.L.A.s,
by endeavoring to make it appear that they were passing docu-
mentary evidence laid before them into the hands of the parties
charged with the frauds. Besides the before-mentioned docu-
ments, which have been stolen from the owners or are missing
from the government offices, is a letter from the' Marquis of
Norman by to E. N. Kitchen, in reference to a despatch from the
British Secretary of State. This document was lent to Mr.
Deakin at his request, with the promise that every care would be
taken of it, and that it would be returned, and cannot since be
found either in the Crown Law offices or amongst Mr. Deakin’s
private papers. An investigation has been demanded in the
public interest from Mr. Cuthbert, the Minister of Justice, but
was refused. His letter of 19th of January, 1888, states—
“ The Minister of Justice has no power to hold an inquiry such a s
that sought. If a definite charge is made against any officer this depart-
ment will promptly investigate it.”
This is simply an evasion. The whole of the facts, together with
the missing documents having been laid before Mr. Cuthbert, it
would be simply impossible for the owners to say which particular
person or persons took them. There is no attempt to deny that
they have dissappeared : that is admitted. The Government hold
the sworn charges against the parties who carried out the original
fraud, and also against those government officials who have aided


(IS)
the bank in obtaining the Crown title, but neither have ever been
permitted to be heard, and it is only by a public investigation
that the actual parties can be found out.
The Government evidently consider that the owners ought to
be thankful that they are permitted to exist, as their freehold
property, and all the documents they have to prove their owner-
ship, are the property of any government official who chooses to
take them. As a specimen of the cool effrontery with which this
game is carried out the following may be taken ;—On the occa-
sion of the Police Court case against George Merrifield, most
important documentary evidence, letters, etc., were laid before
the court and never returned. Application was made to the
Crown Law offices for their return, which was met by the follow-
ing answer—-
“ The documents have been misplaced ; I think some of them are
lost altogether.” Signed M‘Neice, Clerk of Petty Sessions.
It is quite clear that the Government evidently intend that if
ever this comes to a public investigation, to leave the owners with
as little documentary evidence as possible.
The owners are utterly and entirely without redress, and have
no alternative but to publish the searches from the Registrar-
General’s office and other official registered documents as a warn-
ing to the public, and as a sample of the work carried out by
officials receiving large salaries from the State, presumedly in the
interest of Justice.
THE SEARCHES FROM THE REGISTRY OFFICE.
The Deed oe Purchase by Bishop and Others.
[Conveyance.]
Book 113, folio 302.
IGth September, 1861.—Alexander Laing, official assignee and sole
assignee of the estate of John Flaxman, gentleman, in the Colony of Vic-
toria, on the one part, and George Bishop, George Ballingall Stewart, and
Alfred Rowbotham, hereinafter designated the purchasers, on the other
part. Parcels, Allotments 31 and 17 of section 6 parish of Guildford.
Consideration, .-£2OOO, paid by the said purchasers to the said Alexander
Laing, as such official assignee, on the execution of the now memorialising
presents.
(Signed), Alexander Laing, Official Assignee.
Registered 21st December, 1861, by Grosvenor Sinister, clerk to
Messrs. Muttlebury, Malleson and England.
The Deed Under Which the Property was Held.
[Conveyance.]
Book 113, folio ouo.
7th December, 1861. —George Bishop, George Ballingall Stewart,
Alfred Rowbotham on the first part, George Bishop, John Merrifield,
Thomas M'Grath on the second part, George Garrard on the third part.
Consideration of an agreement therein entered, and in consideration of
Ten Shillings upon execution of Memorial entered, and paid George


Garrard to Bishop, Stewart and R-owbotham. Parcels, Allots. 81 and 17
sec. 6, parish of Guildford.
(Signed) Alfred Rowtbotham
George Ballxngall Stewart
Witness — George Bishop.
I). Macpherson.
Entered and registered by Grosvenor Bunster, law clerk to Muttle-
bury, Malleson and England, '24 Queen-street, Melbourne, 6th January,
1862.
All deeds from the Crown down were deposited in the Union
Bank, and have never been removed with the sanction or know-
ledge of the owners. Owing to representations made to the
owners early in the month of May, 1865, by John and George
Merritield, with F. V. Biekley, an employe of George Merrifield,
that the trustee, Thomas M‘Grath, was about to become insolvent,
and that his creditors could realise upon the estate, and that they
would be ruined, as the deed of the 7th December, 1861, was not
a trust deed, but that the land was absolutely vested in Bishop,
Merrifield and M‘Grath, the owners became alarmed, as they
were on the eve of completing a most extensive system of tun-
nelling (nearly three miles) through highly auriferous wash,
averaging from 3 dwt. to 2 ounces to the load, with a thickness of
washdirt from 2 feet to 10 feet, and had over 25 years’ profitable
employment, with room for 200 men.
Dr. M‘Grath was interviewed, when lie expressed his inten-
tion of disposing of his entire interest, and advised the owners to
have a new conveyance drawn up by which each shareholder
would become proprietor in his own right. The owners having
no suspicion of treachery, and upon the advice of the Merrifields,
who stated that, as several of the shareholders were aliens, and
could not own real estate under the British law, except by regis-
tering themselves as a company, it was agreed to do so. At a
meeting held at the company’s office, Guildford, on the 31st May,
1865, the trustees resigned their trust, and the estate was vested
in 25 shares held by 22 owners, viz., George Bishop, J. Kingsley,
A. Rowbotham, E. N. Kitchen, G. Calligari, G. Giovanetti, T.
Mills, J. Hayes, R. Marshall, G. Turner, J. Merrifield, G.
Thomas, T. Bissett, J. Bissett, J. Figgett, J. Thorpe, T. Randle,
J. Harding, J. Hocking, T. Corless, R. Stook, and W. Challoner,
and, immediately after, a deed of partnership was executed by
them for 99 years, the whole of the owners being present except
T. Mills. The deeds were taken away by George Merrifield for
registration and deposit in the Union Bank with the owners’
other deeds.
The searches subsequently instituted by George Smyth, Esq.,
barrister, resulted in the discovery that the deeds were never
registered, and are supposed to have been destroyed, whilst the
Registrar’s office discloses the fact that a forged deed had been
substituted, purporting to be a conveyance from the owners to a
public company, no such company being in existence, viz :


[Conveyance.] Book J5l, fol 020.
7th June, 1865.—George Bishop, John Merrifield, and Thomas
M‘Grath on the one part, the El Dorado Gold Mining Company Regis-
tered on the other part. Consideration, Ten Shillings paid company to
Bishop, Merrifield and M'Grath. Same land as in Folio 365, Book 113.
Witness—George Merrifield. (Signed) John Merrifield.
Entered and registered by C. J. Hayward, law clerk to W. Lynch,
31st J uly, 1865.
[The date of the 7th June is written over an erasure.]
It was upon this deed that the concocted case of perjury was
got up by Messrs. Kerferd, Madden, Harriman and C. A. Smyth,
against George Bishop, he having sworn that he neither signed or
uttered it, there being no sucli company in existence at the time,
and it being a felony against himself and the other owners. The
actual cause of this infamous proceeding was that he and E. N.
Kitchen had both sworn charges of felony against the Attorney
General and the Secretary of the Law Department for causing
the issue of the Crown title over the estate upon this and the
other forgeries, and placed their affidavits in the hands of the
Governor. They by this means endeavored to crush Bishop and
Kitchen by a sham case, and total suppression of evidence, to
hide their guilt. That it was the intention to imprison Kitchen
also was evident, but the Consul of the United States was watch-
ing his case ; had they done so the case would have become an
international one, so they dared not attempt, although they
flaunted a warrant in his face in open court, in case he would not
retract his oath that the deed was a forgery and felony against
him. He dared them to serve it, and it was withdrawn, so he
was compelled to sit under the imputation of perjury for daring
to swear this one-man deed is a forgery.
[Mortgage.]
29th May, 1866. Book 160, folio 575.
The Corporation of the El Dorado Gold Mining Company Registered
on the one part, and the Corporation of the Bank of Australasia on the
other part. Consideration, £2OOO, due to the bank and already partly
secured by a bill of sale over chattels, bearing date the day before these
presents. Same land as in Book 113, folio 565.
Witness— (Signed), George Merrifield,
George Merrifield Solicitor, Castlemaine.
Entered and registered by C. J. Hayward, Ist June, 1866.
The owners never incurred any liabilities with the Bank of
Australasia, and were not in debt to any person, except a, trifling
liability to their bankers, the Union Bank. The owners’ minute
book shows that repeated attempts had been made to pay off this
debt, but was always strenuously opposed by John Merrifield and
F. Y. Bickley, who had been appointed by George Merrifield to
represent the two shares of G. Turner, over which Merrifield
held power of attorney.
During the preliminary working of the mine, from 1861 to
the end of 1865, they had been enabled to pay off upwards of
£7OO of a liability to the Union Bank of £BOO, and expend a


further sum of £7OOO upon permanent improvements out of
the protits, and were in receipt of weekly dividends, varying from
£1 10s. to £lO.
They were forcibly ejected by a crowd of strangers headed by
the Merrifield Brothers, F. \ r . Bickley, their employe, and Thos.
Handle, who had been an employe of M‘Grath, who had sold his
entire remaining interest to E. N. Kitchen on the 31st May, and
conveyed to him on that date in presence of the owners.
Mr. J. W. Burnett, J.P., a person unknown to the owners,
being appointed chairman, and uttering scrip to the public in a
property in which he had no interest (they obtained nearly ten
thousand pounds from the public, principally in Melbourne), and
after a pretence of obtaining gold—putting large quantities of
headings through the sluices and battery, leaving the gold behind
for their future benefit —and after a desperate struggle on the
part of the owners to repossess themselves of their property by
every means available, and appealing to the government for aid,
the bank professed to sell the estate to one M‘Donald for £255,
and machinery, buildings, etc., to the value of £6OOO, to D.
Munro, the owners duly cautioning all persons against purchasing.
They also attended the sale and publicly informed the persons
assembled that any deeds over the estate held by the bank were
forgeries, but without avail. The bank had previously offered
the mine and estate to a Melbourne syndicate for £40,000, but,
having no title, the matter fell through. ( Vide Town and Country ,
July 17, 1885.)
It must be borne in mind that the present Superintendent of
the Bank of Australasia, Mr. John Sawers, informed Mr. Call,
P.M., and the bench of magistrates in the Police Court, Mel-
bourne, 17th November, 1887, that George Merrifield had been
employed by the bank in the matter. The above searches show
the manner and nature of his employment.
[Conveyance.] Book 188, folio 616.
12th March, 1869. —The Corporation of the Bank of Australasia to
Mathew M‘Donald.—Same parcel as in Book 113, folio 565, (but allotment
17 section 6 is called Parish Castlemaine instead of Guildford.) Considera-
tion, £255. (Signed), D. C. M‘Arthur,
Witness—J. B. Goulston. Superintendent, Bank of Australasia.
Entered and Registered by S. C. Prior, 25th March, 1869.
Immediately after the execution of this conveyance John
Merrifield was placed in possession of the mine, and a number
of mortgages executed over the estate for nearly £2OOO by
M‘Donald, and 5 roods 2| perches sold to the Government for the
site of the Railway Station at Guildford. Mr. Gillies, the
Minister, and the officers of the department were duly cautioned,
they however waited until the Crown title was issued.
Seven of the owners-—being all that remained in Guildfotd,
the others Ixaving been compelled to leave in search of employ-


ment—took forcible possession of a portion of the property and
mine, they not being numerous enough to take possession of the
whole. This they held for two years after the pretended sale to
M‘Donald, but were compelled to abandon it in consequence of
the bank’s agents having wilfully destroyed over 9000 feet of
tunnel for the purpose of closing the air passages in the mine.
An attempt was made by the bank’s agents to enforce payment of
rent by an action in the County Court before J udge Bindon; but
as they refused to produce the deeds under which they professed
to hold the property, a verdict was given against them with
costs.
A deliberate attempt was made against the life of E. K.
Kitchen, which was only frustrated by his being warned by one
of the parties less base than the others. And subsequently an
attempt was made by the Superintendent of the Bank of Austra-
lasia, Mr. D. C. M‘Arthur, to incarcerate him in the State luna-
tic asylum, he having informed the detective officer that the bank
would pay all expenses.
Certificate of Title under the Lands Statute.
Vol. 195, folio 138, 976.
To Mathew M‘Donald, of Castlemaine. County of Talbot, surveyor,
of all the lands delineated in plan in margin, of 103 acres 1 rood 16
perches, being Crown allotments 17 and 31 sec. 6, parish of Guildford,
County of Talbot. Dated 11th September, 1874.
(Signed) Thomas Sunderland,
Assistant Registrar of Titles.
Transfer 41178.
Mathew M‘Donald to Board of Land and Works, part of allotment
17, sec 6, parish of Guildford, County of Talbot, containing 3 roods 2\
perches. Consideration, £346. Dated 19th September, 1874.
(Signed) Mathew M‘Donald.
Certificate of Title.
9th February, 1877. —Transfer as to balance.—Mathew M‘Donald to
Joseph Young, 102 acres 2 roods 13| perches, part of Crown allotment
17, and the whole of Crown allotment 31, section 6 parish of Guildford,
County of Talbot. Consideration, £3OO.
(Signed) Mathew M‘Donald.
Entered and registered, Henry Krone, Assistant-Registrar of Titles.
The mortgages are discharged 24th June, 1878. The signature
of Mathew M‘Donald to this conveyance is in a different hand-
writing to the conveyance to the Board of Works.
Extract from Government Gazette , February 16th, 1877.
In the Supreme Court 1 Bank of Australasia f
of the - v. - FI. FA.
Colony of Victoria J M ‘Donald.
JVT OTICE is hereby given that the Sheriff of the Midland Bailiwick will
TA cause to be sold on Wednesday, the 21st March, 1877, at the
Castlemaine Hotel, Castlemaine, at 12 o’Clock, noon, all the above-named
defendant’s estate, right, title in and to allotment 31 and part of allot-
ment 17, sec. 6, parish of Guildford, unless this execution be sooner satis-
fied. Terms cash. No cheques taken.
(Signed) James M‘Namara, Sheriff’s officer.


There is no record in the office of the Registrar-General of
the corporate deed of the “ El Dorado Gold Mining Co., Regis-
tered,” which company, the bank alleges, mortgaged to them.
THE POSITION OE THE FIRM OF MALLESON, ENG-
LAND AND STEWART IN THE CASE OF BISHOP
AND OTHERS.
On the 2nd September, 1873, Bishop, Kitchen and Rowbotham,
on behalf of the owners, saw their solicitors, Messrs, Malleson,
England and Stewart, in reference to an application of Mathew
M‘Donald, advertised 20th August, 1873, for a title under the
Lands Statute to allots, 31 and 17 section 6, parish of Guildford,
when a caveat was drawn up by Mr. W. S. Robertson, their clerk,
under instructions from Mr. Stewart, signed by Bishop on behalf
of self and owners, a copy being supplied them bearing date 2nd
■September, 1873; and on the 27th following Mr. J. C. Stewart
supplied Bishop with a writ of ejectment, returnable within 16
days thereof, to be served by Bishop upon M‘Donald at Castle-
maine. The said writ was duly served, and Messrs. Malleson and
Co. notified.
No. 18, —Form of Summons in Ejectment.—Schedule 36, section 224
of No. 19 Vic., No. 19 Common Law Practice Act, 1856. Bishop
v. M‘Donald.—ln the Supreme Court. —No. 2885. —Writ of Sum-
mons in Ejectment.
This writ was issued by James Cooper Stewart, of 24 Queen-street, Mel-
bourne, in the Colony of Victoria, attorney for the within-named plaintiff.
Malleson, England and Stewart. Dated 27th September, 1873.
A week after the writ was served E. N. Kitchen saw Mr.
Stewart to inquire when the case would come on, and the number
of owners that would be required to attend the court, and Mr.
Stewart informed him that he did not know if M‘Donald would
defend, but would write to Mr. Bishop as soon as they knew.
The following letter was sent;
24 Queen-street, October 18, 1873.
Yourself v. M‘Donald.
Mr. George Bishop, miner, Guildford —Dear Sir —The defendant has
given notice of his intention to defend. When we are ready we will for-
ward for your perusal draft affidavit in support of application for inspec-
tion of defendant’s title. Yours truly,
Malleson England and Stewart.
Hearing nothing more from the firm, E. N. Kitchen waited
upon Mr. Stewart and was informed that they would duly notify
Mr. Bishop when they were ready, Mr. Bishop also wrote to the
firm, when the following answer was received ;
24 Queen-street, Melbourne, November 17/73,
Yourself v. M‘Donald.
Mr. George Bishop, miner, Guildford, —Dear Sir—Yours of the 12th
instant to hand. So soon as the present sittings are over, which will be
in the course of a few days, we will take this matter up.
Yours truly, Malleson, England and Stewart.


Nothing more being heard from Mr. Stewart, Mr. Bishop
came to Melbourne, and, with E. N. Kitchen, waited upon him,
when Mr. Stewart stated that before any proceedings could be
taken it was necessary to obtain an inspection of the defendant’s
deeds ; and on the 22nd December Mr. Stewart informed Mr.
Bishop that he had seen the deed of the 7th June, 1865, and that
the date had been erased.
On the 24th December, Mr. Stewart issued a summons for
Bishop to inspect, to be heard before Judge Williams on the 30th-
December. On the sth of January, 1874, Mr. Bishop inspected
the deed at the office of Mr. C. Faussett, solicitor, 46 Collins-
street East, in the presence of Mr. Druce, and made oath to the
forgeries. From that date to the 15th April Mr. Stewart kept
Messrs. Bishop and Kitchen endeavoring to obtain the sanction
of the Government to inspect the documents in the Court of
Mines, Fryerstown, Mr. Stewart professing to believe that the-
missing corporate deed would be found there ; and on that date
he demanded the sum of three guineas for expenses incurred by
him in obtaining information from the Union Bank.
On the 23rd April, 1874, Mr. Stewart offered a settlement on
behalf of the bank, which he alleged claimed to have been de-
ceived by the forgeries, and on the Bth May lie stated that the-
bank would pay no monies unless the forgeries were condoned,,
and that, unless they accepted this offer, a Crown title would be
issued to the bank over the estate in defiance of all they could
do, and they would then have nothing, as it would be simply
impossible for men in their position to fight both the bank and
Government. This was refused, when Mr. Stewart stated that
the owners would have to take criminal proceedings, as they
could do no more for them.
Through the influence of Mr. R. S. Inglis, the matter got
into the hands of the police, Detective J. M. Christie having-
charge, who worked up the case energetically and impounded the
deeds. Mr. Stewart then sent for Messrs. Bishop, Kitchen andi
Christie, when he stated the case would have to be settled in.
Equity. On this Mr. Christie instructed Messrs. Bishop and
Kitchen to have no further dealings with the firm of Malleson,.
England and Stewart.
In 1879, from private information received, the owners insti-
tuted searches in the offices of the Registrar-General and the
Prothonotary, with the following result:—“Made search in the
office of the Registrar of Titles and found no caveat against the
application of M'Donald had been filed between the 20th
August, 1874, up to this date, 20th June, 1879. (Signed) John
Rose, law clerk. Also—
Prothonotary’s Office.—Registered Judgment, No. 2885.—Bishop v.
M‘Donald.
This writ was issued by James Cooper Stewart of 24 Queen-street, in the
city of Melbourne, on the 27th day of September, 1873, attorney for the


within-named plaintiff, and Mathew M ‘Donald has on this 2nd day of
October, 1873, appeared by Charles Faussett, his attorney, to the said
writ; and the said George Bishop has failed to proceed to trial although
duly required to do so : Therefore it is considered that the said Mathew
M ‘Donald be acquitted. (Signed) Redmond Barry, Knt.
And on the 23rd day of July, 1874, costs were awarded against
George Bishop of .£2O 15s. lid.
It will thus he seen that Mr. Stewart never lodged the caveat,
and that the pretended action of Bishop v. M‘Donald had been
allowed to go by default 16 days before the firm had notified the
owners that McDonald would defend. It is needless to say that
no application has ever been made for the costs, as this would
at once have revealed the position of Malleson, England and
Stewart; but the owners had no suspicion of treachery, believing
the firm to be highly respectable until to their bitter cost they
found out their mistake.
On the Bth of May, 1876, Judge Fellows issued a written
order for Mr. Stewart to appear before him, with Bishop, in
respect to that firm’s position in the case, when the following
colloquy took place ;
Judge Fellows: “Mr. Stuart, how about the forgery of this
man’s name?’ “Mr. Stuart; “Your Honor, Mr. Bishop and
his partners have been thoroughly defrauded and juggled out of
their property.”
Judge Fellows: “Who defrauded and juggled them out of
their property !” Mr. Stewart: “ George Merritield, the solicitor,
your Honor.”
Judge Fellows : “What have you done for these men !” Mr.
Stewart; / lodged a caveat, and followed it up with a writ of
ejectment; but when I turned up the corner of the deed for the
inspection of Mr. Bishop in the presence of Mr. Kitchen, neither
of them would say the signature was a forgery !”
Judge Fellows to Bishop : “ What have you to say to that ?”
Mr. Bishop : “ Mr. Stewart ought to be more careful, your Honor,
of what he says. He never turned up any deed in my presence
or in the presence of Mr. Kitchen !”
Judge Fellows: “Where, and in whose presence, did you
inspect the deed 1 ?’ Mr. Bishop : “At 46 Collins-street East, in
the presence of Mr. C. Faussett, and a Mr. Druce.”
Judge Fellows: “Where was Mr. Stewart when you in-
spected!” Mr. Bishop: “Doing the tourist in Tasmania, your
Honor.”
Judge Fellows : “ Mr. Stewart, it is plain to me that this man
did not utter these deeds.” Mr. Stewart; “ No, your Honor.”
“Judge Fellows : “Who did!” Mr. Stewart: “ George Mer-
rifield, the solicitor!”
Judge Fellows : “ Then George Merrifield, the solicitor, shall
be charged with feloniously uttering a forged deed with intent to
defraud!”


The judge then issued his summons, ordering Mr. Bishop to
place it in the hands of the Minister of Justice at once, which he
did. Dr. Madden the Minister, however, immediately tore off
the judge’s signature and seal which he retained, returning the
mutilated summons to Bishop, alleging that the Government
were not ready.
EXTRACTS FROM REPORTS
OF VARIOUS GOVERNMENT OFFICIALS ON THE CASE OF
Bishop and Others.
The Chief Commissioner of Police, Captain Standish, to Mr.
Secretan (22/8/74); “The deed referred to as being dated 7th
June, 1865, was signed by Bishop, Merrifield and M'Grath, wit-
ness George Merrifield. This deed has been seen. The date has
been evidently erased and altered.”
Mr. Secretan, in charge of Detective Force (29/8/74) : “It
appears that the deed dated 7th June, 1865, transfers the ground
from the original trustees to Bishop, Merrifield and M'Grath.
It was signed on the 31st day of May, 1865, but it being uncer-
tain when the company was registered under the Limited Lia-
bility Act, it was left to Mr. Merrifield to insert the date, when
it had been ascertained that the previous deed had been regis-
tered. This was done on the 7th June, 1865, in the presence of
John Merrifield, Thos. M‘Grath, and Thomas Randle. I cannot
see that any criminal charge can be made against Merrifield in
respect of the alteration, assuming this deed to be valid.”
It will be seen by a reference to the searches that the first
statement of Mr. Secretan is false, as the deed of the 7th June,
1865, purports to convey the estate from Bishop, Merrifield and
M‘Grath to a public company, and that, if the date was left open,
there was no occasion for its erasure; and it dispossesses the
entire body of owners, and is uttered by the Merrifield Brothers
only, the owners being entirely ignorant of the transaction, and
George Merrifield having previously informed the detective police
that he had altered the date with the sanction of M‘Grath and
Randle. M‘Grath had disposed of his entire interest to E. N.
Kitchen on the 31st May, 1865, and Randle had been an employe
of M‘Grath. On the 15th of July, 1876, George Merrifield
swore before Judge Fellows: “I cannot tell who made the
erasure in the deed of the 7th of June, 1865 ; I cannot say who
made it.”
Mr. C. A. Smyth, Cnnvn Prosecutor, 16th June, 1876:
“ I ha\ T e, as the Hon. the Attorney-General suggested, carefully
gone through this matter. I ha\ T e abstained in this report from
referring by name to the persons against whom Messrs. Bishop
and Kitchen have recklessly cast the most serious imputations ;
but that recklessness disentitles them, in my opinion, to any con-
sideration beyond Avhat justice required. They have, in my
opinion, Avholly failed to substantiate their charges, and I think


they may safely he left to the ordinary tribunals, as they may be
advised. In reference to their 3rd charge, of altering a deed with
intent to defraud, there is no evidence to show that any person
altered any deed.”
With respect to this production of Mr. C. A. Smyth, the
Crown Prosecutor, and its allusions to the respectability of the
parties, two of the parties charged are of criminal antecedents ;
and his further statement is a clear proof of the conspiracy in the
Crown Law offices (to use the language of Mr. F, L. Smyth) to
pot Bishop and Kitchen by the concocted Police-court case, as
they were sent to Castlemaine by them, His further statement
that there is no evidence of a deed being altered is shown by
Captain Standish two years before to be untrue. Now, this Mr.
C. A. Smyth is always employed by the bank, and was employed
to crush Bishop or imprison him as a lunatic, and on the 17th
November, 1887, was employed by the bank in the case of
Kitchen v. Sawers, when he represented Ceorge Merrifield to be
the thief who stole the scrip from Kitchen. On that occasion his
brief was marked 40 guineas.
Dr. Madden, Minister of Justice ; “I have come to the con-
clusion that the whole of these complicated and apparently aimless
inquiries have been brought about by the department having
thrown undeserved consideration upon a couple of individuals
haunted by a grievance which they will not seek to have re-
dressed, if it exists. In consequence of allowing these men so
much latitude, the records have been made the means of publish-
ing gross charges and insinuations against most highly respectable
people. For my part, so far as I can see from the almost unin-
telligible evidence, I cannot see the smallest ground for any of
the serious charges; and I advise His Excellency to take no
further notice of these men.”
This was written to the Governor after his promise to the
owners (he having seen seven of them at the Crown Law offices)
that the Crown title should be withdrawn, and that the owners
should be recompensed, as a mistake had been made.
Another Missing Document.
E. N. Kitchen having informed the Minister of Justice, Dr.
Madden, and the Secretary of the Law Department, Mr. Harri-
man, that he had seen a large parchment deed with numbers of
signatures and seals in possession of the Clerk of Petty Sessions
at Fryerstown, but was not permitted to examine it, only its date
being given—24th June, 1865—he requested an explanation,
when the Secretary of the Law Department forwarded the fol-
lowing:—“ Mr. Kitchen is in error in stating that he saw any
other document than those produced. (Signed) E. Townsend,
C.P.S., 17/5/76.
The documents produced by Mr. Harriman were two copies
of the Mount Alexander Alai I and a Government Gazette , and upon
a further complaint being made to Mr. Harriman by Messrs.


Bishop and Kitchen, he advised them to say nothing more about
it as, whatever documents might have been there, there was none
now.
The United States Consul-General, Mr. Adamson, had an
interview with the Acting-Governor, Sir W. Stawell, Kitchen
being present. His Excellency declined to examine any of the
documentary evidence, but stated that no person denied the truth
of the allegations in the case of Bishop and Others, but the
Crown would not prosecute, the owners having a remedy in
Equity. In consequence of which statement the Consuls of the
United States and Italy wished the highest legal opinion avail-
able in the colony to be obtained as to the owners’ remedy, and in
December, 1878, the opinion of the Hon. George Higinbotham
was obtained through Mr. James M £ Kean, and an interview had
with that gentleman. Mr. Higinbotham’s opinion was—“ That
the owners had no remedy in either Equity or Common Law, the
case being one of crime throughout; but that, owing to the very
extraordinary attempts the owners had made to take criminal pro-
ceedings, without success , he thought it would be useless to try
further.” .... “ That the Certificate of Title is utterly
valueless, and ought never to have been issued.”.
At the interview with the Acting-Governor, Sir W. Stawell,
and the Consul-General of the United States, Mr. Thomas Adam-
son, and E. N. Kitchen, which led to the opinion of Mr. George
Higinbotham being taken, Mr. Adamson said: “Your Excel-
lency, when this man came to me with his case I believed him to
be mad. I did not believe it possible that under aiay form of
civilised government on the face of the earth such things could
be carried out; but I have seen members of parliament and
lawyers who have investigated the case, and they assure me it is
only too true.” He then offered the Governor a printed copy of
the Petition to Parliament, and requested His Excellency to see
the documentary evidence in Kitchen’s case. The Acting-
Governor declined, saying, “No person denies the truth of the
allegations, but the Crown declines to prosecute.” Mr. Adam-
son said : “ Then, where is their remedy 1” The Governor :
“ They have a remedy in Equity.” Mr. Adamson : “ The Crown
having taken their property from them, and given a title over it
to the Bank of Australasia, how are they to find the means to go
to law in a civil case, and the criminal courts closed to them T
The Governor: “ I have nothing to do with that.” Mr.
Adamson : “ With all due respect, I must submit that for the
Crown to deprive these men of their entire means, and then tell
them to go to law against both the bank and the Government, is
very like tieing a man’s legs and then telling him to run.” The
Governor: “ I cannot help it; they can sue as paupers.” Mr.


Adamson then pressed the Governor for a reason why the Crown
would not allow a prosecution, when the Governor said “It was
in deference to the purchasers, who considered it unjust that
public money should, be spent to dispossess them.” The interview
then terminated.
THE PETITION TO HIS EXCELLENCY THE GOVERNOR.
To His Excellency the Marquis of Normaney, K.C.M.G.,
Governor of the Colony of Victoria.
The humble Petition of Edward Nicholson Kitchen, a citizen of the
United States; Giovanni Calegari, a subject of the King of Italy ;
and Gottardo Giovanetti, a citizen of Switzerland, whose signatures
are hereto affixed—
Sheweth that your Petitioners, with others, were the owners by purchase
of a freehold estate, being Allotments 17 and 31, Section 6, Parish of
Guildford, County of Talbot, consisting of 103 acres, 1 rood, 16 perches,
with other lands leased from the Crown ; the said estate being vested in
three trustees for the common benefit, and used for mining purposes.
That your petitioners have been defrauded and dispossessed of the said
estate by certain officials of the Bank of Australasia and others, by forged
and fraudulent deeds, and a title in the name of the Crown given to the
bank’s assign, after his admission to the detective officer, Mr. J. M.
Christie, that he was a dummy, through the connivance and assistance of
the Attorney-General, M. G. B. Kerferd ; and all attempts to obtain
justice have been checkmated and defeated up to the present time, and
the courts of justice prostituted in endeavors to fix charges of perjury and
lunacy against the owners, through the connivance of the permanent
head of the Crown Law offices, Mr. B. C. Harriman, to cover the issue of
the Crown Title, and enable the said bank to consummate its felony. That
on November 4th, 1874, your petitioners, with others, obtained a Parlia-
mentary Committee to investigate the case through Mr. J. E. Dixon, M.P.
for St. Kilda, who took evidence up to the adjournment of the House in
December, 1874; but the Attorney-General, Mr. Kerferd, succeeded in
virtually suppressing the committee and the evidence taken through the
assistance of Mr. C. A. Smyth, the Crown Prosecutor.
That, shortly after, a bogus public dinner was got up at Castlemaine,
at which Mr. Kerferd appeared in company with the bank’s solicitor, Mr.
George Merrifield, charged by the owners with the forgeries, and the
individual, F. V. Bickley, who uttered the “consent ” (which is now ad-
mitted to be a forgery by Mr. B. Harriman), was appointed to a position
in the public service, which he still retains, for the purpose of covering
their guilt and giving the lie to the substance of the petition, which your
petitioners had felt themselves compelled to publish. Under these circum-
stances your petitioner had no alternative but to place themselves in the
hands of their consuls, and bring their case before their respective
governments.
That your Petitioners are informed that, before their case can be
brought under the notice of the British Government, they must exhaust
all means of obtaining justice in the colony. They are further informed
that —“In theory, under the British law, there is no official beyond the
power of that law,” but up to the present, your Petitioners have found it
to be theory only, as the administration of justice is virtually in the hands
of one man, Mr. B. C. Harriman, and those with whom he has surrounded
himself, and that all those officials who have assisted in defeating justice
have received increased positions and emoluments, while the few who
dared to do their duty have been driven from the Public Service.
That the case with the affidavits was placed in the hands of the late


Governor, Sir G. Bowen, in consequence of which your Petitioners were
sent for by the Minister of Justice, Dr. Madden, who first told your
Petitioners that the Crown Title would be withdrawn ; and further stated
that the reason the Government had allowed the trustee, John Merrifield
(who had uttered the forged deed in conjunction with his brother, the
bank’s solicitor), to leave the colony was that they looked upon him as the
dupe of his brother.
That, at a subsequent interview, Dr. Madden informed your peti-
tioners that he found a Crown Title once issued could not be withdrawn,
but that the owners would be recompensed out of a fund set apart for
that purpose, where mistakes like the present had been made. Subse-
quently the trustee, George Bishop, was sent by the Minister of Justice
and Mr. Harriman to Castlemaine, under the pretence of prosecuting the
Bank’s solicitor, Mr. Geo. Merrifield, they assuring him that everything
had been prepared and made easy for him; when, although the owners
had an'/}ver whelming number of witnesses, and indisputable documentary
evidence, which had been previously exhibited in the Crown Law Offices,
to prove that no such corporation as that alleged by the bank ever existed
other than as a fraud against the owners and the public, they were
refused, with the exception of four, to see the deeds, and each witness
threatened with perjury ; the Police Magistrate, Mr. Heron, refusing to
allow the most important documentary evidence to be put in, and an
p ndeavor made to intimidate your petitioner, Kitchen, by flaunting a
warrant in his face—which he dared them to serve, and which was
withdrawn.
That the Trustee, George Bishop, was ordered to appear to answer a
charge of perjury, but, as he positively refused to find bail, the Police
Magistrate had not the courage of the crime he was employed to carry
out, left the court without serving a summons or warrant upon him, and
Bishop was told by the police that he must go home.
That he was subsequently committed for trial before Mr. Justice
Fellows, and upon a concocted case upon false issues, and by a total sup-
pression of the evidence carried out by Mr. C. A. Smyth, the Crown
Prosecutor, an attempt was made to incarcerate him in the State Lunatic
Asylum, which failed through the honesty of the Chief Medical Officer,
Dr. M‘Crea. Notwithstanding, he was still detained in gaol, when Mr.
R. S. Inglis, M.P. for Richmond, saw your Petitioner, E. N. Kitchen,
and informed him that he had seen Messrs. Kerferd and Harriman, who
had desired him to see Kitchen, and stated that if he with the other
owners would sign a document not to prosecute the case any further, they
would release Bishop. This was refused, and finding that his case would
be again brought before the Governor, he was released.
That in October, 1878, at the request of the Attorney-General, Sir
Bryan O’Loghlen, the affidavits of Messrs. Kitchen, Calegari, and Row-
botham were placed in his hands, and their solicitor, Mr. James MTvean,
permitted to inspect the deeds, when the “consent of the owners,” upon
which the whole case is based, was admitted by Mr. Harriman to be a
forgery ; lie also admitted that no corporate deed of the corporation which
the bank alleges mortgaged to them had been seen by him, or received at
the Government offices.
That, in August, 1879, Mr. Dixon, M.P., caused, with the consent of
the Government, to be placed on the Notice Paper a motion for a Select
Committee to carry out the labors of the previous Committee, and inquire
into the conduct of Mr. C. A. Smyth, the Crown Prosecutor, but owing to
the purposed obstruction of the private members’ business, and the assist-
ance of officials in keeping the case low down upon the Notice Paper,
they have so far succeeded in preventing an investigation.
That your Petitioners respectfully submit to your Excellency that th e
name of Her Majesty is respected by all nations, and your Petitioner 3
feel certain that the Queen of Great Britain, would never permit any


official to use the name of the Crown to enable any bank or individual to
consummate a felony, either against her own subjects or aliens who may
reside in her dominions, and that to do so is “treason against the
Crown. ”
Your Petitioners therefore earnestly ask your Excellency as the
representative of Her Majesty, and the custodian of the honor of the
British Nation in this colony, that your Excellency will take such steps as
will relieve your Petitioners from the years of gross oppression and in-
justice which they have undergone, for no other reason than that they
were the owners of an estate reputedly very rich in gold, and which had
excited the cupidity of a few persons occupying influential positions in
colonial society. Your Petitioners would therefore urge that your Excel-
lency would be pleased to grant a Royal Commission to carry out the
investigation already commenced, with power to further investigate the
prostitution of the Courts of Justice, to prevent such occurrences in future;
Your Petitioners respectfully forward with this Petition copies of
their Affidavits, the Petition to Parliament, and the Searches from the
Registry, with other Documents, which they have in self defence been
compelled to publish.
Edward Nicholson Kitchen, Orrong Road, Prahran.
Giovanni Callbgari, 43 Drummond Street, Carlton.
Gottardo Giovanetti, Strangways.
Dated this 9th day of February, 1880.
This petition was referred by His Excellency to the Minister
of Justice, who declined to deal with it, alleging that the case
had been fully dealt with. An application was made by E. N.
Kitchen to his Excellency for a Koyal Commission, and the
application was referred by the Governor to the Crown Law
officers, when the Attorney-General, Mr. Kerferd, returned the
following answer : “ The Governor may have the power to grant
the Commission, but, if he did, it would have no force.”
THE PETITION TO PARLIAMENT.
To the Honorable the Speaker and the Members of the Legislative
Assembly of the Colony or Victoria.
The humble Petition of George Bishop, Alfred Rowbotham, Edward
Nicholson Kitchen, and others, whose names are affixed hereto,
Showeth :
That your Petitioners were the owners in fee simple of a Freehold
Estate, being Allotments 17 and 31 of Section 6, Parish of Guildford,
County of Talbot, consisting of 103 acres, one allotment of which they
used for mining purposes, the Estate being vested in three trustees for
the common bene lit, viz.:—George Bishop, John Merrill eld, and Thomas
McGrath, M.D. That the Deeds of the said Estate were deposited with
the Union Bank, Castlemaine, as collateral security for an overdraft of
£7OO sterling.
That in the month of May, 1865, when your Petitioners had com-
pleted a system of tunnels, by which they had twenty years’ highly remu-
nerative labor before them, and upon which they had expended upwards
of £SOOO sterling, and several years of labor, and had reduced their
liability to the Union Bank to a nominal sum—John Merrifield, with
George Merrifield, Solicitor, of Castlemaine (his brother), who held a
Power of Attorney over two shares, held in the name of one Turner,
but which shares your Petitioners have reason to believe were the property


of the Bank of Australasia-—circulated reports to your Petitioners that
the Trustee M'Grath, was about to become insolvent, and that owing to
the peculiar tenure of the land, his; creditors could realise on the Estate,
and they would lose their all, urged upon them, as the means to save them,
from total ruin, the immediate registration of the property under the
provisions of the Mining Companies Limited Liability Act 1864 ; and that
at a meeting held on the evening of the 24th May, 1860, the consent of a
majority was obtained, and George Merrifield was instructed to see the
Registration legally carried out, and execute the necessary documents ;
and at an advertised meeting held on the 31st May, 1865, a document was
signed by the- three Trustees in presence of the owners by which, George
Merrifield stated, each man became the owner in his own right, and the
trusteeship ceased, after which a Deed of Association was signed by your
Petitioners. Thomas M'Grath, M.D., having previously disposed of his.
entire interest, and, as your Petitioners believed, ceased to be either an
owner or trustee, the works were then carried on as usual.
On the 24th June the Merrifields called a meeting for the purpose of
re-organising tire company as a Joint Stock Company, with a capital of
£15,000, with power to increase, and dispose of shares to the public, pro-
posing to give, your Petitioners a certain amount of scrip as value, which
resolution they succeeded in carrying by a majority of one. They then
obtained a large sum of money from the public as premiums, which they
appropriated to their own use, refusing to account for the same ; and at a
meeting called by them at Guildford, on the 9th of August, 1865, your
Petitioners were refused a voice. A few persons wer® appointed Directors
by .them, through the proxies of their dupes. J. W. Burnet was made
Chairman, the mine closed, and private owners refused entry.. They were
thus, at one blow, reduced to total poverty. They (Merrifields) subse-
quently obtained £IO,OOO sterling from the public, the said J. W. Burnet,
J.P., with Thomas Randle (who had been an of Thomas
M'Grath, M. D.) issuing scrip to the public, your Petitioners opposing
with all the means at their disposal.
Subsequent investigations disclosed that in the meantime the Merri-
field brothers, with others, had secretly obtained possession of your
Petitioners’ deeds from the Union Bank without their knowledge or con-
sent ; that they placed said deeds in the Bank of Victoria, Castlemaine,
and secretly borrowed the sum of £1,200 sterling, forging the name of E.
N. Kitchen, with others, to the acceptances, but the Bank, becoming
alarmed at the action of your Petitioners, refused further dealings with
them.
George Merrifield, on 29th March, 1866, mortgaged the estate to the
Bank of Australasia for £2,000 sterling, he being Solicitor to that Bank,
to pay off the liability to the Bank of Victoria. The search in the
Registry also discloses that on the day pi'evious he had given the same -
bank a Bill of Sale over the chattels, &c., &c., upon the Estate, valued at.
that time at £6,000 sterling.
After a pretence of work on behalf of the public Company, portions
of the mine were destroyed by John Merrifield, for the purpose of stop-
ping the works. The Bank foreclosed, and advertised the Estate, Plant,,
Machinery, &c., &c., for sale on the 31st January, 1868, but owing to the
opposition of your Petitioners, who took forcible possession of portion of
the Estate, the advertisement was withdrawn, the Bank eventually pre-
tending to sell to one Mathew M‘Donald, a civil servant of the Crown, for
the sum of £255 sterling, the conveyance dating 12th March, 1869, and
purports to be executed by D. C. M‘Arthur, with J. B. Goulson as witness,
and immediately removed and appropriated the whole of the Machinery,
Buildings, &c., &c., upon the Estate to the value of upwards of £6OOO
sterling : That your Petitioners remained in possession for two years after
the pretended sale.
The case was brought under the notice of the Crown Law Officers in
May, 1870; and, at the request of the Hon. Attorney-General, a Sworm


Information was forwarded to that gentleman on the 24th December, 1870,
a search having been obtained through George Smyth, Barrister, which
revealed the fact that a Conveyance had been executed on the 7th June,
1865, purporting to be signed by the three Trustees, who, as before shou n,
had resigned their trust on the 81st May, 1865, by which they professed
to sell the Estate for 10s. (ten shillings) to the El Dorado Gold Mining
Company, Registered—a Corporation with power to hold lands. This
deed was uttered by John Merrifield only, Geoi'ge Merrifield attesting.
The Sworn Information charges George Merrifield, John Merrifield, with
Francis V. Bickley and Thomas Randle, as aiders and abettors
Ist—With conspiracy to defraud the freeholders and the public. 2nd
—With executing and uttering a fraudulent deed of conveyance on the
7th June, 1865. 3rd —The fraudulent alteration of a deed, &c. 4th—The
obtaining unlawful and fraudulent possession of the deeds from the Union
Bank.
That after much evasion your Petitioners were informed by the Hon.
Solicitor-General they must institute proceedings themselves before the
Castlemaine Court; That your petitioners at once placed the evidence in
their possession in the hands of Mr. Superintendent Winch : That, after
a lapse of five weeks, during which time your Petitioners were treated
with the utmost discourtesy, and absolute refusal on part of the Police
Magistrate to allow the case to be dealt with ; which conduct formed the
subject of several communications with the Crown Law Departments,
the documents were returned bj Superintendent Winch to one of your
Petitioners, Mr. Winch saying : “ The Crown Law officers have refused to
deal with this case ; I, <ts a Government officer, shall refuse also.” On
the 20th August, 1873, the Bank of Australasia, through its assign, Mr.
M ‘ Donald, applied to bring the Estate under the Transfer of Land
Statute. Your Petitioners, through Messrs. Malleson, England and
Stewart, lodged a Caveat on the grounds of forgery, on the 2nd Septem-
ber, 1873, which was followed by a Writ of Ejectment, on the 29th follow-
ing. The Union Bank, through its superintendent and solicitors, admitted
its liability and willingness to grant a redress. On affidavit having been
made by George Bishop, argued before His Honor, Mr. Justice Williams,
as to the forgery of his name to the 7th June Conveyance, an offer of
settlement was made through Messrs. Malleson, England and Stewart,
conditional upon the condonation of the forgery. This was positively
refused by George Bishop, and in this refusal he was upheld by the opinion
of Mr. R. Gibbs, Registrar of Titles, who said—“lt is a document no
honest man would condone.” Messrs. Malleson and Co. then stated that
they could not help your Petitioners further.
In the meantime your petitioners were made aware that the Bank of
Australasia, through its assign, had applied to the Crown for the sum of
£1,012 10s. s'erling, as compensation for a portion of an acre of Allotment
17, Section 6, occupied by the Crown for railway purposes.
Your Petitioners desire to call the attention of your Honorable House
that, from commencement of the frauds, repeated applications had been
made to the Clerk of the Court of Mines, Fryersffiwn, for inspection of
the documents under which the Estate was registered, but had always
met with absolute refusal. Your Peli'ioners übimately succeeded in
ob'aining the sanction of the Atrorney-General for inspection, when it
was found no deed of any kind exists there, but a paper dated 13‘h May,
1865, was found, puporting to be a consent to register—which paper con-
tains the forged signatures of several who were not shareholders at that
time.
Through the Hon. the Attorney-General the case was placed in the
hands of the detective police, and inquiries were instituted by them
which fully established our charges ; but the police were prohibited from
proceeding beyond the 7th of June deed, the police stating it was the


desire of the officials in the Crown Law Department to make the whole
case rest upon that one document. This your Petitioners positively re-
fused, as that document is neither the beginning or end of the forgeries by
which possession of the Estate was obtained. In this refusal they were
upheld by the police, who desired, with your Petitioners, to deal with the
whole ease of conspiracy, both against the freeholders and the public, as
the so-called public company—who, it was prof-ssed, mortgaged the Estate
upon this 7th June d«<nl—was not in existence until ihe following August.
The inspection of this 7 1 h June deed by the police, disclosed that the date
had been erased, and the admission forced from George Merrifield that he,
on the 7th Jun “, in company wiih John Merrifield and Thomas M‘Grath,
M.D., altered the date, but that it is the same document, which was signed
on the 31st May in presence of the owners ; but as they have forgotten to
erase (he month of Jium, and as this month is also contained in the body
of the deed, your Petitioners would humbly submit they stand self-con-
victed of bo h forgery and felony.
Whilst these investigations were proceeding your Petitioners wme
astonished at a statement in the Mount Alexander Mail , 20rh July, 1874,
viz. : “ Circuit Court, before Mr. Justice Fellows, civil case, Bishop v.
M‘Donald, withdrawn ; settled out of court.” As no such action had
been authorised by your Petitioners, nor had they any knowledge of it,
and as a deliberate fraud, with perjured affidavits, must have been prac-
ticed upon the Circuit Court, your Petitioners called the attention of the
Hon. the Attorney-General to the matter, and the subsequent investiga-
tions of Police resulted in the discovery that the case had been brought
by Malleson, England and Stewart, under the pretence of acting for your
Petitioners, but in reality on behalf of the Bank of Australasia.
On the 11th September your Petitioners received a letter from the
Hon. the Attorney-General, stating that, “ after the fullest investigations,
he failed to discover anything to sustain the allegations.” A letter was
returned requesting a reconsideration of the case, and that the police be
not prohibited from proceeding beyond the 7th June, 1865; this was
refused. And your Petitioners were astonished to learn from the Regis-
trar of Titles, that a title had been issued to the Bank’s assign, M‘Donald.
Under these circumstances your Petitioners find that their Estate, which
they had purchased, and neither sold, alienated or conveyed, and for
which they received no consideration of any kind, has in the name of the
Crown been handed over to the Bank of Australasia ; and the trustee,
John Merrifield, has been in possession since 1869, and receiving from
your Petitioner’s Estate large quantities of gold.
Your Petitioners therefore humbly pray that the whole case, from the
commencement to the issue of the title under the Transfer of Lands
Statute, may be completely investigated before a Select Committee of
your Honorable House, with power to call for all documents.
And your Petitioners will ever pray,
George Bishop
Alfred Rowbothom
Edward Nicholson Kitchen
Thomas Corless
Richard Marshall
James Kingsley
Gottardo Giovanetti
Thomas Mills
Giovanni Callegari.
The progress report of the Committee was suppressed, and
the owners were not allowed by the Government to see the
printed evidences Several applications had been made to the


Premier by the Consuls for permission to see the evidence given
before the Parliamentary Committee, but were answered by Mr.
Harriman that all the documents in the case,, together with the
printed evidence, had been burnt in the fire at the Government
Printing Office. The falsity of this statement was since proved
by Mr. David Gaunson, M.L.A., who in 1886 obtained one of the
Government printed reports, when it was found that a large
portion of the evidence given against the bank and Messrs.
Malleson, England and Stewart had been excised before printing,
and other portions had been manipulated and altered so as to
appear totally opposite to the evidence given.
The name of Giovanni Callegari should be spelled so in every instance.
Published by Edward Nicholson Kitchen, 46 Moor-street, South Yarra,
and Giovanni Callegari, Nelson House, Drummond-street, Carlton, for
and on behalf of the owners of the estate.
E. Fitzgerald, Printer, 130 Chetwynd-street, North Melboi
7Afv
&6LIO
v \BRARr




