

MINUTE TO THE STANDING COMMITTEE.
The specific objects proposed by the Diocesan Committee are, the erection of Churches , the
establishment of Clergymen , the institution of Schools, and the distribution of the Scriptures and
hooks of devotion in those parts of the Diocese especially where the inhabitants are not in
circumstances to provide such means of grace for themselves. I am, therefore, induced to bring
under consideration of this Committee the lamentable extent to which a total destitution of these
benefits still prevails in the colony; and I am the more strongly urged to adopt this course at
the present time in consequence of the heavy debt, so long due to the Society for Promoting
Christian Knowledge, having been finally extinguished by the persevering and laudable exertions of
the members who have continued true to their engagements to this Committee. At the same time
it is most evident, that without more extended and cordial support hy far than has been afforded
by members of the Church of England during several years past, the effectual supply of the great
and grievous deficiencies which I have now to represent cannot be accomplished, and must not be
hoped for. Nevertheless I will not withold the statement, because it is my duty to make known
such wants, although it be not in my power to propose any plan for such an immediate removal
of them as the urgency of the case well demands. But there is no small benefit in even familiar-
izing the minds of Churchmen with a knowledge of the extent to which the service of God is
yet unprovided for among us, because it may set each individual upon reflecting seriously within
himself what he ought to do, and can do, towards removing so grievous a calamity, and so real a
source of danger, from the community. When multitudes have made their separate reflections
upon the subject, the impression received by each may be a sense of sorrow and shame that the
Sanctuary of God should be thus abandoned to neglect and ruin. This being accompanied by
an earnest wish that the course of things were otherwise ordered, and a determination that so
far as he himself is concerned it shall be placed upon a more becoming footing, a foundation is
hereby laid for the proposal of some systematic plan of action, and for that general combination
by means of which every such undertaking may be carried into due effect. The resources of this
Committee are by far too limited to justify an expectation of their being found equal to the
difficult task which requires accomplishment, (as the following details will show) ; but by having
the destitute condition of the Church fixed as a constant and prominent subject of attention in
their minds, they may be instrumental in communicating the same impression to others. Every
such well disposed individual may succeed in inducing many to render assistance towards an
object which, considering that they assume the denomination of Churchmen, they now regard
with such apathy as, to say the least, is utterly incomprehensible, or rather admits of no
justification.
The first of the neglected Districts to which I would direct attention, is that which
forms the southern suburb of this city, comprising Chippendale, Redfern, and the large and
now populous quarter called the Glebe. The deserted condition of a portion of this wide extent
namely, Chippendale, has been brought specially and urgently under my notice daring the past
week by the clergyman of the adjoining Parish of St. Lawrence, who states that on the Redfern
Estate, with Chippendale and Islington, he cannot estimate the number of the Members of the
Church of England at less than 1500. For these souls there is no provision, either in Churches
or Schools, except what may be afforded by those of the neighbouring parishes. These, however,
are too distant to be of much service, and are otherwise occupied by the inhabitants of St.
Lawrence’ parish.
Under very similar circumstances another suburb, that of Pyrmont, is placed.
Respecting the state of the inhabitants there, and their numbers, I have obtained some particulars
which I now lay before you for your better information. It may be sufficient to state in addition
that Pyrmont forms nominally a portion of the parish of St. Andrew, to which, however, it has
scarcely any practicable access except by crossing Darling Harbour, which amounts nearly to a
prohibition of access by the inhabitants to their parish Church and School.
A still more urgent case if [ossible is presented in the parish of Alexandria, within
which, locally if not legally, the District of the Surry Hills may be included. Attracted by the


erection of the new Barracks a very large population, indeed, is assembled in their neighbour-
hood, and is receiving daily additions owing to a variety of causes* The same circumstance may,,
comparatively at least, be noticed in every quarter from Darlinghurst Court House to the mouth
of Cook’s River, and from the latter point to the South Head Lighthouse, and at intervals along,
the coast from the South Head of Port Jackson, nearly to the North Head of Botany Bay.
For Balmain a somewhat more satisfactory provision is made ; inasmuch as the
inhabitants there have partially the services of the clergyman of St. John’& Church, at Ashfield
and a School has been established. The population however is already such as urgently to require
the attention and the exclusive services of a resident clergyman.
Another ground for this is that the ministry of the clergyman of Ashfield might be with
great propriety and advantage directed to some one or more of those Districts adjoining
residence, which are now deprived of that benefit in consequence of his employment at Balmain.
As instances of this, I may name “ Liberty Plains,” on the South of the Parramatta Road, and
“ Concord” on the North. Each of these neighbourhoods is populous; but neither has, nor can
have, under present circumstances, the attention bestowed upon it that it ought to have.
In the Parish of St. George, between Cook’s and George’s Rivers, there is a population
of many hundred souls ; as was ascertained by a survey undertaken at my request some years ago ;
but for whom, up to the present time, I have never had any resources as disposable means to<
afford instruction.
The, I hope approaching, establishment of a clergyman in the parish of St. Leonards*
will bring a large population within reach of religious ordinances from which they are now cut off;,
and the withdrawal of Lane Cove from the charge of the clergyman of Hunter’s Hill, will enable
the latter to extend his ministry to Pennant Hills instead. These will be important advances for
good. But still it must be borne in mind that it is not possible that the spiritual condition of the
remote inhabitants (and they are not few in number) around Pitt Water, and those along the
coast, extending to North Harbour,, can be more than in a very slight degree benefited by the
establishment of the clergyman at St. Leonards. It may however afford them partially a blessing,
of which they are now entirely destitute.
Neither must the critical position of Castle Hill and Dooral be lost sight of. For
although through the liberality of the Society for the Propagation of the Gospel, I have been
enabled to fit up one very good Church, and during several years past to maintain a clergyman
there, and during the year 1844, obtained payment from Government of half his salary, out of
the unexpended surplus of the Parliamentary Schedule; it is still to be borne in remembrance that
this was a casual resource : that under the Church Act the people of those parishes neither have,
nor are likely to acquire, any claim upon public funds for the support of a clergyman; and that
if the Society should be unwilling or unable to continue its bounty, this District must relapse into
its previous state of destitution.
The condition of the inhabitants on the various creeks and branches of the Hawkesbury,
from Mangrove to Freeman’s Reach, is generally so bad in a moral and religious point of view
that I should be unwilling and ashamed to describe it. I lay on the table for the information of
the Committee one of the last letters received upon this subject from the Rev. W, W. Simpson,
and I am persuaded that the Members will enter warmly into the zeal and anxiety which he not
only expresses but has displayed to do the best that his circumstances permit for the improvement
of these poor destitute. At the same time it must be understood that this case is but a specimen
of a very great number which might be produced from within the limits that I have named on
this river.
These cases, (I mean all above enumerated,) may be considered as lying within the
County of Cumberland. In those which occur in other parts of the colony I will enter less into
detail.
In Camden County, after leaving the village of that name, there is no Church or
Clergyman nearer to the southward than the District of Sutton Forest. Picton and the Oaks,


and the adjoining country, and from thence as far as the Mittagong along the road and on either
side, are entirely withdrawn from any superintendence by a clergyman, and have only the
benefit of an occasional service by the clergy from Cobbity and Appin. Jri /Ct
From Queanbeyan to Yass, a distance of more than 50 miles there is no clergyman
stationed, and it is only from those two places that by a most inconvenient arrangement even an
occasional service can be performed at Gundaroo, Molonglo, Bungendore, and other populous
vicinities.
In the County of King, and that portion of Argyle between and around Bredalbane
Plains and Lake George, the only clergyman is the Rev. R. Cartwright, whose residence is at
Gunning, and who at the advanced age of nearly three score years and ten, occupies cheerfully
and perseveringly this extended space, which on his removal must be left vacant and destitute ;
no provision being made for the continuance of any stipend whatever to a successor.
In the County of Georgiana there is no clergyman. In the Counties of Westmoreland
and Cook there is none, although they comprise two populous portions of the colony ; the Vale of
Clwydd on the west, and the district of Kurryjong in the opposite direction. In Westmoreland
there are also O’Connell Plains, with the Fish River settlers as far to the eastward as Solitary
Creek, and including Sidmouth Valley, besides Dunn’s Plains more to the south; all of which
are attended to in some degree, but it cannot but be very imperfectly, by the clergyman who has
charge of the Town of Bathurst and half of that county.
The course of the Wollombi (including the township so named) from Laguna to Milbro
Dale, a distance in a straight line of not less than thirty miles, and very populous, is altogether
destitute of religious service, except through the occasional visit of a clergyman who comes from
so remote a point as Hexham on Hunter’s River.
The whole of Brisbane, west of the Waybong, and of Bligh, north of the Talbragar, is
without a Church, School, or Clergyman, or any public religious ordinance, although it includes
the district of Cassilis, and many others occupied by a considerable population, and by many
large and flourishing stations and establishments.
The same observations apply to the north and north-eastern portions of Brisbane and
Durham, including Murrurundi, a considerable town ; also Clarence Town, Dungog, and the
whole upper District of Williams River, the Hunter, and the Page.
Each of the localities here named (with not more than two or three exceptions) I have
visited ; and am therefore able to speak personally of the correctness of the sketch here given
of the general condition of religion over so enormous an extent of the territory even within the
boundaries. 1 submit the statement to the Standing Committee, scarcely venturing to suggest
what measures are proper to be adopted in a case of so much emergency. Advantage may,
however, arise from mutual conference among those who have the best disposition to exert
themselves in endeavouring to remove a calamity which presses so heavily upon the present
generation, and threatens to fall with increased injuriousness upon the future. Something may
perhaps, be effected by bringing the subject in detail under the consideration of those Members
of the Church of England who have property and local interests in the several parts of the
territory herein enumerated, and by employing the influence of this Committee to prevail on
them to take some steps towards the fulfilment of the duty which they are so evidently under an
obligation to charge themselves with.
Above all, even if nothing else be possible, I request the members to unite in constant
and habitual supplication, that as the harvest is so plenteous and labourers so few, it will please
the Lord of the harvest to send forth labourers that the fruits may not be lost.
W. G. AUSTRALIA.
May sth, 1846.


c
- •' \ •• - i ,i- , \1- . . , ..: ;• !v: ’ ' . i
. .... * ' J
• ■ ; ' • . : . ,.V . ■
. - -■ i ■ a, 5 ; a \ 1 3 ■ . .n J; . .'...]
v', ■ .. .• . v; . - . . • . .... ; • . *
f . •' ’ :mj •• ./. t I :
,%•; l. rA-./l . v . i • i .. v < ; .. ■? v.n, .• *.nj ■ -'.i !
\\.... : J r. . . O r . _ ’ . . i J i I . . . • •
. . , .
,
) . ... ... *i •- ‘! • . . .
I : ' 'io 11 , 5 if i‘.' . f <>i ; - ’i.s f t ... . . •
; s.'./ t V;’_ .-v •'v-.'•;?.> '• .. •. . r .» • . , '
. ' . . '. J :; . ...»
1 . 1 (!)••■: ■ •. . ‘ ’ ; ■ V - ', - -■ ’
... . « o
...
; '■ . •• r
\i\ b:u> :> * \\l ’ . :-in; c ‘jil'S
• ■ ■ ’ ’ , ‘ -‘i ,
" ' ; • . - . - . ; ' /
srg* I •. - .. /. ill I: : v: : 4 I Li
• ' • ‘: .•••/■■ * ?•> ■ v' :• ' ;■ , : r ; •' , r '
... . . ■ , . ■
.
.
..; !
■
./;• ::r
