

MINUTES OE PROCEEDINGS
OF THE
INTERCOLONIAL METEOROLOGICAL CONFERENCE
HELD AT MELBOURNE.




MINUTES OF PROCEEDINGS
OF
THE INTERCOLONIAL METEOROLOGICAL CONFERENCE HELD AT
MELBOURNE.
TUESDAY, 1 Ith SEPTEMBER, 1888.
Present:
Sir James Hector, M.D., C.M.G., F.R.S., Inspector of Meteorological Stations, New Zealand.
C. Todd, Esq., M.A., C.M.G., F.R.A.S., F.R. Met. Soc., Government Astronomer, South Australia.
R. L. J. Ellery, Esq., F.R.S., F.R.A.S., Government Astronomer, Victoria.
H. C. Russell, Esq., 8.A., F.R.A.S., Government Astronomer, New South Wales.
Clement L. Wragge, Esq., F.R.G.S., F.R. Met. Soc., Government Meteorologist, Queensland.
Captain J. Shortt, R.N., Government Meteorologist, Tasmania.
R. L. J. Ellery, Esq., was called to the Chair.
The Chairman read the correspondence with the Government of Victoria, which led to the
calling together of the Conference, as follows :
“ No. G. 12/88. Melbourne Observatory,
“ Sir, 13th August, 1888.
“ About eight years ago, at the time of the last Melbourne Exhibition, the Government, at my suggestion, invited
the several directors of Colonial Meteorological Observatories to meet at a Conference in Melbourne, with the view of
improving the intercolonial weather telegraph system, and for the advancement of Australian Meteorological science gene-
rally. The Conference then held, of which the members were—C. Todd, Esq., South Australia; Sir James Hector, New
Zealand; H. C. Russell, Esq., New South Wales; and myself for Victoria, resulted in a very marked improvement in our
intercolonial weather system, and has made possible a method of publishing meteorological news and forecasts but a little
behind those in operation in Europe and America.
“ Sir James Hector is now in Melbourne, and, having conferred with him on the subject, we believe that a meeting
of the several Government Meteorologists in Melbourne shortly would result in surmounting some of the difficulties that
now exist, and still further perfecting our Meteorological system.
“ If you think it desirable to use this present opportunity for a Conference of this kind, I would suggest that the
Governments of the various colonies be at once communicated with, requesting them to permit their respective Meteorolo-
gists to attend a Meteorological Conference in Melbourne about the 10th of September (for Sir James Hector’s stay cannot
be prolonged beyond this date). The following are the names of the gentlemen representing Meteorology in the colonies,
and whose attendance it is desirable to secure :
H. C. Russell, Esq., 8.A., F.R,S., Sydney,
C. Todd, Esq., C.M.G., Adelaide,
Sir James Hector, K.C.M.G., M.D., Wellington,
Captain Shortt, R.N., Hobart,
Malcolm Frazer, Esq., Perth,
Clement Wragge, Esq., F.R.Met.Soc., Brisbane.
As the time is short, will you permit me to suggest that in the case of New Zealand the request that Sir James Hector may
be authorized to attend the Conference may be made by telegraph, and probably it will be well to adopt this course as
regards Western Australia.
I have the honour to be, Sir,
Your most obedient servant,
__ ~ , „ (Sd.) R. L. J. Ellery, Government Astronomer.
‘ The Honorable the Chief Secretary, &c., &c.”
Tliat letter was forwarded to the Government, who concurred in the proposal, and com-
municated with the various Premiers of the different colonies, with the result that the present
Conference was ordered. The Hon. G. Forrest, C.M.G., &c., would attend in place of Malcolm
Frazer, Esq.
The Chairman stated that he had called the members together, to-day, for the purpose of
deciding the times and place of meeting, and also to receive any notices, questions, or papers that
might be brought forward for discussion at future meetings of the Conference. This was only a
preliminary meeting.
It was decided to hold the meetings of the Conference at the Melbourne Observatory, as it
would afford easy access to papers and documents in the possession of the Victorian Astronomer.
The hour of meeting was fixed at ten o’clock in the forenoon, and adjournment to be from
day to day.
The Chairman stated that he had jotted down a few matters for consideration, which he
would bring before the Conference at its next meeting, namely :
Delay in telegrams from the westward, and also from New Zealand.
Weather maps, bulletins, &c.—Can greater uniformity be obtained?
Formation of typical synoptical charts.
No forecasts made in one colony applying to another to be telegraphed to the newspapers
of another colony. r
Alterations of telegraph code—if any.
Limitation of number of stations for telegrams.
Thermometer exposure.
A 2


Mr. Wragge gave notice that he would move—“ That it was desirable to work in uniformity
with the recommendations given in 4 Hints to Meteorological Observers ’ published by the Royal
Meteorological Society, and plan of publication given in the Royal Meteorological Society’s Meteo-
rological Record, with the addition of publishing individual readings from first-order stations only,
especially as to the central and far interior portions of Australia.”
Mr. C. Todd submitted tables of thermometrical readings in Stevenson’s and Adelaide
stands, compared with swing thermometers.
Mr. Wragge said he had a number of questions for discussion, but the notes he had made
were very voluminous; he would, however, bring up the matters as the Conference proceeded.
The question of asking the Government to give weather telegrams precedence over private
messages was mentioned as a matter of great importance and one which required discussion.
Mr. Wragge mentioned a number of exhibits of meteorological apparatus which he had in
the Centennial Internationial Exhibition, brought from Queensland, and which were erected by his
assistant.
Adjourned till to-morrow , at Ten o' 1 clock.
WEDNESDAY, 12th SEPTEMBER, 1888.
Present:
Mr. Ellery in the Chair;
Captain Sliortt,
Sir James Hector,
Mr. Todd,
Mr. Wragge,
Mr. Russell,
The Hon. John Forrest, C.M.G., F.R.G.S., F.G.S., F.L.S., Commissioner of Crown Lands
and Surveyor-General, Western Australia.
The Chairman read an extract from letter read yesterday to show that the chief object of
calling the Conference together was “ With a view of improving the intercolonial weather telegraph
system, and for the advancement of Australian meteorological science generally.”
The first general subject dealt with, was the improvement of the intercolonial telegraph
service.
The following points were discussed: —1. Delay in telegrams from the westward. 2. The
adoption of central time.
After discussion it was moved by Sir James Hector , and seconded by Mr. Todd —“ That
the present times of observation be adhered to.” —Carried.
Mr. Todd moved, and Mr. Wragge seconded —“ That the report of barometer, temperature,
wind and weather at 3 p.m. each day be sent by Albury, Eucla, Cape Borda, Portland, Cape
Otway, and Wilson’s Promontory.”—Carried.
On the questions of how to expedite the telegrams, and of reducing the quantity of informa-
tion telegraphed between the colonies, Mr. Russell moved—“ That each colony send to the others
a forecast of its own weather.” Lengthy debate ensued.
Mr. Russell stated that he thought that the number of stations should be reduced, so that
with shorter telegrams we might get greater despatch. The forecasts would make up for more
detailed telegrams.
The Chairman. —This is what we send now:; —Barometer at sea-level; temperature of air from
dry bulb thermometer.
Mr. Wragge. —We have been sending and receiving the wet bulb as well.
Mr. Todd. —I find the public takes a great interest in the maximum and minimum tem-
perature.
The Chairman. —We send also the wind, direction and force; rainfall; state of weather;
state of sea.
Mr. Todd.— Under the head of temperature, we, at the present time, send the dry and wet
bulb, and the maximum and minimum.
The Chair man suggested that each member of the Conference‘should draw up a list of the
minimum number of stations that he thought would do for the purpose.
Mr. Todd suggested that the Conference should draw up a list of stations for each colony,
commencing from the westward. Mr. Forrest and he suggested the following for W estern Aus-
tralia and South Australia: —
Derby (which will open pre-
seutly),.
Cossack,
Carnarvon,
Geraldton,
Perth,
Albany,
Esperance Bay,
Eucla,
Streaky Bay,
Cape Borda,
Adelaide,
Cape Northumberland,
Robe.
Mr. Todd.— Robe can drop out. Then take the north:—
Port Darwin,
Daly Waters,
Alice Springs,
Strangways,
Farina,
Port Augusta.


The Chairman. —Coming to Victoria, I should suggest:—
Cape Northumberland,
Cape Otway,
Portland,
Wilson’s Promontory,
Melbourne,
Horsham.
Mr. Russell. —I question the need of Horsham.
Mr. Todd. —I suggest Bordertown, in S.A., in place of Horsham.
The Chairman. —For inland stations then we will take:—
Horsham (until the S.A. Border-
town barometer replaces it),
Omeo,
Echuca.
Tasmania.
Captain Shortt. —I am going to put a station at Mount Bischoff, and suggest the reporting
stations in Tasmania be as follows: —
Circular Head,
Low Heads,
Bischoff,
Falmouth,
Hobart,
Southport.
New South Wales.
Mr. Russell. —As regards New South Wales, I would leave out Eden. But it seems to me
that we are avoiding the whole question, if we cut stations out in New South Wales and not in
the other colonies.
Mr. Wragge. —l would hardly agree to cutting out any on the New South Wales coast
particularly between Sydney and Brisbane.
Mr. Russell. —l put the general question of reducing the number of reporting stations in
all the colonies; but if the Conference are against me, I will not go on witli it.
Mr. Russell moved—“ That the amount of information sent by telegraph should be reduced
as far as possible by reducing the number of stations.” Seconded by Sir James Hector. —Carried.
Mr. Todd. —That should be followed up by reducing the number of stations.
Sir James Hector. —The first question is: Are stations to be preserved only for checks?
Mr. Russell moved, and Sir James Hector seconded—“ That, with the telegrams, a fore-
cast be sent from each colony for that colony.”—Carried.
After discussion, it was a greed that each member of the Conference should prepare and
submit the next day a list of stations in his colony which he thought should be adopted.
Adjourned to to-morrow , at Ten o'clock.
THURSDAY, 13th SEPTEMBER, 1888.
Present:
Mr. Ellery, in the Chair;
Sir James Hector,
Mr. Russell,
Mr. Todd,
Captain Sliortt,
Mr. Wragge,
Mr. Forrest.
The minutes of the two previous meetings were read and confirmed.
Limitation of Number of Stations for Telegrams.
Resuming this subject, Sir James Hector stated that at present he sent from three stations
only in JNew Zealand, namely, Russell, Wellington, and the Bluff.
It was moved by Sir James Hector , and seconded by Mr. Forrest —“ That the New Zealand
stations remain as before. —Carried.
ah S !x J , ameS asked wheth . er . th ere was not some local drift in the wind direction at
Albany that accounted for the contradiction of the other reports; and whether some other station
could be adopted.
F orrest he was not aware there was anything the matter with Albany.
lhe ( hair man thought it was not sufficiently important to make a change.
IV. mo^°! 10f tke it was agreed—“ That each member of the Conference use
ms best efforts with his own Government to get as much precedence and despatch with the weather
telegrams as possible ; also “That it be recorded in the report of the Conference that it is hiofilv
desirable and imperatively necessary in order to make the meteorological system more perfected
meteorological telegrams. lere q ' UCk des P ateh and > as far as P ossible , precedence with
Chain ™ n said that 110 do,lbt a great deal of the delay was caused at intermediate
, To f d Panted out, as to South Australia and Western Australia, that the lines ran
along the coast, and were difficult to work, and occasionally worked slowly.
vr Hector stated that the weather telegrams were sent with great reo-ularitv in
iSkL Zealand ’ and t hat any delay that had occurred had been at the New South Wales end of the
cable. He had nothing to complain of as far as the telegraphic service of his colony was concerned.


Mr. Russell thought that was one of the greatest arguments that could be brought to hear
on the other colonies. It was possible to do it in New Zealand; it should therefore be also possible
in the other colonies.
Mr. Wragge stated that the Queensland authorities did all they possibly could to further
the despatch of telegrams, and he had every reason to be grateful to the Telegraphic department of
his colony for the very valuable assistance they had always given him.
Mr. Todd pointed out that it was urgently necessary that the reports should be published
early, so as to be available for the shipping interest.
Adoption of Central Time.
The Chairman said that had already been negatived.
Number of Stations.
Mr. Todd asked whether the Conference would like to strike out any of the stations, and
read over the list.
On the suggestion of Mr. Wragge , it was agreed—“ That all the Transcontinental Stations
be inserted. — \_Amended list to be handed in.']
Sir James Hector stated that nearly all the information they required in New Zealand came
from the south and east of Melbourne, so that it involved a kind of double transmission and delay
in sending to Sydney. He moved — u That the Synoptic Telegrams for New Zealand be sent from
Melbourne, with the number.’' .
Mr. Russell said the method was adopted simply because it was a resolution of the Confer-
ence eight years ago, and was done because Sydney is at the end of the cable, but there was really
no necessity for it.
The motion was seconded by Mr. Russell , and carried.
Forecast from one Colony to Another.
The Chairman said the question now to be considered was as to the desirability of keeping
to one uniform method of sending the forecasts.
Mr. Wragge said he was not in a position to alter the Queensland plan ot daily weather
reports in any way without the consent and full concurrence of his Government, inasmuch as the
forecasts issued by him for all the colonies had become part and parcel of the Queensland new
meteorological service, and were much appreciated by the general public.
Sir James Hector said they were all in that position, and could not make changes until they
were confirmed by their Governments. „ .
Mr. Wragge stated the case that if he received the New South Wales forecast, and found
from that that it was to be fine weather on the north-east coast of New South Wales while heleit
convinced, from his own observations of the data, that conditions dangerous to shipping would be
likely to occur on that coast, he would consider it his first duty to warn all vessels in Brisbane
hoi nd for southern ports that bad weather was to be expected on that coast ; life and property being
of the very first importance. 1 ~ ,
The Chairman stated they were all agreed on that, but the whole difficulty arose thro igh
e colony telegraphing to newspapers of another colony the weather forecast, which, it contra-
dicting the authorities in that colony, was calculated to bring the whole system of intercolonial
telegraphic meteorology into disrepute, which lie thought should be avoided. He thought they
onldall continue to make forecasts for any part of Australia; but what _he deprecated was, for
instance, that lie should telegraph to Sydney to tell the Sydney press over Mr. Russell s head, what
the weather would be. ~ , nvr Ain
Mr. Wragge repeated that if he foresaw dangerous gales likely to occur on the coast ot JNew
South Wales, lie should consider it his duty, in the interests of the public, to warn the shipping.
His daily Australasian forecasts were exhibited in a public place, and open ole us^ c . ie
Press as they thought fit. He admitted he sent occasionally special forecasts to other colonies.
Mr. Todd said the view he had always taken was that they should add weight to then
own forecasts by mutual exchanges. He was glad to receive the forecasts from brother meteoro-
logists, aud thought they should help one another. He agreed as to the lm P olta ? c ®“s° pf her
life and property, and considered that that was the very reason why they should all work together
He thought it would be most injurious to science and to the public generally if there weie
conflicting forecasts issued by any one of them. He thought it most undesirable lor a forecast of
a totally different character to be issued, say by Mr. Wragge ! Mr * Russell * ~ ,
Mr. Forrest said that it seemed to him that what Mr. Wragge suggested coifld only occur
when there was either great want of knowledge or great neglect on the partofthe head of the
meteorological dep.Rnimt of another colony, who with all the detailed mformatmn “ h
ouo-ht certainly to be able better to come to a conclusion as to probable storms than one situated
far s away from the scene of the storm, with very little information before him. ,
ay moved —“ That no meteorological forecast or prediction made m one colony
and having reference to any other colony shall be communicated by telegraph to any other person
or destination than the meteorologist of the colony to which such prediction referb.
Sir James Hector agreed with Mr. Wragge s intentions m the matter, but thought ti ey
should took at the practical o difficulty. He instanced the case of Timaru, an exposed
asked, supposing they locally indicated a phase of weather and rag & would be no
indicate another, who, in that case, would control the hoisting of the drum. The e


objection to sending an opinion to tlie local meteorologist, who could make use of it as he thought
proper- but if ventilated before the public it would cause them to take sides as to who was the best
weather prophet, and to show that the system was not worth maintaining as a guide for the public
Satety " Sir James Hector seconded Mr. Forrest's motion, which was carried with one dissentient,
Mr. Wragge.
Weather-Maps, Bulletins, etc.
The Chairman stated the question before them was, whether it was desirable to try and
secure greater uniformity in the bulletins, weather-maps, &c., issued by them,, and if so, in what
directions the reform should be made. As far as South Australia, Victoria, New South Wales and
Queensland were concerned, they all now issued maps with isobaric curves at some time of the day,
and all very much on the same plan. „ , «. ,
Mr. Russell thought, as far as the isobars were concerned, the maps were fairly uniform,
though not uniform in size. In accordance with a custom adopted 20 years ago, he gave, in
addition a lot of local information about stations in New South Wales which the public seemed to
value highly. None of the New South Wales papers would go to the expense of publishing isobaric
llUeS ' The Chairman said he believed the Melbourne Argus was the only Australian paper that
d ‘ d So ' Sir James Hector stated that he adopted the plan of having 30 or 40 sets of stereograms of
weather charts distributed gratis to the papers. He then gave the block number for the day and
they filled in the figures required for the day’s report. In that way the map appealed simul-
taneously in every newspaper in the colony. They had, of course, to sacrifice extreme accuiacy,
leavim l ' out all local deviations and modifications. He found the people came to understand the
charts*and it was found to be of use to shipmasters, who accepted it as a very g°°« system.
The Chairman said he approved of the system adopted by Sir James Hector foi Nc
Zealand, buthe feared it would be very difficult to adopt it to Australia.
Sir James Hector said lie did not, propose it for Australia, but desired that the Conference
would place on record an opinion as to whether he had done a justifiable thing in depaiting ftotn
what was laid down by the last Conference, which recommended synoptic maps.
Mr. Todd said he quite agreed with Sir James Hector, and he moved ili.it tins ( on-
ference is of opinion that the departure from the recommendations of the last Conference by Sir
James Hector in this direction be approved, and that the system adopted by him is the best means
to meet tlie geographical difficulties and the popular requirements ot New Zealand. lhc motion
was seconded by Mr. Russell. —Carried. , * i _ j
The Chairman and Mr. Todd said they had tried the system of synoptical maps, and had
found ia i rman S aid that he was about getting out anew plate for his maps, and he should
be glad to have any suggestions from the members of the Conference as to any alterations; but lie
did°not see anv possibility of their agreeing to any uniform method.
Mr. Todd stated that in his map he did not show the temperature, but exhibited a table
alongside the map givingthe temperature, confining himself in the map to isobars and the direction
Mr. Russell suggested that Mr. Todd do as lie and Mr. Ellery did, give a short abstract for
Mr. Todd said he gave that on a separate table. His custom was to exhibit six maps for
six consecutive days, and people could see the progressive march of the disturbances. [_ 1 anous
maps were exhibited and explained]. . A . , ~ ,
The Conference agreed—“ That the question of local publication of weather-maps be lett
to the individual meteorologists in each case.”
Alteration of Code—lf Any.
The Chairman asked if any alterations were suggested.
Mr. Todd said that he had never experienced any difficulty with the code.
Sir James Hector said they had a special code for New Zealand, with different words lor the
directions. The question arose whether it would be better to abandon one of the codes.
Mr. Russell said he heard a complaint occasionally about the two, but as it had worked well
for eioffit years he did not see why it should not go on.
° Mr. Wragge thought observations of the direction, whence coming, ol the lower clouds were
of very great importance. Many of the winds received were purely local phenomena, and he
thought a special word ought to be coined, applying to direction from which the lower clouds were
moving. ~. . , . . , , . ~ ,
Mr. Wragge moved, Mr. Todd seconded—“ That an additional line be inserted in the code
for o-ivino- the direction from which the lower clouds move.” —Carried.
sir James Hector said that difficulty arose as to what day or hour, whether p.m. or a.m.,
weather telegrams were sent. He thought the code should be altered to meet that requirement.
The agreed. He said it sometimes happened that a day was missed from Western
Australia; and a number of telegrams coming in next day, they got mixed.
It was agreed that the matter should be left in the hands of the Chairman, who should
arrange to indicate in the code the days of the week and a.m. or p.m.


Thermometer Exposure.
Mr. Russell said that that subject had been fully discussed at the last Conference.
The Chairman advocated, for country stations, the Stevenson stand; every Observatory
had different stands, but he had kept tlie Stevenson stand going, because he wanted to be always
sure what differences there were, if any.
Mr. Wragge moved— u That the approved pattern of Stevenson’s thermometer screen, as
given in the Quarterly Journal of the Royal Meteorological Society, volume 10, page 92, year 1884,
be employed at all the meteorological stations in connexion with the respective Governments of
Australasia, with the exception that the internal portion of the box be two inches higher and two
inches wider to meet the climatic conditions of this part of the world.”
Mr. Todd thought it was not desirable to enter on a long discussion on the point. He had fully
tested the Stevenson stand; he thought it was quite impossible for any one to say positively what
was the best form of exposure; he had, at the Adelaide Observatory, taken the results of simul-
taneous readings of thermometers exposed on a modified form of the Greenwich stand, the Adelaide
thermometer house, the Stevenson screen, and a thermometer swung in the shode. He handed
in a summary of the results, with the remarks thereon:—
Results of Simultaneous Readings of Thermometers exposed on a modified form of the Greenwich Stand, the Adelaide
Thermometer House, a Stevenson Screen, and a thermometer swung in the shade, made at the Adelaide Observatory.
Month.
Nine
A.M.
Three
: p.m.
Six ]
?.M.
Stationary
—Swing.
Ur. Stand Th. House
-Swing, j -Swing.
S. Screen
— Swing.
Stationary
—Swing.
1
Ur. Stand Th. House
—Swing. —Swing.
S. Screen
—Swing.
Stationary
—Swing.
Gr. St and
— Swing.
1
Th. House
—Swing.
S. Screen
— Swing.
1887.
September...
4 0*5
4 0*4
4 0 3
- 03
4 0*5
4 M
4 0-9
4 0*2
4 0*1
- 0*1
4 0*7
0*0
October
4 0-7
4 0-9
4- 0*5
- 0*1
4 0*0
4 1*0
4 10
4 0*3
4 0*1
0 0
4 0*9
4 0*2
November...
4 0*8
+ 10
4 0 4
- 0'2
4 0*6
4 0*8
4 0*7
4 0*2
4 0*3
4 0*2
4 0*8
I 4 0*1
December ...
4 05
4 10
4 0 4
- 0-2
| 4 0*0
1 4 0*7
4 0*5
- 01
i 4 0*5
4 0*2
4 0*8
4 0-2
188S.
January
-f 0-7
1*2
-f 0*6
- 01
4 0’G
4 0*9
4 0*5
4 0*2
1 4 0*4
4 0*3
4 0*6
0 0
February ...
4 0 -8
+ 1*3
4 0 *8
4 0 -2
4 0*8
4 1*0
4 0*8
4 0*4
4 0*4
4 0*2
4 0*9
1 4 0*3
March
TO
4 0-7
; 4 0*2
- 0*3
4 0*9
4 0*6
4 0 *2
0*0
4 0*7
4 0*2
April
+ 0-0
4 0 4
4 0*5
4 0*9
4 1*0
4 0*6
- 0-2
4 0*9
4 0*3
May
-f 0*4
4 0*2
+ 0*2
4 0*5 i
4 0*o
- 0*1
- 0*3
4 06
4 0*1
June
4 01
4 01
0*0
4 0*4 1
4 0*3
- 0*2
...
...
July ...
. .
4 01
4 01
- 0 *3
4 0*5 |
4 0*3
- 0.2
• • •
August ...
+ 0*4
4 0*2
0*0
4 0*7
4 0*0
0 0
...
...
General Remarks.—From the preceding summary it appears that, on the whole, the readings of Stevenson screen
thermometers are nearer than those of the other modes of exposure to the temperature shown by a swinging thermometer.
On taking individual observations, however, the thermometers in S. screen are noticed to fail to a much greater extent
than the others in responding to a sudden change of temperature. Avery noticeable instance of this occurred on the
evening of February 9th, 1887. During a thunderstorm, at 7.20 p.m. the temperature fell yery rapidly. The minimum
thermometer on stand registered 66 - 8 J , and that in the house, 66 ’9°, while that in Stevenson screen did not fall lower
than 79"3°. The changes all occurred in a few minutes, the temperature rising as rapidly as it fell.
He was inclined to agree with Wild that shutting up thermometers in a box was not the best mod e
of exposure; he also thought the height of four feet was not the best that could be adopted in
Australia. Wild, in his reports, referred to the necessity for accuracy in screening the thermometer
from eartli radiation or sky radiation ; he thought the thermometer might be placed from five to ten
feet without making any great difference.
Mr. Wragge said that the Torrens Observatory, Adelaide, established by him, was the first
meteorological observatory established in Australia in accordance with the Royal Meteorological
Society’s principles. One of the foremost Fellows of the Royal Meteorological Society, visited
that observatory in 1880, and also one in connexion therewith on the summit of Mount Lofty, and
he expressed himself, so far as he was able at the time to judge, as satisfied with the arrange-
ments adopted. A height of four feet was recognised by the foremost English and Scottish
meteorologists as a standard height, and he thought it of the first importance that Australia
should follow the British method of taking observations, and adopt, without exception, dhe
principles of the Royal Meteorological Society.
Mr. Bussell stated that they had all used the Stevenson stand, and made their own adapta-
tions. They had before tried to come to some agreement, and had failed to do so, and he did not
see what object would be gained even if they did come to an agreement. He did not think it of such
vital importance to use one form of stand; they all knew that thermometers were most unreliable;
he had made experiments years ago on this subject; and he thought it was not worth wasting any
more time about it. With the Stevenson stand he had found that if the door was shut it invariably
raised the temperature about 1° to 2°. In England the question of taking uniform exposure was
discussed and rediscussed till everybody was sick of it, and they adopted this Stevenson stand to
stop the flood of discussion as to what other should be adopted. Even Mr. Wragge had stated
that he had made alterations in it to suit the climate.
Mr. Wragge said that he had merely had it enlarged two inches because of the hotter climate.
Mr. Russell said that made it a different thing ; he strongly objected to a resolution binding
them to one form of screen.


Captain Shortt mentioned that in India they did not use the Stevenson screen.
Sir James Hector stated that for 25 years past only Stevenson screens had been used in
Hew Zealand, with slight modifications; but he never considered them all that could be desired for
the great range of climate in Hew Zealand. He thought the matter of observing the temperature
at one particular moment of time each day was of very little practical importance, because it varied
so greatly, at even a distance of a chain; he would be sorry to see the Conference adopt any rigid
resolution on the subject, as he held very doubtful opinions of it himself.
The Chairman deprecated following slavishly the paths laid down by the Boyal Meteoro-
logical Society of England; they were in a different country altogether, and experience in the colony
must count for something. He agreed that there should be some uniformity, but he did not agree
that because the Stevenson stand had been recommended by the Meteorological Society they should
adopt it. Ho doubt the adoption of some regularity about the screens would tend to better results.
He thought it would be better if the Stevenson stands were made with thin metal louvres, instead
of wood; at present there was a large mass of wood, with a good deal of temperature inertia
about it.
Mr. Wragge agreed with that, but thought a change should not be made until it was
adopted by Great Britain.
The Chairman asked why they should ignore America, France, and India. Seeing that the
colonies were leading the way in a great many things, they might well strike out a path for them-
selves in this matter.
Mr. Todd said he was going to adopt the Stevenson screen for his out-stations; but was
not necessarily going to put it only four feet from the ground.
Captain Shortt said he used the same one as Mr. Ellery, and there was no radiation from it,
but plenty of free air all round for the thermometer.
Sir James Hector pointed out the practical objection that they could never get their
respective Governments to refit all the stations if they agreed upon any alteration.
Mr. Wragge's motion was not seconded.
The Chairman took the result of the discussion to be that the Conference generally agreed
that they should all work towards uniformity in the matter as far as possible.
The Chairman stated that the first business for next sitting would be the discussion of
proposals to be made by Mr. Wragge in regard to the constitution of first and second order
stations ; and that records of first-order stations be in the form of meteorograms.
Adjourned to to-morrow , at Ten o'clock.
FBIDAY, 14th SEPTEMBEB, 1888.
Present :
Mr. Ellery, in the Chair;
Mr. Forrest,
Sir James Hector,
Mr. Bussell,
Captain Shortt,
Mr. Wragge,
Mr. Todd.
The minutes of the previous meeting read, amended, and confirmed.
Equipment of First-Order Stations.
Mr . Tl ragge moved u That first-order meteorological stations be equipped with the follow-
ing instruments: Standard barometer of either Fortin or Board of Trade pattern, Bichard’s
aneroid-barograph, thermograph, and hygrograph, three large double-louvred thermometer screens
hygrometers (dry and wet bulbs), Hegretti and Zambra’s patent electrical hygrometer (recording at
any hour, but chiefly for telling records at 3 a.rn.), two pairs of maximum and two minimum self-
registering thermometers, solar and terrestrial radiation thermometers, apparatus for determining
the temperature of the ground at depths varying from one to twelve feet (specimens of which can
be seen in the Educational Section of the Queensland Court in the Centennial Exhibition), ozone
tests, wind vane or anemometer, and rain gauge.” Mr. Todd seconded the motion.
ike Chairman asked whether Mr. Wragge had inquired what the cost would be for each
station.
Mr. Wragge thought it would be about £SO.
Sir James Hector said it would be a great deal more than that.
rlie meters °f the Conference made calculations as to the probable cost, and concluded
thut it would not cost less than £IOO to equip them properly.
instrument RuSSell Saul tlle cost of cama ge to the country was often as much as the price of the
i• a Mr. Wragge said he would reckon it from £65 to £IOO. The work was done in his colonv
Wl3te£‘ Md TelegraPh department ’ “ the Same as observations are taken
( aptain Shortt said they were paid in the States.
Queens Sa ‘ and h ® d ‘ d not k “° W that R Was co,lsidered it was part of their duty in


Mr Todd said they were officers in his department—the Electric Telegraph—and he
selected men especially fitted for the work. In the lighthouses he got the Government to give
about £2O per annum extra to distribute among the men there. „ , .
The Chairman said that it was generally understood that no station should be a first-class
station unless equipped with self-registering instruments, barometer, anemometer, thermometer,
sn g ges ted that the Conference should first consider what stations should be called
first-class stations. . , , e . j
Sir James Hector inquired whether they were entering on anew branch ot inquiry, and had
closed everything with reference to the intercolonial weather exchange.
The Chairman said they had. _ _ ~ . , ,
Mr Russell said he had found the most diverse results from Richards instruments; some
gave satisfactory results, and others were perfectly useless. He objected to the Conference adopt-
ing those as representing a first-class climatological record. They had three or four Observatories
in Australia with high class recording apparatus, and he did not see what position they would hold
if stations with Richards’ instruments were to be called first class. « F - .
Mr. Wragge said he would call the one hirst-order Observatories, and the other 1 irst-
order Stations.” ? going beyond Bm . opean Conferences by adopting anything of
this kind. He agreed with Mr. Russell that he could not rely on any of those Richard instruments
for absolute work.
1//- I Vraaae said he agreed with that. . , n q-. ,
Sir Jam $Hi ctor said he had b ;en fortunate with Richard s instruments buU.e would not
look nnon them as anything more than index instruments to indicate something to look or. They
wen-not actual measurements, and the curves were liable to error because of the unequal thickness
Of the paper. As an assistant to reading the weather, especially for weather signalling, he thought.
"""y'." r!!,tid"the l a'lvaui'^<' , <'l' using it in connexion with the Board of Trade barometer
- himself; but M, Wragge had proposed
them as fundamental parts ofa first-class meteorological station. _ ~
\/r \Vraqgi saS he had found the instruments agree admirably, but be would never use
-
tie reorat ot Mr. Forreot. These bsi hod Jeon found to answer othnoUjrs »» »
"" ,M x ssc; ***« *»>■*
** Perth ’** nnless
' SttS SKSHI * Jo £Sser stations in New Zealand, though they
lUld observatory and a first-order station should he
called respectively First Order A and First Order B.
Mr. Wragge concurred. Conference defined what a first-order station was,
Mr. Russell said theyhadat tb eP>'evousGoufereuce detaeuw and in _
and he thought the motion should simply state that it was uesiraoi
selected stations should be equipped with certain instruments. desirable that certain
”V. Wragge l,on S l. f.rw.rd the Mowing JjfftfKSjSf
recommendations given in “Hints to Meteoron,,' q Meteorological Society’s Record, with the
Society, and plan of publication given i u r J_nrrlpr stations only, especially as to the central
addition of publishing individual readings from » - congi d ere and that 3 a.m. observations of the
greates/lmportance^and^ske^^he 1 meaus th^^tendard.
registers utterly vitiated unless
Ule 3 %?; XS a W sked!why d not every hour of the day, if they had the recording apparatus?
He did not see the necessity of recording specially at 3 a.m.


Mr. Wragqe said he thought it highly desirable that Negretti and Zanibra s self-recording
dry and wet bulbs should be used for securing standard 3 a.m. readings.
Mr. Todd said they adopted the hours 9 a.m., 3 p.m., and 9 p.m., and he thought the
3 a.m. would come in to fill up the 24 hours symmetrically. It could be taken automatically,
instead of by eye observation.
The Chairman thought it would create no difficulty.
Captain Shortt thought if the 3 a.m. observations were to be used in taking the mean
temperature every day it would make a decided difference in the mean of the day, as compaied
with taking only at 9,3, and 9.
The Conference agreed that it would be well to take the 3 a.m. record.
Mr. Wragge moved—“ That, as far as practicable, we will assimilate our instructions to
meteorological observers witli the instructions contained in Scott’s 4 Meteorological Instruments,’
and in the 4 Hints ’ published by the Royal Meteorological Society.”
Mr. Russell said if the Conference adopted that, they would be virtually saying they had
not done it before.
Mr. Wragqe moved — 44 That the wet bulb thermometer at each station be managed by con-
ducting threads dipping into a cistern of distilled or rain water.”
Messrs. Todd , Russell , and Ellery said that had been the practice for years.
Mr. Wragge , however, called attention to the following reference to the subject in the code-
book:— 44 The muslin used should be well washed before putting on, or it will not take the moisture
properly. The best method of wetting the bulbs is to use pure fresh water, like rain water, which
should be kept in a small vessel near the thermometer. A tobacco-pipe, or other small convenient
vessel, is filled with the water, and lifted to the bulb, which should be immersed in it until
thoroughly wet; in a few minutes, varying from 3 to 5 in summer to 10 to 12 in winter, the
thermometer will have fallen to the temperature of evaporation. This will be seen by the thermo-
meter no longer continuing to fall, and great care must be taken to get the lowest reading indicated
before it commences to rise again.” He said they could not trust to observers to wait a few
minutes.
Agreed that the passage in the code-book referred to be altered accordingly.
Inspection.
Mr. Wragge proposed— 44 That the several meteorological services be regularly inspected once
in two years.” He regarded inspection as of the very first importance, and thought a meteorologist
should make the personal acquaintance of his observers, and, if possible, teach them, and see for
himself that the work was going on properly.
The Chairman thought most of what was suggested in the motion was already done. He
would not be satisfied with two years. He did it every year.
Mr. Russell said that Mr. Wragge was asking them to affirm things that had been already
in operation for many years. The New South Wales stations were inspected at such times as he
thought fit.
Mr. Wragge thought that the meteorological services of Australia would never be satisfac-
tory until one general inspector was appointed to inspect the lot, and report to the head in each
colony.
Mr. Todd said that such an inspector would have an immense distance to go, and he thought
each colony must have its own inspector.
Sir James Hector said at the present time, in New Zealand, it was done with vary little
expense in connexion with the necessary visits of competent persons to the different offices. He
thought if there was one officer appointed merely for the purpose of inspecting the offices it
would be costly, and quite out of proportion to the result obtained.
The Chairman said he did it as thoroughly as possible in Victoria, but he did not think they
could establish hard and fast lines.
Mr. Russell objected to assuming that the work had not been done.
The members of the. Conference fully agreed as to the importance of periodical inspection.
Mr. Wragge moved— 44 That it is desirable that the nomenclature of the cloud forms pro-
duced by the Honorable Ralph Abercrombv be adopted throughout these colonies.”—[ Photographic
plates of cloud forms exhibited .]
Mr. Todd asked whether they differed very much from Scott’s instructions.
Mr. Russell said they did. Mr. Abercromby had been working with M. Hildebransen in
regard to the phenomena of clouds, and had adopted a series of cloud forms which they considered
indicative of certain phases of cyclones.
The Chairman said that Mr. Abercromby had worked hard at the cloud forms, and had
travelled over the world to secure a better knowledge of them.
Mr. Russell said it would involve teaching each observer, which would take some little time.
The Chairman said the photographs were a little too obscure, and it would be better if they
were lithographed in colours.
Mr. Todd said they wanted something of the sort badly.
Sir James Hector said he used the Reverend Clement Ley’s Pictures, which he found very
effective— \Exhibiting the same\.
Mr. Russell said that Mr. Abercromby’s object was to get observers to note particular
forms of clouds in connexion with his special study of cyclones. He thought it would be an
important advance to use his forms.


Mr. Russell seconded the motion.
The motion was carried, the Chair min undertaking to get copies prepared in lithographic
colours, and sent round for approval to the members of the Conference.
Sir James Hector moved—“ That a line be put in the code book to indicate the different
masses of cloud form.” Mr. Wragge seconded the motion.— : Carried.
Mr. Wragge moved—“ That this Conference use individual and united effort to promote the
establishment of meteorological stations at Port Moresby, Noumea, Norfolk Island, Tahiti, and
Kerguelen Island.” Mr. Todd seconded the motion, which was carried.
Mr. Todd suggested that some agreement should be made with Mauritius and the Cape of
Good Hope. More than ten years ago he traced storms all the way down from the Mauritius to
New Zealand.
Mr. Wragge said he thought he would be in a position to start stations at Port Moresby
and Noumea ; he had been led to understand that the agents of the A.U.S. Navigation Company
at Noumea would farther his views in the matter.
Mr. Russell said there were a lot of instruments in New Caledonia belonging to the Sydney
Observatory; he had tried five times in New Guinea, but had never got auy satisfactory observations.
The Chairman said he also sent a whole set of instruments there.
Sir James Hector said they had three monthly inspections of the Auckland Islands, and
inquired whether there would be any way of leaving self-registering instruments there.
Mr. Wragge moved—“ That a rain gauge of great capacity be placed on the principal islands
accessible in Australasian seas.”
Mr. Russell asked who was to do it.
Mr. Wragge moved —“That the meteorological services of each colony work, as far as
practicable, in the interest of meteorology with the Registrars-General of the several colonies, more
especially in drawing fever curves in connexion with raeteorograms.” He referred to typhoid
curves and measles curves and so on ; he was doing his best to work with the Registrar-General of
Queensland in the matter, especially as regarded drawing those curves indicating the relation of
diseases to meteorological conditions.
Captain Shortt said the Government Statistician at Hobart did that every year.
Sir James Hector said it had been attempted in the various colonies, but had always failed,
because they re [uired to get an accurat ■ record of the causes and surroundings of cases of disease ;
it was not enough to take a record of deaths. If all the Governments would pass medical Acts,
requiring medical men to note accurately the occurrence and causes of disease, then the thing would
be practicable; but at present no Government had done that. It would be good work if this Confer-
ence brought about that result.
Mr. Russell said he was at the Montsouris Observatory at Paris last year, where the thing
had been carried on for years and was now practically defunct, the Government refusing to pay
any further salaries; the instruments for catching germs, &c., there were elaborate, but had been
very much neglected; he thought that such experience in a city like Paris had a great bearing on
the question. The Paris Corporation have stepped in and promised to pay the salaries for one year,
and continue them on the condition of there being some connexion shown between meteorological
influences and disease.
Mr. Wragge mentioned that Professor Maclagan, of Edinburgh, and, he believed, the Royal
Meteorological Society, laid great stress on the importance of drawing disease curves. At the late
Health Exhibition in South Kensington the Society had a properly equipped climatological station,
and brought forward the great importance of studying the effect of local climates on the general
health.
Sir James Hector said the effect of climate was only secondary; the real research to be
carried on was what Professor Franklin had done in London, the collecting of microbes, and the
study of the conditions under which they develop into disease, pure climate coming into play only
in connexion with the development of certain forms of diarrhoea and congestion of the lungs.
Climate had no direct effect, but it supplied the conditions under which germs were produced and
developed, so the two investigations should go hand in hand.
The Chairman said that they had for many years supplied the Registrar-General monthly
with tables, and a great many medical men, who obtained the necessary curves from the Observatory,
had taken the subject up, and had written books on typhoid fever and other epidemics; but the
difficulty was, as Sir Janies Hector said, to get the registration of diseases on a better basis; the
meteorological registration was perfect enough, but the record of diseases was not, and until they
got that they could do no more.
Mr. Todd called attention to the discrepancies he had found in the barometrical readings
occurring between certain places—between Falmouth and Low Head, Hobart and Southport, the
Lakes’ Entrance and Omeo, and sometimes between Hay and Deniliquin; they had also to adjust
the observations from Townsville and Cooktown. He thought it would be well to inquire as to the
causes of those discrepancies.
Sir James Hector said that copies of the report of the last Conference had grown scarce, and
he thought it would be well to pick out of that report what was still standing, so that it would be
made clear what had been done up to date, and what changes had been recommended by the
Conferences. He moved—“ That the Chairman in preparing the report should also along with it
print a recapitulation of the principal points of the report of the 1881 Conference. Mr. Russell
seconded the motion. —Carried.
Adjourned to to-morrow , at Ten o'clock.


SATURDAY, 15th SEPTEMBER, 1888.
Present:
Me. Elleey, in the Chair;
Sir Janies Hector,
Mr. Bussell,
Captain Shortt,
Mr. Todd,
Mr. Wragge.
The minutes of the previous meeting were read and confirmed.
Mr. Wragge moved—“ That no results simply from aneroid barometers be telegraphed in
our weather telegrams.”
Sir James Hector said he had between 40 and 50 stations, many of them with aneroid
barometers.
Mr. Wragge did not think aneroid readings should be used in preparing the isobaric charts.
The Chairman seconded the motion. He did not think it affected him or any of them, as
they did not take any aneroid station as the basis of the intercolonial telegrams.
Mr. Todd said they would not send the reading of the aneroid as data for laying down
isobars, but the value of the aneroid was as an auxiliary, and a very valuable auxiliary, to the
mercurial barometer.
Sir James Hector said New Zealand was isobarred every day on eight times the scale of any
of the other colonies’ maps, and if an error crept in at any station they could easily see and have
inquiry made.
Mr. Wragge said when he first started his daily weather charts he used the Bourke record,
and he was given to understand that the instrument used there was the aneroid.
Mr. Russell asked if that was the reason for the motion. He strongly objected to the
motion. He said persons most interested in barometers, and upon whom the greatest responsibility
rested in regard to their use, the captains of ships, naturally turned to aneroid barometers as the
first indicators of an approaching change, and he thought it would be most undesirable to pass the
resolution, which cast a doubt on what was of great importance to seafaring men. As to drawing
isobars, he would, himself, prefer to have aneroids with the standards all over the country. As to
the aneroid at Bourke, the reading of it was sent with that for Walgett, which was a standard
Fortin barometer, and he thought it most useful, because the aneroid responded to changes much
better than a mercurial barometer.
Mr. Wragge said that aneroids ought not to be used in scientific observations unless con-
stantly compared with the mercurial barometers. As to their value to captains of ships, that was
not the question.
Sir James Hector said it had been ruled that they had closed the question of weather
signalling, and they were now opening it again as to the use of the aneroid for the purpose of
telegraphing weather signals. As to the use of barometric readings for the purpose of noting and
telegraphing the weather from station to station he quite agreed with Mr. Bussell.
The motion was put and lost.
Island Bain Gauges.
The question of island rain gauges was again raised, and it was agreed that each colony
would do the best they could in that direction.
Mr. Wragge moved that each colonv should establish a “ system of plienolosrical observa-
tions.”
Mr. Russell thought the matter would develop in each colony according to the requirements.
Mr. Wragge did not mean to convey that there should be any expense attached to it. They
would be part and parcel of the observations, in accordance with the precedent established by the
Boyal Meteorological Society. He regarded botanical observations, and especially observations as
regarded the crops, stock, sheep, and cattle, as of the very utmost value in Australia.
Ihe Chairman said they had carried on phenological observations for about eighteen years.
Sir James Hector said it was done by the Agricultural College in New Zealand.
Mr. 1 odd said he always sought the co-operation of Dr. Schomberg and others, without
poaching on the doctor s preserves. Mr. Todd gave him information which he utilised in connexion
with his report.
Sir James Hector said that unless they had the plants at the place where the observations
were taken it was no use. It must be done at a botanical garden, and in association with
the observations of temperature and so forth.
Mr. Russell said, as a question affecting meteorology in Australia, he did not think they
need go into it. If they went into it officially it would mean expense.
Mr. II ragge said in England the whole thing was managed by private enterprise. He had
several phenological stations in Queensland of the sort he referred to.
ihe Chairman said that his experience was that people did it for a number of years and
then dropped it.
The motion was put and lost.
Multiplication of Climatological Stations.
Mr. Wragge said a climatological station, as defined by the Council of the Boyal Meteoro-
logical Society was one at which observations were made at i) a.m. only, of temperature of the air,


evaporation, amount of cloud, rainfall, and extremes of temperature during the last twenty-four
hours, the instruments being exposed in Stevenson’s screen. He proposed that some form of
louvred screen he used, and the observations taken at the usual hours of 9, 12, 3,6, and 9; or, 9,
3, and 9.
The Chairman said that every one of the reporting stations was, to all intents and purposes,
a climatological station.
Mr. Russell said that was his case also. He did not see the necessity of passing a resolution.
Sir James Hector said it was already done in New Zealand; he got the schoolmasters to do
the work.
Mr. Wragge said he was not aware that, with the exception of the climatological stations
already existing, founded by the Meteorological Society of Australasia, and those he had established
in Queensland, there were any climatological stations, strictly so-called, established in Australia.
The Chairman said he was afraid Mr. Wragge was in the dark as to what had been done in
the different colonies.
Mr. Todd said that the experience that Mr. Ellery and Mr. Russell (and he would not say
himself) had had in meteorology had enabled them to establish stations which were quite as reliable
and did as much to further meteorological science as if they had followed in every minute degree
the rules laid down by the Royal Meteorological Society; and, in point of fact, they started their
observations long before the Meteorological Society had formulated any special scheme such as that
alluded to. As an old meteorologist in Englaud, and one of the earliest members of the British
Meteorological Society, he had carried on observations at Cambridge and Greenwich, and they
might just as well say that observations conducted at the Greenwich Observatory possessed no
scientific value because they did not agree in every respect with the Royal Meteorological Society
in England, as in say that the existing stations in the colonies were not meteorological stations in
the sense of the Royal Meteorological Society. Their observations possessed quite as great scien-
tific value.
Mr. Wragge said he was aware meteorological stations had been established in the colonies;
hut la' maintained that lie was ignorant, with the exceptions he had given, that any climatological
stations, as defined by ilia Royal Meteorological Society, were in existence in Australia.
Mr. Russell took exception to Mr. Wragge putting the question in that way ; the public did
not know the difference between the Royal Meteorological Society and other authorities ; and if the
statement went forward that Mr. Wragge was not aware that any stations existed for climatological
purposes under the rales of the Royal Meteorological Society, lie thought it would be taken as a
reflection upon them. If Mr. Wragge was ignorant what stations were established, the Chairman
would no doubt afford him information as to what had been done.
Mr. Wragge said he did not desire to cast any reflection on his colleagues.
Sir James Hector suggested that Mr. Wragge should admit that he had learned for the first
time that the work was being done.
Mr. Wragge said that he could not do that.
The Chairman said there could be no objection, if Mr. Wragge merely desired to get a little
more uniformity in carryingout their observations; but if he wanted to pin them down to an opinion
of hi- own, or any opinion of the Royal Meteorological Society, he strongly objected to it. They
a ll a or< ed it was desirable to have climatological stations where possible, and to work as nearly as
possible together. .
Mr. Todd said he would be glad that the substance of what had been said at this discussion
should appear in their report, because he felt the position of the official meteorologists in the
different colonies had been ignored by the Meteorological Society of Australasia. The reason for
establishing that society appeared to be the allegation that they were not carrying on observations
exactly according to the science of modern meteorology. He thought that should not go forth to
the world, and this was the first opportunity they had had of rebutting it. He did not say that
was the intention, but it certainly was the effect upon the public mind. # , ...
Mr. Wragge said he founded the Meteorological Society of Australasia at Adelaide virtually
as an offspring of the Royal Meteorological Society although independent of it.
Uniformity of Rainfall Observations.
Mr. Wragge proposed— a That the Conference try and secure greater uniformity of rainfall
observations.” He thought that all rain gauges should be exposed, in accordance with the Royal
Meteorological Society’s instructions, atone foot above ground, and that the rain be measured at
9 a m local time, and, in every case, entered against the preceding day, and also in accordance with
the practice of Mr. G. J. Symons, F.R.S., the well-known British rainfall observer.
Sir James Hector asked whether there was any instance known to Mr. \\ ragge where it
WaS Wragge said he knew there were rain gauges in Australia that were not exposed in
accordance with the uniform plan he proposed. . , • t
Mr. Todd said he had rain gauges at nearly all his telegraph stations, and made special
arrangements in regard to them. In some cases, if he put them at one foot from the ground, le
got much less rainfall than if he put them at two or three feet, owing to proximity of bmldmgs,
fences, &c., which sheltered the gauges. In such cases it was better to depart from the one foot
rule, and place the gauge higher above the ground. They could not keep rigidly to one rule*
Sir James Hector said he carried out a lot of experiments for the convenience of putting the
receiver on the gable end of a house and having the collecting part of the gauge within the


house and connecting the two with a pipe with a bend in it. He carried on observations, comparing
the result with the results of the standard gauge in the proper standard position alongside, and he
found there was practically no difference whatever. By doing that, lie ensured that the ram gauge
was regularly read at the right time. In the case of an island in Cook s Straits, he found it neces-
sary rain gauges, one on the north side aud one on the south, in order to get at true
results This showed that they could not adhere to any particular rule. .
Mr Russell said that the snbstauce of this resolution had been printed for years in a
former instruction, and he did not think it necessary for this Conference to take the matter up.
The Chairman said the matter had occupied his attention for a great many years, and he
found it impossible to comply with any hard and fast rule.
Mr. Russell said it was agreed to at the last Conference, and would be found on page 21.
2f r , Todd said he did not let any one have a Government rain gauge unless he complied
with those conditions. . , ™ , 1 u
Mr. Wragge said he did the same in Queensland ( i.e ., no one had an official gauge unless he
undertook to comply with the society’s instructions adopted by him).
The Conference came to no conclusion in the matter.
High-Level Stations.
Mr. Wragge proposed — iC That it was desirable to establish or increase the number of high-
level or mountain stations in suitable positions, where practicable, in all parts of Australia,
especially in New Zealand and Tasmania.’ r . „
Sir James Hector said they agreed on certain points for those at the last ( onference.
The Chairman said he had established one at Mount St. Bernard, 6,000 feet high.
Mr. Russell said he had one at Kiandra, 4,600 feet high. It must be borne in mind that
for months in the year, on the high mountains, the wet bulb was frozen and the rain gauge frozen.
Mr. Wragge said that then observations could be taken equally well with a film ol ice on a
wet bulb. He thought he would be able to establish a station on Bartle Frere, on the Johnstone,
and he had a rain gauge on the Tambourine mountain.
Sir James Hector said it would involve great expense in New Zealand.
Mr. Todd said if the Meteorological Society were not going to keep up the station at Mount
Lofty, he should be very happy to take charge of it.
The importance of the matter was affirmed by the Conference.
Barometric Discrepancies.
Deferred to by Mr. Todd at last meeting.
Captain Sliortt explained that the discrepancies between Hobart and Southport arose from
the latter’s position in connexion with Mount Wellington; and occasionally there were errors in
the telegrams. # ....
Mr. Russell said he thought it would do good if, when they came to draw the isobars in
the morning and thought they discovered an error, they should immediately transmit the informa-
tion to the other colonies by special message.
The Chairman said they should bear in mind that physiographical surroundings had a
certain effect. Wilson’s Promontory barometer was persistently *l3 below its proper isobaric
position, and they had the same between Lakes’ Entrance and Omeo. Lakes’ Entrance seemed to
be all right, for it was situated on a long low beach, and Omeo was in a big basin in the mountains.
As to Falmouth and Low Head, one was on the northern low coast of Tasmania, exposed to the
Straits, and the other was on the eastern coast exposed to the open ocean, and backed up by a very
high range of mountains. As to Hay aud Deniliquin he could not speak ; but as regards Echuca
it had been noticed that there was a little local low there.
Mr. Todd asked if it was due to any draught up and down the river.
The Chairman said he thought it might be; no doubt the persistent discrepancy was due to
some local peculiarity he could not at present explain.
Mr. Russell said he could not explain as to Hay and Deniliquin—they were both standard
Fortin barometers, and both situated on the plains—except that one was a somewhat larger town
than the other, and both in charge of fairly good observers. There was one curious thing to be
said about Hay. He found that the evaporation there was very much less than at any of the
corresponding stations, as measured by means of four-feet evaporators in the ground. The only
way he could account for it was that the local water company put so much water on the streets
that it affected the humidity of the air.
Mr. Wragge asked whether, in reducing his barometers to sea-level, Mr. Bussell took the
temperature of the air at the place.
Mr. Russell said no, but that at Sydney.
Mr. Wragge remarked that that was unusual.
Mr. Russell said it was, but there were reasons for it.
Mr. Todd said there had been interesting discussions on the subject, whether they should
take the actual temperature at the time, which might be purely local, or should take the mean
temperature. He did not think they go.t a true result by simply taking the local temperature and
then allowing theoretically for increase of temperature by depth. They could not say, for instance,
at Alice Springs what would be the temperature at the sea-level, and though they got it as near
as possible by taking the leading temperature at Adelaide, and perhaps Port Darwin, and then the
mean temperature at Alice Springs for the month, or for a particular day.


m 99 e as ked wliy Mr. Russell took the temperature of the air at Sycluey in reducing a
barometer at Boutke to sea-level rather than at that place which is nearest to Bourkeon the coast.
He thought uniformity of the first importance.
Mr. Russell said that he had found, as the result of many comparisons of the two
methods, that the barometric results for isobars were very much more accordant if he took the
temperature of Sydney in preference to the temperature of the place of observation, and
Sydney as the coast station. He thought the assumption usually made in reducing barometers to
sea-level that the atmosphere has a gradual decrease of heat from the position on the coast to the
inland station was a very unsound one. He took the mean temperature of the colony as the most
suitable, and jSydney happened to be the nearest temperature to that. He had found that work
better thau the old method. He recommended his system, as in localities they had masses of warm
air which entirely vitiated the calculations by the other system.
The Chairman said, of course, in making hypsometrical calculations they took the tempera-
ture at both places; and that, after all, when they looked at the many local peculiarities, although
it was desirable to have uniformity, he did not think it made a very great difference.
Mr. Wragge said that the Fortin barometers at Cooktown and Townsville had received some
damage at the hands of the local observers. He hoped to remedy all those evils shortly, when he
commenced his tour of inspection of the North Queensland stations.
Exchange of Instruments.
Mr. Todd said he thought it very desirable that they should exchange instruments, that is,
send round the standards. They all had Kew standard thermometers, and it would be desirable if
they could compare them; and they should also see if the anemometers agreed.
Mr. Wragge approved of the suggestion.
Sir James Hector inquired whether the barometer was not an absolute instrument, and was
sent out with corrections at Kew.
Mr. Todd said they never agreed. He always compared his barometers when they came
out, and he never found the Kew corrections referred to one barometer; they never all agreed with
one standard.
Sir James Hector suggested that it must be an alteration in transit, and if they were taken
about, as suggested by Mr. Todd, they would alter again.
Mr. Russell said the metal parts of which they were made did not all expand to the same
extent; hence slight changes of index error took place.
The Chairman said each station should have its own standard barometer, and if it was a
good one, and taken care of, every man ought to know whether it was right. Sometimes it was
necessary, where there were separate measuring bars, to see that they were not altered in length.
When he hung out a dozen of new Board of Trade barometers, they did not quite agree with the
Kew corrections; but after they had been hanging a couple of months they came back almost
exactly to it. The cause of it was, probably, little particles of mercury clinging and not getting
down to their proper place at first. If' thought they could not do better than stick to the Board
of Trade pattern, made by good makers; those of some outside makers were very defective. He
had found Adie’s all good.
The Conference agreed to, as far as possible, find out the difference that might exist between
any of their standards, and compare one with the other.
Mr. Russell moved and Captain Shortt seconded—“ That the foregoing minutes be adopted
as the report of the (Conference, and that the (Chairman be requested to report them to the Govern-
ment of Victoria, with the request that copies of them be transmitted to the other colonies.”—
Carried.
On the motion of Sir James Hector , seconded by Mr. Russell , a vote of thanks was
unanimously passed to Mr. Ellery for his services as Chairman and his courteous attention to the
Conference.
The Conference then terminated.
