

311 N Tj 'l' E 8
SEVER at; conversations
TII E IXI sTE I! s
OF TIIK
AIJSTJiALASTAX
■y,
!fAYESLI<]YAA" METHODIST CHTIIU TI
AT XirKTU
FOI RTH AXXrAL COXFEREXn-:.
IU'TrXJX IX
nor,ART TOWN, TTITJUSDAY, .TAXTARY 21. IS.YS.
PRIISTED BY TVJT-TAAM PBATT AND SON, ELIZABETH STREET,
1858.




F 3d
MINUTES
SEVERAL CONVERSATIONS
BETWEEN
THE MINISTERS
OF THE
AUSTRALASIAN
WESLEYAN METHODIST CHURCH
AT THEIR
FOURTH ANNUAL CONFERENCE,
BEGUN IN
HOBART TOWN, THURSDAY, JANUARY 2], 1858.
HOBART TOWN;
PRINTED BY WILLIAM PRATT AND SON, ELIZABETH STREET,
1858.


- •’ ,' -pj ■ik .’N ' -


CONTENTS.
Addeess: Pastoral 31
„ to British Conference... 28
„ from the British Conference 21
Annuitaijt Pund 11
Book Affairs 14
Chapel Building, not to be premature 14
and other Trust Property 14
Ciiildeeh’s Pund 11
Collections for 1858 20
Committees: Missionary and Connexional ... 12
District 12
Educational ... 13
Chapel ... ... 14
CoNFEEENCE of 1859 : when to be held and where 15
Disteict Meeting Business 17
Division of Circuits 10
Educational Pmid for Ministers’ Children ... 11
Geneeal Seceetaey of Missions 4, 15
Membees of Society, List of 9
Ministees, Alphabetical Lists of 49—51
„ received into full Connexion ... 1
Missions 15, 45


Missionary Committee, Minutes of General ...45 —4G
Native Assistant Missionaries ... ... ... 2 — 3
Number of Ministers, &c. 10
Preachers remaining on Trial ... ... ... 1
„ reeeived on Trial 2
President of the Conferenee ... ... ...6, 25-6
„ of the next Conferenee recommended 29
Provision for Married Ministers... 19
Heading of the Pastoral Address ... .>. 19
Hemovaes of Ministers ... ... ... ... 19
Schedules of the Districts 35—44
Society Tickets 19
Stations of the Ministers... ... ... ... 4—B
Status of Ministers ... ... 16
Supernumerary and Widow Fund 11
Treasurers of the Missionary Committee ... 15
„ „ Children’s Fund 11
„ „ Educational Fund ... ... 11
„ „ Worn-out Preachers’Fund ... 11
IVesleyan Church Contingent and Extension Fund 13


MINUTES.
Question I.—Who are now admitted as Ministers into
FULL CONNEXION WITH THE CONEEKENCE ?
Answek.-
Thomas Angwin Ist.
Nathaniel Bennett.
William Brown.
William Clarke.
James W. Crisp.
William HiU, 2nd.
William Kelynack. •
Hans Mack.
George B. Richards.
James S. H. Royce.
John B. Smith.
Josiah G. Turner.
Robert W. "V anderkiste.
John WheweU.
Question ll—What Preachers remain on trial P
Answer.—
Charles ColweU.
John Crawf(gd.
Widiam D. fjelean.
These have travelled three tears.
Henry Chester.
WiUiam Cumow.
Martin IKson.
William Fletcher, B.A.
Wdliam Gittos.
William Hopkins.
Thomas Lloyd.
Jolm Mewton.
Thfse have travelled two years.


William M. Bennett.
TheophUus Beaizley.
John CatteraU.
James W. Dowson.
Charles Dubourg.
William Fidler.
Samuel Knight.
Charles Lane.
George Lee
WiUiam Thomas Mayne.
Ilichard W’’atson Orton.
William Jackson Watkin.
George Woolnough.
Samuel William Worth.
These have travelled one yeab.
Question lll.—What Preachers are now eeceived on
TEIAL ?
Answee.—
Thomas Angwin, 2nd.
John Atkin.
Charles Joseph Baird.
William Lizard Blamires,
Biehard Caldwell.
Frederick Langham.
William George Biehard Stephinson.
William WoodhaU.
Peter Boe Clark Ussher.
Question IV.—Who are now admitted as Native Assist-
ant Missionaries in connexion with cue Mission Stations ?
Answee.—
David Kata.
Question V.—Who remain on teial as Native Assistant
Missionaries ?
Answee. —
EUezer Takelo.
Nathan Thataki.
Matthias Vave.
These have travelled tiieee yeaes.


Samuel Ngaropi.
Elias Langi.
Solomon Tuilangi.
These have travelled two yeabs.
Benjamin Buindoli.
John Eggleston.
Joseph Orton.
Cornelius Musuka.
Isaac llawaindranu.
These have travelled oste yeak.
Question Vl.—Who are now keceived on trial as Assist-
ant Missionaries ?
Answer.—
Barnabas Ahongalu.
Mark Baongo.
Question VII. —What Preachers have died since the last
Conference ?
Answer —None.
Question VIII.—Are there any objections to any of our
Ministers, or Preachers on trial ?
Answer. —They were examined one by one.
Question IX.—How are our Ministers and Preachers on
trial stationed for the ensuing ?
Answer.—As follows, viz.;—
[N.B. —Each of the places mentioned in these stations, and
numbered consecutively from I to 83, is the head of a circuit.
The Superintendents and other Minister or Ministers stationed
in or appointed to the several circuits undermentioned, is and
are appointed by the Conference to preach and to perform all
acts of religious worship and Methodist discipline in each and
every of the Wesleyan Methodist Chapels already erected, or to
be erected, in each circuit respectively, within the space of
twelve calendar months, at such time or times, and in such a
manner, as to him or them shall seem proper; subject never-
theless to the Superintendent Minister.]


STATIONS 1858.
WILLIAM BUTTEHSj Peesident of the Confeeence.
I.—New South Wales District.
1. Sydney, North {Tork-street) —William Hessel, John G.
MiUard.
John Eggleston, General Seeretary of our Missions.
2. Sydney, South {Chippendale') —Joseph Oram.
3. Sydney, Hast {Surrey Hills) —Samuel Ironside, Josiah G.
Turner; William Schofield, Supernumerary.
4. Newtown A. Quick.
5. Parramatta —Stephen Rabone, William Clarke; Walter
Lawry, Supernumerary.
6. Windsor —Walter J. Davis, Theophilus Beaizley; Peter
Turner, Supernumerary.
7. Bathurst —Henry H. Gaud, Thomas Angwin Ist.
8. Turon Cold Fields —John Bowes, Assistant Missionary.
9. Bowenfells —William Curnow.
10. Mudgee —N J. K. Piddington.
11. Maitland —Benjamin Chapman, William T. Mayne.
Hungog and Clarence Town—Bah&d W. Vanderkiste.
12. Newcastle —George Woolnough.
13. Singleton —George Pickering, Assistant Missionary.
14. Camden —Charles W. Bigg.
15. Woollongong, Kiama, and Shoalhaven —James Watkin,
James Somerville, Hans Mack.
16. Goulburn —John Watsford.
Braidwood Gold Fields —William Kelynack.
Gunning —James W. Dowson.
Yass —Charles Creed.
17. Moruya —Richard Caldwell.
18. Brisbane and Ipswich —Samuel Wilkinson, William Fidler
one to be sent; Nathaniel Turner, Supernumerary.
19. Manning John Pemell.


Arraidale—OixQ wanted
Macdonald River, —One wanted.
Wellington, —One wanted.
Eden, Twofold Bay —One wanted.
Grafton, Clarence River —One wanted.
Wide Bay —One wanted.
Tmiut —One wanted.
Queenbeyan —One wanted.
Binda —One wanted.
Stephen Rabone, Chairman of the Eistrict,
2.—victoria District,
20. Melbourne, West, {Collins-street) —William L. Binks,
Wdliam P. Wells, Samuel William Worth.
21. Melbourne, East (Collifiqwood) —Thomas Williams, James
S. Waugh.
22. Melbourne, South, (St. Kilda) —Daniel J. Draper, Secre-
tary of the Conference, William Hopkins.
23. Brighton —Edward King, John Atkin.
24. Williamstown SixwwCl Knight.
25. Pentridge —Richard Hart.
26. Geelong —William Hill Ist, George Daniel.
Tuclcfield —One to be sent, who shall be under the direc-
tion of the Geelong Superintendent.
27. Warrnanibool —Samuel Waterhouse.
28. Belfast —William C. Currey.
29. Portland —George B. Richards; William Lightbody, Su-
pernumerary.
30. Kyneto7i~icMa Cattcrall.
31. Raston, William L. Blamires.
Chester.
32. Carisbroolc —Joseph Albiston, Widiam Woodhall.
Ararat —One to be sent.
33. Sandhurst —Joseph Dare, Charles Dubourg.
34. Ballaaratand Cresioick —James Bickford, James W. Crisp
(Creswick), Charles Lane ; Theophilus Taylor, Super-
numerary.
85. Beechioorth —Jolui C. Symons; one wanted,
36. Kilmore —Jolm Mewton.
Rushworth. —One wanted.
Daniee J. Draper, Secretary of the Conference, Chairman
of the District.


3,—South Australia District.
37. Adelaide, South, {Pirie-sireet) —William Ingram, Join!
Harcourt (Norwood), Charles J. Bakd.
38. Adelaide, North, {Archer-street') —WiUiam Butters, Pre-
sident of the Conference, Thomas Lloyd.
Port Adelaide —WiUiam HUI 2nd.
39. Oawler —Nathaniel Bennett.
40. Kapunda —WiUiam Brown.
41. Kooringa—Rohext C. Ploekhart, Charles Colwell (Clare).
42. Willunga —Jabez B. Waterhouse.
43. Clarendon —Matthew WUson.
44. Momit Earlier and Nairne —Spencer WUliams, Peter R.
C. Ussher (Nairne.)
45. Yankalilla —WiUiam M. Bennett (NormanvUle).
Goolwa —One wanted.
Strathalbyn —One wanted.
Kersbroolc —One wanted.
William. Butters, President of the Conference, Chairman
of the District.
4.—Western Australia District.
46. Perth —Samuel Hardey.
47. York —WiUiam Lowe.
Freemantle —One wanted.
King George’s Sound —One wanted.
Samuel Habdet, Chairman of the District.
s.—Tasmania District.
48. Hobart Town —John Cope, WiUiam D. Lelean.
49. New Norfolk —Prancis Tuckfield.
50. Campbell Town —John B. Smith.
Horton College, John A. Manton, President of the
CoUege.
51. Launceston—Yhamas, B. Harris.
52. Longford— Smitliies.
53. Westbury —Joseph Pillingham.
54. Deloraine —Richard W. Orton.
55. Mersey —Thomas Angwin 2nd.
Hiton —One wanted.
John A. Manton, Chairman of the District,


IKbsionf)*
I.—Auckland District, (New Zealand.)
56. Auckland —Isaac Harding; John Hobbs, Supernumerary.
57. Mamikau and Three Kings’ Native Institution. —Thomas
Buddie; Henry H. Turton; Joseph Orton, Native
Assistant Missionary.
58. Ilohianga —Henry H. Lawry.
59. Kaipara —William Gittos.
GO. Waingaroa and Aotea —James WaUis.
61. Waipa. —Alexander Held ; Samuel Ngaropi, Native
Assistant Missionary.
63. Kawliia. —Cort Henry Sehnackenberg.
63. New Plymouth —English Departmt.: Joseph H. Eletehcr.
„ „ Native „ John Wliiteley.
64. Mokau—Ona wanted. John Eggleston, Native Assistant
Missionary.
65. Manmnui. —One wanted.
Iliehard B. Lyth and George Buttle are returning to England.
Thomas Buddle, Chairman of the District.
2.—Wellington District< (New Zealand.)
66. Wellington— BuUer; Jonathan Innes; one wanted.
67. Nelson and Moutueka —John Warren ; Wdliam J. Wat-
kin ; one wanted.
68. Waimate and Wanganui —William Kirk ; Wdliam Woon^
Supernumerary.
69. Canterbury —John Aldred ; one to be sent.
Otago —George Stannard ; one wanted.
Wairau —One to be sent.
Chatham Islands —One to be sent.
James Bulleb, Chairman of the District.
3.—Friendly Islands Districti
70. Tongatabu Iliehard Amos, John Whewell, George
Lee; John Eaubula, Native Assistant Missionary.
71. Haabai —John Vereoe, William G. B. Stephinson ; John
Latu, David Kata, Native Assistant Missionaries.
72. Vavau —Thomas Adams ; one to be sent; Peter Vi, Mark
Baongo, Native Assistant Missionaries.
73. Martin Dyson; one earnestly requested; Barna-
bas iVliongalu, Native Assistant Missionary.


74. Mm Foou~W\\\s, Laugi, Native Assistant Missionary.
75. Mna Tobutabu~\JwlQv the care of a paid Teacher.
John Thomas has permission to return to the Colonies, and
is under the direction of the Missionary Committee.
John Thomas, Chairman of the Listrict.
4.—Feejee District.
76. Laliemba —John Polglase, William Tleteher, B. A ;
Moses Mamafainoa, Joel Ketetha, Nathan Thataki,
Matthias Vpe, Native Assistant Missionaries.
77. Frederick Langham; Benjamin Buindoh, Native
Assistant Missionary.
78. Bau —John S. Fordham; Cornelius Musuka, Isaac Eawai-
ndranu, Native Assistant Missionaries.
79. Rewa. —William Moore, J. S. H. Boyce, one to be sent;
Paul Vea, Native Assistant Missionary.
SO. Ovalau—dmi wanted; Solomon Tuilangi, N ative Assistant
Missionary.
81. John Crawford; one wanted; Joel Bulu, Native
Assistant Missionary.
82. Bua —William Wilson; one wanted.
83. Rotumah—OwQ to be sent; Eliezer Takelo, Native Assist-
ant Missionary.
N. 8.—1. John Malvern has leave to visit the Colonies, and is
under the direction of the Missionary Committee.
2. Joseph \Vaterliouse is employed for this year in the
translation department and resides in Hobart Town.
3. James Calvert is on a visit to England.
John Malvern, Chairman of the District.
The Preachers on trial appointed to separate stations are under
the direction of the Chairmen of their respective Districts.
The Ministers and Preachers on trial are expected to be in their
new Circuits the first week in April.


Question X. —Wliat is the number of Members iu our
Churches ?
Answeb.—As follows, viz.
Circuits. Members.
Sydney, North ... 266
Sydney, South ... 256
Sydney, East ... 231
N ewtown 203
Parramatta 163
Windsor ... ... 258
Bathurst and Turon... 237
Maitland 385
Newcastle ... ... 60
Singleton 20
Bowenfells ... ... 47
Mudgee 66
Camden ... ... 107
Wollongong 267
Goulburn ... ... 233
Moreton Bay .., 141
Manning River & Port 1 gQ
Macquarie ... j
IMoruya ... ... 14
Melbourne, ... 282
Melbourne, East ... 542
Melbourne, South ... 105
Brighton ... ... 150
Williamstown ... 28
Pentridge 160
Geelong ... ... 452
Tuckfield 20
Warrnambool ... 29
Belfast ... ... 40
Portland ... ... 65
Kyneton 45
Castlemaine... ... 335
Avoca 167
Sandhurst 248
Ballaarat ... ... 439
Beechworth 87
Adelaide, South ... 640
Adelaide, North ... 408
Gawler Town ... 205
Kapunda 113
Kooringa ... ... 191
WUlunga 163
Circuits. Members.
Clarendon ... ... 149
Mount Barker ... 257
Yankalilla ... ... 77
Perth 70
York 12
Hobart Town ... 348
New Norfolk ... 54
Campbell Town ... 48
Launceston ... ... 176
Longford ... ... 85
Westbury ... ... 66
Heloraine ... ... 32
River Mersey ... 24
Auckland ... ... 273
Manukau ... ... 131
Hokianga 292
Waingaroa and Aotca 244
Kaipara 97
Kawhia ... ... 340
Mokau ... ... 95
New Plymouth ... 150
W'ai|)a 115
Wellington ... ... 254
Waimate ... ... 258
Nelson 97
Canterbury 76
Otago ... ... 50
Tonga 2109
Haabai 1767
Vavau' ... ... 1697
NiuaTobutabu ... 224
Nina Boon 418
Samoa ... ... 400
Lakemba 3296
Vewa 117
Bau ... 1373
Rewa ... ... 529
Bua 262
Nandy 189
Ovalau 76
Rotumah 207
9


Preachers
Districts.
Ministers.
Supernu-
meraries.
on
Trial.
Total.
New South Wales. |
22 & 2
Ast. Miss.
I *
5
31
V ictoria
18
1
11
30
South Australia
10
4
14
Western Australia ..,
2
2
Tasmania
6
3
9
Auckland
10
1
2
13
Wellington
6
1
1
8
h'riendly islands
5
3 .
8
Teejee islands
8
...
3
11
89
7
32
126
Native Assistant Missionaries in New Zealand and}
the Friendly and Feejee Islands j
20
General Recapitulation.
Increase
Decrease
Xumbcr of Members in the
New South Wales District
Victoria
Soutli Australia
Western Australia.
Tasmania
Auckland
Wellington
Priendly Islands.
Deejee Islands .
24461
21247
Increase of Members in tlie Colonies 880
V n on the Mission Stations ... 2334
Net Increase of Members 3214
On trial for Membership—
In the Colonies 693
In the Missions 3222
Total on trial 3915
Ministers and Preachers on Trial, including Supernumeraries,
comiected with this Conference.


Question XI. —What are the resolutions of the Conference
respeeting the various Connexional Funds ?
Answeb.—
The Conferenee aeknowledges with thankfulness the ready,
eheerful, and liberal support which the various Connexional
Funds have had from each District in the Australian Colonies,
and rejoices in this additional proof of the attachment of the
Wesleyan Church to the Connexional principle, the mainte-
nance of which is so essential to its stability and usefulness.
I. The Children's Fund.
1. The Conference directs that, in aocordanee with our
Connexional usage, the support of the children of our Ministers
be divided among the Districts, in accordance with the number
of Members in each District, the ratio in 1858 being SO Mem-
bers to one child.
2. That a uniform rate of £l3 12s. be charged on each of
the Circuits, and allowed for each child, both for Missionaries
on Foreign Stations, and Ministers in Circuits in the Colonies.
3. That the thanks of the Conference are due, and are
hereby presented, to the Rev. J. A. Manton and Capt. Horton,
of Ross, for their services during the year, and that they be
requested to continue to act as Treasurers during the ensuing
year.
11. Fund for the Education of Ministers' Children.
The thanks of the Conference are hereby presented to the
Rev. William Butters and John Colton, Esq., for their services
during the past year, and they are respectfully requested to
continue as Treasurers for the ensuing year.
111. Fund for the Support of Supernumeraries and
Widows.
The thanks of the Conference are due, and are hereby pre-
sented, to the Rev. Daniel J. Draper and Frederic Cooper,
Esq., for their services during the past year; and the Rev.
Daniel J. Draper and Alexander Fraser, Esq., be appointed
Treasurers for the ensuing year.
That the President be requested to correspond with the
President of the British Conference in reference to the re-
payment of the Subscriptions of the Ministers of the Australa-
sian Conference to the Worn-out Preachers’ Amiuitant Society,
according to the agreement of the British Conference, as given
by the Rev. Robert Young, the Deputation from England in
order to the formation of anew Annuitant Fund for the Aus-
tralasian Connexion.


That the Treasurers be requested to obtain from the Her.
P. Haswell all the information that can be furnished, _ that
woxild enable an Actuary to advise as to the safest basis on
which we could establish a Preachers’ Annuitant Pund.
Question Xll.—Who are the Members of the District
Committees for the year 1858 ?
Answer. —The Ministers of the respective Districts, and
the Circuit Stewards of the various circuits in those districts.
Question XIII. are the Members of the Missionary
and Connexional Committees for the year 1858 ?
Answer. —
New South Wales District.
The Pevds. J. Eggleston, J. Oram, W. A. Quick, B. Chap-
man, S. Ironsides, W. Hessel, J. Watkin, J. G. Millard; and
Messrs. G. W. Allen, J. Caldwell, R. Mansfield, W. Speer,
W. Love, A. McArthur, T. Cowlishaw, and T. P. Reeve.
Victoria District.
The Revds. J. Bickford, W. L. Binks, T. Williams, J. C.
Symons, W. Hill, T. Hasten, E. King; and Messrs. W. Little,
N. Guthridge, A. Eraser, C. Stone, T. Ris, W. Raw, and
James Webb.
South Australia District.
The Revds. M. Wilson, W. Ingram, J. B. Waterhouse,
J. Harcourt, R. Elockhart, S. Williams; and Messrs. Bake-
well, Padman, Goldsmith, Colton, Hardy, Goss.
Tasmania District.
Revds. J. Smithies, E. Tuckfield, T. B. Harris, J. Cope,
J. Eillingham, J. B. Smith; and Messrs. J. Crookes, Gleadow,
W. Hebblewhite, S. Horton, E. Shoobridge, R. Shoobridge.
Auckland District.
The Revds. J. Hobbs, J. Whitely, J. Harding, J. H.
Eletcher, H. H. Lawry, and A. Reid ; and Messrs. William-
son, G. E. EUiott, C. A. Harris, H. Ellis, C. J. Stone, and
H. Vercoe.
Wellington District.
Revds. J. Innes, J. Warren, W. Kirk, J. Aldrcd, G. Stan-
nard; and Messrs. Lewis, Hunt, J. E. Watkin, Eoi, Kotten,
and Green.
The Chairman of each District is ex officio the Chairman of
aU the Committees in his District.


Question XIV.-—Who are the members of the Educational
Ckmimittecs for the several Districts for the year 1858 ?
Answee.—
New South Wales District.
Messrs. Mansfield, Caldwell, Speer, Love, L. Moore, T. R.
Reeve, G. W. Allen, Cowlishaw, Jesson, Dowsctt, Blanchard,
Andrews, J. Barker, Dawson, Dueker, MiUs, Golledgc, Owen,
Blair, Ealkiner, J. E. Pearce, with all the Ministers of the
District.
Victoria District.
Ittcssrs. Cutts, R. Hodgsoji, W. G. Thomas, R. Guthridgc,
P. P. Pleteher, A. Eraser, MeNieoll, T. Wfikinson, C. Stone,
P. Rix, J. Lowe, J. A. Doane, and aU the Ministers of the
District.
Tasmajiia District.
AU the Ministers of the District, with Messrs. S. Horton,
P. Parramore, R. Jackson, E. Shoobridge, W. Hebblewhite,
J. Crookes, J. W. Gleadow.
Auckland District.
Rev. T. Buddie, J. Ilobbs, H. 11. Turton, A. Reid, IT.
Harding, and IMessrs. J. Williamson, T. Russell, E, J. Stone,
A. Clarke.
Question XV.—What are the Resolutions of the Conference
respecting the Wesleyan Church Contingent and Extension
Eund, raised by the various Districts, m aid of the work of
God in their several localities ?
Answee.—
1. In order that the Gospel may be sent into the neglected
portions of the various Colonies, while existing stations arc
vigorously sustained, the Conference deems it highly important
that each circuit of the Connexion should do all in its power
to augment the resources of this Eund.
2. Referring to a Minute of the New South Wales District,
requesting that an alteration be made in the mode of sustain-
ing the various District Eimds, it was resolved : —_
That the Conference does not at present deem it desirable
to effect any alteration, but would recommend that the Church
Extension and Chapel Eunds be vigorously sustained in aU the
districts of this Connexion.


Chapel and, other Trust Property.
Question XVl.—What are the resolutions of tlie Confer-
ence respecting our Chapel and other Trust Property ?
Answer.—
The Chapel and Building Fund Committees in the several'
Districts are as follows: —
New South Wales.
Revds. J. Eggleston, H. H. Gaud, W. A. Quick, S. Iron-
side, B. Chapman, W. Hessel, J. Watkin; Messrs. Caldwell,
Cowhshaw, Speer, Austin, Andrews, Howitt, GoUedge,
McArthur.
Victoria.
Messrs. Pamham, N. Guthridge, Powell, N. N. Hosking,
P. P. Fletcher, W. Little, Raw, R. Guthridge, J. Hurst, J.
Webb, J. Lowe, T. Wilkinson, E. S. Parker, Meaden, A. Fra-
ser, R. Smith, and J. B. Kendall, with all the Ministers in
the District who are in full Coimexion.
South Australia:
AU the members of the Financial District Meeting.
In order to prevent rash and premature undertakings in
Chapel Buildings, which must prove a source of embarrassment
to the Connexion, and be oppressive to our circuits, it is enacted
as a standing order, to be applied to all the Chapel Building
Committees, that no Chapel shah, be erected uiness there is
the reasonable expectation that two-thirds of the entire cost
win be raised by subscriptions, including the coUections at the
opening services; but we strongly urge that, whenever it is
practicable, aU our Chapels be erected free from debt.
Boole Affairs.
Question XVll.—What are the resolutions of the Con-
ference respecting our Book Affairs ?
Answer. —The Conference, having seriously considered the
recommendation of the several Districts on our Book Affairs,
resolves :
That the establishment of a Central Book Depot for this
connexion is, at present, impracticable; but that it is most im-
portant to promote in each District, by the formation of Depdts
or otherwise, such arrangements as shall lead to the more
feneral circulation of Wesleyan literature, amongst the mem-
ers of our congregations, and the children of our schools.


Question XVIII.—What are the resolutions of the Con-
ference respecting our Missions ?
Answer.—
1. The Conference cordially adopts the resolutions of the
General Committee, held 28th January 1858; and directs
that they he printed in the Minutes. See Appendix, No. 1.
2. The cordial thanks of the Conference a represented to the
Treasurer the Hon. George Alien, M.L.C., and to the General
Secretary, the Rev. J. Eggleston, for their services during the
year.
3. The thanks of the Conference are presented to G. W.
Allen, Esq., for the valuable service he has rendered to the
Society during the year.
4. The Rev. Stephen Rabone, and the Hon. George Allen,
Esq., M.L.C., are appointed Treasurers.
5. The Rev. J. Eggleston is re-appointed General Secretary.
6. In order to promote the translation into the Eeejeean lan-
guage of the 2nd part of the Conference Catechism, as weU as the
preparation of a condensed commentary, and other works in
that language, for the benefit of the people generally, it is re-
solved that Brother Joseph Waterhouse be placed under the
direction of the Committee for one year, without appoint-
ment to a cii’cuit.
Question XIX. —When and where shall our next Conference
be held ?
Answer.—
On the matter of holding the Annual Conferences to which
reference is made in the Minutes of several Districts, this
Conference is of opinion that it is unadvisable at present to
make any alteration.
The next Conference shall be held in Sydney, on Thursday,
the 20th of January 1859. The Stationing Committee will
meet on Tuesday the 18th, and the Lay Committees on Thurs-
day the 27th January.
Signed in behalf and by order of the Conference,
William Butters, President.
Daniel J. Draper, Secretary.


MISCELLANEOUS MINUTES.
STATUS OP MINISTERS.
The Conference directs tliat the following Minutes of the
Conference of 1856 and 1857 be published for the iuformation of
Ministers and Preachers on Trial:—
“ That any candidate for our Ministry employed for this Con-
ference by the British Conference or the Missionary Commit-
tee in London during or previous to the Conference of any
given year shall at the ensuing Australasian Conference be re-
garded as having travelled one year.”
“ That any candidate for our Ministry having been accepted
by the Conference and employed before the 25th June in any
given year, shah at the foUowhig Conference be accounted to
have travelled one year; but that, in the event of his not be-
ing actually engaged before the 25th June, he shall commence
his probation at tJie ensuing Conferenee.”
“ The time of the brethren taken into our work in the Co-
lonies previously to our being formed into a separate Con-
nexion shall commence from the date of their actual emplov-
ment after having passed the District Sleeting; those who
were employed before the 25th June in any given year being
eonsidered at the ensuing Conference as having travelled oim
year, while those who were not actually employed before the
25th June shall be regarded as having commenced their pro-
bation at the ensuing Conference.”
“No application to alter a Muiister’s status, in conformity
with these regulations, shall be entertained by the Conferenee
unless such alteration be recommended by the District Meet-
ing.”
DIVISION OP CIRCUITS.
No recommendation to divide a circuit can be entertained
by the Conference unless such a recommendation proceed from
the Quarterly_ Meeting of the Circuit held immediately preced-
ing the District Meeting, and is sanctioned by the District
Meeting.


The Gonfetence approves of the division, of the following
Circuits, which have been recommended by their respective
Quarterly and Distriet Meetings:—
1. The Turon Gold Pielda to be separated from Bathurst,
and formed into a new Circuit.
2. Kersbrook and Houghton to be separated from the Gaw*
ler Circuit as soon as a Minister can be appointed, and formed
into a new Circuit.
DISTKICT MEETING BUSINESS.
The following is the order which shall be observed in con-
ducting the business of our District Meetings;—■
1. What Ministers and Preachers on Trial are present ?
2. Have any Ministers or Preachers on Trial died since the
last District Meeting ?
3. Do we recommend that any of our Ministers be made
Supernumeraries at the ensuing Conference ?
4. Do we recommend that any Supernumerary be again
employed in the regular work ?
5. Are there any objections to any of the Ministers or
Preachers on Trial m this District ?
(1.) Is there any objection to his moral and religious
character ?
(2.) Does he believe and preach our doctrines ?
(3.) Has he duly observed and enforced our discipline ?
(4.) Has he competent abilities for our itinerant work ?
6._ What Preachers on Trial do we recommend to be
admitted into full connexion at the Conference ?
7. What Preachers do we recommend to remain on trial ?
8. What Candidates for our Ministry do we recommend to
be received on trial at the ensuing Conference ?
9. Do any of our Ministers or Preachers on trial offer
themselves for our Mission work ?
10. Have the Conference Stations for this District been
observed ?
_ll._Do we recommend the division or alteration of any
Circuit in this District ?
12. recommend our Ministers and Preachers
on Trial to be stationed at the ensuing Conference
13. What are the Statistical Returns of this District as
required by the Conference ?
14. Are Registers of Baptisms, Marriages, and Burials kept
in each Circuit, and are the entries carefully made ?
15. Can any measure be adopted for the promotion of the
work of God ui this District i


16. Whom do we appoint as the Representative of this
District at the ensuing Conference ?
17. What other Ministers do we permit to attend the Con-
ference ?
18. Have we anything to recommend to the ensuing
Conference ?
19. When and where shall our next District Meeting be
held?
The following are the subjects which shall be considered in the
Financial District Meeting.
I.— Church Frojierty.
1. What is the state of our Conuexional Property in this
District ?
2. Have any new erections been completed, and have the
Conference regulations relating thereto been observed ?
3. Do we sanction the purchase or erection of any property
in any Circuit in this District ?
4. What is the present state of the Chapel Pund ?
5. What arc the probable receipts of this Pund for the en-
suing year P
6. What Grants are to be made to Chapels, Mmisters’
Dwelling Houses, &c., from tins Pund ?
ll.— Church Contingent and Extension Fund.
1. What are the Receipts and Expenditure of this Pund for
the present year ?
2. What Circuits request aid from this Pund ?
3. What is their financial condition?
4. What Grants are made ?
111.— Connexional Funds.
(I.) — Worn-out and Widows* Fund.
1. What amount has been raised in this District for this
Pund ?
2. What claims on this Pund in this District do we recom-
mend ?
(II.) — Chiliren’s Fund.
1. What is the state of this Pmrd in this District for the
present year ?
2. Wliat number of children in this District must be pro-
vided for at the onsiung Conference ?


(III.) — Educational Fund.
It Wliat amount has been raised in this District for this
I'und?
2. What are the claims for Educational Allowances for this
year ?
(IV.) — Foreign Mission Fundk
1. What is the amount raised in each Circuit in this District
for this Fund, and what the local Expenses ?
2. What arrangements can be made for holding the Mis-
sionary Meetings in the various Circuits during the ensuing
year ?
Ff.—Connexional Committees.
Whom do we nominate as Members of the Connexional
Committees for the ensuing year ?
STANDING OBDERS.
Provision for married Ministers.
In aU eases where the appointment of a single man is
requested by any Circuit, it is understood that in the event of
such appointment being made by the Conference, the Circuit
is pledged to provide for a married minister at the end of four
years.
Society TicketSi
The Secretary of the Conference for the time being shall
prepare a form of ticket for each quarter of the following year,
and transmit a copy to the Chairman of each District not later
than the month of July, in order that a sufficient number may
be printed for the use of the several circuits in his District.
Removals of Ministers.
Every Minister and Preacher on Trial shall be in his new
Circuit during the first week of April.
Reading of, the Pastoral Address in Society Meetings.
The Superintendents are directed to appoint a special
Society Meeting, to be held at each principal chapel in their
ch’cuits, either in the afternoon of the Lord’s day or on some
convenient evening of the week, for the purpose of having the
Pastoral Address read to the Society, and made the subject of
suitable remarks and exhortations.


General Collections and Subscriptions for 1858
'The following are the usual and regular coUections which
hre to be made in all our circuits in the ensuing year.
Missions to the Heathen.
Public Meetings, Collections and Subscriptions, according to
Circuit or District arrangement.
Wesleyan Church Contingent and 'Extension Fund.
Public Meetings, Collections, and Subscriptions, according
to Circuit or District arrangement.
Chapel and Building Fund.
Collections in aU our Chapels in the course of the yeari
Education of Preachers’ Children.
Collections in all our Chapels in the course of the year.
Fund for the Supernumerary and Widoios.
Collections in all our Chapels, according to Circuit or
District arrangement.


THE ANSWEK
Of the British Conference to the Address of the Australasian
Conference.
Rev. and very dear Brethren,
We heartily reciprocate the affectionate sentiments expressed
in your Address. It is most refreshing to us to receive frojn
a far country the kind and Christian greetings of tliose in
whom we feel the deepest interest, and for whom we offer to
the God and Father of us aU, through Jesus Christ, the most
fervent prayers. Our affection for you is not lessened by
your distance, or by the new relation which you sustain
toward us. Our concern for you is, if possible, more tender
than ever; and we tliankfully recognise, in our mutual attach-
ment, an illustration of that blessed experience which our
Redeemer contemplated when He prayed, —“That they all
may be oneas, Thou, Father, art in Me, and I in Thee, tliat
they also may be one in Us !”
We rejoice greatly that it has pleased God to establish the
work of your hands; and our joy is increased when we discern
in your prosperity such elements as ■ indicate its genuineness,
and promise its perpetuity. The prevalence of peace in your
Societies, the steady growdh of your congregations, the una-
nimity of your counsels, the aggressive zeal of your labours,
and, above aU, the conversion of sinners to the faith and love of
Christ, we regard as glorious and incontrovertible proofs of
the presence of God with you ; and we hold that the Divine
presence is at once the test and pledge of real evangelical
success. Our Founder enunciated a sublime doctrine of the
Faith, when he said, “ The best of aU is, God is with us !”
In the history of your operations during the past year, we
note with special gratitude one striking symptom of health
and promise,—the raising up of candidates for your mmistry
from your own Home and Mission Societies. This is the
more cheering to us, as the claims of the work under the
immediate direction of the Parent Conference are such as to
absorb the labours of aU whose services we can command. At
the present time we have considerable difficulty in meeting the
necessities of our Circuits; and we are deeply convmced that
the future ministry of your Church will have to be furnished,
in the main, from your own Societies. We trust that the


indications of a succession of faithful Ministers, to which you
make reference in your Address, will become permanent; and
this, not only because of the prospective paucity of the supply
from England, but for reasons economical and expedient.
Ministers reared in your own immediate spheres of labour will
always possess facilities which strangers from a distance can-
not have. On all these grounds we commend this subject to
your prayerful attention. It is a matter of grief to us that we
cannot respond more fully to your call for additional mniis-
terial aid; and we pray that “ tlie Lord of the harvest” may
“send forth more labourers into His harvest.”
We congratulate you on the success whicli has attended
your most praiseworthy efforts for meeting tlie educational
exigencies of the country by the establishment of schools. To
educate tlie people of the land is a part of religion. The
church, while speeding on her mission as the almoner of the
Cross, must not forget tliat hers is the foremost place in the
vanguard of intellectual progress. Nor will Methodism prove
faithful to her trust among the churches, if she forget that her
work is to educate as well as to evangelize. The expansion
and refinement of the popular mind demand a cultivated min-
istry. _ The day is gone by when zeal, unaccompanied by
intelligence, might hope to sway the masses of the people; and
we therefore commend to your attention the propriety of
making some definite arrangement for the training of your
ministerial candidates in theology and general science. It
would be better to decline new spheres of labour for a time
than to send forth immature and inefficient men.
The prosperity of your Missionary operations in general
calls for thankfulness to God. We deeply sympathize with
you in the reverses which you have sustamed m one sphere of
your Missions. We are grateful, however, to learn that these
reverses are owing to causes over which you have no control,
and not to any slackening of your efforts. May the Prince of
Peace speedily set up His kingdom in those dark places of the
earth, in wliieh war and bloodshed frustrate the enterprise of
your faith! The increase in the contributions of the native
Societies to your Mission Funds is encouraging; and we have
no doubt that when the converts from Heathenism are more
fully instructed in the discipline of Christianity, they will raise
their offerings to a higher standard. The future stability and
enlargement of your Mission-churches will depend, to a great
extent, upon their liberality in relation to the claims of the
unregencrate world. We augur great things for the moral


and political prosperity of your country, from the fact, that,
among its many and gigantic enterprises, preaching tlie Gospel
to the Heathen holds so prominent a plaee. Happy will that
country be, the early history of which is consecrated by the
leaven of a pure evangelism !
It is most gratifying to us to be assured of your firm attach-
ment to the constitution of Weslejan Methodism. Our system
is not to be regarded as an experiment. It has been tried as
by fire, and it has stood the fiercest tests. Its principles, in
all their integrity, have survived the most painful dispensations,
—have proved our strength, under God, m the heat of trouble;
and we eherish them, as a sacred trust, and rejoice that you
sympathise with us in this feeling. There may be in our sys-
tem certain minor and non-essential points, which, in their
bearing upon the claims of a new country, are open to modifi-
cation; but we firmly believe that the great principles of
Wesleyan Methodism are adapted to every clime, period, and
circumstance. The presence at our Conference of Representa-
tives from the Conferences of Ireland, France, the Canadas,
Eastern British America, the United States, and Australasia,
as well as from Mission stations in all parts of the world, —all
expressing unalterable attaehment to the system,—is to us a
magnificent proof of the universal fitness of the economy of
Methodism.
We need not remind you, dear Brethren, of the perils by
which the pure religion of the Gospel is beset in a new land,
teeming with enterprise. The tendency to throw off the
restraints of the past, and to encourage the wholesale intro-
duction of the novel, together mth the absorbing greed of
gain, imperil the principles of Christian morality. In sueh
circumstances we pray that you may have grace to declare
the whole counsel of God, and to advocate with unyielding
fidelity that purity and strictness of life without which the
influence of religion upon the outer world must ever be feeble
and incomplete. It woidd be far better to cleave to the old-
fasliioned severities of our fathers, than to adopt the lax
notions and habits of the day.
Your zeal in maintaining the sanctity and obligation of the
Christian Sabbath is most refreshing to us. The or|janized
opposition winch is offered to this and other Divine institu-
tions calls upon us to stand by the old landmarks. On the
great questions of Christian doctrine, it wiU not do for the
churches to hold an equivocal position. Our trumpet must
give no uncertain sound; and we trust that you, with our-


selves, will publisli more faithfully than ever the Gospel of
our Lord Jesus Christ, —the one Sacrifiee aud Oblation for
the sins of the world. Ever may the ministry of Wesleyan
Methodism, the wide world over, be distinguished by an earnest
proelamation of the free and full salvation of the Cross !
We learn with satisfaction that you are endeavouring to
promote the circulation of works published under the sanction
of the British Conference. We deem it to be of the highest
importance that the early literature of any country should be
impregnated with the truth of God; and a large introduction
of the religious element will give a sacred tone to the litera-
ture of Australia, the influence of Avhich must be most salutary.
The list of works published by our Book-Boom is rich and
varied. In the department of religious biography it is, per-
haps, unrivalled. Our serials are well adapted to the tastes of
an earnest church, and may be put into the hands of the
young, and of all who are exposed to the perils of subtle and
anti-christian speculation, with most beneficial results. We
trust that you will be able to make such arrangements as will
guarantee a plentiful supply of thoroughly Methodistical
works.
With unfeigned thankfulness to the Giver of all good, we
are able to report very cheering intelligence respecting our
work at Home, and in our Eoreign Missions. We have peace
and prosperity in aU our borders. Many of our churches
have been graciously visited with “ showers of blessings and,
with but few exceptions, all our District-returns show a con-
siderable increase of members. In the midst of great political
excitement, our people have maintained their integrity. The
pressure of augmented taxation has not restrained their
liberality ; our Connexional Emids are in advance of preced-
ing years. In the face of an insidious heterodoxy among
some of our neighbours, and notwithstanding the active an-
tagonism of infidelity in its various forms, we are making
headway ; and in every department of our work we discern a
tone of reviving health and power. Our Educational Institu-
tions yield the most cheering fruits ; and we arc organizing
Home Missionary operations, and endeavouring, with some
success, to respond to the claims of the wmrld around us. We
lay the trophies of our sacred enterprise at the feet of the
Bedeemer, and give all the glory to Him.
The tide of emigration still flows from our land, and bears
with it to your shores many of our members. W e are anxious
lest, in the excitement of their new position, they should
neglect to join the Society in Australia, and shomd thus


endanger tlieir religious life. We therefore commend them to
your pastoral care, trusting that you will make suitable provi-
sion for finding them out, and leading them into fellowship
witli the people of God.
Your valued friend, and ours, the Rev. William B. Boyce,
has been prevented from attending the session of our Confer-
ence ; but we have welcomed with great pleasure your other
Representative, the Rev. James S. Waugh, to whose most
interesting statements respecting your present position and
prosperity we have listened with thankful satisfaction. We
respond heartily to your recommendation, and appoint the
Rev. "Vl' illiam Butters President of your next Conference.
Your prospect, dear Bretliren, grows with promise. A
vast field lies before you, and you have matchless appliances for
its cultivation. Thousands are pouring into your land, year
by year, who have been instructed in the Gospel-truth in the
Sunday-schools of Great Britain. The masses of your popula-
tion inherit the prayers of generations. Your spheres of
labour are therefore, to a great extent, prepared; the fields are
already white unto the harvest. You have not to contend
with the stereotyped prejudices of the past; and you have the
most precious or truths, and the most aggressive of systems,
for giving character to the future. Australia is to hletiiodisni
a promised land, hlay God help you to be faithful to your
charge, to go up and possess it I
“Now the God of j)eacc, that brought again from the dead
our Lord Jesus Christ, that great Shepherd of the sheep,
through the blood of the everlasting covenant, make you per
feet in every good work to do His working in you that
which is well-pleasing in His sight, through Jesus Christ;
to whom be glory for ever and ever. Amen.”
Signed on helialf and hy order of the Conference,
FRANCIS A. WEST, President,
JOHN HANNAH, H.D., Seereiary.
Liverpool, Avgust \Uli, 1857.


ADDEESS
Of the Conference of the Australasian Wesleyan, Methodist
Church to the British Conference.
lIONOUIUiD TaTHEKS AND BkETHBEN, —
We have been refreshed in spirit by yonr kind
reply to our last Address. We thank you for the affectionate
concern you cherish in our behalf; we value your prayers for
our continued increase; we are comforted by your sympathies
in all our exercises; and we are cheered by your approval of
all our measures.
Greatly do we partake in your joy for the signs of returning
prosperity among you. “Lo, the winter is past!” The many
tokens of diAune favour that you enjoy we regard as a pledge
of “yet greater things than these.” Though earnestly intent
on the extension of our great work in “the Southern World,”
our attachment is unabated for the Church of our spiritual
birth, “ which is the mother of us all.” Eervently do we pray
that the God of all grace ” may greatly enrich you with the
blessings of the “everlasting covenant,” and “make you a
thousand times so many more as ye are, and bless you as He
hath promised you!”
We are grateful that our esteemed brother and fellow-
labomer, the Rev. James S. Waugh, was so kindly received by
you in the character of our Representative. We shall welcome
nim on his return to us with open arms. Tor your ready com-
pliance with our wish hi the appointment of the Rev. WiUiam
Rutters, as our President, we beg to tender you our sincere
thanks. We assure you that the confidence reposed in him is
fully justified. His long and honourable course of mhiisterial
labour and official duty in these colonies, combined with his
personal worth and uniform courtesy, has gained for him the
admiration of his brethren, the affection of our people, and the
respect of the entire community. We feel ourselves honoured
by this appointment.
It will, we are sure, be most gratifying to you to be informed
that the sittings of our Coidereuce have been uniformly


marked by the spirit of harmony aird love. Convened from
widely-separated spheres of labour, we enjoy a large measure
of consolation in our mutual intercourse, anti our united devo-
tions. Gracious manifestations of the divine presence have
been vouchsa,fed nnto us: a holy influence has rested on our
religious services : and we have reason to believe that we shall
return to our respective Districts and Circuits under a renewed
baptism of the Holy Spirit.
vYe have been mercifully spared from the visitation of death.
God is mindful of us. He preserveth the lives of His servants,
whose powers arc so greatly taxed, and whose services are so
much needed. _ Our great difficulty is the want of an adequate
supply of Ministers. Still have we to exclaim, “the harvest
truly is plenteous, but the labourers are few.” We have re-
ceived into fuU connexion with us fourteen brethren, who have
passed their probation with usefulness and honour. Thirteen
of these, not being present, will be ordained by the imposition
of hands in their several Districts. This solemn and impres-
sive rite has been observed in the case of four valued brethren—
tluree of whom have been long labouring witli great success in
the Mission field. Two of these are sons of the late Rev. John
Waterhouse. In the spirit of martyrdom they gave themselves
to Feeiee. They were “baptized for the dead.” Broken
health has compelled a reluctant retnrn to these Colonies for a
little season. The clear, decided, and ardent testimony which
was borne by each of our dear brethren, to the converting
grace of God, their call to the jMinistry, and their devotion to
the sacred office, was very deliglitful, and deeply affecting to us
all. Nine candidates have been received upon trial, as well as
two native Assistant Missionaries. We accept this as a
“ token for good;” while we are constrained to ask—“ What
are these among so many ?” ]\lost earnestly do we pray that
men of gifts and graces may be raised up to aid us in main-
taining our position and extending our borders. We could
employ many young men of energy and zeal. From the
rapidly increasing population of the Colonies, and from the
multitude of converts in our Missions, we receive urgent calls,
to which we are unable to respond. In this exigency, we feel
our dependence upon God, and unitedly implore the abundant
effusion of His Holy Spirit upon our Colonial and our Mission
Churches, that He may anomt a succession of faithful men,
—“able Ministers of the New Testament,” —for this great
work.
Your remarks on the importance and necessity of Educational
Institutions are in accordance with our own views and senti-


ments. On the foundation of a Christian faith, we are anxious
to raise the intellectual standard of the people. Horton Col-
lege, in Tasmania, under the very efficient management of our
ex-President (the Rev. J. A. Mauton,) commands an influential
position. At Sydney, preparations are in progress for building
“Wesley College” on a large scale, and in coimexion
University. Arrangements are also made for the immediate
erection of an extensive Grammar School at Melbourne. By
these, and similar establishments, \vc hope facilities will be
afforded for that general and theological training which is so
desirable for candidates for our work. We are fuUy alive
to the necessity of an appropriate education in order to a suc-
cessful Ministry.
Our well-tried system of Church polity and discipline is
admirably adapted to the wants of new countries. It is a
glorious Mission to which we are designated. Could our
brethren in England but look upon our noble enterprise, we
are persuaded that many would come and join us. It is a
great honour to be instrumental in planting Churches in Aus-
tralasia. These, we believe, are destined to become as great,
as powerful, as aggressive, as have been the Wesleyan Churehes
in the mighty Continent of North America. It is our firm
resolve faithfully to adhere—both in doctrine and polity—to
the principles ot Wesleyan Methodism, in all their integrity.
But, in the spirit of our venerable fomider, we would, in minor
details, considerately adapt ourselves to the peculiar circum-
stances of an infant world.
The sphere of our operations fcmbraces a large proportion of
the colonial population. That the Lord is among us is evident,
not only from large and increasing congregations, but, in many
places, by powerful visitations of His grace, and by numerous
accessions to our Churches. Temptations of no common order
beset the path of our people, and increase our difficulties.
Notwitstanding, our Zion is favoured with a net increase of
880 full and accredited Church members in the Colonial Dis-
tricts, and 2334 on the Mission stations, besides 693 on trial
in the former, and 3222 in the latter.
With you, we will steadfastly and fuUy preach the good old
Methodist doctrine. We are “ determined to know nothing
among men, save Jesus Christ and him crucified.” By the
faithful enunciation of that lucid and ample theology which is
embodied in our standards, we labour to “ spread Scriptural
holiness ” over these lands. It is a free, a full, and a present
salvation that we offer to the sons of men.
The Eoreign Missions engage our deep concern. Our


people maulfest a very lively interest in their prosperity.
Witli us, tiiey are anxious that they shall be sustained by an
increased number of zealous men. In every part of our
Mission field an enlargement of the Ministerial staff is impera-
tively required. In the Friendly Islands, —wliicli continue to
contribute largely to our funds, —two stations arc vacant by
the failure of the health of several of our beloved bre-
thren or their families. The very extent of our successes
in Feejee creates embarrasment, while we are unable to send
them “the sincere milk of the word.” And in New Zealand
it is impossible to extend our labours without an additional
number of young men. Instead of twenty, we have only three,
young Ministers to spare for all those flourishing Missions
from this Conferenee. We are filled with grief, we are dis-
tressed, lest the thousands who have been led to sock Christian
instruction in those islands should relapse into heathenism, or
become a prey to popery.
We reciprocate your desire for the widest circulation of
religious books, and especially of Wesleyan literature, in the
Australian Colonies. Insuperable difficulties arc in the way
of the establishment of one General Depot for tliis Con-
nexion, but we have made arrangements to render increasingly
effective our various District Depots. By these and other
means, while aiming at a high intellectual standard, we sliall
be imparting a Christian tone to the general reading of our
people.
We unanimously and most respectfully request you to ap-
point the Bev. Daniel J. Draper as our next President. His
long and eminently successful labours among us render liiin too
well known to require any “ epistles of commendation to you.”
It is enough to say that liis “ praise is in all the churches.”
By appointing him to this office you will do us great service,
and confer on us great pleasure.
We sincerely hope that, during the ensuing year, you will be
enabled to send us some young men of ability and zeal for both
our Colonial and our Mission work. The present enfeebled
condition of our Polynesian Missions awakens our most anxi-
ous solicitude. We pray that Gal may “ send forth labourers”
into those extensive fields which are “ white already to harvest.”
We separate from this Conference united in alfection for each
other, devoted to the interests of our beloved Zion, and pui--
posing, by God’s grace, to “ give ourselves continually to
prayer and to the ministry of the word.” We arc encouraged
to know that we live in your affections, and are remembered in
your intercessions. We are engaged in a great work. It is


otir earnest desire to be faitliful to the trust committed to otfi*
hands. We feel, Reverend Fathers and Brethren, that our
object is one with yours, and entreat you to accept our assur-
ance of fidelity and attachment as your sons and brethren in
the Gospel of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ.
Signed on hehalf and by order of the Conference,
DANIEL J. DRAPER, Secretary,
Hobart Town, February 'bth, 1858.


the annual address OE the CONFERENCE-
To the Members of the Wesleyan Churches in Australasia and
Polynesia.
Deakly beloved Beetheen,
Assembled again in Conference, we are favoured
with another opportunity of addressing you in our pastoral
character. We avail ourselves of this privilege under a deep
sense of our responsibility to the Great Head of the Church,
pd also with feeMngs of sincere pleasure for the duty to which
it calls us, though deeply solemn, is nevertheless agreeable.
The relation whieh exists between you and ourselves is most
important and mutually endearing. Our interests are one and
indivisible, —we are fellow helpers of your faith, je are our joy
and crown, while we regard these spiritual relations
year by year with increasing complacency and delight, we are
cheered by the assurance that you reciprocate these feelings.
Unite with us, brethren, in acknowledging the goodness
which God has manifested in crowning our labours during the
past year with success. In the midst of many circumstances
calculated to neutralise our efforts, we have to report a good
measure of prosperity. Especially we have been permitted to
see many who were living without regard to God deeply con-
vinced of sin, and made partakers of His pardoning love, and
the renewing of the Holy Ghost. While rejoicing with us,
brethren, in these results, give God the glory. The benefits
which they yield, and the encouragement wliich they supply,
to a great extent belong to the Church, but the honour belongs
only to God.
The increase of members in our Colonial Churches is 880,
and 693 on trial, and in the Mission Churches 2334, and 3915
on trial, being a total increase of 3314 accredited Church mem-
bers, and 3915 on trial for membership. The number of at-
tendants on our public services is estimated 146,510.


It IS a very promising feature in the results of the past yfiai',
that a considerable nnniber of those who have received the
grace of God in truth are comparatively young,—many of tlicra
being scholars in our Sabbath Schools. We look uy)on tliis
feature of our prosperity with great expectation It affords a
foundatioil of hope such as no other kind of success can sup-
ply ; for, from the ranks of converted youth, the Church must
draw the elements of her aggressive power.
Eight young men of decided piety, having passed their respec-
tive Quarterly Meetings, have been presented as suitable ean-
didates for oilr Ministry, and received by the Conference as
Preachers on Trial, besides two Native Assistant Missionaries,
Surrounded, as we are, by many pressing calls for Ministerial
labour, this circumstance affords us great encouragement, as
well as continued assurance of His presence, whose exclusive
prerogative it is to send forth labourers into the harvest.
Permit us, brethren, to invite your eo-operation in our fu-
ture labours. The multitudes residing on these shores are ex-
posed to peculiar temptation, arising from the love of gain,
and the absence of many of those social ties and holy restraints
which they enjoyed at home. You will do well to seek after
these wanderers in a strange land as opportunity offers, and
strive to lead them to Christ and into fellowsiiip with His
Church. Moreover, as you regard these lands as destined to
occupy a distinguished place among the nations of the earth,
and to contribute in no small degree to the accomplishment of
God’s gracious purpose in the salvation of the world, realise
the solemn responsibilities of your position, and seek to have
the foundation of our national character laid deep in eternal
truth. Especially conserve with strict fidelity that system of
Methodist doctrine and discipline which has been bequeathed
to us by our fathers, —particularly the great doctrines of justi-
fication by grace, through faitli, —the witness of the Spirit,—
and entire holiness. " Hold fast the form of sound words.”
Healise in your own souls “ the fulness of the blessing of the
gospel of peace.” As it is your privilege to enjoy a real and
constant fellowship with Cod, seek it, daim it, possess it. Be
not content with occasional gracious feelings. Be determined
to enjoy the full extent of your privilege. Without this you
cannot really rejoice in a conviction that the eternal interests
of your souls are safe, nor can you be so useful as otherwise
you would be. Ijct it then be your earnest prayer,—“Lord,
lift thou up the liglit of thy countenance upon us.”
Conscientiously and diligently improve all the means of
grace which are available to you. Cherish an ardent love to


“ the habitation of the Lord’s house,” and to “ the ])lace
wliere His honour dwellethi\l ake His worship our deligJit.
Let no considerations of mere convenience deprive you of the
pleasure and profit of w'aiting on Him. Especially improve
the opportunities of Christian fellowship wliich are secured to
you in your weekly class meetings. Carefully guard against
that device of the enemy, that you can do without regvdar and
consecutive attendance upon this means of grace. M any who
were eminent in piety, and honoured of God at home, have, in
this land, declined in love for this means of Christian fellow-
ship, and “made shipwreck of faith.”
Be constantly on your guard against the fascinations and
pleasures of the world, especially in periods of relaxation from
business. Let none of its amusements which an enlightened
conscience tells you are of a questionable character have your
countenance. Steadfastly resist all worldly overtures. Maintain
a holy distinction as God’s “ peculiar people.” In all things
“let your conversation be as it bccometh the Gospel of Christ.”
Avail yourselves as largely as possible of the religioiis litera-
ture of the day. A rich store of biography, containing the
record of those who have been eminently holy and devoted to
God, is place within your reach; the perusal of such works
will refresh your spirit, and encourage you to emulate their
deeds of piety and zeal. Above all, “ Search the Scriptures.”
Peruse daily a portion of their contents, and make it tlm sub-
ject of devout meditation. Prayerfully seek a spirit of discern-
ment, that you may clearly understand the will of God, and
“ Be ye doers of the word,” in all things regulating yom- con-
duct by its teachings.
We would also urge upon yom’ serious attention the impor-
tance of family religion. Let your domestics share your sym-
pathy and concern. Especially watch over the spiritual in-
terests of your children. Instruct them well in the Avord of
God, and never be satisfied until they are partakers of your
hope and joy. Not only train them with a view to their per-
sonal salvation, but also with a view to their usefuhiess. Set
before them, as the only object worth living for, the glory of
God. So shall your “ sons be as plants grown up in their
youth; and your daughters be as corner stones, polished after
the similitude of a palace.”
We hear, with deep concern, of the increasing prevalence of
Sabbath desecration. Attempts arc being made to prostitute
that blessed day to purposes of mere pleasure. We call upon
you to Avatch with jealous care these insidious movements, and
to use all your influence to counteract them. Especially let


your own example accord with the sacredness ofjthat day.
Avoid all worldly engagements and conversation. Abstain
from everything of a merely recreative kind. Suffer nothing
to allure you into a violation of its sanctity. Let it be to you
“ a delight, holy of the Lord, honourable.”
To the young men of our Churches wm would affectionately
address ourselves. Some of you enjoy the advantages of a
superior education, and possess talents for usefulness in the
cause of God Can we enlist your sympathies on its behalf ?
Can we induce you to devote your abilities, your acquirements,
and your lives to God’s service ? There are pressing calls on
every hand for increased Ministerial labour, to which it is im-
possible for us to respond, because “the labourers are few.”
Sinners are perishing by thousands for want of knowledge.
Will you consecrate yourselves to the divine purpose of seek-
ing to save them? May the mind which was in Christ dwell
in you, and move you to this holy work ! May you see and
feel, with reference to tlicse things, as did Paul when he said,
“Tor the love of Christ constraineth us, because we thus
that if one died for all, then were all dead; and that he
died for all, that they which live should not henceforth live
unto themselves, but unto him which died for them, and rose
again ”
And now, dear brethren, in closing this address, permit us
to ask a continued interest in your prayers. After a Confer-
ence marked by perfect harmony and brotherly love, we are
about to separate, and to repair to our respective spheres of
labour. We feel, in view of this, our utter insufficiency for
the work in w'hich we are engaged, and we tremble under a
sense of our solemn responsibility,—pray for us, —that we may
be sustained and succeeded in our labours, and “that the
word of the Lord may have free course and be glorified.”
“Now the God of peace, that brought again from the dead
our Lord Jesus, that great Sliepherd of the Sheep, tlirough
the blood of the everlasting covenant, make you perfect in
every good work to do His will, working in you that which is
well-pleasing in his sight, through Jesus Christ; to whom be
glory for ever and ever. Amen.”
Signed on behalf and ly order of the Conference,
WILLIAhI BUTTERS, President.
DANIEL J. DRAPER, Secretary.
Hobart Town, sth February, 1858.




Melbourne West
Melbourne East .
Melbourne South .
Brightou ....
WillianistoTO » .
Pentridge ....
Geelong ....
Tuckfield ....
Warrnambool . .
Belfast
Portland ....
Kyneton ....
Castlemaine . . .
Avoca
Sandhurst ....
Ballaarat ....
Beechworth . . .
Total . . .
ClllCUlTS.
1 Number of tUiapels
05
CO
ODCOCOCOMCOOOtfi'-McnlOrf^en
other Preaching
Places.
15
• • ; H-*j kot—*; ; wiozo
Schools used as
Chapels.
20
►“*00)—tlOiOl—‘Z0f-‘H-«t—‘l0>~*t-‘l01-il0l0
Ministers and Preach-
ers on Trial.
O
H
W
W
>■
t-4
lo
w: :::: :
Catechists.
Subordinate
Paid Agents.
lO
iCCJTtOlOW* • JOCO* h-*rfi.C04-.
Day School
Teiichers.
895
I“* h-' 1—1 j—4
I-* 00 C5 lo »“* 1-4 j-i to Co H-* f-4 ?o cv
C0-N2C0-N{l-‘OOMI-‘C5OiOOCi»C500O
Sunday
School
T eachers.
Unpaid
Agents.
, EETURNS: VICTORIA DISTRICT— 1857.
259
CrtlOWCO . . to h-i 1-4 cow
ox O O CO 00 C5 IC • • rf-lo o--z OO CD
Local
Preachers.
CO
h-*
to
tf*-
282
542
105
150
28
160
452
20
29
40
05
45
335
167
248
439
87
Full and accredited
Church Members.
w
tOD5?CCO.... to . .t-i*-*
lOOxOxWCD* • * • C5* OOCO
On Trial for Member
ship.
0X89 1 86
w ww w w
Wo000OO>-‘l-‘l-‘l0Wrfi^05W-<ZC0C0C5
Number of Sabbath
Schools.
OD O CO 00 CD to to W 1—1 -s?
CD C-. to CD CD CO 05 CD C5 00 W OC' iO O
■“vZt*;».O05C0OO0<“^OC«OCJX-'-ZOOO
Sabbath Scholars
of both Sexes.
o
WWW* w<yx* C5lO-*>ZCJt
Number of Day
Schools.
crt
Goto COI—*CnC5
wc5C0CTtcD: c;ic<o«o
rf^OOOWto C5 O -Z CD O C5 O W CO
Number of
Day Scholars of
both Sexes.
CO
00
c;x>f5*wc;t ~zi—4 towoscrx
CTC;tO*^lOO«»:CnOC5if*Ox'ZOC500
Male.
Total Number of
Scholars, deducting for
those who attend both
Sabbath and Day Schools.
CjTtf54.wc;x cr»w tow-z>(i*-
OtDC-xtOlf»-OOOOjf4.-iDOGOCOt*-.WO
Female.
8689
1—'WGOCOO W W loco lii. to W O
lOO-‘Z>UCDOOO*'ZWC5-‘ZO-ZWWC5»-*
<0xC0CHCDC5OC5C7xOOC5Cxc.tC0OI—‘O
Total.
lo
o
lo
00
CO
CO to W to CO w JSO
OC.’cOOoOOOOOoOOtf^OOO
Total Number of
Attendants, includ-
ing Members and
Scholars.


to
oo
rH
I
H
O
I—l
CZ3
t—l
Cl
HH
H
CO
p
w
H
p
o
CQ
CO
!Z
Ph
P
H
M
P
pd
P
p
o
•Sai?[Ol{OS pUB
s.T9qui3iu
diqsjoAV ouqTt<l uo
JO aoqumvj
_oooooooo S
lO
«CO M o, W
H o :
“* ,0 O qj
occ OD
_ 0Q« 2 i-H
S
3Sr> -35 Oo4i-4CO»HCOOO« f^y
■■‘O'S o»^3)iHi-»rHi—ICO
n 3 ? 3 Oi
■satj[Oi[os tootiDS goo ...... S
JO ,ioqwm>i oco ■co • • • • o
' cortrH :-J. : : ; :
XncT JO jaqmn vi |
•BJratoqDS Xtipuns gFESgWsWI T~§
JO .xaqTOtijj oOc««i»coaiOr-i I o
'SJOOqOg 'r^^O^■<^^COCD-^^'o^—4CO I I-H
ABprms JO J9qnm>i | “
CllT{S.TBq o
■tTr9TO joj I'Bi.TX np o<n o .-< o
•sjoqraaH qomqo I sggS3S®og S
pajTpajooypun lpi.>T I «
■s-Jsp’sa"! S
TO«r-Ir-li-lr-l « T-l
•sjoqotiojj
•d <»
CO
02rHrHrHC<t r-trH O
n
• 5.X91X989J,
XOOTjog ‘XupTing
O X
"S "s
C 3 X
■“2
3 2
“PM
•S,TDipt!BXl
xooqog
CO *H t H
‘sjsiqoaj'BO
OlCOrHi-tCviT-Hr-lt??*-)
•s.isjßniijM;
•S9OD[X Suiqoßa.ix JaqJO I | o
JO J9quin>j | |
<53 •••••• •
'So ■
• C S 0!
shl «
o'«S,'s OS-^«
H
rH
D
U
s
KJ


Perth
York
Total
CIRCUITS.
Ox
to 00
Number of Chapels.
1
00 I 03 Ox
Other I’reaching
Places.
to
t-j HJ
Missionaries.
:
i :
Catechists.
Paid
Agents.
. . 1 Day School
• • 1 Teachers.
to I
Sab. School
to 1 Ox <I
Teachers.
4^
1 Preachers.
Unpaid
Agents.
Ox
Ox
Class
oo
to
•<)
to o
Full Members.
00
00
On Trial.
00
to l-k
Number of Sabbath
Schools.
to
00
o
J-*
Ox 00
o o
Number of Scholars
of both Sexes.
i i
Day Schools.
h-1
to
o
to CO
Ox Ox
Males.
Total N
Childrei
o
to 00
Ox Ox
Females
" B
f-i
O
to
oo
o
Ox 00
O O
Tota
•
o
o
500
200
Total Number of
Attendants on
Public Worship, in-
cluding Children.
s>-
iO
GO
rH
(
H
O
HI
CO
I—l
P
t—l
*<
H
CO
P
§
P
H
CO
P
CO
p
p
H
U
p
p
p
p


GENERAL RETURNS : TASMi
iNIA
DISl
'RICT— 1857.
CIRCUITS.
Chapels.
1 Other Preaching
1 Places.
Ministers and
Preachers on Trial.
Subordi-
nate Paid
Agents.
Sul
Unpa
)ordin
id Ag
ate
ents.
Full and accre-
dited Church
Members.
On Trial for
Membership.
Number of
Sabbath Schools.
Sabbath Scholars
of both Sexes.
Number of
Day Schools.
Number of
j Day Scholars.
Total Number of Scholars,
deducting for those who
attend both Sabbath and
Day Schools.
Total Number of
Attendants on
Public Worship.
Catechists
Day Schl.
Teachers.
S. School
Teachers.
Local
Preachers.
Class
Leaders.
Males.
Females
Total.
Hobart Town
7
7
2
2
57
12
26
348
19
7
675
2
60
347
328
675
1700
New Norfolk
3
5
1
1
10
1
5
54
3
3
136
1
30
80
86
166
500
Campbell Town ...
4
2
G
4
48
3
2
60
35
25
60
350
Launceston
5
3
1
35
ii
14
176
9
2
344
159
185
344
1100
Longford
6
1
1
15
10
9
85
2
3
120
64
56
120
500
Vv estbury
2
2
1
12
2
4
66
3
3
156
87
69
156
350
Deloraine
2
4
I
12
2
3
32
1
1
92
50
42
92
300
River Mersey
3
12
3
4
24
2
60
30
20
50
250
Total
29
25
9
3
159
41
G9
833
40
23
1633
3
90
852
811
1663
5050


o
CO
r—i
!
H
O
I—l
P=i
H
02
l-H
Q
P
r<
P
P
O
P
-<!
r/3
P
EH
P
P
P
P
P
p
p


P
O
I—l
P
P
CO
I—i
p
o
H
O
I—l
i-H
i-q
W
m
P
H
P
P
P
P
p
o


SlB[OllOg
puß saequioH o§o o § S
-pnpui g ° S g
JO ißjox
b "'
a
ci :
I
O « o
iiSHCc-g ts ::::::
"S rt iyj S
f- iS.S'^a
s sil * ::::•:
7 I'Ss I
fn T 3
H ~
O -SIBICUOa j(b<7 -gg
JO S 2 S
-spoqos Xb(i
Q JO m «s .rn t-.
Q -saxag qjoq jo §§§:::
sißioqog qjßqqßg >noo«^
<
-sjooqag qjßqqßg • • •
JO laquinjq co <n « : : :
■diqsiaqraaiM gw : : : :
Q JOJ IBUX «0
•sjsquiajv
W qajtiqO pajip
“8J00B nnj[
m si
gg, -siaqaßax oo««u,<»
Qj Sif coTt<coeo
P JOOUOg -g
f.,'l rl » f-<
Mg- -mag Xbct
t 3 I
>-3 1 sjsiqoajßg .: : : :
-<i !
(4 -SaUBHOISSIM ir-r
H jnßjgtssy aAtjßfq
- : :
;i5
'saaßix
SiiTqoßaix Jamo ::::;:
~ o cq om 01
•sjaaßqa co <n co -<t<
CQ : i : i j :
H : : : :3 :
M:: : : :
w : : = : I -j
Pi "S °
)-( « ni ;3 c 9 O
O ec,s rf 2 =« <3
C g > s 0l ;i
O "3 is •- ■-


Lakemba
Vewa
Bau
Rewa
Bua
Nandy
Ovalau
Total
Rotumah
CENTRAL
STATIONS.
00
I— » o» OO
Chapels.
00
hO
Cn
t— 09 ?0 to •
4i- ic w 09 CO o«:
Other Preaching
Places.
GENERAL RETURNS: EEEJEE DISTRICT— 1S5L
-vj
; H- k- to *— H- »-•
Missionaries.
bO
Eng. School
blasters.
Subordinate Paid Agents.
-
o
H-: : w 09 ;
Native Asst.
Missionaries.
oa
to to t-*
4U Co CO CO CO O
Catechists &
As. Catechists
-
00
; ; ; co j •
• • > Co Cn . .
Scripture.
Readers.
o
00
*-• 04
; tn to • •
• O to to : . CO
Day School
Teachers.
CJ
s
M.
Teachers.
>
-
4^
09
: I-* 09 C4
. CO 04 C4 00 CO CJt
Local
Preachers.
~ rt>
S
iC
o
5842
3296
117
1373
629
262
189
76
Full and accredited
Church Members,
cc
2677
1252
14
722
523
48
118
On Trial for Mem-
bership.
tc
Number of Sunday
Schools.
20185
Total Number of
Scholars of both
Sexes.
09
09
cc
09
144
121
69
14
35
Day Schools.
S
20185
CO CO 4^
O CD CO »—t c?«
O O O CJt 00 CO CJX
O O CO © O O
Day Scholars.
1200 1
4^
hO
CO
to ‘-*
00 Co to O H- Go
00 to O O o OO CO
o 4*. *VJ o I—* Co O
O © 09 O Cn ©
Attendants on
Public Worship.


GE
NERAL SUMMARY OE DISTRICT RETURNS EOR 1857.
DISTRICTS.
I Chapels.
other Preaching
Places.
Ministers, Super
numeraries, and
Assist. Ministers.,
bubordu-
nate Pad
Agents.
Subordinate
Unpaid Agents.
Full and accre-
dited Church
Members.
On Trial for
Membership.
Number of
Sabbath Schools.
Sabbath Scholars
of both Sexes.
Number of Day
Schools.
Number of Day |
Scholars.
Total No. of Children, de-
ducting for those who
Total Number ofj
Attendants on 1
Public Worship. I
Catechists
Day Schl.
Teachers.
S. School
Teachers.
Local
1 Preachers
Class
Leaders.
attend
D
Males.
30th Sab
iy Schoc
Females
bath and
Is.
Total.
New South Wales
Victoria
South Australia ...
Western Australia
Tasmania
Auckland
Wellington
Friendly Islands...
Feejee Islands......
94
96
56
5
29
55
29
141
172
128
84
50
8
25
89
36
263
34
26
14
2
9
16
7
14
18
2
1
214
25
127
9
10
3
654
897
739
895
713
22
159
191
86
151
125
259
123
4
41
159
71
644
154
195
153
5
69
119
57
3014
3194
2203
82
833
1737
735
6615
6049
163
324
163
3
40
149
6
377
2690
92
98
61
3
23
77
37
84
6090
6819
4606
163
2769
1186
2060
7164
17
65
9
"3
9
4
161
396
1188
4557
571
90
219
80
7164
20906
3279
4398
2132
120
852
1426
611
3500
10402
3257
4298
2418
110
811
1067
575
3664
10504
6536
8689
4650
230
1663
2535
1186
7164
20906
18407
26289
14429
700
5050
5779
3507
15868
55481
Total
677
683
140
217
1928
2956
1680
598
24462
3915
475
32327
664
34775
26120
26710
53559
146510


APPENDIX I.
MISSIONAEY COMMITTEE.
Meeting of the General Missionary Committee, held during the
sittings of the Conference, in Melville-street Chapel,
Hobart Town, January 'iMh, 1858.
Present:—TheEev. W.Bxjttehs, President of the Conference,
in the Chair. Also,
Stephen Eabone 7 -i? at o nr i
John Eggleston j
„ Danl. J. Draper
„ James Bickford f Erom Victoria.
„ WiUiam Hill J
„ John Harcourt, Erom South Australia.
„ John A. Maiiton J
5, John Smithies (
„ Eraiicis Tuckfield It, m
„ Thos. B. Harris Tasmama.
„ John Cope |
„ Josh. Eillingham J
„ James BuUer, Erom Wellington.
Walter J. Davis, Erom Eriendly Islands.
Joseph Waterhouse }-r, -n, ■
Samuel Waterhouse I Eeejee.
Messrs. James Webb and Alexander Eraser, of Melbourne;
Ebenezer Shoobridge, and William Barnett, of New Norfolk;
John Crookes, of Launceston; and William Hebblewhite, of
Hobart Town.
I-—Tlie Minutes of the Executive Committee were read and
confirmed.
II — Eesolved,
1. That the thanks of the Committee be presented to the
General Secretary and the Treasurers for their services during
the past year.
2. That the thanks of the Committee be presented to George
Wigram Allen, Esq,, for the very valuable service which he
has rendered to the Society during the past year.
3. That the Honorable George Allen, Esq., AI.L.C., and the
licv. Stephen ILabone, be appointed General Treasurers.
L That the Accounts for 1857, as presented, do pass.


lll—The revenue for the past year was stated to be £9125
16s. 9d , and the expenditure about £12,946 18s. 5d.: the bal-
ance £3821 Is. Bd. to be paid by the Missionary Committee in
London; but, as this account could not be made up with ex-
actness before the Conference, owing to the non-receipt of the
subscription lists, there may be found to be a shght discre-
pancy between these amounts and those which wrU. shortly be
published in the Annual Missionary Report.
IV.—The estimated Revenue for 1858 is as follows :
New South Wales District 3300 0 0
Victoria _ 2500 0 0
South Australia 700 0 0
Tasmania ... ... 700 0 0
Auckland 450 0 0
Wellington 300 0 0
Rriendly Islands 40 0 0
Teejee 42 0 0
Net proceeds of Oil 1500 0 0
£9532 0 0
V.—Tlie following estimated Expenditure is authorized for
the year 1858 :
Auckland District... ... ... ... 2500 0 0
Wellington do. ... ... 1500 0 0
Eriendly Islands ... ... ... ... 1788 12 0
Eeejee do 3519 16 6
3519 16 6
Brig “ John Wesley” ... ... ... 1400 0 0
General Expenses... ... ... ... 990 0 0
Special grant for Education and addi-) pr,,. n n
tional Missionaries ... / 600 0 0
Rotumah, translation and printing ... 150 0 0
Expenses to Conference ... 40 0 0
Chinese Mission ... ... ... 150 0 0
Bank Exchange and Interest ... ... 400 0 0
£13038 8 6
leaving a deficiency of £3506 Bs. 6d., to be drawn from the
Committee in England.
Vl. —Resolved,
1. That the consideration of the Laws and Regulations of
the W esleyan Missionary Society be deferred to next year.
2. That the arrears due to the Annuitant Society on behalf of
the Missionaries be added to the estimates for the present year.
Wm. Butteks, President of the Chairman,


APPENDIX 11.
Receipts and Expenditure of Educational Fund,
for the Year ending Yecemher 1857.
Bt£a'pW.
£ s. d. £ s. d,
North 22 0 0
„ South 13 0 0
» East 13 10 0
Newtown ... ... 13 0 0
East 13 10 0
Newtown ... ... 13 0 0
Parramatta 10 16 0
g Windsor 15 13 3
Bathurst 17 0 0
JJcltillLiol/ ~, ••• X/ U
Maitland ... .. 10 211
.{ Bowenfells
Mud wee
Camden 2 0 0
m Wollongong ... ... 7 0 0
Goulbum 8 0 0
Newcastle 3 0 0
Singleton 13 5
... ... X O O
Moruya
Moreton Bay
; 136 5 7
"Melbourne, West
bourne. West 35 19 2
„ East ... 28 2 9
„ South 11 0 0
Brighton 11 4 8
-g Williamstown 5 3 9
g Pentridge .5 0 0
S 1 Geelong 25 6 7
.g I Tuekfield ... ... 111 0
_o Warmambool ... ... 214 1
-S Castlcmaine 19 13 3
Avoca 5 0 0
Sandhurst ... ... 13 3 1
Ballaarat ... ... 10 1 5
._Beechworth 12 10 0
12 10 0
lB6 9 9
Adelaide, South 28 12 3
„ North 20 12 10
g , Gawler ' 5 13 0
■g « Kapunda 111 4
'E •< 2 5 0
Willunga 2 12 4
g 'Clarendon 7 8 9
Mount Barker 7 19 3
0 14 0
77 2 9
, „ North 20 12 10
g , Gawler ' 5 13 0
■g « Kapunda 111 4
H J TTnmnrirp'i OKA
Carried over ... £399 18 I


£ s. 4.
Brought over ... £399 18 1
£ s. d.
!obart Town 13 10 4
. Now Norfolk 419 10
'g .o Campbell Town 716 0
S - Launceston 13 14 7
Longford ... ... 4 9 1
West bury ... ... 914 0
13 14 7
4 9 1
9 14 0
Mersey 0 10 0
54 3 10
New South Wales ... 16 5 6
'8 (Victoria 14 8 6
..S I‘3 r South Australia 9 19 6
J Tasmania 6 16 6
14 8 6
9 19 6
6 16 C
47 5 0
Total £5Ol 6 11
EDUCATIONAL ALLOWANCES.
New South Wales District—
9 Girls, @ £l2 125.... 118 8 0
4 Boys, @ £l6 165.,.. 67 4 0
180 12 0
Victoria District—
1 Girl, @ £l2 12s. ... 12 12 0
1 Boy, @ £l6 16s. ... 16 16 0
29 8 0
South Australia District—
2 Girls, @ £l2 125.... 25 4 0
4 Boys, @ £l6 165.... 67 4 0
92 8 0
Tasmania District—
4 Girls, @ £l2 125.... 50 8 0
4 Boys, @ £l6 165.... 67 4 0
ll7 12 0
Balance to credit of Bund 81 6 11
Total £5Ol 6 11
Vv'iLLiAW Butters, ) „
JOUX COLTOK, ' J


AN ALPHABETICAL LIST
OF THE
WESLEYAN METHODIST MINISTERS
PREACHERS ON TRIAL
AUSTRALASIA
IN CONNEXION WITH THE
AUSTRALASIAN
CONFERENCE.
The figures at the beginning of the lines show the year in which each lUi-
nister commenced his ministry; and those at the end of the lines denote
his first, second, &c., annual appointment to his present Circuit.
1845 Adams, Thomas, Va-
vau ... 2
~\ QKQ A -Tncorvli
1853 Aibistoii, Joseph,
Avoca ... 2
1839 Aldred, John, Can-
terbury ... 6
1853 Amos, Richard, Ton-
gatahu . . . 1
1854 Aiigwin, Thomas, Ist,
Bathurst . . . 1
1858 Angtyiu, Thomas, 2nd,
Mersey . . . 1
1858 Atkin, John, Brigh-
to7l . . . 1
1858 Bah’d, Charles J.,
Adelaide, South . 1
1857 Beaizley, Theophilus,
Windsor ... 2
1854 Bennett, Nathaniel,
Gawler . . . 1
1857 Bennett, William M.,
Yanhalilla . . . 1
1838 Bickford, James,
Ballaarat ... 2
1844 Binks, William L.,
Melbourne, West . 3
1858 Blamires, William
L., . 1
Bowes, John, Asst.
Missionary, Turon 1
1854 Brown, Wm. Kapnnda 2
1835 Buddie, Thomas, il/fi-
nukau ... 4
1837 Buller, James, Wel-
lington ... 4
1833 Butters, William,
(President of the Conference)
Adelaide, North . 4
1839 Buttle, George,
[returning to England]
1858 Caldwell, Richard,
. Moruya ... 1
1838 Calvert, James, . . 3
[on a visit to Idngland for the purpose
of superintending the printing of
the Scriptures in the Eeejeean lan-
guage.]
1857 Catterall, John, Kyne-
ton ... 2
1845 Cliapman, Benjamm,
Maitland ... 2
1856 Chester, Henry, Cas-
tlemaine ... 1
1854 Clarke, William,
Parramatta ... 1
1855 Colwell, Charles,
Kooringa ... 1
1851 Cope, John, Tlohart
Tmcn ... 1
1855 Crawford, John,
Nandy ... 2
1837 Creed, Charles, Yass 2
1854 Crisp, James W.,
Ballaarat ... 2


1856 Curnow, William,
Bowenfells . . . 1
1848 Currey, William C.,
Belfast ... 2
1846 Hamel, G., Geelong 2
1852 Hare, Joseph, Sand-
hurst ... 2
1848 Havis, Walter J.,
Windsor . . . 1
1857 Howson, James W.,
Goulburn . . . 1
1834 Hraper, Haniel J.,
(Secretary to tlie Conference.)
Melbourne South , 1
1857 Hubourg, Charles,
Sandhurst ... 1
1856 Hyson, Martin,/Sizmot!! 1
1834 Eggleston, John,
(Missionary Secretary.)
Sydney . . . . 1
1857 Eidler, Wm., Brisbane 2
1851 Eillingham, Joseph,
Wedbury ... 3
1847 Eletcher, Joseph H.,
New Plymouth . . 1
1856 Eletcher, William,
A. 8., Lahemha . . 2
1850 Elockhart, Eobert C.,
Kooringa . . . 1
1852 Eordham, JohnS.,E(!i!2< 1
1835 Gaud, Henry H., Ba-
thurst . . . 1
1856 Gittos, Wm.,l
1845 Harcourt, John,
Adelaide, South . 2
1827 Hardy, Samuel, PerM 4
1836 Harding, Isaac,
Auckland . . 1
1840 Harris, Thomas 8.,
Launceston ... 1
1847 Hart, Richard, Pen-
tridge ... 1
1845 Hessel, William,
Sydney, North . . 2
1849 Hill, WiUiam, Ist,
Geelong ... 2
1854 Hill, William, 2nd,
Port Adelaide . 1
1824 Hobbs, John, Super-
numerai-y, Auckland.
1856 Hopkins, William,
Melbourne, South . 1
1839 Ingram, Wdliam,
Adelaide, South . 2
1845 Junes, Jonathan,
Wellington ... 3
1837 Ironside, Samuel,
Sydney, Bast . . 1
1854 Kelynack, William,
Braidwood ... 2
1846 King, Edward,
Brighton . . . 1
1846 Kirk, William, Wai-
mate ... 4
1857 Knight, Samuel,
Wilhamstown . . 1
1857 Lane, Charles, Bal-
laarat ... 2
1858 Langham, Erederick,
Vewa ... 1
1845 Lawry, Henry H.,
Hokianga ... 3
1817 Lawry, Walter, Su-
pernumerary, Par-
ramatta.
1857 Lee, George, Tonga-
tabu ... 2
1855 Lelean, WUliam H.,
Hobart Town . . 1
1844 Lightbody, WiUiam,
Supernumerary,
Portland.
1856 Lloyd, Thos., Adelaide 1
1846 Lowe, William, York 4
1836 Lyth, Richard 8.,
[returning to England]
1854 Mack, Hans, Wol-
longong ... 2
1846 Malvern, John,
[returning to the Colonies]
1830 Manton, John A.,
Horton College, Boss 4
50


1857 Mayne, William T.,
Maitland . . 1
1856 Mewton, John, Kil-
more . , 1
1848 Millard, John G.,
Sydney, North . . 3
1849 Moore, Wm., Rewa 5
1847 Oram, Joseph, Syd-
ney, South . . 1
1857 Orton, Richard W.,
Deloraine . . 2
1849 Pemell, John, Man-
ning River . . 1
Pickering, George,
Assistant M issionary,
Singleton . . 1
1852 Piddington, W. J, K.,
Mudgee . . 1
1850 Polglase, John, La-
kemba . . 5
1841 Quiek, W. A., New-
town . . 2
1833 Rabone, Stephen,
Parramatta . . 2 i
1841 Raston, Thomas,
Castlemaine . . 2
1848 Reid, Alexander,
Waipa . .1
1854 Richards, George 8., |
Portland . . 1 i
1851 Rigg, Charles W.,
Camden . . 3
1854 Royce, James S. H., |
Rewa . . 3 I
1827 Schofield, William,
Supernumerary, !
Sydney, East. |
1853 Schnaekenberg, Cort, |
H., Kawhia . . 1
1828 Smithies, John, I
Longford . . 1
1854 Smith, Jolm 8., |
Campbell Town ..Is
1849 Somerville, James,
Wollongong
1844 Stannard, George,
Otago . . 2
1858 Stephinson, William
G. R., Haahai . . 1
1849 Symons, John C.,
Beechworth . . 3
1852 Taylor, Theophilus,
Supernumerary,
Ballaarat.
1824 Thomas, John,
[returning to the Colonies]
I 1836 Tuckfield, Francis,
I New Norfolk . . 1
1854 Turner, Josiah Geo.,
Sydney, East . . 1
1821 Turner, Nathaniel,
Supernumerary,
Brisbane,
1829 Turner, Peter,
i Supernumerary,
Windsor.
1839 Tui-ton, Henry H.,
Manukau . . 1
1858 Ussher, Peter R. C.,
Mount Barker . . 1
1854 Vanderkiste, Robert
W., Bungog . . 1
1852 Yercoe, John, Haahai 1
1833 WaUis, James, Wain-
gar oa . . 21
1836 Warren, John, Nelson 4
1845 Waterhouse, Jabez
8., Jf illunga . . 2
1849 Waterhouse, Joseph,
Hobart Town, . . 1
[under the direction of the
Missionary Committee]
1850 Samuel,
Warrnambool . . 1
1830 Watkin, James,
Wollongong . , 1
1857 Watkin, William,
rvulQfWi O
1843 Watsford, John,'
Goulburn
51


ISIO Wau;;'h, James S., ; 1839 Williams, Thomas,
McMmirne, East . 1 j Melbourne, East . 2
1850 Wells, William P., j 1835 Wilson, Matthew
Melbourne, West . 2 I Clarendon . . 1
1851 Wliewell, Jolm, j 1852 Wilson, William, 2
Tongatabu . . 1 i 1858 William,
1832 Whitelcy, John, i CarisbrooJc . . 1
New iHymouth . . 3 I 1857 Woolnough, George,
1836 Wilkinson, Samuel, | Newcastle _ . . 2
Brisbane . . 1 | 1830 Woon, William, Su-
-1852 Williams, Spencer, I pernumerary, Waimate
Mount Earlier . . 1 i 1857 Worth, Samuel W.,
i Melbourne, West . 1
ALPHABETICAL LIST
OP THE
NATIVE ASSISTANT MINISTEIIS
NxATIVE PREACHERS ON TRIAL.
1858 Ahogalu, Barnabas, •. 1857 l\Tusulca, Cornelius,
Tonga . . 1 I Bau . . 2
1858 Baogo, Mark, Tonga 1 i 1856 Ngaropi, Samuel,
1851 Bulu, Joel, Nandg . 1 i Waipa . . 2
1857 Buindoli, Benjamin, i 1857 Orton, Joseph
Vewa . . 1 i Manakau . . 2
1857 Eggleston, Jolin, I 1857 Rawaindranu, Isaac,
Mokau . . 1 I Bau . . 2
1852 Eaubulu, John, Ton- j 1855 Takelo, Eleizer, Ro-
gatabu . . 2 | tumah . . 4
1854 Kata, David, JTaaia/ 5 I 1855 Thataki, Nathan,
1851 Ketetha, Joel, La- 1 Lakemba . . 3
kemba . . 4 I 1856 Tui Langi, Solomon,
1856 Langi, Elias, Niua i Ovalau . . 3
Foou . . 3 i 1855 Yave, Matthias, La-
-1852 Latu, John, Haahai 2 i kemba , . 3
1851 Mamafainoa, Moses, j 1851 Yea, Paul, Bewa . . 5
Lakemba . . 4 i 1852 Ye, Peter, Vamu. . 2
I’JRATT AND SON, PIUNTEfiS, HOBART TOWN,
52




1>: '
' "
■“ V
J4® »v.
•k^\
’’* » , • i „'. '
/ -‘. <•, •>' *l^:l^
h'*:-W' •‘’ ' , -%,-
-.r i 'V:t.v ;
