

MINUTES OF PROCEEDINGS
CONFERENCE
OF THE
III! |%llo|W
she (United jOlluirrh of dug land and Ireland
THE PROVINCE OF AUSTRALIA
HELD AT SYDNEY
From November 23? d! to December Ist.
A.D. 1368*
iSgtmejr :
JOSEPH COOK & CO., 3„'o, GEORGE STREET,
OPPOSITE THE BANK OF NEW SOUTH WALES.




MINUTES OF PROCEEDINGS
CONFERENCE
OP THE
ill ffelisf®
m* United (pnrdi of (Inland and Jpland
THE PROVINCE OF AUSTRALIA
HELD AT SYDNEY
From November 23 rd to December ls£„
A.D, 1368.
SglmciJ :
JOSEPH COOK & CO., 370, GEORGE STREET,
OPPOSITE THE BANE OP NEW SOUTH WALES.




to a ss/rgi9
s-s-rr
We, the undersigned Metropolitan and Suffragan
Bishops of the United Church of England and Ire-
land, in the Province of Australia, as it is at present
defined in the Letters Patent of the Lord Bishop of
Sydney, having been permitted by the good Provi-
dence of God to come together for the Consecration of
St. Andrew’s Cathedral in the City of Sydney, have
taken advantage of this opportunity, for consulting
upon various matters affecting the welfare of the
Church in such Province; and we desire to commend
the conclusions, at which we have arrived, to the con-
sideration of the Church in its several Dioceses.
F. SYDNEY, Metropolitan
AUGUSTUS ADELAIDE
C. MELBOURNE
W. NEWCASTLE
E. W. BRISBANE
M. GOULBURN
C. H. TASMANIA.




THE PRESENT RELATION OF THE CHURCH OF
ENGLAND IN THE PROVINCE OF AUSTRALIA
TO THE CHURCH AT HOME, AND THE BEST
MODE OF MAINTAINING SUCH RELATION.
We desire to express our opinion, that the present
relation of the Church of England in the said
Province to the Church at home is one of
identity of doctrine and worship and of subiection
to the Law of the United Church of England
and Ireland, so far as it is applicable to a Church
not established by law ; and that this relation may
practically be best maintained by a system of Dio-
cesan and Provincial Synods, and by a common
final Court of Appeal, and by a Council of Reference.


THE MODE IN WHICH COLONIAL BISHOPS
SHOULD BE APPOINTED.
In our opinion it is desirable that (saving the rights
of the Crown) Colonial Bisho'ps in the said Province
should be appointed in the following manner; —that
the election of a Bishop, having been made by the
Church of the Diocese (whatever mode of election the
Diocesan Synod may have adopted)shouldbe confirmed
by the Bishops of the Province ; and that the person,
so elected and confirmed, should be consecrated by
the Archbishop of Canterbury, or by the Metropolitan.
We are also of opinion that, so long as it is practicable,
Letters Patent, assigning to the Bishop a territorial
sphere of action, should continue to be issued.
We are further of opinion that, in the election of a
Bishop, the Diocesan Synod might, if it thought pro-
per, delegate the power of choosing a clergyman to
fill the vacant See, to any Bishop or Bishops, or to
such a body as the Standing Committee of the Synod,
or a permanent Committee specially appointed for
that purpose, or the Cathedral Chapter; or it might no-
minate two or more clergymen, of whom the Bishops
of the Province should select one.


THE CONSTITUTION OF A GENERAL SYNOD, AND
ITS FUNCTIONS.
In our opinion it is desirable that there should
be constituted a general Synod for the entire
Province of Australia; and that such Synod
should consist of the Bishops and Representatives of
the Clergy and Laity of the Church, in the several
Colonies comprised within that Province.
To carry this object into effect, it is our opinion
that the Metropolitan of the said Province should in-
vite the Church in each Colony to send a represen-
tative or representatives, who should, with the several
Bishops, be empowered to frame a Constitution for
such Synod, and to define its functions. The re-
presentatives, thus sent, might bring with them any
instructions, which the Church in the several Colonies
thought fit to give them, and, subject to those in-
structions, they should be authorised finally to deter-
mine all particulars, connected with the purpose for
which they were assembled.
It is also our opinion that these representatives
should be empowered, so soon as they have concluded
their labours in Conference by framing a Constitution
for the proposed Synod and defining its functions, to
form themselves into such Synod, and proceed to
business.
The object of such General Synod should, in our
opinion, be to maintain the relation of the Church in
the Province of Australia to the United Church of Eng-


land and Ireland, both at home and in the various
Colonies; as well as to secure unity of doctrine and dis-
cipline between the several branches of the Church
in that Province.
To this end although it appears to some of us that
more directly controlling powers in the General Synod
are, judging from ancient usage, essential to the com-
plete organization of the Church, we are unanimously of
opinion, that such Synod should be authorised amongst
other functions :
1. To constitute a Metropolitan Court of Appeal.
2. To frame general rules for the formation of new
Dioceses and Provinces.
3. To make rules for the confirmation and due
consecration of newly elected Bishops.
4. To communicate with the authorities of the
Church at home, and in the various colonies, on all
matters relating to the general well-being of the
Church.
5. To consult upon any matters which may be
brought before the Synod affecting the well-being of
the Church in the Province; and to frame regulations
thereon, such regulations to take effect in the several
Dioceses, from and after the Session of each Diocesan
Synod, to which they have been communicated, pro-
vided that they be not, and so far only as they are not,
disallowed by either the clergy or the Lay Represen-
tatives of the Diocesan Synod in such Session.
6. To take measures for promoting inter-commu-
nion between the Church in the Province and other
Reformed Episcopal Churches.


THE CONSTITUTION AND FUNCTIONS OF A
TRIBUNAL OF THE GENERAL SYNOD, AND OF
A COUNCIL OF REFERENCE.
We are of opinion that, besides any right of appeal
which may at present exist, and with which we do not
desire to interfere, there should be, in all cases in which
any question of faith or worship is involved, aright of
appeal from the decision of any Bishop or of any
Diocesan Tribunal, within the Province of Australia,
to a higher Tribunal, which should be constituted
by the proposed General Synod.
That such Tribunal of Appeal should consist
of the Metropolitan (or some Bishop appointed
by him) and of two other Bishops of the Province,
and two laymen learned in the law ; that the Metro-
politan or (in his absence) the senior Bishop should
preside ; that of the two other Bishops one should
be chosen by the Bishops and the other by the
Clergy, assembled in General Synod ; and that the
two laymen should be elected by the lay represen-
tatives in such Synod, one at least being a Chancel-
lor of some Diocese of the Province ; that whereas
vacancies might arise among the elected members,
or some of them might be unable to attend, there
should in every case be a second Bishop and a second
lay-man named to meet such contingency; and that
the Bishop ot the Diocese, to which the appellant be-
longs, should not sit upon the Tribunal when the
cause is tried.


That, as respects the parties in any cause brought
before the Tribunal of the General Synod, they
should continue to enjoy any right of appeal which
they at present possess, and desire to retain. But
since it is possible that the Tribunals of the various
branches of the Colonial Church may arrive at
different decisions upon questions of doctrine and
discipline, it appears to us, in the uncertainty
whether it would be practicable to carry an appeal
from the Colonial Church to the Judicial Committee
of the Privy Council, to be desirable that, for pre-
serving the unity of the whole Church, there should
be in England a Council of Reference, to which such
questions might from time to time be referred by
the General Synod; that such Council should
consist of a small definite number of Bishops of the
Church at home, and laymen learned in the law, viz.
the Archbishop of Canterbury or some other Arch-
bishop or Bishop appointed by him, the Bishop of
London, and one layman holding some specified office
in connexion with the Church, together with two
other Bishops and two other laymen, to be elected by
the several branches of the Colonial Church in such
manner as may be agreed upon among them ; and
that any decision pronounced by such Council should
be binding upon the General and Diocesan Tribunals,
unless a judgment at variance therewith should be
pronounced by some ecclesiastical court in England.


TRIBUNAL FOR THE TRIAL OF A BISHOP.
With respect to charges against a Bishop, we are of
opinion that the General Synod should constitute a
Tribunal for the trial of such charges, and should
make regulations for the procedure thereof.
OATH OF CANONICAL OBEDIENCE.
We are of opinion that, since the Bishop of Sydney
is the Metropolitan of the Province of Australia as
defined in his Letters Patent, every Bishop of a
Diocese within that Province should, under existing
circumstances take at his consecration the oath of
Canonical obedience to the Lord Bishop of Sydney
as his Metropolitan.
VII.
RESIGNATION OF CURES.
We are of opinion that, for the purpose of protect-
ing the Church from injury, the Bishop of one
Diocese of the Province of Australia should not en-
tertain an application for employment from a clergy-
man of another Diocese, until his Bishop shall have
accepted his resignation, or consented in writing to
his removal.
We are also of opinion that in all cases, when a
clergyman desires to resign his cure, he should give
not less than three months notice to his Bishop.


'TiVFp
& \& L\ o
F" \ O
12
F. SYDNEY, Metropolitan
AUGUSTUS ADELAIDE
C. MELBOURNE
W. NEWCASTLE
E. W. BRISBANE
M. GOULBURN
C. H. TASMANIA
CONCLUDING RESOLUTION.
We desire to acknowledge the goodness of our
Heavenly Father, who, in answer to our prayers and,
as we trust, under the gracious influence of His Holy
Spirit, has guided us to such entire agreement, in the
conclusions at which we have arrived, upon the
various subjects under discussion, and we earnestly
pray that, as the result of the measures which we re-
commend, the peace of God may rest more abundantly
upon the Church, by the promotion of its union and
edification, and by the increased knowledge of our
Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ.
That the Lord Bishop of Goulburn, having under-
taken, at the request of the conference, the office of
Secretary, be now requested to embody in a Report
the resolutions which have been adopted by the
conference, and that a copy of such Report be
forwarded by the Metropolitan to His Grace the Arch-
bishop of Canterbury, and to the other Archbishops
and Bishops of the United Church of England and
Ireland at home and in the Colonies.




