

MINUTES OF PROCEEDINGS
OF THE
INTERCOLONIAL METEOROLOGICAL CONFERENCE
1879.
NEW SOUTH WALES.
HELD AT SYDNEY
ON tub
iith, 13TH, 14TH NOVEMBER, 1879.
SYDNEY: THOMAS RICHARDS, GOVERNMENT PRINTER.
m-




INTERCOLONIAL METEOROLOGICAL CONFERENCE.
TUESDAY, 11 NOVEMBER, 1879.
The Conference met at the Sydney Observatory, at 10 a.m.
Present: —
James Hector, Esq., M.D., C.M.G., E.E.S., Inspector of Meteorological Stations, New Zealand.
C. Todd, Esq., C.M.Gr., F.8.A.5., Government Astronomer, South Australia.
B. L. J. Ellery, Esq., E.E.S., Government Astronomer, Victoria.
H. C. Eussell, Esq., 8.A., E.E.A.S., Government Astronomer, New South Wales.
H. C. EUSSELL, Esq., was called to the Chair.
The Chairman read the following letter: —
Sir, Colonial Secretary’s Office, Sydney, 8 November, 1879.
I am directed by the Colonial Secretary, at the instance of the Minister of Justice and Public
Instruction, to transmit herewith copies of propositions for the consideration of the scientific men
nominated by the several Australian Colonies to consider what means should be adopted to improve the
system of intercolonial weather signals. I have, &c.,
CEITCHETT walkeb.
The Chairman of the meeting of scientific men appointed to
consider what means should be adopted to improve the system of intercolonial weather signals.
Propositions foi' Meteorological Conference.
1. To consider the meteorology of Australia and New Zealand, with a view to united action in
its investigation.
2. To consider whether additional first-class stations shall be established, and if so, in what
localities.
3. To consider the desirability of using the same class of instruments at all stations and making
the observations at the same local hour.
4. To consider the desirability of securing the co-operation of the meteorologists of New
Zealand and Tasmania in the system of weather telegrams, which now embraces the
Colonies of South Australia, Victoria, New South Wales, and Queensland.
5. To consider by what means the weather telegrams may be transmitted and published for
public information at an earlier hour than they are at present.
6. To consider whether meteorological stations should be established upon the highest available
mountains for the special study of winds.
Observatory, 27 October, 1879. H. C. EUSSELL.
He said the object for which the Conference had met was to devise some system by means of which more
united action might be established in respect to meteorological observations, and especially with regard to
weather telegrams. He had experienced great difficulty in obtaining telegrams from the different Colonics
with sufficient punctuality, and he thought that if the matter were discussed in Conference some suggestions
would be made by which the transmission of these telegrams might be greatly facilitated, and earlier
information furnished to the public. Holding this opinion, he had suggested the desirability of having a
Meteorological Conference, and the Government of New South Wales had sent invitations to the Colonies of
South Australia, Victoria, Queensland, Tasmania, and New Zealand. Queensland and Tasmania had not
responded to the invitation, or at least they had not sent representatives. He very much regretted the
absence of the representatives of the Colonies of Queensland and Tasmania, but thought the Conference
should proceed with the business before them.
United investigation of Meteorology.
To consider the meteorology of Australia and New Zealand, with a view to united action in its
investigation.
Mr. Ellery thought it would be well to start by affirming the desirableness of united action, and
he would therefore move formally, before entering upon other questions, the following resolution in
reference to the first proposition :
That in view ot the great importance which a better knowledge of the movement and origin of
strong gales and storms on our coast lines and neighbouring seas is to the shipping and
commercial interest generally, it is desirable to secure, as far as possible, co-operation in all
the Australasian Colonies for the investigation of storms, as well as for agricultural and
general climatological purposes.
It had already been shown that the westerly gales which visit New Zealand and the easterly
gales occurring on the coast of Australia were marked by premonitory signs; and some co-operative
action in the transmission of information could not fail to lead to profitable results.
The resolution, after discussion, was agreed to.
Dr. Hector moved :
That with the view of giving effect to the foregoing resolution, similar observations and the same
form of publication should, as far as possible, be adopted throughout the Colonies.
n mean no °tber form of observations should be published, but
that the Government of each Colony should be asked to sanction the expense of publishing certain
observations taken at the same local hour in the form required bv the Conference, so that they could be
compared with each other. '
The resolution, after discussion, was agreed to.
First-class Stations.
The Chairman read the second proposition :—
To consider whether additional first class stations shall be established; and if so, in what
localities.
He thought the Conference should free themselves from the task of defining what constituted a first
class station, as circumstances might arise to alter their opinion on that point.
Mr.


Mr. Todd : There would in reality be only one first class station in each Colony, which would be
the Observatory.
Mr. Ellery did not think it would be desirable to lay down any fixed rule on this point. The different
Colonies worked under different circumstances; and all that was required was to secure their co-operation
Dr. Hector thought the number and position of the different stations should be left for each
Colony to determine. The Conference should not dictate to the Colonies what expenditure they should
incur; nor did he think they should lay down any expensive or elaborate scheme, which might have the
effect of preventing cordial co-operation.
The Chairman said his object in submitting this proposition was to suggest one or two more
stations in the western district. It would be seen in the map that there was a scarcity of stations in the
interior; and as most of the atmospheric disturbances came from the west, the establishment of additional
stations there would supply valuable information.
Mr. Todd moved: —
That in order effectively to carry out the objects of the Conference as affirmed in the foregoing
resolutions, it is desirable to establish first class meteorological stations in certain well
selected positions in the several Australasian Colonies, including New Zealand, in addition
to those now existing.
The resolution, after further discussion, was agreed to.
On the motion of Dr. Hector, the Conference adopted the definition of the work of a first-class
station given in the preface to the New Zealand Meteorological Report for 1873.
“ The observations taken are limited to those for determining atmospheric pressure ; maximum
and minimum daily temperature of atmosphere, and of insulation and radiation ; the average
daily amount of moisture, the rainfall and number of rainy days ; the force and direction
of wind, and amount and character of cloud.”
3rd proposition : Similar Instruments.
To consider the desirableness of using the same class of instruments at all stations, and making
the observations at the same local hour.
The Chairman said he was aware that in some cases instruments of different kinds were used,
and thus the results were not comparable. He did not think temperature observations could be exact at
all stations—a different way of exposing the thermometers made such a difference in the result. With
regard to the barometer, it would be sufficient to say that it should be a mercurial barometer and not an
aneroid; and with respect to the wet and dry bulb, it should mean an instrument of good class, certified to
by a firm of recognized position; and the same with regard to the maximum and minimum thermometers;
and the rain-gauges should be used at the same altitude from the ground.
Mr. Ellery moved :
That the instruments at each first-class station consist of a mercurial barometer of either the
standard or Board of Trade form ; thermometers of Kew or approved patterns, compared
with standards as frequently as possible ; rain-gauges of 8 inches collecting diameter ; and
wind-gauges of any approved form. The local hours of observation to be 9 a.m., 3 p.m.,
and 9 p.m. Beaufort’s scale of wind to be adopted ; the observations to be recorded in
equivalents in velocity and pressure.
The resolution, after discussion, was agreed to.
Desirability of co-optation.
4th proposition:—
To consider the desirableness of securing the co-operation of the Governments of New
Zealand and Tasmania in the system of weather telegrams, which now embraces the Colonies
of South Australia, Victoria, New South Wales, and Queensland.
Mr. Ellery said, with regard to Tasmania, that for the meteorological knowledge of that Colony
they were indebted to the long and valuable gratuitous services of E. Abbott, Esquire, of Hobart Town.
But in order to provide for carrying out the proposed scheme, which involved a daily expenditure for
telegrams, he would move : That it is very desirable to obtain the co-operation of the Government of
Tasmania and to persuade them to establish a station at the public expense at Hobart Town. He did
not think this would be a difficult matter if the Conference suggested it. At present there was no
machinery to co-operate with, and it was very desirable that one or two first-class stations should be
established. He thought it would be better not to take Launceston for a second station, which was a
long way inland, but rather to take George Town.
The resolution, after discussion, was agreed to.
Dr. Hector moved :
That it is desirable to secure the co-operation of the Governments of Western Australia, New
Zealand, and Tasmania, in the system of weather telegrams, which now embraces the Colonies
of South Australia, Victoria, New South Wales, and Queensland.
With regard to New Zealand, on account of the greater expense of communication, the great range
of latitude, and the consequent complicated phases of weather which occurred simultaneously in the
different coastal areas, it was desirable that instead of any definite observations or readings of instruments
being transmitted, a daily synoptical report of the general conditions of the weather should be prepared
at the Head Office in New Zealand and transmitted, together with immediate telegraphic notice of any
important or exceptional phenomenon ; and that the return communications to New Zealand should be
comprised in a similar synoptical report of the state of the weather in the different coastal areas of
Australia, to be prepared and transmitted from the Observatory in Sydney.
The resolution, after discussion, was agreed to.
Mr. Ellery moved :
That, in the opinion of this Conference, it is desirable that weather telegrams and forecasts shall in
all cases depend upon the observations used for general meteorological and climatological statis-
tics, and be under the direction of the head of the meteorological department in each Colony.
Mr. Todd thought such a resolution was essential to prevent conflicting reports and to ensure
public confidence.
The resolution, after discussion, was agreed to.
The Conference adjourned at 1 p.m., until Thursday, 13th instant, at 10 a.m.
THURSDAY,


THURSDAY, 13 NOVEMBER, 1879.
The Conference met at the Observatory at 10 a.m.
Present :
Dr. Hector, Mr. Russell,
Mr. Ellery, Mr. Todd.
H. C. RUSSELL, Esq., in the Chair.
The minutes of the previous meeting were read and confirmed.
The Conference resumed their consideration of the 4th proposition, affirming the desirableness of
securing the co-operation of the New Zealand and Tasmanian Governments in the system of weather
telegrams.
Mr. Todd moved:—
That this Conference, having been informed that the Eastern Extension Telegraph Company will
charge half rates for the transmission of weather reports through the cable connecting
Australia and Tasmania, and probably also the cable to New Zealand, recommend that the cost
of such reports be defrayed by the participating Colonies in equal proportions ; and that, in the
opinion of this Conference, such cost need not exceed in the aggregate £350 per annum.
2. That, in the opinion of the Conference, this expenditure is justified by the extreme importance
to the shipping interest of early information of the approach of dangerous easterly and
westerly gales.
He said that as these reports transmitted through the cable would be merely synoptical reports of the
state of the weather in Australia on the one hand, and in New Zealand and Tasmania on the other, they
need not be of great length. Messages comprising ten or twelve words would probably, by means of the
code adopted, convey all the information that would be required. A message of ten words would cost—
to or from New Zealand—at the reduced rate, about five shillings. The amount named in the resolution
would therefore, in his opinion, be ample.
The Chairman said that from the experience in reference to gales which he had obtained during
a number of years, it was quite evident that from the observations taken in New Zealand and the
southern Colonies valuable warnings might be given. A short warning of the approach of a gale in
many instances would be the means of saving a large amount of property, as the vessels could take refuge
in the coast harbours. Warnings of dangerous gales might be given several days in advance, and
considerable importance was attached to such information by the shipping interest. For instance, in
the severe gale in which the “Dandenong” was wrecked, it had subsequently appeared that valuable informa-
tion might have been given sufficiently in advance to prevent the great loss of property which took place,
if that information could have been furnished to the shipping interest at the different ports along the coast.
Mr. Todd entirely concurred with the Chairman as to the importance and value of this
information, and especially of the reports from western stations. His observations tended to show a great
regularity in the easterly march of disturbances from the westward, and the stations in South Australia,
and especially in Western Australia, should be able to give the easterly Colonies timely warning of
approaching gales, because they would be able to report the effect of a gale which had already reached
one of these stations. The information would therefore not be hypothetical, but an actual fact of which
timely notice could be given.
Dr. Hector said that from a New Zealand point of view, he thought it would be very
advantageous that Queensland should join in this co-operation, as it would be from that quarter
they receive early notice of the origin and progress of the dangerous and suddenly occurring
eye ones that crossed the northern part of New Zealand. On the other hand, the southerly gales could
not, of course, be directly predicted in Australia for New Zealand, but New Zealand could give early
information to Australia of the occurrence of such gales, and probably Queenslaud would receive the
greatest benefit from such predictions.
r l Blleey at that view of the case, great advantage would be derived from the estab-
nshment of a station at Hobart Town, because if Hobart Town observations were discussed in connection
with this movement on the western coast of Australia and the subsequent weather on the east coast, it
would be round that those observations w'ould often determine whether that easterly movement had
become deflected by any other current. The observations at Hobart Town would indicate a considerable
time beforehand whether the disturbance would become a serious one on the eastern coast of Australia.
or instance it was a fact that the gale in which the “Dandenong” was wrecked was indicated at Hobart
down thirty hours before it reached Sydney.
t i j r ' X*?? 1 * caßed attention of the Conference to the hurricane which struck the Lacipede
Islands and the north-west coast of Australia on the 24th and 25th of December, 1878, as a case in
point The barometer fell to 29 50 and 28 94 ;at Alice Springs, in the centre of the continent, it began
qo-9 a in°^ the on x the mornm B of January 2nd; at Eucla, the barometer fell from
f°9Q ° E D ® ce “ b ® r 29th ? to 29 '00 on January Ist; at Cape Borda, it fell from 30 23 on December 30th,
onff U 3 at L ldn l gh January Ist; at Cape Northumberland, it fell from 30 2on the morning of the
til W°l 9 ’^ at 6 on / anuai 7 2? d > or hours after Cape Borda ; and the barometer
the n i° Wn u af^no^ n ° £ i anuar 7 2nd > or about twenty-four hour* after passing
the 1 0 !™, between the ? reat Bl ght and Hobart Town was probably identical with, or
V ffect ° f ’ hEmcaE ? 011 the north-west coast, in which case it must have had a slow
LT ® niotion over the Australian continent, between the north-west coast and the Australian
from the to Hobart W* “ d oCCUpying twent ?- four “ P^ing
The resolution was then agreed to.
. . Weather Teleqrams.
otii proposition :
T ° 'rntr™ f 7 m f ans th v w , eather telegrams may be transmitted and published for
n pnonc information at an earlier hour than they are at present
was whic \ w “ P. resent his mind in submitting this proposition
other telegrams tele S rams should > ™ Australasia, as in Europe, take precedence of all
g • his arrangement would not add in any appreciable respect to the time occupied
in


in transmission, and tlie delay of five or six minutes caused by sending these messages first could not be
any serious detriment to business. He thought it probable that if the matter were represented
by the Conference to the several G-overnments, the general principle would be adopted, and weather
telegrams would take precedence of all other messages, Government telegrams of course excepted.
Mr. Todd entirely concurred with the Chairman in thinking it highly desirable that weather
telegrams should have the precedence, and he saw no practical difficulty in giving effect to the resolution.
Ho doubt the hour which had been agreed to—9 o’clock—might appear at first sight to clash with the
ordinary routine business at the telegraph offices; but as a matter of fact, with the exception of the
transmission of messages from the different stations to the central office at 9 o’clock, there would be no
reports sent at that hour. It would probably be 11 o’clock before all these messages would be received
at the central office. In his case it was generally a quarter-past 10 before he could send any weather
reports to the other Colonies. In the case of Western Australia it was still later, on account of the
difference in longitude. So that the sending of these weather reports would not really clash with the
office reports, and there was no reason why they should not be transmitted immediately, and take pre-
cedence of all private messages. He thought it only required to be properly represented to the different
Governments, so that the telegraphic departments might be instructed that the weather reports were to
take precedence, and the Telegraph Superintendents in the different Colonies be relieved from any
responsibility in the matter. It should be borne in mind that by the adoption of the cypher code, the
messages were reduced to the minimum in point of length.
He would now move—
That the several Governments be requested to cause precedence to be given to the regular
weather telegrams and special storm reports.
Hr. Hector said, that in New Zealand they had three kinds of telegrams— urgent , ordinary , and
delayed. The public could take advantage of this scale, and by paying two shillings could make a telegram
urgent. Messages arriving in the evening could be sent as delayed telegrams in sufficient time for
the morning post.
Mr. Ellery said the value of weather information was lost in many cases by delay, while it was
increased in proportion to the punctuality with which it was furnished. He might state that in his last
Annual Report he had made reference to the procedure in America and several European States who had
at first to be coaxed into allowing weather telegrams to take precedence, but they now generally accorded
it. Weather telegrams were of no value to the shipping and commercial interest unless they were trans-
mitted punctually. In Victoria the Chief Secretary had entered into correspondence with the Telegraph
Department of that Colony on the subject, and precedence had always been accorded. He thought it
would only be necessary to bring the matter before the several Colonial Governments. The only difficulty
would lie with the Telegraph Departments themselves.
The resolution was agreed to.
Mountain Stations.
6th proposition:—
To consider whether meteorological stations should be established upon the highest available
mountains, for the special study of winds.
The Chairman said, his object in putting this proposition before the Conference was to obtain if
possible records of the winds that pass over-head, and were therefore lost to the records of the lower
stations.
From observations made years ago by Strzelecki, it appeared that at the top of Mount Wellington,
he had noticed a hot wind which was not felt at all 3,000 feet lower on the same mountain ; and from
similar observations in this Colony, it appeared that hot winds were frequently felt at the high stations
and not at those which are at a lower level.
Similar facts might be stated with regard to the south-east gales, which frequently appeared first
at lofty stations. He thought these facts were a sufficient reason for the establishment of stations on high
mountain peaks, —the only means which appeared to him available to secure the desired information.
Mr. Ellery moved :
That, in the opinion of this Conference, there should be established in each of the Colonies, upon
a high mountain peak, a meteorological observatory for the special study of winds and other
meteorological phenomena:
And that the most desirable positions for them would be the following :
About
South Australia—Mount Lofty 2,500 feet above sea level.
New South Wales —Kiandra ... ... 4,600 „
New Zealand —Tauhara Taupo ... ... 4,600 „
Do. Mount Herbert ... ... 4,000 „
Tasmania —Mount Wellington ... ... 4,000 „
Victoria —Mount Macedon ... ... 3,500 „
The resolution, after discussion, was agreed to.
The Conference adjourned at 115 p.m., until to-morrow, Friday, 14th instant, at 9 o’clock a.m.
FRIDAY ; 14 NOVEMBER, 1879.
The Conference met at the Observatory, at 9 a.m.
Present :
Dr. Hector, Mr. Russell,
Mr. Ellery, Mr. Todd.
H. C. RUSSELL, Esq., in the Chair.
The minutes of the previous meeting were read and confirmed.
Mr. Todd moved: — r -d n j
That the revision of the present telegraph weather code be referred to Messrs. Russell and
Ellery, with a view to its simplification and extension.
The resolution, after discussion, was agreed to. ■ Ur *


Dr. Hector moved :
That the interchange of weather statistics, in carrying out the suggestions of this Conference,
between the different Australasian stations, should be in the form of a diagram ; and that
this should not interfere with the printing of statistics by the different Colonies in any way
they like.
He would, at the same time, strongly recommend that some uniform system of publication should be
gradually approximated.
The resolution, after discussion, was agreed to.
Mr. Ellery moved
1. That the monthly graphic records for interchange consist of curves, showing—
Barometer,
Velocity and direction of wind,
Temperature,
Humidity,
Bain fall,
with remarks upon weather, especially with reference to storms and atmospheric disturbances
and that specific forms be prepared and distributed to the co-operating Colonies.
2. That the mean humidity curve be derived from the means of maximum and minimum of wet
and dry bulb thermometers.
3. The barometer curve to be constructed from barographic records, so as to depict the turning
points.
4. The temperature curve to represent maximum and minimum and mean for each day.
5. The velocity and direction of the wind to be deduced from the anemometer.
The resolution was, after discussion, agreed to.
Dr. Hector moved :
That, in the transmission of cablegrams, the reports be generalized from the local weather
reports.
For Hew Zealand the following subdivision into districts is recommended for convenience of
reporting:—
A N.E. aspect North Cape to East Cape.
B N.W. aspect Cape Maria to West Cape (exclusive of Cook Straits).
C S. aspect West Cape to Moeraki.
B S.E. aspect Moeraki to East Cape (exclusive of Cook Straits).
F Cook Straits Comprising Wanganui, Wellington, Cape Campbell,
and Cape Farewell, Nelson.
A code to be framed to express the weather in each of the above aspects in general terms,
according to the judgment of the reporter, thus—
Aspect. Wind and Weather. Bain. Sea.
No remark to indicate absence of marked phenomena.
The resolution, after discussion, was agreed to.
Mr. Ellery moved :
That the cablegrams furnished to Melbourne by Tasmania should conform with those between
the Australian Colonies.
The resolution was, after discussion, agreed to.
Mr. Todd moved :
1. That weather telegrams from the Australian Colonies shall comprise—
(l) Barometer reduced to 32° and sea level,
(2) Dry bulb,
(3) Humidity,
(4j Maximum and minimum,
(5) Direction and velocity of wind,
(6) State of weather,
(7) Bainfall,
(8) Sea disturbances,
with a synoptical report of the weather generally.
2. And that within New Zealand the same system should be adopted.
The resolution, after discussion, was agreed to.
Mr. Ellery moved: —
That the extreme importance of the weather system proposed be strongly urged upon the
Queensland Government, with a view to obtain their more active co-operation.
The resolution was, after discussion, agreed to.
It was further resolved, —
That Australia be divided into six meteorological areas for transmission of reports to New
ealand, viz. Western Australia, South Australia, Victoria, New South Wales, and Queens-
and; South Australia being divided into two districts, tropical and extra-tropical.
The Conference adjourned at 11-30 a.m., until half-past 7 o’clock the same day.
The


The Conference met again at 7*30 p.m.
Present :
Dr. Hector, Mr. Todd,
Mr. Ellery, Mr. Eussell.
H. C. EUSSELL, Esq., in the Chair.
The minutes of the previous meeting were read and confirmed.
It was resolved, —
That weather telegrams be written on paper of a special colour, so as to be readily distinguish-
able in the offices.
Mr. Todd moved: —
1. That the solar radiation thermometers should be blackened bulb thermometers in vacuo, and
should be exposed on an open space at an elevation of 4 feet 6 inches from the surface of
the ground, supported by a post carrying two light arms.
2. And that radiation thermometers be placed over grass.
The resolution, after discussion, was agreed to.
Mr. Ellery moved: —
That the following subjects for experiment be referred to each member of the Conference, for
future consideration and report:—
1. Shade temperature.
2. Swinging thermometer and thermometer sheds in use.
3. Standards to be swung with 2 ft. G in. string during sunshine and after sunset.
4. Observations to determine the difference in humidity by self-registering maximum and
minimum thermometers, and by other methods.
5. The best method of measuring the velocity and pressure of wind.
6. Whether any better method than black bulb thermometers can be devised for measuring
the direct effect of the sun.
7. As to the best method of determining spontaneous evaporation.
The resolution was discussed and agreed to.
Mr. Ellery moved: —
That as investigation of the Newcastle tide-gauges has shown that such instruments give
valuable indications of distant earthquakes, gales, and sea disturbances, it is desirable, in
the opinion of the Conference, that self-registering tide-gauges be established in as many
convenient places as possible on the coast, in connection with the Meteorological Depart-
ments of the different Colonies.
The resolution was agreed to, after discussion.
Dr. Hector moved:—
That the foregoing minutes be adopted as the Eeport of this Conference on the various matters
referred to it, and that the Chairman be requested to report to the Grovernment of
New South Wales.
H. C. EUSSELL.
EOBT. J. ELLEEY.
CHAELES TODD.
JAMES HECTOE.
