

v.jc-,-.‘.-,->--'-..vr<.: ~>?.,. -J
sTO.;- “.-fe '^ax'ikl




/ MINUTES
SEVERAL CONVERSATIONS
BETWEEN
THE MINISTERS
OF THE
AUSTRALASIAN
WESLEYAN METHODIST CHURCH
AT THEIR
FIFTH ANNUAL CONFERENCE,
Beg-un in Sydney, Thursday, January 20th, 1859.
SYDNEY:
WELCH, PRINTER, ATLAS OFFICE, GEORGE ST.,
OPPOSITE BANK OF AUSTRALASIA.
MDCCCLIX.


, f , *!''■<'■' > fWr,e- -• % A • '4*»!' I
i aii f
■■ ■ --J
'*7iS2’'
■* itr


CONTENTS.
—♦—
Address : Pastoral 34;
„ TO British Conference . , . 30
~ FROM THE British Conference . . 20
Annuitant Fund 13
Book Affairs 17
Chapel Building, standing order upon . . 17
„ APPROVAL OF . . . , 17
„ AND OTHER TrUST PROPERTY ... 16, 17
Children’s Fund 13
Collections for 1859 20
Committees: Missionary and Connexional . 11
~ District 14
~ Educational ... .15
~ Chapel and Building . . lo
Conference of 1860 : when to be held, and
WHERE 18
District Meeting Business 21
„ „ ON PUBLISHING CERTAIN MIN
UTES OF 20
Division of Circuits 20
Educational Fund for Ministers’ Children. 13
General Secretary of Missions .... 6
Members of Society, List of ... . 11
Ministers, Alphabetical List of . . . 60—65
„ received into full Connexion . 1


Missions . 18,25,53
Missionary Committee, Minutes of General . 53—55
Native Assistant Missionaries ... 3
„ List of . . 65
19 99
Number of Ministers, &c. 12
Preachers remaining on Trial . . . . 1,2
~ RECEIVED ON TrIAL .... 2
President of the Conference . . . .7,29
~ of the next Conference recommended 32
Provision for Married Ministers ... 24
Reading of the Pastoral Address ... 24
Removals of Ministers 24
Schedules of the Districts 43—52
Society Tickets 24
Stations of the Ministers 6—lo
Status of Ministers ....•• 19
Supernumerary and Widow Fund .... 13
Treasurers of the Missionary Committee . 54
Children’s Fund ... 13
„ Educational Fund . . 13,25
„ Worn-out Preachers’ Fund 13,25
Wesleyan Church Contingent and Extension
Fund 16,25


MINUTES.
Question I.—Wlio are now admitted as Ministers
INTO FULL CONNEXION WITH THE CONFEEENCE ?
Answee.
Charles Colwell.
William D. Lelean.
Question ll.—What Preachers eemain on teial ?
Answee.—
Theophilus Beaizley.
John Catterall.
Henry Chester.
William Curnow.
James W. Dowson.
Charles Dubourg.
Martin Dyson.
William Fidler.
William Fletcher, B.A.
William Gittos.
William Hopkins.
Charles Lane.
Thomas Lloyd.
William T. Mayne.
John Mewton.
These have travelled theee yeaes.
William M. Bennett.
Thomas James.
Samuel Knight.
George Lee.


Richard W, Orton.
William Jackson Watkin.
William Woodall.
George Woolnough.
William S. Worth.
These have travelled two yeaes.
Thomas Angwin, 2nd.
John Atkin.
Charles J. Baird.
William L. Blamires.
Richard Caldwell.
John Crump.
Francis Fawcett.
Frederick Langham.
George Martin.
James Moorehouse.
William Rowse.
William G. R. Stephiuson
Peter R. C. Ussher.
Robert L. Vickers.
These have travelled one year.
Question lll.—What Preachers are
received
ON TRIAL ?
Answer.—
Thomas Baker.
Henry Bath.
Henry T. Burgess.
Edward Benson Bums.
Jesse Carey.
Robert Smith Casely.
Richard Osborne Cooke.
Charles H. Goldsmith.
Thomas Skewes.
Edwin Iredale Watkin.


Question IV.—Who are now admitted as Native
Assistant Misssionaries, in connexion with our Mission
Stations ?
Answer,—
Eliezer Takelo,
Nathan Thataki.
Matthias Vave.
Question V. remain on trial as Native Assis-
tant Missionaries ?
Answer.—
Samuel Ngaropi.
Elias Langi.
These have travelled three years.
Benjamin Buindoli.
John EketonS.
Joseph Otene
Cornelius Musuka.
Isaac
These have travelled years.
Barnabas Ahongalu.
Mark Baongo.
These have travelled one year.
Question Vl.—Who are now received on trial as
Assistant Missionaries ?
Answer.—
Naphtali Fifita.
Aaron Fotofih.
William Batene.
Question Vll.—What Preachers have died since the
last Conference ? \
Answer.—
I.—THEOPHILUS TAYLOR.
Theophilus Taylor, who was born at Bawtry, Yorkshire, Eng-
land, April 15th, 1829. He was converted to God in early life.


and at once united himself with the Wesleyan Church, Sincerely
anxious to be useful to his fellow-men, and possessing abilities
of more than an ordinary character, he was soon appointed to the
office of Local Preacher, in which capacity he laboured with such
acceptance, as to be proposed and received as a candidate for the
full work of the Christian Ministry. After two years study in the
Richmond Theological Institution, he was appointed to the Castle
Donnington Circuit, where he laboured with great acceptance —
though amid much trial—for one year.
In February, 1854, Mr. Taylor arrived in Melbourne, and was
appointed to the charge of the Ballaarat Circuit. It was his honor
to be the first Wesleyan Minister resident in that important sphere
of labour. Few persons, now, can fully estimate the difficulties
of such a position. Entering upon his work with his whole soul,
and relying upon the promised aid of his Divine Master, Mr.
Taylor was enabled to lay “ broad and deep” the foundations of
Methodism in that important gold field. His health—never
robust—suffered from the severe labour which his work entailed
upon him. In 1857, Mr. Taylor removed to Brighton ; but was
compelled in a few months to leave his Circuit, and proceed to
New South Wales, in the hope that his health would be restored.
This hope was not realized; and at the Conference of 1858 he
became a Supernumerary, and removed again to Ballaarat. He
w'as only able to preach a few times, when, in June, 1858, it be-
came apparent to all his friends that his days were numbered.
At first, during his illness, he deeply felt being laid aside from
the work of the ministry,—a work to which he was most ardently
devoted, and in which he was greatly honored of God ; but after
many severe conflicts, he was mercifiilly enabled to submit to the
Divine will. His last days were eminently peaceful. Sustained
by the grace of God, he felt that while his “ strength and heart
failed, God was the strength of his heart and his portion for ever,”
and died in the full assurance of the hope of that gospel which he
had preached to others. He departed this life, on Tuesday, Jan-
uary 4th, 1859, in the 30th year of his age, and the 7th of his
ministry.
2.— WILLIAM WOON.
He was called to his rest on September 22nd, at the age of 54
years. He was a native of Truro, in Cornwall; was converted to
God in early life, when he became a Member of the Wesleyan
Methodist Church, and in due time exercised his gifts as a Local
Preacher. He entered our ministry in 1830, and his first ap-
pointment was the Friendly Islands, where he laboured for four
years. Under the power of temptation he retired for a season
from the ministry. His next station was Mangungu, in New
Zealand. In after years he was removed to Taranaki, where he
was in “labours more abundant.” His health having failed he


became a Supernumerary in 1853. From that time he resided in
the little town of Whanganui, where he preached on the Sabbath
and otherwise made himself useful as far as his strength would
permit. During last summer he visited Wellington, and ap-
peared much benefitted by the change, but soon after his return
home his old malady re-appeared with increased force, and he
gently fell asleep in the bosom of his own family. His end was
peace. His last words were, “ give my love to all my brethren, I
am going to heaven.”
3.—JOHN CRAWFORD.
John Crawford, who after having travelled two years in the
Colony of New South Wales, had but just entered upon his mis-
sionary career. He died of dysentry at Ovalau, on the 20th day of
January, 1858. Until a short time before his death he cherished
the hope that he should recover, but a few moments previous to
that event, he expressed to his beloved wife his assurance of ac-
ceptance with God, and his full confidence that he was about to
be admitted into the heavenly world.
Question VIII.—Are there any objections to any of
our Ministers or Preachers on Trial.
Answer. —They were examined one by one.
Question IX.—How are our Ministers and Preachers
on Trial stationed for the ensuing year ?
Answer.—As follows, viz.:—
[N.B. —Each of the places mentioned in these Stations, and
numbered consecutively from 1 to 95, is the head of a Circuit.
The Superintendent and other Minister or Ministers stationed
in or appointed to the several Circuits undermentioned, is and are
appointed by the Conference to preach and to perform all acts
of religious worship and Methodist discipline in each and every
of the Wesleyan Methodist Chapels already erected, or to be
erected, in each Circuit respectively, within the space of twelve
calendar months, at such time or times, and in such a manner, as
to him or them shall seem proper; subject nevertheless to the
Superintendent Minister.]


STATIONS
li©©®o
[DANIEL J. DRAPER, President of the Conference.
STEPHEN RABONE, Secretary.]
I.—New South Wales District.
1. Sydney North, (York Street,) William Hessel, George
Hurst, Francis Fawcett, Balmain.
John Eggleston, General Secretary of our Missions.
2. Sydney South, ( Chippendale,) —Joseph Oram.
3. Sydney East, (Surry Hills,) Samuel Ironside, T.
Beaizley ; Wm. Schofield, Supernumerary.
4. Newtown, —Stephen Rabone, Secretary of the Conference,
G. Martin.
5. Parramatta, —John A. Manton, R. Amos; W. Lawry,
Supernumerary.
6. Windsor, Walter J. Davis, George Woolnough; P.
Turner, Supernumerary.
7. Bathurst, —Henry H. Gaud, Thomas Angwin Ist, William
T. Mayne.
8. Turon {Gold Fields) —John Bowes, {Assistant Missionaiy.)
9. Bowenfells, —Thomas Skewes.
10. Mudgee, —William J. K. Piddington.
11. Maitland, —Benjamin Chapman, Charles W. Rigg.
12. Dungog and Clarence Town, —Robert W. Vanderkiste.
13. Newcastle, —Josiah George Turner, who shall change on
one Sunday in each month with the Ministers of the
Maitland Circuit.
14. Singleton, —George Pickering {Assistant Missionary^
15. Camden, —William Clarke.
16. Wollongong, —James Watkin.
17. Kiama, —Hans Mack.


18. Shoalhaven, —James Somerville.
19. Goulburn, —John Watsford.
Braidwood (GoW Fields,) —Wm. Kelynack.
Gunning, —James W. Dowson.
Yass, —Charles Creed.
20. Moruya, —Richard Caldwell.
21. Brisbane and Ipswich, —Samuel Wilkinson, Wm. Curnow;
N. J'urner, Supernumerary.
Warwick, —William Fidler.
22. Manning River, —John Pemell.
Port Macquarie,— One wanted.
Armidale, —One wanted.
Stephen Rabone, [Secretary of the Conference,') Chair-
man of the District,
2.—Victoria District.
23. Melbourne West, —James S. Waugh, James Hutchison,
W, P, Wells.
24. Melbourne East, —Thomas Williams, W. L. Binks, Samuel
Knight.
25. Melbourne South, —Daniel J. Draper, President of the
Conference, Thomas James.
26. Brighton, —Edward King, Wm. C. Currey.
27. WiLLiAMSTOWN, —Edwin I. Watkin.
28. Pentridge, —Richard Hart.
29. Geelong, —William Hill, Ist, John C. Symons, William
S. Worth.
30. Tuckfield, —To be supplied.
31. Warrnambool, —Samuel Waterhouse.
32. Belfast. —Edward B. Burns,
33. Portland, George B. Richards; William Lightbody,
Supernumerary.
34. Kyneton, —John Catterall.
35. Castlemaine, —Thomas Raston, William L. Blamires.
36. Maldon, —Henry Chester.
37. Carisbrook, —Joseph Albiston, W. Hopkins.
38. Ararat, —William Woodall.
39. Ball AAR AT, —James Bickford, J. G. Millard.
40. Creswick, —George Daniel, Charles Lane.
41. Sandhurst, —Joseph Dare, Charles Duhourg, John Atkin.
42. Kilmore and Seymour, —John Mewton, One from Eng-
land.
43. Beechworth, —James W. Crisp.
44. Mount Franklin, —One from England.


45. Dunolly and Tarnagulla, —One from England.
Rushworth, —One wanted.
Echuca, —One wanted.
Dandenong, —One wanted.
Hamilton, —One wanted.
Daniel J. Draper, \_President of the Conference,'] Chair-
man of the District.
3.—South Australia District.
46. Adelaide, South, —William Butters, John Harcourt, Nor-
wood, Thomas Lloyd.
47. Adelaide, North, —William Ingram, Peter R. C. Ussher.
Port Adelaide, —Henry Bath.
48. Gawler, —Nathaniel Bennett.
49. Gumaracka, —Wm. M. Bennett.
50. Kapunda, —William Brown.
51. Kooringa, —Robert C. Floekhart.
52. Mintaro. —Charles Colwell.
53. Willunoa, —Jabez B. Waterhouse.
54. Clarendon, —Matthew Wilson.
55. Mount Barker and Nairne, —Spencer Williams.
56. Yankalilla, —Henry T. Burgess.
57. Strathalbyn, —Charles H. Goldsmith.
William Butters, Chairman of the District.
4.—‘Western Australia District.
58. Perth, —Samuel Hardey.
59. York, —Charles Clay.
Samuel Hardey, Chairman of the District.
s.—Tasmania District.
60. Hobart Town, —John Cope, Wm. D. Lelean.
61. New Norfolk, —Francis Tuckfield.
62. Campbell Town, —John B. Smith.
Horton College, Ross,— William A. Quick, President of
the College.
63. Launceston, —Thomas B. Harris.


64. Longford, —John Smithies.
65. Westbury, —William Lowe.
66. DeKoraine, —Richard O. Cooke.
67. Mersey, —Thomas Angwin, 2nd.
68. Huon, —Robert S. Casely.
69. Oatlands, —Joseph Fillingham.
Thomas B. Harris, Chairman of the District.
Mmim.
I.—Auckland District. (New Zealand.)
70. Auckland, Isaac Harding, James Moorehouse ; Jno.
Hobbs, Supernumerary.
71. Manukau, and Three Kings Native Institution, —
Thomas Buddie, Jno. Crump ; Joseph Otene, Native Assis-
tant Missionary.
72. Hokianga, —Henry H. Lawry.
73. Kaifara, —William Gittos, One wanted.
Wairoa, —One wanted.
74. Waingaroa and Aotea, —James Wallis.
75. Waipa, —Alex Reid; Samuel Ngaropi, William Batene,
Native Assistant Missionaries.
76. Kawhia, —Cort Henry Schnackenberg.
77. New Plymouth, English Department, Joseph H.
Fletcher.
Native Department, —John Whiteley.
78. Mokau, —John Eketone, Native Assistant Missionary.
79. Mangunui, —George Stannard.
Thomas Buddle, Chairman of the District.
H. H. Turton has permission to return to England.
2.—Wellington District. (New Zealand.)
80. Wellington, —James Buller, Jonathan Innes, Robert L.
Vickers.
81. Nelson and Motueka, —John Warren, William J. Watkin.
82. Waimate and Wanganui, —William Kirk.


83. Canterbury, —John Aldred, William Rowse.
84. Chatham Islands. —Te Kote, Native Assistant Missionary.
James Buller, Chairman of the District.
3.—Friendly Islands District.
85. Tongatabo, —John Thomas, John Whewell, George Lee,
Richard W. Orton ; Naphtali Fifita, Native Assistant
Missionary.
86. Haabai. —John Vercoe, Wm. G. R. Stephinson ; Peter Vi,
Jno. Faubula, Elias Langi, Native Assistant Missionaries.
87. Vavau, —Thomas Adams, William Hill, 2nd ; .Jno. Latu,
David Kata, Native Assistant Missionaries.
88. Samoa, —Martin Dyson, One to be sent; Barnabas Ahon-
galu. Native Assistant Missionary.
89. NiuaFoou, —Mark Baongo, Native Assistant Missionary.
90. NiuaTobutabu, A Native Assistant Missionary to be
sent.
John Thomas, Chairman of the District.
John Thomas has permission to return to England.
4.—Fejee District.
91. Lakemba, —William Fletcher, 8.A., Frederick Langham ;
Moses Mamafainoa, Joel Ketetha, Nathan Thataki, Mat-
thias Vave, Native Assistant Missionaries.
92. Bau, Vewa, and Ovalau, —Joseph Waterhouse, John S.
Fordham ; Benjamin Buindoli, Cornelius Musuka, Isaac
Rawaindranu, Native Assistant Missionaries.
93. Rewa, —William Moore, James S.H. Royce, Thomas Baker,
Kandavu-, Paul Yea, Native Assistant Missionary.
Native Teachers’ Training Institution, —John Polglase.
94. Bua, —William Wilson, Charles J. Baird; Joel Bulu, Aaron
Fotofili, Native Assistant Missionaries, Somosomo.
95. Rotumah, —Jesse Carey; Eliezer Takelo, Native Assistant
Missionary.
Joseph Waterhouse, Chairman of the District.
John Malvern has permission to return to England.
The Preachers on trial appointed to separate Stations are under
the direction of the Chairmen of their respective Districts.
The Ministers and Preachers on trial are expected to be in their
New Circuits the first week in April.
10


Question X.—What is the numbee of Members in
our Chui’ches ?
Answer.—As follows, viz
Circuits. Members
SYDNEY, NORTH.. 253
Sydney, South.. ~ 244-
Sydney, East .. .. 236
Newtown 212
Parramatta .; .. .. 174
Windsor 227
Bathurst 200
Maitland 419 '
Newcastle 60
Singleton 33
Bowenfells 59
Mudgee 41
Camden 128
Wollongong .. .. 272
Goulburu 309
Moreton Bay .. .. 145
Manning River .. .. 70
Moruya 36
Turon 40
MELBOURNE, WEST 332
Melbourne, East.. .. 583
Melbourne, South .. 116
Brighton 176
Williamstown ~ .. 36
Pentridge 96
Geelong 644
Tuckfield 24
Warrnambool .. 30
Belfast 35
Portland 80
Kyneton 55
Castlemaine .. .. 378
Carisbrook 279
Sandhurst .. .. 304
Ballaarat 655
Beechworth .. .. 65
Kilmore 50
ADELAIDE, SOUTH 705
Adelaide, North .. .. 427
Gawler Town . .. 240
Kapunda 178
Kooringa 274
Circuits. Members.
Willunga 167
Clarendon 159
Mount Barker .. .. 229
Yankalilla 97
PERTH 60
York 14
HOBART TOWN .. 329
New Norfolk .. .. 51
Campbell Town ~ .. 58
Launceston .. .. ISO
Longford 90
Westbury 71
Deloraine 33
Mersey 31
AUCKLAND .. .. 273
Manuicau 119
Hokianga 322
Waingaroa, &c. .. 256
Kaipara 107
Kawhia 300
Mokau 95
New Plymouth , 142
Waipa 230
WELLINGTON .. 250
WELLINGTON .. 250
Waimate, &c 325
Nelson 90
Canterbury 115
Otago 32
TONGA 2097
Haabai 1886
Vavau 1618
Niua Tobutabu .. 178
Niua Foou 367
Samoa SQO
LAKEMBA .. 3680
Vewa 136
Bau 2185
Rewa 1550
Bua 323
Nandy 189
Ovalau 75
Rotumah 207
11


GENERAL RECAPITULATION
I. —Membees
Districts.
This Year.
New South Wales
Victoria
South Australia
Western Australia
Tasmania.,
Auckland ..
Wellington
Friendly Islands.
Fejee Islands ..
28,138
Increase of Members in the Colonies
~ ~ on the Mission Stations
Net Increase of Members
On Trial for Membership—ln the Colonies
In the Missions.
Total on Tria1...4990
2.—Ministeks and Peeachers on Trial,
Including Supernumeraries, connected with this Conference
Supernu-
meraries.
Preachers
on Trial.
Districts.
Ministers.
Total.
New South Wales.. |
Victoria
24 and 2
Ast. Miss.
South Australia
Western Australia
Tasmania..
Auckland ..
Wellington
Friendly Islands
Fejee Islands ..
92 I 6 1 48
■Native Assistant Missionaries in New Zea-
land, the Friendly, and Fejee Islands .. ...
1082
3908
368.5
1171
2.514
12


Question Xl.—What are the Resolutions of the Con-
respecting the various Connexional Funds ?
Answer.—
The Conference acknowledges with thankfulness the
ready, cheerful, and liberal support which the various
Connexional Funds have had from each District in the
Australian Colonies, and rejoices in this additional proof
of the attachment of the Wesleyan Church to the Con-
nexional principle, the maintenance of which is so essential
to its stabihty and usefulness.
I. The Children's Fund.
1. The Conference directs that, in accordance with our
Connexional usage, the support of the children of our
Ministers be divided among the Districts, in accordance
with the number of Members in each District, the ratio in
1859 being 75 Members to one child.
2. That a uniform rate of j£l2 12s. be charged on each
of the Circuits, and allowed for .each child, both for Mis-
sionaries on Foreign Stations, and Ministers in Circuits in
the Colonies.
3. That the thanks of the Conference are due, and are
hereby presented, to the Rev. J. A. Manton and Captain
Horton, of Ross, for their services as Treasurers during the
past year.
4. That the Rev. T. B. Harris and Captain Horton be
Treasurers, during the ensuing year.
5. That the attention of Chairmen of Districts be called
to the law requiring that the names and ages of children
shall be placed on the District Minutes.
11. Fund for the Edueation of Children.
The thanks of the Conference are hereby presented to
the Rev. William Butters and John Colton, Esq., for their
services during the past year, and they are respectfully
requested to continue as Treasurers for the ensuing year.
HI. Fund for the Support of Supernumeraries and Min-
isters'" Widows.
I. That the cordial thanks of this Conference be given to


the Treasurers, the Kev. Daniel J. Draper, and the
Honorable A. Frazer, M.L.C., for their services during
the past year; and that they be appointed as Treasurers
for the ensuing year.
2. That the Conference is unable to take further steps in
the organization of the Worn-out Preachers Fund, until
some arrangement can be effected with the English Annui-
tant Society, and, therefore, respectfully requests the Pre-
sident of this Conference to urge an immediate settlement
of the claims of its Australian Members.
Question XII. are the Members of the Dis-
trict Committees for the year 1859 ?
Answer. —The Ministers of the respective Districts,
and the Circuit Stewards of the various Circuits in those
Districts.
Question Xlll.— Wlio are the Members of the Mis-
sionary AND CoNNEXiONAL COMMITTEES foT the year
1859?
Answer.' —
New South Wales District.
The Revds. J. Watkin, J. A. Manton, J. Eggleston, H.
H. Gaud, S. Ironside, G. Hurst, J. Watsford, B. Chap-
man, W. Hessel, J. Oram ; and Messrs. G. W. Allen, J.
Caldwell, T. Cowlishaw, J. Dawson, W. Love, R. Mansfield,
A. McArthur, T. P. Reeve, and W. Speer.
Victoria District.
The Revds. J. Bickford, T. Williams, J. S. Waugh, W-
L. Binks, E. IGng, G. Daniel, W. Hill, J. C. Symons, W-
C. Currey; and Messrs. James Copeland, Hon. A. Frazer’
M. N. Guthridge, J. Oddie, E. S. Parker, W. Powelb
T. Rix, T. Vasey, and T. Wilkinson.
South Australia District.
The Revds. M. Wilson, W. Ingram, J. B. Waterhouse,
John Harcourt, R. C. Flockhart, S. Williams, W. Brown,
N. Bennett, C. ColweU ; and Messrs. Bakewell, Burgess,
Colton, Dunn, Goss, Hardy, Jones, Kingsborough, and
Padman.


Tasmania District.
Revds J. Smithies, F, Tuckfield, W. A. Quick, W. Lowe,
J. Cope, J. Fillingham, J. B. Smith, W. D. Lelean ; and
Messrs. Crooks, Douglas, Gleadow, Hehblewhite, Horton,
E. Shoohridge, R. Shoohridge, and Wigan.
Auckland District.
Revds. J. Hobhs, J. Whiteley, J. Wallis, I. Harding, J.
H. Fletcher, A. Reid, and Messrs. H. Ellis, W. Phillips, T.
Russel, H. Vercoe, H. White, and J. Williamson.
Wellington District.
Revds. J. Innes, J. Warren, J. Aldred, W. Kirk, W. J.
Watkin ; and Messrs. Fox, Green, Hunt, Kotten, Lewis,
and J. E. Watkin.
Question XIV.—Who are the Members of the Edu-
cational Committees for the several Districts for the
year 1859 ?
Answee.—
New South Wales District.
Messrs. G. W. Allen, Andrews, J. Barker, Blair, Blan-
chard, Caldwell, Cowlishaw, Dawson, Dowsett, Ducker,
Falkiner, GoUedge, Jesson, Love, Mansfield, Moore, Neale,
Owen, Pearce, Reeve, Speer, with all the Ministers of the
District.
Victoria District.
Messrs. Cutts, Doane, Fletcher, Hon. A. Frazer, M.L.C.,
Guthridge, Hodgson, Lowe, Parker, Powell, Rix, Stone,
Thomas, Wilkinson, Wilton, with all the Ministers of the
District.
Tasmania District.
Messrs Crooks, Gleadow Hehblewhite, Horton, Jack-
son, Parramore, Shoohridge, with all the Ministers of the
District.


Auckland District.
Messrs. Clarke, Matthews, Eussel, Stone, Williamson,
with all the Ministers of the District.
The Chairman of each District is ex officio the Chair-
man of all Committees in his District.
Question XV. —What are the Resolutions of the Con-
ference respecting the Wesleyan Chuech Contingent
AND Extension Fund, raised hy the various Districts, in
aid of the work of God in their several localities?
Answee. —
1. In order that the Gospel may be sent into the neg-
lected portions of the various Colonies, while existing stations
are vigorously sustained, the Conference deems it highly
important that each Circuit of the Connexion should do
all in its power to augment the resources of this Fund.
2. The Minute of the New South Wales District Meet-
ing referring to the projected formation of a Wesleyan
Methodist Church Sustentation and Extension Society for
that District, and the Constitution of the said Society hav-
ing been submitted to the Conference, it was resolved ;
That permission he given to the New South Wales Dis-
trict to form the proposed Society, and that its Constitution
be approved hy the Conference.
Question XVl.'—What are the Resolutions of the
Conference respecting our Chapel and othee Teust
Peopeety ?
Answee.—
The Chapel and Building Fimd Committees in the several
Districts are as follows :
New South Wales.
All the Members of the Financial District Meeting
Victoria.
Messrs. J. Copeland, Hon. A. Frazer, M.L.C., P. P.


Fletcher,'N. Guthridge, J. B. Kendall, J. Lowe, J. Oddie,
E. S. Parker, J. Pentland, W. Powell, A. J. Smith, R.
Smith, J. Webb, T. Wilkinson, W. Wilton ; and all the
Ministers of the District.
South Australia.
All the Members of the Financial District Meeting.
1. In order to prevent rash and premature undertakings
in Chapel Building, which must prove a source of embar-
rassment to the Connexion, and be oppressive to our
Circuits, it is enacted as a standing order, to be applied to
all the Chapel Building Committees, that no Chapel shall
be erected unless there is the reasonable expectation that
two thirds of the entire cost will be raised by subscriptions,
including the collections at the opening services; but we
strongly urge that, whenever it is' practicable, all our
Chapels be erected free from debt.
2. The Conference rejoices in the recent erection of
several large and commodious public sanctuaries, in dif-
ferent parts of the Australasian Connexion, especially in
Melbourne, Maitland, Adelaide, Ballaarat,and other places,
and earnestly commends this example as worthy of the
imitation of our friends in large or central populations, and
highly important to the future interests of our Church.
Book Affairs.
Question XVll.—What are the Resolutions of the
Conference respecting our Book Affairs ?
Answer. —Resolved:—
That it is most important to promote in each District, by
the formation of Depots or otherwise, such arrangements as
shall lead to the more general circulation of Wesleyan
literature amongst the Members of om: Congregations and
the children of our schools.


Question XVIII.—What are the Resolutions of the
Conference respecting our Missions ?
Answer.—
1. The Conference cordially adopts, with one or two
modifications, the Resolutions of the General Committee
held 27th January, 1859. See appendix No. 1.
Question XlX.—When and where shall our next
Conference be held ?
Answer.—
1. In MELBOURNE, on Thursday, the 19th day of
January, 1860.
2. The Stationing Committee wiUmeetpn Monday, the
16th January.
3. The Missionary and Connexional Committees will
meet on Wednesday, the 18th January.
4. This Conference respectfully requests the British
Conference to allow the Australasian Conference to deviate
from that part of its “ Plan” which requires that its sit-
tings shall be held in four different Colonies successively.
Signed in behalf and by order of the CONFERENCE.
Daniel J. Draper, President.
Stephen Rabone, Secretary.
18


MISCELLANEOUS MINUTES.
STATUS OF MINISTEES.
The Conference directs that the following Minutes of
the Conference of 1856 and 1857 be published for the
information of Ministers and Preachers on Trial:—
“ That any Candidate for our Mnistry employed for this
Conference by the British Conference or the Missionary
Committee in London during or previous to the Conference
of any given year shall at the ensuing Australasian Con-
ference he regarded as having travelled one year.”
“ That any Candidate for our M.inistry having been
accepted by the Conference and employed before the 25th
June in any given year, shall at the following Conference
be accounted to have travelled one year ; but that, in the
event of his not being actually engaged before the 25th
June, he shall commence his probation at the ensuing
Conference.”
“ The time of the brethren taken into our work in the
Colonies previously to our being formed into a separate
Connexion shall commence from the date of their actual
employment after having passed the District Meeting;
those who were employed before the 25th June in any
given year being considered at the ensuing Conference as
having travelled one year, while those who were not
actually employed before the 25th June shall he regarded
as having commenced their probation at the ensuing Con-
ference.”
“No application to alter a Minister’s status, in con-
formity with these regulations, shall be entertained by the
Conference unless such alteration be recommended by the
District Meeting.”


ON PUBLISHING CERTAIN MINUTES OF DISTRICT
MEETINGS.
This Conference recognises the right of the District
Meetings to record on their Minutes the views which they
may entertain on such subjects as may he brought before
them affecting our Ecclesiastical or Financial position,
but regards it highly inexpedient to publish any Resolutions
bearing on changes in any part of our policy before those
proposed changes have been submitted to the Conference.
ON THE OFFER OF CANDIDATES FOR THE MINISTRY.
That the attention of Superintendents of Circuits be
directed to the importance of keeping before the minds of
all Candidates for our ministry, the necessity of offering
themselves for the general work, and of leaving their
appointments either to the Colonial or Mission Circuits to
be fixed by the Conference.
THE SYDNEY “WESLEY COLLEGE.”
That this Conference rejoices in the prospect of a
satisfactory arrangement of difficulties which had arisen
in framing the Wesley College Bill, and hopes by the
blessing of Divine Providence and the generosity of our
Churches, that Institution will soon he established and
become a blessing to the youth of our Connexion.
DIVISION OF CIRCUITS.
No recommendation to divide a Circuit can be enter-
tained by the Conference unless such a recommendation
proceed from the Quarterly Meeting of the Circuit held
immediately preceding the District Meeting, and is sanc-
tioned by the District Meeting.
The Conference approves of the divisions and alterations
in the following Circuits, which have been recommended
by their respective Quarterly and District Meetings :
1. That portion of the Glebe hitherto attached to the


Newtown Cii’cuit shall in future form part of the Svdnev
South Circuit.
2. That the Wollongong Circuit be divided into three
Cu’cuits, Kiama and Shoalhaven being the heads of the
two new Circuits.
3. That Dnngog and Clarence Town he separated from
MaTland and formed into a new Circuit.
4. That Maldon be separated from Castlemaine and
formed into a new Circuit.
5. That Ararat be separated from Carisbrook and formed
into a new Circuit.
6. That Creswick be separated from Ballaarat and
formed into a new Circuit.
7. That Gumaracka be separated from the Gawler
Circuit, and Houghton from the North Adelaide Circuit,
and formed into a new Circuit.
8. That Mintaro he separated from Kooringa and
formed into a new Circuit.
9. That Strathalbyn be separated from Mount Barker
and formed into a new Circuit.
DISTRICT MEETING BUSINESS.
The following is the order which shaU be observed in
conducting the business of our District Meetings :
1. What Ministers and Preachers on Trial are present ?
2. Have any Ministers or Preachers on Trial died since
the last District Meeting ?
3. Do we recommend that any of our Ministers be made
Supernumeraries at the ensuing Conference ?
4. Do we recommend that any Supernumerary be again
employed in the regular work ?
5. Are there any objections to any of the Ministers or
Preachers on Trial in this District ?
(1.) Is there any objection to his moral and religious
character ?
2.) Does he believe and preach our doctrines ?
3.1 Has he duly observed and enforced our discipline ?
4.) Has he competent abilities for our itinerant work ?


6. What Preachers on Trial do we recommend to be
admitted into full connexion at the Conference ?
7. What Preachers do we recommend to remain on
trial ?
8. What Candidates for our Ministry do we recommend
to be received on trial at the ensuing Conference ?
9. Do any of our Ministers or Preachers on trial offer
themselves for our Mission work ?
10. Have the Conference Stations for this District been
observed ?
11. Do we recommend the division or alteration of any
Circuit in this District ?
12. How do we recommend our Ministers and Preachers
on Trial to be stationed at the ensuing Conference ?
13. What are the Statistical Returns of this District as
required by the Conference ?
14. Are Registers of Baptisms, Marriages, and Burials
kept in each Circuit, and are the entries carefully made ?
15. Can any measure be adopted for the promotion of
the work of GOD in this District ?
16. Whom do we appoint as the Representative of this
District at the ensuing Conference ?
17. What other Ministers do we permit to attend the
Conference ?
18. Have we anything to recommend to the ensuing
Conference ?
19. When and where shall our next District Meeting
be held ?
The following are the subjects which shall he considered in
the Financial District Meeting.
I. —Church Property.
What is the state of our Connexional Property in this
District ?
1. Have any new erections been completed, and have
the Conference regulations relating thereto been observed ?


2. Do we sanction the purchase or erection of any pro-
perty in any Circuit in this District ?
3. What is the present state of the Chapel Fund ?
4. What are the probable Receipts of this Fund for the
ensuing year?
5. What Grants are to be made to Chapels, Ministers’
Dwelling Houses, &c., from this Fund ?
n. —Church Contingent and Extension Fund.
1. What are the Receipts and Expenditure of this h’und
for the present year ?
2. What Circuits request aid from this Fund ?
3. What is their financial condition ?
4. What Grants are made ?
lll. —Connexional Funds.
(I.) — Worn-out Ministers', and Ministers' Widows' Fund.
1. What amount has been raised in this District for this
F und ?
2. What claims on this Fund in this District do we re-
commend ?
(11.) — Children's Fund.
1. What is the state of this Fund in this District for the
present year ?
2. What number of children in this District must be
piwfided for at the ensuing Conference ?
(III.) ' —Educational Fund.
1. What amount has been raised in this District for
this Fund?
2. What are the claims for Educational Allowances for
this year ?
(IV.) —Foreign Mission Fund.
1. What is the amount raised in each Circuit in this
District for this Fund, and what the local Expenses ?


2. What arrangements can be made for holdmg the
Missionary Meetings in the various Circuits during the
ensuing year ?
IV.— Connexional Committees.
Whom do we nominate as Members of the Connexional
Committees for the ensuing year ?
STANDING ORDERS.
Provision for Married Ministers.
In all cases where the appointment of a single man is
requested by any Circuit, it is understood that in the event
of such appointment being made by the Conference, the
Circuit is pledged to provide for a married Minister at the
end of four years.
Society Tickets.
The Secretary of the Conference for the time being shall
prepare a form of ticket for each quarter of the following
year, and transmit a copy to the Chairman of each Dis-
trict not later than the month of July, in order that a
sufficient number may be printed for the use of the several
Circuits in his District.
Removals of Ministers.
Every Minister and Preacher on Trial shall be in his
new Circuit during the first week of April.
Reading of the Pastoral Address in Society Meetings.
The Superintendents are directed to appoint a special
Society Meeting, to be held at each principal chapel in
their Circuits, either in the afternoon of the Lord’s day, or
on some convenient evening of the week, for the purpose
of having the Pastoral Address read to the Society, and
made the subject of suitable remarks and exhortations.


General Collections and Subscriptions for 1859.
The following are the usual and regular collections
which are to be made in all our Circuits in the ensuing
year.
Mission to the Heathen.
Public Meetings, Collections and Subscriptions, accord-
ing to Circuit or District arrangement.
Wesleyan Church Contingent and Extension Fund, and
Chapel and Building Fund.
Public Meetings, Collections, and Subscriptions according
to Circuit or District arrangement.
Education of Preachers' Children.
Collections in all our Chapels in the course of the year.
Fund for the Supernumerary Ministers, and Widows.
Collections in all our Chapels, according to Circuit or
District arrangement.
25


ANSWER OF THE BRITISH CONFERENCE
TO THE
ADDRESS OE THE AUSTRALASIAN CONFERENCE.
REVEREND AND VERY DEAR BRETHREN.
Youe affectionate Address has awakened our gratitude
to God, while it has called forth our solicitude for the
conservation of the blessed fruit of your evangelical toils.
We have been cheered as we have thought of the pros-
perity vouchsafed to you : and we are anxious, with you,
that the fields which are “white unto harvest” should be
fully occupied by faithful labourers; and that the thousands
who, from among the Heathen, are turning unto the Lord,
should be watched over and instructed in saving truth by
men whom Christ has commissioned to he Pastors of His
flock.
It is a relief and comfort to us, that we are able, in
some degree, to respond to your appeal for help. It has
pleased our adorable Lord and Head to favor us with an
unusually large number of candidates for the ministry;
many of whom are willing to go forth to distant lands, and
to labor, if the Providence of God shall so direct, amidst
the wilds of Heathenism. We hope, therefore, to send to
you several young Preachers, on whom, we trust, the rich
anointing of the %irit of Christ will rest, qualifying them
for any sphere of hallowed service which you may assign
to them. Our prayers will attend them to your shores ;
nor shall we ever cease to feel toward you as brethren in
this holy ministry, engaged, even as we are, in setting
forth and diffusing that truth which is still “ the power of
God unto salvation to every one that believeth,” and pro-


claiming to all nations the only Name given under heaven
among men whereby they can be saved.
It is our own resolve, beloved Brethren, to adhere to
the truth of Christ in all its simplicity, while we seek to
unfold its “ treasures of wisdom and knowledge.” More
and more do we exult in the Lord Jesus, as the incarnate
Son of God, the second Adam, the Kepresentative and De-
liverer of the sinful race of man ; and, while we rejoice in
that relation to Him into which His assumption of our
nature has brought us, we accompany the “ Man of sor-
rows” to the mysterious scene of the cross, and behold
Him as there bearing our iniquities, that we might be
made the righteousness of God in Him.” This is the tes-
timony of God, which we go forth to proehiim ; and the
power of which, applied by the living energy of the Holy
Ghost, we have again and again witnessed with joy. We
have been labouring, during the past year, amidst cheering
tokens of the presence and power of God. He has “ given
testimony to the word of His graceand, in almost every
District at home we have had to record an encouraging
accession of converts from the world. The net increase of
members in our Societies in Great Britain is G 996 ; and
in Ireland 119; while on the Mission stations which are
under the immediate direction of this Conference we have
an increase of 73.
Suffer us to remind you—even as we wish to enforce it
upon ourselves —that while you exhibit Christian truth in
its simplicity and fulness, and dwell on the privileges of
those who are in Christ, you should also give adequate
prominence to the duties of the Christian life, and seek to
train up a holy people, who shall be your “joy and crown
of rejoicing in the day of the Lord Jesus.” The perils
which beset us are numerous and varied ; and it is most
important that members of Christian churches, while they
seek to walk humbly with God, should abstain from all
appearance of evil, present to the world an unblemished
character, and be recognised as examples of all that is
pure, and upright, and lovely, and generous, and kind.
Bich will be your reward, and great will be your joy, if,


maintaining yourselves the inward life of piety, you are
instrumental in building up your people in faith and holi-
ness, so that they shall “not” he “of the world,” even as
our Master was “ not of the world,” —while yet they go
forth, with tenderest solicitude, to seek in order to save
the outcasts of mankind.
Though our attention is annually called to records of
mortality, we have again been solemnly impressed by the
removal of several, whom we had been accustomed to meet,
to their heavenly rest. On the list of our departed Fathers
and Brethren, we have now had to place the honored name
of Dr. Bunting; and we cannot address you without being
reminded of the relation which he so long sustained to our
Missionary churches, and of his deep and untiring interest
in the extension of Christ’s kingdom, both in our Colonial
possessions and in Heathen lands. His dying testimony
has edified and cheered us. We admired and esteemed
him, as a profound theologian, a rich expositor of Divine
truth, a powerfiil and impressive Preacher of the Gospel,
and as one who fully comprehended the duties of the pas-
toral relation, and was anxious that those duties should
ever he faitlifully discharged ; and now we have derived
instruction from the manner in which, during his last ill-
ness, he clung to Christ. Permitted to realize, in a very
blessed degree, “ the tranquillity of faith,” it was given to
him to bear his decided testimony to the truth, that from
first to last Christ is the only Refuge of the human spirit;
and that our highest hope must he, to “be found in Him,
not having our own righteousness, but that which is through
the faith of Christ, the righteousness which is of God by
faith.”
But, as we look back on the career of those who have
finished their course, and are now with Christ, we are re-
minded that we have a race to run, a charge to keep, and
a strict account to give. The highest character of our
present hfe is, that it is a period of service to Christ, of
service to Him in that world where His authority is dis-
puted, and where thousands of men, redeemed by His
blood, are living in heedless ignorance, and crowding the


way to destruction. Brethren, let us work while it is day.
Let us go forth to our hallowed toil, with a renewed deter-
mination to be entirely the Lord’s; remembering that
without Christ we can do nothing, but trusting that we
shall he made “ strong in the Lord and in the power of
His might.”
It has afforded us pleasure to comply with your request,
that your esteemed Secretary, the Rev. Daniel J. Draper,
should he the President of your next Conference ; and we
trust that, in all your deliberations and arrangements, you
will be guided from on high. We commend you, and the
tribes and people under your charge, to the care and bless-
bg of our common Saviour and Lord.
Signed on behalf and by order of the Conference,
JOHN BOWERS, President.
JOHN HANNAH, D.D., Secretary.
Hull, August 13th, 1858.
29


ADDRESS OF THE CONFERENCE
OF THE
AUSTRALASIAN WESLEYAN METHODIST CHURCH
TO THE
BRITISH CONFERENCE.
HONOURED FATHERS AND BRETHREN,
With feelings of sincere pleasure we avail ourselves
of the privilege aftbrded us to address you, on the occasion
of our Fifth Annual Conference. Accept our warm thanks
for the paternal and valuable reply to our address of last
year. It is cheering to us to feel that we belong to the
great family of “ Methodists,” and that in heart, in doc-
trine, in discipline, and in labour, we are so closely united
with the venerable “ Connexion” in our “father land.”
We trust we are not unmindful of the solemn resi)onsibility
which rests upon us as “ Alinisters of the New Testament,”
and “ pastors of the flock of Christ;” but we feel we con-
stantly need more of the constraining love of God, that we
may be fully qualified for our great work of saving souls.
We unite most fervently in the joy occasioned by the
prosperity of the work of God among you. We were not
indifferent spectators of your “ great fight of afflictions.”
Many, and sincere, were our prayers for you, amid your
persecutions and sufferings. We thank God with you,
that the “ night of weeping” has passed away, and the
“ morning of joy” has dawned. We earnestly hope that
the large and gratifying increase of last year is but tbe
“ promise of a shower,” and that still greater outpourings
of the tioly Spirit may attend your ministrations.
Fach succeeding year impresses us with increased con-
viction of the importance of that “form of sound doctrine,”


and that wise and excellent discipline which has been com-
mitted to our trust. The tokens of God’s blessings upon
these in the past confirm us in our resolve to adhere closely
to them in the future. As a Church, we are occupying a
prominent and important position in these lands. Large
numbers attend our public ministrations; and the great
Head of the Church has been graciously pleased to afford
us many tokens of his presence and blessing. The net in-
crease of Members in our Churches during the year, is, in
the Colonies, 1,171 ; in the Missions, 2,514; making a
total of 3,685. We have also, on trial for Membership
in the Colonies, 1082; and on the Mission Stations, 3908;
making a total of 4990. In this we have cause to “thank
God, and take courage.” New fields of usefulness are
opening up before us, and we are seeking to occupy them
with all possible speed.
It will be gratifying to you to be informed, that God is
putting it into the heart of many young men amongst us,
as well as among yourselves, to place themselves at our
disposal as candidates for our Ministry. At- tliisrConfer-
ence, we have received eleven preachers on trial. These,
with the Brethren sent to us from you, will make an ad-
dition of twenty three labourers in this field; and our
earnest hope and prayer to God is, that a corresponding
increase in Members and hearers may result from this ac-
cession to our ranks. We heartily thank yon for your
response to our appeal for help. We hope, however, that
for the future our own Churches will furnish us with an
adequate supply of “ faithful men,” qualified and called to
preach “ the Word of life.”
This seasonable supply of Ministers will enable us to
reinforce our Missions in New Zealand and Polynesia.
Broken health and family affliction have deprived our
Missions of several well tried and valuable Missionaries.
Some of them have been compelled to return to England ;
others have removed to the Colonies, and are employed in
our work here. We have made arrangements to send, in
a few weeks, three additional Missionaries to Fejee, (besides
Bev. J. Waterhouse, who returns there after a year’s rest


in the Colonies) two to the Friendly Islands, and four to
New Zealand. We are most anxious to cultivate with all
possible energy these interesting fields of Christ ian enter-
prize, in which the labours of God’s servants have been so
signally owned and blessed. Our hearts are set, as we
Anow yours are also, upon this work, and we believe, that
by God’s blessing, the “ Isles of the South” will soon be
completely and truly christianized. These arrangements
for reinforcing and extending our Missions will necessarily
be attended with very considerable increase of expenditure;
but we are confident that this will be cheerfully sustained
by the abounding liberality of our Churches, and those of
Great Britain.
During the year, our ranks have been thinned by death.
Two of our brethren have fallen in the Mission field :
one in full vigour, and just at his entrance upon his career;
the other “ sleeps” after some years retirement from active
service. In our “ Home” work, we have been called to
mourn the loss of one, who bid fair to take a foremost
place among us. Thus are we solemnly reminded of our
own mortality, and of the need that we should “work
while it is called to-day.”
We are deeply sensible of the irreparable loss, which
we, in common with yourselves, have sustained by the
lamented death of our honoured father Dr. Bunting. His
memory will be held most sacred by us; and we shall
cherish a grateful recollection of his pre-eminent services
to the Church of God, and especially to the cause of Chris-
tian Missions. We thank God that his great virtues and
gifts were spared to our beloved Methodism, for so long a
life time ; and we believe that the beneficial results of his
counsels and labours, will be felt by us through years to
come.
We beg to thank you for acceding to our request in ap-
pointing the Bev. D. J. Draper our President. We res-
pectfully request that you will be pleased to appoint the
Bev. John Eggleston, our General Secretary for Missions,
“ who needeth no Epistles of Commendation to you” to be
our President for the next year.


Our Conference has been one of peace and love. We
are increasingly impressed with the important interest
which God has committed to us, and we resolve
grace assisting us—more than ever, to seek an increase of
personal holiness, and to devote ourselves to our great
work of “ saving souls.” Our sphere of labour is far from
yours, and our work is in many respects peculiar; but our
object and yours is one. We are encouraged by the belief
that we have your sympathies and prayers, and we assure
you of our profound and devoted attachment as sons and
brethren in the Gospel of Christ.
Signed on behalf and by order of the Conference.
STEPHEN RABONE,
Sydney, N.S.W.,
Secretary,
February Bth, 1859.
33


THE ANNUAL ADDRESS
OF THE
AUSTKALASIAN WESLEYAN CONFERENCE
TO THE
Members of the Wesleyan Church in Australasia and
Polynesia.
DEARLY BELOVED BRETHREN.
We, the united pastorate of the Wesleyan Methodist
Church in Australasia and Polynesia, assembled in our
Annual Conference to watch over and direct the work of
God entrusted to our care, “ send greeting unto the breth-
ren ” who belong to the Church “ over which the Holy
Ghost hath made us overseers.” “Ye are our glory and
joy.” “Grace be unto you, and peace, from God our
Father, and from the Lord Jesus Christ.” We thank our
“ God upon every remembrance of you,” “ making request
with joy, for your fellowship in the Gospel,” in our prayers
“for you all.” We trust “that he which hath begun a
good work in you will perform it until the day of Jesus
Christ.” God is our “ record, how greatly we long after
you aU in the bowels of Jesus Christ,” and “pray that
your love may abound yet more and more in knowletlge
and in all judgment; that ye may approve the things
which are excellent; that ye may be sincere and without
oftence, till the day of Christ; being filled with the fruits
of righteousness which are by Jesus Christ, unto the glory
and praise of God.”
We humbly and devoutly acknowledge the condescen-
sion and goodness of God, who “ hath counted us faitliful,
putting us into the Ministry.” We are not insensible of
the honor thus conferred upon us, but the weighty cares


and solemn responsibilities of our office constrain us trem-
blingly to exclaim “ who is sufficient for these things! ”
It is our humble trust that “ our sufficiency is of God.”
A sense of our many imperfections and great unfaithful-
ness deeply affiicts us, and we desire to be baptized anew
for the holy service in which we are engaged. We ask
an interest in your prayers to God, that we may be
“ strengthened with all might, according to His glorious
power,” that we may be able to fulfil “ the Ministry which
we have received of the Lord Jesus, to testify the Gospel
of the grace of God.”
Our earnest and prayerful deliberations upon the affairs
of that great work of God in which you, as well as our-
selves, are happily engaged, have suggested to us occasions
of congratulation, and topics of affectionate counsel and
warning; and we now ask you to rejoice with us in that
wherein ye ought to rejoice, and to give heed to the
tilings which may tend to your personal profiting, and use-
fulness, and the glory of God.
It will gladden your hearts, as it has evoked the joy
of ours, to learn that our united labours and prayers
during the past year “ have not been in vain in the
Lord.” God has been merciful unto us, and blessed us,
and caused his face to shine upon us, and his way has been
made known, and his saving health unto many people.
Besides supplying the vacancies occasioned by death and
other causes, our Church returns shew an increase of 1171
Members in the Colonies, and 2514 on the foreign Stations,
making a total increase of 3685 Church Members. The
number of persons on trial for Church Membership in
both the Home and Foreign departments is 4990; so
that the Lord is now prospering the work of our hands
upon us. But though we feel constrained to call upon you
to join with us in thanksgivings to God for this measure
of prosperity, we think that our grateful joy should be
temfiered by the conviction that had we, as Ministers
and people, been more holy and faithfid, we should have
seen much greater things. Let us, therefore, rejoice with
trembling, and prayerfully endeavour to brace ourselves


for more earnest efforts and larger conquests in tlie service
of God and mankind.
We have been called to mourn the loss of three Minis-
terial fellow-labourers in the vineyard of the Lord, two of
whom have fallen in the foreign field. The other was
zealous and faithful in the midst of us, but he faded in the
hopeful morn of his ministerial career. We have been
comforted and cheered by the assurance that they all died
in peace, and now rest from their labours.
It is matter of grateful joy that God is giving us a suc-
cession of faithful men, not only of our own race, but also
of other races, who have received the Gospel from us in the
Islands of the sea. Two Ministers and three Native Assis-
tant Missionaries have honorably completed the term of
their probation. During the past year, God has given us
from the colonial churches eleven approved Candidates for
our work, and'three in the foreign field. This is one of the
signs of vitality in the Church, and we prayerfully trust
that these brethren will he helpers of our prosperity in the
future. Our ranks are further enlarged by the addition of
twelve fellow-labourers, sent from the Mother Church in
England, some of whom have had the benefit of experi-
ence in the work of the Ministry. We mention these facts
that you may know that our labourers are being increased,
and pray the Lord of the harvest that He would enable
them to reap much fruit for His heavenly kingdom. The
utmost care has been used to secure men who are moved
by the Holy Ghost to preach the Gospel, and we do
humbly believe that the blessing of God will crown their
labours with abundant success.
We heartily congratulate you, dear brethren, on the
largely increasing number of fellow-workers in the service
of the Church of God, who are not separated unto the
Ministry. Our Church is distinguished above all others in
the number and efficiency of its Lay labourers. We re-
joice in our Leaders, Local Preachers, Sabbath School
Teachers, Prayer Leaders, and Tract Distributors as most
valuable and useful helpers in the one great work; and
we beseech you to honour, and sustain by your prayers,


all those who worthily fill any of these appointed spheres
of service. To those who occupy such posts of useful-
ness we say, rejoice with us in the prosperity to which
your labours have contributed, and devote yourselves, with
a quickened piety and a renewed zeal, to the service of
God and his Church. Let nothing turn you aside, or
cause you to slacken your hand. Let not the claims of
business, or the seductions of wealth, or the discourage-
ments of care and adversity, interfere with your active
service of Christ. Business, riches, adversity, are all
blessings when they are sanctified by a zealous devotion
to the interests of Christ’s kingdom, but they will be fright-
ful curses to your souls, and injurious to the cause of God,
if you allow them to damp your zeal and interrupt your
labours. Honor and happiness will attend you if you prove
faithful in your calling,—the honor that cometh from God,
and the bliss of doing good.
We proceed, dear brethren, to offer you a few general
counsels that our experience and observation have sug-
gested as appropriate to the present circumstances of our
Church.
We affectionately remind you that we do not exist as a
religious body for any merely political or party purposes,
neither can our objects be accomplished by the mainten-
ance and prevalence of any peculiar doctrinal or ecclesias-
tical principles. Party has its uses in the political world.
Doctrine and Church polity have an important province in
the Church of God. But the great and paramount pur-
pose of your association with us in Christian fellowship is
your personal salvation. Permit us, therefore, to urge the
Apostolic injunction, Examine yourselves, whether ye
be in the faith; prove your ownselves.” If you
“ stand fast in the liberty wherewith Christ” did
“make you free,” you will not lack consolatory assur-
ances of your acceptance with God. “ The Spirit itself
beareth witness with our spirit, that we are the children
of God,” and “ Because ye are sons, God hath sent forth
the Spirit of his Son into your hearts, crying, Abba,
Father.” This is your present and abiding privilege, as


tlie sons of God. And in proportion to tlie distinctness
and power with wliicli this divine testimony is borne to
your souls, will be the life, and joy, and hope of your
personal piety. We warn you against living in a state
of doubtfulness on this most vital point. You would thus
be bereft of peace, and shorn of strength, and become
weak as other men. 0 take care that the manifested love
of God continually inflames your heart with a growing
filial devotion, then will your peace be “as a river,” and
your “ righteousness as the waves of the sea.”
As means for the promotion of this great end of your
being, we affectionately urge your diligent and earnest use
of the various ordinances of the Church of your choice.
They have been fully proved to be eminently adapted to
promote personal holiness. The memorials of thousands of
the dead in Christ, and the consistent testimony of tens of
thousands yet alive, bear witness to the value of these
ordinances. Be regular and punctual in your attendance
upon public worship, and strive with your might to enter
into its spirit. Hear the word of God. It is the bread
of life. Frequent the table of the Lord, and thus
solemnly renew your covenant engagements with him.
And let not your religious duties be confined to the Sab-
bath. The week-night preaching, and the weekly class
and prayer meeting, are all needful and helpful to your
sphitual prosperity. If you neglect these, you will not
live in the spirit of your duty as Wesleyan Methodists.
It is matter of regret that some of you do not so fully ap-
preciate these means of grace, as you did in the days of
your first love. 0 brethren! we are jealous of you with a
godly jealousy. We cannot but fear that you have suf-
fered loss. We exhort you to “ consider one another, to
provoke unto love and good works; not forsaking the as-
sembling of yourselves together, as the manner of some
is ; but exhorting one another: and so much the more, as
ye see the day approaching.”
Some of you, to whom God has given leisure and under-
standing that fit you for posts of honor and influence in
the Church of God, are in great danger of unfitting your-


selves fur sucli service by your neglect of the more private
and spiritual means of grace. Men of an unspiritual mind
are sometimes ambitious of office, and impatient of disap-
pointment. Such persons frequently leave our Church be-
cause they think they are not allowed a just influence.
If you so use the Weekly Class Meeting and Prayer Meet-
ing as that your godly profiting shall appear unto yoru'
brethren, you will have all the influence in the Wesleyan
Church that your hearts desire ; and if you neglect these,
it may be doubted whether any influence in the Church of
God can be safely committed to you.
We are grateful to God for the peace and unity which
prevail within our borders, and we beseech you to “ let
brotherly love continue.” Avoid contention and strife, for
they “ eat as doth a canker.” “Be kindly affectioned
one to another with brotherly love ; in honor preferring
one another.” We also commend to your practical regard
the apostolic exhortation to the Thessalonian Church, “We
beseech you brethren, to know them which labor among you,
and are over you in the Lord, and admonish you; and to
esteem them very highly in love, for their works’ sake. If
you do not esteem your Ministers you will not profit by their
ministrations, and you wiU be in danger of injuring their
influence with your families and others, and so damaging
the work of God. The indulgence of a disrespectful and
hypercritical spirit towards ministers, by Christian parents,
has not unfrequently cursed whole families with alienation
from the ministry and Church of their fathers. If you
wish your children to follow in your path, and swell the
ranks of the Church of your choice, 0, beware that you
do not by word or deed teach them to despise the am-
bassadors of Christ!
We exhort you brethren to seek and cherish a burning
charity towards all mankind. The souls of men in multi-
tudes are perishing around you, and hundreds of millions
of the human race are going down to the pit. 0 let your
souls realize and feel this sad truth, that you may be in-
fluenced by a self-consuming zeal for the salvation of


men ! If this spirit dwell in you, you will be eager to
enter every open door of usefulness and, ready to become
all things to all men, if by any means you may save some.
Your Church affords you ample opportunity to employ your
gifts and means for the extension of the work of God,
both at home and abroad, and we beseech you, by your
obligation and love to Christ, and by your charity to men,
to consecrate yourselves to this highest service of man-
kind.
As one means of promoting your usefulness seek an en-
lightened attachment, and cherish a loyal devotion to the
Church with which you are identified. Make all its in-
terests your own. Wed yourselves to it, and, as your
spouse, love it and provide for its wants. Be jealous of
its honor. Call to mind its history. Kemember how your
noble ancestry nursed and defended it in its infancy. Think
of its mighty growth, and of the beneficent influences it
has shed upon the wide world. And determine that its
glory shall not be tarnished in your keeping. It demands
your sustenance as well as your love. Deal not with a
niggardly hand. “ Freely ye have received, freely give.”
And let not your contributions be fitful and irregular,
made under the influence of uncertain impulses, but let
them be the spontaneous and well considered offerings
of duty. The system of weekly payments for the
support of the cause of God, which has been observed as
a rule in the Wesleyan Church from the beginning, is
sanctioned by inspired precept, and the example of apos-
tolic times, and it has proved highly advantageous. Other
Churches have admired it, and been astonished at its
power for good. There is great need in this new country,
where your numbers are few, and ministerial labourers
need to be multiplied that your should adhere to the plan
of regular weekly contributions for the support of the
ministry. Otherwise you will most assuredly cripple the
Methodist work of God, and involve your hitherto pro-
gressive Church in comparative feebleness and defeat. A
word to the wise is sufficient; and we make these sugges-
tions to awaken and help your meditations on a subject.


which a little thoughtfulness will convince you is of great
practical importance to the kingdom of Christ.
Need we remind you, that without God “nothing is
wise, or holy, or strong,” therefore, be instant “ in prayer”
for the divine blessing upon all you do for Him. The
divine spirit in you, the divine wisdom guiding you, and
the divine power helping you, are all absolutely essential
to the efficient fulfilment of your mission as disciples of
Christ. These things must be sought in prayer, —in your
closet and the family altar, as well as in the house of God.
Guard against a cold and formal discharge of this duty.
Deadness in your closet will curse you as with a blight.
Deadness at your family altar, if you be heads of families,
will be a curse to those you most tenderly love ; and your
want of earnest prayerfulness will stay the gracious rain of
heaven upon the Church of God. 0 then give yourselves
to prayer! Let nothing turn you from this duty, or rob
you of this great privilege. What higher honor or joy
could be given to man than this, that he should be per-
mitted to plead and prevail with God! Prove me now
herewith, saith the Lord of Hosts, if I will not open you
the windows of heaven and pour out a blessing that there
shall not be room enough to receive it.”
We trust you will bear with us, dear brethren, if we
put you upon your guard against the seductions of the
world. There is a spirit abroad which would remove the
ancient land marks, both in faith and practice. We affec-
tionately warn you against this, and entreat you to cherish
a reverential regard for the truths and institutions of re-
ligion, and to abstain from all appearance of evil. Parti-
cularly, we commend to your reverent and godly observ-
ance the holy Sabbath of the Lord. We believe the loose
notions that prevail respecting this most beneficent and
sacred divine institution are infidel and immoral, and sub-
versive of the highest interests of men, as well as the
honor of God. Beware, therefore, of the sophistries that
would lessen your religious esteem for the Lord’s day, and
“ call the Sabbath a delight, the holy of the Lord, honor-
able, and honor him, not doing your own ways, nor finding


42
your own pleasure, nor speaking your own words.”
We also earnestly caution you against the fashionable
amusements of the present times, which do not tend
to godly edifying. Perhaps there never was a period
when sin was so deceitful as it is now. It affects to he
clothed even with moral charms. It calls to its aid intel-
ligence, politeness, and philanthropy, in order that it may, ;
if possible, “ deceive the elect.” 0, remember that you .
are called to “come out from the world,” th “he separate,”
to “ touch not the unclean thing.” “ Know ye not that
the friendship of the world is enmity with God.” “ Let
your conversation be as becometh the gospel of Christ,”
and “ adorn the doctrine of God your Saviour in all
things.” “ Finally, brethren, farewell. Be perfect, he
of good comfort, be of one mind, live in peace, and the
God of love and peace shall be with you.”
Signed on behalf and by order of the, Conference.
DANIEL J. DRAPER, President.
STEPHEN RABONE, Secretary.


|o ;ooooooooo<pooooo o oo
h2‘.SS§SS^SoSSS^S§?S;®MS
JO I6Jf>X o
C O XJ *‘--
1 rt :oc<jf'«-cct'»i—<»rs oCsiccv4ox«so o cc : cc
±3'>rt c^.Or~>— O
'C?_ O Oi C<jTt'CCCC.-i O
U-S H *"
6bßs ■- -.
-S o
'm o
” o
S ’*' r-iC<»—iiM O
I tsS' _
, S A
CO C o nd
»c» .—idC w
oA CCfi-O) f-i CC.»TSOO'^COi Ci
'-' fi «
E-<' '
U -S«101[0S XtJCI : :: 2
JO o <n .-h o
H ~.
c« •siooqog /(bci co--~--o-co--.
joiaquitiK ‘
'saxagqjoqjo c SS
W sißioi[Og mßqqT?g ,oo'=Doo-<t.«>(N x
1-5
L siooqog irj^cor—c<* wco -^t*
P- JO , „ o
&H diqsjoquiajij -o x
Id -ioJ I«HX «0 . r-. mCO - -. rH w-, : CO
O.- - -
j/2 qoinq'j o coo oo
pojipB.voov pire *" 2
I !!
'Siopuocj ;(MCOCOCOTtHOOCOCCICO'chcqeO‘O'ct-(M C^
IO«• I SSTipj oq
* * a, 5 J2O ; i>«. f— GC CC <M LO *|-H t^
- ■
§ d ■ *s.toijO'BoX oo 'm
pOUOg *IIUS ‘O «0 OO CO r-l lO
H -siaqoßax .-,„o= • : • Ico
pq ’S ;S c I %l • :■■:■. : . | oq
■§ -S< -sjsiqoajßO \\ \ \\]i\: I { ] ] I \ [ = =
<s_. c ) .
-siojs'iuiK "isissy
piresouwoumu cocooq co^^^co^co
p£j -jsdng‘sJ3jsiu!i\r _
tt] SuiqoßOJd wqjo ' ’ "" -■m- o
0 -. o
o <m weo o
w ;Ii §i i s :
s .=.=.= ! = . = . = I .‘I I .
" . rillfiilsisilllliiiei J


GENERAL
RETURNS : VICTORIA DISTRICT
1858.
CIRCUITS.
j Number of Chapels.
Other Preaching Places.
Schools used as Chapels
.S 1
rt i
Subordinate
Paid Agents.
Unpaid
Agents.
Full and Accredited
Church Members.
On Trial for
Membership.
Numlrer of
Sabbath Schools.
Sabbath Scholars
of both Sexes.
Number of
Day Schools.
Number of Day
Scholars of both
Sexes.
Total Number of Scholars,
deducting forthose ■who at-
tend both Sabbath and
Day Schools.
Total N umber of
Attendants.
Ministers and Pix
1 on Trial.
Catechists.
Day School
Teachers.
Sunday School
Teachers.
Local Preachers.
Male.
Female.
Total.
Melbourne, West ...
5' 4 2
3
13
88
23
332
34
8
889
4
584
609
565
1174
3570
Melbourne, East...
11 2 2
2
12
130
36
583
33
14
1132
6
530
621
742
1363
4480
Melbourne, South ...
3; 1 ...
2
4
27
7
116
3
3
191
2
155
134
120
254
620
Brighton
5 3 3
2
11
43
12
175
12
7
290
6
366
240
203
443
1260
Williamstown
1 ...i...
1
10
3
36
4
1
60
30
30
60
200
Pentridge
6 ...! 1
1
6
33
9
96
29
5
200
4
180
145
155
300
1000
Geelong
17 8 2
2
2
32
160
34
644
76
17
1120
11
800
735
680
13)5
3750
Tuckfield
1 3 ...
6
1
24
2
56
20
36
56
220
Warrnambool. ...
2 ...1...
1
...
2
11
2
30
5
1
95
2
40
55
67
122
350
Belfast
1 3 ...
1
1
17
2
35
3
2
81
1
45
60
45
105
450
Portland
2 3 ...
I
1
20
4
80
30
2
130
1
36
70
90
160
500
Kyneton
3, 3 ...
2
1
20
11
55
14
1
100
1
37
70
66
136
450
Castlemaine
13; 6 ...
1
12
159
32
378
23
14
1122
6
497
719
651
1370
3380
Carlsbrook
11
3
2
82
23
279
83
11
479
2
71
200
208
408
1300
Sandhurst
8l 1 ...
2
14
106
29
304
66
10
845
8
400
540
470
1010
2800
Ballaarat
18 10 1
2
25
213
61
655
20
15
1240
14
878
740
700
1440
4850
Beechworth
1 3 ...
4
2
16
4
65
1
115
1
87
70
65
135
500
Kilmore
2i 2 ...
! 1
1
...
1
3
4
50
4
‘20
1
40
25
20
45
470
Total
no 52 11
32
2
139
1150
297
3937
439
115
8165
70
4746
5083
4813
9896
30,150


•sjtj[oqos put! g§2§§§g§§
SaiptipuT oijqnj
uo JO a9qum|^[
1 2 o p-< !>. ■
2'S S' 'TPIOT COCOQCCOCSIMC3Oi-1,-l
lO O (N (M «5 >!f <N 50 (N
O J 4) . I—l ?—4
g'O O o 00 w (N eo 00 '
,« 3 o 'aTPiira j 50-^c^oooOrt'^<N(N
jr^>o-c.-icos^.-co.-H
. O <M O <N 1-H ?£> CO
no !3 s® S "aTPTAT IriCOOOOS
S O S « t^>Oi-Hr-.CO(Nr-l(N
00
7 •s.reioqos . .gs . . . .
;Cb(J jo • • co • • • •
O
’siooqog jfßd JO I I I I I :
H
M -sißfoqos looqog
p ifßpung JO
*s{ooqo§ coco'^cot^cot^i— l-^
j JO " '“'
'dms 000510055000000
eO(NCO IMIMIMIOCO
H -JagmaH FPX «0
g -saaquiajM qoinqo
pajipajooß puß iinj
501>.000'>J<50(M.—105
M •SI9pB9'J SSB[3 eoiMr-i.-iC'jt-i^iM
, "lb co” CO 00 O’O) w o
O rS g "siaqaßoaj[Booq;
-sjaqoßax §lSoco®
looqog XBpung
<A „• -sJoqDBOx «s . . .50 . . . .
p 'S P-g lOoqog Xbcl
H 2 <u —-
MI -sjsiqoajßo :::::::::
i-g coco.-irt(Nr-(i-(iM.-i
•soobljJ Suiqoß9Jjj .loqjo
W •s[9dßqp JO
H : : : ;
o ; : : : :
c» 111.
H
t—( * u
3
gocsrao;-'JS|®S


OS .2 SP a
oo o
OO O
S'--So
o' O o
/ ’Fiox 2 2
53 ———
S 0-2 2 -saiuuia j g ® ®
I Hs -
2"f *S3It?TAT ® ® ®
Q «3 l? 3 00
H -siooips j : : :
X/1 . _
S '®3XOS HJoq I® ® ®
JO s.ißjoqog qo j '"'
'spoqos eq
qjßqqßS Jo
H 'FIJI «0 os . oi
Z/2
<J -sjaquiapf i[nj ® jf; g
Ph •saapua'q ssbjq
H i
Oh g "siaqaßaJj jboo^
fS -s-taqaßax <n
jooqag
g „• ! -s.iaqoßax . ,
2 § I looqoB ...
PL| I
H -< ; ; ;
W !
Ph ”
'saoßij Suiqoßa.ix ■isqiO °°
C 2 •S[adßqQ JO aaqumjq;
w*' . "
* . ’
o cn : :
H :
p : :
u :
Ph * 3
O - H
-S
53 o


Total
Hobart Town
New Norfolk ..
Campbell Town .. ;
Launceston .. ..
Longford
Westbury
Deloraine
Mersey
CIRCUITS.
09
tO»—‘CO-^ClCOCO-^T
Chapels.
W
09
o
C0OiC0t—»^J»»tOC;i*<I
Other Preaching Places.
!2!
Kl
o
Ministers and Preachers on Trial.
Catechists.
CJQ . Q
>
Day School
Teachers.
* '
H
H
00
o
1—* • to t—‘ CO 1—* Cn
*-<rc:iC;<ooco
Sunday School
Teachers.
Subordir
Unpai
Agent
!z!
o
1—» • H-4
CO to »-* CO CO • f-*
Local Preachers.
C/2
Os
00
to
0it00i<^09>^>^cri
Class Leaders.
r pi- p
Cl
H
>
CO
fe!
00
CO
h-i CO
coco«<rcooootcnto
Accredited Church Members.
CO
• to (-> Oi • O CO
On Trial for Membership.
;>
H
to
cotococotococooo
Sabbath Schools.
1—1
CO
H
Ci
to
to
h-i I CO H-* Ci
cncocso^f^coi—*co
Sabbath Scholars of both sexes.
s
o
H
1—-
Number of Day Schools.
:
Number of Day Scholars.
GO
CO
-<r
H-* CO
•-itociOtoo^-<rh^».
Males.
aig'pl £&
00
to
Cn
V- CO
CDOiCi^^CitOCOH-*
Females.
Cl Ht> P
$ p 2 P
p.aS‘3
? 2 o'
M 9 S' ™
D o 5j cl
!“ a o o
•< ' S,
to
to
t—» j—‘ CO • Oi
cncoC50Kfi^eo»—*co
Total.
0\
o
CsCoCnOi'—'CoCrtOO
OOOOOCnOO
oooooooo
Total Number of Attendants
on Public 'W'^orship,


, I a. C>«*fso©oo‘oo© I
i COOOOO I ©
puß
SmpnToui ‘SI9JB9H ! i ©•©•©©••• ©'"' ©
jo’laquinN wox | « j J; 'S •"« • • S
« x 3 i Ts< i:©© © ® o © i
o I .b. . .©Tf© © (N © I £0
f-4 to rr iM I ©
-IBJOX • • • —r-S —
2J ?! ! S
locs'S iN-i :©:©—'©©©*oo I ©
5-13 ow —
■§§S>« S3IBUI3X -
I '
3 ! 1 i !
/ I N
j- I w I Irr :<N—IN© © © ?< 3-
S I H I ::•; i I
oo j rji : . o :© © o i co
•SJBpqDg *z;| j ©
H Jtßa JO J3qumjs[ § = :!::*'::: j o
g -siooqog izi | :" : | ®
j(Ba JO JoqninN; H 1 : I ”
C/5 ~ i -OSOOOOCOO i O
rj : !0 1» o oo o o 2
p -S3X3S UJoq \ .-0 o -a- g< « |
JO sißjoqDS qißqqßs |TTTT : i i | «
sr
qjyqqeg JO MqtTON H I : : : :I
— I : © tx« CO 05 © : © : ® I rs
Q -diqsioquioK | ' ’»' —»< • •” | _
iz; lOj IBUX «0 h 1 “i-::::::" I 2
<ri J i S
._|o |J2
y -sisquisH qDinqo A \ m-> »< - j 2
0 P3JIP3IDDV POB lin J |■To e<“To^:| |
j ._t»t'"-o'3’«>>o<»o j
<! . -SI3PB3X ;3 I : _
.. I SSBIO I t:
W 3 e Sii i •o t- i>. oi 1' o—oo o I 2
!z; -swqDßOid » j : " I S
Pi g 1800 l o: - :::'::« | «
'a 5 i i 'O O* ©O 00 1 'O'
H & -swqDBSX i L 2
w qqos XBpuns! | 9; = :•••*::: 2 I_ B _
• ■swqo’jax !g I I
IPS'! H| I ”
I :::::::::: I :
W “ ‘gjsiqosjßj M I I :
-83UBU01SS1H JUBJSXS , : |
S -SV PUB S3IIBU0ISSIH! W I j o
-53381X ®2-" i: I S
SuiqDßSix -loqJO w 1 ::::*' 111 I
CO ©© © 'f 1 ©
•nodßua
• ; : c 3 ; : :
. . d> . .
.•.•. o . * , '
H I
D iI : =I: . : I =
jj^s3oe^:oc3^Oa)


Q©© © © ©
’sißtoqag M S 2 5 2 5
IUB qaxtmg
Sinpntaui ‘sjareaH 00000 o
JO ibjox W §2S g " «?
(N
o
O 03 .
o a,
'' I ~ S
oo^—: S
PP I <N CO :
i o
•sjßioqag I Iz; | ::: : : I =
Xb(J jo laqumN; IW I ::: S S j b_
•siooqag I jg I : : : : '~' I "
jtBgJO I pq | : : : I
I ©©(?<:© } (N
•saxag qjoq j " ‘ ” ! S
o
I—l
Ph
H
XTi
5
N
O
H
C 5
JO SJBioqag qjßqqßg « | SS§ S : j §
•siooqag »' 2 : : | J;
qjßqqßg jo pq | h< fn m : j o
I ;g~i Si I g
JOJ mJX up
I to o : o "S'
I 2;; •
qainqo
KH
h-J
W
pajipaiaov puß nnx j | |
“ -siapßag | :: : I
ta S ssßio pq I : I S
;g -siaqoßaix J S g " I
S 3 ißOog IH ) S■* 2 " J e 3
'sJOgaßax ’ :z; I 2 5 :” : 1 _ m
p ggog pq I g"’”” : I o
rQ *S
'z t
g --
W c
Pi es^
ill
•o . -siaqaßax | \
looipg XBg I W I ;“ : : | ”
/ ‘oig |_s_J I\\ ■ \ I :
“13 1 H | \ • ; • • | •
•saußuoissiH }UB}sisj \ ::: : : | :
■<*l -ssußuoissiw: }UB}sisj j ::: i i | :
-sy puß saiißuoissij? w | « | t,
j2j -saoBM I co-iN IQ : j g.
fiq gmnoß9j<i latuo W I <o (N o j oo
O S j ®o> : : j 5
•sTadßUf) —! ! r'_
W I V : c* j
•*3 • . •
.
; b£ : :
U :
: :
•
-*-> <D 3
bCIi ;Q
02
H
B
u


Total
Tonga
Haabai ..
Vavau
Samoa
Niuatobutabu
Niuafoou..
CIRCUITS.
GENERAL RETURNS : FRIENDLY ISLANDS DISTRICT— 1858.
Cn
w to w
to S.1 CO P— ■ to
Number of Chapels.
Other Preaching Places.
•<r
*-• t-i to CO
Missionaries.
CO
-
t-* to CO h-*
Native Assistant
Missionaries.
Co
: : :
Catechists.
to to »-*
I—• to to CO
00 o o o o
Day School Teachers.
CO
00
•—I • Cr< CO
O • O CO o
Sabbath School Teachers.
0\
Ci
Ci
bO
Cr<
00
*—* to to
Ci to 00 00 o o
Oi 00 o to o o
Local Preachers.
h-» to
CO N-i Cn Oi 00 o
Ci O ►—* 00
00 o 00 oi *<r
Full and accredited
Church Members.
• • O vfi*
. . -<r 00
On Trial for Membership.
00
Ci
• • • CO to CO
• • • to O
Number of Sabbath
Schools.
to
to
Ci
00
to
00 CO
• • • to o
• • • O 00 o
Sabbath Scholars of both
Sexes.
t—* f— Oi
00 o C5 Oi CO
Number of Day Schools.
10,140
CO to I-*
00 cn -<r Ox
to Oi O CO 00
00 CO o o to
Number of Day Scholars.
Male.
Total Number of
Scholars, deduc-
ting for those who
attend both
Sabbath and Day
Schools.
•
Female.
10,140
CO to >— *
00 Ox “<I Ox CO
to Ci O CO 00
00 1-- CO o o to
Total.
17,505
»-* to Ox
O CSX crx o O
O Ci o o o
O O Ox o o o
Total Number of attendants
including Members and
Scholars.


o 2i w w f
H
S p p Sg c
p ; p P £5
S’
• *
o
•
o
d
H
c«
fcs5
00
H-* »—‘ *<T Ox
t— o to to O C’x Oi
Chapels.
Q
W
to
I-* CO CO CO t—• •
Other Preaching
o
CO to Ox o Ci •
-..^Places.
P3
>
. . i-a bO H-» h-> fcO
Missionaries.
iso
• • • • «
English
w
f-4 . . . h-1 . .
Schoolniasters.
Native Assistant
P- O'
c;
• • K-l h-* to
Missionaries.
CT5 St
§ s
Catechists and
OS
Oi
• to to OO Ox K-»
• 00 Ox o to ‘ o
Assistant Cate-
W
chists.
Ci
CO CO o to
Local
Preachers.
d
«-i
w
School
bO
Oi
to CO •
o • *<r
Teachers.
CO P-<
O
00
H-» to CO
1—‘ CO Ox H- H-I Oi
Full and Accredited
cc
H
CO
00
00 to crx 00 CO 00
Ox CO o Ox 05 O
Church Members.
-2
CO
)-4 H-1 H-t
H
to
>-» o o o
CO H-• 00 Ox 05 to -<r
00 )-» H- Ox 05
On Trial for Membership.
00
00
CO to to CO •
Day Schools.
en fct- o 1— ‘ • -<r
to
,
o
CO »—• «<r 00
to p CO -<r 05 Ox CO
Scholars
00 o 00 Co
c;i
i®
to >-•
00 to
Attendants on
Public
Ci
to to o o o
CO H-* 00 O CO o-x
Worship
50 Oi Os O In (fk to


S-£-o23$£S§
0
ct 3 S3?r3 srS-O
3 2. 3 >■ p 2
H
2- S-P.P.3 s-
!“ tr' 3 • H** « • 3-
3 El. ” • 3 ?T •
: ?St
•c-p*
• • . o>
• • • CO
s
0
H
c«
*<r
wX
to h-. h-i
-<ri—‘O
ooH^-<r-<tH-oxooo5
Chapels.
Ci
to 1— '
O
*<r
o« ZO
O* 0»-*000>^^co^
Other Preaching Places,
Ox
J—I 1—. 1—» 03 CO
Ministers, Supernumeraries,
O
ooox*<rh^k.otooxto***j
and Assistant Ministers.
to
to
0
to
CO I--I
to 10 to
Catechists.
w
O'? 3 0-
Oi •“»
. »-• • 1-k CO to
Day School
3 h3
GO
• CO CO 0 • • 0 CO CO
Teachers.
• •
Ox*
i-i -^T^OO
Sunday School
Ol
>• o'
'S 3 S
2 3.
tOCOOGOCCtOCOO-x'—*
CiOOtOCOOtOOOOtO
Teachers.
C/3
to
—' ,-4 to —*
COCOf^s*.
Local Preachers.
cl
g
0
5. 9=
CO
CO
>_« to to
• Ox Ox <—* C:> -<j- N—•
• ooooooooxcoo*<r
Class Leaders.
CD
>
pi
to
00
00 Oi to CO CO
Pull and Accredited Church
Members.
*<!
0
00
6x'^h^4^i^>^»^'<r-^5d
*0
CO
CO
to >-* to CO
OxCOCO
On Trial for Membership.’
pi
W
0
toootocicccococooi
Ox
to
Ox
• 00 CO to -<r I—* 0
• Oi-<ico^co>i^Oxhf!^
Number of Sabbath Schools.
d
to
00
to !-» to )-* Ox 00 Ci
Sabbath Scholars of both
C/2
Ox
to
OOtOtOtOOCOOx»^2^
sexes
1
to
00
00
CO
Oi (—1 . . H-»
hi»* CO t-* • • CO 0 Ox
JN umber of Day Schools.
Crx
00
«»■
to I-*
to
CO
Ox
Ox 0 1— •
CO I—* CO • • c: 0
CO “<r Oi • • cc
Number of Day Scholars.
Ox
>—* 0 0 0 Ox Ci Co
I—* to Ox CO
• • . Ci 0 CO
Males.
Ci 0 00 CO
CO
to CO
• • Ci CO CO __ 00 00
Females.
cr w 2
o'
5 =;;lp,g
0
C5 ci 0 W <W 5>
jjf' ja 0 Q< j-j*
Ci
CO
CO
to
Ox 0 >—* to H- > Ox CO
wcoci^^h^ooo
Total.
■
eg 3'°
Ci
t—‘oootoo»^d^co
P.W ”•
Ox
CO
Ox I—* >—» CO to
CO*<rCOOxOx OiOO
Total Number of Attendants
0
h^k.Ox*^O>i^’<T00i— *►—*
CiOO-xCiOxOCOOxCO
on Public Worship.
Ox
C0 0x0>--00000


APPENDIX I.
MISSIONARY COMMITTEE.
Meeting of the General Missionary
the sittings of the Conference, ;
Sydney, January 27th, 1859.
I Committee, held during
in York Street Chapel,
Present:—The Rev. D. J. Draper,
President of the Con-
Also,
ference in the Chair,
Rev. J. Watkin,
„ S. Rabone,
„ J. Eggleston,
~ S. Ironside,
„ W. A. Quick,
From N. S. Wales.
„ B. Chapman,
„ W. Hesse],
„ J. Oram,
„ J. G. Millard,
„ T. Williams, A
„ W. L. Binks, V
„ J. C. Symons, J
From Victoria.
„ W. Butters,
„ T. B. Harris,
From S. Australia.
From Tasmania.
„ T. Buddie, ... From Auckland.
„ R. Amos, ... From Friendly Islands.
„ J. Waterhouse, 7 in r? •
J. Malvern, j From Feejee.
Messrs. Love, M‘Arthur, Caldwell, Cowlishaw, Reeve,
G. W. Allen, Hon. G. Allen, M.L.C., W. Speer, and Rev.
R. Mansfield.


New South Wales District
.... JgSOOO
0
0
Victoria
2500
0
0
South Australia
750
0
0
Tasmania
900
0
0
Auckland
285
0
0
Wellington
300
0
0
Friendly Islands
60
0
0
Feejee
40
0
0
Net proceeds of Oil
1800
0
0
0
0
I.—The Minutes of the Executive Committee were read
and confirmed.
ll.— Kesolved,
1. That the thanks of this Committee be presented to
the Treasurers of the Society, The Hon. George Allen,
M.L.C., and the Rev. Stephen Rabone, and also to the
General Secretary, for their services during the past year.
2. That the thanks of this Meeting bg presented to
George Wigram Allen, John Caldwell, William Love,
Alexander M‘Arthur, and William Speer, Esqrs., for the
personal liabilities they have incurred in the arrangements
found necessary for meeting the Society’s financial require-
ments.
lll.—The Revenue for the past year was stated to be
A 9,500 ; and the expenditure about j£13,453 2s. 5d.: the
balance, £3,953 2s. 5d., to be paid by the Missionary
Committee in London; but, as this account could not be
made up with exactness before the Conference, owing to
the non receipt of the subscription lists, there may be found
a slight discrepancy between these amounts and those
which will shortly be published in the Annual Missionary
Report.
IV. —The estimated Revenue for 1859 is as follows:
54


Auckland District
M2320
0
0
Wellington do
1518
12
0
Friendly Islands
2124
10
0
Feejee do
2286
8
0
„ Additional
1812
16
0
Brig “ John Wesley”
1800
0
0
General Expenses
930
0
0
Returned Missionaries and Children
1518
0
0
Chinese Mission, Victoria
300
0
0
,, „ N. S. Wales
150
0
0
Bank Interest, &c
400
0
0
jei5,160
6
0
V.—The following estimated Expenditure is authorized
for the year 1859 :
Leaving a deficiency of J 05525 6s. Od. to be drawn from
the Committee in England.
VI. — Resolved,
1. That this Conference is glad to learn that the Reso-
lutions of the Executive in reference to Finance have had
the serious consideration of the Ministers and Lay Mem-
bers of the Financial District Meetings in New Zealand,
and that the recent visit of the Chairman of the Auckland
District to the several Circuits of his District has been pro-
ductive of the most satisfactory results, and earnestly hopes
that every effort will be made in all the Circuits in that
country to augment the amount received towards the sup-
port of their own Ministers.
2. This Committee recommends the establishment of
Wesleyan Missions to the Chinese in the Colonies of New
South Wales and Victoria, to be under the same manage-
ment as the other Missions of the Society.
3. That the proposed Laws and Regulations for the Mis-
sionary Societyjis now amended, be recommended to the
Conference.
D. J. DRAPER,
PRE.SIDENT OF THE CONFERENCE, Ch.\IRMAN.


APPENDIX 11.
Receipts and Expendituee of Educational Fund,
for the Year ending 31si December, 1858,
ÜBIBiptS.
s, d» 5, d~
Sydney, North 18 0 0
Sydney, South 10 0 0
Sydney, East 16 0 0
Newtown 5 13 7
*s
CO
cu
g
I
Parramatta 11 2 6
Windsor 12 0 6
Bathurst 17 3 9
Maitland 13 13 3
Bowenfells 0 0 0
Mudgee 0 0 0
Camden 2 10 0
Wollongong 8 13 8
Goulburn 12 0 0
Newcastle 4 0 6
Singleton 1 16 6
Moruya 0 0 0
Moreton Bay 10 0 0
142 19 9


Melbourne, West...
Melbourne, East ...
Melbourne, South...
Brighton 10 11 0
Williamstown 5 0 0
Pentridge 5 18 5
Geelong 26 15 10
Tuckfield 1 6 1
Kyneton 3 0 0
Castlemaine 21 15 4
Carisbrook 5 0 0
Sandhurst 14 6 0
Ballaarat 15 0 0
Beechworth 6 9 0
Adelaide, South ... 34 17 2
Adelaide, North ... 20 7 10
Gawler 5 0 5
Kapunda 3 14 11
Kooringa 5 4 0
Willunga 4 13 3
Clarendon 4 18 5
Yankalilla 19 6
' Hobart Town 13 12 6
New Norfolk 4 0 0
Campbell Town ... 5 9 2
Launceston 10 0 0
I Longford 4 10 0
1 Westbury 6 6 9
0 0 0
New South Wales... 16 16 0
Victoria 14 3 6
South Australia ... 1010 0
Tasmania 6 16 6
£ s. d. s. d,
40 0 0
28 2 9
11 0 0
4 5
5 6
4 0 0
5 9 2
43 18 5
48 6 0
-1
s
•S
s tS
I
-I -s
10 0 0
4 10 0
6 6 9
0 0 0
CO V
S ss i '
Total 14 1
57


d^a'iirnMtnrß.
£ s. d. Jc s. d.
New South Wales :
8 Girls @ £l2 12s. ... 100 IG 0
5 Boys @ £l6 16s. ... 84 0 0
184 16 0
Victoria District :—
1 Boy @ d£l6 16s. ,
South Australia District :—
16 16 0
2 Girls @ Jei2 12s. ... 25 4 0
4 Boys @ i£l6 16s. ... 67 4 0
92 8 0
Tasmania District :—
3 Girls @ £l2 12s. ... 37 16 0
5 Boys @ £l6 16s. ... 84 0 0
l2l 16 0
Balance to Credit of Fund 93 18 1
Total 509 14 1
WILLIAM BUTTEBS,7
JOHN COLTON, j Trea&urees.
58


APPENDIX 111.
Receipts and Expenditure of Children’s Fund,
For the Year ending 31s# December, 1858.
aßEii|its.
New South Wales District :—
38 Children @ £l2 12s. 478 16 0
Victoria District :—
40 Children @ £l2 12s. 504 0 0
South Australia District :—
27| Children @ 12s. 346 10 0
Tasmania District : —
9i Children @ j£l2 12s. 119 14 0
1449 0 0
New South Wales District :—
50| Children @ £l2 12s. 633 3 0
Victoria District :—
18| Children @ j£l2 12s. 233 2 0
South Australia District :• —
19 Children @ £l2 12s. 239 8 0
Tasmania District : —
16i Children @ £l2 12s. 204 15 0
1310 8 0
138 12 0
Balance to Credit of Fund
<£1449 0 0
JOHN A. MANTON,-)
SAMUEL HORTON,P J-^^easurlrs.


AN ALPHABETICAL LIST
OF THE
\VESLEYAN METHODIST MINISTERS
PREACHERS ON TRIAL
AUSTRALASIA
IN CONNEXION WITH THE
AUSTRALASIAN CONFERENCE
The figures at the beginning of the lines show the year in which each Minister
commenced his ministry ; and those at the end of the lines denote his
first, second, &c., annual appointment to his present Circuit.
-1845 Adams, Thomas, Vavau 3
1853 Albiston, Joseph, Carii-
h'ook 1
1889 Aldred, John, Canter-
bury 6
1853 Amos, Richard, Parra-
matta 1
1854 Angwin, Thomas, Ist,
Bathurst 2
1858 Angwin, Thomas, 2nd,
Mersey 2
1858 Atkin, John, iSawef/Htrs# 1
1858 Baird, Charles J., Bua. 1
1859 Baker, Thomas, Rewa. 1
1859 Bath, Henry, Port
Adelaide 1
1856 Beaizley, Theophilus,
Sydney, East 1
1854 Bennett, Nathaniel
Gawler 2
1857 Bennett, William M.,
Gummaracha 1
1838 Bickford, James, Bal-
laarat 3


1844 Binks, W. L., Mel-
hourne, East 1
1858 Blamires, W. L,, Castle-
maine 2
Bowes, John, Assistant
Missionary, Turon ~ 2
1854 Brown, William, Ka-
punda 3
1835 Buddie, Thomas, il/awM-
kau 5
1837 Buller, James, Welling-
ton 5
1859 Burns, Edward B.,Re^-
fast 1
1859 Burgess, Henry T. Yan-
kalilla 1
1833 Butters, William, Ade-
laide, South 1
1858 Caldwell, Richard, ilTb-
ruya 2
1838 Calvert, James 4
[On a visit to England for the purpose
of superintending the printing of
the Scriptures in the Feejeeanlan-
guage.]
1859 Carey, Jesse, Rotumah, 1
1859 Casely, Robert S,,
Huon
1856 Catterall, John, Kyne-
ton 3
1845 Chapman, Benjamin,
Maitland 3
1856 Chester, Henry, Mal-
don 1
1854 Clarke, William, Cam-
den 1
1836 Clay, Charles, York .. 1
1855 Colwell, Charles, Min-
taro 1
1859 Cooke, Richard 0., De-
loraine 1
1851 Cope, John, Hobart
Town 2
1837 Creed, Charles, Yass.. 3
1854 Crisp, James W.,i?eec^-
worth 1
1858 Crump, John, Manukau 1
1856 Curnow, William,Rris-
bane 1
1848 Currey, William C.,
Brighton 1
1846 Daniel, George, Cres-
wick 1
1852 Dare, Joseph, Sand-
hurst 3
1848 Davis, Walter J., Wind-
sor 2
1856 Dowson, James W.,
Gunning 2
1834 Draper, Daniel J., Pre-
sident of the Con-
ference, Melbourne,
South 2
1856 Dubourg, Charles, Sand-
hurst 2
1856 Dyson, Martyn, Samoa. 2
1834 Eggleston, John, Mis-
sionary Secretary, Syd-
ney 2
1858 Fawcett, Francis, Bal-
main 1
1856 Fidler, William, War-
wick I
1851 Fillingham, Joseph,
Oatlands 1
61


1847 Fletcher, Joseph H.,
New Plymouth 2
1856 Fletcher, William, 8.A.,
Lakemha 3
1850 Flockhart, Robert C.,
Kooringa 2
1852 Fordham, John S., Raw. 2
Gaud, Henry H., Ba-
thurst 2
Gittos, William, Kai-
para 2
Goldsmith, Charles H.,
Strathalhyn 1
1845 Harcourt, John, Ade-
laide South 3
-1827 Hardy, Samuel, Perth. 5
1836 Harding, Isaac, Auck-
land 2
1840 Harris, Thomas 8.,
Launceston 2
1847 Hart, Richard, Pent-
ridge 2
1845 Hessel, William, Syd-
ney, North 3
1849 Hill, William, Ist, Gee-
long 3
1854 Hill, William, 2nd, Va-
vau 1
1824 Hobbs, John, Supernu-
vaex&vy,Auckland ~
1856 Hopkins, William, Car-
isbrook 1
1839 Hurst, George, Sydney,
North 1
1845 Hutchison, James, MeL
bourne. West 1
1839 Ingram, William, Ade-
laide, North 1
845 Innes, Jonathan, Wei- 1
ington 4
1837 Ironside, Samuel, Syd-
ney, East 2
James, Thomas, Mel
hourne, South 1
1854 Kelynack, William,
Braidwood 3
1846 King, Edward, Brigh
ton 2
1846 Kirk, William, Wai.
mate 5
1857 Knight, Samuel, Mel-
bourne, East 1
1856 Lane, Charles, Ores
wick 1
1858 Langham, Fredrick,
Lakemba 1
1845 Lawry, Henry H., Ho-
kianga 4
1817 Lawry, Walter, Super-
numerary, Parramatta
1857 Lee, George, Tonga-
tabu 3
1855 Lelean, William D.,
Hobart Town 2
1844 Lighthody, William,
Supernumerary, Port
1856 Lloyd, Thomas, Ade
laide. South 2
1846 Lowe, William, West-
bury 1
62


1854 Mack, Hans, Kiama .. 3
1846 Malvern, John, {Re-
turning to England.)
1830 Manton, John A., Par-
ramatta 1
1858 Martin, George, New-
town 1
1856 Mayne, William T.,
Bathurst 1
1856 Mewton, John, Kilmore 2
1848 Millard, John G., Bal-
laarat 1
1849 Moore, William, Rewa 6
1858 Moorehouse, James,
Auckland 1
1847 Oram, Joseph, Sydney,
South 2
1857 Orton, Richard W.,
Tongatabu 1
1849 Pemell, John, Manning
River 2
Pickering, George, As-
sistant Missionary,
Singleton 2
1852 Piddington, W. J. K.,
Mudgee 2
1850 Polglase, John,
tion, Feejee 1
1841 Quick, William A.,
Horton College, Ross
1833 Rabone, Stephen, Se-
cretary of the Confer-
ence, Newtown 1
1841 Raston, Thomas, Cas-
tlemaine 3
1848 Reid, Alexander,
Wai'pa 2
1854 Richards, George 8.,
PorAand 2
1851 Rigg, Charles W.
land 1
1858 Rowse, William, Can
terbury i
1854 Royce, James S. H.,
Rewa 4
1827 Schofield, William, Su-
pernumerary, Srjdney,
1853 Schnakenberg, Cort
H., Kawhia 2
1859 Skewes, Thomas, Bow-
enfells 1
1854 Smith, John 8., Camp.
bell Town 2
1828 Smithies, John, Long-
ford 2
1849 Somerville, James,
Shoalhaven 2
1844 Stannard, George, Maw-
gunui 1
1858 Stephinson, William
G. R., Haabai 2
1849 Symons, C. Gee-
long ]
1824 Thomas, John, Tonga-
tabu 4
1836 Tuckfield, Francis,
New Norfolk 2
1854 Turner, Josiah G., New-
castle 1
1821 Turner, Nathaniel, Su-
pernumerary, Brisbane
63


Turner, Peter, Super-
numerary, Windsor ..
Turton, Henry H.,
{Returning to England.)
Ussher, Peter R. C.,
Adelaide, North .... 1
Vanderkiste, Roht. W.,
Dungog 2
Vercoe, John, Haabai. 2
Vickers, Robert L.,
Wellington 1
Wallis, James, Wain-
garoa 22
Warren, John, Nelson. 5
Waterhouse, J. 8., Wil-
lunga 3
W aterhou se, J oseph,
Bau 1
Waterhouse, Samuel,
Warrnambool 2
Watkin, James, Wol-
longong 2
Watkin, William J.,
Nelson 3
1859 Watkin, Edwin T.,
Williamstoivn 1
1843 Watsford, John, Goul
burn 3
1840 Waugh, James S., Mel-
bourne, West 1
1850 Wells, William P., Mel
bourne. West 3
1854 Whewell, John, Tonga
tabu 2
1832 Whitely, John, New
Plymouth 4
1836 Wilkinson, Samuel,
Brisbane 2
1852 Williams, Spencer,
Mount Barker 2
1839 Williams, Thomas, Jfe/-
bourne. East 3
1835 Wilson,Matthew,CZarew-
don 3
1852 Wilson, William, Bua 3
1857 Woodall, William,
Ararat 1
1857 Woolnough, George,
Windsor 1
1857 Worth, William S.
Geelong 1
64


ALPHABETICAL LIST
OF THE
NATIVE ASSISTANT MINISTERS
NATIVE PREACHERS ON TRIAL.
1858 Ahongalu, Barnabas, Samoa 1
1858 Baongo, Mark, Niuafoou I
1851 Bulu, Joel, Bua 1
1857 Buindoli, Benjamin, Vewa 2
1857 Eketone, John, Mokau 2
1852 Faubulu, John, Haahai 1
1859 Fifita, Naplitali, Tongatahu 1
1859 Fotofili, Aaron, Bua 1
1854 Kata, David, Vavau .. .. 1
1851 Ketetha, Joel, Lakemha 5
1856 Langi, Elias, Haahai 1
1852 Latu, John, Vavau 1
1851 Mamafainoa, Moses, Lakemha 5
1857 Musuka, Cornelius, Bau 3
1856 Ngaropi, Samuel, fVaipa 3
1857 Otene, Joseph, Manukau 3
1859 Patene, William, JVaipa 1
1857 Rawaindranu, Isaac, Bau 3
1855 Takelo, Eliezer, Rotumah 5
1859 Te Kote Chatham Islands 1
1855 Thataki, Nathan, Aa/ce9w6a. .. 4
Vave, Matthias, Lakemha 4
1851 Vea, Paul, .. .. 6
1852 Vi, Peter, Haahai 1


fCc.T-’S'ic
SYDNEY :
L. WELCH, printer, ATLAS OFFICE, GEORGE STREET,
OPPOSITE THE BANK OP AUSTRALASIA.




