

rirl'.ypl'.J -U - ivl'. N ii. lrlrtrlvi'.' i. It!', t. v I -'l^.'^
S| OOiETTIBI^Ts/^^
Leader ... 1 What Was That? 5
T.fi aß| Money Article 1 „J>L Theatre Royal, Mirzapore t>
—TO but Leaves from our Diary , 3 ft’ A Parody on Hohenlinden 6
—Alarming Accident 2 * Double Acrostic
. Valentine’s Day ‘£ '{& Mirzapore Opera House 6
—7*s wS- K*s’i A Strange Coincidence 3 1 Cablegrams • .. 0
tj gßf !J£ Editor’s Box 3 A Cricket 0
*>l The Melanesian Mission 3 w Our Log 7
*(•;■ XuW[f List of Passengers 3 y Editorial Notes 7 _jj4
=* |}JB< Sports on Board the E.M.S. Mirzapore 1 Q Key to Double Acrostic 7
I m CHRONICLE
—jy
—fi
—*y
ffffftHiWn™




impugn it
“ We are in the place where we are demanded of
Yol. I.
FRIDAY,
conscience tc
it whoso list.”
FEBRUARY
“ Mlirmjjorc ” Cbromclc.
FRIDAY, FEBRUARY 29th, 1884.
“Nemo Me Impune Lacessit.”
' being usual on the first issue of all newspapers to ask the
forebearance of their readers in criticising the matter placed
before them, we must follow on the well-beaten track, as
our difficulties are of no ordinary character, for who
ever heard of a newspaper being started without an
office, without press, type, pressman, compositor, or printers’
devil, and in our case we make our appearance even without
an editor. For the latter omission, we must blame the
sJk extreme modesty that characterizes most of the gentlemen
passengers on board this ship, as no single individual could be
found who would accept the onerous position, the general excuse
being, “ My revolver and bowie-knife are packed away with
luggage not wanted on the voyage,” and no gentleman cared
to assume the position without those indispensable pieces of
furniture to an editor’s office. The difficulty was at last over-
come, by the selection of four gentlemen who had each received
a careful training at the hands of Jem Mace, or other masters of the
art of self-defence, and as it is the intention of the committee of
management to be always within cooey of each other, it is con-
fidently expected they will be able to ward off all attacks made by
angry correspondents, or others coming under the editorial lash. It
is an old story that every story has two sides, and the remark applies
particularly to this venture of ours, as, although we have difficulties,
we, on the other hand, have much encouragement. We stand alone
as the only newspaper in our limited kingdom, and will consequently
be saved the strife that is inseparable from fighting an opposition
journal. With us, black and white will each appear in its proper
colour, and having no rival editor to write down, or facts to mis-
represent, we will be at peace with all men, and will be able to get
through our duties without our respective Life Insurance Companies
asking enhanced premiums consequent on the risky nature of our
occupation. One further source of comfort to us, is the large
29th, 1884.
Yo. 1.
amount of support promised by the highly intelligent community
with which we are surrounded. Contributions of no mean character
are expected, so that a perusal of our modest journal may serve
not only to pass a pleasant half-hour on our passage to the sunny
south, but also to enlighten and instruct those to whom the
Australian Continent is at present a terra incognita. As the success
of this effort depends entirely on those who, having the ability, are
willing to contribute articles that may amuse others, we trust our
editorial box may be so filled as to render light the duties of your
humble servants,
The Committee of Management.
Money Article.
Thursday Evening.
SHE stock and share market opened flat this morning, the only
stocks required being that of provisions, and in shares
0,3 ’ inquiry was eager for large parcels. The ruling magnate or
manager of Mirzapore Bank, corner of “ Gin-street and Whiskey"
lane,” reports that he issued an unusual number of drafts during the
past week. All anxiety has, however, been allayed by a steady
influx of gold on the clearing day (Monday), and credit was again
buoyant for another period. The tone of general business may be
gathered as under. Liquor in good demand, especially for light wines.
Scotch whiskey keeps up its character, and is excited, stocks
getting low. Brandies simply beyond the reach of all in prices.
Cordials—demand excessive : a good line could be struck for
immediate delivery. In the meat market the late copious rains
have caused a downward tendency, and prime beef and mutton
will be in full supply in a fortnight. Breadstuffs, provisions, and
dried fruits command attention, the former being of good quality
and light with decreasing stocks. Butter still retains its high
character. Poultry declining. Eggs selling freely at 2s. per bushel.
Dried fruits soon out of market. A full supply of grapes expected
to arrive on Monday. A correspondent of the “ Daily Digger”
reports the labour market as brisk. Great demand for waiters,
and bedroom stewards, who are in general request. Cooks who can
supply 900 meals a day punctually to time, and invent new names
for the same dishes, would receive high wages, with the prospect
of a pension.


Leaves From Our Diary.
aN Thursday, January 17th, the ship received her first comple-
ment of passengers, some sixty souls, at Gravesend. It was
hoped that we should sail about 2 o’clock in the afternoon,
but a large quantity of specie was late in coming on board, and we
were consequently delayed till 4 o’clock the next morning. At
length we were at sea, endeavouring to settle down into the
monotony of a voyage. The white cliffs passed before us in review,
and in the evening, when we bade our pilot adieu, we felt that the
last substantial tie that bound us to the native shore was severed.
Having hitherto enjoyed the calmest sea, it was naturally a matter
of fruitful speculation, whether the “ Bay ” would be smooth or
rough. Happily, on entering its dreaded precincts, our rosiest hopes
were realised, and no duck-pond was ever calmer. Sunday, the 20th,
saw our first service on board, the Venerable Archdeacon of Newcastle
preaching. Ee it also noticed that on the self-same day we saw the
sun for the first time since leaving England—somehow we seem to
have seen it rather often since. A comet was also on view in the
evening, for the especial delectation of the passengers. On the
21st, some of the younger passengers, with more courage than
prudence, gave themselves up to the threading of the mazy dance—
a practice, which, with some intermissions, has continued. The
next night Gibraltar was passed, the lights from the town being
very conspicuous, while only a dim outline of the rock was there to
cause a heave within our patriotic breasts. Next morning, on the
23rd, the high pressure —we believe it was the high pressure —
piston-rod got inconveniently hot, and we had to stop about six
hours to let it cool. By breakfast time, however, we were again en
route, and after a three day’s run on the calmest sea, during which
the Sierra Nevada and the African hills appeared to the best
advantage, we arrived at Malta on Saturday, the 26th, about 1
o’clock. We left again in the evening at about 10 o’clock, after
performing the objectionable, but necessary operation of coaling.
Our next run was not so lacking in incident, for
the two whole days before arriving at Port Said,
it rained almost incessantly with only slight intermissions
between the squalls. Port Said was entered on Wednesday,
the 30th, the weather being cold and wet, and such hardy spirits as
ventured ashore, were careful to arm themselves with their thickest
coats and least holey umbrellas. To give a graphic account of our
passage through the canal would baffle the most powerful writer ;
for nearly four whole days we pursued our placid course through
that triumph of modern engineering, grumbling withal, as only
Englishmen are allowed to grumble, because “M. Lesseps had’nt
made it wider while he was about it.” When within about eight
miles of Suez, we had to make a long and involuntary stay, a lighter
being sunk somewhere between us and our goal. Here, in spite of
the rain, which came on most inopportunely, we were soon beset by
donkeys and donkey-drivers, who exerted all their powers of oratory,
both pathetic and comic, to tempt us to a ride. On Saturday,
February 2nd, at 8 a.m., we arrived at Suez —Suez, a name that will
remain engraved on the tablets of our hearts for many a long day,
for who would choose Suez of all places to make a long stay at ?
And yet we were there for nearly three whole days, waiting for the
Cathay with our fresh complement of passengers. But she came not;
the Canal was blocked, and it was not till late on the Monday afternoon
that the alarm was raised, that ships were visible coming through
the Canal. On Monday evening we welcomed our new passengers,
on Tuesday morning we sailed. Between Suez and Colombo all of
interest that occurred—the two concerts and St. Valentine’s Day—
has been mentioned in other columns. Suffice it here to mention
that the Red Sea was not particularly cool, although snow was seen
on the hills, a phenomenon which has not happened for twenty
years. We passed the Straits of Babel-Mandeb about noon on
Saturday, the 9th, and arrived at Colombo on Saturday, the
16th, early in the morning. Most of the passengers went
ashore, and the hotels in the place were well filled. Arabi Pasha
was frequently interviewed, and all seemed sorry to return to the
narrow limits of our floating palace, on Monday, the 18th, when we
sailed about 4 o’clock in the afternoon.
Alarming Accident.
evening, during dinner, an accident occurred which
might have been attended by the most serious consequences,
but which, fortunately, from the admirable presence of mind
exhibited by the ship’s officers and men, and the heroic composure of
the passengers under a most trying ordeal, had few if any dangerous
results. Before describing the details of the occurrence, it may be
as well to recall to our readers the features of the scene prior to the
disaster. It will be remembered that at the lower or stern end of
the table, presided over so admirably by the courteous commander
of this excellently-appointed steamer, two small punkahs are
irregularly waved to and fro over the heads of the perspiring diners,
without, in a general way. producing any effect upon them, except
an occasional reflection upon the absolute inutility of the con-
trivance as here represented.
To the close observer, the action of the punkah has afforded a
considerable amount of interesting speculation. It is ordinarily
worked by a small wallah who is placed between the chair backs of
the diners and the cabin partitions. This space is somewhat
limited. The variation in the length of the arc formed by the
oscillation of the punkah is measured by the amount of elbow pro-
jected into the visage of the punkah-wallah by the officiating
steward in the act of placing or removing plates. Time for the
observation of this phenomenon is allowed by the admirable fore-
thought of the company, who have considerately given a space of
about ten minutes for reflection between each course at dinner that
no opportunity may be wanting for careful and minute study of the
scientific appliances devised for the comfort of the passengers.
It was during one of these intervals that the accident took place.
The time allotted was drawing to a close, a steward had already
bent forward, the punkah-wallah had commenced to receive his
allowance of elbow,, and the arc of oscillation had diminished
accordingly, when an appalling crash was heard which penetrated
to the remotest recesses of the vessel.
It may be mentioned here that one individual says he never
heard it, but it has since been ascertained that he has confessed to
being a little deaf on the port side. For one terrible moment there
was a silence as of the grave. The moment was after the crash ;
for, although silence and a crash are in the same category of facts,
it has been demonstrated that they cannot co-exist. As soon- as
the alarm caused by the crash had subsided, it was discovered that
the punkah had ceased to be—at least, as a punkah. One end had
detached itself from its support, and descended violently upon the
table, destroying china, glass, and composure in about equal parts.
It is regarded as almost a miracle that no personal injury was sus-
tained. Had the arc of oscillation been larger, had one young lady
bent forward, had the gentleman opposite been helping himself to
salt, had the person who was away been present, it is impossible to
conjecture what the consequences might have been. No theory has
yet been broached to account for the event, but an inquiry has been
set on foot, and it is stated that a clue has been obtained, but we
consider it our duty to reserve our own judgment until our next
issue.
Valentine’s Day.
3 HE 14th of February, being St. Valentine’s Hay, furnished an
opportunity for passengers to indulge in a little harmless
amusement at each other’s expense. Our special artists
were hard at work for some time previous to the auspicious day
preparing works of art that would do credit to much older com-
munities, and our poet was so over-burdened with work that he
had bare time to attend to the necessaries of life, and none to devote to
its comforts, whilst so that he might have his head perfectly clear
for his duties, he was for some days placed on low diet, his
medical attendant certifying that his mental faculties could not
bear the great strain they would be subjected to, unless his system
were kept low. The poor man was consequently limited to four
meals a day. Under these distressing circumstances, he produced
such touching poetic effusions that his name will remain green
(very green) with future generations into whose hands his sublime
works may come. It would be impossible in the narrow compass of
this journal to reproduce the many poems written by him on this
occasion, but with the author’s permission we select two specimens :
“ To Mr. H , alias Joe Buggins, who accidently slipped over-
board when returning from a visit to the Island of Malta.”
“ Dear Buggins, by a narrow chance we were saved much grief,
For if a friendly hand had not come quick to thy relief,
We should have missed your jovial face, your banjo tunes, and larks,
For long ere this your corpus would have been eaten up by sharks.
To save you from so dire a fate your many friends have felt
The Valentine for you should be a very nice life belt.”
The rhyme being accompanied by a neatly-made miniature life
belt.
“ To Mons. W , alias Little Frenchy.
What would we do without you,
You lively little spark,
You are fun and jollity itself
From morning until dark.
You are good at quoits and bull,
Whilst whist’s game of thine.
We will find a sweetheart for you yet,
To be your Valentine.”


l orYh'^U i s \ \


Sports on Board the R.M.S.
“ Mirzapore.”
(By a Correspondent.)
Thursday and Friday , 14th and 15th February, 1884,
Under the distinguished patronage of Captain Perrins, R.M.S.
Mirzapore.
Committee.
Mr. D. Ross, Chief Officer Mr. T- H. Payne
„ G. Hewitt Captain Wilson, Judge
„ H. Lilley „ H. Franks, Hon. Secretary
and Treasurer,
Thursday, the 14th February, an auspicious day, under the
patronage of good Saint Valentine, was chosen by the Committee to
celebrate the above sports, and the epistles dedicated to this occasion
were profusely scattered by Neptune’s postman punctually at the
usual postal delivery, viz., 9 a.m., which gave a zest to the pro-
gramme to be carried out later in the day, and when palpitating
hearts were either soothed or their cherished hopes damped for ever.
“Hope seemed to spring exulting on triumphant wing” that at
least one chance was left to either again be reinstated by the fickle
god Cupid to their former position by pangs of heroic endurance or
marvellous agility, the male portion striving hard to win their
laurels back again, believing that
“ Without a smile from heavenly beauty won,
Alas for man, a world without a sun.”
The appointed hour arriving, a distinguished assemblage soon
filled the grand stand, which was tastefully draped with bunting
delicately arranged by the fair sex, who vied with each other who
could tender the greatest assistance on this memorable occasion.
We noticed prominently among the distinguished visitors : —Sir
Charles Lilly, K.C.M.G., Chief Justice of Queensland ; Sir William
Manning, K.C.M.G., Primary Judge in Equity, New South Wales;
the Honorable J. Hawker, M.L.C., South Australia; the Honorable
Julian Salamons, Q.C., M.L.C., Sydney ; Wm. Fehon, Esq., late
manager for Railways, Victoria ; Edye Manning, Esq., J.P.,
Sydney; Captain M,Gammon, of Dublin ; Revd. Archdeacon Child,
of Newcastle; Revd. W. Scott, late Principal of St. Paul’s College,
Sydney, and numerous others holding high and special positions,
whose interest shown proved that on no former occasion or in such a
place had dignitaries of both church and state combined together to
lend an aid to national amusement.
To endeavor to enumerate the galaxy of beauty and fashion which
prominently occupied the first seats of the grand stand would
defy the most fertile imagination of your correspondent. Suffice it
to say that the national colors of red, white, and blue formed a con-
spicuous portion of the ladies’ adornment. The many furtive glances
cast round struck the most unobservant how deeply they felt, as each
favorite competitor took his “ preliminary canter ” past the stand ;
the more matronly unconsciously dropping their ever busy hands as
an occasional ovation was given to some more than ordinary com-
petitor. It is worthy of notice that beyond the extra display of
bunting, sumptuous refreshments were plentifully supplied (by* the
kindness of Captain Perrins, the patron) of fruits, tropical and rare,
arranged in a perfect manner by his chef de cuisine, elaborately inter-
spersed by choice shrubs and fiowers, giving a perfect finish to the
whole.
Punctually at half-past 2 o’clock the gallant Captain Wilson, of
India and Zulu celebrity, majestically took up his position, evidently
feeling his great responsibility, and rigidly he did his duty, to the
satisfaction of all, as the bell rang for the first race.
First Race — The Hurdle Race.—lo competitors “toed the
mark ” amidfet breathless silence, as the gallant Captain in measured
tones said : “Are you ready, go.” Nerve and muscle were strained
to the utmost, the narrow course being death to those behind. The
straight home with shoulder to shoulder amidst ringing cheers was
heard.
Child Ist
Franks ... ... ... ... 2nd
2nd Event—Potatoe Race. —This novel invention in racing
brought out 12 to risk their reputation for endurance, and, after a
closely contested event, resulted in an ovation to—
Payne ..
Franks ..
3rd Event—Child’s Race. —The juveniles were frantic with glee
from the time it was first recorded that they also were not forgotten,
and “ balmy sleep ” forsook their eyes until a late hour on the even-
ing previous. Five “ happy little joyous souls ” scampered about,
eager to start.
James Dymock ... ... ... Ist
Miss Vena Davis... ... ... 2nd
Walter Dymock ... ... ... 3rd
4th Race—Sack Race.—ll entries appeared duly clothed
in their garb, peculiarly adapted for a temperature of 90 degrees—
viz., double blankets sewn up. Much amusement was caused as
each found his level, but by furious and gigantic leaps resulted in
Lieut. Browning ... ... ... Ist
Marshall ... ... ... 2nd
sth Event—Ladies’ Egg Race. —The natural impetuosity of the
fair sex was taxed to a degree, and numerous attempts were made
and preparatory runs engaged in before the final event. Ten
entries were obtained, and, of course, as many spoons. Again the
gallant Captain in softened cadence said : *• Ladies, are you ready—
go.” Truly wonderful was the result, so intent on being first (not
unnatural) that the charge of the Light Brigade was nothing to it,
and as each lady “ gracefully poised her spoon,” on which rested the
most restless of eggs (all declared), those at the goal were in danger
of being driven back by the energy displayed. Amid rapturous
applause the decision was given—
Mrs. Taggart ... ... ... Ist
Miss Leese ... ... ... 2nd
6th Event—Running High Jump.—The 9 entries all came to
the post, the result being—
Child, Ist ... ... ... 4 feet 10 inches
Porter, 2nd ... ... ... 4 ~ 9
7th Race—Obstacle Race. —This might properly be called the
“Tug of War,” and requires both staying powers and muscle to
stand any chance of a “ score.” A high jump, a crawl through a
barrel (especially if some nails are in it), a scamper up a greased
board at an angle of 30 degrees with the assistance of ropes, under
two forms with sharp edges on purpose to lacerate your spine, a
tumble through a miniature lake, and, when thoroughly saturated, a
crawl through a windsail to dry, form the principal obstacles of the
contest. However, no less than the round dozen were found with
British pluck to undergo this modern penance of the nineteenth
century. After a determined struggle, it resulted in the following
order, especial mention being made of the winner for his splendid
jump up the greasy board :
Lieut, Browning ... ... ... Ist
Dr. M'Donnell ... ... ... 2nd
Child ... ... ... ... 3rd
Bth Race —Putting the Sandbag, 14lbs. —The result was—
Payne ... ... ... ... Ist
Porter ... . ... ... ... 2nd
9th Race—Running Long Jump,—This was a capital event, and
the competitors good, the result being, amid applause—
Robson ... ... ... ... 14 feet 11 inches
Chase ... ... ... ... 14 „ 5 „
10th Race—Ladies’ Tug of War.— Amusing, vigorous, and
lustily they pulled, and the old aphorism “when Greek meets
Greek ” put the fair sex on their mettle. lam not aware who won ;
but, as all seemed pleased with their part taken, it was a decided
success, and may be called a “ warm-handed sport.”
11th Event—Gentlemen’s Tug of War.—A full rope, even
numbers, strong wills, a jolly pull, and, although several heavy-
weights did not join the encounter, it may be truly said of all they
enjoyed it.
Distribution of Prizes.— The closing of the two days drew
together a full assemblage, Mrs. Kilby being requested to do the
honor of awarding each successful competitor with his or her prize
as each smilingly drew near, and made their best bow. The public
applauded lustily, especially Mr. Child, when he was presented with
the Cup, he being the champion of the sports ; and as the energetic
and indefatigable Secretary, Mr. Franks, who was the moving spirit
throughout (and to whom is due especial thanks), received his well-
earned prize of a bottle of whisky, which he affectionately hugged,
brought the sports to a close. Cheers for Mrs. Kilby, Capt. Perrins.
Mr. Ross, and the committee, brought a very enjoyable two days’
amusement to a close, and, when the object in view was a donation
to the “ Seamans’ Dreadnought Hospital,” it is pleasing to know
that the sum of £2O was handed to Capt. Perrins for that object.
Those interested can feel that they have added another grain of
sand in their charity to help a deserving institution.
Why is the Mirzapore the reverse of a railway train ? —Because
yOu usually find the Las-car in front of the engine.


Clxc port’s Comer.
Our Voyage to Ceylon.
9N board the good ship Mirzapore,
In Chase of health we came,
Boyde with the hope of getting it,
We found r e-Leese from Payne.
Our steward politely Marshalls us
All to our Chambers fair,
Where, welcome sight, our baggage was,
By Porter Plant-e d there.
A fog Vail-e d thick the English Coast,
As we slowly steamed along,
And when near merry Shanhlin,
We were left by the pilot strong.
Our captain bold now takes command,
Cries Turner to the sea,
The course lies straight for the land of Franks
As the Crowe flies o’er the sea.
Cape Ushant on the port hand lay,
O’er the waves we quickly go,
The Clark of the weather is a good Child,
In the Bay of Biscay Oh !
Then sailing on by Portugal,
O’er a lovely calm Oreen sea,
No bar was there to happiness,
With Cocktails strong for tea.
On Cuming past the ‘ ‘ Rock of Gib.”
With its many a gun and guard,
’Twas night, no doubt its gates were Lock-e d,
And men kept watch and Ward.
When on to Malta’s Isle we came,
Some fast ones went a mucker,
But Buggins brave, the Church did save,
Although he got a Ducker.
To the Canal we quickly came,
Canal without a Lock,
With desert Heath, along the side.
Canal with many a block,
Blocked up near Suez, donkey Bob.
With many an ass comes out
Oh ! “ Mr. Masher ” there you are,
You know you are, “ Get out.”
The anchor down in Suez roads,
To the shore we pull away,
And pass the time in Suez Streets,
While waiting for Cathay.
So steaming down the smooth Red Sea,
In the evening there’s no loss.
Of merry dance and jocund song,
E’en from the man of Boss.
At length we gain fair Ceylon’s Isle,
Many Colliers come in view,
But coaling is such dusty work,
So we wish you, friends, adieu.
The “Mirzapore” Alphabet.
A is the Artist, who, on St. Valentine’s Day,
Made some from their meals in disgust turn away.
B are our Bunkers, once full of coal,
If they used them more fairly, the ship would’nt roll.
C is the Companion, otherwise hatchway,
Young ladies think it is meant for a match way.
D is the Doctor, so gallant and gay,
Who attends to the ladies both by night and by day.
E is the Ease with which attention to duty,
Some officers mix with devotion to beauty.
F is for Franks, who for frolic and fun,
Is equalled by few, and beaten by none.
G is the Grace with which one gives up a chair,
Four hours from the first you know you’ve been there.
No wonder the owner declines your excuses,
Blind, deaf, or asleep, he sees through your ruses.
H is for Hewitt, Joe Buggins, the frisky,
Who is constantly calling for Crawford’s Scotch whisky.
I now am a victim if anyone’s offended,
At that which for joke is only intended,
And in reading these lines, I trust that good sense,
Will prevent all allusions from giving offence.
J are the Jovial and Jolly ones who
Form the far greater half of our quarter-deck crew,
If you give them a lead they are easily suited,
But leave them alone and they’ll sit till their rooted.
K is for King, a big Yorkshireman bluff,
Whose favourite breakfast is roast beef and duff,
But the meat is so stringy, and wanting in taste,
That he’ll soon have to take a reef in his waist.
L stands for Lillies, of these there’s a pair,
One fairish dark, and one darkish fair.
M are Mannings, who at cricket so easy,
Good form display, in upper deck breezy.
N’s for the Neill, a Scotch lassie, but she
Has no northern failings, as far as I see,
If the Sydney young men to her charms are not steady,
She always will find there’s an Englishman ready.
0 are the Officers, in blue and brass-bound,
To girls, cargo, and duty, attentive they’re found,
P is the Price one pay’s for one’s liquor,
The whisky’s not bad, would the claret were thicker.
Q is the Query that crosses my mind,
How many faults will the editor find
In these feeble verses, which painfully show it,
Nature did not intend me for a poet ?
R are Retiring creatures that feel,
Conversation most easy abaft the big wheel,
Or “ Far from the busy haunts of men.”
Hug one another on a fowl’s pen ;
They like to have their little lark,
After five bells, in the dark.
S is the Ship, whose motion infernal,
Causes stomachic commotions internal.
T stands for Turner, bald-headed and grey,
His appearance is grave, but his manners are gay.
U’s for the Union of bodies and souls,
Bodies meet oftenest when the ship rolls,
And when she is nice we feel as we oughter,
She claims our support, and we like to support her.
V is the Victim of dread mol de mer,
Of these Mirzapore has quite her full share,
Some smile as they suffer, some lie like the dead,
Some litter the deck, and some go to bed,
The symptoms entail the most painful convulsions,
But none like to show it save on compulsion.
W is the Will to be happy and gay,
And wile away time however one may,
Although one may say, oh, here’s a bore.
The time that we waste in this Mirzapore.
X are the Xpenses we’re sure to incur,
When we quit the salt sea, for terra firmer.
Y stands for You, and each one of you’ll know,
Who of girls is the belle, and of men is the beau,
And pitying the others, and pluming herself,
Will look down on the rest, as china on delf.
Z is the Zest with which one begins,
A task that is worse than needles or pins,
For each pin has a point, and each needle a head,
But where is the point here, from A down to Z.
Pal o’Mine,
What was That?
j '(jorJWAS dusk, and the twilight had left us,
Iplfe The stars were beginning to shine,
SggZ We had donned our black coats and black waistcoats,
And were just preparing to dine,
When suddenly somewhere behind us
We heard a most horrible whine.
“ ’Tis the baby ! ” said someone, whose slumbers
Had oft been disturbed in the night,
But the mother said cautiously, “Listen,
Now I just believe you are right.”
Then she rushed to her cabin to give it
A quiet little “this for that,”
When somebody said, “ 0, it’s nothing,
It’s only that horrible cat ! ! ! ”


“Theatre Royal” Mirzapore.
•N Saturday evening, February 23rd, at the Theatre Royal, a
performance was given by Messrs. Lewis and Morris, two of
our second-class passengers. On the after-part of the quarter-
deck Mr. Ross, our chief officer, with his assistants, erected a capital
stage, decorating the surroundings of same with flags. A very
elaborate drop scene, painted by a passenger on a former voyage, was
much admired, and, with a number of foot-lights and the stage taste-
fully arranged, gave a very pretty effect. A charge of 2s. for adults
and Is. for children was made.
During the first part of the evening Mr. Lewis gave some very
clever conjuring tricks. Amongst others an egg was made to disap-
pear from a glass sugar-basin, and a silk handkerchief, which had
covered it was found in one of the candles on the stage, which was
alight. One of the audience kindly lent Mr. Lewis an Australian
one-pound note, which was sent into the middle of Greece, and then
returned to the owner. He gave another clever trick with a card,
which was torn up into eight pieces by one of the audience, who
retained one of the pieces, Mr. Lewis taking the remaining seven,
and he, with a “presto,” re-united them into a whole card again,
with the exception of the missing piece, which exactly fitted into the
corner of the restored card. The bell that described the cards that
some of the audience had drawn was another clever trick. Mr. Lewis
rather surprised the audience by making the cards change color.
Mr. Lewis caused much amusement and excitement (especially
amongst the ladies), when after eating what looked like ordinary
cotton wool, he began drawing from his mouth yards of colored
ribbon. Amongst other tricks a watch was borrowed from one of
the audience who did not know its number ; but Mr. Lewis, after
a little time, was able to read it, although he had never seen the
figures.
This brought a very pleasant evening to a close, and we are glad
to state we had much pleasure in handing Messrs. Lewis and Morris
the sum of £5, and the Seaman’s Orphan Asylum £1 7s. fid.,
this being the proceeds from sale of tickets. As Messrs. Lewis and
Morris are on their way to Australia to try their luck, we heartily
wish them every success.
[lt must be understood that passengers when taking a voyage do
not buy the quarter-deck, and so try and prevent any entertain-
ment.—Ed.]
A Parody on Hohenlinden.
In which, owing to imperative exigencies of rhyme, the word Mirzapore cannot
introduced.)
gN board ship, when the sea was still,
Each passenger paced the deck at will,
And hastened down to get his fill,
At dinner eating rapidly.
But faith, you saw another sight,
When the sea rose in all its might,
Impelling all to take to flight,
To cabins groaning grumblingly.
Then log-like in his berth or cot,
Each wretched creature mourned his lot,
And cursing, wished that he had not,
A stomach heaving horribly.
Then smote the ship each thundering billow,
Then sought each head its stuffy pillow,
And swaying like the drooping willow,
The stoutest tottered fearfully.
’Tis morn, but still in horrid sport,
The sea comes swish against each port,
You feel you can’t, although you ought,
Swallow your breakfast manfully.
The feeling rises, oh, be quick,
And rush on deck, your steps don’t pick,
Rush, hasten, or you’ll sure be sick,
And feed the fishes famously.
Few, few can eat when much is spread,
Deeper and deeper droops each head,
With prostrate forms the deck is shed,
And stewards chatter gibingly,
Pal o’Mine.
Why is the fowl on board the Mirzapore like leather ?—Because it
is frequently curried.
If the steward ran short of milk, to what part of the ship would
he go for a supply ? —To her rudder !
Double Acrostic.
carries you well from shore to shore,
||w Not a “ heart of oak,” but of “ iron core,”
A frail little flower, which yet can say,
Remember me for ever and a day.
These letters require no addition,
It is itself mere repetition.
In gay Melita a well known street,
For dirt and odours hard to beat.
Not horse no unicorn, I vow,
’Tis striped ; well, you can guess it now !
A well-known place, where fish can oft be seen,
Not far from Westminster, where all have been.
Gods worshipped by the Roman men of old,
And found in nearly every house I’m told.
This word means much or little as you will,
It may sprain your ankle, or perhaps worse still.
To make a word of these two letters
A person would gain fame,
So I have left them unconnected,
You may do the same.
This last word is not hard,
If you have guessed the rest,
To hide the words I’ve used the verb,
Or tried my very best.
Mirzapore Opera House.
« CONCERT was given at this house on the quarter-deck on
February 7th, the Venerable Archdeacon Child taking the
chair. The weather was beautiful and fine, and the per-
formers and audience in excellent spirits. All passed off exceedingly
well. Miss D. Davis played the overture “Styrian Waltz ” in capital
style. Mr. Paine, our second officer, gave much amusement with
his song “Get out,” accompanying himself on the banjo. Miss
Helen Manning sang in her usual clear voice ; and last, but not
least, our worthy Captain Perrins sang “I Fear no Foe,” which was
duly appreciated by the audience. Space will not permit of us giving
further particulars of this concert. Suffice it to say each and all did
their best, and with “God Save the Queen,” a very pleasant evening
was brought to a close.
Cablegrams.
Australia.
FEDERATION of the Australian colonies consummated. Free
trade policy general ; great rejoicing. Immense goldfields
discovered ; depth of gold unknown.
London.
Parliament met on 12th. Queen’s speech generally approved.
Bills introduced —To Protect Lambs, Abolish the Poor Laws, and
Grant General Pensions. Parnell, Prime Minister; W. E. Glad-
stone, Lord-Lieutenant of Ireland. General European war. Lord
Loftus recalled from N. S. W. to Stamboul. Emperor Russia
furious. Dutch occupying Holland, Bismarck jubilant. Lager
beer scarce. British army and navy disbanded. P. and 0. Co.
purchased the ironclads as coal hulks.
Cricket.
The games that have been played have been innumerable on the
hurricane deck, giving much fun, many of the ladies joining in and
displaying good batting form. The match of the voyage was English
v. Australians. The first match was played on February 22nd,
seven players being selected to represent Old England, and the
same number to do their best for sunny Australia. There was a
great muster of spectators on the hurricane deck, who took a lively
interest iu this capital sport, and great was the applause when any
particular favorite gave a good hit or sent in a good ball. The
result was most disastrous for the Australians, they being beaten by
1 run and 5 wickets. A return match was arranged the following
day, and resulted in a like manner for the Australians, the English
team being too strong.
[The only objection we have to young ladies joining in this game
is that they are apt to get bold. —Ed.]
If the man at the wheel is married, why does his wife have the
upper hand ?—Because he is only quarter-master.


Our
Log.
Date.
Latitude.
Longtitude.
Miles.
Friday,
Jan. 18
5T0I N.
1-16 E.
64
Saturday,
„
19
49-23
4-29 W.
249
Sunday,
M
20
45 07
8-07
298
Monday,
,,
21
40-32
9-33
289
Tuesday,
,,
22
36-34
7-39
288
Wednesday
91
23
36-23
303
233
Thursday,
19
24
3702
2"52 E,
292
Friday,
99
25 •
37 36
8-55
288
Saturday,
91
26
33-57
14-32
291
Sunday,
19
27
35-9
17-42
163
Monday,
91
28
33-37
23-19
292
Tuesday,
„
29
3212
28-37
280
Wednesday,
30
Arrived at Port Said
206
Thursday,
99
31
In Suez Canal
29
Friday, Feb.
1
9 9
—
Saturday,
„
2
9 1
—
Sunday,
91
3
At Suez
—
Monday,
19
4
91
—
Tuesday,
19
5
28-51 N.
32-55 E.
69
Wednesday,
99
6
24-51
35-54
298
Thursday,
19
7
20-44
38-22
282
Friday,
9 1
8
16-33
40-52
288
Saturday,
91
9
12-36
43-39
294
Sunday,
99
10
12-23
48-39
300
Monday,
91
11
11-33
53-15
275
Tuesday,
99
12
10-45
57-46
270
Wednesday,
99
13
9-47
62-26
283
Thursday,
91
14
8-47
67-23
300
Friday,
11
15
7-55
72-03
281
Saturday,
19
16
7-12
76-51
288
Sunday,
19
17
At Colombo.
—
Monday,
99
IS
1)
—
Tuesday,
11
19
3-41
81-19
223
Wednesday,
11
20
0 8 S.
83-56
277
Thursday,
11
21
3-44
86-58
282
Friday,
99
22
7 23
90-02
285
Saturday,
91
23
...
11-17
93-20
305
Sunday,
19
24
14-43
96-13
267
Monday,
99
25
1811
99-12
270
Tuesday,
99
26
21-34
102-17
268
Wednesday,
99
27
25-00
105-22
268
Thursday,
99
28
27-56
108-37
248
Friday,
11
29
31-16
111-36
254
Saturday, March 1
34-41
115-34
281
Sunday,
9 9
2
35 03
119-04
59
Monday,
99
3
35-17
124-35
262
Tuesday,
99
4
35-30
129-51
269
Wednesday,
99
5
35-41
135-18
267
Thursday,
99
6
Friday,
9 1
7
Saturday,
99
8
Arrived Melbourne.
Wit
and
Humour.
Key to Double Acrostic.
Mirzapore. Steamship.
M y o s o t i S
I T
Real E
Z e b r A
AquariuM
P e n a t e S
O verreac H
R I
E n v e 1 o P
along, every turn of the screw,
Brings us nearer and nearer to home,
’%S§ss> Home to the most, though many there are,
Who simply are taking a roam ;
Through the ocean’s expanse to visit the south,
For pleasure, or business, or health,
Some to start life and join in the strife.
And worry and scramble for wealth.
A complete little world exists in our ship,
All sorts and all sizes are there,
From the infants in arms, to the aged and infirm,
Who to leave this bright world must prepare ;
The lusty and strong, who all the day long,
Are competing in atheletic games,
Enjoying their joke, their yarn, or their smoke,
Or serious reading that tames
And subdues, others reading the news,
Last from Melbourne, or Sydney or London,
Some dozing or sleeping, many diaries keeping,
Telling all except duties left undone ;
By the aid of our screw, and good Lascar crew,
All obedient to our chief, Captain Perrins,
We trust soon to reach, the goal that to each,
Has brought us together, wayfaring
Why is the rudder chain of the Mirzapore like a railway bridge ?
—Because it bears a good strain.
Why is an album like a stable?—Because it will hold “cartes,”
and often has a handsome cab-in-it.
Startling intelligence. Dreadful atrocity. Two officers and 20
stewards hung every night in hammocks.
Editorial Notes.
*T having been suggested to the Committee of Management that this
paper should be published, they have considered the matter, and
have come to the conclusion that it be left in thfe hands of Mr.
Franks, who has kindly consented to see that all passengers wishing
copies will be supplied ; but as it is requisite he should be provided
with the necessary funds to pay for printing and postage (which it is
estimated will cost not less than £l2 10s.), the Committee beg to
notify that, to j ustify the work being undertaken, not less than fifty
subscribers of five shillings each will be necessary, and each person
so contributing will have three copies posted to any address within
the Australian colonies ; all extra copies being charged for at six-
pence each.
Should there be any surplus it will be handed over to some
charitable institution.
It is with regret the Committee have had to hold over several
communications ; but as the first number of our paper already
exceeds the limit it should have reached, and as articles for our
second issue may not be sent in so freely, it was deemed advisable to
refrain from publishing all the communications so kindly sent us.
Much of the matter kept back is of a very interesting character, and
will be duly appreciated by our readers when it reaches them ; and
they must not close this notice without thanking their contributors,
each and all, for the valuable assistance they have afforded to the
Editors of this important limb of the press.


Mirzapore Opera House.
SN the evening of February 13th a very extensive and varied
programme was most satisfactorily concluded before a large
U(e „ and fashionable audience, Sir William Manning taking the
chair. Precisely at 8 o’clock Mr. Dunlop played the overture, and
right well he did it. The part singing by the full chorus was very
well rendered, the voices harmonizing well. Captain Perrin’s song,
“ The Village Blacksmith,” was sung in capital style, and our second
officer, Mr. Paine, had his banjo out again, causing much merriment
with his comic singing. One of the treats of the evening was a
recitation rendered by Mr. Cuming, “ How we Beat the Favorite.”
Miss Helen Manning again sang with her usual good taste.
General Intelligence.
By a curious coincidence our first number is issued on a memorable
day, as its anniversary happens but once in four years. But in
directing our passengers’ attention to this fact, we do not wish to
remind the young lady portion of their privileges, as if they had
wished to exercise them, they had ample opportunity when at
Colombo, where there are so many Cingaleese.
To meet the wants of the season, and as the cooling delicacy
appears to be otherwise unobtainable on board this vessel, Mrs.
T ’s baby will be happy to furnish passengers with specimens of
I scream on the shortest notice.
Why are the stairs leading to the saloon called the Companion-
way ? Because young people are usually seen in couples on the
settees at the approach.
What would be done if the steward ran short of eggs ?—The
captain would order the ship to lay to at once.
Why should the Mirzapore land more passengers than she took on
board ?—Becausejthere have been no deaths, and she has more than
200 first-class births.
jgi£Lio
N canj
Wit and Humour.
Why should the Mirzapore passengers he well armed ?—Because
they have fowl-in-pieces offered them every day at dinner.
Why are the dog watches so called ? —Because they are curtailed.
Why should Dr. James guess riddles better than any other person
on board ?—Because he has more patients.
Why is Ireland the richest country in the word ?—Because its
capital is always Dublin.
LOST.— Several LADIES AND GENTLEMEN’S APPETITES
at the lunch and dinner table on Monday. The finders are
requested to forward the same to the owners.
LOST, by a celebrated magistrate, the ODD TRICK, through his
own recklesness. Any person or persons who will endeavour
to show him how to gain this important trick will greatly oblige his
partner and others.
LOST, the day we cross the line, a GENTLEMAN’S BEARD.
As he looks a little bare without it, an earnest search is
advocated. Many changes of air have been experienced during the
last few days, and, as he is not particular to a hair, any one that
may be secured will be acceptable.
FOUND a TWISTED HAIRPIN. Any person knowing the
whereabouts of the rest of the lady will please communicate
with the man at the wheel.
KAFFLE. —To be raffled, a MARTINI RIFLE ; can bo seen at
the bar. Tickets, ss. each.


TYERMAN. Rev. Daniel and BENNET, George
Voyages/ and/ travels round the world,/ by the/
Copies: N.L.
■


Mirzapore Opera House.
the evening of February 13th a Very extensive and varied
(jm)J programme was most satisfactorily concluded before a large
and fashionable audience, Sir William Manning taking the
chair. Precisely at 8 o’clock Mr. Dunlop played the overture, and
right well he did it. The part singing by the full chorus was very
well rendered, the voices harmonizing well. Captain Perrin’s song,
“ The Village Blacksmith,” was sung in capital style, and our second
officer, Mr. Paine, had his banjo out again, causing much merriment
with his comic singing. One of the treats of the evening was a
recitation rendered by Mr. Cuming, “ How we Beat the Favorite.”
Miss Helen Manning again sang with her usual good taste.
General Intelligence.
By a curious coincidence our first number is issued on a memorable
day, as its anniversary happens but once in four years. But in
directing our passengers’ attention to this fact, we do not wish to
remind the young lady portion of their privileges, as if they had
wished to exercise them, they had ample opportunity when at
Colombo, where there are so many Cingaleese.
To meet the wants of the season, and as the cooling delicacy
appears to be otherwise unobtainable on board this vessel, Mrs.
T ’s baby will be happy to furnish passengers with specimens of
I scream on the shortest notice.
Why are the stairs leading to the saloon called the Companion-
way ? Because young people are usually seen in couples on the
settees at the approach.
What would be done if the steward ran short of eggs ?—The
captain would order the ship to lay to at once.
Why should the Mirzapore land more passengers than she took oit
board ?—Bccausejthere have been no deaths, and she has more than
200 first-class births.
Bi6Uo
f[Qh 4^
hi OC j
Wit and Humour.
Why should the Mirzapore passengers be well armed ?—Because
they have fowl-in-pieces offered them every day at dinner.
Why are the dog watches so called ?—Because they are curtailed.
Why should Dr. James guess riddles better than any other person
on board ?—Because he has more patients.
Why is Ireland the richest country in the word ?—Because its
capital is always Dublin.
LOST.— Several LADIES AND GENTLEMEN’S APPETITES
at the lunch and dinner table on Monday. The finders are
requested to forward the same to the owners.
LOST, by a celebrated magistrate, the ODD TRICK, through his
own recklesness. Any person or persons who will endeavour
to show him how to gain this important trick will greatly oblige his
partner and others.
LOST, the day we cross the line, a GENTLEMAN’S BEARD.
As he looks a little bare without it, an earnest search is
advocated. Many changes of air have been experienced during the
last few days, and, as he is not particular to a hair, any one that
may be secured will be acceptable.
FOUND a TWISTED HAIRPIN. Any person knowing the
whereabouts of the rest of the lady will please communicate
with the man at the wheel.
RAFFLE. —To be raffled, a MARTINI RIFLE ; can bo seen at
the bar. Tickets, ss. each.


P 1 >K)' .388 ; px-oi;.p;r s -


