

MISCARRIAGE OF JUSTICE
IS MARYBOROUGH,
AND
THE CHINESE OCTOPUS.




PREFACE.
In sending this Pamplilej, to the public I wish them to
understand that the lepers I have seen iTi Victoria are Colonials
and Europeans.
MY OBJECTS ARE—
1. To give a caution to all Justices of Peace, and let them
know that it is dangerous to play with Justice—that it is possible
to pay too high a price for the Chinaman’s vote, and to show the
rottenness of Chinese voting.
2. To warn all Jews and Capitalists that they are far enough
on the slavery track.
3. To cause Government to ascertain the true state of
leprosy in Victoria.
4. To drive from Victoria the yellow' agony.
It is my intention to send one Pamphlet to each of the
Trade Unions, one to every member of the Legislative Assembly,
one to every Borough Council, and one to every Shire Council in
Victoria ; therefore assistance will he wanted, and as contribu-
tions are received the pamphlets will be sent.
FREEMAN J. STEEL.
JSTolan Street, Maryborough,




MISCARRIAGE OF JUSTICE IN
MARYBOROUGH.
Jack—Yow see’t the poliss hevgot properli
s it on.
Bill—What are you talking about ?
Jack —I’m talking abart Chinamen who
war doin a bit o’ gambbn fur charitobol pur-
puses but poliss woddent let em aluan.
Bill—Are you alluding to what happened
at the police court on v; onday, 6th September,
when the police had am sted seven Chinamen
on the Saturday night previous?
Ja k—Ah, I am ; an I rekon poliss got a
duas they 11 not forget in a hurry.
Bill —Well, Jack, I am very much sir-
prised at you I gave you credit for ha ing
more sense, In the first place you will
understand that three justices of peace
sat on that oc- asion, and I have no hesitation
in saying that all and every one of them dis-
graced themselves.
Jack—What, fur letting Chinamen guar ?
Hill —Listen to me. When a Justice of
Peace is appointed, he swears to give his de-
cision according to the evidence. In this
this case the three Justices of Peace
gave their decision against the evidence,
thereby committing themselves, for which
they all ought to be dismissed.
Jack-Luk e ere; tha ud better draw it
mil<l. Duster know who tha art maggin
abart?
Bill—Let anyone re d the evidence, as
printed in the Maryborough Standard on
Tuesday, 7th September, and they will see
that the case was fully proved by four wit-
nesses. Their lawy r mad- no defence
aga nst the evidence, All he did was to
make a rambling statement that fan tan was
the fairest game that could be played, and
they were not gambling for money (acknow-
ledging the gambling iu his defence), but to
get up a Chinese procession, and one penny
in every shilling was thus handed over to the
charity. It was notorious that the police
were daily gambling—gambling at the corner
in shares
Jack Wha, luk e ere; that wornt rait, for
t Justices ar all hed men e that suart o
gamblin.
Bill—The lawyer made no defence, the
case was clearly proved, and the justices
disgraced themselves by interfering about
bail when it was the gambling only they
had before them; and not only did they dis-
miss the case, but refused to state a case for
an higher court.
Jack—Polismen kno nar ter let Chinamen
aluan.
Bdl -It is said that thieves commence first
in a small way, and bv practice and profit
became experts. If this decision of the
Maryborough Justices of Peace is only a
commencement, w hat will be their decisions
if they are allowed to become experts? Re-
member that the three Justices of Peace are
all supporters of prison labor, t > the prejudice
of the free laborer ; that they are all coun-
cillors, one of them Mayor of Maryborough,
one of them a member of the Legislative As-
sembly.
Ja k—Aye, and tother wants ter be.
Bill—And that all of them by their posi-
tions are the head men of the town, and
when we find that to be the case
Jack —What dust ter me-an ?
Bill—l mean that when the head men of
a town uphold Chinese gambling, and thereby
upholding the great- st curse ever brought to
any country, 1 say that it is then time tor to
speak plain, so that the people shall know
what Chinamen are.
Jack - Well, I luk on t Chinamen as suar
many innorcent chaps wot knows nuthin.
Why they suar soft that they let off crackers
every nar an then, to scare awayt Devil,
an they are nicest spocken fellers I hever
hehard an; they is nua fayit in em.
Bill—No, and that is, perhaps, the reason
why these justices have encouraged them ;
they perhaps think that if a war springs up
that all old and young men will be wanted
to expel the invaders, and the Chinamen
being no use will be left b hind, and that
they will take especial good care of their
wives and their daughters,
Jack—So mote it be.


THE MONGOLIAN AGGRESSION.
Bill—The Chinamen were brought here by
capitalists, to reduce the price of labor.
Jack—And what dust ter mean bi capital-
ist ?
Bdl—lt means in Victoria a man who has
climbed into a position, and then tries to pull
up the ladderafter him, so that the low scrub
that he sprang from cannot follow him.
Jack—Ha is it they havent put Cainamen
ont rail ruad ter keept gates ?
Bill—The capitalists of Victoria have al-
ways done their utmost to reduce Colonials
and Europeans to a state of slavery. Look
at tbe Clunes affair, in 1873, when they had
Chinamen escorted by the p dice to Clunes,
with the declared intention of starving out
the miners, and when the Corrish women and
men turned out in a body, and beat back
both the police and ChioameD. They stood
back amazed; they had gone a step too far.
They saw that the whole of Victoria was
with the brave Cornish miners and their
wives. The disgraceful Mongolian aggression
was stopped for a tim». It was left for the
cunning of a Jew to comp'ete the Mongolian
aggression, who has 100 Chinamen now work-
ing in the Duke Consols, at Timor, of which
mine be is president. As this Jew is a mem-
ber of the Legislative Assembly for Mary-
borough, and wet nurse to two of our Chirnse-
loving justices, and owner ot two large furni-
ture shops in Melbourne (but, according to his
account, employs no Chinamen there), and
returned by the miners of this district, to
their lasting disgrace, I will let him speak
for himself, —“ If any man comes to me to get
his son in tbe civil service, I say no 1 let your
son help to develope the resources of the
country, and I say do not make the civil ser-
vice too good, too enticing,” It does not
matter to the capitalist what energy, wbat
attainments, wbat intellect a young man may
have; he must work in the mines, and be
made a slave by the help c f Chinamen, who
are now working in tbe Duke Consols, at
Timor, at 12s 6d a week. And when asked
if he had given the same chance t > white men
that he had given to Chinamen, he said,
“Those men that, were turned from the mine
went to work at other places, and there was
ne harm done.” Just fancy these slave
traders taking Chinamen down to Sandridge
wharf when the strike was on. Those men
would not have gone to other p'aces, and
there would have been harm done to the
slavery cause and to Chiokies beads.
the jew’s character of the mining
j BOARDS.
Then again he says, “Some mining board
membeis could be bought for a five-pound
note.” Well done; I’ll bet he’s tried them,
and ought to know. And then he says, “He
did not intend it to apply to any member of
the Maryborough mining beard, in whose
honesty he entertained the fullest confidence.”
Of course you do, and know them be'ter than
the other boards; but I do think that when
a member speaks from experience be ought
not to damage bis friends who had been kind
enough to take his five-pound notes.
Jack—Gu on wit kurae, an let Jew a’uan.
Bill—ln 1848 the squatters lowered shep-
herds’ wages from £3O to £lO, by the help of
Chinamen, and labor has been deprived of its
just due ever since, by the same cause.
Jack—What dust ter think abart Minister
o’ Justis ?
Bill-I am glad you have asked me. you
will understand that he represents this pro-
vince, and by acting as he is doing he will
be sure of the Chinaman’s vote.
the Chinaman’s vote.
Jack—Dust ter think they owt ter hev a
vuat ?
Bill—Decidedly not. In the first place
they do not care bow the country is governed,
bo long as they are let alone. They are
marched up to vote, and vote as one man for
the merabtr who pays the highest price f r
their vote. When I wa9 a boy I have seen
thousands of men hold up their hands at
elections to show which member they were
in favor of. The show of hands was of no
avail, but it was the only way that men—
Englishmen—could vote. Then came the
Chartist’s, who wanted vote by ballot, Toen
could be seen horse soldiers riding shoulder
to shoulder through the streets at a rapid
pace, tratrp’ing down all that came in their
way. That was how the vote by billot was
answered at that time—it took years of agita-
tion btf re it was an accomplished fact.
John Bright, speaking of tbe ballot, says,
“Every man voting would thus te enabled
to give his vote in accordance with bis own
conscientious convictions.” It is evident
John Bright never had any idea that a few
slave traders would prostitute tbe vote by
ballot so as to make slaves tf Englishmen.
If the Czar of Russia wished to invade Vic-
toria he would have to build ships, drill
soldiers and sai ors, and would then have to
send them here to be shot a 3 they landed. If
the Emperor of China wished to invade Vic-
toria he would have to build no ships, to drill
no soldiers or sailors. What he would do is
this : send 200,000 Chinamen, with a few
Mandarins, pay the poll-tax, give the slave
traders an intere t, and the Government cf
Victoria would quittly pass from the English-
men to the Chinamen. The Englishmen would
be completely routed atthe ballot box. It is
safer to trust Chinamen with dynamite than
with a vote.
CHINESE Lt PROSY.
And then there is the diptheria and typhoid
fever, both of which are Chinese diseases,
and would never have found the way here if
there had been taken as much caro of the
people as there was of the sheep. Then there
is the Chinese leprosy, which in Victoria is


unknown to the medical profession. It is
looked for among Chinamen only, and when
Englishmen or Colonials gets it the doctors
dll it veuereal erysipelas, and a variety of
other names.
Jack—Luk bean; if doc f ors duant kno
nowt abart it, bar dus thar kno?
hill Well, I wil tell you. X left Victoria
in 1854, and went to the Sandwich ls’ands.
J ck—l tbowt they wor all saviges thear,
Bill —No, they are all a well-educated
people.
Jack—An what suirt o’ whether did ter
hev their ? Hot, I reek in.
Bd—lhiok of the finest week you can
recollect in Victoria. That is the climate all
the year round in the Sandwich Islands; it is
sim;ly splendid. The ih-rmomster never
risis or falls suddenly and ranges about 25
degrees.
Jack—An what du they du tbear ?
Bl ; —At ihe time I arrived there, and
until ie bee :me an article of commerce,
the islands were supported by the American
whaleships, who came there to recruit and
refit, an 1 for years after I arrived I heard
nothing of the Chinese leprosy.
Jack—l ha civer sed they wor ony China-
men tbear, Ha did they cum ter bs thear ?
Bill—The old, old sto y : they were brought
there by capitalists, to reduce the price of
labor.
Jack—Wor thear nua natifs thear?
Bill Yes, but the natives’ wage was eight
dollars a mouth and find themselves; tie
Chinaman’s wage for five years was three
dollars a month, and find hitmed ; and when
the Chinamen’s 5 years were done they had
fresh cargoes to take their places, and the
Chinamen who bad served their 5 years were
turned loose, and when I d d hear of the
Chinese leprosy (called by the natives Mai
Fake), there was an excitement that the
nat ves and white men were infected with it,
an 1 laws were passed ro isolate all lepers at
Krlaupapi, on the island of Molokai. Just
about this time Kamehameha IV. died, and
his brother, Prince Lot, come on the throne
as K uneh imeha V , and he would not allow
the law to be put in force, being a leper him-
self. At his death
Jack—What did he dee on ?
Bill—The Chinese leprosy. And as I was
sa\iog, at his drath Lunalilo was elected
King, and immediately ordered the laws con-
cerning leprosy to be put in force, without
respect to persons. The schooner ‘Warwkk’
was employed in sending the lepers into ex le
for ever, A receiving depot was established
at Kalihi, a few miles from Honolulu. Doc-
tors were sent into the different district’, the
police were ordered to forward a'l persons
su-peeked ot having leprosy to the depot, and
the following notice appeared in the Govern-
ment Gazette :
“By Authority. Notice is hereby given
that from and after this date the lands
Kaltupapa, Waikolo, and Kalauao, on
windward side of the island of Molokai, se !
apirt by the board of health for the isolatio
of lepers, are strictly tabu, aad all vesse
boats, or canoes are prohibited from touching
or landing a t e ther of them, except by sped
psrmis ion of the board. Public attention
h reby calhd to section 5 (a) of Cbapt
XXXIII of the Laws of 1870, to wit, ‘F
person not being a leper shall be allowed
visit or remain upon any land, place, or e
closure set apart by the Board of Health f
the is >lation and confinement of lepers, witl
out the wii ten permission of the Presideut o:
the Board, or some officer authorised theret
by the Board of Health, under any circum
stances whatever, aid any person found upo
s ich land, place, or eoclomre without a wri
ten permission shall upou conviction thereo
before a Police or District Justice be fined i
a sum n.d less than Ten nor more than On
Hundred Dollars for such offence, and in de
fault of payment to be imprisoned at hare
lab r until the fine and costs of Court ar
discharged in due course of law.’ The abov
regu'ation will be strictly enforced from nc
a f ter this date.—By order of the Board o
Health, Chas. T. Gulick, Secretary Boarc
of Health, Interior offi je, Juno 18th, 1873.”
It was theD found that the disease had go
a firm hold, and that it had attacked the rich
and poor, old and young, and that another o
the Royal family was a victim. Here is
portion of a letter sent by him from Molokai
to a friend tn Hunt lulu :
“Dear Friend,—l have arrived at my des-
tination. Well, this is the damdiest hole 1
ever got into. Prison built by nature. Every-
b >dy is on the mak p . It has cost me alreidy
88 dollars and 75 cents. The beef we get I
have uot touched; it is so sickening to look
at when they are killing it. Bill is my com-
pinion when riding, but I always keep to the
windward, etc. e f c — Petsik, Young.”
Peter Young is own cousin to Queen Emma,
and one of the highest chiefs in the kingdom,
B 11, h s companion, is William Ragsdale, an
eminent harrister. I tell you this to show
the fear that a a has of the disease being
infections.
J mk—An what is that ?
Bdl— i’o have the power to give the disease
without coming in contact, You see, Peter
xoung rides to wiudward for fear of getting
the disease.
Jack—Har du they get it then ?
Bill—By sexual intercourse, smokmg the
same pipe, sleeping under the same"”bed-
clothes, taking anything from a leper and in-
oculating a sore or scratch. But the worst
is inoculation by a fly. A fly leaving a
leprous sore, and alighting on a scratch,
pimple, or sore of a healthy person is certain
destruction in a short time. It does not
matter how slight a person gets the leprosy


there is no e3cape, no help; sooner or later
the victim dies, a miserable, loathsome death,
a mass of corruption before be dies, and it is
not like any other disease, that shows itself
at once, for a person may have it 8 or 10
years, and not show it, and during all that
time have the power to give it to others, I
will give you an extract from tbe New Eng-
lish Commentary on the Bible :
“Fiist, —Tbe leprosy is the most terrible
of all disorders to which the human body of
man is subject. There is do disease in which
the hope of recovery is se Dearly extinguished.
From a commencement slight in appearance,
with but little pain or inconvenience, often in
its earlier stages ineiduously disappearing and
reappearing, it goes on in its strong but
sluggish course generally, iu defiance of the
efforts of medical skill, until it reduces the
patient to a mut lated cripple, with dulled or
obliterated senses, the voice turned to a
croak, and ghastly deformity of f atures.
When it readies some vital part it generally
occasions what seem like the symptoms of a
distinct disease (most often dysentry), and so
put an end to the life of the sufferer. Its
made of selecting its victims has something of
the same mysteiious deliberation as its mode
of attack. It presses on slowly from country
to country and from race to race, as little
checkedby variations of climate as by art ficial
remedies. If tbe type of disease is in some
way modified in different countries, or in par-
ticular cases by local circumstances or consti-
tutional peculiarities, it Dever fails to have
it 3 own way in the general character of the
effect produced.”
Dr. Trousseau, Physician of the Board of
Health, writing to stop the panic, says.—“Mr
Editor, —I have been frequently asked by
some friends to write some information or
other about leprosy and the action of the
Board of Health. We always thought that
tbe least talk about the subject the bettir.
Action was the tbiog netded, in pnseuce of
the alarming spread of the disease of late
year*. I will explain wbat the action of the
Board has been, mw that the painful part of
itt duties is almost at a close. How sad these
duties have been my colleagues and myself
ODly know. The influ nee brought to bear
upon us has been numerous; prayers, threats,
aod worse have been resorted to, We may
boldly say that no consideration of fortune,
rank, or nationality has arrested us, and our
ta-k has been achieved to the best of our
ability. Many a time our hearts were bleed-
ing. I for myself, as a medical man, hive
been far from coming in contact with the
pleasantest features of humanity. Well, I
never in my life hid to witness more painful
scenes of physical and mental suffering.
Since the Ist of March (this letter is dated
July Bth) I have examined ove one th rnsanp
people, Four hundred casei have been sent
to Molokai—24o men and 170 women, all
natives and half whites, with the exception of
six foreigners, one American, oDe Frenchman,
one Englishman, and three Chinamen. In
no case has a relative or friend been allowed
to fallow the leper. The number on Molokai
now is about 800. Is leprosy infectious or
6ven contagious in the true sense of the word,
that is by contact mere aod simple ? I em-
phatically say no. Leprosv cannot be com-
municated like cholera, yellow fever, small-
pox, or typhoid fever. But provided there
is a predisposition in a person, that person
may contract the disease by various means—
co-habitatioo, smoking out of the same pipe,
eating or drinking with a leper—and so forth.
Isolation, and thorough isolation, as the
Board understands it, and is carrying out,
will be one of the most efficient means of
arresting the progress of the disease. In
fact, leprosy is not only a skin disease; it is
what we call in medical parlance, a cachexia.
This means a debilitated state of the blood
under a morbid influence. To conclude, I
will state that a great deal has to be dote
yet. The Board will have to devise preventive
and sanitary measures, without which the
disease will not be eradic ted.”
You see, Dr Trousseau draws it mild,
without any froth. Well, at the very time
he w, ote the above letter the Presideot of Ihe
Board cf Health stated that the lives of
half-a-dozen were endangered by the aloha of
one person.
Jack What is loha ?
Bill—Aloha oe is the native salutation. TLe
words mean “Love t you.” They also shake
hands and rub noses. Well, during this
scare my wife went down to the beach to s e
a lot of tchool chi dren sent away. There
were fathers, mothers, and a 1! relatives there.
The children were from 6 to 12 years of age,
were taken on board the schoonir. The wait-
ing on the beach was something awful; they
had lost those children for ever; they
had gone to a living death. The whole of the
children caught it from a boy whose father
had died at Molokai of leprosy, but showed no
signs of it when he came to Ham, after his
fathei’s death. After that my wife wts never
easy; she was afraid some of her own ill 1-
dren would be taken, aud by her persistent
and continued entreaties I sacrifice! every-
thing I had, and came back to Victoria in
1873, after residing 19 years on the bandwich
Islands.
THE CAUSE OF LEPROSY.
Jack—Tha hes biin Likin abart leprosy fur
a nour, and thar hes niver teld me why tha
calls it Chinaman’s leprosy, and thar hes
niver sed bart leprosy is brew’d at tus\
Bill—l am nat a medical mao, and I only
know what I have seen, heard, and read. The
leprosy was unknown on the Sandwich
Islands before Chinamen went there, and it
was remembered to have commenced at Wai-
kapu, on the Island of Mani, 16 yiars before


the panic, in the person of a Chinaman, a cake
teller named Amau, and as in Victiria to-
day, no not.ee was taken of it. The leprosy
is brought into existence by vitiated air.
Jack—An what is that ?
is air that is breath, d over and
over again, as in close, crowded rooms,
such as the sleeping dens of ths Chinamen,
wbo sleep on shelves erected from floor to
ceiling. But the main cause is the crowded
opium smoking dens. The predisposing food
is tnh, bad fed pork, and poultry : and I
have noticed those th *t had the leprosy by
eating fab, pork, poultry, rice, and poi, the
joiuts of tbe r fingers and toes would d op off
while those who ate beef, mutton, b ead, and
potatoes very seldom lost their fingers or
toes. B
°f INBS3 lepr OSY IN MELBOURNE.
The first day I arrived in Melbourne I met
a woman in Swanston street who had the
Obinese leprosy bad.
Jack—Dd terdu owt abartit?
Yes, I had brought some pictures that
had been taken for medic.l purposes of the
Chinese leprosy, and a lot of newspapers. I
took them to the Age ofßoe, in Elizabeth
street, showed them to the factotum there,
and after some time they declined having
anything to do with leprosy, because it would
create such an excitemeut against the China-
men.
Jack—Did ter drop t then ?
Bill—No ; I was advised to go to Dr L. L.
Smith. I went to him, he saw the import-
ance of the case, aDd brought it before the
Mouse, and afterwards he wrote a letter
which appeared in the Australian Journal.
November 1873, and was at the expense of
having woodcuts taken from the leprosy pic-
tures, and be told me the time had not yet
come, that a sheep or bullock was of more
value than a man in the of those in
power, and finished his letter thus, “They
quaran ine diseased sbrep and cattle, to pre-
vent the spread of a malady amongst their
aDd surely a similar precaution
should be shown to human beings; but in this
country a sheep's life is looked upon as of
more va’ue than a man’s, Anyway, I have
done my duty, and I throw the responsibility
upon the Government.”
Jack—Wor that the end on it?
Bill What could Ido ? I had got it before
rar,iam<sn f . Dr L. L, Smith got no thanks
for bis letter. I then wrote a letter or two
for the newspapers. Several papers refused
them, and they were printed in the Tele-
graph.
Jack Suar that did all tba cud then.
Did ter see ony muar ot leprosy while tha
stopt e Melbourn ?
Bill I did, I saw, and could not help. I
then went up the country and selected 248
acres of land, and I there saw a young man
that had the Chinese leprosy. I spoke to the
young man’s father, asking him if he knew
what ail’d his son. He said, "I do not know,
he has cost me LSOJ in medicioe, and it has
done him no good.” I then told him that his
son had the leprosy, and to isolate him
tirely from the rest of the family. The o d
man got outrageous, threatened to knock
d iwn with h'« whip. The old man is deac •
the family are all lepers. Well, my w
died, 1 lost the land, and came to Homebusii
in 1882.
THE CHINESE LEPROSY 15 MONTHS IN TH
MARYBOROUGH HOSPITAL.
i® r 0 I saw a leper, 1 warned everybody,
told them how he would be better and wor
until he was a mass of corruption, and then
die I was threatened with an action. Tb; 9
leper went into several hospitals. He wi
oneyear'and three months in the Maryb
rough hospital, and was a mass of corru 1.
tion, and died on the Bth of August last, coa
taminating the hospital, and giving the
leprosy to God knows how many.
By thunder, that’s a rum uo.
Bill—We know that doctors and nurse
have caught leprosy by at'endiog on lepers.
Jack—Luk e ere, can ter prove it ?
*u ßl *r Ye £ " l!1 £ ive y°u a» extract from
the New E tghsh Commentary on the Bible
It say-,
“ But many of those who have replied t
the leprosy committee affirm their belief tha 1
the disease is contagious in a certain stage
when the ulcers are running. It is eviden ;
that if the disease is contagious, a very rare
and critical concurrence of circumstances is
required to develop the contagion, but i 1
should not be overlooked that the contagious-
ness of disease cannot be disproved by the
multitude of escapes, if there area few wel!
attested and well observed facts in its favor.
It cannot at any rate be doubted that the few
.Englishmen who have suffered from Ele-
phantisis have always or nearly always as-
sociated with leprous people, or lived iu
iep ous countries. The esse of Dr Robertson,
who while superintending the leper house in
the S-jrchelles Islands, became a leper, is a
very important one.”
On Tuesday, the sth of October, I saw a
man on the Maryborough railway platform
that was an unmistakeable leper, trying to
nnd room in a carriage for Dunolly. The
carriages were nearly all full. I had gone to
the station to see off a friend, and I kept
close to the carriage door in which my friend
was in, to keep the leper from going in the
same carriage. That leper was more dan-
gerous m a close carriage than a black SDake.
Ihe time has come to speak plain. The hos-
pitals in Melbourne are infected with what the
doctor s call erysipelas, that is killing every*
body. In my opinion it is thie Chinese
leprosy. You will understand that a doctor
is ignorant of this disease if he has not been
where it is or has not studied it. And where


have our Victorian doctors studied leprosy ?
Jack—Ha ter gain ter du owt abart it?
Bill—l am going to write down all that has
been said between us about Cninamen.
Jack—Ar ter guin for to print it in news*
papers ?
Bill—No ; I am going to get it done in
pamphlets, and send them from one end of
Victoria to the other.
Jack—An wear ist munny ter cum
fru', tha hes none.
Bill—Very true, I shall go round, and try
to get a subscription to print a few hundred,
and if anyone thinks tr.at there is any good
to be done, they can send in subscriptions,
and as the money comes in the pamphlets will
be printed and sent.
•Tack—An if tbar gets nua script ions, wot
then ?
Bill—l shall think that the time has not
yet come.
Jack—Then thar thinks time will come.
Bill—l am sure the time will come, and not
very long either, when a Chinaman will not
be allowed to live in Australia.
Jack —When I wor looking round tother
day, I see sum Chinkees dun up gardins fort
fuacbs as hes shops it Eye street.
Bill—Yes, I have also seen it, and at the
same time men, old men, who would have
beeo glad to have done the r gardens, walking
about. But you look round, put down the
day of the month and the names of the
parties who employ Chinamen, and I will
insert their names in the next edition of the
pamphlet.
Jack—Luk eie, if t l jey wor ter drive
Chin >man, what would fuacks du fur gardin
stuff ?
Bill—l went to Melbourne in August last,
and saw cabbages and cauliflowers as bg as
my head sold for oue penny each, and 1 be-
lieve they would be equally as cheap here if
encouragement were given to market gar-
deners. Chinamen have the trade in tbeir
hands, and are making the people pay for it,
as at the time I went to Melbourne the
Chinamen were selling a miserable thing not
worth the name of cabbage for thieepence.
And by encouraging your own countrymen
you would be keeping the leprosy breeding
aoimal from visiting your wife six times a
week. Maryborough takes the lead of all
tiwns in Victoria in htr support of the
Chinese. The only attempt at manufactory
here in a compiny was the establishment of a
Jam Factory, got up solely to find employ-
ment for Chinameo. People would not use
Chinaman-made jam; there was no way to
wash it, as they could the vegetables; so the
whole concern has gone up in a bdloon,
much to the disgust of the snobility of Mary-
borough, who, when there is any laborer’s
work such as digging dams, laying stret t
pipes, etc., get prisoners sent up here from
Melbourne, and drive the pioneers of
the town to look for employment else-
where.
Jack—Why not pass laws ter stop em ?
Bill—lt is no use to pass laws against
Chinamen in Victoria. The capitalists and
head men of the towns are with the China-
men. Look at the poll tax law, very nearly
a dead letter. Look at the law making it
compulsory to stamp all furniture made by
Chinamen with a brand stating that it is the
work of Chinamen. Well, l am in the furni-
ture line, and I hare yet to see the fi st piece
of furniture so branded. Then look at the
Maryborough Chinese gambling case, whtre
the Minister of Justice has paraliz d the
police for daring to molest Chinese gambling.
Jack—Dus ent ter think it ull be too hard
ter drive em all out ?
Bill—When they were trying to declare
the Earl of Staff >rd guilty by Act of Parlia-
ment, Oliver St. John used this argument,
“We give law to hares and deer, becanse
they are beasts of the chase; but it has
never been acc uuttd foul play to knock foxes
and w -Ives on the head as they can be found,
b cause they are beasts of prey. The
wartener sets traps for pole cats and other
vermin, for the preservation ot the warren.
This Gr' at Earl was a bold bad man, and
they chopped his head off ” Wbafc compunc-
tion ought we to have concerning Chinamen,
who by their numbers have done more harm
and are doing rrore harm to the
people than 500 Earls of Stafford ? If
there should be a Russian or Prussian invasion
hi re, is it to the Chinamen our capitalists
would look for bone and sioew ? No; even
the Jews would expict the help of the race
they ara trying to enslave. Men of Victoria,
it is in your power to drive this Chinese
curse away. Recollect the Chinese brothel
keepers and emissaries ate always on
the alert to lead your daughters
to destruction, the fan tan and
lottery to lead your sons to be gamblers and
thieves, the cheap labor to enslave you, and
pes ilence, disease, and death the curse that
follows the presence of the Chinaman as
certain as his shadow. Tht foxes prey on
poultiy, rabbits, &c. The Chiuamau preys on
a race of people superior to himself. Let that
race say they have had enough, and drive him
to the sea, They have had a good time, been
the pets of Justices of Peace and Capitalists.
Let them take what belongs to tt em, and
leave. I don’t doubt they have made it pay.
I cannot see any hardship done.
Jack What dust ter think ought to be
done ?
Bill—First appoint medical men that have
studied leprosy to visit all hospitals, and
cleanse them first.
Jack—Whear ar they ter get em ?
Bill—There was a gentleman of the
medical profession in Victoria a year or two
ago, I believe he is here now, who thoroughly


understands the leprosy. I will give his
Dam i if required. Secondly, appoi.ic a com-
mission to inquire into tne alleged miscar-
ri;ga of justice, the commis ion to have
power to deal with the three Justices of
Peace as they deserve. Th rdly, take away
the right to vote from the Chinamen as soon
aa possible. The necessity of this is shown
by the action of the Minister of Justice
fishing: for their votes, and compel
the Minister of Justice to produce
all correspondence in any way re-
lating to the miscarriage of justice in Mary-
borough Fourthly, form anti-Chinese socie-
ties all through the country, aDd keep oo
agitating until every Chinaman has left Vic-
toria.
CHINESE GAMBLING.
[From the “ Maryborough Standabd ” or
7th September, 1886.]
On Saturday nigh , last the police made a
raid on a g m liug den at the Chinese Camp,
Maryborough, and arrested seven Celestials,
and placed them in t ie lock-up.
The prisoners were brought up at the pol ce
court yesterday, Mr C. W. Carr, P. M.,
Messrs A. Lowenstein (mayor), W, M. Page,
and A. R. Outtrim being on the bench Ah
Po was charged with actiug as banker, and
Ah Yeong with acting as croupier, in conduct-
ing an unlawful game, to wit, the Chinese
game of fan tan. Chei Lea, Ah Sing, Wee
FoDg, Ah Nam, and Ah Qrook, were charged
with being found in a common gaming house
without lawful excuse. It was dec.ded to
hear the cases together. Inspector Rennie
conducted the prosecution. Mr WartoD, who
appeared for the prisoners, pleaded not
guilty. Mr Joseph Wmte'.y acted as Chinese
interpreter.
Mr Warton drew the attention of the
beuch to the wording of the information and
warrant, which only allowed the police to go
into the house of Pee Kee, whereas they had
broken into the house of Ah Poo.
Inspector Rennie said the police could go
into any house with a wairaut where gamb-
ling was suspected.
Mr Warton replied that the police could
not do so unless the name of the owner of the
house was in the warrant. Ha contended
that the constables hid acted illegally in
arresting Ah Poo, who entitled .to be dis-
charged. «
After further remarks, the bench decided
to go on with the cases.
Inspector Reonie said the cases were brought
under the 42ud section of the Police Offences
Statute, under which section an information
had been laid that Pee Kee’s house was sus-
pected as a common gaming house. A warrant
was issued, and the police effected an entrance
to the house, and found Chinese engaged in
playing “fan tan or any other similar game was
an illegal game.”
Constable Williamson deposed that he
lodged the information on the 30th August.
On Saturday evening, tbe 4th inst,, Con-
stables Jennings, Skepper, O’Connell, and
witness went to the Chinese camp. He
instructed Constables Jennings and Skipper
to go at the back of Pee Kee’s house, whilst
O’Connell aid himself went the front way.
He saw a Chinaman run towards the house,
and and witness chased him and
arrived first. They got into the house and
found the prisoners and others playing fan
tan. Ah Po was ac'ing as banker and Ah
Yeong as croupier. About 15 or 20 Chinamen
escape! through the back entrance. He
seized the articles used in thying the game.
(The witness produced the articles, 'and
explained to the bench the mode of playing
fan tan.R To the bench—Witness kaew
sufficient of the game to swear that the
prisoners were playing it when the police
broke in. To Inspector Rennie—Any number
can play the game. To Mr Carr—There was
English money on the table, but tbe
Chinese took particular care tbe police
did not get any of it. Cross-examined by
Mr Warton—The house belonged to Pee Kte,
who was standing outs de when the police
effected an eotraooe. No one else lived there
to wtness’ knowledge. About an hour
previous witness passed the house and heard
gambling being carried on. Could not then
see what was being done. Knew by the
noise made that gambling was carried on
every day in the house, and had seengamb ing
going on repeatedly. Had not seen gambling
actually going on since tbe previous arrests
were made from the house, three or four
mouihs ago. Witness had played the game.
The odds were 9 to 1 against the backer.
Cheating could be done in the game. When
the police broke in the croupier was drawing
in the pieces of china used in fan tan,
Chinese coins were formerly used for fan tan,
but cheating could be carried ou too much
with them. Saw money on the table, but
not on the fan. Wagers could be laid without
putting money on the fan. Mr Warton—.Are
you p epared to swear that the money wa3
not in front of Ah Yeong, who was collecting
for the Chinese doctor? Witness—No. 1 am
no\ To luspector Rennie—Had reasonable
information before getting a warrant, that
the house was used for gambling purposes.
Constable O’Connell said that when Wil-
liamson and himself were going to the front
entrance of the house he heard Pee Kee
call out in Chinese to the gamblers to close
the door. Previous to that he had passed the
door and saw them playing. When the
police broke in he saw Ah Po acting as
banker and Ah Yeong as croupier. They
were playing fan tan. There was a lob of
silver on the table, and the Chinamen grabbed
it up. Ah Po dropped some small silver on
the matting, which witness picked up and


now pr o d uoed (six threepenny pieces and six
* a °P p f B J- . J*°ney was never placed on the
fan, but at the side of it, iwhile playing the
pamhl f 9 knew as an inveterate
f, er f ° r y ears - The house was built by
£ Jf ee *°. r , the purpose of gambling, and
ako the adjoining one, which was ufed for
a retreat when a raid was made. He bad
frequently witnessed gambling carried on in
the house, but having no warrant on him had
taken no action. To Mr Warton-Did not
w?th W °th aDy oth l r Kame that CoUld be P !a y ed
with the paraphernalia used for fan tan,
> L aa i t : BB . m 'e bt be P la y ed *ith
articles. He had seeD fan tan being played
early on Saturday evening, men
backing ° Ut ' 10 Chlnese > tll9 numbers they
*n C *t Df t ab ! e JeDnings deposed that he went
t the back entrance and jumped the fence.
He saw a number of Chinamen escaping
through the back door, and arrested two ol
M h r w loB f d the . case for the prosecution.
Mr barton said it seemed strange that
these cases were brought, when it had always
been sard that fan tan was the fairest
foTn^d \h if be Play 6 He had been m-
favor d nf ha ,V he K e V T re scarce, y any odds in
favor of the hanker, who simply received
?P- eDtage - It seemed in the pri sent case
that the ponce had jumped at the conclusion
*!“ Waa being played, and the evi-
dence for the prosecution, he submitted, was
STor SOdff lD ?* e PJuro P ea Dame of cards,
50 or 60 different games could be plays d, and
why could the Chinese Dot be able to
play various games with the articles used for
tan tan. One witness bad admitted that
S t e h« g f ame ; pitcb and tOSB> mighfc be pi*yed
with the fan tan paraphtrnalia. Tne defend-
ed*:; b J beeD playing “odd and
even, and he was instructed that that was
the game played, only two taking part. And
* b f? 7®'®. “ ot gambllDg for money, but for
entirely different purposes. Last year the
friendly sodeties held a fete in aid of the hospi-
tal and ladies benevolent asylum. The most
important part of the fete was the Chinese
procession, which cost every Chinaman who
o part 10s each. Ihe Chinese were wanted
sum y T f ° r tbe fete ’ aod to raiBe the large
sum of money required the Chinese devised
* S lr e *1 m t P ° rtion 0f ths ™nninga in
Mi™ tr g Bh ° U il d be hailded over <o Dr Wong
Mng Kam. He understood that Id in every
ftrf B Th“nt" banded over *» lbe ob.,itJ
lit. t l ' crime,, did not u,e c.rda or do.
like Europeans, but adopted their own
familiar art cles to carry out a game of
chance, the same at bazaars, &c. It
seemed a most wonderful thing that ihe
who were arrested on Saturday
night at 7 o clock, should have been kept in
It e J° ck ' Up a, [ da y Sunday till that morning,
It was a most un-English and unheaid of
proceeding Good and sufficient bail had
been offered, but the police had deliberately
refused to entertain it. Two justices 0 f the
peace attended the lockup to accept bail and
were first put off by the pobce on the plea
‘ th f forms were nut made
the’mp d the ° atter wards they were told that
the men could not be bailed out till Monday
morning, This was the most strong-handed
proceeding on the part of the police that he
had heard of. A magistrate could hardly
Aclln r 1h S e ed - (° a r' W them out on
Again, the information appeared to have
f b aThion WO; rhp ,n i an U i° U , BUai and sl *P' s hod
tashion. The police only knew that gambling
was carried on in the house three or four
mouths ago. It se-med the police did not
understand their own position. In cases of a
most severe character when the attention of
the police was directed to them no notice was
hadn't He W ° Uld llke t 0 know if ,he Pol ce
bad taken any action with regard to the re-
marks in the press about extensive gambling
being carried on in public bouses. It w s
notonous that the police were daily gambling
gambling at the comer in shares. It was a
known fact that a policeman could not be got
when wanted, owing to them being gambling
thl ;h . e . C ° rDer * n . Bhare ’'> aad order to show
tba they are doing their duty they arrest a
tr^t C S ineBe t V TuG Way tbe ChineB ° had been
treated in this instance was thoroughly ur-
Lnghsb, and he asked the bench to take notice
of the fict that the defendants perforce were
kept incarcerated since Saturday.
" i EenD u Said statement made
inci rr cIT ‘ WaS wholly
Mr Outtr m—lt is quite correct.
Inspect r Rennie- It is not.
Mr Outtrim (to Mr Rennie)-lt is quite
correct, and you are making a false itatement
in saying MrWartoo’s st ,t ment is incorn ct.
Inspector ReDnie—All I can say i 8 that the
pol ce never refused proper bail
Mr Lowensttio—They did.
meet, ° uttldm You are making a false state-
inspector Renn e—l was not present but
my instructions were carried out ’
Mr Outtr-m-You will see whether it is
correct before the week is out
Mr Carr interfered, and said a'l that was
before the bench was whether the defendants
were playing the game or not.
calltd Wong MingKam,
the Chinese doctor, who deposed that the
defendants Ah Poo and Ah Yeong were con.
nected with him in connection with the
from Bport8 ’ a ° d haDded him a percentage
from the winnings at a game played. The
game of fan tan was not played with the
the Cfc Cbinese D £^ rodUCed - L ' St year i,: Co6t
Chinese £305 in connection with tl e
chanty sports, and they wanted to raise £270
this year, and could not do it unless


they resorted to the perc nt ige from the game
of chance. To I spector Rennie—Fan taa
was played wth Chinese coins (produced).
Men would not play fan tan with the pieces
of china. Witness was not present when the
police broke into tbe house. To Mr Warton
—Defendants were playing a game ca led
“ Loo bung bo.”
Inspec or Rennie applied for leave to call
rebutting evidence to prove that fan tau wa3
played with the china pieces.
Tbe bench acquiesced,
Joseph White y, Chinese interpreter, de-
posed that he had frequently seen the game
of fan tan played, both with pieces of cbina
and with Chinese coins. The Chinese some-
times played with the china pieces. To the
Bench -Did not know if the Chinese played
any other game with the fan tau articles. To
Mr Warton- Had seen tbe Chinese play domi-
noes with coins. No doubt they could play
other games with the pieces ot china. Had
never seen the game called “Loo hung bo”
p'ayed.
Mr Carr said a majority of the bench were
of opinion that a case had not been nude out,
and the defendants would be discharged,
Inspector Rennie asked tbe bench to
state a special case for tbe higher court.
Mr Carr said a majority of the bench
were of opinion that tbe evidence did not
show sufficiently that fan tau was being
played by defendants.
Inspector Rennie—Two constables have
sworn to it.
The application w r as refused.
Mr Outtrim (addresssing Inspector R nnie)
—I consider you have given me the lie direct,
and I shall report you to head quarters.
Your conduct has been most uugent’f manly
in the extreme. You were not present on
Saturday evening when bad was refused,
and yet you make me a liar.
Inspector Rennie—There has been a mis-
understanding, and is still a misunderstanding,
I maintain that the proper legal course was not
adopted to al’ow the prisoners out on bail.
Proper bonds have to be prepared, and
stamps attached, which is necessary before
prisoners are allowed out on bail.
[ln connection with the recent police court
case against Chinese for gambling, which were
dismissed, we (Standard) are informed that
Mr Carr, P.M., dissented from the decision
of the justices of the peace.]
Police Offences Statute 1865, Amendment,
Section 3.—“ The Chinese game known as
the game of fan tan, or any simi ar game, is
hereby declared to be an unlawful game
within tbe meaning of the said Statute.”
THE CHINESE IN AUSTRALIA.
u~ — '
THEIR VICES VtNDVIHEIK VICTIMS.
J?
(Reprinted from tbe Sydney Bulletin of 20lb
August, 1886.) ir
Disease, defilement, d p avity, misery,
and crime—these are tbe indispensable ad-
juncts which make Chinese camps and
quarters loathsome to the senses and faculties
of civilised nations. Whatever neighbour-
hood the Chinese choose for the curse of
their presence forthwith begins to reek with
the abominaims which are ever associated
with their vile habitations. Wherever the
pigtailed pagans herd on Australasian soil,
they introduce and practice vices the most
detestable and damnable—vices that attack
everything sacked iu the system of Europan
civilisation—vices which cannot be named iu
print, and'otbers infinitely worse, so horrible
and heinous that they cannot be spoken of by
man to man. Corruption and pollu-
tion the most vile, characterise these centres
and radiate widely therefrom, for tbe
Mongolian Octopus grows mightily within
Australian territory, and stealthily, but surely
includes in the giasp of his withering and
remorseless arms a daily increasing Dumber
of helpless and hopeless victims.
The whole world of land and water
produces no form of animal life so repulsive
as that of the octopus. Iu dark ocean cives
this brute hides its hideous body, and its
prehensde limbs shoot out thence silently a d
swiftly to grip its unsuspecting prey. So
sudden is the attack that the victim knows
not its danger uot 1 the saucer-shaped suckers,
by which the limbs fasten, are pumping its
heart : s-blood into the insatiable maw ol its
captor. And tbe>e is no escape for the prey
until its blood and Ife are alike exhaus ed;
when this is accomplished, the sapless body
is permitted to tall away and float where it
will, but so long as there i 3 sti 1 a single drop
of blood remaining, the suckers adhe r e vith
more than leech-like persistence and must be
cut away one by one befote relief can he
obtained.
Ho with the Mongolian Devil-fish, Lurking
in his hid ng-places, his arms are swift to
seize unwary victims, which so grappled can
never obtain relea e so long as they are
capable of a disgraceful u efuloess, profit, or
pleasure. Wherever this hideous monster
forces an entrance he stays; wherever he stays
he grows, and his growth is induced and
made memorable by the destruction of all
whom he can grasp and hold by means of the
sinews and suckers within and upon his
ever-1 ngtbening, ever-strengthening arrnß.
Every ODe of these arms, each of these
sessile suckers has its own class of victims,
or especial mission of iniquity. One arm
shoots out and drains the blood of those who
approach the fan-tan table; another brings


the pak-ah-pu or lottery-swindle sucker iuto
play; a third sucks through the agency of the
hop tuck, or opium-pipe, which yearly draws
from hundreds of persons their ability,
integrity, and vi tue; another plunders the
law-abid ng, and usually moral white work-
man, who sets the labour which is rightly
his, torn from him by a set of moon ered
whoremongers, who nether know nor fulfil
any voidable duties to the State or rnanki d.
Corruption, direct and indirect, endows
a filth arm with power to do evil, and health
is drawn in by other tentacles which work
by aid of the demons of disease bred in the
dark and filthy dens, where the Coinesa
recklessly crowd, and where they allure the
vii t ms of their lust. Such are some < f the
results of the existence of the Chinese
Devil-fish ia the cities and towns of Australia.
Such are some of the kinds of his devastating
labours, and such are his pitiable victims.
Yet, as like his prototype, he shrinks away
into dark corners and dens, his mode and
meaos of life, and the magnitude of hi 3
operations are known only to those whom he
ruin?; and to them the knowledge never
c >mea till the suckers are doing their merci-
less work.
'I hat is why Chinamen are tolerated in
Australia. If the nature of their life, its
objects, and results,were fully known, there
would not be one Chinaman left on the con-
tinent; public ignorance on these points m
the only thing that saves the Mongolians frois
inst >nt expulsion. To set down, as we pro-
pose a few facts about the Chinese in
Sydney, necessarily entails a charge of sen-
sationalism, but yet we only publish one-
third of our knowledge of the subject. One-
third more is not fit to be set forth in print,
and an equal portion is forbidden by a libel-
law, framed apparently in the direct interrsts
of all who commit criminal acts For months
we have been collecting information of the
Chine e, and visiting them in their ra st
secret, and therefore most loathsome, dens.
We have allowed them to rob us at fan-tan
and pak-ab pu; to sicken us with loathsome
afflavia which burden tbeir vile breath and
hang like a fog within their narrow and
prlluted dens. That we have risked health,
and safety, is merely a necessary incident of
the enquiry; that every faculty and sen e
bis b en affronted by t’oe various features
of the scene is only an assertion of the
fact that ordinary white men are less
degra led than the Mongols and their
victims. And having thus ascertaintd
the truth of the whole question we
venture io publish a portion of that, re-
gardless of the fact that thrre will ba many
who taunt us from the pulpit and the press
with the charge of being mere sensationalist?.
What do the general public < f New South
Wa es think of the Chinese ? They buy
cabbages from them, never asking how those
cabbages have been grown; they occasionally
buy cigars from them, without enquiring
whether those cigars have paid any duty or
not; they buy furniture, not troubling to con-
sider by what class of workers that furni-
ture has been made; and perhaps they think
the almord-eyed Mongol not half a bad
fellow. They even ascribe some admirable
virtues to him. He doss not drink, it is said,
and is, therefore, more moral than the Aus-
tralian, who has a lamentable tendency that
way; he is civil, even to spcophancy; be has
solved the problem of growing carrots out of
sewage and sand; and as he sells his goods
usually a shade below the price required by
Europeans, the unenquiring purchasers are
inclined to regard him with a mild kind of
aimiration. They see that there are some
advantages to be gained by dealing with him,
and they know nothing, and th retore believe
nothing regarding his devastating vices. His
pock-scars are regarded as a peculiarity of the
Celestial skin; the grime which his face bears,
and of which the foundations were laid im-
mediately after his bi th, they account for by
racial reasons; and the evil odour and evil
look which he carries they explain by his
nationality. Passing along Lower George-
street, Goulburn-street, or some of the streets
io the lower suburbs, and noticing the aggres-
sive atmosphere of stink—no other word de«
scribes it—stink from the coukshops, stink
from the opium dens, stick arising from the
filth of the dwellings, and the filth of which
the skin of every fau-tau-shop Chinaman
carries a share—the careless Australian merely
hast ns his step and passes along, wondering
for a moment, perhaps, what those houses are
like inside which are so foul-smelling and foul-*
lookiDg without, Men of more observant
nature, noticing that the doorways of some
of these foul dens are fi led with opium-reek-
ing caricatures of humanity, whoso numbers
certainly indicate neglect of all laws of
hyg ene, shudder at the foreboding of small-
pox, cholera, or other disease, which, nursed
in these pestilential decs, may one day go
fo th through the streets of the city and
strike down unnumbered victim?. And there
is to the observant the sign of more certain
calamity—a calamity of to-day, and every
day as long as the Chinese hordes are allowed
to defile this fair city—a calamity which
blasts the fortunes, health prospects, aud
hopes, of thousands of young men and eirla
yearly—a calamity which is achieved et the
fan tau tables, the pak-ah-pu dives, and
more than all at the opium couch, and in
chambers of sexual degradation, a sight or
detailed description of which would make the
strong man shudder, the virtuous stand
aghast, and the seQsuai and depraved in the
eye of a Christian code, sicktn with undis-
guised disgust.
And all these institutions ftr the demonis-
ing of humanity are carried on without


hindrance or restraint from the laws of the
colony. If an Australian started a fan-tan
hell, Darhnghurst would be his home, and
stone-breaking his employment, withm
month; and indulgence in pak-ah-pu lotter;
would s:m larly mean penal seclusion for
lengthy period. But no such just retribut :
overtakes the Mongolian. The laws of t
colonies are protective of his life and propert;
but are to him devo : d of punitive power,
an Australian steals a cabbage from
Coinaman’s garden the law is swift to aveng
but no law interferes when the same Chin
man robs the Australian of money, healt
and all that makes life worth having. Nc
can it be considered as certain that life itse
ie not sometimes taken in those ominous
foul and obscure dives, approached by dar
and narrow stairs or ladders leadin
down to mtricate and tortuous passage!
Certain it is that murders might daily be com
mittel in these branch offices of hell, withou
a chance of discovery by the outside work
and it is similarly certain that there ar
Chinamen having access to these rooms wh
are debised and brutal enough to bite a man
ear off for a shilling.
How do all these Chinamen live, is
question that must often arise, when it i
remembered that there were 10,205 i
New South Wales in 1881 an increase
of 3000 since 1871—of whom mor
than a third, upwards of 4000, the
lived in Sydney and suburbs, and that th
number has been added to considerably sine
then. How do they obtain the mone;
which enables a majority ot them to pass tb'
hours of daylight in lordly idleness, anc
what is their conduct within thei
own houses? How do they live, and or
whom ? Follow them into their houses, anc
you will solve the problem as far as it con
cerns a very large number of them.
Gambling by pab-ah-pu and fan-tan is the
first item iu their revenue account, and i
is an important one. There is no concealmen
about the places where these swindles are
worked. Anyone may go in, although
janitor, looking through a small hole in the
door of the Inferno, satisfies himself of the
appearance of candidates for admittance
before passing them in. The various “banks”
and tab'es are publically known—known as
well to the police as to the civilian. The
“Mashers” can be pointed out by any of the
army of loafers who hang about the street
corners; the “Cookshop” is equally celebrated,
so are the places where Yok Lee, Cum Lee,
Quong Lee, Chi Lee, and various oth rs carry
on a perpetual swindle in a skilful and lucra-
tive manner. A Chinaman’s shop without a
fan-tan table is as incomplete as a first-class
funeral without a corpse, and there are over
20 pak-ah-pu “banks” each with a fall staff
of officials, in Sydney and its suburbs, going
all day and half the Di'ght as well. In the
five principal camps in the country, visited
by Inspector Brennan and Mr. Q iong Tart in
1883, the total of inhabitants was 942; of
these besides 37 prostitutes and 36 women
“married” to Übinameo, 26 Chinese return
themselves as gamblers, and 193 as of n
occupation. That the number of professions
gambhrs is absurd y under-estimated may b
judged from the fact that the Albury cam
which th>n rnairt lined 12 fan-tan tables to
population of 110, does not appear t) hav
any gamblers at all, although the repor
states that gambling is carried on extensively
so that if-the return speaks truly the tables
are automatic and run themselves—an
inference which borders on the improbable.
Wherever the Chinese settle in Anstrali
their chief industury is the robbery of Euro
peans by fhe simple agency of their nationa
games. Sydney is no more cursed, in propor
tion to population, by slant-eyed swindler
than are Melbourne, Brisbane, Sandhurst
Rockhampton, and other Australian cities, anc
with a m re alteration of names whatever is
here written of Sydney dens, will be equally
fitted to the description of the results of thi
Mongolian invasion in other colonies. The
dens are wounrlerfuliy a'ike in appearance,
for tbe Chinaman is as conservative in his
habits as a limpet, always adapt ng the domi-
cile to his own taste, and a sketch of oae
house will serve as a sample of the rest, Lei
one den in Sydney, which need not be here
named, stand as representative of its class. It
has sh >w windows on either side of the front
door. That on the left hand side contains
orange?, bananas, and sugar-cane ; that oa
on the right is en'ir«.ly and completely empty.
Within tbe shop a deeply pock-marked
Chinaman, sitting on a low stool, sells the
fruit over a rough counter in dimension some-
thing like an elongated gincase, ora shortened
coffin, and this is tbe only honest trade
carried on in the premises. On the right-hand
side the back of the show-window is boarded
over, and there is no pretence to any sort
of trade except in pak-ah-pu tickets. These
are sold by a blank little Jfagan, usually
assisted in his clerical work by some stone-
broke European victim of the lottery
frauds. On the wall behind him are posted
tickets which have “caught” various prizes,
and beside him are hung the marked tickets,
the result of the drawings of various banks.
His customers plank a '‘lokoloey” (sixpence,
or any multiple of it) and mark off 10
characters out of the 80 printed upon the
rice-paper voucher handed them by the
blank heatheo, who, thereupon, proceeds to
take a dublicate for the use of tbe “hank.”
This front shop is in size about 16 feet by 8.
At theback of the tickt-t-counter is a door in
the wooden partition which, when open, shows
room with sleeping places or shelves, like
those of a book-case, on either side, and with
a passage about 2 feet wide between them.


this svattr 9 ? inafcioa of infections diseases
tfiis system has no equal. To borrow an
expression from a recent writer, “the scales
i°n th 6 l ma “ may fall 00 the Wealthy man
m the berth beneath him.” Fancv six or ~i
?Set hiW ? a hUtCh ’ Say 7 feet h y 6 and
8 feet high ! Forty-two cable feet of air to
ITavSiL f nd t ?, Uch air - to ° •' No window
i for the eBca P o of the noxious
of supnlv “"“t if 0 d ° or for the
lie there ; . Llke P’S B the Chinamen
He there, snoring and exhaling the ooium
like they haVe been smoking;
like pigs in the dirt which clings to them- like
P'gs in their utter indifference to the debasing
only in their ability to attain to depths of
ar e e Br barred n T ™ hlch tbe insensate beasts
door at 1 th ' oU S h the shop by a
side of thl ao aD /° r , ner ’. a pas ‘‘ a S e a t the
side ot the aforesaid sleeping den leads to
another room about 16 feet by 10 feet where
a gesticulating and malodorous gang of China-
men crowd round a fau-tan tabled which
st S: a . f . e not allowed to play. Small
Stakes in silver or copper are the rule but
sometimes gold glitters .here and uotesrustle
for every Chinaman is an inveterate gambler’
is about 8 feet high, for with that passion for
economising space at the expence of health
and every other desideratum, the lessees or
the widthof t B h° rS ha ? rU ° 9 platform across
the width of the room to serve either as a sleep-
whinh P° r 8t ?u e_lt is impossible to say
which Passing through this room access is
T? n 1U t T hich European gamblers
l ? ec , e(l ' , There th e unsophisticated junier
clerk who. for the first time in his life is
earning a salary”; the more experienced book-
keeper, whose r, asou tells him he is a fool to
bu to so bald a system „t robbery;
cute waiter, who is wide aw ke in all
“trthe ea T 8 ’ ' aVe With the Mon golaus;
and the otherwise sensible workman or
lumper with the sweat of the day's work still
on h,s forehead-all linger un.il Hey Zml to
«lol a i 6 ° f Btone - broke « aDd then suddenly and
1 wly pass out with a deep contempt of the
folly which leads them on to mis, ry and ruin
but usually with an equally firm determina-
tion to come back and “slate the Chows” bv
m ansof some infallibly remunerative style
of play on a futrne occasion. y
came r Vh F rt fearful faBci nation about the
g • Ihere are no enticements in the
surroundings, no soft allurements to the vice
and no attempt whatever to cloak the process
of robbery. The “tan-dealer” is usually re
pulsively ugly even for a Mongolian; 7 the
w o hl fl e 7 ene ? ,,y , Uglier sti,l; and the animal
w o acts as door-keeper B nd chucker-out, a
of af| I th ( ,T P °s Und - UnleSS bis face be a libel,
of all the worst varieties of vice and villainy
The hum 6 Capab i" of attaching themselves to
the human mind. Everything is repellant,
iS th Ther V i Ie - ab ° Ufc K the Chinese fan 'tan
trir hI” j a heavy-bodied leering
wall, before^^h 1 y ’ Paint ? d gods a § ailJSi; the
timially bum.; t“er‘ ar°°'the Mcklef, Tnd
dM'pated gamesters »bo hang round the
elo^uentl y protesting against
elve P s Z Z ?f Z rSODS who res pectfbem-
Z •’ or desire to be respected by others
in spite of all disgusting and repelling
nfluences, there are men-young and old-
iome well and carefully dressed, B some evid-
_ntly of repute m circles where their g.tmb-
ime h in b the a Lft COt kD ° WH ’ playing at laDcb '
ime, in the afternoon, or at night, whenever
ey can escape for a few moments from office
r from home. Ask the merchants who carry
a the business in the vicinity of these place!
‘Z h f e had
ecause ot a.fatal fondne s for these games- ask
ther employers who have suffered from
peculations brought about by the
fatuation of fan-tan ; or ask the poverty
ipressed wife who lives cn a crust because
;r husband s ample wage is weekly offered
the fan-tan board as an oblaiiou to a fate
■ask them So ILfalli . ble ByStem of swindling
a k them how grert a power this hell-born
me has over ita European victims Aud
this point useful and valuable testimony
mes from Mr. Groom, of Melbourne “Z
sfor years been trying to evolve the
rikins V,rt FT 8 ? f f * Z® nuD)ber of alleged
nkms. He states that one of the chief
ficulties in the way of reforming his bovs is
i fact that they are constantly drawn back
r ll T"?®/ of vice irresistible attraction
th-se fatal fan- an tables. “
3ut what, it may be wondered, is this game
ich exercises to potent an influence is
umple as pitch-aud toss. The appliances
SlSfc only of a souare nlil-Q rst • PP llances
.d ,„ / “ B( l ua re plate of iroD, num-
ed 1,2,3, and 4 on the respective sides and
amber of counters or “cash,” in size some-
-1 ordinary trouser-buttms. The dealer
es a bandful of these from the amp'e heap
)re him and puts them under a cup, then
money is staked on either side of the
rd, the dealer lifts the cup, rakes out the
iters, by four at a time, and the number
a,mug after the last four is drawn
urn s the winning side. Thus, if there be
r ers placed under the cup, four is the
if r ’ f £}• tbree < aud so on with other
bers. I'hen the winners, if any, are paid
a fresh d al at once started. The methods
windling are excrescences all over the al
S:; The odds paid to winners aJeeut
f ially 3to 1 every time; they nominally
mt to this, whether the money is placed


on tbe “fan,” nr the “mm,” or the “save,” —
positions which need not be described— but
commission varyiDg from 8J to about 20 pe
cent is deducted from winners, and othe
dodges unnumbered, but not unknown, ar
canstantly practised. There is the devic
of “spring-coins.” These are slightly tbicke
than the ordinary counters, and when tapper
with the stick used by the dealer for rakin
them io, the spring which holds the tw
halves of tbe coin together is released, anc
what was a single coin counts two. Thus, i
the three is heavily backed while the fou
carries no money, the spring-coin enables th
dealer to swindle the rightful winners anc
“scoop the pool.” But this device is no
very often used; it is liab’e detection, and
other methods are easier. Besides the com
mission, which its good every time, there is
s'eady means of gain in the power wh ch th
dealer acquires by long practise of knowing
by the weight of the counters which he lift!
from the heap how r many there are, and, con
eequently, what the remamder will be. This
may seem utterly incredible, but it re»ts
upon strong proof. Often in the day-time
when no victims are expected the “tan
dealer” may be seen taking up the count rs
lifting up, and then counting them to see i
his estimate of their number is correc 1 ; anc
frequently when big money is placed upon
number just before the cup is lifted, a look o
anger may be noticed in eyes of the other
wise unimpressionable and immovable dealer
A good “tan-dealer” in Frisco is frequently
paid as much as £5 a night, and it is affirmec
that the services of sucb are of almost equa
value in Sydney and Melbourne.
It is strsnge that so glaring and well-known
a system of swindling should have any power
0\ er men who have intelligence enough to play,
yet the power is undeni ible. Here is a single
instance in proof. A few nights ago, a re-
spect ably-dressed and rather handsome
young man, who had apparently just about
reached his majority, lounged over one of the
tables. He had lost his last copper, and,
after va nly offering to stake his pocket-knife
against sixpence, as vainly tried to borrow
coppers from the other players. Dis-
appointed in th's he turned upon the
dealer and cursed him and his ancestors back
to the reign of Hung Fat, or thereabouts, in
eloquently anrl forcible blasph my. Then
he turned to go out, probably in search of a
more fortunate table or charitable crowd.
As he got to the door he shivered; the night
was piercingly cold and the rain descending
pit ously. And one who had witnessed the
scene stopped him in the street and learnt the
full tale of hi 3 woes. He had that day been
dismissed from his third situation —each lost
by his infatuation for fan-tan. .No door was
open to him, he had pawned everything, and
must stay out all night—“find a boibr some-
where, perhaps,” was his hopeless reflection.
Put his inquisitor promised to provide for him
for the night, gave him tbe equivalent of bet
and break'ast, on tbe single condition of
promise willingly and fervently given, neve
to go into a gambling den again; then the
two shook bands and parted. But not fo
long. Hardly had the Samaritan gone 51
yards when the other came running up to him
again. “Take it,” be said, holding out th
money; “take it, for God’s sake, and pay
them for a bed for me somewhere! Take it
If you leave me with it 1 will only go back to
those ; they will rob me again, anc
I will have to sleep out in this cold after
all.”
Down from tbe fan-tan den are stairs leading
to lower and dirtier abodes: rooms darker anc
more greasy than anything on the ground-
floor: rooms where the legion of aggressive
stinks peculiar to Chinamen seem ever to lin
ger, and where the forms of the grimy MoDgo
1 ans passing to and fro with shuffling, sneak-
ing step, seem more like demons of another
world thin d ba?ed inhabitants of this,
ViDr than pigstyes, gloomier than caves, and
fouler than sepulchral vaults, these cellars
and passages possess the worst attributes ol
each of these places. Yet the rooms are not
naturally repulsive, nor would they be so
when occupied by other tenants; but the
Chinaman has defiled their walls with h's
filthy touch; he has vitiated what was once a
reasonab’y pure atmosphere, with his pre-
sence, and he has polluted the premises with
his disgusting habits; and so it is that nought
save suggestions of evil, ircentives of disgus*’,
and associations of vice, now seems to move
in the fedit atmosphere. Here, more than
anywhere else, perhaps, the casual visitor is
struck with the total immunity of Chinamen
from the laws of the land in which they live.
Not only do their dwellings disclose
the most reckless disregard of all regulations
and penalties to which Australians are rightly
subject, but the facilities for escaping the
power of all laws is amply apparent. To
appr- hend a Chinaman who is known to have
offended would belik6 catching one particular
rat out of a thousand running loose in a coal
cellar. To identify any particular Mongolian,
wh re all are so mu< h alike, is a feat which
would generally baffle the smartest detective
in Sydney, apd to find him in the gloomy
recesses of his grimy abode, is a ten-times
more difficult matter. Like the devil-fish
which, pursued by an enemy, obscures the
waters with an inky cloud, so the Chinamen
hides within the congenial darkness and mazy
intricacies of ha! i ations seemingly con-
structed wi'h the single aim of protecting him
from a righteous retribution. From one
house to another he may pass, as passes a
rabbit through all tbe passages radiating
from a warren, and so it happens that unless
a Chinaman is caught red-handed in crime,
be it burglary, coin-sweating, larceny, smug-


ofjfi *• **»•t—
ffy X Sr;«:
.Loix 1 ’ 11 ! 1 ? ower ot tbe Kb;
enac.m nta of immemorial antiouitv thn
thi? ’ i - the Chinaman cares notb.ng for
. He imports his fellows here and keeos
worked* out° th ltioD ° f B ' a ? ry unfcil ba ™
Jmn« * nt' the r own enfranchisement. He
imports Chinese women sometimes and sells
them (as one was sold a few days aeo in
wTI fn/to i° r £ f s ’° fco whomsoever is
wit mg to mvest in so precarious a property.
Ho assistance woull be ffiven h« ” 1*
of Law nr f 6 iven b Y the courts
contracts' ? ? f ° r tbe enf «™einent of such
There tth h !,! S '? Je endent of Buch aid
nw ! U , author ity enforceable bv his
inaux w ho tread their native ice q
,«aT ndlog again the “arrow stairs which
lead down to the lower regions of the dwelling
cr. d at P r°*“ r ° UBh room, an otb£
dK, h ."s ™T™rtr.;r' with
infatuated gamblers - iua.lu up to™bTde°o
where pak-ah-pa spiders feed upon the monev
and the hfe 0 f the deluded human fl?e7
The den is disagreeably ominous of tbe cense’
queDces of crime. A narrow passage, bounded
plr a on°r ° D V^ e ’ and by a breast-high
partition continued by means grim-lookine
ooden bars suggestive of the prisoner’s dock
at a crim-nal court, on the other, isneordd
• k> They have paid their “l«ko-
loey (sixpence), marked off their 10 figures
boTm*'* ”‘ tb hopefulueej to
bow many of their markings will corres
If ^ ed ° ff by the baQk-
-1 they get fi ve thus coiaciding, they win Is
»9 l;,f 13s “f « 8, £2O 10s;
in iL 36 ’ and a 080 corr espond, £7O. It
Sskes X' 6 :! ”?,"® 06 ” 09 01 the ibat
niases the swindle so noDular au
dimensions of the chance Knning a p
are in much less than inverse ratio tn P n?
magnitude of the prize itself. The data of
e calculation are easily obtained for tbe
th°e 80 ?nth a3er BtrikeS ° Ut 1( > characters of
20 more a f Dd the bank ° b| iterates
. mo . re * is, therefore, 4 to 1 aoainof
bink; SID And an . y Pa'ticuHr number by the
’ . ?d what is the chance often num-
°in ° S AS p tbe smartest mathema-
iician m Sydney. Give him reams of oarer
and a week for the calculation. Or ask the
to VTS 1 ; out rofe Tll tried fora moath
thn g t ° Ut ’ and tben could only sav that
the answer was in tens of thousands' The
a r Jarge C scale Wh the ? ? Sar ? o game is ruo on
P*Y. aie » the price of the ticker in
dollara* 1 the bigbeafc l3OO
aonara (£260), and yet the “ bank ”
such as ia only granted to one man in .
million, and the Mongolians malm ti •
money on the other 999,1)99. The invest^
of th« 8 t i®, ket " d ? nofc know the magnitude
of the odds against which they contend
S,ween an the°m? rehe f Bd "^difference
the value, £7O, of the highest they
cannot understand tba'betweeu the ticket
fixed whS Z f ttere 13 gulf of chance
cross Wh r Ve 7u feff ~a« ever able to
?r° 8 ?- S .° ‘hey buy the tickets. They keen
b 0 bank ® gola B> both in George aod y Goul P
b “™ T k ?l half-hour throughout the
day and through the greater part of the
ght, and time after time they stand before
tne partitions and p ke their noses th ough
the wooden bars, while they await with hJL
thed d °° med 5° disa PP°i°tment, the result ?f
Sneral^ D fn° f tbe f numbers - This is managed
With od f dl'o(“l 00 ffST* 1
favour, the Moogoliao swindlers can afford to
I.?h. U t P M a , t P o e t l, ;r 0f
10 , c P art of the room, shut off hv
partition from the outer passage, four or five
usual.y sit whi]e the another manages the
f ra K of all tickets purchased
are handed in, and then the drawing com-
ences. Eighty single charac‘ers similar to
those upon the tickets, each inscribed Lon
a se p a ate ticket, are then folded up and put
mo a Jarge b It These are mx P P»t
into four smaUer bowls. Characters repre-
counters * heSo , . small9r bowls, inscribed on
a trav anT arble3 ’e 01 : arS P laotd upon
person’s 13 knup hy arj y one of the
persons standing outside. Thus the howl
Td a°dSf ‘ he 20 ,a,et ‘; l """■'»** » »W»
James of th« aD P [° Ceeds to chant the
names of these as he pastes them one by one
°^., a board, while the other Mongolians
jfonX
o^^heT^tb^°s
o P en° kv e 7J° T° d the night under^ the
Seventy noon ? f 600 - gh that eDtl <>ing
wrSj vSf\ o '°, t « n u E“l.ir ce '
ticket; Kune of them to wonder how they
the 2ZZZ X^ b LZZf.»°°
tab’es. 8 °I bigger VwlJdV'&M 'pL^h-pJ


n v r was invent id; more merciless swindle
tban the men wbo run it never came to Au
tra la. and gr at r fools than th 9 investors
tickets never were bom.
Yet for all that it will c ntinue to clai
its vict'ms as long as there is a Chinaman
Sydney. The police may obtain conviction
as they have already done in the case o
Ah Toy, Charley Torse, and others, bu
about future prosecutions th re will be th
wretched half-h ariedne s which alway
charac eriees a 1 prosecutions of Mongolia
criminals, and if 20 banks are stopped ther
will tt 11 be enough going to bring immens
revenue to the cnmme-cial promoters of thes
ingenious systems of public robbery. Th
de.ec ives, able aud conscientious men
usually find themselves, for some reason
unable to check these unlawful proceedings
If the banks are prevented from acting openl;
they will transact their business iu th i
c >vert manner at which Chinese are adepts
It is absurd to suppose that the police wl
now be able to effectually prevent, withou 1
the enactment of new laws, the system o
wholesale robbery which for years past the 1
have been utterly un ibleevt-n to limit or check
The Mongolian is not easily circumvented b;
law. His first acquaintance with colonial
authority is in h s evasion of the £lO poll-tax
the first English he reads is that contained
in the Acts r> lating to gambling.
Aod the Ch have another means o
self protec ion against the ttr-ors of the
Criminal haw. Their New Year is a joyous
season. Their hearts bubble over with
generosity and good-will it that pirticular
period. They are impelled then to give
presents to all their friends and acquaintances,
and it is strange how many friends a China-
man discovers at the period, and friends also
who could, if they would Only give the
necessary instructions, bring unpleasant
pressure to bear in an inconvenient manner.
Virtue is its own reward. Generosity is a
virtue, John’s generosity brings great reward.
And so it happens that Chinese fan-tan
tables bring him in a remarkably larye
revenue; his pak-ah-pu swindlers are magifi-
cently remunerative; his smuggling ventures,
ovtn if discovered and proved, are not always
very severely punished; his coquettings with
“Maly Ann" in an opium-den are not
penalised; and his infraction of the whole
criminal code at pleasure brings no retribu-
tion, or at least ra:ely such as would be com-
mensurate with the offence.
Strangely enough, the cabbage growing
Chiuamen are not so generous in their gifts.
“Toiling onward as toils the dull bullock”
among their uninspiring esculents, they grow
boorish and strictly commercial in sentiment.
But their more enlightened brother, to whom
inspiration is wafted from the fan-tan table,
generosity instilled with the odour of
smuggled cigars, and beneficence born upon
the melody of the pak-ah-pu chant, is elevated
by these influences; his soul swells out in
gratitude accordant with the inspiration, and
he willingly lavishes ample gifts upon
whole lot of peop e. The code of Drac
might adorn the Statute-Book in New Sout 1
Wales, and yet it would not avail a very
great lot so long as John maintains h; j
present munificence. The Americans have a ;
l*st risen to an apprtc at on ot this fart A
the laws they could pass had no power tin cur >
Mongolian eccentricities-'; despite all legis
lative enactments John refus d to be clean
to be honest, or to be moral; with increase o
numbers came huger developments of vice
every objectionable feature was magnified as
the Chinese population became more dense
and now, as a final resource, and as the only
means of removing a national cancer, the
S ates are trying to effect the gradual bn ;
complete expulsion of the detested anc
degraded race. Wherever be goes the China
man adapts his surroundings to himself
The Chintse camps and colonies all ove
Australia, from Cape York to Cape Otway,
from Port Jackson to Perth, are essentially
similar in their filth, tbeir independence o:
local laws, their agencies of degradation anc
disaster; and entirely the same in the class o
persons whom they bury in moral ruin
Where Attili’s steed trod no blade of grass
afterwards grew; similarly, wherever China-
men settle, respect of laws, civil, municipal,
and moral, is utterly banished never to return
so long as the slant-eyed Celestial is permitted
to r main.
Such is a discursive description of a den in
the main streets of the New South Wales capi-
tal or any other Australian city, but to see the
Chinaman in his domestic life, his dwellings
in the cross-streets, and in such purlieus as
Queen street, Cumberland-strict, the “Suez
Canal” Goulburne-street and Cambridge street
in Sydney must be visited. In George-street
the Chinamen coquettes with crime, chiefly
in the form of gambling swindles; but
about the “flocks”, and other localities of a
similiar secluded character, he wallows, and
rolls, and revels in vice for the gratification of
his sensual tastes and passions. There also
are his establishments maintained as a means
of defrauding the revenue of the country, by
aid of careless or amiable Customs Officials,
There he hides the cigars and opium of which
consignments are constantly smuggled from
various vessels friquenting the port. The
opium pipe is there in constant request, and
its fearful ravages are seen in every hou-.e.
The very air of the alley is impregnated with
the heavy odour of the drug, and the
Mongolians who pass and repass, by their
shambling gait, glistening eyes, and trembling
muscles bear evidence of its pernicious effects.
Enter one of these dwellings, and you will
most likely see the wretched morpliinees
actively achieving their own bodily damnation.


The smokers’ couch is usually a low square
table, with a rough pillow at one end, and
covered with strips of fine matting. On one
side of his table the Chinaman lies, some-
limns resting on his elbow, and at othe
reclining at full length. In the middle
the table or couch is a slush lamp with a sho
Bugarloa-f-ahaped glass. Th© lamo giv
but a teeble light, and this Is farther obscurer
by the grime, smoke, and opium particle
whmh cloud over the gla«s. The prevailm
gloom of the apartment is suited to th
usual occupation of its tenants. In opium
smoking the first operation is to “cook ” th
drug, to reduce it to the proper consistency
A piece about the sze of a pea is put on the
end of a thin skewer (called the “yen hock”
about the size of, and similar in appeirance
to, a knitting-needle, and then held over tb
lamp where it seethes and melts into softness
when it is put in the pipe bowl. The ppe
stem is about 2d inches long, made of
h avy polished wood, and is nearly as thick
as an ordinary broomstick. A biwl’
shape like a shallow cup, screws into thi
about six iuches from the end, the extra spac
being left to increase the draught obtainable
The cooked opium is pressed down and per
foroted with the yen hock, and then the
smoker, leaning so as to get the pipe-bow
over tne lamp, with a few long breathe
d aws the flame or heat on to the opium, anc
inhales the resultant smoke, puffing it ou
again through his nostrils. Av. ry few puffs
suffice to exhausts the more powerful con
stituents of the dose, and when no more fumes
result, the devotee relaxes his grasp of the
p.pe; it falls on the table, and he turns over
languidly and lays prone, with nerves for a
time pacified and at ease. He is an interest-
ing though sad study. He has, perhaps,
been smoking daily for 10, or even 20, yeats,
arid the ravages of the habit are apparent in
every visible muscle and feature. The pupils
of h s eyes are abnormally di ! ated, and the
eyeballs are covered with a thin glassy coat-
ing, which effectually cloaks aoy lust e they
may once have possessed. His skin in
appearance, resembles the hide of a biast,
and looks though it were no longer nourished
from within; the outer muscles of his neck
are rigid, and their course plainly tr ceable
beneath the dry skin enfoldit-g them; his
hands are those of a sundried corpse, and
his body is emaciated and enfeebled to the
last degree. To him the pipe is now not
even a pleasure, Once, so long ago that he
can hardly remember the period, opium
liked him up for a time from this world of
hard reality, to an opt rniatic region a
realm of rapture where troubles were
unknown, and al was dreamy, languorous,
sensuous sati.-faction. Then the drug was a
Jacobs ladder, by means of which he could
climb to a Nirvana of picturesque romance,
where phasant Fancy ruled supreme and
brought all the senses into subjection to her
will. But that period was to delightful to
endure for long. The poor weak nerves were
distressed by the exertion of exalting the
gross brain to such unnatural ecstacy; they
cried out for a return of the strength taken
from them by the fierce strain, the cruel task,
which had been imposed upon them. They
trembled in their agony of weakness, ancl
called with a voice that could not be stifled
for a return of the stimulant which had
wrought so disastrously upon them. Then
relief was tried in newer doses of the drug,
but this could no longer enable the brain to
soar to blissful heights; it could only still fo
a time those clamorous cries which woulc
arise with renewed and louder vehemence as
soon as the evanescent influence of the poison
had departed.
The wretched victim has endowed those
nerves with a raging passiou which nothing
but the grave can fully satisfy, and which
only the inciter of that passion can temporari'y
allay. Like Frankenstein, he has rais d a,
monster for his own irredeemable torture; he
has planted seven devils withia his breast
which rend and tear him until he gives them
the food that strengthens them to torment and
tear him again with fiercer force. He is
like one who, adrift on the open sea, drinks
of the briny waters to qsench his thirst; the
draught is no sooner swallowed than the thirst
breaks out afresh, and with each draught
rages the more until finally it gathers a pas-
sionate s rength anain-t which the enfeebled
bram vainly contends for mastery. The
powers of thew and sinew have long since de-
parted; he is left at last a pitiable wreck, over*
whelmed with utter ruin of body, oblivious of
ail moral obligations, and deprived of all hope
and even of reason itself—nay, werse, for the
reason given for his comfort and consolation
has become an agent of fortune and anguisu
to him as long as his life sbali endure.
Ia writing thus we do not overlook two
objections to such a statement of the case.
There are some peisons who will assei t opium-
smokiog to be harmless, if practised “m
moderation” and with “due precaution.” We
a im.t this, but ask who ever beard of these
conditons being observed, in Australia at any
rate ? There is ou this continent no sucu
thing as moderation in this indulgence, and
temperance in the same habit is equally un-
known in America. We look at opium-
smokers as they are, not as they would be if
they exercised a species of control whico is
foreign to their powers and the nature of
their temptation. Either th= y use the drug
immoderately or they avoid it altogether—
they kuow not the “moderation” so compla-
cently advocated by arm-ebair moralists who
have never been assailed by the fierce torment
of opium-hunger. And it maybe ol jected
that it is possible lo “knock it ofl” altogether.
It is possible in the case of (hose who have


only been sm k : ng long enongh to know the
d lusire and d delights which the
prelim>na>y pip s afford, but with such there
is no rieaiie to abandon the rapture when
they know not what hellish m'B' ry it entails.
Even to tb»m fearful agony from abstinence
inevitably ensues. The ‘'yin-vans'’ super-
vene on a sudden depriviti n, and then every
nerve in the whole body is a rm eking rag'ng,
agonisii g find, armed with indescribable
powe s of torture. The eubj '.ct tempor rily
loses bis faculties and staggers blindly and
tnadly through the streets, unheeding
because uuknowing of everything around him.
Reason is de v hrOned. Unnumbered demons
hoH high oarmva 1 and run riot through his
entire system, and tbe ordeal proves too
dreadfol to be indured unless restraint comes
from without aud the drug is withheld.
Men in 'his s'ate stop short of no crime to
obtain opium, and tbe Chinese, kmwing this,
look upon one of their own countrymen, so
suffering, as a reckless thief, and therefore
try to leave him with ut opportunity. In
’Frisco, onlv a month ago, a Mongolian in
this state of freD/y with the alternative cf
death is penalty of refusal. And Mr. Quong
Tart, of Sydney, will testify that in China, if
any property is stolen, it oan always be
ob'ained at the opium-dens if something like
its price is offered as a reward, Men who
talk calmly of the ability of morphinees to
renounce their habits, must consider these
frail victims to be mere machines and not
creatures of flesh and blood, nerve and brain.
Knock off opium-smoking! As well shout to
a man to stop falling when he is yet only
half-way to tbe b >ttom of a precipioe; an
obs'aole interposed may prevent his r aching
the rocks of ruin at the bottom, but nothing
else can. .
The opium-smoker is rarely alone in the
indulgence of his voice. There is space for
two on the table, and the other place is
usual'y occupied—occupied sometimes by a
dea l-b'oke and reckless European, who can
be m da a useful accomplice in the numbtr-
les3 systems of swindling which are never
absent from those regions where Mongolians
“ most do congregate” or else by the
“nicee grl.e,” ‘lttle girlee,” whose
presence aud appearance put the finishing
touches to the revolt og degradation of the
scene. To the lowest'depth of depravity to
which men may teach there is always a
lower depth attainable only by women, and
whatever the vioe be, its most revolting
aspect is se n when the weaker tex lend
themselves to its allurements. So in this
case. It is possib'e to moralise over the con-
dition of the male debauchee, but the mind
cannot reflect calmly upon the appearance of
his partner in revolting practices. There
she lies, sucking in the fumes of the drug
with a degree of diligence that betrays some-
thing akin to mean ty. Her dress is negli-
pent in the extreme, and often not sufficient
to ratisfy the ordinary requirements of
decency. Her cheeks are hollow—sometimes
devoid of all colour and sometimes marked
with a brand of Mongolian yellow. Re-
gard! ss of the presence of strangers, lost
to the reality and completeness of her moral
prostration, unheeding of duty, and u'terly
indifferent concerning her manifest des'iny,
she continues her smoking until satiation
ensues and brings brief respite from the
tortu es by which she is now ever oppressed.
Her powers for good in this world are
destroyed by a series of acts for which she
may not after si', be much to blame. Her
capacity for enjoyment of the many gifts of
the world is exhausted. She has sunk to an
abyss of loathsome and miserable sensuality
which the vilest beast of the field are forbid-
den to attain, and, just as the merciful man
put a dog, hopelessly smitten with painful
disease, out of his misery, so one could wish,
in nr rcy’s sake, to bring quick deliverance to
this hapless victim by the aid of unerring lead
or remorseless steel. Such happy release
would be murder only in the eyes of the law.
Before tin God who rules the world, and in
the sight of those of His creatures who can
reason with unfettered and unprejudiced
minds, the act would be its own and ample
justification.
It is difficult for those who have never seen
such sights to relise their existence, in the
midst of a wealthy, populous, and in many
respects a magnificent city. In George-street,
Sydney, brilliant aud lavishly-appointed
equipages roll along bearing the possessors of
lordly wealth; the “Block” is crowded with
aristocratic scrupulously-attired pedestrains;
while banks, shops, warehouses, aod churches
of magnificent proportions and costly design,
eloquently t stify to the wealth of their
possessors. Yet almost within the shade of
these edifices, within hearing of the rolling
carriages, and almost in view of those who
flaunt their respectability, riches, aod beauty
on the block there lanes, slums, and
alleys tenanted by Chinese where the practice
of immora'ity and the worship of sensuality is
is reduced to a science and systematically
pursued. There are men and women drunk
with the vile abuse of a potent drug, wallow
in the sea of indescribable social crimes, yet
—worst shame of all—feel and show no shame
at disoovery. There are grades, even in the
lowest class. Marriage is said to exist in
s< me cases, and where no pretence is made of
such a state, there is often a distant re-
semblance, an abhorrentoaricature of domes io
life.
An instance which may be taken as a fair
type of one of these g; adesis found in the house
of in . [N te—The blanks
here are our tributes of respect to a brutal
libel law.] The front room upstairs is used
as a bedroom, and as the op;um-p : pas are


there, it is rarely left without a tinant.
Commonly the scene may be described thus.
A low doulli-bed has its bead to the front
wall, aod on the opposite side a ragged colonial
Sofa is placed, and the remaining furniture
consisting of a chest of .drawers, o d aad dirty,
and two or three chairs. Upon the bed tw T o
girls, carelessly dressed, recline. Both are
cooking or smoking opium. They are sisters;
one is said to be married to a Chinaman, and
the o‘her to a European. It is difficult to
guess tbeir ages, for their faces are marred by
the profligacy with which they have wasted
tbeir powers. Each has a child, a poor
shrivelled, weary-looking mite, which seems
t> have tired of a brief view it has had of the
woill. Breathing the atmosphere in whicl
all vile odours are blended with a predomin
ance in favour of opium: if they ever do play
—with other chi'dren whose only birthday 113
a heritage of vice, and accumulating thei
vocabulary by collecting the words utterec
by the voces of prostitutes* thieves, anc
acoun Ire's of every degree, their certain
destiny of misery is a'ready guaranteed
There is only one ebanee of averting thal;
doom; they are weak and sickly; the germs
of disease may even now be doing their
deadly work: the children may soon die, anc
thus end their lives that can only be a burder
and a curse. It is a sign of sympathy tc
wish them such a boon.
Upon the couch in the same room sits a
bloated and bleary-eyed old woman, She is
said to be the mother of these two girls. With
apparent unconcern and listless manner she
looks at the two wrecks opposite her. But
the sight has probably become a familiar one.
She herself has evidently undergone some
devasting dissipation which has dulled her
faculties and bunted her perception. Pre-
sently tbe alleged husband enters the room;
hs is hide< usly ugly and scarred by a former
visitation of small-pox; his eyes glitters with
expectation and pass on as he looks at the
smokers and the pipes. He will occupy a
third place on that couch, and the girls will
“cook,’ his opium for him and prepare his
pipe. He will then be aboat as happy as
he knows how. Any noblsr species of enjoy-
ment would be incomprehensible to him as
it would be to his female companions. And
the old mother? She sits passive, silent, and
uoconcern d. She shows no emotioD, she is
cipable of none.
But a description of the Chinese quarter
would be incomplete without an allusion to
houses of tbe lowest class- Vile subjects c»n
only be described by the aid of vile terms,
therefore no apo ogy need be made, because
the language is in accord with the theme.
To avoid the necessity of leaving the task
unfinished, the worst specimens must be held
up to view; it is tbe fault of the theme, not
of the scribe, if the presentment is indelicate.
There are times when obscenity must be
lo; ked upoD, and crime described.
While there are some of (he Chinamen who
decoy white women to their decs, in order
that they themselves m<y have consorts in
crime, there are others to whom “Maly Ann”
is merely a souce of revenge. Ther captive
European woman is a mere ch .ttel to such;
there is no sentiment in the relationship, it
is strictly commerc'al. The joint enterprise
of servant and master brings in large profits,
of which the ChinameD claims bis share
about 96 per cmt usually, and the balance is
expended ia providing opium and clothing for
the degraded Caucasian Phryne. High revels
often are held in those quiet-looking dwellings
perched up on the rocks. Periodically the
black boys in service at pretentious villas
and magnificent mansions in the suburbs, come
into town and resort. Then the signal of their
adv.nfc is passed from den to den, and the
human stock-m trade of the Mongolian
traffickers in dep avity is collected for
the entertainment of the visitors. The
subsequent scene, even broadly described,
could Dot be printed, and even if printed,
could not be read. A few outline particulars
give a dim idea of the carnival, the house
itself consists only of four or five rooms, of
which two are furnished w ith beds or coucbf s,
and in these meagre apaitments from 15 to
30 of each sex are gathered. At the back
door stand two or three foul fiends in Mongo-
lian shape, the promotes of the festival, the
receivers of the resulting profits. They look
on with hideous complacency, as wreckers
might look on the wave-battered hulk of a
ship wh ch they had drawn on the destruc-
tion, and seem to be calculating the extent of
the demoralisation they have induced, and
mentally estimation its probable commercial
value. This is the very deification of sen-
sual vice. Every feature tending to obscure
or disguise the grossness of immorality is re-
moved; the surroundings and accompaniments
are of the most repulsive character. All is
gross, foul, hideous, horrible, and obscene.
The drama is re-eDacted on the nights when
men from the mail boats, or seamtn from
other ships elect to risk their goods, health
and even lives in the pursuit of d< pr<v ty.
The same moral tragedy is then stag-d, the
actors pile a further weight of guilt on the
lo >d they already have to bear, ai d the Mor-
golian manag r exultantly empties the
treasury box, for the production is always
for bis benefit.
But these wretched Rahabs do not alwovs
stay in Sydney. Their considerate employers
deem an occasional change of air, from, sav,
the Rocks to Botany, to be very beneficial.
Change of the scene a'.soii good. The eye
wtar-es of continual observation of changeless
streets, and then the sight of a 1 e I of cabbages
is an immense relief. CbaDga of companion
ship also ii occasionally pleasant. And the


Chinese in suburban vegetable-'arms a r e ex-
ceedingly hospitable; though t .ey may be 20
of them sleeping in one sma 1 room, “there is
room for Mary there.” So M»ry goes for
occasional visits to a suburoan cvbbage-
garden, fo' the et'quette of the Rocks, as
interpreted by her master, does not admit of
refinal of so kind an invitation. And a few
piece* of gold help to c inao'.e the kind master
for Mary’s absence. So h isp,table are some
of the cabb ige merchints that they willingly
pay for the privilege of entertaining the
miserable female pilgr m* from the “ Rocks.”
It is mor ndly interesting to go to thi.se
haunt-', in su sh h>c ilitms as the 1 * Su z Canal,
where the dilapidated ones congregate where
there are no visito s to he entertained at the
temples of a disgusting Venus. Of a d )Z in
of the wo nen present perhaps two or three
are r pated to be what is conside el respect-
able and even “tojey” on the ‘ Rocks;’’
th>y live with alleged husbands, and even
aspire los>me exclusiveness in the bestowal
of the r affection. Two or three more, per-
haps, are red oil “ Johnny Warders,” and
t e remand r are undeniably and professedly
traffickers in shame All, without a single
have been in gaol for offences
ranging f om “ loitering” and •* righteous ”
(for that in ths “ Suez Canal ” is the received
pronunciation of “riotous”) and nea r ly all
opum-smokere. They have tasted the drug,
aid no sense ot sham : is powerful enough now
to wean them from it. It is the one bond
which bolds them to m?n whom the most
degraded of their cliss must detest, and
scenes which they must abhor. Were it
not for the all-powerful h tuchj the opium-
pipe, eveu reformation might be possib'e, but
against its influence they are helples*.
Varous causes and circumstances hive
brought them to their prespnt etat9. Some
have fled to the arms of tbe multitudinous
Mongolian aliairtrs bee use of outraged and
pursuing justice, and the present state of such
is capa de of exciting but little commiseration;
others hive hidden here from offended
husbands aad angry parents, and the remain-
der have been captured anf ssducsd by means
of that potent ally of Mongolim lust, the
omnipotentopium-p pe.
The 1 ist-aamed class are the most numerous,
anl their misfortunes deserve the greater
cons.d ration. It is difficult to arouse much
compassion for those who have deliberately
cho en—even though the choice were unde
in a moment of inoignition and auger the
habitations of the Mongol. But the case is
different with those who have, by their own
thoughtlessness or innocence, been made the
vict ms of gross and crim'nal treachery.
Degradation of tha thought'ess or in-
nocent usua'ly comes by slow degrees. It
may be that a vain girl in rome tooacco or
boot-factory is in want of some fite y, or even
money, for an approaching holiday. Etuis-
saries of the Octopus cimc to hear of the
wish; they load Mias Vanity to aa obliging
Celestial, who lends her what dress stuff or
pßttv cash she dedres, aud thus opens an
an account against her in the ledger which
will subsequently contain the record of her
ruin. The loan of goods or money is rarely
repaid. The emissiries of the Chinese
creditor remind the debtir of the obligation,
and fo ce her to revisit the den. If she is
pliant to the wishes of toe debtor, and williog
to nrnist r to his pleasure, her down hill
course is certain and rapid, but if virtue, or
even disioclin ition, bars the way, the hop
tuck is called in to break the barrier, and once
the pipe is held to the lips the Rubicon is
passed, no retreat is possible, and advance
meaus inevitable destruction. Thus the
female European population iu the Chinese
quarter is maintained. Sometimes mere school'
children, promptly by childish curiosity,
wander round to those dens. They look at
toys and nick-nacks which are new and
strange. The Chinese, with calculating
generosity, give presents, which serve an
fnc'tement to future visits, when those visits
lead to the only possible result when a
lus'fnl and unscrupulous Chinaman is one
of the pxrties, and an unsuspecting, though
perhaps instinctively cautious girl, the other.
Another recruit is sooner or later added to
the Mongolian ha em, the list of the
Australian criminal classes receives another
entry, and another innocent girl starts with
feariul velocity on the downward path which
ends only in death.
This is no fancy sketch. Girls can be seen
in that worst part of the Chinese quaiter,
who but two or three yea r s since, were
rightly honoured by loving schoolfellows,
and they are familiarised with all the vices
which accompany as a shadow the torm of
the Mongolian Octopus. Ooe of the girls
now kept in a den on the Rocks says of her-
self, “I went to ’ place when 1 was
only about 16, because he used to give me
presents. He then wanted me to smoke, but
I never would, because thß pipes looked so
dirty. But one dßy he pub a new pipe
before me, and made it ready, and after the
first whiff from it, he or any other man ——
their mercy, but so help me God! I was a
good girl before that, what am 1?’
Shall these things be continued? Shall
these monsters of sensuality grapple the youth
and innocence of Australia ? Let this _be
answered by agitatioD, by the popular voice,
and by unflinching legislation. So long as
smsual Chiaamen and innocent girls are pe‘r-
mi ted to come into contact so long will the
results be disastrous to the latter, And as
th--ru w 11, we hope, be innocent girls to the
end of time, the only way to obviate the evil
is by forcible removal of the remorseless
agent of degradation, the Chinaman himself.


The suckers which thus a'tack feminine frailty
must be cut therefrom else the moral life and
and evtry enjoyment which makes existence
valuable or even endurable will be drawn from
the welling veins of victims who atone for
their sin with life-long and irredeemable
suffering. To rescue the hapless girls who
would otherwise fall into the grip of the
Mongolian octopus is a sacred duty devolving
upon every Australian who has a sister, or a
mother. But it must be done by legisla-
tion, and the only legislation of any value
whatever must effect the absolute expulsion
of the Chinese Devil fish. So long as he re-
mains, so long also will this evil continue.
Repression is impossible; if Chinese vicas be
penalised, they will still continue to be
practised, but greater caution will observed
than now is customary, and newer dodges wi 1
be resorted to in order to effect seclusion.
When the octopus of the ocean ia pursued
or wounded, he glides into deep r and darker
crevices, ejecting a clond of ink to conceal
his hidiDg-place. Similarly the Mongolian
Devilfish, if pursued by the police, or
wounded by legislation, will not cease from
crime; he will merely remove it back from its
present location, and obscure bis movements
by those devices with wbieh a IJDg course of
evasion and defiance of the law has made him
thoroughly familiar. The existing causes
must ever induce the present evil effects.
A glance at the facts of the case will m ke
this clear. There are in Sydney, say 2000
Chinamen who are not married, and never
will marry. They are not men who can
occupy themselves in study, aDd the contem-
plation of philosophy and virtue. They are
beings without any higher ideal than based
upon their own passions; the gross pleasures
of the body are their one and only delight.
And lastly, their lust is in most cases fed by
the fierce stimulant of the enslaving hop tuck.
The degradation of others is, therefore, an
absolute necessity of their habits aud mode
of life. And these habits are incapable of
alteration. On this point a Californian, who
is thoroughly familiar with the history aDd
habitations of the Chinese ia America, forcibly
writes in the Northern Miner (Q): —“Trane-
sport John Chinaman to any part of the
globe and he remains John Chinaman to the
t per finger 9. His dress, laws, prejudices are
dear to him as life, or that symbol of
Celestial citizenship, bis pig-tail. He is as
incapable of any radical change in habit as a
mammy. Let him down in the Antipodes
•nd he lives ss though under the shadow of
Pekin’s wallB.” Even if the vile instincts of
the Chinese labourer were not unalterably
fixed, his lack of physical strength would
still maintain him in his immorality. The
labour of the Australian workman is so
valuable that its fruits suffice for the support
of a family in decency and moderate comfort.
But the weaker and stupid Chinese cannot do
the work of a white nao, b cause be is
lacking in strength and intelligence, and,
therefore must be content with a smaller wage,
upon which be cannot venture upon marriage
even if he desires to do so. It is a huge
mistake to suppose that it is the greater
diligence of Chinamen which enab'es them to
supplant European labourers. The real truth
is that the Chinaman who can do say half
the amount of work of which his Christian
compet tor is capable, will accept about
one-third the wage of the other; his
labour is therefore abso'utely cheaper.
Working alongside an English navvy or
mechanic the Mongol would be beaten
out of sight, but as be only wants suffi-
cient mo iey to support himself in vice,
while the other must earn enough to main-
tain himself and others in the methods of
viitue, the Chinaman can do the work more
cheaply. Thus because of his traditions,
physicial powers, and low intellectuality, the
the average Mongol must nec ssarily be a
degraded creature. If tbe Legislative could
supply h m with intellect, an elevating idea],
and inceased strength of thew and sinew, it
might possibly deprive him of his present
absorbing desire to commit crimes which
every good citizen abhors, tut so long as be
has that desire it will, despite all po’ice
control«r restrictive ! aws, be satiated by bis
own debasement, and the utter ruin of others.
Religion is equally im fficient on this point.
If the Mongol could appreciate any other
god than bis own sensuality, his inability,
because of the insufficiency of bis wage, to
live as Christians do would prevent him from
following the demands of a higher law.
Until the lsopad changes bis spots and the
Ethiop bis co'our, the Mongo's will continue
to be an ulcer in the fair bosom of Australia.
Expulsion, ard expulsion only, can meet the
necessities of the case.
* * * *
Such are some of tbe features and results of
a Chinese caoip or quarter, andths descr.ptions
and observations apply throughout Austra-
lasia, wherever Chinese infest the land.
We give the facts generally, because d ta la
are disgusting and par iculaiisation dan-
gerous. Shortly the quistl nif dealing with
the Mongd invasion will have to be met by
every Australian Legislature, And it will
have to be met squaiely, not evaded by
levying a poll- ax, as on tbe last occasion of
its Parliamentry debate With the object
of furnishing facts upon the question, our
investigation was undertaken, aud its nsul’s
thus written. If Australia takes the warn-
ing thus given the enterprise will be amply
rewaided and its labors redeemed.
Printed for the Publisher by Gearing and Son, Maryborough.




