

*j&'\ /V v
:<w piwv
5 £ u<T
w - I’rtMi
Cj
■ " N ?■■«:'
f"
j;
WL;
. : T.




FizoSo
MISOPSEUDES:
OR THE
YEAR 2075;
A MARVELLOUS VISION.
“First understand, then judge :
Bring forth the people blind, although they have eyes,
And deaf although they have ears ;
Or let them hear in their turn and say this is true.”
Hlellmrmu;
W. H, WILLIAMS. PRINTER, 68 ELIZABETH STREET,




MISOPSEUDES: A VISION.
AS, under the lee of a gigantic eucalyptus, I lay supine,
weary, inert, dozing, dreaming, while all the air of the
solemn forest around was quivering and humming, musical and
fragrant beneath the pulsation of the fervid sun, a vision came
to my prophetic soul.
A vision, as of a youth—a student of the year 2075 —girt
about with a great gathering of fellow students, to whom he
lectured, with whom he discoursed. And sore grief and dismay
fell upon my soul as I hearkened to his words; for it quickly
appeared that in his day all now extant Religious Creeds had
become mere “ Historical Expressions.” Of a verity, his day
seemed to be the day of the “ Abomination of Desolation.”
“My friends,” the student said, or seemed to say, “ perusing
these great works, the ‘ History of Human Error,’ the ‘ Hebrew
and Christian Mythology,’ the ‘ Dictionary of Superstition,’ and
the ‘ Curiosity of Unreason,’ one is filled with amazement and
disgust, and with humiliation and shame too, as one discovers
what gross superstitions, what puerilities, absurdities, impossibili-
ties, contradictions, immoralities, atrocities and lurid horrors
were held by our unhappy ancestors as sacred and divine truths
and holy religion. Learning what poor infatuates our forefathers
were of but two or three hundred years ago, our pride, if any
pride be left to us, need no longer take affront at the theory of
our immensely remote descent, or rather ascent, from the ape.
“ Though much light had been for some time streaming in,
and the black cloud of superstition, brooding incubus-like over
the mind of man, had been riven and rent, and was being slowly
dispersed, still, as lately as near the close of the nineteenth
century, great numbers of so-called educated men continued to
hold, or to profess to hold, such monstrous beliefs- as these :
“ That they were in possession of paper-revelations from the
Infinite Soul of the Universe, who was not only the Infinite
Spirit, but also, somehow, a personal deity, whatever that might
have meant; that there was also another great spirit—the spirit
of evil —whom they commonly call the Devil, and who in some
sort shared the dominion of the universe with the good spirit.


Though the good spirit, being omnipotent, could easily have
extinguished the bad one by a gentle euthanasia, yet he did not
so will it, but, on the contrary, appointed the devil his superin-
tendent in some portion of the universe called Hell, where his
appointed duties were to torture for ever, in sczcula soeculorutn, all
the human creatures whom the Deity had made, except some
few, who were saved by divine grace, or by their implicit faith,
without inquiry, without using the reason God had given them,
in impossibilities. But, nevertheless, God was all-merciful and
of loving-kindness.
“ And when any sceptic asked them what it was that was
tormented in hell, seeing that they were speaking of dead men,
they would reply it was ‘ the immortal souls; the immortal
spirits of the dead.’ When it would be pointed out to them
that immaterial spirit, without flesh and nerves, would be
incapable of feeling any sensation whatsoever, then they
seemed to think that the immortal souls would be reinvested
in fresh clothings of flesh and blood, facsimiles of the old ones,
so as to enable them to enjoy again the luxury of sensation.
But these new robes of flesh and blood were to be quite different
from the old ones, inasmuch that they were indestructible, no
matter how much they got torn. They could not bleed to
death. When asked what was the difference between immaterial
spirit and nothing, they were sorely puzzled, and could only say
—nothing 1
“Though they in some sort, perhaps rather dubiously, ac-
cepted the idea of God being the soul of the infinite universe,
they, nevertheless, at the same time believed that he was
also the son of the wife of a Jewish carpenter; that he was
executed as a visionary impostor ; but, coming out from his
grave in a day or two, was mistaken for a gardener. That,
after that, in the presence of human witnesses, this God went
up from the top of the hill into the air, like a balloon, until he
vanished out of sight, and never came down again, though he
promised he would before that generation passed away !
“ They had a notion, those superstition-bewildered fore-fathers
of ours, that, by becoming thus incarnate and going through
the ceremonial of human death —(to a god it could be but a
ceremonial) —the Deity in some way appeased his own wrath
against his own human creatures, or his Father’s wrath (there
is some confusion here, not easily unravelled, for it seems there
were two or three gods, and still only one), and reconciled it to
his own sense of justice to save mankind from the clutches of his
superintendent, the evil spirit, and his cells of eternal torment.
But, somehow, this divine scheme of the Omnipotent turned out
not a great success, inasmuch as they held that, after and in
spite of this queer divine expiation, the number of men to be


saved would be to those hopelessly damned but as the gleanings
of the field to the harvest.
“ When asked what was their warranty that Jesus of Nazareth
was really incarnate God, their reply was that it was incontro-
vertibly proved by his having changed water into wine, and
made loaves and fishes out of nothing, with some other similar
little thaumaturgics. They also believed firmly that in those
old days an angel used to swoop down from heaven once a
year, and fall flop into an inconsiderable little pond near
Jerusalem, and stir up the waters thereof, and that any sick or
maimed mortal bathing therein after him would be immediately
restored to health and the normal number of limbs. Also that
their Anthropoid Deity had a singular talent for discovering lots
of little deviis in men’s insides, and a faculty for making them
come out of that pretty quickly. Sometimes he hardly knew
what to do with them after their ejectment, for it is narrated
that on one occasion he had to get rid of them by making them
fly down the throats of a herd of poor pigs, who incontinently, in
atfront or despair, rushed into the sea and committed suicide,
drowning at once themselves and the little devils, their inside-
passengers. A sad loss to the owner of the porkers. She was a
widow, and they were her all. She died of starvation. If
a handkerchief or other bit of rag touched the body of the
Divine Anthropoid, or of any of his chief spokesmen, the
woollen or cotton fibre thereof became impregnated with a
certain magical aroma, capable of inoculating all sick people with
health.
“ Once upon a time the great Evil Spirit, Superintendent of
Hell, carried this God to the top of a hill so lofty that he
was able to show him from it all the kingdoms of this world,
the spherical form of which was unknown to both of them,
“it is almost inconceivable, but I can assure you it is a
certain fact, that all the grotesque fables of the old Hebrew
mythology were held by our poor ancestors to be sacred truths,
divinely-inspired narratives of real events ! Of those old fables —
sometimes merely fantastic and puerile, often horrible, sanguinary
and revolting, full of impossibilities, immoralities and obscenities,
and having as much versimilitude as the ‘ Arabian Nights
Entertainments’ —they deemed every word to be divinely
inspired! They accepted as the Infinite Soul’s revelation of
itself, all the sordid anthropomorphic conceptions of the Deity
formed by the dark minds of the old superstitious Hebrew
people, who pictured him as a vague, gigantic old man,
sitting in the clouds, full of their own vile passions, wrathful,
revengeful, jealous, fickle, taking no heed of the great universe
(of which they knew nothing), but solely occupied as the
tutelary but cruel geuius of one selected tribe. Thus they


believed, as a divinely-revealed fact, that quaint old myth of God
having made the universe out of nothing only a few hundred
years ago, and, after six days hard work at it, finding himself so
knocked up that he had to rest on the seventh. Curiously
enough, there is a reason to believe that in this old myth
originated our present custom of generally keeping every
seventh day as a sort of holyday. They further believed that
God had to carve the rib out of the side of the first man in
order to make the first woman. Also, in that queer old tale
(which some of you may have seen in the nursery, bound up
with the ‘Arabian Nights’) of a paradise somewhere near the
site of the great railway station, on the Euphrates line, in
which the first human couple were paddocked, and where the
woman was overpersuaded by a rattlesnake to eat a ribstone
pippin which God had fordidden her to eat —for which disobe-
dience she and her female descendants were for ever cursed with
the penalty of having to be the mothers of children. But for the
snake there would have been no human race, it appears !
Perhaps that was the reason he was worshipped in some countries
in old times. It was also considered quite certain that
the Asiatic aborigines used to live to the age of about a thousand
years !
“ It seems probable that at a very early human period, before
our race had become very numerous, and when it was chiefly
gathered together in some valley, perhaps in the alluvial flats of
Mesopotamia, some considerable local flood occurred, by which
many people perished, and others only escaped by boats and
rafts. And that, after a time, among an utterly ignorant and
barbarous people, this catastrophe got magnified into a monstrous
myth—full of moral and physical impossibilities—bearing the
palpable mark of the savage mind in which it was coined. And
by degrees the fable was built up that in the days of yore, God,
getting awfully enraged with all the organic life he had placed
on the earth, determined to swamp it all, with the exception of
one human family, and pairs of every species of animal and insect.
So he ‘gave the office’ to an old aboriginal called Noah, and
lessons in naval construction, and caused him to build a great
punt, as big as one of our passenger steamers. Into this got
Noah and his family, and received pairs of all the beasts, divinely
inspired to come to them. Fancy the amiable Noah handing in
the cobra-di-capella, and rattlesnakes and centipedes, and
scorpions ! Then God caused it to rain for four or five weeks,
which had the singular effect of raising the water over the
summits of the highest mountains in the world —the Himalayas,
the Andes, etc. After a long cruise, the big punt grounded in shoal
water on the top of a very high peak, and the four-or-five-miles
thickness of water ran away into the sea-bed, and somehow found


room there. The old reciters (improvisator!), priests who piled
up the myth, forgot or did not know that such a submersion
would have destroyed all vegetable as effectually as all animal
life. So, by this oversight, they omitted to make any provision
for the preservation in the punt of seedlings of all trees and
plants. No doubt it would have appeared to them only natural
that all these should spring again in full development from the
drying soil. You will find it hard to credit, but I can assure
you I have ascertained it to be a fact, that this childish and
ridiculous fable was universally believed in as lately as the
seventeenth century, very generally in the eighteenth, and that
even in the nineteenth century there were thousands among the
classes middlingly educated who still believed or feigned and
professed to believe it.
“This Bible-God of our forefathers, neglecting the infinite
myriad of myriads of thousand-fold grander worlds, devoted all
his time and attention, in personal presence, to this microscopic
satellite of a microscopic star, an insignificant unit in that
insignificant cluster of suns which we call the Milky Way.
“ And even on this microscopic grain of cosmic sand there was
only one paltry nation of redeemed slaves for whom he cared.
With them he bivouacked; and sometimes he marched at the
head of the escaping multitude in the costume of a pillar of
smoke and of fire. Sometimes he sat in a burning bush and
commanded a gentleman who came to interview him to show him
decent respect by taking off his slippers, for the ground within a
certain radius around the bush had become more holy than the
rest of the surface of God’s earth.
“ At another time, the Bible-God camped on the top of the
Horeb ridges, surrounded by a really brilliant display of fire-
works, accompanied by the blowing of trumpets and rams’
horns. The chief magistrate of the people of the valley below
went up to call upon him, and to request the pleasure of an
interview; when he, scarcely setting an example of good manners,
replied that'he would not permit him to see his face (for that no
man could see and live), but that he might see his hinder parts if
he pleased. Afterwards, however, changing his mind, he met the
same visitor face to face, and conversed with him ‘ as one man to
another/
“ And, on a second occasion, he courteously received a full
deputation of the mayor and all the aldermen, and entertained
them pleasantly. Nevertheless, not feeling quite sure of himself,
he warned them to take care of themselves, lest he should break
forth on them (like a savage dog). While he thus held court
on the top of the hill, he took the trouble to engrave with his
own royal hand, on tablets of stone, all his laws for the guidance
of the human race, —or rather of the one wandering tribe for


which alone he cared. But herein he made a mistake, not being
able to foresee or prevent the smashing-up of these tablets next
day by an angry man.
“It is not unlikely that this myth had its origin from some
volcano, of which the priests had availed themselves for the
purpose of humbugging the people. Once upon a time, this
great god, putting on a human form, indulged in a wrestling-
match with one of the old. patriarchs. Whether for so much a
side or not, is not recorded. After a very severe tussle, he flung
him by a cross-buttocker, and hurt him so much that he limped
ever after.
“ This Bible-Deity was not represented at all as an omnipo-
tent god. On the contrary, he usually encountered great
difficulty in carrying out his schemes, and often signally failed.
For instance, when he took it in hand to free the slaves held by
the king and people of Egypt, he first endeavoured to persuade
the king to permit them to go. Failing in this, he next tried to
coerce king and people by afflicting them with various juggling
plagues, fantastic or horrible. The king, however, was still
resolute—being a man of stronger will than the Bible-God,
who then got up a sort of Fenian conspiracy among the slaves,
instructing them to rise simultaneously in the night, rob their
sleeping masters and mistresses, and bolt for the bush. After-
wards, by a beautiful act of military strategy, God succeeded in
decoying his enemy, the Egyptian king, into an ambush, where
he could easily bring into play his old celebrated drowning
tactics; which he did ; swamping the hostile king and all his
army. This brilliant success against a few of his own poor
creatures —crawling upon a miscroscopic grain of cosmical dust —
was an enormous and magnificent triumph for the Infinite
Spirit of the Universe, and was celebrated ever after by endless
rub-a-dubbing, and ‘sounding of loud timbrels o’er Egypt’s
dark sea,’ for the Infinite has triumphed, and his darlings
were free. God himself was very proud of it, and frequently
thereafter declared himself to be a Man of War, and the
Generalissimo of Hosts ! But he was not always so successful;
for, when he and his people came into conflict with a tribe
possessing chariots of iron he could not prevail against them.
And all through these veracious, inspired histories, I find our
Bible-God pictured as a struggling, striving, unscrupulous (but
often unsuccessful) partisan.
“ In point of morality this God was far lower in the scale than
any other god ever invented by the human brain—altogether
viler. The gods of the Greeks had their little foibles and pecca-
dilloes, but, upon the whole, they were a gracious, amiable
debonnair and festive lot; gentlemen, and cavaliers, and
ladies. But the god of the Jews was limned in the lurid


and sanguinary hues of their own peculiarly dark, gloomy and
ferocious minds. He was a god who delighted, above all things,
in carnage, massacre and murder, in treasons, stratagems and
spoils. He led his armed and trained bands against nation after
nation of peaceful and comparatively civilised people, always
with sternest injunctions to smite and spare not; to slaughter
man, woman, and child; to rip up the bellies of women with
child ; and to despoil, burn and lay waste their cities. If they
failed to make a satisfactory extermination in any case they
themselves incurred his wrath. On one occasion, when his
people had been hard at work all day, making a most lovely
massacre, the day not proving long enough to make a nice clean
finish of it, he graciously commanded the sun to stand still in the
heavens for two hours, so as to give his pet bravos so much
more time for slashing and stabbing, and ripping up bellies. You
see astronomy was not known when this myth was concocted.
When 100,000 women and children of another nation were brought
in captive, this Divine Being would command that all the women
who were not virgins, together with all the boys, should be cut to
pieces, and that the virgins should be divided fairly among the
soldiers, after the priests had taken their pick.
“At another time he would proclaim to his chosen people,
‘ I remember that which Amalek did to Israel (four hundred
years before), how he laid wait for him in the way, when he
came up from Egypt. Now go and smite Amalek, and utterly
destroy all that they have, and spare them not, but slay both
man and woman, infant and suckling, ox and sheep, camel and
•ass.’
“ And sometimes when there were no other people about handy
to be slaughtered, he would command his own people to run-a
muck among themselves, in such words as these : —‘ Thus saith
the Lord God, put every man his sword to his side, and go in
and out from gate to gate throughout the camp, and slay every
man his brother, and every man his companion, and every man
his neighbour.’
“ He greatly delighted in good, clever, treacherous, private
assassination. So, when an amiable woman invited a political
refugee into her house, gave him good cheer and a comfortable
bed, and then drove a spike-nail into his brain as soon as he
•slept, he gave her great kudos, and proclaimed her ‘ blessed
beyond all women !’ His chiefest favorite among men, David,
king, saint and inspired prophet, specially characterised as
* the man after God’s own heart,’ whenever he overcame foreign
nations, was wont to put the people of all their cities under saws
and under harrows of iron, and under axes of iron, and cast
them into brickkilns. The exterminating massacres made by
his people, under his guidance, among the peaceful nations of


Asia Minor have, probably, never been paralleled, before or
since, in the world’s history. Some nations were so utterly
swept away that not even their name survives; no record, save
the most imperishable ruins of their most magnificent cities—
to overturn which those savages possessed not sufficient
mechanical skill. For instance, the Baalbec ruins, which many
of you have seen. The people who reared those wonderful
temples or public buildings were certainly, in some branches
of mechanics and in architecture, superior to us at this day.
They must have enjoyed many centuries of peaceful prosperity,
and must have attained to a considerable degree of civilization.
They had, perhaps, never heard of war, and fell victims, helpless
as sheep, before the ruthless sword of the chosen horde, under
divine guidance.
“ This old book I have here, entitled the ‘ Comic Bible,’ is
certainly the most comical of all the books I know ; it was an
immense favorite a hundred years ago, but has lost its piquancy
now, because so few in these days know anything of the original
of the burlesque.”
The student seemed to resume :
“ It would fill a goodly volume, my friends, to give anything
like a full answer to the question as to how so shallow and absurd
a superstition as the Christian could ever have obtained a first
footing in the days of the old Roman Empire. On this occasion
I can do no more than point out very briefly two or three of the
most salient and obvious causes —predisposing and active. The
great predisposing cause was, beyond doubt, the absolute mental
blankness of the lower classes in those days; the intellectual
and educational status of the classes among whom, for the first
two or three centuries, the new superstition crawled, like a low
typhoid, was not superior to that of the nigger slaves of early
American history; while in natural acumen, sense of logic and
appreciation of the ridiculous, the early Christians must have
been inferior to the average uneducated African negro.
“And there was an epidemic of credulity abroad which
impelled the minds of the ignorant to accept with hungry and
implicit faith all that was marvellous and impossible, which
seemed, indeed, to make the marvellous and impossible more
belief-worthy than the natural. As for scientific inquiry and
physical truth, the ideas had not been born. One of the great
fathers of the new sect declared, ‘ credo quia impossibiie.’
“It should ever be borne in mind that at first and for
a long period, the new doctrines were promulgated only
among the slaves, the pauper, the lazzaroni and gutter people
of the old world; only among the classes clothed in rags,
ignorance, dirt and disease. The educated classes knew little
of what was going on in the cellars and slums; if they heard


of it, they called it an extiahilis superstiiio, and ‘ pooh pooh’d’
it, de haut en bas, as merely the silly Obiism of the slaves.
They ignored the disease, until, alas! it had spread beyond
stamping out.
“ Like the vile Communism which, a century and a half ago,
it cost so much blood and treasure to hold under foot until the
general spread of an enlightened knowledge of economic and
social laws finally exorcised the unclean spirit, the new Gospel
of Jesus was expressly framed to pander to all the mean
passions and prejudices of an ignorant proletariat; to pander
to the envy and malice, the dull and savage hatred, which, in the
ignorant ages, always animated the hearts of the poor against
all who were a little above them in material comfort, or educa-
tion, or intelligence. It proclaimed the kingdom of heaven
as the inheritance of the paupers only of this world ! that
into that blissful kingdom no rich man should enter: ‘ Woe
to the rich; they had their portion here ! ’ In the world
to come they should only have hell fire. And the paupers
luxuriating in the abodes of the blessed should solace .them-
selves for ever by the agreeable spectacle of the writhings of
their whilorae masters in fiery lakes of sulphur! And, from
the pauper standpoint of view, who is Dives, the rich man ?
Why, every man who wears a decent coat and lives in a
comfortable house —the well-to-do farmer, shop-keeper, or
tradesman, the successful artisan—they are the rich of this
world, as viewed from the gutter. Woe to them all! they
have had their portion —for them, in the world to come, only
the worm that dieth not! It shall be as impossible for one
of them to enter the Kingdom of Heaven as for a camel to
pass through the eye of a needle.
“This new Gospel taught them also not to trouble them-
selves to be saving and prudent; to take no heed for the
morrow, but to trust to odd jobs that might turn up. Not
to bother themselves with much work or labour, but rather
to follow the example of the lilies which ‘ toiled not/ What
mattered rags and dirt, and a few ulcers? They would soon
be looking down from heaven on all the prudent and
painstaking, Suffering infinitely worse inconvenience, in a
place where there would be eternal gnashing of teeth. W T hat
a seductive, irresistible gospel for town lazzaroni and country
mud-cabin ers !
“ Another potent cause of the rapid spread of the mental
epidemic is to be found in the panic terror with which the low
multitude was stricken by the authoritative and positive an-
nouncement of the immediate end of the world, and by the
horrifying pictures of a ghastly, imminent Hell, together with
the confident and unfaltering pretensions of the preachers, that


they alone could show the one way of escape therefrom. Be sure,
preachers and proselytisers were plenty ! To ambitious, vain
and wordy loafers, who hate work and love to hear their own
voices, what role so attractive as that of preacher and prophet?
To rise, per saltum , say from the sweeping of a crossing to the
position of semi-divine personage ! To be welcomed to the
best fare in every house or cabin, to be listened to with gaping
mouth and wondering reverence ; to be petted, and kissed, and
worshipped by all the women! And no more work; no more
sweeping of the crossing ! Only to talk, and lift up the eyes !
You have heard that some of them came to grief. That is so.
Casualties occurred in the ranks both of the early Mormon and
early Christian apostles. In both cases some were hanged by the
authorities, and some wiped out in street rows. But they were
mere casualties ; happening to, say, one in a thousand. And in
both cases, doubtlessly, when the victims (that were to
be) first took up the propagand, they thought little of remote,
possible, future danger, which each one, individually, would
naturally hope to escape by prudence and management. Or,
if they foresaw a slight contingency of peril, it would be
to them enormously outweighted by the immense, immediate
gain in position, in gratification of vanity, in the sudden
emergence from unconsidered and unknown pauperdom to
a sort of social eminence. When accidents happened to them
they were dubbed * holy martyrs,’ and their bones and toenails
were worshipped; and, in old word slang, they were said to
have given ‘ testimony unto death to have ‘ sealed their faith
with their blood,’ etc. Yes ; _ just as a fallen soldier may be
said to have ‘ sealed his faith ’ in a red coat and the comforts
of the barracks. A contingency attached to a good profession
—that is all.
“ But undoubtedly most of the early preachers were sincere and
earnest fanatics, insane and frantic with the terror of their own
conviction of the rapidly approaching end of all things.
“ The propagandists always made a great hurrahing about their
new doctrine being a ‘gospel of glad tidings,’ inasmuch as
that they had come to show the only way of salvation, by which
a few might escape the general doom of eternal damnation.
“ What a wonderful piece of impudence was this ! Considering
that it was they and they alone who had set up the doctrine of
eternal damnation, and that before them no human heart among
all the nations had been dark-and-wicked-and-desperate enough
to dare to dream such an atrocity. What a gospel of glad tidings !
Hell for all except the singular few, who, by performing the
arduous task of believing in the Impossible, might possibly escape
the doom !
“ My friends,” the student went on, “it seems to me that I


have already partly answered your second question —Why we are
at the present day usually taught to consider the Christian the
most pernicious of the superstitions of the past? The student
of history sees reasons only too grievous for so estimating it.
It would, however, be more correct to speak, not of Christianity
apart, but rather of the Hebraic cluster of religions conjointly.
For, as you all know, Mormonism, Mahometanism, and Christian-
ism, were only excrescences —morbid outgrowths from the original
baleful Hebrew stock. Indeed, all dark and gloomy conceptions
of Nature and of man and his destiny, seem to be derived from
the farouche and sombre Semetic mind. It was that cluster of
religions which first hatched the detestable idea of persecution for
theological—that is, merely speculative—opinion. The principle
of persecution was the marked characteristic which differentiated
them from all other crystallisations of religious thought. All the
other religions of the Old World were comparatively free from
that fiendish element ; comparatively mild and benevolent. The
Greeks of old had their imaginary gods, but they picked no
quarrel with the gods of other people. On the contrary, they
complaisantly acknowledged them, and gave them niches in their
Pantheon. And Buddhism, the religion which has numbered so
many more followers than any other, was purely philosophical
and meditative. The special Christian development possesses,
however, the most direct interest for us, as having been the error
of our own forefathers. Not without some element of good in it,
the overbalance of evil and mischief wrought upon mankind by
that superstition is incalculable. What calamities and woes it
caused! What cruel persecutions, what horrors and gloom, and
despair and blood.
“ During the earlier centuries, when Faith was not merely
nominal, but frightfully real and active, the peoples were
frenzied by the new terror of an ever-yawning Hell. The world,
under the shadow of night, was made hideous with the ceaseless
prowlings of the Devil and his ghastly imps. No other such
calamity as this terror of the Christian Hell ever fell upon man-
kind, overshadowing it with a sulphurous cloud of despairing
ascetism ; blotting out the brightness and j oyousness of the earth ;
driving men into the unintelligent ferocity of frightened wild
beasts. Men were taught that all who knew not, or accepted not,
the Faith, were doomed to eternal torment by the inexorable
decree of a merciless all-merciful God. More than that, each
sect within the faith was taught that every other sect would be
certainly damned!’ ‘Tweedledum’ believed that ‘ Twiddledee’
would be as satisfactorily damned as even they who had never
heard of ‘Tweedledum’ and ‘Tweedledee.’ Further; it was held
that even among the correctly orthodox, only an elect few —not
one in a thousand —would be really saved.


“ With the conviction on every mind that the vast majority of
mankind were predestined to be foul fiends in Hell, what' could
there be in the world of respect for human life; of kindly
human feeling, of cheerful brotherhood ? No ; nothing in those
days but the evilness of fear and despair. Only gloom ; only
cruelty; only self-brooding and self-mortification ; only the
stern suppression of all the pleasurable emotions. What could
signify the present suffering, or the mortal lives of future
demons ? Let us slaughter and burn a thousand misbelievers,
and so save our own souls.
“ And hundreds of thousands were driven into caves and
deserts, and monasteries and nunneries, and became more or
less insane. Even up to a comparatively recent era thousands
of fine minds were thrown off their balance and ruined by the
terrible inner conflict between early-implanted.faith and reason,
revolting against the transparently false.
“So anti-social was the Christian dogma in its essence, that,
had not the bulk of the people always and everywhere been too
unimaginative —stolid and commonsensible—fully to apprehend
and realise it, the human race would doubtlessly have died out
under its icy, devitalising breath; for its real teaching was to
despise all mundane matters, for ‘ the Kingdom of Heaven was
at hand : ’ to cast away property as an incumbrance, to contemn
wealth and comfort as snares; only to live upon such fruits of
the earth as could be picked up without much anxiety, and tc
wait patiently as they could until death opened to them the
portals of eternal bliss. Had all the world fully believed, all
the world had turned anchorite, —as did the portion which sc
believed. There v ould have been an end of all industrial and
commercial effort, or ships, colonies and commerce, of mines and
manufactures. Why trouble ourselves about such trumpery ?
for ‘ the Kingdom of Heaven is at hand.’
“ The ethics of this creed were often utterly bewildering. If a
poor man were reckless, improvident, incapable, and so remained
always a poor man, he had chance of Heaven ; but if he were
prudent and saving, and so raised himself into wealth and
household comfort, then, woe to him ! none such shall enter the
kingdom ! he had had his portion.
“ So class was set against class, and the poor taught to hate the
rich : yet, at the same time, passive obedience to all in authority
was inculcated. Why should the poor man, certain of developing
into an angel in Heaven, be so submissive to Dives, whose doom
was hell ? Though the whole nature of religion was such as
necessarily to evoke the fiercest spirit of persecution, and though
the reputed author himself was reported to have declared that
he came to bring a sword into the world, still one of its chief
moral teachings was cowardly submission to injury and insult,


If a man smote you on one cheek, you were to offer him the
■other to be smitten. How should evil be mended, or cured,
or removed, if it were never to be resisted ? A poor, mean,
humble spirit was highly commended. And consider the
monstrosity of making salvation depend upon faith, upon the
wholly involuntary act of believing or disbelieving certain
propositions, which were either mere assertions or theorems
submitted to your judgment and reason ! That was a puzzle which
drove many men mad.
“To us, in this twenty-first century, there is, perhaps, nothing
more repulsive in the old Christian ethics than the intersexual
asceticism they set up, and the insult they offered to our human
nature, by reprobating the sexual passion as unholy and impure.
Taking the obverse of the true moral, that the gratification of
this appetite, as of any other of our appetites, is naturally and
essentially innocent, and only casually made sinful by circum-
stances and consequences, Christianism taught that it was
naturally and essentially sinful and unholy, and only permissible
under the one circumstance of matrimony, blessed by a priest;
even then only barely to be tolerated, not to be commended.
The only truly holy life for men and women was to live apart in
monasteries and nunneries, and suppress natural desires by fasting,
flagellation, fustigation, maceration. Weaker brethren (which
perhaps meant the saner ones) were, however, out of consideration
for their deplorable frailty, permitted the alternative of priest-
blessed marriage, without being certainly damned; though their
chances of salvation were, of course, far inferior to those of the
nobler ones in the stone cells.
“ The ethics of the Bible were, however, many-sided and
abundantly contradictory ; passage gainsaying passage through-
out. So that out of them you could build up any moral:
system you pleased—from the worst to the best. During
the latter periods of the prevalence of superstition, it was
customary to pick out, by a judicious eclecticism, all the best
precepts and ignore all the evil—pretending it did not exist.
Then these selected, assorted, and sieved Bible-morals were
held up to the admiration of the world as something too
perfect ever to have been discovered by human reason, un-
assisted by Divine revelation. As if there were something
very abtruse in the science of morals —the science merely of
what, in the principle of moral action, tends, or tends not, to
the well-being of mankind.
“ At first though, it would seem an inexplicable phenom-
enon that any among the educated classes in the nineteenth
century could keep on believing, in face of the fact that, in
those days, and in the previous century, it had been by many
able writers repeatedly—and, we would say, incontrovertibly


—shown that the popular religion was no better than the-
baseless fabric of a dream; in face of the fact that it was
repudiated, either contemptuously or with pity and in silence,
by all their scientific men, and by the great majority of all
their foremost thinkers. Again and again it had been shown
that the religion was self-condemned by its own inherent
absurdity; that the book they called ‘inspired’ was self-con-
demned by its own internal evidence ; by its self-contradictions,
its assertions of physical falsehoods, its laudation of vile
crimes and immoral sentiments. It had been shown that
the reputed and miraculous-and-supernatural events on which
Christianity was based were reported to have occurred in a
very dark corner of the world, in a very dark age, when
there was no printing-press, no newspapers, no telegraph, no
post-office, no stage-coaches, no special reporters, no publicity,
and among the very lowest class of people—fishermen, beggars,
etc. —among whom the accomplishments of reading and writing
were not to be looked for (though these same disciples were
afterwards absurdly credited with high literary abilities); that
no scientific commission had examined into the alleged facts;
no able counsel had been appointed to cross-examine the
witnesses and sift the evidence; and no detectives had been
dispatched from Scotland Yard. That, in fact, the very idea of
scientific investigation had not been conceived in those days;
the inductive study of natural laws was unheard of, and no definite
boundary had been drawn between the natural and the super-
natural, but both were jumbled up together —the one appearing
as probable as the other.
“ With regard to the writings which they called ‘ the Gospels ’
—on the literal truth and exactness of which they depended for
all knowledge of the sayings and doings of the Founder of their
Faith —it had been shown, again and again, that they were
written nobody knew when, and nobody knew by whom; but
certainly not by their reputed authors; that there was no his-
torical record of their publication or their existence earlier than'
a century and a-half after the events of which they professed to be
narratives by eye-witnesses. That, earlier than that, no writer
had ever alluded to their existence; that those four Gospels were-
then avowedly selected by the priests, or “Fathers,” from
hundreds of other gospels; that these old Fathers were {teste their
own writings) men, at once of inconceivable folly and credulity,
and of boundless dishonesty; esteeming all frauds pious that
favoured their own Church and their own interests.
“ And it had been forcibly represented that, in those old, dark,
troublous days, and in relation to events in which only some of
the lowest and most ignorant class took any interest, the lapse of
a century and a-half, or even half that time, would have thrown.


over the past a more impenetrable fog of antiquity and obscurity
than could the rolling of thousands of years of the modern world,
“ There was another proof much relied upon by the Christians
at a somewhat earlier period, namely,—the so-called ‘Evidence of
Prophecy.’ This meant that certain more ancient Jewish writings
referred to and had predicted the events of the Christian Gospels.
The Divine Founder and the ‘ inspired writers ’ of those gospels
distinctly claimed them in evidence. The Jews, however, who>
ought to have known something about it, always utterly denied
that their old scriptures bore any such meaning. And when, at
last, criticism proved beyond controversy that none of those
ancient writings referred to the then-distantly-future Christian era,
but to synchronous events easily designated, then the Christian
divines, receding, took up the position that, if not in a direct
or primary sense, still, in a secondary (allegorical and mystical) -
sense, they were unquestionably prophetic of Jesus. They
argued well that ‘Jesus was certainly the Christ’ because the old
prophets had prophesied of him ; and that the prophets had
certainly prophesied of him (even though only allegorically),
since he, being the Christ, had said so,
“ A great portion of the so-called ‘ prophetic writings ’ are void
of all intelligible meaning, and may be supposed to signify
anything or nothing. They were, probably, the rhapsodies and
ravings of priests who had gone mad. In the East, the insane -
were always regarded with a superstitious reverence.
“ I have remarked that the evidence from prophecy was not
much insisted upon—indeed, seldom alluded to—since the close
of the eighteenth century. The position seemed to have been
abandoned, probably as untenable.
“In fine, in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, it had.
been made patent to all who were willing and able to inquire
with an even-balanced mind, that the intrinsically incredible
popular religion was unsupported, except by such shadowy
proofs as would not for a moment be entertained in the dis-
cussion of any other historical question—proofs such as no
secular historian would consider sufficient to throw any colour
of authenticity over traditions of even a natural and non-
absurd character. The true Gospel of Science had been pro-
claimed, and yet thousands of infidels shut their ears and kept
on believing in their own mis-shapen idols. How was this?-
The phenomenon is not inexplicable. There were many reasons ,
why it should be so. There was the heavy vis inertia, of old
custom, and the dull, stolid resistance of bourgeois respectability
and black-coated Philistinism. Then the women were systemati-
cally kept in the dark ; so that, though paterfamilias might have
made himself a thoroughly enlightened man, still his son—
receiving his earliest, too often indelible, impressions from his-


mother, female relatives, nursemaids and parsons—would have
to start again in life from a mental platform no higher than that
of his great-grandmother, gaining little, or nothing, by the
intellectual elevation of his father. And each successive genera-
tion of young men had to repeat for itself hhe painful process of
believing at first and learning to disbelieve afterwards. And in
each generation the authority of the nursery clung supreme
through life to thousands of minds, sluggish and unenquiring, or
obstinate and proud, or timid and reverential and feebly imagina-
tive. A reticence, for politic reasons very generally maintained,
long upheld the form of a religion that was really moribund and
nearly inanimate. The worldly success and comfort of most men
depended upon appearing to swim with the tide of popular preju-
dice, and so, before the public they hypocritically pretended to
reverence what, in their hearts and in the society of intimate
friends, they despised and derided. Thus, the free-thinkers had
no means of learning their own numbers and strength. And this
cowardly reticence was carried so far, that, long after they were
in a decided majority, each individual free-thinker was afraid to
speak, supposing himself to be only one of a small minority.
Writers of the close of, the nineteenth century express an opinion
that for nearly a hundred years the popular creed had floated only
upon reticence.
“But to explain this phenomenon, which seems to puzzle you
'so much, of the coexistence, side by side, for more than a
hundred years, of the broad light of Science and Philosophy,
and the darkness of superstition, what more is necessary than the
biological doctrine of the produced hereditariness of mental
impressions, warps and twists, continued through many genera-
tions? We know that what we call instinct in the lower animals
is only inherited memory, experience and habits. The fish that
have swum for countless generations in the pitch-dark waters of
the Adelsberg caves have become eyeless through the gradual
atrophy of the unused organs of sight. When removed to open
waters, many generations pass ere they begin once more to blink
at the glimpses of the sun. Had the Chinese bandaged, cramped,
and dwarfed the feet of both sexes for a certain number of
generations, it is highly probable that, at last, the foot-deformity
would have become congenital, inherited.
“Nov/, the minds of men who, in the light of the nineteenth
century, still l:ept on believing, were like Adelsberg fish that had not
yet been in the open water for a sufficient number of generations
to recover their vision. The minds of their forefathers had been
for so many ages shut up in the tenebrous crypts and cloisters
of superstition—seeing nothing therein but false and doleful
phantoms-—that the mental eye, capable of seeing the truth, had
become congenitally atrophied. And their minds were like the


suppositional Chinese foot; their predecessors’ minds had been
so long dwarfed and distorted by the bandages of priestcraft,
authority and custom, that a few generations without bandages
were necessary for restoration.
“ Happy are we in this glorious twenty-first century ! Happy
to have learnt to be humble enough to acknowledge that there is
a definite impassable limit to the range of human inquiry; to be
wise enough never more to shatter our brain-power in vain
attempts to transcend the limit into the infinite abysses!
Whereas, the men of old, in the arrogance of ignorance, glancing
at the one infinite phenomenon of the universe, flippantly
declared themselves at once capable of hitting on the true solu-
tion of the mystery of mysteries, and that the solution was, that
the universe had been made by a god pre-existing in vacuo (the
Hindoo elephant and tortoise over again !), and thereupon fell to
discussing the attributes and character of this brain-coined Being,
we simply say that all inquiry into the first causes and the real
nature of things is ‘ beyond the limit,’ and cease to beat the air.
While they, mistaking inference for observation, naively declared
that they could plainly see all around the wonderful evidences of
design, we, noting—all that can be noted —the marvellous adapta-
tion of things, humbly admit that the cause of those adaptations
is from man for ever hidden, and that the inquiry is beyond the
limit.
“ Happy are we that, with souls no longer perturbed by the
menacing figure of the old-man-gcd in the clouds, with his
attendant devil, we can tranquilly cultivate the one real religion
—the religion of humanity—how we may best labour to promote
the happiness and alleviate the woes of mankind.”
Here the impious visi n ended, and. springing to my feel, ?
devoutly crossed myself, erclaiming, “Anathema maranatha/”


EXTRACTS FROM LETTERS.
I am quite aware of the mode in which the sacerdotalists deal with the
promise and prophecy of Jesus that he would return in glory before that
generation passed away, I know how, by a little hanky-panky, they deftly
convert that terrible difficulty, that (one might have supposed) crushing
disaster into a brilliant sham victory, with endless sham jubilations. But
only sham, indeed. For it is simply not true that the Greek word genea,
correctly rendered in the English version “generation,” ever elsewhere
bears the meaning of a “ people ”or “ nation.” No, Sir—not in any Greek
work extant—not in any Greek passage that can be found and quoted.
Consult the highest Greek authority you can find, and (if he be not pledged
to falsification by his metier) I think he will tell you that in no context
elsewhere does genea signify anything but a generation of man. Most
assuredly the companions and immediate followers of Jesus understood that
he had pledged himself to return before all who stood about him had
tasted of death. Were they not as likely as we to understand his meaning T
Note, too, that in the passage (Matthew XXVI.) “ Hereafter shall ye see
the Son of Man sitting on the rignt hand of power, and coming in the
clouds of Heaven,” the precise meaning of the original Greek word is not
hereafter but immediately.
Why, we should never have heard of Christianism but for the electrifying
effect on the startled imaginations of the first converts produced by the posi-
tive announcement and daily expectation of the second advent and the end
of all things. That was the sharp terror that gave first impetus to the new
creed and set it rolling. At this time of day, however, it suits Christianists-
best to sing a palinode, and to explain that when Jesus said he would return
before the death of that generation, while those about him were still alive,
and immediately, he really only meant, “ the Jews ceased to exist as
a separate people.” And thereupon they burst into a gushing enthusiasm
over the wonderful fulfilment of the word of our Lord. “ Behold, say they,
the unparalleled fact, the grand unmistakeable miracle of the continued
existence of the Jews as a separate people, though scattered among all
nations. They are a crushing evidence of the truth of Christianity and a
contirued pledge that the Lord Jesus is coming again.” (By the way,
former Christians thought it the holy thing to try to exterminate them.)
Securely clothed inside and out with self-deceit, they say all this and much
more without blushing, without winking, in the face of the precisely
parallel (miraculous?) tacts—of the Parsees or Zorastians of Persia, scat-
tered for some 1200 years among all the nations of India, yet keeping them-
selves as a distinct people even more rigidly than the Jews—of the gipsies,
probably for nearly a thousand years—and, more remarkable than all, of
the auchthonic aborigines of India, the Bhuls, Gonds, etc., who still pre-
serve themselves distinct, with all their immemorial rites and customs,
though the overflowing of India by the Hindoos (Aryan, Indo-Germanic
race) occurred in times prehistoric.
Note that against Jesus’ unfortunate unfulfilled prophecies of his im-
mediate return Christianists had begun to hedge as early as the date of


the writing of the gospel according to St. John (about A. D. 170), from
'which all these predictions are carefully excluded, and in which occurs that
most unpleasantly prevaricating passage in chapter xxi. 20-23—t00 obviously
and transparently designed to quibble away the disconcerting puzzle-priest
■difficulty that John, the last survivor of the apostles, was dead, all “ Divine ”
promises to the contrary notwithstanding.
Some ingenious critics have defended the rendering of genea by “ race ” or
people ” by appealing to the authoity of our poet Pope, who, in his
metaphrase of a passage in the Iliad (6th Book), has translated that word
'both “ generation ” and “ race ” thus :
“ Like leaves on trees the race of men is found.
Now green in youth, now withering on the ground ;
Another race the following spring supplies.
They fall successive and successive rise ;
So generations in their course decay,
So flourish these when those have passed away J”
Here, however, it is plain enough that Homer used and Pope understood
the word in the sense of generation after generation, though the exigencies
of English verse made the monosyllable “race” more convenient.
In any case, Alexander Pope was not Pope Alexander, and therefore not
infallible.
Then, which of the Harmonists has been able to bridge over the well-
known historical interval of ten years (hiatus val<U dejlendus /) between the
death of Herod and the birth of Jesus ? Facts here seem too stubborn for
them. For it is certain that St. Luke tells us that Jesus was born at the
time of the taxing of Judea and Syria by the Roman Governor Cyrenius (or
Quirinus). It is equally certain that after the death of Herod his son
Archaleus reigned some nine years, when he was banished by the Imperial
Government, those provinces definitely absorbed into the Roman Empire,
and Cyrenius (see Josephus, Book 18, chap, i.) especially deputed from
Rome to make registration of the people and their substance, and to put them
under the general Imperial system of taxation, Josephus, the historian, who
lived and wrote a.d. 37 to 97, and who was so intimately acquainted with
all the minutiae of the affairs of Judea, had never heard of the remarkable
■event of the slaughter of the Innocents by a king who was dead ten years
before the poor things could, as contemporaries of Jesus, have been born.
With regard to the so-called remarkable prophecy in Genesis XLIX. 10, the
■most eminent modern Hebrew critics have come to the conclusion that the word
Shiloh means a place—& place of tranquillity, and that the correct rendering
■of the passage is “ until Shiloh be come to, and to it shall the gathering of
the people be.”— E.g., see Bunsen’s (German) Bible for the people.
But after all, what folly it is to waste time and brain-power in so futile an
■occupation as minute verbal study of the legends of the old Jew semi-
barbarians ! What can it signify to us what they said, or wrote, or thought,
with their poor undeveloped, uneducated minds ?
The primd facie view of the Superstition has always been quite sufficient
for me. If the Supreme Soul of the Universe had willed to speak to us exter-
nally, otherwise than through our own nature, it is incredible that He would
have sent us his Divine message in a hole and-corner manner, from out of
■very dark places in very dark days—or through the medium of miserable
savages wandering through Arabian deserts, or of unlettered Jew paupers
in Palestine, or of human manuscripts. Or that He would have spoken to
one generation, and then have left the report of the rumour of his having
spoken to be filtered down through thousands of succeeding generations
until, by the ever-deepening mists left by the lapse of tfme and the imperfec-
tion of the very nature of human testimony, any semblance or trustworthiness
that the report might have had should be gradually obscured and oblitera-
ted. Or that the reported Divine message should have been full of self-
contradictions, absurdities, incredibilities, mistakes, misstatements, and


gross immoralities, and altogether of so vague, grotesque and unintelligible
a nature as to be capable of bearing a thousand different interpretations,
and so ill adapted to its intended effect as to have failed to have the slightest
influence on the vast majority of mankind. Why, any so-called Divine
message is self-condemned by the very fact of its being possible to question
its authenticity.
But for one thing the wonder would ever grow that so many men of
strong, sound, cultivated minds, and, in all other respects of logical habits
of thought, should habitually become utterly fatuous, irrational, and im-
becile, the moment there falls upon them the glamour of the gruesome
Idol of Bibliolatry. And that one thing that solves the marvel is a due
appreciation of the enormous influence over the dawning intellect of each
individual man of the credulous, uncritical (or rather, imperfectly educated)
female mind. Naturally, cur childish minds are first moulded by onr
mothers and nurses, who press them in a particular shape. And but a
few have sufficient innate strength to recover from the cramp and spring
into natural form. So it comes to pass that so many strong fellows never
get out into the light of day, but remain ever groping and wandering and
puzzling among the gloomy, mouldering cloisters of a crumbling fetish;
a fetish which always seems moribund, but still not to be utterly exploded
while men continue to keep an esotoric doctrine of intellectual freedom and
rationalism for themselves and an exoteric doctrine of Old Mother
Hubbard and spiritual moonshine for the women. As it is, it is only by
the women that all the churches are upheld. Priests and parsons are right
in cultivating them so sedulously.
We crusaders of the nineteenth century against the infidels—“ The Pagans
suckled in a creed outworn” —who deny the gospel of science, will never
achieve our triumph, we shall never finally hurl down the grim idol of su-
pernaturalism until we popularise the inner and profounder thoughts of the
scientific mind, and reveal them to the people at large, in language they
can understand ; until, no longer limited as an esoteric doctrine to the co-
terie of the highly educated few, something of the spirit of science be made
to penetrate the masses. We can never cast down this Dagon so long as
the popular mind is still clutched fast by the implicit conviction that what-
ever else may be doubtful, it is at least certain that there must have been
one set of miracles and of special acts of divine creative power when organic
lif e _that is, when tree, beast and man—appeared on earth. Here is the
very root of the matter—which must be grubbed up.
For, one miracle granted, what bounds to the miraculous ? One Breach
of the absolute reign of natural law, and at a stroke the reign of law is
abrogated.
At present the popular mind is wholly unconscious of the fact that no such
idea of sudden and violent creation is ever entertained by men of science—
by any holding rank in the vanguard of thought. They hold—and this is
what we philalethists must strive to pierce the stolid general mind with, by
pegging away with incessant iteration, in plain phrases—they, the men of
advanced thought, all hold that nothing has come to pass, per saltwm, by
sudden Jump, but that all things have ever been, as now, governed by orderly
and immutable physical law ; slow, gradual working through aeons of
ages ; that organic life as it is now is the result of evolution and develop-
ment—of evolution in humblest forms, out of the inorganic elements by
natural processes, and development gradual through enormous periods from
those first low types.
To use a metaphor—halting and imperfect indeed, yet roughly serving the
turn—as we know that oxygen and hydrogen, mingled in certain proportions,
filliped by an electric spark, vanith, coalescing into an equal weight of water,
so we hypothesize that certain other inorganic matters in combination,.


under the stimulus of some force—it may be of magnetic currents in ocean
depths—coalesce into protoplasm, the. basis of physical life.
The theories of development, variation and natural selection, roughly
explain the rest. Says Darwin (Descent of Man, vol. 11, 385), “ The main
conclusion arrived at in this work is that man is descended from some less
highly organised form. The grounds on which this conclusion rests mill
never be shaken , for the close similarity between man and the lower animals
in embryonic development, as well as in innumerable points of structure and
constitution, both of high and of the most trifling importance—the rudi-
ments which he retains, and the abnormal reversions to which he is occa-
sionally liable—are facts which cannot be disputed. They have long been
known, but until recently they told us nothing with respect to the origin of
man. Now, when viewed by the light of our knowledge of the whole or-
ganic world, their meaning is unmistakeable. The great principle of evolu-
tion stands up clear and firm when these groups of tacts are considered in
connection with others, such as the mutual affinities of the members of the
same group, their geographical distribution in past and present times, and
their geological succession. It is incredible that all these facts should speak
falsely. He mho is not content to look , like a savage, at the phenomena of
nature as disconnected , cannot any longer believe that man is the work of
a separate act of creation.'”
Among men in any degree imbued with the noble, because truthful, spirit
of modern science, no other theory is tolerable, possible than that
of the derivation of man from lower animal types, and through them in
series long-drawn-out from the humblest organic forms, and thence from
the inorganic elements. It may indeed be affirmed that there is no other
competing theory now extant. For the fantastic goblin Miracle has been
chased before the growing light of Science, as vanishes some poor clown’s
terrror-drawn ghost before the realistic brightness of the morning.
To him whose mistaken human pride still fights against this theory, two
or three questions may be propounded ; From what has he himself, as- an
individual, been derived? Has he not been developed from a minute
germinal vesicle, from a minute ovule ? an ovule in no respect distinguishable
from that of any other mammal ? Is it not an indisputable fact that in his
embryonic stages he has progressively assumed the form of a fish, of an
amphibian, of a dog, of a monkey ? If such a past career be not degrading
to the individual, why so to the species ?
To belong to an ever-improving and ascending series, or to the degenerate
progeny of perfect parents —Which is the more cheering and ennobling view ?'
In all nature we believe that there never have been any sudden, miracu-
lous—that is Mwnatural creations, nor any events not growing naturally out
of their antecedents.
All the processes of nature resemble what we understand by the word
growing. Black Topsy’s blanky ignorant theory of her own existence —
“ Guess I grow’d”—is the summary of all that the highest knowledge and
the profoundest thought can teach us. We bud out of the earth, we are its
efflorescence. The inorganic world teems forth organic life at every pore ;
most probably the process of so-called creation still goes on even to-day, of
which the not unfrequent appearance of new forms of insect blights and
fungoids may be a token.
Says Shelley : —“ Infinity within, infinity without, belie creation.” Recog-
nising that there is nothing strictly logical in the objection, nevertheless I
have always felt some immense force in it. Look at the infinity of minute-
ness ! Consider how all the living tissues of all animals are pervaded by hosts
of parasites, and the bodies of those parasites by their parasites. How
“ Great fleas have less fleas,
And they other fleas to bite ’em,
And those fleas have their fleas,
And so ad infinitum.


Whether do such things seem to bear the impress of intelligent creation, or
of a spontaneity of organisation in the inorganic ?
As, without definite boundary, the animal kingdom merges into the vege-
table, so, doubtlessly, does the organic world into the inorganic. As we
get more light, even to us does the distinction between those two worlds
seem to lessen. We no longer regard the inorganic as inert matter ; we
know there is no such thing as inert matter ; that all things are permitted
by force ; that even a granite rock is in a violent state of force, and we
begin to surmise that the force which pervades the universe is one and
constant. If we must have a god, we may regard that force as god. But,
different to our old anthropomorphic idols, a god without attributes con-
ceivable by us. The views of philosophical materialists are, vulgarly, much
misconstrued. We are wrongly interpreted to deny that there is any-
thing in space but Matter-c*m-Force. But if we so dogmatised about the
Unknowable we should be no better than theologians. What we maintain
is, that all phenomena whatsoever, of which the human mind is or can be
cognizant, are the resultants of the molecular Forces of Matter. But surely
we are not supposed to pretend that we know in the least what matter is.
For all that Man can possibly know, Matter may be Divine—may be to us
only a manifestation of a Divine Force filling Infinity. But such specula-
tions are entirely beyond the limits of philosophic inquiry, and utterly futile
and inane.
Contrariwise, for all we know, organic life may be the highest specialised
-outcome of Matter and Force.
The spring-blossoms on the tree of two thousand years growth are but
slight and ephemeral things compared with the great trunk which bears
them aloft, yet they are far superior to it, of higher and finer organisation, of
more vivid activities, more nearly approaching to the state of consciousness.
As they are to the trunk, so may we be to the inorganic cosmos.
You maintain that you plainly discern throughout the physical world,
especially in the animal .and vegetable kingdoms, innumerable wonderful
evidences of intelligent design ! My dear fellow, permit me to say that I
think you here fall into the old, old logical error of mistaking inference for
observation. What we really do see is, only innumerable and wonderful
instances of the adaptation of things. That those adaptations are the product
of design is what we cannot possibly see ; that would be merely a meta-
physical and speculative inference which might or might not be true.
You say the inference is a good one, and quite the same as if one seeing a
watch for the first time —and never having heard of a watch before —should
infer that it was certainly the work of human hands and human intelligence.
There I differ from you entirely ; it is not the same ; the two cases are in
nowise parallel ; in the latter case you know for a certainty that man
exists, and you have seen many other works which you experimentally know
to be his ; and it is some analogy with his other known works that would
lead you at once to recognise his handicraft in the watch. s
But, in the other case, you don’t know for a certainty, or at all, of the
existence of God : at least you cannot assume his existence here, as that is
just the theorem you are seeking to prove. To make the cases at all parallel,
there ought to be many other worlds experimentally known to you to be
made by God j then, reasoning by analogy, you would have a right to say, I
recognise here also the hand of the god who, I know, made those other
worlds. But the mystery of the adaptations, which have the appearance of
design, is part of the mystery of the universe, which is unique, and cannot
be approached by any analogy, or by any comparison. No doubt these
adaptations are marvellous, but more marvellous still would be our hitting,
in the infinitude, upon their one real cause and true raison d'etre.
It always strikes me as something very arrogant and presumptuous, to


assert that we can plainly discern the proofs of divine design ; it is rating
the power of the human intellect too high, thus to claim for it the ability of
sounding by the plummet of an inference the depths of the Infinite-
Unknown. Rather let us be humble here, and call ourselves Agnostics.
This is a problem of which a conclusive solution is unattainable; still, one
on which the human mind cannot easily cease to speculate. At present and
provisionally, until we know more, we may accept the Darwinian —as of all
theories—the most satisfactory. Any materialistic is better than a super-
natural exegesis ; anything better than calling in the aid of a vague, indefi-
nite devs whom we have to invent for the occasion.
As the light of knowledge has advanced, the boundary of the chaotic
realm of the supernatural has ever been pushed back. Says Buchner (Man
in the Present, Past and Future), “Every science, and especially every
philosophy, that seeks reality instead of appearance, truth instead of pre-
tence, mmt necessarily be free from svpernaturalisw.; otherwise it blocks
up against itself the path to its end, the truth. As soon, then, as in a
philosophic book the word “ God ” occurs, except in criticism or reference,
one may confidently lay it aside ; in it will be found nothing capable of
promoting the real progress of knowledge. In properly scientific works the
word will be seldom met with ; for in scientific matters the word “ God ”
is only another expression for our ignorance ; in like manner as are also on
more special occasions the words ‘vital force,’ ‘instinct,’ ‘soul,’ etc.” We
may well believe that, were our knowledge absolute, the supernatural
chimera would have vanished utterly into the inanities.
Pilecipuum Nature bonum, Mobs.— Pliny.
BUT how account for the fact that the idea of the immaterial soul, as dis-
tinct from the body and surviving it, has been conceived by all the people
of the earth, by even the most barbarous tribes—otherwise than assuming
it to be an intuition—a divinely-implanted intuition of the human mind ?
For the sake of argument, grant for a moment that, in point of fact, the
soul is but an unreal figment ; still, I think, a little consideration will show
you that the idea must, nevertheless, have arisen, necessarily and naturally,
in the minds of men everywhere. The illusions of the senses, the hal-
lucinations resulting from abnormal and distempered conditions of the
brain and nervous system, would inevitably have given birth to it. If an
uneducated man, suffering from fever, has the sensation of seeing his dead
friend or foe standing by his couch—of seeing him as distinctly as ever he
saw him in life, and of hearing, perhaps, his voice and his words—must not
the conviction at once be borne in upon him, that after dissolution of the
body man still continues to exist in some indefinable condition ? In his
physiological ignorance, to what other conclusion could he come ? Then he
relates his experiences and communicates his convictions to others ; others
corroborate them from their own similar experiences ; the idea spreads, the
dogma follows. On this dream-land basis has been reared the whole super-
structure of the doctrine of a future life ; what other foundation for it can
you suggest ? There is not only no proof, no evidence, but there can be none.
All knowledge comes to us through the material organs of our senses, and
by the reflections we make on what they teach us. It is impossible that
any intimations of the immaterial should penetrate us through the portals
of our material organs.
You know, they who are still in subjection to the Christian delusion, and
the belief in divine messages and inspired papers, very generally admit, or
assert, that the hope of eternal life depends wholly on the word of the
Nazarene Jew. I think the opinion is common among them that he was
the first to enunciate the doctrine ; though, of course, it existed among
many nations, or all nations, hundreds of years, perhaps thousands
of years, before the date of the earliest Christian papers, which iu


this respect did but emphasize popular opinions. Singularly enough,
the old Hebrew scriptures contain nothing of the doctrine, but on the con-
trary, in many places, seem opposed to it. Still, there must have been some
such idea among the old Hebrews, as among all other peoples in the world,
for it springs naturally out of human infirmities. If you concede im-
mortal souls to man, on what grounds can you refuse them to the ape,
the dog, the horse, etc. ? Do we differ from them in anything but our finer
physical organisation and ampler development of brain ?
There is the distinction that we have reason and they have not—is there?
But I know you don’t believe in that old-fashioned ignorant argument. Of
course it is not true in its statement; the lower animals have their reasoning
faculties as we have ours, but ours are transcendant in the ratio of our finer
organisation and our ampler brain ; there is no radical distinction, but only
difference in degree. Have you ever heard any plausible answers to many
questions such as this 7 —when a man is so far drowned that, unassisted, he
would never move again, but, after an hour, or perhaps two, is restored to
life by artificial means, what becomes of the soul in the interval of state
which was virtually death ? is the immortal soul, too, asphyxiated, or where
is it ? why can’t it report on return to the body ?
No doubt the prospect of immortality is very gratifying to human pride
and human tenacity of life, and very consolatory to the bereaved is the hope
of meeting again the lost loved ones. But, before all things the truth I
Pleasant or unpleasant, give us the truth ! Away with shams and unrealities
and figments, however flattering they be ! But let us inquire whether, upon
the whole, the expectation of eternal life really makes mankind happier;
does its consolation outweigh its oppression—the oppression it lays upon all
our lives—of vague dread, distrust and avulsion ? Were it possible to poll
the real sentiments of mankind, do you think many would be found (besides
a few enthusiasts and the impassioned by recent bereavement) who would
not gladly forego their hope to get quit of their dread ? who would not
choose, had they free choice, rather to lie as the tree lies than chance a
futurity of some undefinable, inconceivable mode of existence ? Ask all your
intimate friends, who are not too much encrusted with whitechokerism
and Philistinism, to give you a conscientious answer, and they will reply,
After life’s fitful fever, let us lie as the tree lies i Why not ? How can we
really feel otherwise? How can we breathing terrestrials, children of our
dear loveable and beloved mother earth, conceive of any existence away
from her in the slightest degree desirable ? Without our warm bodies, our
passions, our appetites, our adventures—our struggles, or even our perils—
without wooing, and marrying, and children, and home, and home-affec-
tions—without earth, ocean, air, and all their vicissitudes—without moun-
tain and valley, and sea and cities —without loving, and eating and drinking,
and riding and sailing ? No ! Better a thousand times to lie as the tree
lies, than to exist sundered from all the surroundings we know and love.
Remember the story of the old English farmer, whom, dying, the parson
endeavoured to cheer with word-pictures of the joys and glories of heaven.
“ Ah ! parson,” said he, “ all that you say about heaven is very fine and very
true, no doubt—but, after all, Old England for my money !” That is the
natural human sentiment—our dear earth or nothing—life as we know it,
or nihility and dreamless peace ! Pax nobiscum.
There is, upon the whole, an incompatibility between earthly happiness
and the hope-with-fear of immortality. May not this incompatibility be
in some measure a sign of its unveracity ? But that is metanhysical moon-
shine, to be taken for what it is worth. But let us also further inquire
whether it would be for the advantage of mankind that the doctrine of a
Future State should be true.
“Divines” are perfectly correct in maintaining that there is no logical
via media between accepting what they call Revelation on the one hand
and the abandonment of the dogma of the Immortality of the Soul on the


other. Certainly there are no natural reasons (that are not merely fanciful)
in favor of that theory—all natural reasons are emphatically opposed to it.
If we accept it at all it must be on the basis of the so-called Revelation.
Now what does this Revelation teach us? That we are lost, degraded,
ruined creatures, born into the world and living in the world under a divine
curse. As the grave is the ultimate receptacle destined for the human body,
so a place of endless and unspeakable torment is the natural receptacle
destined for the human soul. If this be true, then the wildest imaginings
of the most savage creeds are as sunlight compared with the horrors of our
situation. Yet a gleam of light (it is but a gleam) is suffered to penetrate
to this our dreary prison, in which we are penned up like so many cattle
waiting for the shambles. In virtue of a mysterious transaction in Judea,
a certain number of persons will be “ saved,” that is to say, will not only be
rescued from the general fate, but will exchange it for a condition of
endless happiness. These Scriptures lay it down very clearly that the
number of the saved will be extremely small, and that a vast majority of us
are destined by the Creator (of the theologians) to a fate at which imagina-
tion stands aghast.
Now, it is certainly not for the advantage of mankind that the great
bulk of us should be thus doomed to eternal perdition, while only a few
spiritual aristocrats are nominated for eternal bliss. Therefore, it would
not be to our advantage that, standing on the only possible basis on which
it can stand, the doctrine of a future state should be true. —Q.E.D.
Even to wish it to be true is abominable. A sainted man, confident of his
own election, wishing it to be true must be a monster of inhuman selfishness.
For he wishes for his own eternal happiness bound up with the inevitable
corollary or the eternal misery of nearly all the rest of our race. How he
expects to be infinitely happy in the endless contemplation of the endless
torments of the other billions of billions, including many of his own blood-
relations, is hard to explain. Certainly some of us poor carnal unspiritual
terrestrials are incapable of conceiving so grand a sublimity of cynical
egotism.
Yet the “ Divines ” call upon us to hasten to embrace their “ Revelation,”
seeing that the only other alternative is a “ cold heart-withering negation
too fearful to be contemplated 1” Rather should the human heart expand
with joy, and the human face glow with kindly gladness at found
sure relief from the crushing incubus of their accursed figments. For my
part, I hope I am, above all else, a philanthropist, and I would do anything,
sacrifice anything to help, tant soit peu, to bless my fellow men with the
blessing of cold negation.”
Death has lost all its terrors when we know it to be nothing but Cessa-
tion—nothing but the extinction of Ego with the dissolution of the
organism.
“ That which befalleth the sons of men befalleth beasts ; even one thing
befalleth them : as the one dieth, so dieth the other ; yea, they have all
one breath ; so that a man hath no pre-eminence above a beast.” —Eccles.
HI. 19.
Often have I thought how true an emblem of organic life is the great
whirlwind-dust-column we frequently see solemnly stalking across the vast
and arid Australian plains 1 Each is a specialised and individualised mani-
festation of force ; each has a corpus constituted of particles which, ever as it
marches, it assimilates and discards ; a body, whose constituents are ever
changing, upheld by a force preserving its identity and individuality. After
a little while, the special differentiation of force ceases ; the force flows
away into the universal, and the dust falls back to the dust; the organisa-
tion has vanished—the column and the man have ceased for evermore !
Mind is but the product of organisation ; thought but the music of the
organism the current of impressions, as the JSolian harp by the
wind.


Can we reckon up the whole theory of moral philosophy, and of the nature
of the moral sentiments and conscience, within the compass of a page or
two? Why not? Does the attempt seem presumptuous 1 No need that it
should ; the whole matter is one of the extremest commonsense simplicity,
which has only been confounded by the admission into the question of the
ever confounding element of supernaturalism—of phantasms and of spiritual
moonshine.
Single copies of the tomes that have been written on this subject would
freight a ship worthy to be one of the fleet which would be required to
carry all the works on theology. That last mass of verbiage—what a sub-
ject for melancholy contemplation ! All utterly inane and valueless, except
as waste paper or manure for the fields 1 What hundreds of thousands of
fine intellects —naturally fine, but distorted by superstition—have earnestly
and fervently wasted all the bright days of their poor lives, and all the
energies of their good brains, in endeavouring to
“ distinguish and divide,
Hairs betwixt South and Sooth-west-side!”
The hairs, alas! not being real and substantial hairs, but merely the
shadowy etchings of dreams.
The moral law, as conceived by man, is purely subjective, relative to his
own welfare ; there is nothing in it mysterious, spiritual or divine ;it is
built on the material basis of self-preservation—on the well-being of self,
or of our race. We call all moral actions in which the principal involved
is such, according to our judgment, as to tend to promote the well being of
mankind, good or virtuous —all moral actions springing from a principle, as
we judge, of an opposite character, bad or vicious. This is the concise but
perfect definition of virtue and vice, of good and evil, as seen from the
human standpoint; this is the formula by which the merit or demerit of all
moral actions is tested. The desire of approbation, of being praised and
liked by our fellows, and the desire of being respected and feared by our
enemies, contained the first germs, the sufficing roots of all the moral feel-
ings. Not a jot is there of the miraculous in conscience, or the so-called
moral sense—that sense which seems to tell us instantaneously, without
need of appeal to reason, that this action is good, that action vicious. Much
the sacerdotalists and superstitionists have made of this faculty of quick
discrimination between good and evil, parading it ever as a divinely-
implanted intuition. Long and wordy has been the battle between the
intuitionists and the derivativists (such are the hard words the metaphy-
sicians use). But now we may safely regard the intuitive school as become
merely an historical memorandum, or, if it still anywhere survive, it is only
in the fusty regions of priestly and senile old-fogeyism.
That so-called instinctive sense is derived partly from infantile impressions
and partly from inherited memory. Just as the wonderful habits of the
animals —usually vaguely called instinctive—are but due to the inherited
remembrances of the experiences of millions of ancestral generations; so
the human brain, subjected, generation after generation, to certain vivid
moral impressions, acquires a modification which becomes hereditarily
transmittable.
Other cerebral impressions there are, which plainly become hereditary—
notably, proneness to superstition, and an abnormal facility of accepting
particular forms of superstition, which, though primd facie absurd and
incredible, have nevertheless been believed in by a long train of unen-
lightened ancestry. This instantaneously-acting moral sense is, among the
children of an average orderly and not uncivilised ancestry, a generally
safe guide. But in other cases it is so unreliable, so varying, so grotesque,
and so obviously subjective to human conditions and environments, that it
is marvellous how any could have deemed it a divinely-implanted rule of
conduct. It does not tell the young bandit-born that it is wrong to pillage
and murder the people—only that cowardice and treachery to the band


are heinous crimes. It tells the American Indian that it is meritorious and
praiseworthy to tomahawk and scalp all who belong to other tribes than his
own, and to torture his prisoners—that cowardice and treachery, within or
against his tribe, are the only crimes. It does not tell the Hindoo that it is
wrong to burn widows, nor a Thug that there is any moral delinquency in
strangling the non-Thugs—nor priests’ that it is not good to bum those whose
doxy is not their doxy. But one might fill volumes with instances of the
diverse and perverse teachings of the “ innate moral sense ” —while among the
children of the hereditary criminal classes, it is simply non-existent, a fact
which makes the reclamation of them so difficult.
Educated intellect is the only trustworthy arbiter of wright and wrong.
It is for the Reason, cultivated and experienced, to decide whether any
given class of moral actions is of such a nature as to be beneficial or pre-
judicial to man. Nor does she give uncertain responses ; very clear she
makes it, that if we would that this our world should be for us a habitable
and not unhappy abode, our rule of life must be perfect probity, honesty
and honour, truthfulness and trustworthiness; kindly, gentle, cheerful,
sympathetic consideration for others ; courage and vigor in the resistance
and suppression of evil; and sternness, tempted by mercy, in dealing with
evil-doers.
And though the rules of intersexual ethics are, naturally, allowably
conventional and shifting, varying with time, place, social status and
circumstances, yet one unmistakeable law governs through every phase—
to refrain from any act likely to be productive of misery to others.*
I don’t think we educated sons of educated fathers and forefathers
sufficiently realise the enormous mental disparity between ourselves and
the uneducated descendants of forefathers from the beginning of things
uneducated.
It requires some thoughtful stu ly, much inquiry, questioning and probing,
to arrive at any just conception of their to-us-strange mental incapacity
and impotence—of their lack of all the higher intellectual powers, especially
of the logical faculty, and of all the capability of discriminating between
the prob ible and the improbable, the possible and the impossible, the
natural and the preternatural.
The reasoning level of the average uneducated adult so descended is
probably scarcely as high as yours and mine was at seven or eight.
What a huge pity it seems to be that this important fact of the mental
ineptitude ot the unimproved is so generally overlooked, or insufficiently
appreciated—when we consider that it has always been exclusively among
such that every religion has first arisen ! It was only poor twilight-blinking
creatures of that sort before whom Joe Smith, Mahomet, Jesus and Moses
appeared.
Of people in that crysalitic mental stage, the observations, the inferences,
opinions and reports, are simply valueless—of no importance whatever.
They can’t understand what they see and hear, nor correctly report what
they fancy they see and hear.
When we were children of seven or eight years, had some individual
appeared to us of commanding stature, of singularly majestic and heroic
pr< sence, of unusual melodiousness of voice (as we know Joe Smith was,
and mty assume the others were), and had he asserted himself to be the
Prophet, or the Son of God, or God himself, should we not probably have
* I may assume that my readers are above the childish illogicality Of objecting against
the assertion of the subjectivity and absolute relativity to ourselves of the moral feelings
our revolting against cruelty to the lower animals, and onr sympathising with their suffer-
ings. The answer to such objections is obvious--that in any deed of cruelty we see in aciion
one of the principles which we most dread, and that our sympathy is due to the imagina-
tion putting us in the place of the sufferers.
For the clearest exposition of the mode in which the moral sense has been derived from
the social or gregarious instincts, consult Darwin’s “ Descent of Man.”


implicitly believed him, if left to ourselves, with none more enlightened
around us ? Just so ; and not a whit wiser were the other first converts.
I know, of my own knowledge, of whole races of people whose mental
development is yet in so rudimental a stage, that not unfrequently they
lack the power of distinguishing between their own dreams and actual
events.
When, in some far out-lying parts of Australia, I was first thrown into
association with the aborigines, I was much surprised at the utter disregard
with which reports made by them to us were often received by the old
hands among us. “ Why,” I would say, “ don’t you hear what these blacks
report?” ‘’Oh,” the reply would be, “ we knows ’em ! what they says goes
in at one ear and out at t’ other with us—they are such infernal liars 1”
“But,” I would remonstrate, “they can have no possible interest in
palming this story off on us, if it is false.” “ That says nothing,” an old
hand would answer, “nobody can tell why, or how, they invent their
lying yarns—seems to me they somehow believes ’em theirselvea—you see,
sir, they are not quite the same as human beings, and no one can make out
their ways.”
One time, some of the blacks belonging to the station, friendly and under
protection, came to me to report a terrible event that had just occurred at
a station about forty miles away, at which there were tnree white men.
Two of them, they said, had been surprised and murdered by bush-blacks,
and the third was defending himself inside the slab-hut, and bad shot many
of the assailants —many details were added. We could not learn from them
exactly how they had heard all this, but were not surprised at that,
knowing that there were bush telegraphs, about whom they did not wish us
to know anything, between our quiet station-blacks and others who were
out in the bush and inclined to be hostile. On the strength of this narration,
three of us rode over to the beleaguered station. There was not the slightest
foundation for the report—no disturbance whatever had occurred 1
On my return, I investigated the origin of the fable as closely as I could,
and came to the conclusion that a woman in the camp had dreamt it, and
given it out as fact to the others, who had implicitly accepted it.
Often afterwards, comparing notes on this subject with other experienced
bushraen, I found they all agreed that such cases were common.
Lately I read in the papers of an expedition which, somewhere in South
Australia, had been sent four hundred miles out to some place in the desert,
where the blacks reported there were white men with large herds of cattle.
Of course, when they got there there was no sign that hoof had pressed
the ground since the ground was formed. Had those South Australians
known the niggers as well as I do, they would not have troubled them-
selves. So with all the aboriginals’ reports about Leichhardt—utterly
valueless.
It never necessarily follows, in these cases that the natives are wilfully
lying, or that they don’t really believe what they say, but the origin of their
belief may always be in some dream. Their waking and mental states get
jumbled up, and what anyone among them positively affirms, all the rest
will believe, no proof required.
Think you, that the barbarous Hebrews, of Mosaic times, were not like
these people—just about in the same mental stage? Or that the Jew
paupers who were Christ’s witnesses were any better ?
For my part, of the three lots, I would soonest believe our own niggers,
just because they are extant, and not dead two or three thousand years ago.
“ Insomnia vana valete.”
Consider what was man’s conception of the surrounding universe in the
days of Eld, when the Idea summed up in the word God first sprang up in


his bewildered darkling brain ! A conception from immediate optical sen*
sation ! To him the Earth was the material universe. It was a plane,
arched over by the “firmament,” a solid blue crystal vault, above which
was the natural abode of the anthropoid Gods, and through which they could
at will glide down to Earth. Beneath this vault the Sun, Moon, and Stars,
lamps devised by God for the benefit of terrestrials, were daily and nightly
driven across by his hand, extinguished under the western horizon and
theurgised back to the Orient. With his own hand he rolled the thunder
and smote with the lightning. Eclipses and Comets were signals of the
breaking out of his capricious fury against his creatures. The rainbow was
a token that multiplicity of business had not caused him to forget a solemn
treaty he had made with man. All environing phenomena were the imme-
diate acts of Gods or Demons ; under foot, beneath the plane of the Earth,
was a suitable locality for Hades. Had it been patent to primeval man that
the Earth was but a speck of dust dancing round an insignificant star, itself
waltzing among infinite millions of other stars—that there is really no
Above and no Below, that when we close our hands and cast our eyes up to
heaven, we are looking towards a point which in twelve hours will be under
our feet, and are at the same time, relatively to our Antipodeans, in the
position of looking downwards—that there is no firmament, nor heaven just
above our heads, but infinite space everywhere—nothing below but our
Antipodean friends—that we are, in fact, but parasites on a little globular
grain of matter—had these cosmical facts been patent to man in primeval
times, probably none of those baseless dreams called Religions would ever
have tortured poor Humanity.
In point of plain logic Copernicus and Galileo destroyed religion. Human
stupidity resists long, but yields at last.
We may say that not only is every religion a delusion, but that the
religious feeling itself is but a barbaric emotion of wonder, unworthy of
adult man.
You don’t doubt the word of God ? The man was never born who could
doubt the word of God. But the question is—what is the word of God ?
You say it is contained in this book. I ask, what prior knowledge had you
of God—what previous intimacy existed between you and God to authorise
you thus positively to authenticate these as his writings—these as his senti-
ments ? Was he really A, your familiar friend ? Or is he not rather the
unknown X for ever and ever ? Is it even competent to the Human Mind
to discover whether He be indeed an Objective Reality, or only a Subjective
Idea ? You say the internal evidence of this book convinces you, every-
thing it contains being entirely consonant with your idea of God. But
then you will in fairness cencede that you are not everybody. For instance,
here am I, to whose conception of what God may be this book is in most
violent dissonance and oppugnance.
Said a friend to me, “ Against our making any active strenuous exertion to
spread over the general world the Free-thought-light to which we ourselves
have attained, there are two reasons which appear to me sufficing. First,
that such effort would be unsuccessful, the time not being ripe ; next, that
in the subsisting low mental status of the people the Light would be even
more hurtful th*n their old gross superstitions. Man is very young yet;
civilisation is only dawning. The people think themselves finely educated,
but in all capacity for logical thought their progress is imperceptible. Prove
to them by the most crystalline logic that their Holy Things are but
Mumbo-Jumboes—what use? they would stolidly stick to their Mumbo-
Jumboes all the same—for they are only in the Fetish stage of mental
evolution. Vain the attempt to disabuse them of Mumbo-Jumbo ! And


for the few minds capable of assimilating the logic, still what use? Where
would be found the courage to fly in the face of Extreme Eespectability and
bis spouse Mrs. Grundy ? For one more half-century Ut the majority of
the people continue to be driven by the priests, with winkers, bit and rein,
until the numbers that can be so driven be reduced to minority by the
gradual trickling-in of better sense, by thousands of little runlets. For
you and me, with our culture and our philosophy, the emancipation from all
Supernaturalism is our glory and our greatest happiness. But there can
be no doubt that Freethought should ever go hand in-hand with Culture I
think that by working against Superstition quietly and privately, but
diligently, each of us may do a duty sufficing for the present day.”
“ Your words, my friend,” I replied, “are largely the words of wisdom.
No more than you, wish I for any speedy boulversement. But 1 think we
ought to be more active in hastening the trickling of the runlets of Truth*
shine. My idiosyncrasy differs from yours, in being more coarsely honest,
more bluntly earnest. I take for my motto— Truth is the one sacro-
sanct ; and all complacence for, or complicity with, is extremely
repugnant to me. Though Man can never attain to the Truth Absolute, he
can still keep on drawing nearer and nearer to her. And he must hew
down or uproot the obstructing Falsities in his endeavours
To narrow the realm of the False and the Yain.”
FINIS.
W, H, Williams, Printer, 68 Elizabeth street,Melbourne,




