

r 65^
|Eboion 00lorl|
MALEKULA,
NEW HEBRIDES.
4s t
By REV.T. WATT LEGGATT,
OF THE
“AMY GERTRUDE RUSSELL”




mission Work iq mama,
NEW HEBRIDES.
By the Rev. T. Watt Leggatt
Maleknla is one of the largest islands
of the New Hebrides group, which lies
almost on a line with Northern Queens-
land, about 1000 miles or so eastward.
Some of the large northern islands were
discovered by Quiros, a Spanish navi-
gator, in 1606 ; but the whole group
was explored and named by Captain
Cook in 1778.
In 1838 John Wdliams visited the
islands, endeavouring to introduce the
Gospel. He was kindly received at two
islands, Fotuna and Tanna, but on the
following day he and Mr Harris were
cruelly murdered by the natives of
Erromanga.


The first missionary who was per-
manently settled on the group was the
Eev. Dr. Geddie, in 18-18. He came
from Nova Scotia, and began work on
the southernmost island, called Aneit-
yum. His labours and those of Dr.
Inglis, who followed him a few years
later, were so blessed that in less than
15 years the whole island was won for
Christ.
In course of time more missionaries
came, and were settled on the islands
northward, among whom was Dr. Paton,
whose name and autobiography is familiar
to many of you. At present there is a
staff of 17 European missionaries and
their wives, 150 native teachers, and
about 10,000 native Christians. There
are still about 50,000 heathen on the
large northern islands which have just
been occupied by missionaries during the
last four or five years, and where it is
too soon yet to expect much fruit from


their labours. The mission is Presby-
terian, and the missionaries are sup-
ported by the churches in Australia,
Canada, Scotland, and New Zealand.
Its internal affairs are controlled by the
Mission Synod, which meets yearly at
one or other of the mission stations.
The island of Malekula, on which I
have been labouring for the past 5 years,
is about GO miles long, and 20 wide at
the south end. The population is esti-
mated at 12,000, The people are of a
dark brown colour, wiih woolly hair.
They are a sturdy race, and have the
reputation of being the greatest warriors
in that part of the group. The report
even that a Malekulan canoe is approach-
ing any of the adjacent islands is suffi-
cient to make the people fly to the bush.
Their dress is almost indescribable. The
men wear a girdle made of cocoa-nut
cloth, held together with a strip of native
matting and a little wrapper in front.


While the women have only a strip of
matting or calico a yard long, and about
nine inches wide round their loins. But
their scanty attire is fully compensated
for in their eyes, by the amount of orna-
ments and paint with which they adorn
themselves. The women load themselves
with necklaces of beads, while the men
decorate themselves with armlets, brace-
lets of pig’s tusks, flowers and plumes
of feathers in their hair ; while both sexes
lay on paint with a liberal hand. For
ordinary occasions black is used, some-
times the soot of the saucepans in the
missionary’s kitchen is earned off for the
purpose, but for festivals and dances red,
white, and green are the prevailing tints ;
Sometimes the missionary’s wife finds
her washing blue mysteriously disappear
about these times. They adorn them-
selves in all manner of fantastic designs.
The right side of the forehead black and
the other red, the one cheek white, and
the other black. A black streak down


the nose, and a red spot on the point.
Sometimes the women have their hair
matted with paint and oil until it resem-
bles a close-fitting cap. Formerly they
used a red ochre, which is common to
the islands, but since the white man
came, they have discovered that red lead
is a far brighter colour, and it would be
safe to say that there is not a native
leaves Queensland after his period of
service there, but has a few pounds of it
in his box, wherewith to adorn himself
at next season’s balls.
Their houses are miserable huts, about
five feet high, in which it is impossible
to stand upright. They are quite bare
of furniture of any description. The
men live by themselves, and their wives
have each separate houses. Food is
plentiful. They live principally on yams,
faro, and bananas, which they cultivate ;
with breadfruit and cocoa nuts, which


grow abundantly. The yams and faro,
which somewhat resemble potatoes, but
are very much larger (some yams attain
a growth of four feet in length and two
feet in circumference), with green ban-
anas, are roasted on the fire or else
grated down, mixed with milk wrung
out of scraped cocoa nuts, wrapped in
banana leaves, laid on hot stones and
covered with earth for two or three
hours. This forms a very nourishing
pudding, but it requires a few years for
a European to get accustomed to it.
They ah*) get a good many fish and
shell-fish on the reef, with an occasional
pigeon or flying fox, and on great occa-
sions a pig. They are well off for food,
for when the old yams are eaten and the
new are not ready, they have an abundant
supply of bread-fruit, which grows with-
out any cultivation whatever. Then the
sea is teeming with fish and turtle, so
that they never need be hungry if they
chose to exert themselves.


As you may well imagine, this
plentiful supply of food obtained so
easily does not tend to industrious
habits on the part of “ man Malekula.”
They really do very little. Occasionally
a new house has to be built, for which
the thatch must be prepared, a canoe
or drum hollowed out of a tree trunk,
or an image carved and painted ; but
when that is done there still remains a
great deal of time for fishing, hunting
wild pigs, smoking and talking. A
Malekulan year has three seasons.
From September till Christmas they
work at preparing and planting their
yams and taro. About half an acre is
cleared and fenced in with the wood
cut down; dried cocoanut leaves are
then spread over the ground and set on
fire, which consumes all the rubbish
and helps to kill some of the germs in
the soil. The yams, taro, and bananas
are then planted; the two latter require
no further care, but the yam vines


have to be carefully trained on a trellis
of reeds. Those yams are somewhat
like potatoes in taste and appearance
when cooked, but are very much
larger. They are somewhat of the
shape of an enormous cigar, and are
from a foot long and a couple of inches
in diameter to four or five feet, by a
foot and a half across. The taro is as
like the arum as could be, in fact it
is of that family. Bananas are well
enough known. All these are cooked
either by roasting on the fire whole or
baking; when baked they are grated
down on banana leaves, cocoanut milk
squeezed over them, wrapped in leaves
and laid on hot stones with leaves and
earth piled over, and left for two or
three hours. This forms the pudding
which is so often mentioned by writers
on the South Sea islands.
From January until the end of
March is the time for fighting; the


work is done, the yams are growing,
and their daily wants are supplied by
the bread fruit which is now ripe So
they have nothing to do but sit and
plot mischief against their neighbours.
A “casus belle ” is always found in
some ancient feud, or some wife deserts
her husband for another, which has to
be discussed, and an ambassage sent
with the ultimatum of a tine of pigs or
war.
About the beginning of April the
yams begin to ripen, and all feuds and
quarrels are patched up for the time of
feasting, which goes on from then until
the planting season comes round.
These feasts, or “ mangkes,” are
given by men who aspire to chieftain-
ship. There are four great grades of
chieftainship; the “ Baras,” “ Gulguls,”
“ Muhins,” and “Maras,” and in each
of these there are sub-divisions. All


below the rank of Bara are called “ com-
mon people,” while the Maras are the
highest chiefs, of which there are very-
few. The entrance to all these ranks is
by the giving of these Mangkes, at
which great number of pigs are slaugh-
tered. The pigs must all be boars with
long tusks, and in order that the tusks
may not be broken by rooting, the pigs
are kept tied up in the villages for
years. A system of caste prevail among
these. Women are not allowed to eat
with the men, nor are the men of one
rank allowed to eat with those of another;
in fact, they must not eat food prepared
on the same fire, nor off a fire kindled
with a brand from the other. The only
good effect of this that I know of is,
that it relieves the women of a little
work. In other islands women have to
work all day cultivating the gardens,
preparing thatch, or gathering shell-fish,
and then in the afternoon toil back to
the village with a heavy load of yams


and firewood, and set to to prepare their
husband’s supper, but in Malekula a
man, no matter how tired or lazy be may
feel, has all this to do himself.
Difference in rank is indicated by
the style of their houses. A Male-
kulan house is a very simple affair,
merely a low thatched roof set on
the ground with the ends closed
in with bamboos, and a hole about three
feet by two left for the door, window,
and chimney. They are of course quite
bare of furniture of any description,
except a pile of cooking stones, and a
plaited cocoa-nut leaf for a bed, with
perhaps a musket, or bow and arro.ws,
and club in the corner, and a knife
stuck in the thatch. The thatch and
bamboo rafters are smoked to a rich
brown, which helps to preserve them.
The ridge pole is rarely above five feet
from the ground, so that it is impossi-
ble to stand upright, and when the fire


is lighted the smoke is stifling, until
one gets into the native ways of squat-
ting or lying on the floor. The chief’s
houses are much larger, and have a
stone wall built around them, with their
household god, a carved fern tree stem,
on guard at the door.
Opposite the man’s house are the
houses of his wives, a yam house, and
a pig house. In the centre of the vil-
lage is the “ amil ” or public square,
where all the dances and palavers are
held. No woman is allowed to come
near it unless at a feast time, when they
occupy a portion of it as spectators, fn
the. centre of the square stands a group
of drums hollowed out of trees, and
carved into some resemblance to human
faces. At one end are the images of
their ancestors carved out of fern trees,
and most grotesquely painted in red,
black, white, and green. At the other
end is the men’s houses, where the un-


married youths live and where the whole
male population assemble to talk and
smoke. All around are stone altars (a
flat stone laid across two upright ones),
on which the pigs are sacrificed.
Social Customs. —As I have indi-
cated, polygamy is practised, and is
in no way restricted to men of high
rank. The value of a woman is ten
pigs with long tusks, and whoever
can muster them can have as many
wives as he chooses. Their treat-
ment of women is brutish. At the age
of six or seven, as soon as the perma-
nent teeth appear, the two upper front
teeth are knocked out, and the girl is
clothed with the woman’s dress, and is
now readj for sale. When a purchaser
appears, she is taken up to his village
and “ left ” there, as they say. This is
not a mere bethrothal, as with some
tribes, but an actual marriage, and its
consequences may be imagined. A


woman is unwelcomed at birth, un-
honoured in life, and unwept at death.
The only grief that her husband has at
her death is for the pigs he paid for
her.
Boys live with their mothers until
six or seven years of age, when they
are circumcised, and shortly thereafter,
if their father is able to afford it, they
are initiated into the first rank of
Baras, after which they must cook their
own food. From their earliest years
they are trained to shoot with the bow,
and as they grow up the great ambition
of life is to get a musket. For a musket
they will go away to work on the planta-
tions of Fiji or Queensland for 3 years,
if no other means of procuring it can
be found. When a man dies there is a
great wailing, at which his property is
distributed among his friends, and pigs
are slaughtered. He is usually buried
in a part of the “ Amil” for a year or


two, and then his bones are taken up
and laid up among a heap of stones in
the bush. Wailing is kept up for thirty
days, during which time one or two men
remain in the amil, and from sunset to
sunrise, at intervals, play on a bamboo
flute called “ metiorior ” (the weeper),
which has a very soft and mournful
note. At end of that time the
mourning is c.included with a feast.
Religious Belief.— The principal
religious idea is a kind of ancestor wor-
ship. The images in the u amil ” are
intended to represent the dead chiefs,
and to them offerings of food and pigs
are made at intervals to secure their
goodwill and prevent them doing injury
to the yams or themselves. They also
believe in sacred men who can make
rain and wind, and also cause disease
and death. A Malekulan is always very
careful to bury or otherwise dispose of
the refuse of anything that he has been


using, such as the peel of a banana
which he has eaten, cuttings of his hair,
&c.; and also to obliterate any mark he
has made by sitting in the sand, lest
an enemy should get hold of them and
burn them with certain incantations, and
so cause him to turn sick or die. hfo
man is ever considered to have died of
natural causes. Some one must have
bewitched him, aud his friends imme-
diately set about trying to discover who
has done it. The sacred men are of
course well paid, and it is to their in-
terest to maintain the deception. They
also have a kind of Fetishism, Certain
stones are credited with supernatural
powers. One which lies before me now,
an ordinary pebble, was supposed to
protect the life of its wearer from being
killed by an arrow or musket ball; others
when placed among the pigs’ food make
them grow fat ; and on Tanua, where
eloquence is greatly esteemed, one, when
placed on the tongue, gives great fluency


of speech. They believe in a future
life. When a man dies his spirit
wanders in the bush until his relations
perform his funeral ceremonies and
slaughter pigs at his grave ; then his
spirit, driving the spirit of the pigs be-
fore him, goes to the entrance of the
spirit world, which is called Lelemis.
At the gate stands a spirit called Le-
siv-siv, who examines the “shade” to
find if he has certain tatoo marks of a
snake or lizard on his body ; if so he is
admitted, but, if not, his head is split
open with an axe, and he is sent back
to wander in the bush. They seem to
have no idea of a place of punishment,
all souls go to Lelemis, but as they take
rank there according to the number of
pigs killed at their grave, men who have
been respected will obtain greater rank
than the others. This Lelemis is a
dark, dreary abode, a place of mirk and
misery, contrasting sadly with the life
of freedom and sunshine on earth. ISTo


man would go there willingly ; it is only
when iron fate compels him. This re-
sembles closely the classic ideas. The
shade of Achilles says to Ulysses in
Hades—
“ Better by far laboriously to bear
A weight of woes and breathe the vital air
Slave to the meanest hind that begs its
bread,
Than reign the sceptred monarch of the
dead.”
They have also some dim idea of a
blood-atonement. If a man has com-
mitted any crime, or two tribes who have
been at war desire to make peace, pigs
are brought to the “ amil,” and friend-
ship is renewed, by the chief killing one
with his spear, and as the blood flows
he says “ It is peace.”
They have a belief in a Creator called
Bokoro, who made heaven, earth, and
sea, and formed man out of clay. They
offer no worship to him, and all their


legends about him are a strange mix-
ture of extraordinary power and foolish-
ness and lust. The real gods of the
Malekulans however are pigs. With
pigs a man can obtain every good, both
in this life and the next. Two or three
atone for all crimes against property or
person. Ten purchase him a wife, a
hundred slaughtered at intervals raise
him to the highest rank of chieftainship,
while his honour and happiness in the
next world depend on the number sacri-
ficed at his funeral. A somewhat
amusing incident illustrating this hap-
pened lately. An old chief found his
end was approaching, and was of course
anxious that his funeral ceremonies
should be duly honoured. He had a
few pigs, but in order to procure more
he sold off his seven wives , by which he
got 70 pigs, which were duly slain at his
burial.
Such is Malekula, and such are its


people in all their ignorance, filth, and
superstition. Until five years ago they
had not heard the gospel message, but
since then three missionaries have been
settled among them, Mr Morton and
'myself in 1886, and Mr Gillan in 1888,
My mission station is named the
“ Amy Gertrude Russell,” and, with a
missionary scholarship in Ormond Col-
lege, Melbourne, was founded and en-
dowed by Thomas Russell, Esq., of Vic-
toria, in memory of the devoted life and
early death of his daughter—an example
well worthy of imitation. The Trust is
administered by the Foreign Missions
Committee of the Presbyterian Church
of Victoria.
We are supported by a staff of the
native teachers from the Christian islands
to the south. Each of these teachers is
settled in a village where he lives among
the people, learns their language, gathers


them into school daily, holds a service
on Sabbath, and, above all, he and his
wife, by their lives, set before them an
example of Christianity that they can
understand. Opposition has not been
a wanting, both our teachers and our-
selves have many times been in peril of
our lives, but still the work goes on.
Our services are well attended, and one
village at least has resolved to give up
heathenism and “ take the book,” The
work is but in its infancy yet, for a long
time was spent at the beginning in learn-
ing the languages, of which there are five
or six, and getting into friendly terms
with the people. We ask God’s people to
remember us in their prayers, that soon
that lovely island may be won for
Christ.
E. E. Campbell, Printer , Sturt Street, Ballarat.


MHO
h U / o‘sb
U c&yj
