





J/' ■■ J ,
<v - A. v/
/ss, /,,/ * ;, '/
y/ y
■






MISSIONARY RECORDS.
TAHITI
AND
SOCIETY ISLANDS.
LONDON:
RELIGIOUS TRACT SOCIETY,
Instituted 1799;
SOLD AT THE DEPOSITORY, 56, PATERNOSTER ROW;
AND BY THE BOOKSELLERS.


Printed by J. Rider, Little Britain, London.


CONTENTS.
PAGE
CHAPTER I. 1
Discovery of Tahiti by Captain Wallis—First Inter-
course with the Islanders—Voyages of Captain Cook—
Effects of early Voyages to the South Sea Islands, in
directing the Attention of Christians to the Moral
State of their Inhabitants—Geographical Situation,
Extent, Climate, and Natural History of the Islands—
Notices of the Bread Fruit, Cocoa Nut, Plantain, &,c.
CHAPTER 11. 22
Peculiarities of the various Tribes inhabiting the
Islands of the Pacific—Physical, intellectual, and
moral Character of the South Sea Islauders—Feelings
of Sympathy excited in their behalf—Formation of
the Missionary Society—The broad, catholic Principles
of its Founders—Appointment and Departure of the
Ship Duff, with the first Mission to the South Seas—
Sentiments and Feelings of the Missionaries—Arrival
at Tahiti—Reception of the Missionaries by the King
and Chiefs—Temporary Accommodations provided—
Grant of Laud for the permanent Support of the Mis-
sion—Ordination of Missionaries for other Islands—
Establishment of the Monthly Missionary Prayer
Meeting—Probable Causes of the favourable Recep-
tion of the Mission.


CHAPTER 111. 52
Circumstances under which the Mission was com-
menced—Notice of an earlier Attempt by Spanish
Roman Catholics—General View of the State of the
Inhabitants at the time —Nature and Tendency of
their Superstitious—Number and Character of their
Idols, Birds, Beasts, Fishes, and other objects of reli-
gious Veneration —Deified Men—lnfluence of their
Superstition—Temples, different kinds, their Extent,
Structure, Uses—Account of the great Temple of
Oberea in Papara—Sacred Trees within the precincts
of the Temples—The Foundations laid on the Bodies
of human Victims offered in sacrifice—Pagan Worship
Priests Prayers Offerings Victims Human
Sacrifices—Recollections of their Cruelty still retained
by the People—Manner- of disposing of the Bodies of
the human Victims—Heathen Festivals—Depraved
Morals of the People—Prevalence of Dishonesty—
Intemperance—Habits of the South Sea Islanders—
Degradation of the Female Sex—Operation of the
Tabu System.
CHAPTER IV. 73
Practice of Infant Murder among the South Sea
Islanders—Numbers Destroyed—Means by which this
cruel Deed was accomplished—Motives by which they
were influenced in its Perpetration—Female Infants
most frequently Destroyed—Disproportion between
the Sexes—War, its frequency—Human Sacrifices
offered during the Preparation for War—Modes of
Warfare—Attack and Defence —Weapons, Dress, and
Ornaments of the Warriors—Treatment of the Van-
quished—Destruction of their Villages, of the aged
Relatives and Infants of the defeated Party—lnsult of
the Bodies of the Slain—Customs in relation to the
Dead—Self-torture and Weeping Practice of em-
balming—Curious preparatory Ceremonies—Houses
erected for the Dead—Means employed to pacify the
Spirits of the Departed—Probable Population of the
Island at the time the Mission was established.


CHAPTER V. 94
Effects produced on the Minds of the Natives by the
different Occupations of the Missionaries; a Saw-pit;
the Forge, &c.—Study of the Language—Visit to the
Chiefs—lnsecure State of native Society—Account of
the Murder of a Native—Efforts to prevent the offer-
ing of Human Sacrifices, and the Murder of Infants—
Arrival of a Ship in Distress—Desertion of part of the
Crew—Kindness of the Missionaries to the Captain—
Their Endeavours to secure the return of the Deserters
—Four of the Missionaries assaulted and plundered by
the Natives—Cause of this Barbarity—lts disastrous
Effects upon the Mission—Departure of Eleven of the
Missionaries from Tahiti—Sentiments and Feelings of
those who remained—Their Decision on the Subject
of War.
CHAPTER VI. 120
Circumstances under which the Missionaries pursued
their Labours—Painful Developements of native Cha-
racter —Singular Custom of disposing of Presents—
Difference of actual Missionary Work from the Ideas
formed of it before departing from England—Notice
of the Missionary Prayer Meeting—Assassination of
the High Priest—Remarkable Preservation of one of
his Friends—Cruelty practised by the Natives—
Treachery of Otu—Summary of the State of the Mis-
sion—Singular Observances in connexion with the
Celebration of Marriage among the People—lnquiries
of the People why earlier Visitors to the Islands gave
the People no Information on the Subject of Religion
—Difficulties attending their Attempts to teach the
People—Notice of Human Sacrifices and Agitation
among the People—Death of Mr. Lewis—lnstance of
savage Cruelty—Reflections on the Close of the Year
—Second Voyage of the Ship Duff—Capture of the
Vessel—Detention of the Missionaries—Embarkation
for Rio Janeiro—Second Capture by the Portuguese
Treatment in the Voyage—Return to Europe.


CHAPTER VIE 15Q
Encouraging Tidings from England—Rapidity of
Depopulation in Tahiti Reflections on the State
of the People —Arrival of additional Missionaries
in the Royal Admiral—Missionary Tours of Tahiti
and Eimeo—Wars on Account of the Image of Oro
—Providential Arrival of Foreigners—The Mission-
House garrisoned by Seamen—Baneful Effects of
idolatrous Wars upon the People—Treacherous Mode
of obtaining Human Sacrifices—Contemptuous Man-
ner in which the Labours of the Mission were regarded
Testimony of Turnbull in favour of the Missionaries
—Probable number to which the Inhabitants of the
Islands were reduced—Death of Pomare the First
Origin of his Name—Practice of burying the Sick alive
Human Victims brought from Eimeo—Afflictive
Privations of the Missionaries, and want of Tidings
from England—Happy Death of Mr. Jefferson—Out-
breaking of War in Matavai.—Departure of the Ma-
jority of the Missionaries for Huahiue—Defeat of the
King—Flight of the remainder of the Missionaries to
Eimeo, and breaking up of the Tahitian Mission—
Reflections—Voyage of the Missionaries to New South
Wales—Hospitable Reception and kind Treatment
from the Governor and others in New South Wales,
CHAPTER VIII. 176
Return of the Missionaries to Eimeo—Their friendly
Reception by the King—Painful bereavements in the
Mission Families—Public Profession of Christianity
by Pomare ll.—His Request to be baptized—His Con-
versation with the Chiefs—Extracts of his Letters to
the Missionaries—Encouraging Accounts from Tahiti
—Seasons for private Prayer observed among the Na-
tives—Names of the first Converts recorded—Progress
of Crime and Barbarity among the Idolaters at Tahiti
—Conversation with the Votaries of Oro at Eimeo
Death of a native Christian—Native Christians, de-
signated “ Bure Atua,” or Prayers to God.—Visit to
the Society Islands—Persecution in Tahiti—Martyr-
dom of native Christians—Acknowledgment of the


true God before a public Assembly—Death of Mr.
Scott-—Malice of the Idolaters—Proposed Assassina-
tion of the Christians—Their Escape—Quarrels among
the Idolaters —Efforts of Pomare among the Chiefs at
Eimeo —His Letter to the Missionaries.
CHAPTER IX. 210
Effects of the War on the Christians —Seasons of
Fasting and Prayer—Voyage of Pomare to Tahiti—
Treachery of the Idolaters—Assault upon the Chris-
tians—General Engagement on the Sabbath —Death
of the Leader of the idolatrous Forces—Their entire
Defeat and Flight—Humanity of the Victors—Submis-
sion of the Chiefs and People of Tahiti to Pomare’s
Sway —Destruction of the Image of Oro, the national
Idol —Complete Subversion of Idolatry, and general
Profession of Christianity—Missionary Tours among
the People—lnvitations to Matavai —General religious
Worship—Poraare’s Prayer—Surrender of his Family
Idols—Letter from Pomare —Extension of general
Change among the Inhabitants of the Islands of Eimeo,
Huahiue, Raiatea, Tahaa, and Borabora —Arrival of
Mr. Crook—Observance of the Sabbath—General
State of the Mission—Arrival of Messrs. Ellis and
Orsmond—Effect of native Services—Arrival of fur-
ther Aid from England.
CHAPTER X. 235
Formation of a new Station in Eimeo —Establish-
ment of the Press—First Printing in the Islands—
General desire for Books—Pleasing instances of ear-
nestness to obtain Copies of the Scriptures—Comple-
tion of the Vessel—Re-occupancy of the Missionary
Station in Tahiti —Establishment of new Stations—
Commencement of Missions in the Islands of Huahine
and Raiatea—Formation of Tahitian Missionary So-
ciety—Speech of Pomare—Establishment of a Mis-
sionary Society in Huahine and Raiatea —Probable
Cause of Attention to Religion at this time—Attempt
to introduce the Culture of Sugar in the Islands—
Erection and opening of the Royal Mission Chapel at


Tahiti—A Code of Laws prepared—Conduct of the
Missionaries in reference to the same—Establishment
of a Code of Laws—Baptism of Pomare—Formation
of Christian Churches in Tahiti—Remarkable Effects
of the preaching of the Gospel in Huahiue—Desire
for Copies of the Scriptures—Blind Hiro, the con-
verted Priest —Encouraging State of the Mission in
Raiatea in 1819.
CHAPTER XL 267
General of the Windward Missions —Com-
mencement of a Mission in Borabora—Formation of a
Christian Church in Huahine—Destruction of the Idols
in Raivavai—Profession of Christianity by the In-
habitants—Voyage and Wreck of the Austral Chief-
Introduction of the Gospel to Rurutu—Letter from
the native Teachers—Visit of a Deputation from the
Missionary Society—Death of Pomare—Voyage to the
Sandwich Islands—Commencement of a Mission in
Tahaa—Public Meeting on New Year’s Day, 1824, at
Raiatea—South Sea Academy established—Testimony
of the Deputation after leaving the Islands—Progress
of the Missions in 1825—Arrival of Messrs. Pitman
and Pritchard—Voyage of Mr. Crook to the Marquesas
—Subsequent Efforts to introduce the Gospel among
the Inhabitants.
CHAPTER XII. 300
Return of Mr. Nott—Death of the young King—
His Sister, Aimata, acknowledged as Queen—Relaxa-
tion of Morals among the People—lntroduction of
ardent Spirits—Rise of Visionary Heresies—Wreck of
an American Ship—Conduct of the Natives at Huahiue
and Rurutu—Happy Death of Maoae—Advancement
of Civilization—Disturbance in Tahiti—Arrival of the
Pitcairn Islanders—War in the Leeward Islands—
Death of the King of Raiatea—His Letter to a Lady
in England—General State of Society—War in Tahiti
—Retrospect of the Progress of the Gospel.—State of
the Mission in 1834.






MISSIONARY RECORDS.
TAHITI AND SOCIETY ISLANDS.
CHAPTER. I.
Discovery of Tahiti by Captain Wallis.—First
Intercourse with the Islanders. — Voyages of
Captain Cook. —Effects of early Voyages to the
South Sea Islands, in directing the Attention of
Christians to the Moral State of their Inhabit-
ants. —Geographical Situation, Extent, Cli-
mate, and Natural History of the Islands. —
Notices of the Bread Fruit, Cocoa Nut, Plan-
tain, &c.
The annals of our country, during the last half
century, are distinguished by the progress of re-
ligion at home, and efforts to spread it abroad;
and the records of the progress of these bene-
volent exertions in the South Sea Islands, are
peculiarly gratifying and instructive. The great
moral processes they describe, may be justly
classed with the most satisfactory modern evi-
dences of the authenticity and the power of the
gospel; while the important facts they embody
furnish the happiest illustrations of the manner in
which we may expect the fulfilment of inspired
B


predictions, which assure us that men shall be
blessed in Jesus, and all nations shall call him
blessed. They supply, also, a sacred and cheering
evidence of the Divine faithfulness, grace, and
omnipotence of the Redeemer, and the mighty
transforming energy of the Holy Spirit, rendering,
in answer to prayer, the incorruptible seed of the
word of God, the means of spreading moral verdure
in the most dreary spiritual wilderness, and yield-
ing, finally, an abundant harvest, to the praise and
glory of Him who shall carry forward the same
glorious work until the number of the redeemed
be accomplished, and He who bore the sins of
many in his own body on the tree, shall see of the
travail of his soul, and shall be satisfied.
The South Sea Islands, in which this astonishing
manifestation of the Redeemer’s power has been
witnessed, were discovered not very long before the
commencement of the period already referred to.
As captain Wallis, the commander of his ma-
jesty’s ship Dolphin, was pursuing his way across
the comparatively untraversed waters of the Pacific,
on Ihe 19th of June, 1767, he discovered a lofty
and fertile island, in a part of the ocean where no
land previously known to exist. He ap-
proached the south-eastern shore, sailed along the
eastern coast, and, on the 23rd of the same month,
anchored his ship in a bay, which the natives
called Matavai. To this bay, which is situated
on the north-west side of the island, captain
Wallis, when, in the name of his sovereign, he
hoisted his broad pennant on the shore, gave the
name of Port Royal, calling the island of which it
formed a part, and which the natives designated
Tahiti, King George the Third’s Island. The in


habitants of the island beheld the approach of the
stately vessel with mingled sensations of wonder
and admiration, to which they soon added the
feeling of terror, as their earliest interviews with
the strangers taught them by experience the fatal
effect of European fire-arms, and for a trifling theft
life was destroyed among the islanders before a
single foreigner had set his foot upon their shores.
After this fearful intimidation, the natives refrained
from the manifestation of hostility; traffic was
commenced, and, with few interruptions, continued;
the sick among the crew were conveyed to the
shore for recovery, and refreshments, in abundance,
of every kind which the country produced, were
cheerfully supplied.
From the arrival until the departure of their
discoverers, the natives manifested that universal
and unconquerable propensity to theft, and to that
debasing and shameful licentiousness, for which
they have been disgracefully notorious in their
intercourse with subsequent visitors. Having
remained several weeks at the island, received
great attentions from the queen, Oberea, recruited
the health of his seamen, and obtained the neces-
sary supplies, captain Wallis resumed his voyage,
and ultimately reached his native land. The
account of his discovery, and of the state in which
he found a people, whose origin was unknown,
whose arrival in the country they occupied was
evidently remote, but involved in uncertainty;
who had been hitherto secluded in the solitude of
the unexplored expanse of the largest ocean in the
world, and unknown to the rest of mankind, did
not fail to excite considerable attention.
About this time a representation was made by


the Royal Society to George the Third, that im-
portant services would be rendered to the interests
of science by the appointment of suitably qualified
individuals to observe, at Tahiti, the transit of the
planet Venus, and lieutenant, afterwards captain
Cook, was selected to convey to that remote part
of the world the astronomers and others appointed
to this service. Captain Cook also visited the
Pacific on two subsequent occasions: once in
search of a favourite object of geographical specu-
lation at that time, a southern continent; and
afterwards in hopes of discovering a northern
passage from the Pacific to the Atlantic. During
these voyages, captain Cook visited and explored
the eastern coast of New Holland, the islands of
New Zealand and the Marquesas; and discovered
the Society, Friendly, and Sandwich Islands: at
the last he was killed, Feb. 14, 1779, in a quarrel
with the natives.
Whatever hopes the pursuits of these and other
daring and adventurous discoverers might excite
in the mind of the philosopher, the patriot, or the
merchant; whatever benefits may have resulted to
science; whatever islands and countries may have
been explored; and whatever fields may have
been thus laid open to enterprise and commerce,
to the Christian they all appear connected with
results of a higher order and a more important
bearing. He views the advancement of science,
the improvement in arts, the progress of discovery
by sea and by land, as proceeding according to
the arrangements of Him who is wonderful in
counsel and excellent in working, the develope-
ment of whose purposes in providence harmonize
with the predictions of his word, and render all


subservient to the triumphs of his gospel, and
the ultimate establishment of the spiritual domi-
nion of his Son.
In few instances, especially in recent times, has
the correctness of these views been more distinctly
manifested than in the results of the discoveries
made in the Pacific Ocean during the last century.
The favourite and long-cherished theories of the
philosopher have been relinquished; the golden
dreams in which, under the influence of excited
fancy, the avaricious and the sanguine were allured
to the fond expectation of abundant wealth, have
issued in disappointment or distress; and the tribes
inhabiting the islands of the South Sea were about
to be abandoned to oblivion, with no other recol-
lection of their visitors than that they were their
superiors in power to destroy, and their equals in
vice, the destructive memorials of which would
have embittered every remembrance of their visits.
But the attention of a portion of the Christian
population of England had been attracted to their
circumstances; their sympathies had been awak-
ened on their behalf, and a generous effort was
made to communicate to them a knowledge of the
gospel, and, under the Divine blessing, a partici-
pation of its benefits. The motives in which these
exertions originated, and the principles on which
they were pursued, have secured a perseverance in
labour, and a dependence on the favour of the
Most High, that have been followed by results
abundantly rewarding all past exertions. New
encouragement has been given to the hopes of the
church, in reference to the moral renovation of the
remaining portion of the dark places of the earth,
that are still filled with the habitations of cruelty.
b 3


Before proceeding to record the progress of the
gospel in this remote part of the world, it will be
requisite, in order to form a correct estimate of
its influence and power, to contemplate the state
in which the people in some of the principal
groups of islands were found by their earliest
visitors, and in which they continued when the first
missionaries commenced their career of labour and
peril. In doing this, it will not be necessary to
detail the peculiarities of the inhabitants of the
several clusters of islands in which missionary
efforts have been pursued during the last thirty
years; a notice of the distinguishing characteristics
of the inhabitants of the principal islands will be
sufficient. The general resemblance which pre-
vails in the whole of eastern Polynesia, in the
distinguishing features of the character, habits,
and circumstances of its inhabitants, renders an
account of any one of the principal groups appli-
cable to the whole.
The islands of the Pacific in which missionary
operations have been pursued, comprise the chief
clusters of eastern Polynesia, and comprehend
New Zealand, the Friendly, Fiji Hapai, the
Navigators and Hervey Islands, Tahiti, or, as it
was formerly written, Otaheite, the Society and
Austral, or Southern Islands, the Paumotus, or
almost innumerable clusters of low islands form-
ing the labyrinth or dangerous Archipelago, the
Marquesas, and the Sandwich Islands.* Of all
* The Sandwich Islands are situated a few degrees within
the tropic of cancer, in the northern Pacific Ocean : the
rest of the groups of islands are on the southern side of the
equator.


these Hawaii, the chief of the Sandwich group,
is probably the largest, being nearly three
hundred miles in circumference, rising to an
elevation equal to the highest land in Europe,
and presenting a surface which has been computed
to contain four thousand square miles.
The climate is remarkably pleasant, almost
equally removed from the scorching and oppres-
sive heat of the East and West Indies, and the
severity of a northern or southern winter. The
average range of the thermometer may be con-
sidered as between 70° and 90°; while, in some of
the principal islands, the medium temperature is
reckoned at about 75°. The atmosphere, though
frequently moist, is, from the insulated situation
of the islands and their great elevation, so
perpetually subject to the operation of the sea-
breezes, and especially to the grateful influence
of the regular trade winds, that it possesses an
elasticity which renders it, though generally
wanner than is altogether grateful to the feelings
of a European, refreshing and salubrious.
The soil varies in different islands. In those
which are volcanic, and of comparatively recent
origin, as is the case with the northern clusters,
large portions of the country are sterile wastes;
other parts are singularly fertile; in the low lands
generally, and the bottoms of the valleys, the soil
is remarkably prolific; and the productive land,
with the partial and imperfect tillage which the
inhabitants bestow on those patches which they
bring under cultivation, is capable of maintain-
ing a populating vastly greater than the present
number.
The geological features of one cluster of islands


are, in many points, common to all. There are,
however, varieties peculiar to each group or
cluster, and the natural history of eastern Poly-
nesia, notwithstanding its inferiority in some
respects to that of other countries, in its general
characteristics and phenomena, possess greater
beauties and wonders than are perhaps to be found
in any other equal portions of the globe. Without
referring to its charming and diversified sea views,
which everywhere increase the attractions of its
shores, the luxuriance, verdure, rich and varied
beauty of its lakes and highland scenery, the
sublime elevation of many of the Polynesian
mountains, its grottoes and caverns, equal almost
to any with which we are yet acquainted, its
precipices and cataracts, and the grand and
appalling exhibitions of volcanic agency, are such
as excite emotions of astonishment and awe.
The natural history of eastern Polynesia, though
presenting less variety than is to be found in the
continental portions of the globe, is interesting
and valuable. The animals, originally few, com-
prise the swine, the dog, the cat, and rat, all of
which were formerly, and in some places still are,
used as articles of food, especially in the Hervey
Islands. In one of the latter* islands, where the
rats were exceedingly troublesome, the missionary
directed the natives to destroy them, and they
soon brought about thirty baskets full, each basket
was supposed to hold between two and three
hundred; but this produced no visible diminution
of their numbers.
To the quadrupeds originally found in the
* Rarotonga.


islands, horses, asses, oxen, goals, and sheep, have
been added, and, with the exception of the latter,
appear to thrive remarkably well.
The fish that people the waters of the ocean
surrounding their shores, and swarm in their
extensive lakes and inland streams, are diversified,
abundant, and many of them exceedingly valuable.
Numbers of whales are taken in the vicinity of the
islands, and yield a just and abundant reward for
the toils and perils of the adventurous fishermen,
w hose success, it is hoped, will ultimately stimulate
the natives to engage in the fishery. Turtle, of
excellent quality, abounds among the low islands.
Bech le mer, so highly prized by the epicures of
China, pearls, and mother-of-pearl shells, espe-
cially the latter, are becoming, in an increasing
degree, articles of advantageous commerce.
Among the limited variety which prevails in
the feathered tribes originally found in the islands,
there were several kinds of parroquets and pigeons,
numerous aquatic birds, wild geese, wild ducks, and
the common domestic fowl. To these, in some of
the islands, the Muscovy duck and turkey have
been added, and are now plentiful.
But it is in vegetable productions that the
variety, beauty, and profusion of the Creator’s
bounty is the most conspicuous. These compre-
hend the stately and prolific bread-fruit tree, the
graceful and perennial cocoa-nut, the rich and
mellow plantain, the juicy and nutritious sugar-
cane, the farinacious arum esculentum, the
agreeable and nutritious yam; to which have been
added, the orange, the lemon, pine-apple, the
grape, the melon, the custard-apple, and a num-
ber of the valuable roots and vegetables of the


more temperate climates. The large and excel-
lent pine timber, and the valuable flax of New
Zealand, the odoriferous sandal wood of the Fijis,
Sandwich, and other islands, are among the
natural productions most important to commerce
that have been discovered in the Pacific. They
are, however, to the inhabitants of these beautiful
islands, greatly inferior in value to the bread-fruit,
the cocoa-nut, and some other vegetables, of
which a short account will be both interesting and
instructive.
The tree is large and umbrageous; the bark is
light-coloured and rough; the trunk is sometimes
two or three feet in diameter, and rises from
twelve to twenty feet without a branch. The
outline of the tree is remarkably beautiful, the
leaves are broad, and indented somewhat like
those of the fig-tree, frequently twelve or eighteen
inches long, and rather thick, of a dark green
colour, with a surface glossy as that of the richest
evergreen.
The fruit is generally circular or oval, and is,
on an average, six inches in diameter; it is
covered with a roughish rind, which is marked
with small square or lozenge-shaped divisions,
having each a small elevation in the centre, and is
at first of a light pea-green colour; subsequently
it changes to brown, and, when fully ripe, assumes
a rich yellow tinge. It is attached to the small
branches of the tree by a short thick stalk, and
hangs either singly or in clusters of two or three
together. The pulp is soft; in the centre there is
a hard kind of core extending from the stalk to
the crown, around which a few imperfect seeds are
formed.


There is nothing very pleasing in the blossom;
but a stately tree, clothed with dark shining
leaves, and loaded with many hundreds of large
light green or yellowish coloured fruit, is one of
the most splendid and beautiful objects to be met
with among the rich and diversified scenery of a
Tahitian landscape. Two or three of these trees
are often seen growing around a rustic cottage,
and embowering it with their interwoven and
prolific branches. The tree is propagated by
shoots from the root; it bears in about five years,
and will probably continue bearing fifty or sixty.
The bread-fruit is never eaten raw, except by
pigs; the natives have several different methods
of dressing it. When travelling on a journey,
they often roast it in the flame or embers of a
wood-fire ; and, peeling off the rind, eat the fruit;
this mode of dressing is called " tunu pa,” crust or
shell roasting. Sometimes, when thus dressed, it
is immersed in a stream of water, and, when
completely saturated, forms a soft, sw r eet, spongy
pul]), or sort of paste, of which the natives are
exceedingly fond; but the general way of dressing
the bread-fruit is by baking it in an oven of
heated stones. When the pieces of bread-fruit are
taken out, the outsides are brown, and the inner
part presents a white or yellowish, cellular, pulpy
substance, in appearance slightly resembling the
crumb of a wheaten loaf. Its colour, size, and
structure are, however, the only resemblance it
has to bread. It has but little taste, and that is
frequently rather sweet; it is somewhat fari-
naceous, but not so much so as several other
vegetables, and probably less so than the Eng-
lish potatoe. As a vegetable it is good, but to


Europeans is a very indifferent substitute for Eng-
lish bread.
To the natives of the South Sea Islands it is
the principal article of diet, and may indeed be
called their staff of life. They are exceedingly
fond of it, and it is evidently nutritive, as an
improvement is often manifest in the appearance
of many of the people a few weeks after the bread-
fruit season has commenced. For the chiefs it is
usually dressed two or three times a day; but for
the peasantry, &c. seldom more than once during
the same period.
The tree on which the bread-fruit grows,
besides producing two, and often three crops in
a year, yields a valuable gum, or resin, which
exudes from the bark, when punctured, in a thick
mucilaginous fluid; it is hardened by exposure
to the sun, and is serviceable in rendering water-
tight the seams of their canoes. The bark of the
young branches is used in making several varieties
of native cloth. The trunk of the tree also
furnishes one of the most valuable kinds of timber
which the natives possess. It is of a rich yellow
colour, and assumes, from the effects of the air,
the appearance of mahogany; it is not tough, but
durable, when not exposed to the weather.
It is probable, that, in no group of the Pacific
Islands, is there a greater variety in the kinds of
this valuable fruit than in the South Sea Islands.
The several varieties ripen at different seasons,
and the same kinds also come to perfection at an
earlier period in one part of Tahiti than in
another; so that there are but few months in the
year in which ripe fruit is not to be found in the
several parts of this island. The missionaries are


acquainted with nearly fifty varieties, for which
the natives have distinct names ; the principal are
the paea, artocarpus incisa, and the uru maohe,
artocarpus integrifolia.
Whether we regard the richness and beauty the
bread-fruit tree imparts to the scenery in which it
appears, the spontaneous luxuriance of its growth,
the abundance of its fruit, the rapidity with which
its crops succeed each other, or the suitable,
pleasant, and nutritious food it supplies to the
islander, it is scarcely possible for a Christian to
behold it without increasing convictions of the
wisdom and benevolence of the Most High, and
without fresh excitements to praise Him who
* causeth the earth to bring forth and to bud, that
it may give seed to the sower and bread to the
eater; and who crowneth the year with his good-
ness.^
Next to the bread-fruit tree the cocoa-nut is one
of the most useful and ornamental in the islands,
imparting to the landscape, in which, wherever it
prevails, it is remarkably conspicuous, all the
richness and peculiar characteristics of inter-
tropical verdure.
The stem of the cocoa-nut tree is perfectly
round, three or four feet in diameter at the roots,
very gradually tapering to the top, where it is not
more than four or six inches in thickness. From
the foot to the top it presents one single stem,
formed of a vast number of hollow reeds, united
by a resinous pith, and enclosed in a rugged,
brittle, and exceedingly hard bark. The tree
produces no branches, and the stem is leafless,
excepting at the top, where a beautiful crown or
tuft of long green leaves appears, like a gracefu
G


plume waving in the gale or quivering in the fitful
breeze.
After the growth of five or six years, when the
stem of a young cocoa-nut tree is seven or eight
feet high, the first fruit appears, and the tree
continues to hear fifty or sixty years. This tree,
though so slender and elegant in its form, and
delicious in its fruit, is one of the most hardy in
the islands, and seems to grow equally well in the
rich mellow bottoms of the valleys, on the brows
of the low hut comparatively sterile hills, and the
barren sands on the sea-shore, where its roots,
insinuating themselves among the fragments of
coral rock, are washed by every rising tide.
The trunk of the tree is used for a variety of
purposes; the best spears formerly used by the
natives were made of the cocoa-nut stem : some of
the most important parts of their large houses
were of the same material. Their drum, in
some islands, is made of its trunk, as also the
implements for preparing the bread-fruit for the
oven; the rollers for their boats or canoes, as well
as their most durable fences, are of cocoa-nut
wood, which, besides being a valuable article of
fuel, makes the best substitute for coal in all their
labours ,at the forge. The leaves 'are strong
stalks, twelve or fifteen feet long, with a number
of long narrow-pointed leaflets ranged alternately
on opposite sides. The leaf, as cut from the tree,
or manufactured into baskets, matting, &c. is
applied to a number of valuable purposes, besides
being the symbol of power, and carried by the
king’s messenger, when he delivers to the chiefs
the orders of his sovereign. In several of their
idolatrous ceremonies they were also used.


Through the cocoa-nut leaf which tied the offering or
animal presented in sacrifice the god was supposed
to enter, and cocoa-nut leaves, attached to those
who were afflicted with diseases, formed the
pathway hy which evil spirits were supposed to
leave those whom they had been tormenting.
Bunches or strings of the cocoa-nut leaf were also,
on certain occasions, suspended in the temples,
answering the purpose of beads in the papal
worship, namely, reminding the worshipper of the
order of his prayers.
The long leaves of the cocoa-nut, frequently
twelve feet in length, attached to the trunk of the
tree, and exposed to the force of the wind at an
elevation often of eighty or ninety feet, and thus
far above the support or shelter of the ordinary
trees of the island, are secured hy a wonderful and
curious provision of nature. A remarkably strong
fibrous matting, attached to the bark below the
insertion of the stalk of the leaf, extending half-
way round the trunk, and reaching perhaps two or
three feet up the leaf, like a bracing net-work on
each side of the stalk, keeps it firmly attached to
the trunk of the tree. While the leaf is young
this substance is transparent, and resembles fine
silver paper; but, as the growth of the leaf
proceeds, it becomes yellow, coarse, and strong.
There is a kind of seam along the centre, exactly
under the stem of the leafi from both sides of
which long and tough fibres, about the size of a
bristle, regularly diverge in an oblique direction.
Sometimes there appear to be two layers of fibres,
which cross each other, and the whole is cemented
with a still finer fibrous and adhesive substance.
The length and evenness of the threads or fibres,


the regular manner in which they cross each
other at oblique angles, the extent of surface, and
the thickness of the piece, corresponding with
that of coarse cotton cloth, the singular manner in
which the fibres are attached to each other, cause
this curious substance, woven in the loom of
nature, to present to the eye a remarkable
resemblance to cloth spun and woven by human
ingenuity. This singular fibrous matting is taken
by the natives, in pieces two or three feet wide,
and used as wrappings for their arrow-root, or
made into bags. It is also occasionally employed
in preparing articles of clothing.
Jackets, coats, and even shirts are made with
the " aa,” though the coarsest linen cloth would
be much more soft and flexible. To these shirts
the natives generally fix a cotton collar and
wristbands, and seem to suffer but little irrita-
tion from its wiry texture. It is a favourite
dress with the fishermen and others occupied
on the sea. The fruit, however, is the most
valuable part of this serviceable, hardy, and
beautiful plant. The flowers are small and white,
insignificant when compared with the size of the
tree or the fruit. They are ranged along the
sides of a tough, succulent, branching stalk,
surrounded by a sheath, which the natives call
“ aroe,” and are fixed to the trunk of the tree
immediately above the bottom of the leaf. Fruit
in every stage, from the first fonnation after the
falling of the blossom, to the hard, dry, ripe, and
full-grown nut, that has almost begun to germi-
nate, may be seen at one time on the same tree;
and frequently fruit, in several distinct stages on
the same bunch, attached to the trunk of the


same stalk. The tree is slow in growth, and the
fruit does not probably come to perfection in less
than twelve months after the blossoms have fallen.
A bunch will sometimes contain twenty or thirty
nuts, and there are perhaps six or seven bunches
on the tree at a time. Each nut is surrounded
by a thick and fibrous husk, in some parts two
inches thick; and when it has reached its full
size, it contains, in a soft white shell, a pint or
a pint and a half of the juice, usually called
cocoa-nut milk. There is, at this time, no pulp
whatever on the inside of the shell. In this stage
of its growth the nut is called “ oua,” and the
liquid is preferred to that found in the nut in any
other state. It is perfectly clear, and in taste
possesses a degree both of acidity and sweetness,
which renders it equal to lemonade. No accurate
idea of the consistence and taste of the juice of
the cocoa-nut can be formed from that found in
the nuts brought to England. These are old and
dry, and the fluid comparatively rancid : in this
state they are never used by the natives, except
for the purpose of planting or extracting oil.
The shell of the oua, or young cocoa-nut, is used
medicinally. In a few weeks after the nut has
reached its full size, a soft, white pulp, remarkably
delicate and sweet, resembling in consistence and
appearance the white of a slightly boiled egg, is
formed around the inside of the shell. In this
state it is called “ niaa,” and is eaten by the chiefs
as an article of luxury, and is used in preparing
many of what may be called the made-dishes of
Tahitian banquets. After remaining a month or
six weeks longer, the pulp on the inside becomes
much firmer, and rather more than half an inch
c 3


in thickness. The juice assumes a whitish colour
and a sharper taste. If it hang two or three
months longer on the tree, the outside skin be-
comes yellow and brown, the shell hardens, the
kernel "increases to an inch, or an inch and a
quarter in thickness, and the liquid is reduced to
less than half a pint. It is now called “ opad,” and,
after hanging some months on the tree, falls to
the ground. The hard nut is sometimes broken
in two and boiled, or eaten as taken from the tiee,
but it is generally used in making oil. If the
cocoa-nut be kept long after it is fully ripe, a
sweet, white, spongy substance is formed in the
inside, originating at the inner end of the germ,
which is enclosed in the kernel, immediately
opposite one of the three apertures, 01 es, in the
sharpest end of the shell, which is opposite to that
where the stalk is united to the husk. This
fibrous sponge ultimately absorbs the water and
fills the concavity, dissolving the hard kernel, and
combining it with its own substance, so that the
shell, instead of containing a kernel and milk,
encloses only a soft cellular substance. While
this truly wonderful process is going on within
the nut, a single bud or shoot, of a white colour
but hard texture, forces its way through one of
the holes in the shell, perforates the tough fibrous
husk, and, after rising some inches, begins to
unfold its pale green leaves to the light and the
air. At this time, also, two thick white fibres,
originating at the same point, push away the
stoppers or coverings from the other two holes in
the shell, pierce the husks in an opposite direc-
tion, and finally penetrate to the ground.
If allowed to remain, the shell, which no kui(e


would cut, and which a saw would scarcely pene-
trate, is burst by an expansive power generated
within itself; the husk and shell gradually decay,
and, forming a light manure, facilitate the growth
of the young plant, which gradually strikes its
roots deeper, elevates its stalk, and expands its
leaves, till it becomes a lofty, fruitful, and elegant
tree. The juice of the nuts growing on the sea-
shore does not appear to partake, in any degree,
of the saline property of the water that must
constantly moisten the roots of the tree. The
milk of the nuts from the sandy beach or rocky
mountain, is often as sweet and as rich as that
grown in the most fertile parts of the valley.
The cocoa-nut trees are remarkably high, some-
times sixty or seventy feet, with only a tuft of
leaves, and a number of bunches of fruit, on the
top ; yet the natives gather the fruit with com-
parative ease. A little boy strips off a piece of
bark from a purau, branch, and fastens it round
his feet, leaving a space of four or five inches
between them, and then, clasping the tree, he
vaults up its trunk with greater agility and ease,
than a European could a ladder to an equal
elevation. When they gather a bunch at a time,
they lower them down by a rope; but when they
pluck the fruit singly, they cast them on the
ground. In throwing down the nuts they give
them a whirling motion, that they may fall on the
point, and not on the side, whereby they would
be likely to burst. Cocoa-nuts were fonnerly a
considerable article of food among the common
people, and were used with profusion on every
feast of the chiefs; but for some years past they
have been preserved, and allowed to ripen on the


tree, for the purpose of preparing oil, which has
recently become an article of exportation, although
the value is so small as to allow hut little en-
couragement to its extended manufacture.
In addition to these advantages, the shells of
the large old cocoa-nuts are used as water-bottles,
the largest of which will hold a quart; they are
of a black colour, often highly polished, and, with
care, will last for many years. All the cups and
drinking vessels of the natives are made with
shells of the cocoa-nuts, usually of the omoto,
which is of a yellowish colour. It is scraped very
thin, and is often slightly transparent. Their ava
cups were generally carved with a variety of
devices, but the Tahitians did not excel in
carving. The fibres of the husks are separated
from the pulp by soaking them in water, and are
used in making various kinds of cinet and cordage,
especially a valuable coiar rope.
More rich and sweet to the taste, though far
less serviceable as an article of food, is the maia,
plantain, and banana, musa paradisaica, and
musa sapientum . These are also indigenous,
though generally cultivated in the native gardens.
They are a rich nutritive fruit, common within the
tropics, and so generally known as to need no
particular description here. There are not, per-
haps, fewer than thirty varieties cultivated by the
natives, besides twenty kinds that are large and
serviceable, growing wild on the mountains.
The orea, or maiden plantain, with the other
varieties, comes to the highest perfection in the
South Sea islands, and is a delicious fruit. The
stalk or tree on which these fruits grow, is seldom
above eight or twelve feet high; the leaves are fine


broad specimens of the luxuriance of tropical
vegetation, being frequently twelve or sixteen feet
long, eighteen inches or two feet wide, of a
beautiful pea-green colour when fresh, and a rich
bright yellow when dry. The fruit is about nine
inches long, and in shape somewhat like a cu-
cumber, excepting that the angles are frequently
well defined, which gives to the fruit, when ripe,
the appearance of a triangular or quadrangular
prism, of a bright, yet delicate yellow colour.
Sixty or seventy single fruit are occasionally
attached to one stalk. Each plantain stem, or
tree, produces only one bunch of fruit; and when
the fruit is ripe it is cut down, and its place
supplied by the sucker that rise around the root
whence it originally sprung. If the suckers, or
offsets, be four or five feet high when the parent
stem is cut down, they will bear in about twelve
months. The fruit is not often allowed to ripen
on the trees, but it is generally cut down as soon
as it has reached its full size, and while yet
green; the bunch is then hung up in the native
houses to ripen, and is eaten as the fruit turns
yellow. When they wish to accelerate their ripe-
ness for a public entertainment, they cut them
down green, wrap them in leaves, and bury them
thirty-six or forty-eight hours in the earth; and on
taking them out they are quite soft, and appa-
rently ripe, but much more insipid than those
which have gradually ripened on the tree, or even
in the house. The kind growing in the moun-
tains are large, and though rich and agreeable
when baked, are most unpalatable when raw; they
have a red skin, and a bright yellow pulp. Their
native name is fei; their mode of growth is


singular; for while the fruit of all the other
varieties is pendant from the stem, this rises erect
from a short thick stalk in the centre of the crown
or tuft of leaves at the top. In several of these
islands the fei is the principal support of the
inhabitants. The plantain is a fruit that is always
acceptable, and resembles in flavour a soft, sweet,
but not juicy, pear.
CHAPTER II.
Peculiarities of the various Tribes inhabiting the
Islands of the Pacific. — Physical, intellectual,
and moral Character of the South Sea
Islanders. —Feelings of Sympathy excited in
their behalf. —Formation of the Missionary
Society. — The broad, catholic Principles of its
Founders.—Appointment and Departure of the
Ship Duff, with the first Mission to the South
Seas.—Sentiments and Feelings of the Mission-
aries.—Arrival at Tahiti.—Reception of the
Missionaries by the King and Chiefs. — Tem-
porary Accommodations provided. —Grant of
Land for the permanent Support of the Mis-
sion.—Ordination of Missionaries for other
Islands. —Establishment of the Monthly Mis-
sionary Prayer Meeting. —Probable Causes of
the favourable Reception of the Mission.
The South Sea islands are inhabited by tribes
differing essentially from the aborigines of New
Guinea, and the larger islands of the Asiatic


Archipelago. The inhabitants of the several clus-
ters differ in many respects from each other, though
they possess a striking physical resemblance, a
similarity of language, religion and institutions,
and usages, and are evidently derived from one
common source.
Generally speaking, the South Sea islanders are
above the middle stature, and in habits of body are
rather corpulent than the contrary. The females
in most of the islands are taller and stouter than
those of Europe.
The New Zealander is the most gigantic in
stature and muscular in frame, and may be justly
regarded as the most robust and hardy of the
oceanic race. Scarcely inferior in stature, the
Sandwich islander approaches nearest to the New
Zealander in vigour and strength. The Friendly
islander is patient and laborious. The inhabitants
of Rarotonga and the Hervey Islands are inferior
in stature to most in the Pacific, but are indus-
trious and persevering. The Tahitians nearly, if
not altogether, equal in size to the more hardy
inhabitants of the northern and southern boun-
daries of Polynesia, are greatly inferior to them
in energy, labour, and perseverance. They arc
the most corpulent and indolent race in the South
Seas, which may perhaps be the effect of the
extreme salubrity of their climate, the fertility of
their soil, and the abundant supply of provision
it spontaneously yields, which has rendered them
enervated, voluptuous, and naturally inactive. The
inhabitants of the Paumotus, or dangerous archi-
pelago, are taller than the Tahitians, less corpu-
lent, equally indolent, but more robust and hardy.
The Marquesans are in every respect an


interesting, and in several respects a peculiar
people. By some they have, from their volatile
and sportive disposition, been characterized as the
Frenchmen of the Pacific. They are with pro-
priety ranked among the most handsome portions
of the human family. It is not possible to
imagine greater symmetry of form, and graceful-
ness, and beauty, and dignity of movement, and of
figure, than many of them exhibit. The wide,
extended diversity which exists in the human
race, does not present more striking contrasts than
are to be met with among them; for it is scarcely
possible to behold more perfect models of personal
loveliness and beauty, or practices more revolt-
ingly cruel and barbarous, than those to which
they are frequently addicted. To say nothing of
their other enormities, cannibalism prevails among
them to an affecting extent, and is practised
under circumstances peculiarly degrading and
savage.
In respect to the islanders generally, it may be
observed, that their limbs are muscular and well
formed, their gait and actions free, and often
exceedingly graceful. Their countenances are
open and prepossessing, exhibiting the peculiari-
ties of each respective tribe, and their features
having little in common with those of the African,
but often bearing a strong resemblance to those of
the European. Their complexions present every
variety of shade, from a light brown or yellow, to a
dark olive, and occasionally a black. Their teeth
are good, their hair long, and frequently curling,
presenting very rarely any approximation to the
crisped or woolly hair of the natives of New
Holland or New Guinea.


We have as yet no means of forming any thing
approximating to a correct estimate of the total
amount of population, but, according to the lowest
computation, the inhabitants of the islands now
under consideration must be considerably above a
million.
The intellectual faculties of the islanders do not
appear to be naturally inferior in any respect to
those of the inhabitants of other parts of the
world. Total strangers to all knowledge of
letters, as they necessarily were, and conse-
quently destitute of the means of mental cul-
ture, the copiousness, and, in* many points, high
degree of perfection in their language, their
traditions and legends, their songs and mytho-
logy, their extensive and methodical use of
numbers, together with the great natural shrewd-
ness which they frequently exhibit in their in-
tercourse with more intelligent foreigners, lead
us to conclude that they are capable of high
attainments, if favoured with the means of im-
provement.
Their dispositions are in some respects amiable,
but generally the reverse; and though a descrip-
tion of one tribe would in general be applicable to
all, yet some, in their dispositions, are much more
agreeable than others. The New Zealanders are
bold and daring, frequently open and candid, but
treacherous, revengeful, proud, and cruel. The
Friendly Islanders are said to be less adventurous
than the New Zealanders, less daring and bold,
but treacherous and unrelenting in their bar-
barities. The Tahitians, though courteous, bland,
and engaging in tht?ir manners, are fickle, proud,
indolent, deceitful, and deliberately barbarous.
D


The Marquesang are volatile, sportive, restless,
turbulent, fierce, and savage. The Sandwich
islanders are, probably, more sincere and upright;
they are rugged in their manners, revengeful in
malice, implacable, and resolute. All delight in
war, in its most horrid and sanguinary forms; all
were formerly addicted to theft, familiar with mur-
der, and, in religion or war, brutally licentious.
Most of them sought to propitiate their imaginary
deities with human victims, while the New Zea-
landers, the Marquesans, and some others, were
amongst the most savage and voracious cannibals
in the world.
These, and other repulsive features of character,
were but partially discerned by their discoverers
and early visitors, while many of their most
revolting and barbarous usages were entirely con-
cealed from the necessarily superficial observation
of those by whom they were first visited. The
early voyagers, after the loneliness of their course
across the vast extent of the Pacific, and the
privations and exposure to the diseases incident to
long voyages in the earlier periods of our maritime
history, were charmed by the appearance of these
blooming islands in the solitudes of the ocean.
The bold and varied attractiveness of their scenery,
the richness of their verdure, the salubrity of their
atmosphere, the refreshing purity of their streams,
the abundance of refreshments obtained, so grate-
ful and congenial to men who had long been
reduced to the crude provisions of their vessels,
could not fail to make a favourable impression on
their minds.
There was also, in regard to the inhabitants of
several of the groups of islands, every thing that


could heighten the charms of novelty. This,
together with their desire to gratify their friends
by every means within their reach, their unre-
strained licentiousness, which did not render them
less commendable in the estimation of many by
whom they were visited, combined to induce the
latter to consider them as among the most favoured
of mankind.
These impressions gave a tone and a colouring
to their accounts, which were sought with avidity,
and perused with an intensity of interest, that was
adapted to perpetuate the impressions first received.
The interest excited was almost as universal as it
was powerful, and gave rise to a number of golden
dreams and extensive speculations, which issued
in disappointment, and, in many instances, in dis-
tress bordering upon ruin.
By degrees the excitement of novelty had sub-
sided, the plans for promoting the interest of science
had been accomplished, the schemes for lucrative
commerce and the speedy accumulation of riches
had produced only actual and extensive loss; the
interest of the public was excited by other objects,
its expectations derived from other sources, and
the remote and insulated tribes inhabiting the
islands of the Pacific were all but consigned to
oblivious neglect. But, in common with those of
others, the feelings of the religious portion of the
inhabitants of Britain had been excited in their
behalf, and the interest they felt suggested the in-
quiry, whether it would not be practicable to com-
municate to them the knowledge of the gospel. A
plan for effecting this was shortly afterwards devised,
by some zealous and devoted Christians connected
with the late countess of Huntingdon’s connexion,


who prepared to send out missionaries with captain
Bligh, who proceeded a second time, in the close
of 1791, to Tahiti, in a ship called the Providence,
for the pin-pose of conveying plants of the bread-
fruit tree from Tahiti to the West India islands.
But the defection of those appointed to the work
frustrated the benevolent design of its projectors,
and it was for a time abandoned. The bread-fruit
tree was carried to the West Indies, but the seeds
of the tree of life were withheld from the islands
of the South.
The commencement of the Baptist mission, in
1792, had excited the minds of modern Christians
to the duty of proclaiming the unsearchable riches
of Christ to the perishing heathen. In 1794 the
attention of the religious portion of the community
was again called to the subject by writers in the
Evangelical Magazine, and the publication of let-
ters on missions by the Rev. Melville Horne,
which, by tbe Divine blessing, led to the formation
of the Missionary Society, now designated, not from
any modification of its original constitution or ob-
ject, but to distinguish it from other and kindred
associations, that have since been established, the
Rendon Missionary Society. This institution was
commenced on the most liberal principles, and com-
bined among its directors and supporters many pious
and excellent clergymen, also ministers and laymen
of various denominations, who associated for the
simple but sublime purpose of sending the gospel
to heathen and unenlightened nations. Speaking of
the design of the institution, and the principles on
which they proposed to carry forward their opera-
tions, its founders observe, it “proposes, as its first
object, the Divine glory, and the salvation, temporal


and eternal, of those whom hitherto no man hath
cared for. Names, sects, and parties, have no
place among us, we mean nothing political, partial,
or exclusive. One is our Master, even Christ;
we desire to know and teach nothing but him cru-
cified ; to interfere in no contest, to disturb no
government established, or introduce any peculiar
modes of religious worship, but to leave every man
to his books of truth for his guide, in the spirit of
meekness; to unite in one centre Jesus Christ,
the same yesterday, to-day, and for ever; and to
love one another out of a pure heart fervently ,**
At the first general public meeting of this so-
ciety, which was held in September, 1795, it was
determined that the first endeavour of the society
should be to convey the knowledge of Christianity
to the inhabitants of the South Sea Islands, to
whose circumstances a large measure of public at-
tention had been for some time past directed; and
whatever opinions might at the time be entertained
in respect to this proceeding, subsequent events
warrant the inference that it was according to the
will of God.
At this time, an individual eminently qualified
by knowledge, experience, piety, and devotedness
to the cause of the Redeemer, was led to offer his
services to the society to convey the missionaries
to their distant field of labour, and, as far as prac-
ticable, carry the views of the society into effect.
This was captain James Wilson, whose varied
service, peculiar hardships, and perilous career in
India, had rendered him remarkably fitted for the
important and benevolent enterprize now contem-
plated. A ship, called the Duff, was purchased
for £5,000. and the requisite preparations were
d 3


commenced. These being completed, and all the
stores on board, a solemn designation of the mis-
sionaries to their office was made, and the evening
preceding their embarkation the directors met the
missionaries, and celebrated their last happy com-
munion together in the fullest confidence of shortly
meeting again in the presence of God and of the
Lamb ; and of enjoying eternal fellowship with
Jesus the Mediator, and the spirits of all just men
made perfect.
The missionaries, thirty in number, of whom six
were married, and accompanied by their wives,
embarked at London, early in the morning of the
10th of August, 1796. The morning was serene,
the bustle of the day had scarcely commenced
among the boats and vessels on the Thames, and
the external tranquillity was favourable to the in-
dulgence of the feelings which the whole scene
excited. The missionary flag, which was of purple,
with three silver doves, each bearing an olive-branch,
was unfurled at the mizen top-gallant-mast head;
and, as the vessel moved down the river, the hymn,
“Jesus, at thy command we launch into the deep,” &c.
sung by upwards of a hundred voices, produced a
pleasing and solemn effect. The singing of this
Christian band roused those on board the ships on
either side of their way, and, as they passed, the
sailors in the ships listened with silent astonish-
ment, while their friends, who lined the banks of
the river, waved their hands, and bade them a long
and last adieu.
Circumstances over which they had no control
detained them a considerable time at Portsmouth,
and during this period one of the missionaries.


partly on account of the illness of his wife, re-
turned to the shore, but the rest, supported and
encouraged by reliance on the Divine protection,
guidance, and bounty, and greatly encouraged by
the affection, sympathy, interest, and prayers of
multitudes of the people of God whom they left
behind, sailed from their native land on the 23d of
September.
The comprehensive views of the society, as ex-
pressed in the resolution of their first general meet-
ing, were, “ That a mission be undertaken to
Otaheite, the Friendly Islands, the Marquesas,
the Sandwich, and the Pelew Islands, as far as may
be practicable and expedient.” The carrying of
this into effect was confided, under God, to the
pious and experienced commander to whom the
directors wrote in their instructions, “ It is in-
deed desirable to introduce the gospel into several
islands ; but it is necessary, if possible, to establish
it in one ; for if you concentrate your exertions,
and gain a solid establishment in one place, it
may become the germ of other missionary efforts,
and be a sacred leaven which may gradually spread
its beneficial influence through numerous and dis-
tant islands of the South Seas. ,,
Harmony and affection prevailed among the
missionaries on board during the period of the
reluctant detention at Portsmouth, and they were
greatly encouraged by the sympathy and kindness
of the friends who visited them. Before their de-
parture, they addressed the following letter to the
directors:—
“ Brethren, —We the missionaries, whom you,
under the influence of our common Saviour, Lord
and Master, Jesus Christ, the only-begotten Son


of the eternal Jehovah, have been instrumental in
bringing together, uniting in one body, and every
way furnishing with all temporal necessaries for
the arduous undertaking we have in hand, cannot
bid adieu to our native country, and dear brethren
in Christ, without laying before the directors of
the society, (with the desire the same may be com-
municated to all whom it may concern), our views
and feelings upon our present situation and future
prospects.
“ Having, through grace, overcome the disagree-
ableness which we at first experienced on our em-
barkation, arising from our little acquaintance with
each other, change in our habitation, and manner
of living, we find our minds composed and re-
signed, and our hearts more closely united to each
other in the bonds of love.
On looking forward to the length of our voyage,
and deliberating on all the dangers and difficulties
which those who traverse the bosom of the mighty
deep are exposed to and frequently meet with, we
are by no means discouraged, but can cheerfully
give ourselves up unto Him who holdeth the winds
in his fist, and the waters in the hollow of his
hand.
“ When we extend our view across the great
Atlantic Ocean, and contemplate the more southern
sea; when, in our imagination, we conceive our-
selves landed on our destined islands, surrounded
by multitudes of the inhabitants, earnestly in-
quiring, From whence do you come ? and what is
your errand ? we answer. From a distant shore;
the friends of God and human kind, touched with
compassion at your unhappy state, as represented
by our countrymen who formerly have visited you.


moved by the Spirit of God, we have forsaken
relatives and friends, braved storms and tempests,
to teach you the knowledge of Jesus, whom to
know is eternal life. Though Satan and all the
host of hell should be stung with indignation and
resentment at our boldness in the Lord, and fire
the hearts of their deluded votaries with all the
fury and madness which brutal ignorance and
savage cruelty are capable of; though our God,
in whose name we go, our Saviour, by whose rich
grace we are redeemed, should deliver us up to
their rage, and permit our bodies to be afflicted,
yea, persecuted unto death, yet trusting in the
faithfulness of the Most High, the goodness of our
cause, the uprightness of our intentions, the fer-
vency of our affection for Christ our Head, and the
elect of God, our hearts remain undaunted ; and,
being bv Divine grace enlisted under the banner of
the great Captain of our salvation, we are desirous
to be accounted worthy to suffer for his sake, and to
endure hardship as becometh good soldiers of Christ.
“ Such, honoured brethren and fathers in Christ,
are our present feelings, which we hope, through
your united prayers and the supply of the Spirit
of Jesus Christ, our Lord and your Lord, our God
and your God, we shall never, never lose.
“ To you, and all who have contributed towards
our going forth, we render unfeigned thanks; and
our prayers are, that the most high God may
grant you occasion to rejoice in Jesus Christ on
our behalf, to whose grace we humbly and heartily
commend you, most respectfully and affectionately
bidding you —Farewell!
“ By order of the missionaries,
“LOHN JEFFERSON, Secretary,”


Captain Wilson intended to pass by Cape Horn
into the Pacific Ocean, but on approaching the
southern extremity of the American continent, the
long prevalence of contrary winds and tempestuous
weather obliged him to relinquish his design, and
direct his course across the Atlantic and the Indian
Oceans to the South Sea, by way of the Cape of
Good Hope and New Zealand. Though they were
thus detained much longer at sea than was ex-
pected, their voyage was generally pleasant, and
they safely reached the shores of Tahiti in less
than six months after their departure from Eng-
land.
During the voyage the missionaries had been
diligently employed in preparing themselves, as far
as practicable, for their important work, by in-
creasing their acquaintance with the holy scrip-
tures, studying the languages from such aids as
they had been able to obtain before leaving Eng-
land, and maturing their plans for commencing
and pursuing their labours. It had been decided
by the captain and missionaries, during the voyage,
that they should attempt to secure a residence
among three of the principal clusters of islands in the
Southern Pacific, namely, Tahiti, the Friendly Is-
lands in the west, and the Marquesas in the east. It
was deemed advisable that the largest number should
settle in Tahiti, as that had been the first object
of the Society’s attention, and might be expected
to become the centre of their future proceedings.
As they approached the scenes of their future
labours, the missionaries, after seeking the Divine
direction, and freely deliberating, in the spirit of
brotherly kindness and harmony, as to the stations
which, so far as their information enabled them to


judge, they could respectively fill with the greatest
prospects of accomplishing the ultimate object of
their mission, it was arranged that, to the four or-
dained ministers and fourteen of the unmarried
brethren, should be confided the establishment and
prosecution of the mission in Tahiti; that ten should
endeavour to effect a settlement at Tongatabu, in
the Friendly Islands, and two should proceed to the
Marquesas. According to this arrangement, the
mission to Tahiti was composed of the Rev. Messrs.
J. F. Cover, John Eyre, John Jefferson, and Tho-
mas Lewis; Messrs. Henry Bicknell, Benjamin
Broomhall, John Cock, Samuel Clode, John A.
Gilham, (surgeon,) William Henry, Peter Hodges,
Rowland Hassall, Edward Main, Henry Nott,
Francis Oakes, James Puckey, William Puckey,
William Smith. As it was intended that the first
attempt to introduce the gospel to the heathen
should be made at Tahiti, the brethren thus ap-
pointed made every possible preparation for enter-
ing upon their labours as soon as the vessel should
reach her destination.
On the morning of the 4th of March they be-
held the long desired island of Tahiti at a great
distance, and late in the evening approached within
a few miles of the reefs which guard its south-
western shores. Their feelings at this season may
be more easily conceived than described. On the
morning of the next day, which was the sabbath,
as the ship pursued her way between Tahiti and
Eimeo, multitudes of the natives thronged the
vessel for the purpose of gratifying their curiosity,
bartering their hogs and fruits, or for other pur-
poses for which they had been accustomed to


crowd the vessels that visited their shores. They
were made to understand, chiefly by signs, that it
was a tabu day on board, a day of the Atua of
their visitors, and all barter was refused; this, as
might be expected, excited some surprise and dis-
appointment, numbers went away, but about forty
remained on board, and, excepting their eagerness
to secure taios or friends among their visitors, oc-
casioned the crew and missionaries but little in-
convenience. In the forenoon all on board assem-
bled for their accustomed worship, as the ship was
steadily, though slowly, moving forward between
the verdant and mountainous islands of Tahiti, and
surrounded by scenes of natural beauty, scarcely,
if ever, surpassed; and probably of moral deformity
equal to any in the wide range of human weak-
ness and misery, they met to worship Him by
whose power a new moral creation shall arise in
the most degraded and unpromising portions of
the world. The service was commenced by sing-
ing—
“ O’er those gloomy hills of darkness,
Look, my soul, be still and gaze,
All the promises do travail
With a glorious day of grace.
Blessed jubilee,
Let thy glorious morning dawn.”
We have already seen that the missionaries left
their native land singing the praises of that Saviour,
at whose command they launched forth upon their
voyage to the distant heathen, and the promises of
his word thus cheered and animated them in the
prospect of that work, as they approached the land
of moral and spiritual death in which they were to


labour. The subject of discourse, " God is love,”
was appropriate, and its effect appeared deep and
salutary. The heathen spectators had often per-
haps heard the holy name of God uttered amidst
the imprecations of the profane and the jests of
the vile, but they now in all probability heard it
for the first time uttered with a sense of veneration,
which must have appeared strange to them. They
were silent and orderly during the reading and va-
rious devotional parts of the service, but the sing-
ing appeared to excite their astonishment and plea-
sure, the expression of which they could scarcely
restrain.
During the day the missionaries were visited by
two Europeans, natives of Sweden; one had left the
Deedalus, and the other had been about five years
before wrecked in the Matilda, on one of the low
islands in the neighbourhood. As these indivi-
duals spoke the English tolerably well, they de-
rived much information from them, as to the
changes that had taken place among the inha-
bitants of the islands since the departure of Cook,
Bligh,and other visitors, and their present circum-
stances. Their acquaintance with the language of
the islanders enabled them to make their inten-
tions and wishes more fully known to the king
and chiefs than they would otherwise have done,
and greatly facilitated the establishment of the
mission. These men were illiterate and profligate,
and afterwards proved very dangerous enemies to
the brethren, one of them at least having, as the
missionaries were informed by the king, frequently
counselled him to have them assassinated; and
having pointed out the season as they knelt in
family devotion, as the most favourable for


accomplishing the diabolical olject. But God, in
dependence on whose guardianship and care the
work had been begun, preserved the missionaries,
and allowed them to derive, in the period of their
greatest necessity, namely, on their first arrival,
considerable assistance in negociating with the
chiefs and commencing their mission.
About noon on the following day, the 6th
of March, they reached their destined port, and
anchored safely in Matavai Bay, at a distance of
about three-quarters of a mile from the shore. In
the afternoon, the captain and a member of the
mission landed, and were met on the beach by
Paitia, the aged chief of the district, who welcomed
them to the country, and informed them that a
large house which had been erected for the accom-
modation of captain Bligh, whose return they ex-
pected, should be cleared for their accommodation
on the following day. He then showed them the
picture of captain Cook, upon the back of which
were written the names of his Britanic majesty’s
ships and their commanders who had visited Ma-
tavai since the time of captain Cook.
On landing on the following day they were met
and welcomed by the young king, then called Otoo,
and his queen, to whom the captain, by means of
one of the Swedes as his interpreter, communicated
the design of his voyage, the purpose for which the
missionaries had been sent, and solicited his pro-
mise of protection in the free pursuit of their ob-
ject, and so much land as would be sufficient for
their dwellings and a garden. To this the king
consented, informing them that the large house
was theirs, and they might take as much land as
they required. The young king, in whose name


the government was conducted by his father,
as regent, was about seventeen years of age, stout
and well made. He surveyed them with much
attention, but did not greatly prepossess captain
Wilson and his companions in his favour. His
queen, who appeared about the same age, was
finely proportioned and handsome. According
to the custom of the country, both appeared
on men’s shoulders, in which manner they were
borne wherever they went, as their persons were
considered so sacred, that it would have been a
degradation for them to have trodden the ground
over which the common people walked.
On the next day the missionaries left the ship
and took possession of the large English house.
They marked out the several apartments requisite
for sleeping rooms, &c. which they separated by
partitions of bamboo canes covered with cocoa-nut
leaves, woven in the form of mats, or with cloth
manufactured in the country. To find a house so
suitable in every respect for their abode on first
going on shore, when they would stand most in
need of the accommodation it afforded, could not
fail to impress their minds with gratitude for the
providential mercy thus vouchsafed. The house
was oval in shape, and upwards of one hundred
feet long. The natives thronged around them
in crowds, but neither robbed nor otherwise an-
noyed them ; they brought them provisions, and
appeared pleased with the idea of strangers coming
to reside among them.
Anxious to contribute to the gratification of
the strangers, the natives formed a ring, and com-
menced wrestling and boxing, and this with
some sports or other, was kept up through the


greater part of the day, though it is probable
they perceived that the exhibition was not very
congenial with the taste of their new friends.
Assisted by the natives, the missionaries were em-
ployed in preparing the house for the reception of
their families, and at the close of the day, when
silence was secured, a hymn of praise to the true
God was sung, an evening prayer was offered, and
the natives were requested to retire. They did, in
the most peaceable manner, leaving the mission-
aries in the undisturbed occupancy of their new and
comparatively unsheltered dwelling, to review the
novel and impressive scenes they had witnessed, to
render their devout and grateful acknowledgements
to the Most High for the encouraging circum-
stances under which they had entered the field of
their future labour, and the favour he had given
them in the eyes of the people. The events of the
day appear to have made a suitable impression on
the minds of the brethren, and they close their
account of it with the acknowledgement, “ Lord,
thou hast been better to us than all our fears;
grant us firmer faith in thy care, that we may be
able to trust thee more in a future day.”
On the 10th the captain landed for the purpose
of presenting some showy dresses to the young
king and his wife. They met him at the beach
as usual. Peter informed him of what was in-
tended, and showing him a box which contained
the treasure, desired Otoo to walk towards his
house, a temporary shed they had erected for
the purpose of being near our people. This was
complied with, and when they came near, the cap-
tain, stopping under a tree, ordered them to form
a ring, and placing the box in the midst, Otoo was


requested to alight, that the brethren might dress
him; he replied. By and by, and gazed sullenly for
a considerable time, till the patience of the captain
was pretty well exhausted; repeating the request,
and receiving no answer, they opened the box, and
on taking out the dress for the queen, she instantly
alighted from her bearer’s shoulders, and Otoo fol-
lowed her example. The fancy cap fitted her ex-
ceedingly well, and she seemed very proud of it;
but it was only by unripping that the other articles
could be put upon her or Otoo. The captain told
him that the arris of Pretane thought he was not
yet so stout a man. Dressed complete in this
gaudy attire, the surrounding crowd gazed upon
them with admiration. She, true to the foibles of
her sex, appeared delighted; but Otoo thought
little of them, saying, an axe, a musket, a knife,
or a pair of scissars, was more valuable; which was
saying more than was expected, from one who ap-
peared to have but little sense.
On the 11th of March the wives and children
of the missionaries removed from the ship to the
house provided for their accommodation. The
natives had never seen European females or chil-
dren before, and their curiosity was highly ex-
cited, and the expressions of admiration loud and
general; but not the least rudeness was mani-
fested towards them by any one; though after-
wards, during that and subsequent days, as the
report of their landing spread through the island,
fresh parties arriving in the district came before the
house, and requested the wives and children of the
missionaries to come out, that they might see the
likeness of the women of Britain.
At the close of this day, before the natives
E 3


retired from the dwelling of the missionaries, which
had been thronged every day since their landing,
the natives were told that the next day was a tabu
day, sacred to their Atua, and devoted to his wor-
ship, that no work would be done, and no presents
received if brought.
In the afternoon of the succeeding day, the
brethren, by means of the Swede as their inter-
preter, addressed the people on the great subject
of their mission, and endeavoured to present be-
fore their minds, in as plain a way as possible, the
first principles of the gospel. Though the people
probably understood but little of what was said to
them, they appeared attentive, and asked if the
message was to the inferior classes of society as
well as to the king and chiefs. The king Otoo
was present; but the brethren remark that, “ ac-
cording to human judgment, his stubborn and
unteachable nature seems to be the last that any
impression can be made upon. This shows that
it is unwise to prejudge any individual, for Otoo,
afterwards Pomare, proved their earliest convert,
and for many years their steadiest friend.
We cannot commend too highly the conduct ot
the missionaries on their first arrival among the
people, in regularly holding, at jhe accustomed
season, family worship, morning and evening, and
suspending during the sabbath their ordinal y in-
tercourse with the people. It was of vast impor-
tance, as it conveyed to the natives a lesson,
which they could understand much better than
any thing the missionaries could say, at that
time, as to the obligation which they felt to
regard the requirements of the religion they pro-
fessed, under erery diversity of circumstance.


This early practice also gave in after years the
sanction of consistent example to their instruc-
tions on this subject, which was as salutary as
it was powerful. There is nothing that the hea-
then detect and adduce as a reason for their
own conduct, sooner than the least discrepancy
between the precepts of the missionary and
his own practice at any time. They will rarely
make sufficient allowance for the difference in
circumstances, which to his own mind fully jus-
tify the deviation at one time from the course
which at another period he may have pursued.
And there can be but little doubt that the very
general observance of family devotion, and the
almost universal regard to the sabbath, which dis-
tinguished the conduct of the South Sea islanders
for some years after the general profession of Chris-
tianity was as much the effect of the consistent
example of the missionaries, as of the injunctions
in the holy scriptures on the subject If a new
mission is begun well, under God, its success is
half secured.
Pomare, the actual sovereign of the island,
though nominally only the regent for his son, sub-
sequently, in company with Idia his wife, visited
captain Wilson, who made him acquainted with
the designs of the missionaries, and inquired
whether it was agreeable to him that they should
remain on the island. The king replied that it
was, and that the whole district of Matavai should
be appropriated to their use. A day was after-
wards appointed, in which a formal cession of the
district was made to captain Wilson, by the king,
in the presence of a vast concourse of the people,
when the land was given over for the occupancy


of the missionaries, and such natives as they might
allow to reside upon it. This cession of the dis-
trict was a mere act of courtesy or respect to the
visitors, and the right and proprietorship it con-
ferred was more nominal than real; the original
occupiers still considered themselves the owners
of the land, and continued to derive the greatest
benefit from its produce, though they allowed the
missionaries the use of so much as they might
require for their dwellings or chose to enclose for
their gardens. Presents of this kind were cus-
tomary among the people, as a mark of regard for
a chief or other distinguished person by whom
they might be visited.
As no one of the ordained ministers were to accom-
pany the missionaries going to the Friendly Islands,
the latter chose from their own number Mr. Seth
Kelso to be their pastor, and the propriety of or-
daining him and John Harris, previous to their de-
parture, having been considered. Sunday, the 19th
of March, was appointed for that purpose, on which
occasion they observe, “ it having been known
that we intended to address the natives this morn-
ing, numbers of them assembled around our dwell-
ing. Among them was Pomare and his sister;
he had been inquiring a day or two before con-
cerning our speaking to them, and said, he had
been dreaming about the book which should be
sent “ him from the Eatood.” At ten o’clock we
called the natives together under the cover of some
shady trees near our house, and a long form being-
placed, Pomare was requested to seat himself on it
with the brethren, the rest of the natives standing
or sitting in a circle around us. Mr. Cover then
addressed them from the words of St. John, "God


so loved the world, that he gave his only-begotten
Son, that they who believe on him should not
perish, but have everlasting life;” the Swede in-
terpreting sentence by sentence as he spoke. The
Otaheiteans were silent and attentive. After ser-
vice, Pomare took brother Cover by the hand and
pronounced the word of approbation, “ Myty,
myty.” Being asked if he had understood what
was said, he replied, “ There were no such things
before in Otaheite; and they were not to be
learned at once, but that he would wait the com-
ing of the (Eatooa) God.” Desiring to know
if he might be permitted to attend again, he was
told. Yes. Being conducted into his house, he
and his wife dined with us and departed. About
three o’clock the ordination solemnity of the
brethren Kelso and Harris took place; they were
set apart for their work by prayer and the imposi-
tion of hand of our ordained brethren. Brother
Cover preached the ordination sermon, and deli-
vered the charge, brother Jefferson having made
the usual inquiry of the candidates, and brothers
Lewis and Eyre prayed at the commencement
and end of the service. The communion closed
the solemnity, which was to us all a most re-
freshing and cheering ordinance ; and, for the first
time, the bread-fruit of Otaheite was used as the
symbol of the broken body of our Lord, and re-
ceived in commemoration of his dying love.
On the 21st of March captain Wilson sailed
from Matavai with the missionaries for Tongataboo
and the Marquesas. During his absence those who
remained had many opportunities of becoming more
fully acquainted with some of the difficulties to be
encountered in the work. One of the first objects


of their deep lamentation was the frequent and
unfeeling perpetration of infant murder; and to
the prevention or diminution of this revolting crime
their earliest and most assiduous efforts were di-
rected. Within a few weeks after the departure of
the Duff for the Friendly Islands, two of the
execrable society of areois came to take leave of
them before going to a place where they intended
to destroy an infant, of which it was expected the
female would soon become the mother. The mis-
sionaries remonstrated against the horrid custom;
the female felt tenderly, and appeared willing to
spare the infant, but the brutal chief was ob-
stinately bent on the deed, which he acknow-
ledged was a bloody act. The missionaries of-
fered to build a house and take every child whom
they would devote to death under their own imme-
diate care. The guilty couple afterwards made a
promise to spare the infant, which they never ful-
filled. A few days afterwards they were conversing
with a number of areois on this subject, when Idia,
the wife of Pomare entered; as they were given to
understand that she expected shortly to become a
mother and to destroy her infant, the missionaries
endeavoured to convince her of the dreadfulness
of murder, especially in a mother. They pro-
mised that they would receive the infant from its
birth, and prevent its being any trouble to her;
but she was sullen and made no rejily. They
entreated Pomare to use his endeavours to stop
this and the practice of offering human sacrifices;
he promised, but never kept his word. They sub-
sequently renewed their attempts with Idia, in-
vited her to remain near them, and to allow their
wives to take care of the infant; urged the bene


ficial effects her example would produce; offered
her a number of European articles, and proposed
to report her conduct to the queen of England
and the females of Britain, who would hold her
in high estimation for breaking through so re-
volting a practice. Their efforts were unavailing,
and she left them. Three days afterwards, when she
appeared in public, they learned that during the
interval she had become a mother, and had effected
her cruel purpose. When she afterwards was ac-
quainted with their displeasure, she said she had
a right to do as she pleased with her own children,
and should observe the customs of the country
without regarding them.
They were also early taught the general pre-
valence of theft, which was practised with equal
avidity by the king and the lowest menial. On
one occasion, while Mr. W. Wilson was sitting in
conversation with a chief, a boy picked his pocket.
At another time Otoo, the king, sent a message,
desiring them to discharge certain persons from
their house, whom he described as great thieves;
at the same time he nominated others, whom he
recommended as servants. These they knew to
be part of his followers, and saw that he wanted
to introduce them only to be able to rob them
with greater facility: his recommendations were
of course declined. From these and other occur-
rences they became acquainted gradually with the
character of the people, and the nature of some
of their difficulties. Other circumstances encou-
raged them to persevere; they were led to hope
that the people were inquisitive, docile, and
attentive, though more deeply impressed with
the conviction that nothing less than the power


of God could effect any decisive moral change.
This led to a more regular and earnest attend-
ance on the means of seeking the Divine bless-
ing.
On the 4th of April, 1797, they met in the
morning of Tuesday, between eight and nine
o’clock, to hold a monthly missionary prayer
meeting, which they have continued ever since.
This time was selected, as being the same as the
hour on Monday evening on which Christians in
Britain were assembled. In references to the ser-
vice, they observe, “We were revived with the
consideration of the thousands of God’s people
who were remembering us, and at the same throne
praying for our success among the heathen.”
Captain Wilson having settled the missionaries
who were to labour in the Friendly Islands, then
visited the Marquesas, where he left Mr. Crook,
returned to Tahiti on the 6th of July, and remained
till the 4th of August, when he finally sailed
on his way to Canton.
The missionaries had now been five months on
the island, and had been dining the most of the
time deprived of the presence of the ship and the
influence of the captain for their protection; but
the natives had treated them with uniform kind-
ness and respect, had supplied them abundantly
with whatever means of subsistence the country
afforded, manifested no opposition to their en-
deavours, through the medium of such interpreters
as they found, to instruct the natives as to the
sin and folly of their idolatry, and to dissuade
them from the continuance of the vices and cruel-
lies to which they were addicted. 4he mission-
aries appear to have received from the people all


they could desire in the commencement of' their
mission—a secure and quiet dwelling place, the
means of temporal support, and free access to the
people. But it must not be supposed that the
kindness of the people, their avowed pleasure at
seeing the foreigners settle among them, and pro-
fessed willingness to receive instruction, arose
from any sense of the evil of their own idolatries,
abominations, and cruelties, any willingness to re-
nounce them, or the least regard to the great
object for which the mission had been established.
Of these it is probable they had, until the mission-
aries had been a much longer period among them,
no correct idea. They might suppose their teachers
were influenced by an ardent zeal to inculcate the
peculiarities of their creed, and introduce the worship
of their God, but then it was probably to be placed
on a level with their own ; or, if the strangers
claimed superiority for their God, it was not to
the extent of abolishing all others. They might
suppose the missionaries would endeavour to dis-
suade them from some of the more repulsive fea-
tures of their own superstitions, such as the
offering of human sacrifices, the practice of in-
fanticide, and nameless abominations to which
they were addicted; but there was at the time no
disposition to comply with their instruction, even
in these respects; and the prominence which in-
struction occupied in the proceedings of the mis-
sionary, appears to have excited disappointment
rather than satisfaction, as the high priest, who
was also a great political leader, observed, they
gave the people plenty of parau, talk and prayer,
but very few knives, axes, scissors, or cloth. The
favourable regard at first shown towards the
F


missionaries must therefore he ascribed to other
causes. The mutineers of the Bounty had resided
for some time among the people, their influence
had been found of the utmost importance in the
wars which had long distracted and desolated the
island; and in these wars, whichever party the
mutineers joined, they had, by the aid of their fire-
arms, rendered victorious. The missionaries gave
the king no encouragement to expect aid from them
in his wars; yet he hoped to obtain some benefit
from them. . , . ,
Many of the missionaries were acquainted with
the most useful mechanic arts ; they were well
supplied with tools of different kinds ; they under-
stood working in wood, and especially in iron,
with the use of which the natives were already so
well acquainted, that it was considered the most
precious article which Europe could furnish.
Their skill in those arts the natives regarded with
admiration and astonishment, and the advantages
they expected to derive therefrom, and from the
liberal supplies of articles of European manufacture
which they brought with them, in the appropria-
tion of which the natives expected a considerable
share, rendered them willing to make any sacri-
fices to detain and accommodate them.
We cannot he surprised at the force with which
these motives operated on the minds of the Tahi-
tians; and, though altogether selfish in themselves,
the facilities and encouragement which, under their
influence, were afforded to the missionaries, were ot
the highest importance. They gave them confi-
dence, enabled them deliberately to survey the field,
and to pursue, under the most favourable circum-
stances, the first great labour of the mission,, the


acquisition of the language, by which they became
independent of the worthless and treacherous men,
whom they had at first been obliged to employ as
interpreters, and whose machinations their igno-
rance of the language for a time prevented them
from discovering. While the missionaries enjoyed
the friendly regard of the natives, they had many
opportunities of discovering the peculiar disposition
of the people, their deep-rooted prejudices, and
reckless propensities to all iniquity, a knowledge
of which was of the greatest service to them, when
actual perils afterwards came upon them; while
the estimation in which the natives held their
skill, and the advantages they anticipated there-
from, and from their influence in bringing ships to
their shores, operated frequently to alleviate the
pressures of those troubles to which they were af-
terwards exposed, and always secured them the
favour and protection of Pomare and many of the
chiefs.


CHAPTER III.
Circumstances under which the Mission was
commenced. —Notice of an earlier Attempt by
Spanish Roman Catholics.—General View of
the State of the Inhabitants at the time.—
Nature and Tendency of their Superstitions.—
Number and Character of their Idols, Birds,
Beasts, Fishes, and other objects of religious
Veneration.-Deified Men.—Influence of their
Superstition.—Temples, different kinds, their
Extent, Structure, Uses.—Account of the great
Temple of Oberea in Papara.—Sacred Trees
within the precincts of the Temples. The Foun-
dations laid on the Bodies of human Victims
offered in sacrifice.— Pagan Worship.—Priests.
Prayers. — Offerings.—Victims. — Human sa-
crifices.—Recollections of their Cruelty slid
retained by the People. — Manner of disposing
of the Bodies of the human Victims.—Heathen
Festivals.—Depraved Morals of the People.—
Prevalence of Dishonesty. — Intemperance.—
Habits of the South Sea Islanders.—Degrada-
tion of the Female Sex.—Operation of the Tabu
System.
Considering the circumstances under which
the mission in Tahiti was commenced, it must be
acknowledged that the willingness with winch the
king and chiefs received the men who told them
so far as they could make them understand, that
they came to bear witness against the vices and


idolatries to which they were addicted, and to re-
quire their homage of the true God, and obedience
to his will, was justly regarded as propitious. The
accommodation they found on shore, the security
they enjoyed, the ample supply that was furnished
for every want, far exceeded the highest expecta-
tions that the most sanguine friends of the mission
could have indulged.
In connexion with the establishment of the pro-
testant mission in Tahiti, it ought to be stated that
this was not the first effort that had been made by
persons professing the Christian faith. In 1772,
two Spanish ships, sent to survey some of the
islands of the Pacific, visited Tahiti, and on their
return conveyed two natives of the island to Peru,
where they were baptized according to the form of
the Roman catholic church. In 1774 they were
taken back to Tahiti, and two Roman catholic
missionaries sent with them, for whom a house was
erected in Taiarabu, the smaller peninsula near
Vaitapeha Bay. Though the chiefs of that part of
the island appear to have guaranteed their protec-
tion, the missionaries do not seem to have made
many efforts to instruct the people or to persuade
them to be baptized. After they had been about ten
months on the island, the ships in which they had
arrived returned to Tahiti, and they re-embarked
for Lima. The house erected for their accommo-
dation was standing in 1777, when Taiarabu was
visited by captain Cook. A wooden cross stood in
front of the house, and near it the grave of the
commander of one of the ships, who died while the
■vessel remained there in 1774. The Spaniards
left goats and dogs on the shore; and to them the
people are indebted for the superior kind of hogs,
f 3


which have proved so serviceable to the natives
and their visitors. f ,
Before proceeding to narrate the progress of the
mission in the island of Tahiti, it will be proper o
(jive some account of the state of the people at the
time when the brethren from England arrived
among them. This appears necessary, in order to
a just view of the difficulties winch usually attend
the commencement of a mission among idolatrous
and uncivilized nations, and a correct estimate of
the important change which has, under God, since
taken place; at kast it seems requisite to notice
their superstitions, their morals, their social state,
and their practice of war. . ,
The Tahitians as a nation were entirely ig-
norant of letters, and consequently not an intel-
lectual people, in the ordinary acceptation o
the term as descriptive of persons of cultivate
minds. They had been for ages excluded from
intercourse with nations more enlightened and
civilized than themselves and they weie le-
markably superstitious; and the influence of then
faith, erroneous and irrational as il.was, pervaded
every period of their existence. Their regard to
their superstitions in almost every transaction
of life, offers a lesson to those favoured with a
more reasonable creed and a purer faith, which
may be attended to with manifold advantages.
Their mythology was crude and absurd in the
extreme, and supplies an affecting prool of the
derangement and impotency of tbe , ' U |‘*f 1 D ™Xe
in its present state, when unassisted b) Unine
revelation. It was, however, in many respects,
as reasonable as some of the systems which
have obtained among communities in which t..e


human mind has attained its greatest elevation,
and wrought some of its noblest achievements. In
some respects it presents the most striking analo-
gies to the systems which have prevailed among
the most celebrated nations of the earth.
Like some of the nations of antiquity, the Tahi-
tians ascribed to chaos, or a state in which dark-
ness prevailed, the origin of the universe, and the
production of their gods, the chief of which were
described as born of night. All knowledge of one
supreme God, of moral perfection, creating, up-
holding, governing all things, seems to have been
entirely obliterated among them. They had lords
many, and gods many, but they were either the
workmanship of their own hands, men like them-
selves, or some of the inferior orders of creation.
They had thus changed the glory of God into an
image made like unto corruptible man, or four-
footed beasts, or creeping things.
The chief objects of superstitious homage and
fear were men, of a period in their history so
remote as to admit of as much of the fabulous as it
was thought desirable to blend with the adventures
of the individuals, whom they deified ; as Ru, who
had raised the heavens, Maui, who prolonged the
day. Some few were men renowned for deeds
ascribed to them, by which they had been raised to
the distinction of public benefactors; others were
celebrated warriors, as Oro, &c.; but the greater
part were notorious chiefly for their monstrous
abominations and cruelties. The name of their
principal god was Taaroa, who seems to be the
chief imagined deity of a large proportion of the
inhabitants of the various groups of islands in the
Pacific Ocean. Oro, the national idol of Tahiti,


is said to have been the son of Taaroa. Little
that is valuable could be learned from extending the
catalogue of their names. Besides these and other
imaginary deities, they regarded with religious ve-
neration certain animals, birds, insects, and fish, not
as themselves gods, but as bodies into which the
gods at times entered, and through whom they
often communicated their will, or accomplished
their purposes. On this account they worshipped
the shark, several kinds of heron, and a venomous
reptile, the centipede.
In the supposed character of their gods there
was a remarkable uniformity, notwithstanding
their number, and, in this latter respect, the Ta-
hitians equalled the ancient Egyptians, among
whom it was at one time said it was easier to find
a god than a man. Besides the national gods
and the household divinities, the gods of the hus-
bandman, the fisherman, the various handycrafts-
men that were known among them, and of the
healing art, there were gods of the sea and of
the land, gods of the wind and the rain, the tem-
pest and the calm, the meteors and clouds, the
hills and the valleys, the rocky defile and the
plain, the trees and the flowers. Their luxuriant
imaginations had peopled every scene with active
and powerful, though invisible beings, for whom
every part of creation formed an abode, and to
whose agency every phenomenon of nature was
ascribed.
Next to the gods, the oromatuas or spirits of
the departed, were objects of superstitious venera-
tion and fear. The chief oromatuas were the
spirits of warriors, who had, during life, been dis-
tinguished by their fury, cruelty, and murder, and


were imagined to be equally irritable and powerful.
The people regarded them with the greatest terror,
rendered them the most servile homage, and spared
no efforts to avoid displeasing them. Within the
sacred enclosures houses were sometimes erected
on high wooden posts, wherein the skulls of de-
parted warriors or chiefs, to which the spirits
were supposed to be attached were deposited. The
reason assigned for building their dormitory in this
unusual manner, was to keep them out of the way
of the people ; but here persons were appointed to
be constantly with them, in order to keep them
pacified; and notwithstanding all their attention,
the unhappy keepers, in the event of disturbing,
or in any way annoying them, were supposed to be
subject to death.
Their idols were many of them of wood, some
few were of stone, but the greatest number were
made with the finely braided cinet of the fibre of
the cocoa-nut husk. The upper part of the images
were, if of wood, rudely carved in imitation of the
human face, or if of the platted cinet, projections
were formed to represent the chief features of the
countenance. The idols were generally kept in
some secret place in the temple, and only occa-
sionally exhibited to the people. The images of
wood were frequently hollow, and were filled with
red feathers, human bones, or other precious relics.
The images made of the braided cocoa-nut husk
were most of them profusely ornamented with the
red feathers of a species of parroquet, found in
some of the islands. The influence and power
of the god was supposed to be in a peculiar
manner communicated to, and retained by, the
red feathers, which, after having been by the


prescribed ceremonies rendered sacred emblems of
the gods themselves, in the absence of the image
received the homage supposed to be required by
the god himself.
The priest pretended that the image was only a
representation of the god, through which they
offered their homage to the real god, who was
invisible, and through which the god manifested
himself unto them; but the mass of the common
people regarded the image, however rugged and mis-
shapen it might be, as the god, and the obj ect of their
perpetual terror. Hence, also, the voracious shark
committed his ravages on the defenceless a ictim
that fell within his power without molestation, and
the poisonous reptile was regarded with sacred
veneration. The character of the gods of the Ta-
hitians was generally cruel or odious in the ex-
treme ; though so many of them had been once
numbered with their own ancestors on earth, they
never ascribed to them any disposition that was
amiable or commendable, any principles that were
upright or virtuous, or any regard for their vo-
taries that could be contemplated by the latter
with satisfaction or with pleasure. It never en-
tered into the mind of the most zealous votary of
any of Tahiti’s gods, that the object of his homage
and obedience regarded him with affection or good-
will, and he was himself, amidst all his zeal and
devotedness, a stranger to any feeling approaching
to complacency or love. Fear was the secret
cause of all the power of the gods, and fear the
chief, and often the only motive, that influenced
the most active and persevering of their votaries.
If another feeling was at times associated with
fear, it was that of selfishness. The exercise


of compassion and the pleasure of doing good,
were alike unknown to the people; and as they
thought the gods were influenced by motives corres-
ponding with those of which they themselves were
conscious, they regarded them only with those
feelings which the dispositions ordinarily cherished
in their own bosoms were adapted to excite. This
slavish fear the priests and rulers of the people
rather cherished than removed, as it increased the
power of the gods over the minds of the people,
and thus placed in their hands one of the most
effectual means of consolidating and extending
their own. Their superstitious worship partook
largely of the character which their ideas of their
gods could not fail to produce. Nothing was
spontaneously and cheerfully offered, all was obe-
dience to a demand which could not be disregarded
without imminent peril, and in many cases certain
death. The presents they carried were the exac-
tions of despotism, rather than the free-will offer-
ings of the people, and the ends proposed by them
were generally of a negative character, not to
secure the bestowment of a favour, (with few
exceptions,) but, if possible, to avert the inflic-
tion of a calamity, otherwise inevitable. It ex-
hibited no redeeming feature, all was repulsive-
ness and deformity in vice, recklessness in op-
pression, or diabolical in wanton and diversi-
fied cruelties. Benevolence, forbearance, and
forgiveness, were never associated in their minds
with their ideas of their gods, whom they re-
garded as invested with power against which it
was in vain to contend; but that power was ex-
ercised only to wreak vengeance on the hapless
objects of a wrath which was often as implacable


as it was destructive. To inspire terror, and rule
by fear, were the principles on which those whom
birth or circumstances had raised to a station of
influence in society, sought to keep in subjection
those who were beneath them; and they na-
turally imagined that every god was altogether
such an one as themselves, excepting that, in some
respects, a portion of their deities had been greater
monsters, in murder and abomination, than would
have been tolerated among themselves. How
striking the contrast here presented with every
idea and feeling which is derived from the con-
templation of the living and true God, as made
known to us in the Bible. How suited is every view
we take of superstition and idolatry, to awaken our
liveliest sympathies towards those who are withering
and dying under its influence, and to stimulate to
every effort we can possibly make, at any sacrifice
of our own convenience or even temporal enjoy-
ments, for the amelioration of their wretchedness.
How adapted to excite a feeling of gratitude, so
seldom cherished towards Him to whose unmerited
mercy alone we are indebted for all that distinguishes
us from the most profligate and miserable heathen
communities, and w ho has indeed caused the lines to
fall unto us in pleasant places, and given us a goodly
heritage.
The temples in which their gods were wor-
shipped presented but little variety in their form
and structure, though they differed greatly in their
dimensions. The national temples, in wdiich the
principal deities were worshipped, and all the great
national ceremonies performed, consisted of one
high and solid stone building, comprising a centre,
and wings, and enclosing a number of distinct


shrines, altars, and houses for the idols ; sometimes
having a secret place, or inner court, in which the
idols were kept. What might be regarded as the
front of the temple was generally open; the
sides were stone, and the back was a solid pile,
in the form of an oblong pyramid, raised with
great skill, and carefully finished. Immediately
in front of this solid pile, in the centre, the
idols were fixed, before which the altars were
reared. Those temples were frequently large:
speaking of the one at Papara, which he visited in
1797, Mr. Wilson observes, —“ The great morai
of Oherea stands on a point a little to the east-
ward ; thither 1 went to have a view of so great a
curiosity. Otoo has one of his representative
houses here, and in passing it, some of his ser-
vants, judging where I was going, followed me,
and were very assiduous in explaining every thing
to me. This morai is an enormous pile of stone-
work, in form of a pyramid, on a parallelogram
area; it has a flight of ten steps quite round it,
the first of which, from the ground, is six feet high,
the rest about five; it is in length, at the base, two
hundred and seventy feet, and the width ninety-
four feet; at the top it is one hundred and eighty
feet long, and about six wide ; the steps are com-
posed partly of regular rows of square coral stones,
about eighteen inches high, and partly with blue-
ish coloured pebble stones, nearly quite round, of
a hard texture; all about six inches in diameter,
and in their natural unhewn state: this is the out-
side. The inside, that is to say, what composes
the solid mass, (for it has no hollow space,) is
composed of stones of various kinds and shapes.
It is a wonderful structure, and it must have cost
G


them immense time and pains to bring such a
quantity of stones together, and particularly to
square the coral of the steps with the tools they
had when it was raised, for it was before iron came
among them ; and as they were ignorant of mortar
or cement, it required all the care they have taken
to fit the stones regularly to each other that it
might stand.
When sir Joseph Banks saw this place, there
was, on the centre of its summit, a representation
of a bird carved in wood, and close by it the
figure of a fish carved in stone ; but both are now
o-one, and the stones of the upper steps are in
many places fallen; the walls of the court have
also gone much to ruin, and the flat pavement is
only in some places discernible. The above-named
gentleman, speaking of this court, says, “ The
pyramid constitutes one side of a court, or square,
the sides of which are nearly equal, and the whole
was walled in and paved with flat stones; not-
withstanding which pavement, several plantains
and trees, which the natives called etoa, grew within
the enclosure. At present there is within this
square a house, called the house of the Eatooa, in
which a man constantly resides.” The aito or
casuarina, the miro, the tamanu, and other um-
brageous and stately trees, regarded as sacred by
the people, were frequently planted around, and
within the precincts of their temples, and being
suffered to grow uninterruptedly for a long series
of years, their wide spreading and evergreen
branches, interwoven with each other, forme a
perennial covering for their places of worship and
sacrifice, while the howling of the tempest and
the siahina of the breeze through the leaiy root


increased the effect, which the gloom of their im-
pervious shade, their lonely solitude, and the piles
of the sculls of victims which had been offered in
sacrifice appearing in different parts, were pecu-
liarly calculated to excite.
Besides the national temples, there were others
belonging to the respective districts, or other poli-
tical divisions established in the islands; these
resembled the larger temples, in their form and
the materials of which they were constructed, but
were of smaller dimensions. And besides these
may also be noticed the rude and smaller piles
erected for the worship of domestic idols of the
chief families of the people. The temples were usu-
ally ornamented with a number of pieces of wood,
curiously carved and fixed in the ground, in the
same manner as grave-stones are placed in the
church-yards of England.
The sanguinary character of Tahitian worship
may be inferred from the manner in which their
temples were generally erected. Human victims
were slain when the building was commenced,
and during its progress, as well as when it was
finished and the gods were brought within it; and
the foundations of their sacred buildings were
sometimes literally laid in human blood, or the
pillars of some of the houses were planted on the
body of a man who had been slain as a sacrifice
to the god who was to be deposited or worshipped
there : this was done it was said to impart great
sacredness to the building, and render the god better
pleased than he otherwise would have been. Pro-
bably the chief object was to perpetuate a feeling
of dread in the minds of the people.
Their worship was stated and occasional, no


kind of instruction to the people was ever con-
nected with their religious services, which con-
sisted in offering prayers, gifts, and sacrifices. The
priest or worshipper, when addressing the god,
knelt on one knee, and assuming a crouching
position, with his back against a stone, fixed in
front of the altar for that purpose, addressed the
god in a shrill and unpleasant tone of voice, occa-
sionally blending with his petitions reproach for
neglect, and threatening to transfer his homage to
some other god if his requests were not granted.
Among the stated seasons of worship may be
reckoned the daily morning prayers, called the
awakening of the gods, when they are addressed
by name, directed to the birds and to the parents
of clouds, and are informed that the accustomed
offerings are brought. Much of their worship is
exceedingly indecent. The altars were occasion-
ally of stone, but more frequently ot wood, and
were supported by a number of wooden pillars,
often carved with considerable labour and in-
genuity : the top of the altar was covered with
leaves of the plantain-tree, which also formed a
graceful fringe around its border.
& The offerings deposited on the altar consisted ot
animals, fish, birds, fruits, and the choicest pro-
ducts of their industry and skill. In killing the
hogs when offered, great care was taken to avoid
disfiguring the carcase or breaking any ot the
hones * on this account the attendants of the priest
frequently held the hog by the feet while it was
strangled, by having a strong bar placed oil its
neck and another under its throat, both of which
were pressed together, until the animal was dead.
When the hog was killed by bleeding, it was, in


order to render it acceptable to the god, smeared
all over with its own blood and then placed in a
reclining position on the altar. When the offer-
ings were dressed, a part only was presented to
the idols, the rest was eaten within the precincts
of the temple by the priests and other privileged
persons. All that was placed on the altar was either
eaten by the birds or allowed to remain till decom-
posed, which often rendered the atmosphere in the
neighbourhood of the temples exceedingly offensive.
But the most horrible and revolting part of their
worship was the presenting of human sacrifices,
which were offered in appalling numbers, and with
revolting barbarity. The unhappy men were fre-
quently captives taken in war, the defenceless
occupants of some unprotected district, a pass-
ing traveller, who might be among them at the
time a victim was required, or ill-fated indivi-
duals against whom the chiefs or priests had im-
bibed a feeling of prejudice, which nothing but
their destruction could remove. The manner in
which a human sacrifice was sought was as fol-
lows : —The king sent either by one of his servants,
or a priest of the district, a little black stone,
on which was inscribed his request to the chief.
“ The cruelty of the practice extended not only to
individuals, but to families and districts. When
an individual had been taken as a sacrifice, the
family to which he belonged was regarded as tabu,
or devoted, and when another was required it was
more frequently taken from that family than any
other; and a district from which sacrifices had
been taken was in the same way considered as
devoted; and hence, when it was known that any
ceremonies were near, on which occasion human
g 3


sacrifices were generally offered, the members of
tabu families, or others who had reason to fear
they were selected, fled to the mountains and hid
themselves in the caverns till the ceremony was
over. .
“ At a public meeting in Raiatea, Paumoana, a
native chieftain, alluded to this practice in terms
resembling these ‘ How great our dread of our
former gods ! Are there not some here who have
fled from their houses to avoid being taken for
sacrifices ? Yes ! I know the cave in which they
were concealed. ”
In general the victim was unconscious oi his
doom, until suddenly stunned by a blow from a
club or a stone, sometimes from the hands of the
very chief on whom he was depending as a guest
for the rights of hospitality. He was usually mur-
dered on the spot, his body placed in a long
basket of cocoa-nut leaves, and carried to the tem-
ple. Here it was offered, not by consuming it
with fire, but by placing it before the idol. The
priest, in dedicating it, took out one of the eyes,
placed it on a plantain leaf, and handed it to the
kin o- , who raised it to his mouth, as if desirous to
eat & it, but passed it to one of the priests, or at-
tendants stationed near him, for the purpose of
receiving it. At intervals, during the prayers, some
of the hair was plucked off and placed before the
o-od, and, when the ceremony was over, the body
was wrapped in the basket of cocoa-nut leaves,
and frequently deposited on the branches ot an
adjacent tree. After remaining a considerable
time it was taken down, and the bones brined
beneath the rude pavement oi the marae. * irese
horrid rites were not unfrequent, and the number


offered at some of their festivals was truly ap-
palling. The people, in general, had a greater
horror of being offered in sacrifice than of meeting
death in the field of battle, or in a more ordinary
way, from the apprehension which they were
taught to cherish, that after the slaughtered
bodies were offered, the spirits of the victims were
eaten by the gods. Hence one of their impreca-
tions was, —“ May you become food for the gods;”
that is. May you be offered in sacrifice. Their
superstition, which reduced woman to the greatest
degradation, and rendered ceremonially defiled
whatever she might touch, was sometimes the
cause of a melancholy satisfaction to the family
and surviving friends of the unhappy man who
might have been selected as a victim. After the
man had been seized and stunned by the blow of
a club or stone, or even killed, if his wife or sister,
or any female could but touch any part of the
body, or even look steadfastly upon it, it was
considered as polluted, and could not be offered
to the god. This was one reason for the great
caution and secrecy which was observed till the
body was secured and tied up in the long basket
of cocoa-nut leaves, and the haste with which,
after being seized, it was carried to the temple.
On these occasions, the strength of natural affec-
tion has been manifested in a way that is pecu-
liarly distressing. After the body had been seized,
and before it was offered, a wife or a sister has
been known to rush to the spot, apparently frantic
with grief, and force her way to the body, and
either gaze upon it, touch it, or in order effectually
to prevent its being offered, fix her teeth in some
part of the body, and bite out a piece of the flesh.


though exposed, perhaps, to instant death, from the
infuriated wretches who would thus be deprived of
their prey, and must seek another victim.
Human sacrifices were generally offered at all the
great national ceremonies, those which were annual
or fixed, as well as those which were only occa-
sional. At the birth and inauguration of the king,
during his illness or that of any of the chiefs, at
the building of a temple, before going to war,
during its progress, and at its close, as well as on
all occasions when the sanction or aid of the gods
was required for the accomplishment of any object
of importance.
One of the most singular, and certainly the least
criminal of their stated festivals, was that held in
some of the islands in commemoration of the com-
pletion of the year. The greatest peculiarity was,
that females were allowed to attend it, though the
men only might enter the sacred enclosure. The
time of observing this annual festival was regulated
by the blossoming of reeds, when, as usual in most
of their religious ceremonies, a profuse supply of
provision was brought for general feasting. When
the worship had been offered at the temple, and
the banquet was ended, a usage prevailed much
resembling the popish masses for the souls in
purgatory. Every person went to his own marae
to make special supplication for the spirits of
departed relatives, that they might be released
from the state of darkness in which it was supposed
they were kept, and ascend to what they imagined
was a region of enjoyment.
In the ordinary ceremonies, &c. connected with
the household, the father, after the patriarchal
manner, was the priest of the family; but for all


special purposes the regular priest was engaged;
the priests of the national temples were a distinct
class of men, and the office, like most offices among
them, was hereditary.
It is not to be expected that, in morals, any
people should surpass their gods, but though this
was the case among them, and the Tahitians were
less depraved than those objects of religious
homage had been, yet, under the influence of a
superstition so brutalizing and destructive of all
correct moral feeling, as that was which we have
now noticed, the South Sea islanders were scarcely
elevated above those lowest in the scale of moral
deterioration among mankind. Temperance and
chastity, honesty and truth, equity and justice,
were virtues held in no estimation, and some of
them were almost unknown, except in name ; while
every vice that deforms and debases human beings,
luxuriated amongst them with a vigour and fruit-
fulness equal to that of the most poisonous weed
in a genial and prolific soil. The injurious opera-
tion of vice was felt throughout every period of
life, by every grade in society, and shed its blast-
ing influence over what might otherwise have
presented much that was suited to afford instruc-
tion and pleasure. Before their intercourse with
foreigners, they used the juice of a highly narcotic
plant, the ava, for intoxication, and when made
acquainted with the process of distillation, carried
their intemperance to a frightful extent. No
member of any Christian or civilized community
would ever imagine the extent to which their
licentiousness prevailed. To steal, especially from
foreigners, was considered a virtue. Every voy-
ager, from their discoverer downwards, has noticed


and testified to their universal, and, excepting where
the principles of the gospel have prevailed, their
invariable propensity to theft. Falsehood, op-
pression, and injustice, were general. It was their
propensity to theft that occasioned the loss of
life, by the destructive fire from the ship of their
discoverers, almost before he had anchored; this
also occasioned the disasters that occurred during
Cook’s visit, and was the cause, among another
tribe of the same race, of the melancholy death of
that great navigator. A voyager who was wrecked
in the neighbourhood, and proceeded in a boat to
Tahiti, where he remained some time among the
people, in speaking of the prevalence of this vice,
observes, —“ Ido not hesitate to say, the whole
island is but a receptacle of thieves. European
property they will possess, by some means or
other; and theft they consider as cheaper coin
than they can give by any method of purchase.
One method of theft is as palatable to them as
another. Pomare himself is as dexterous a thief
as any amongst them. —The Otahitians are thieves
in every sense of the word; their impudence ot
theft exceeds all belief.—Otoo himself is a mon-
ster of debauchery. Their pollution in this respect
beggared all description ; my mind averts from
dwelling upon an object which recalls so many
images of disgust and horror.”
The same writer adds, as to their intemperance,
“ I could not but observe their immoderate use of
ava. No sooner had they procured any fresh sup-
ply from Eimeo, or the more distant parts of their
own island (Tahiti), than they gave themselves up
to intoxication, and remained stupid for days to-
gether. I was again confirmed in my opinion.


(adds this writer), that the introduction of (ardent)
spirits would be attended with the general de-
struction of the population.”
“ The effects of their inebriation were really
horrible; Otoo, the young king, was so furious in
his fits of inebriety, that I am persuaded he would
make no scruple of killing his subjects out of mere
ferocity.”
The habits of the South Sea islanders were in
many respects interesting and commendable ; yet,
in these, as in morals, they often presented the
most strange contradictions. In their passion for
public amusements, which so generally prevailed,
they appear a social people, yet their domestic
habits were unsocial and cheerless. This is pro-
bably to be attributed in a great degree, if not
altogether, to the invidious distinction, established
by their superstition and enforced by tabu, between
the sexes. The father and the mother, with their
children, never as one social happy hand surround
the domestic hearth, or partook together, as a fa-
mily, of the bounties of Providence. The name-
less but delightful emotions experienced on such
occasions were unknown to them, as well as all
the endearments of domestic happiness. The in-
stitutes of Oro and Tane inexorably required not
only that the wife should not eat those kinds of
food of which the husband partook, but that she
should not eat in the same place, or prepare her
food at the same fire. This restriction applied not
only to the wife, but to all individuals of the fe-
male sex, from their birth to their death. In
sickness or pain, or whatever other circumstances,
the mother, the wife, the sister, or the daugh'er
might be brought into, it was never relaxed.


The men, especially those who had occasionally
attended on the services of idol worship in the tem-
ple, were considered sacred, while the female sex
were considered common; the men were allowed
to eat the flesh of the animals, fowls, and a variety
of fish, cocoa-nuts, and plantains, and whatever
was presented as an offering to the gods; these
the females were forbidden to touch on pain of
death, as it was supposed they would pollute
them. The fires at which the men’s food was
cooked were also sacred, and were forbidden to be
used by the females. The baskets in which their
provision was kept, and the houses in which the
men ate, were also sacred, and prohibited to the
females under the same cruel penalty. Hence the
inferior food, both for wives, daughters, &c. was
cooked at separate fires, deposited in distinct bas-
kets, and eaten in lonely solitude by the females,
in mean huts, resembling dog-kennels, when com-
pared with the habitations of the men. The tabu,
one of the most powerful and extraordinary insti-
tutions in the South Sea islands, operated with
peculiar force upon the females, who were the most
frequent objects of its prohibitory injunctions,
and the slightest refraction of its humiliating and
despotic regulations, was followed by the most
sanguinary punishment. It was the charter by
which, under the sanction of his imaginary gods,
the male part of the population were exempted
from a large part of the drudgery requisite to pro-
vide for their necessities, and were absolved from
all obligation to cherish affection, or manifest kind-
ness towards the female sex, while it was the
inflexible law by which the latter were deprived o
whatever, in their rude state of society, was regarded


as a privilege, and doomed to neglect, insult,
oppression, and cruelty. Its operation commenced
with her birth, continued through every period, cir-
cumstance, and relation of life, and terminated only
with her earthly existence. It was this more
than anything else that made and kept woman a
slave ; and wherever this has been the case, man
has ever been a savage.
CHAPTER IV.
Practice of Infant Murder amour) the South Sea
Islanders. — Numbers Destroyed. —Means by
which this cruel deed was accomplished. —
Motives by which they were influenced in its
Perpetration. —Female Infants most frequently
Destroyed. —Disproportion between the Sexes.
— War, its frequency.—Human Sacrifices of-
fered during the Preparation for War.—Modes
of Warfare. —Attack and Defence. — Weapons,
Dress, and Ornaments of the Warriors. —
Treatment of the Vanquished. —Destruction of
their Villages, of the aged. Relatives and In-
fants of the defeated Party. —Insult of the
Bodies of the Slain.—Customs in relation to
the Dead. — Self-torture and Weeping. — Prac-
tice of embalming.—Curious preparatory Ce-
remonies.— Houses erected for the Dead. —
Means employed to pacify the spirits of the
departed. —Probable Population of the Island
at the time the Mission was established.
One of the most heart-rending evidences of the
barbarism of the Tahitians is furnished in the
H


extent of their infanticide; the most revolting and
unnatural crime that prevails, even amongst the
habitations of cruelty which fill the dark places
of the earth. Though this affecting species of
murder has prevailed in different parts of the
world, in ancient and modern times, until the in-
troduction of Christianity, it was probably prac-
tised to a greater extent, and with more heartless
barbarity, by the South Sea islanders, than by
any other people.
Although the date of its introduction to Tahiti
and the adjacent isles has not been ascertained,
the traditions of the people warrant the inference
that it is of no very recent origin; though pro-
bably it was practised less extensively in former
times than during the fifty years immediately
preceding the subversion of idolatry. _
It is not known to what extent this crime pre-
vailed when captain Wallis discovered Tahiti, or
the subsequent visits the islands received from
Cook, but its frequency and avowed perpetration
was such as to attract the attention of the latter.
Captain Cook's general conduct among the na-
tives was humane; he took every opportunity ot
remonstrating with the king and chiefs against a
usage so merciless and savage. In point of num-
ber the disproportion between the infants spared
and those destroyed was truly distressing. It has
been supposed that not less than two-thirds of the
children were murdered by their own parents.
The affecting details many of the people have
o-iven since their reception of Christianity, au-
thorise the adoption of the opinion as correct.
The first three infants, they observed, were ire-
quently killed, and in the event of twins being


born, both were rarely permitted to live. In the
largest families, more than two or three children
were seldom spared, while the numbers that were
killed were incredible. There have been many
parents, who, according to their own confessions,
or the united testimony of their friends and neigh-
bours, had inhumanly consigned to an untimely
grave four or six, or eight or ten children, and
sometimes even a greater number.
The painful and humiliating conviction, which
we are reluctant to admit, is thus forced upon us
from the testimony of the natives themselves, that
during the generations immediately preceding the
subversion of paganism, not less than two-thirds of
the children were massacred ! A female, who was
accustomed to wash the linen of one of the mission
families had thus cruelly destroyed five or six.
Another, who resided very near them, had been
the mother of eight, of which only one was
spared.
The consideration of these painful facts, cannot
fail to awaken, in the Christian mind, lively
gratitude to the Father of mercies, strong con-
victions of the miseries inseparable from idolatry,
tender commiseration for the heathen, and vigorous
efforts for the amelioration of their wretchedness.
The universality of the crime was no less pain-
ful and astonishing than its repeated perpetration
by the same individuals. It does not appear to
have been confined to any rank or class in the
community; and though it was one of the in-
dispensable regulations in the areoi society, en-
forced on the authority of those gods whom they
were accustomed to consider as the founders of
their order, it was not peculiar to them. It was.


perhaps, less practised by the farmers than any
other class, yet they were not innocent.
Startling and affecting as the inference is, it is,
perhaps, not too much to suppose that few, it any,
became mothers, in those later periods of the
existence of idolatry, who did not also commit
infanticide. Recent facts confirm this melancholy
year 1829, Mr. Williams was con-
versin'* with some friends in his own house, m the
island°of Raiatea, on this subject. Three native
females were sitting in the room at the time he
oldest not more than forty years of age. In the
course of conversation, he observed— Peihaps
some of these females have been guilty of the
crime ” The question was proposed, and it was
found that not one was guiltless; while>the _asto-
nishment of the parties was increased, when it was
reluctantly confessed, that these three females had
destroyed’not fewer than one-and-twenty infants
One had destroyed nine, one seven, and another
five. These individuals were not questioned as
having been more addicted to the practice of this
crimeffian others, but simply because they hap-
veiled to be present when the conversation took
place Without reference to other deeds of bai-
harisni they were, in this respect, a, nation of
murderers ;"aml, in connection with the
stitution, murder was sanctioned by then laws.
The methods by which infanticide was affected
were various vJ cruel. It does not appear that
they ever buried the children alive, as the Sand-
wich islanders were accustomed to do, by digging
■i hole sometimes in the floor of the dwelling,
laying a niece of native cloth upon the infant s


mouth, and treading down the earth upon the
helpless child. Neither were the children as
liable to be destroyed after having been suffered
to live for any time. The horrid deed was always
perpetrated before the victim had seen the light,
or in a hurried manner, and immediately after
birth. The infants thus disposed of were called
tamarii, huihia, uumihea, or tahihaia —children
stabbed or pierced with a sharp pointed strip of
bamboo cane; strangled by placing the thumbs on
the throat; or tahihia, trodden or stamped upon.
These were the mildest methods ; others sometimes
employed are too barbarous to be mentioned.
The parents themselves, or nearest relatives, who
often attended on the occasion for the express
purpose, were the executioners. Often, almost
before the new-born babe could breathe the vital
air, gaze upon the light of heaven, or experience
the sensations of its new existence, that existence
has been extinguished by its cruel mother’s hands ;
and the “ felon sire,” instead of welcoming with
all a father’s joy a daughter or a son, has dug its
grave upon the spot, or among the thick-grown
bushes a few yards distant. On receiving the
warm palpitating body from its mother’s hand, he
has, with fiendish unconcern, deposited the pre-
cious charge, not in a father’s arms, but in its
early sepulchre; and, instead of gazing with all
that thrilling rapture which a father only knows,
upon the tender babe, has concealed it from his
view, by covering its mangled form with earth;
and to obliterate all traces of the deed, has trod-
den down the soil, and strewed it over with green
boughs, or covered it with turf.
This is not an exaggerated description, but the
H 3


narrative of actual fact. Other details, more
touching and acute, have been repeatedly given to
the missionaries in the islands, by individuals who
had been themselves employed in these unnatural
deeds.
The reasons assigned for this practice were
shameful and criminal. The first was, the regu-
lation of the areoi institution; in order to be a
member of which, it was necessary, in obedience
to the express injunction of the tutelar gods of the
order, that no child should be permitted to live.
Another cause was, the weakness and transient
duration of the conjugal bond, whereby, although
the marriage contract was formed by individuals
in the higher ranks of society with persons of cor-
responding rank, fidelity was seldom maintained.
The marriage tie was virtually dissolved whenever
either of the parties desired it, although, amongst
their principal chiefs it was allowed nominally to
remain. When the rank of the parents was un-
equal, the children were almost invariably de-
stroyed ; if not by the parents themselves, by the
relations of those superior in rank, lest the dignity
of the family, or their standing in society, should
be injured by being blended with those of an
inferior class. More infant murders have pro-
bably been committed under these circumstances
from barbarous notions of family pride, than from
any other cause. The raatiras, or secondary class
of chiefs, and others by whom it was practised,
appear to have been influenced by the example ot
their superiors, or the shameless love of idleness.
The spontaneous productions cf the soil were so
abundant, that little care or labour was necessary
to provide the means of subsistence; the climate


was so warm, that the clothing required, as well as
the food, could be procured with the greatest
facility; yet they considered the little trouble
required as an irksome task. A man with three
or four children, and this was a rare occurrence,
was said to be a man with a cumbrous burden ;
and there is reason to believe, that, simply to avoid
the trifling care and effort necessary to provide for
their offspring during the helpless period of in-
fancy and childhood, multitudes were consigned to
an untimely grave. The natives have been heard
to say, that if all the children born were allowed
to live, there would not be food enough in the
island to support them. This, however, has only
been resorted to when other methods of defending
the practice have failed.
During the whole of their lives, the females were
subject to the most abasing degradation. Their
sex was often at their birth the cause of their
destruction; if the purpose of the unnatural pa-
rents had not been fully matured before, the cir-
cumstance of its being a female child was sufficient
to fix their determination on its death. When
asked what could induce them to make a distinc-
tion so invidious, they have answered—that the
fisheries, the service of the temple, and especially
war, were the only purposes for which they
thought it desirable to rear children; that, in
these pursuits, women were comparatively useless,
and therefore female children were rarely suffered
to live. Facts fully confirm these statements.
In the adult population of the islands, at the time
of the arrival of the missionaries, the disproportion
between the sexes was very great; there were pro-
bably four or five men to one woman. In all the


schools established on the first reception of elms-
tianity, the same disproportion prevailed.
In addition to this cruel practice, others, equally
unnatural, prevailed, for which the people had not
only the sanction of their priests, but the direct
example of their respective deities.
War, among uncivilized nations, is often an ob-
ject of the highest ambition, and a source of most
ardent delight. It was so among the South Sea
islanders. They appear to have been greatly ad-
dicted to it from the earliest periods of their his-
tory. It occurred very frequently prior to the
introduction of Christianity. During the fifteen
years Mr. Nott spent in the islands, while the
people were pagans, the island of Tahiti was
involved in actual war ten different tunes. The
missionaries were painfully familiar with r , 1
surrounded their dwellings, and the wounded m
battle have often, with their wounds J5 ei *
bleeding, sought their houses for relief. When
war was in agitation, a human sacrifice was
offered to their great war god, named Oro , t
ceremony connected with it was called fetching
the god to preside over the army. The image of
the god was brought out; when the victim was
offered, a red feather was taken from Ins person
and given to the party, who bore it their com-
panions, and considered it as the symbol ofOro s
presence and sanction, during their subsequent
Pl Tamai°or S ’taua, is the general term for war, in
all its diversified forms; the same word is also
used to denote quarrelling. Are is the teim 01
battle. The modes of attack and defence were va-
rious. and regulated by circumstances. The torces


were marshalled for the fight by the principal
leader, who was said to shape or form the battle;
when this was accomplished, the signal was given,
and uniting in the song of battle to the god of war,
or in deafening shouts and imprecations, they
rushed with bold impetuosity to join in combat.
Sometimes their attacks were made by night, but
then they generally bore a torch. To ambus-
cades they seldom had recourse, though they some-
times adopted what was called the attack by stealth;
surprising their enemies by an unexpected onset.
The flags of the gods, or the emblems of the idols,
were carried to the battle, to inspire the combatants
with confidence, and the martial banners they em-
ployed were formerly hoisted on board the dif-
ferent fleets, but more recently carried by the
bravest of their warriors in the centre of their
armies. Their flags were red, white, or black:
rude and harsh kinds of music animated the
warriors in their fleets, and the combatants
marched to the battle inspired by the sound of
the trumpet. When their modes of attack were
deliberate, the celebrated warriors of each army
occasionally marched forward beyond the first line
of the body to which they belonged, and on ap-
proaching the ranks of the enemy, sat down on
the sand or the grass. Two or three from one of
these parties would then rise, and, advancing a
few yards towards their opponents, boastfully chal-
lenge them to the combat. When the challenge
was accepted, which frequently was with the ut-
most promptitude, the combatants advanced with
intimidating menaces. They often addressed each
other by recounting their names, the names and
deeds of their ancestors, their own achievements


in combat, the prowess of their arms, and the aug-
mented fame they should acquire by the addition
of their present foes to the number of those they
had already slain; in conclusion, inviting them to
advance, that they might be devoted to their god,
who was hovering by to receive their sacrifice.
With taunting scorn the antagonist would reply
much in the same strain, sometimes mingling
affected pity with his denunciations. When they
had finished their harangue, the club of insult, or
insulting spear was raised, and the onset com-
menced. Sometimes it was a single combat,
fought in the space between the two armies, and
in sight of both. At other times several men en-
gaged on both sides, when those not engaged,
though fully armed and equipped, kept their seat
on the ground. If a single combat, when one
was disabled or slain, the victor would challenge
another, and seldom thought of retreating so long
as one remained. Wdien a number were engaged
and one fell, a warrior from his own party arose
and maintained the struggle: when either party
retreated, the ranks of the army to which it be-
longed rushed forward to sustain it; this brought
the opposing army on, and from a single combat
or skirmish it became a general engagement.
The conflict was carried on with the most
savage fury, such as might be expected in bar-
barous warriors, who imagined the gods on whom
their destinies depended, had actually entered into
their weapons, giving precision and force to their
blows, direction to their missiles, and imparting to
the whole a supernatural fatality. The combatants
did not use much science in the action, nor scarcely
aimed to parry their enemy’s weapons: they used


neither shield nor target, and believing that the
gods sped their weapons with more than human
force upon their assailants, they depended on
strength more than art for success. Their clubs
were invariably aimed at the head, and often with
the lozenge-shaped weapons they would cleave
the skulls of their opponents. Their spears they
directed against the body, and often a deadly
thrust would pierce through the heart.
The dress and ornaments of the warriors of
Tahiti and the adjacent islands were singular, and
unlike those of most savage nations, being often
remarkably cumbersome. Their helmets, though
less elegant and imposing than the fine Grecian-
formed helmet of the Hawaiians, were adapted to
produce considerable effect. Some of the Tahi-
tians wore only a fillet or bandage round the
temples, but many had a quantity of cloth bound
round, in the form of a high turban, which not
only tended to increase their apparent stature, but
broke the force of a blow from a club, or a thrust
from a spear. The most elegant head-dresses,
however, were those worn by the inhabitants of
the Austral Islands, Tubuai, Rurutu, &c. Their
helmets were considerably diversified in form,
some resembling a tight round cap, fitted closely
to the head, with a light plume waving on the
summit. Those used by the natives of Tubuai
and High Island, resembled an officer's cocked hat,
worn with the ends projecting over each shoulder;
the front beautifully ornamented with the green
and red wing and tail feathers of a species of
paroquet. The Rurutuan helmet is graceful in
appearance, and useful in the protection it affords
to the head of the wearer. It was a cap fitted


close to the head, and reaching to the ears, made
with thick stuff or native cloth, on a cane ol frame-
work. The lower part of the front is ornamented
with hunches of beautiful red and green feathers,
tastefully arranged; and above these a line ol the
long slender tail feathers of the tropic or man-of-
war bird, is fixed on a wicker frame : the hinder
part of the cap is covered with long flowing human
hair of a light-brown or tawny colour, said to be
the human beard; this is fastened to a slight net-
work, attached to the crown of the helmet, and
being detached from any other part, often floats
wildly in the wind, and increases the agitated
appearance of the wearer. On each side, imme-
diately above the ears, numerous pieces of mothei-
of-pearl and other shells are fastened, not as plates
or scales, but as dependent in a bunch, and at-
tached to the helmet by a small strong cord, simi-
lar to those passing under the dim, by which the
helmet is fastened to the head. These shells, &c.
when shaken by the movements of the wearei s
head, produce a rattling noise, which heightens
the din of savage warfare. The Rurutu helmet
though more complete and useful, was far less
imposing than that worn by the Georgian and
Society islanders: this was also a cap, fitted closely
to the head, surrounded by a cylindrical structure
of cane-work, ornamented with the dark glossy
feathers of aquatic birds; the hollow crown fre-
quently towering two or three feet above the head,
and being curved at the top, appeared to nod 01
bend with every movement of the wearer. Ihe
dingers, and the most light and swift among the
fighting men, wore in battle only a loose mantle.
Some of the fighting men wore a kind of armour


of net-work, formed by small cords, wound round
tbe body and limbs so tight as merely to allow of
the exercise of the arms and legs, and not to im-
pede the circulation of the blood, and a kind of
wooden armour for the breast, back, and sides,
covered with successive folds of thick cloth, bound
on with ropes. Over this a costly cloth was
spread; the head was guarded with a correspond-
ing quantity of cloth; the warrior, secure against
either club or spear, was generally stationed with
the main body of the army, though so encum-
bered as to render retreat impracticable, and, in
the event of the defeat of his companions, was
invariably captured or slain. In general the dress
of the Tahitian warrior must have been exceed-
ingly troublesome : to make an imposing appear-
ance, and to defend their person, seem to have
been the only end at which they aimed. They
went to battle in their best clothes, sometimes
perfumed with fragrant oil and adorned with flow-
ers, and their clothes bound round the waist with
a finely braided sash or girdle. On the breast
they wore a handsome ornament, ingeniously
wrought with mother-of-pearl shells, white and
coloured feathers, and dog’s hair.
When the murder and destruction of actual
conflict terminated, and the vanquished sought
security in flight, or in the natural strong holds
of the mountains, some of the conquerors pursued
them to their hiding places, while others repaired
to the villages and destroyed the wives, children,
infirm and afflicted relatives of those who had fled
before them in the field. These defenceless
wretches seldom made much resistance to the
lawless and merciless barbarians, whose conduct
i


betrayed a cowardly delight in torturing their help-
less victims. Plunder and revenge were the prin-
cipal objects in these expeditions. Every thing
valuable they destroyed or carried away, while the
miserable objects of their vengeance were deli-
berately murdered. No age or sex was spared:
the infant that unconsciously smiled in its mother s
arras, and the venerable grey-haired father or
mother, experienced unbridled and horrid bar-
barity. The bodies of the slain were treated m
the most savage manner, they were pierced with
their spears, and at times the conduct of the
victors towards their lifeless remains was incon-
ceivably barbarous.
Among the native customs connected with the
death of relations or friends, none was perhaps
more singular than the otohaa, which, though not
confined to instances of death, was then most
violent. It consisted of the most frantic expres-
sions of grief, under which individuals acted as it
bereft of reason. This wailing, which commenced
when the person appeared to be dying, was at that
time most distressing; but, no sooner had the
spirit departed, than the individuals became un-
governable. Their grief was not only expressed
in the loudest and most affecting tone, but was
accompanied with actions and selt-mflictions, in-
dicative of a state of insanity : such as tearing
their hair, rending their garments, and cutting
themselves with sharks’ teeth or knives, in a most
appalling manner. The instrument usually em-
ployed was a small cane, about four inches long,
with five or six sharks’ teeth fixed in, on opposite
sides With one of these instruments every fe-
male provided herself after marriage, and on ocea


sions of death it was unsparingly used. In ad-
dition to this, another instrument was frequently
appropriated to the same cruel purpose; this re-
sembled a plumber’s mallet, about six inches long,
rounded at one end for a handle, and armed with
two or three rows of sharks’ teeth, fixed in the
wood at the other. With this, on the death of a
relative or friend, they cut themselves unmerci-
fully, striking the head, temples, cheek and breast,
till the blood flowed profusely from the wounds.
At the same time they uttered the most deafening
and agonizing cries ; and the distortion of then-
countenances, torn and dishevelled hair, and wild
gestures, gave them a frightful and almost inhu-
man appearance. The otohaa commenced with
the nearest relations of the deceased, but was not
confined to them, for no sooner had the tidings
spread, and the sound of lamentations been heard
through the neighbourhood, than the friends and
relatives repaired to the spot, and joined in the
tragic performance. It does not appear that
these enormities were practised to the same extent
here as in the Sandwich Islands at these times j
but, on the death of a king or principal chief, the
scenes exhibited in and around the house were, in
appearance. The relatives and members of the
household began, the other chiefs of the island
and their relatives came to sympathise with the
survivors, and on reaching the place joined in the
infuriated conduct of the bereaved. The tenantry
of the chiefs also came, and, giving themselves up
to all the savage infatuation which the conduct of
their associates or the influence of their supersti-
tions inspired, they not only tore their hair and
lacerated their bodies till they were covered with


blood, but often fougbt with clubs and stones till
murder followed. e
It is somewhat remarkable that the practice o
preserving the bodies of the dead by the process
of embalming, which has been thought to indicate
a hi"h degree of civilization, and which was car-
ried to such perfection by one of the most cele-
brated nations of antiquity, some thousand years
ago, should be found to prevail among this people.
U is also practised by other distant nations of the
Pacific, aid on some of the coasts washed by its
waters. In commencing the process of embalm-
ing and placing the body on the bier, another
priest was employed, who was called the talma
bure tiapapau, literally, “ corpse-praying one ri
His office was singular: when the house for the
dead had been erected, and the corpse P IT™
the platform or bier, the priest order.3dlaholeto
he dug in the earth or floor, near the foot of the
platform. Over this he prayed to the god, by
whom it was supposed the spirit of the deceased
had been required. The purport of his prayer
was that all the dead man’s sms, and especially
that for which his soul had been called to the mght
might be deposited there; that they m.ght not
attach in any degree to the survivors. and
anger of the god might be appeased. The puest
next addressed the corpse, usually saying, El. m
oi na te hara e vai ai. “ With you let the guilt
now remain." The pillar, or P“Y- n ,i. e hole
as it was called, was then planted m the: hole,
perhaps designed as a olthe de-
ceased, to exist after his body should have de-
cayed- the earth was thrown over, as they sup-
pied, the guilt of the departed, and the hole filled


up. At the conclusion of this part of the curious
rite, the priest proceeded to the side of the corpse,
and taking a number of small slips of the fa maia
plantain leaf-stalk, fixed two or three pieces under
each arm, placed a few on the breast, and then,
addressing the dead body, said. There are your
family, there is your child, there is your wife,
there is your father, and there is your mother.
Be satisfied yonder, (that is, in the world of
spirits,) look not towards those who are left in
this world. The concluding parts of the cere-
mony were designed to impart contentment to the
departed, and to prevent the spirit from repairing
to the places of his former resort, and so distress-
ing the survivors. This was considered a most
important ceremony, being a kind of mass for the
dead, and necessary for the peace of the living, as
well as the quiet of the deceased. It was seldom
omitted by any who could procure the accustomed
fees for the priest, which for this service were
generally furnished in pigs and cloth, in proportion
to the rank or possessions of the family. All who
were employed in embalming, which they called
miriy were, during the process, carefully avoided
by every person, as the guilt of the crime for
which the deceased had died, was supposed in
some degree to attach to the persons who touched
the body. They did not feed themselves, lest
food defiled by the touch of their own polluted
hands should cause their own death; but were fed
by others. As soon as the ceremony for depo-
siting the sins in the hole was over, all who had
touched the body or garments of the deceased,
which were buried or destroyed, fled precipitate-
ly into the sea, to cleanse themselves from the
i 3


pollution called maburuhuru, which they imagined
to have contracted by touching the corpse; cast-
ing also into the sea the clothes they had worn
while employed in the work. Having finished
their ablutions, they gathered a few pieces of coral
from the bottom of the sea, and returning with
them to the house, addressed the dead body by
saying, “ With you may the maburuhuru, or
pollution be,” and threw down the pieces of coral
on the top of the hole, that had been dug for the
purpose of receiving every thing contaminating
connected with the deceased. The ceremonies
were generally finished at this time; hut if the
property of the family was abundant, their attach-
ment to the deceased great, and they wished his
spirit to he conveyed to Rohutu noanoa, the ia-
hitian paradise, a fifth priest was employed.
Costly offerings were presented and valuable ar-
ticles given to the priest of Romatane, the keeper
of this happy place. Uruteatea was the guide of
such as went thither, and the duty of the puest
now employed was to engage him to conduct the
spirit of the departed to this fancied region of
euioyment.
The Tahitians divide their history into two eras;
the first they call the hau, hupe-hupe, the rude
or unpolished age: during this period, the bodies
were allowed to remain in the houses m which they
had lived, and which was still occupied by the sur-
vivors, a kind of stage or altar was erected in the
house on which the body was laid. Bu \
the people became wiser and society improved,
the hau, unu, neat or polished age commenced
which continued till the arrival of foreigners,
was in the commencement of this age that sepa


rate houses were built for the dead. The houses
erected as depositories for the dead were small
and temporary buildings, though often remarkably
neat. The pillars supporting the roof were planted
in the ground, and were seldom more than six
feet high. The bier, or platform, on which the
body was laid, was about three feet from the
ground, and moveable, for the purpose of being
drawn out, and of exposing the body to the rays
of the sun. The corpse was usually clothed, ex-
cept when visited by the relatives or friends of
the deceased; it was, however, carefully rubbed
with aromatic oils once a day. A light kind of
altar was erected near it, on which articles of
food, fruits, and garlands of flowers were daily
deposited; and if the deceased were a chief of
rank or fame, a priest or other person was ap-
pointed to attend the corpse and present food to
its mouth at different periods during the day.
The marae or temple being sacred, and the bodies
being under the guardianship of the gods, they
were in general considered secure when deposited
there. This was not, however, always the case,
and in times of war the victors sometimes not
only despoiled the temples of the vanquished, and
bore away their idol, but robbed the sacred en-
closure of the bones of celebrated individuals.
These spoils were appropriated to what the natives
considered the lowest degradation, by being con-
verted into chisels, or borers, for the builders of
canoes and houses. In order to avoid this, they
carried the bones of their chiefs and even the
recently deceased corpse, and deposited them in
the caverns of some of the most inaccessible rocks


in the lofty and fearful precipices of the moun-
tainous defiles.
In this brief outline of the state of the people
when the mission was commenced among them, it
seems requisite to give some account of the num-
ber of the inhabitants in Tahiti at this period of
their history.
Early writers estimated the population at an
amount far beyond that which the missionaiies
found when they reached the islands. The elder
Forster gives the following estimation of the num-
ber of inhabitants on the island of Tahiti, namely,
as consisting of 121,500. This computation was
made from exceedingly uncertain data, namely,
the number of fighting men present with the fleet
of canoes collected at Pare in 1774. He was in-
formed they all came from two districts, and he
multiplied what he supposed to be the average
number of men by the total number of districts,
which made 2,700. Each man he supposed to be
married, and to have one child; thus he made
81,000 connected with the fleets, besides old per-
sons, and those who were not warriors, or em-
ployed in navigation. He supposed the number
of inhabitants to be at least double the above
number. But without alluding to the deceptive
sources whence he drew his inferences, Forstei is
wrong in the very outset. Supposing one hundred
and fifty-nine war canoes to have come Irom
Atehuru, which is doubtful, as the fleet piobably
included those of the allies; while Atehuru is the
name of a district, it is also the designation ot one
of the five great political divisions ; and calculating
from the men in the fleet, he should have multi


plied by five, or at most by six, instead of twenty-
four or forty-three. This estimate of Forster’s,
which was probably incorrect, on account of the
fallacy of his premises, as was also that of Cook,
who estimated the inhabitants by the number he
saw at one place, multiplied by the geographical
extent of the island, shows how unsafe it is to
hazard definite statements on partial and imper-
fect information.
Whatever the population might have been in
1774, in 1797, or any earlier period, when the first
missionaries arrived, it did not amount to 17,C00.
Mr. Wilson, the chief officer of the Duff, travelled
round the island for the special purpose of ascer-
taining the number of inhabitants; and after visit-
ing each district, and conversing with most of the
chiefs, gives the following tabular view of the
result:—
Total of men, women, and children in
Tahiti - 12,042
Ditto in Taiarabu, or smaller peninsula 4,008
Total on the whole island - - 16,050
This estimate vvas probably greater than the
actual amount of population at the time; but,
supposing it to be correct, it shows an amazing
difference between the actual and sujiposed num-
ber of inhabitants, as stated by more superficial
observers.
Having given some account of the circum-
stances of the people at the time when the first
missionaries arrived among them, the narrative of
their proceedings will now be resumed.


CHAPTER V.
Effects produced on the Minds of the Natives by
the different Occupations of the Missionaries;
at Saw-pit; the Forge, Study of the Lan-
guage.—Visit to the Chiefs— Insecure State of
Native Society. —Account of the Murder of a
Native.—Efforts to prevent the offering of Hu-
man Sacrifices, and the Murder of Infants.—
Arrival of a Ship in Distress—Desertion of
part of the Crew. —Kindness of the Mission-
aries to the Captain.—Their Endeavours to
secure the return of the Deserters.—Four of
the Missionaries assaulted and plundered by
the Natives.—Cause of this Barbarity.—Its
disastrous Effects upon the Mission. Depar-
ture of Eleven of the Missionaries from Tahiti.
—Sentiments and Feelings of those who re-
mained,—Their Decision on the Subject of
War.
It was not till after the departure of the Dull
that the missionaries from England were enabled
to apply themselves in earnest to their important
work. But as captain Wilson had now taken his
final leave of them, and they felt that they were
left to pursue, in dependance on Divine guidance
and aid, their adventurous career, they began to
arrange their plans for regular and persevering
labour. In this they were encouraged by the
continued friendship of Pomare and his cpieen,
the high priest Hamanemane, who had been cap


tain Wilson’s friend, and other chiefs, who treated
them with kindness, and supplied them generously
with whatever the island produced. The daily
occupations of the missionaries, especially those
who followed some handicraft, kept the curiosity
of the natives in a state of high excitement, while
they afforded them much gratification. The erec-
tion of a saw-pit, and the cutting of a tree into a
number of boards, the saw, as they expressed it,
biting the boards asunder, filled them with astonish-
ment and delight: they had before never thought
it possible to make more than two planks out of a
single tree, however large it might be, which they
did by splitting it down the middle. But when
the forge was erected, and the anvil first employed
on their shore, their wonder and joy exceeded all
bounds. They were previously acquainted with
the superiority of iron tools over the stone hatchets
and chisels of bone, which they had been accus-
tomed to use. The whole process of working
iron, the flying of the sparks when it was beaten
on the anvil, its hissing when plunged into the
water, equally astonished them; but the facility
with which a bar of iron was wrought into adzes,
hatchets, fish-spears, or fish-hooks, filled them with
delight.
Pomare came into the shop one day while the
smith was at work, and after gazing with extacy
for some time, was so overcome, that he caught
up the smith in his arms, and disregarding the
dirt and perspiration produced by his occupation,
most cordially embraced him, and saluted him
according to the fashion of the country, by touch-
ing noses. Implements of iron were there justly
reckoned among the most valuable articles which


their intercourse with foreigners enabled them to
obtain ; and the prospect of a perpetual supply of
them from the establishment of the forge among
them, was regarded by them as the greatest benefit
they could possibly receive.
While the labours of the sawyer, the carpenter,
and the smith were thus raising the mission in the
estimation of the people, the missionaries generally
were pursuing the acquisition of the language with
diligence and perseverance. It is an uncouth
language, and the difficulty of acquiring an ac-
quaintance with it, and of reducing it to a written
form, are greater than are generally imagined.
The pronunciation of the natives was their only
guide to the selection of the letters to he employed
in representing the words they expressed. And
when they had succeeded in fixing in a manner
comparatively satisfactory the spelling of the
words which they heard, the ascertaining of the
precise meaning of these words was a work ot
great perplexity and labour. At stated times they
met together for the purpose of blending the
knowledge they had been able to gather from the
people, and assisting each other in the work.
Occasionally one or two of them went to reside
with some of the chiefs for a season, and thus laid
a necessity upon themselves to use the native
language, "if they held any communication with
the people, and to render themselves more familiar
with the native modes of thought and expiession.
The magnitude and importance of their object
encouraged them to persevere, and the difficulties
became less formidable as they advanced, though
for many years they were such as to require the
most patient and laborious application. One ot


them, still living, and well versed in the language,
has repeatedly been heard to say, that he was ten
years on the island before he understood the pre-
cise meaning of one of their words of very fre-
quent occurrence.
Their progress in the language, and more ge-
neral and familiar intercourse with the people,
greatly enlarged their acquaintance with their true
character, and with the formidable difficulties
which they had to overcome; while the progress
of events among the natives themselves, increased
their embarrassment. The political state of the
island was far from being tranquil; the mission-
aries had more than once been requested to assist
some of the chiefs in their quarrels, but had firmly
declined ; and as it was likely they would be in-
creasingly exposed to the consequences of actual
war, they unitedly deliberated on the course which,
in the event of its occurrence, it would be proper
for them to pursue. The result of their delibera-
tion was a public declaration, that they could take
no part in any of the wars in which even their
friends might be engaged; and that the fire-arms
which they had brought on shore, for the purpose
of intimidating any who might be disposed to
attack them, should be used only in the event of
their being attacked in their dwelling; and then
not until every other means of self-preservation
had been used.
The restraint which the natives had for some
time after the landing of the missionaries imposed
on their strong disposition to steal, began to de-
cline, and rendered a nightly watch around their
dwelling for some time necessary; and, notwith-
standing this precaution, one of the natives, with
K


that dexterity for which they have ever been dis-
tinguished, one night burrowed in the ground
under the fence which formed the outside of the
blacksmith’s shop, and rising on the inside took
a number of valuable articles, and escaped with
them unperceived, by the same way as he had
entered. By the exertions of the friendly clnet
of the district the property was recovered; but
within a week’s time another attempt was made to
plunder them. On this occasion they remark:
“ The natives that surround us are as void ot
o-ratitude as of principle, and seem, in general,
to he watching opportunities to impose upon us.
We endeavour to defend ourselves from depreda-
tions without doing any injury to the depredators,
when we have it in our power, thereby mani-
festing, that we desire to do them good. But our
lenity has been construed into cowardice by some,
and they take encouragement, therefore, to ani-
mate each other in their evil practices.
When the Duff had first approached the shores
of Tahiti, an individual of some importance came
on hoard, made the captain his friend, and took a
conspicuous part in all the transactions relating o
the settlement of the mission. This was Hama-
nemane, the high priest of the island; he had
formerly been chief of one of the western islands,
and was a shrewd, active, ambitious politician, as
well as a bigotted idolater. He, however, treated
the missionaries with uniform kindness, and ren-
dered them important services, though his de-
mands upon them were at times greater than they
C °Sevemdays after the final departure of the Duff,
Pomare, who was then in the district of Papara,


on the south-west part of the island, sent for this
individual to go and offer a human sacrifice at a
great convocation of the chiefs, called Taurua.
The wily priest pretended to be disinclined to the
task, but said he feared the anger of Pomare if he
refused, and requested that some of the mission-
aries might accompany him, suggesting that the
chief would not require it in the presence of those
to whom he had promised that he would abolish
the custom. Perceiving how criminal the mission-
aries considered this practice, the priest had, from
the early part of his acquaintance with them, ex-
pressed his willingness to abolish it, and on one
occasion, before going on shore, had requested an
extra quantity of wine, stating that he was going
to sacrifice a man, and required it to sustain him
in the performance of the bloody rite.
As it was considered a favourable opportunity
for bearing their testimony in the name of the
true God, against the frequent murders which
were thus perpetrated under the sanction of reli-
gion, two of the missionaries accompanied the
high priest. On their journey they spent a sab-
bath in the district of Atehuru, where one of the
missionaries read an address in their language,
which, he observes, they appeared to understand,
but did not show any desire to be instructed in
the things of God. The missionary states, in
reference to his observations among the people
at this place, “ The more I see of the temper,
customs, and conduct of this people, the more I
am confirmed in the opinion I have some time
formed, that our success will not be speedy. The
Lord, however, can remove all obstacles; but we
are not to expect it out of the ordinary way.”


On the following day they reached the district
in which the chiefs were assembled. One of them
presented, on his return, the following account to
the body of missionaries, which shows the state of
unsettleness and insecurity of native society at the
time.
After breakfast, on the 15th of August, 1/97,
we paid a visit to Otoo, who has a residence in
this district. On seeing us approach his house,
he came out to meet us; he appeared to have
been drinking ava, as all the symptoms of it were
evident. After some trifling conversation, he ac-
companied us part of the way towards the habita-
tion of Pomare ; we were met by one of Pomare s
sons, chief of Tiaraboo, the lesser peninsula.
When we arrived at the habitation of Pomare, we
found him busily employed in superintending his
servants in dying cloth, it being customary for
him to make large presents to the chiefs and
areois at the annual feast, which is near at hand,
for which he has been making provisions for some
time past. At this feast it is also customary to
offer human sacrifices, and distribute the limbs of
the victim to the populace, in the same manner as
they do the cloth; the heads being deposited on
the marai, and the eyes presented to the young
king. . .
After receiving some refreshment, we took lea\e
of Pomare, and returned to the habitation of
Temaree (chief of Papara at the time). On our
arrival we were informed of a very affecting cir-
cumstance having taken place, namely, that the
servants of Temarge had killed a man. On m-
quiry, they informed us that the man was a thief;
that they caught him robbing the plantations of


ava, and stoned him to death. We were desirous
of knowing if they had offered the man as a sacri-
fice to their eatooa: they replied. No; that they
had buried him, and that thieves should be pu-
nished. To this we could make no reply, being
unable to inform them (for want of knowing their
language) how to proceed in such cases. In the
afternoon several men from Tiaraboo came to
Temarge, and seemed much displeased on account
of the man's being killed. In the evening, the
natives who came with us from Matavai alleged
that it was very bad to kill the man, who was no
thief, but only came to ask for (or demand) the
ava, being a principal servant of Pom are; but
that they were afraid to say much, for fear of the
images or gods, which Temaree had in his house,
who would come at night when they were asleep,
and kill them.
1 endeavoured to convince them their fears
were groundless, but to no purpose ; they told me,
I might ask Peter, or John the Swede, if what
they told me was not true. It growing dark, we
took some refreshment, leaving brother Main in
conversation with Temaree. In a short time we
were alarmed with the cry of Tamai! tamai! i. e.
War ! war ! occasioned by a report that the people
of Tiaraboo intended to attack Temaree in the
night. Brother Main coming in, brought infor-
mation of the report, and that Temaree and his
servants were making necessary preparations for
defence, observing, that he did not know how to
act; to which it was replied, if the people of
Tiaraboo come, we must endeavour to compro-
mise matters, and act as mediators. Brother Main
then went to see what was going forward, leaving
k 3


his companion to rest with his clothes on, to be
ready in case of an alarm. Temaree’s servants
kept watch all night, some of them being sent to
a distance to give alarm in the event of the ap-
proach of a body of men; but we did not meet
with further interruption during the night.
On the next day, the alarm of war having sub-
sided, the natives were quiet, and turned their
attention to the ava (or intoxicating drink).
After breakfast I went to Pomare’s house, where
I was surrounded by many natives, who, thinking
I was a friend of Temaree, the chief, whose ser-
vants had killed the man, looked very sternly at
me; having their weapons in their hands and
their turbans on, their appearance was formidable.
I remained in the house during the night, but
had little rest, being frequently disturbed by the
cry of war. Pomare slept with a spear by his
side, and having a musqueteer to guard him.
The next morning I commenced my return to
Matavai, with orders from Pomare to inform the
brethren that there would be no war. Pomare
advised me to go over the isthmus, to avoid any
evil designing men of the opposite party, and to
make the best of my way home.
Pomare and his son Otoo were not very strong
in the government of the island; the majority of
the people were against them ; besides which, there
were two or three powerful chiefs, who were their
avowed enemies, and who were kept quiet only
through fear of being unable to stand against
Pomare, aided as he was by some of the Euro-
peans, previously in the country, and, as they
supposed he would be, by the missionaries. The
sort of feudal system which prevailed in the island,


the enmity subsisting between the principal chiefs,
and the constant appeal to their weapons, to resent
every insult or aggression, occasioned the perpetual
agitation and insecurity and apprehension of blood-
shed, which were very unfavourable to the objects
of the mission; and every week the missionaries
found this state of things became more fully de-
veloped before them.
The frequency with which instances of the
murder of infants by their own parents came be-
fore them, continued to occasion great distress,
and led to the frequent consideration of the means
which they could most successfully employ to
induce the people to diminish or discontinue the
practice. In the month of November, in the
same year, they resolved to take the earliest op-
portunity of bringing the subject again before the
notice of the rulers of the country.
Before the close of the year in which they had
arrived at Tahiti, they heard of another barba-
rous murder. On the 24th of December, Ha-
manemane arrived, and informed the brethren pri-
vately that Pomare had killed a man, contrary to
his promise; but that on his, Hamanemane’s re-
fusing to offer him to his god, he had buried
him. The reason of this criminal barbarity was
a dream in the night, in which, it was said, the
god appeared to Pomare, and told him he must
sacrifice a man to him, or be the object of his
wrath. In obedience to the intimation thus given,
this chief arose and seized the first man he saw
suitable to his purpose, and murdered him with-
out hesitation. On the day on which this in-
telligence was brought to the missionaries, Po-
mare, accompanied by his retinue, arrived at the


west end of the district, and sent a messenger to
request them to beware of thieves during the night.
On which account they felt it requisite to keep a
double watch until morning. The last day of
the year was a sabbath, which the brethren ob-
served in peace and security. In noting it in
their journal, they observe, “ Thus we are brought
to the conclusion of another year, the principal
part of which was spent among rude and bar-
barous heathen; and, notwithstanding the fears
which are inseparable from our situation, and
the dangers that surround us, hitherto our God
has not suffered any one to do us any real hurt;
nor has he exercised us with any sickness of con-
sequence since we have been on the island
The quarrels and petty wars between the ad-
herents of the principal chiefs, forced upon the mis-
sionaries the conviction of the possibility, not to say
probability, of their being involved in some of them;
although they might be ignorant of the grounds
or existence of any misunderstanding between
their friends, the inhabitants of Matavai, and any
other portion of the people; and they felt it re-
quisite to consider what course it would be proper
for them to take in the event of their house being
assaulted, or even threatened with an attack. See-
ing it necessary to act in the defensive, and not
yield their little property to plunder, and them-
selves to lawless outrage and savage barbarity, it
was proposed that the dwelling be surrounded by
a strong paling, that opportunity might be afforded
for negociation, to persuade their assailants to
desist.
Shortly after they had adopted this resolution,
it appeared desirable to erect a more durable ha


bitation than that which had been provided by the
natives on their first landing; and having selected a
suitable spot in the neighbourhood, and obtained a
supply of timber from the chiefs, they commenced
the work with industry and spirit, considering
such a building as requisite for their security as
their convenience.
The year 1799 had commenced, when they
heard that a general meeting of the natives
was to take place in the adjoining district of
Pare; and deeming it a suitable season to bring
the subject of recent deliberation before them,
six of the missionaries were sent shortly after-
wards, to the assembled chiefs and people, in
the district of Pare, to urge upon them attention
to the instruction they were desirous to impart;
to point out the benefit that would result from
their acquiring a knowledge of the mechanical arts
of Europeans, and especially from instruction
concerning the living and true God. To inform
them, that, in those countries where the word of
Jehovah is known, the worship of idols and offer-
ing of human sacrifices are abolished, and mur-
der, and other crimes equally heinous, are pu-
nished with death. They were also to advise them
to adopt the customs of these countries, and ear-
nestly to entreat them to use their utmost en-
deavour to put a stop to the inhuman practice of
infant killing, which is so great an evil in the
sight of God, and also tends to the depopulation
of the islands, and the extirpation of their race;
and to further their design of saving infants, they
were to repeat their promise to build a house for
the reception of such children as might be saved;
and to instruct them in building vessels, &c.


The missionaries went on this benevolent er-
rand to the great meeting of the chiefs at Pare,
on the 10th of Janmny, 1798, but found that the
confusion and noisy mirth, the exhibition of the
areois, the gluttony, debauchery, and intoxication
which prevailed, so occupied their attention, that
they returned with hearts deeply affected by the
aboundings of iniquity which they had witnessed,
and without having effected their object. Three
weeks afterwards there was a large meeting of the
chiefs and people at Matavai; and in a public as-
sembly, the missionaries, by means of Peter the
Swede as their interpreter, urged upon their at-
tention the subject which they had brought before
them at Pare, and endeavoured especially to pre-
vail upon them to discontinue the revolting crime
of infant murder. The assembly paid great at-
tention to the statements that were made, and at
the close of the address, the chiefs promised that
no more infants should be destroyed. It is, how-
ever, probable, from their subsequent conduct,
that at that time they were practising the greatest
possible deception, and making a promise which
they never meant to keep.
An event now occurred, comparatively insigni-
ficant in itself, but which was attended with results
as unexpected as they were disastrous to the mis-
sion. Early in the morning of the 6th of March
the shout of" A ship,” was heard among the natives.
The circumstance of the first ship that had visited
the islands, arriving on the day on which the Duff
had reached Matavai, added to the excitement her
appearance produced. On reaching the mouth of
the harbour, the progress of the vessel was stopped,
and three of the missionaries went on board, and


were joined by a fourth before coming to anchor.
On their return to the shore, the missionaries
informed their companions that the vessel was the
Nautilus, of Macao; Mr. Bishop being captain,
and Mr. Simpson supercargo. The vessel was
originally bound for the north-west coast of Ame-
rica, for the purpose of obtaining furs, but had
been driven by stress of weather to Kamschatka,
and so seriously injured as to relinquish the voyage
originally contemplated, and proceed to Masuefero.
In prosecuting her intention she touched at the
Sandwich Islands for refreshments, and on depart-
ing brought away two Englishmen and seven
natives, whom they purposed leaving on Masuefero.
On their way it was designed to have made the
Marquesas, but their intentions were defeated by
the currents or prevalence of contrary winds, which
compelled them to direct their course to Otaheite.
The brethren informed the society that the vessel
was in great distress, and destitute of most of the
necessaries of life, and that the captain had nothing
to barter with but muskets and ammunition, (the
very things the natives desired, but which the
brethren, on many accounts, thought the most
improper for them.) Brother Jefferson, with the
consent of the three brethren, proposed to Messrs,
Bishop and Simpson that their wants should be
supplied, as far as possible, by the missionaries on
the island, on condition they kept their muskets
and ammunition from the hands of the natives.
This proposal met with the approbation of the
commander, and was readily acceded to by them.
Great numbers of people went on board when
the vessel anchored, and, among others, Po-
marc, who shewed expressions of contempt in his


countenance at the apparent poverty of the ship
and the distresses of the people. There was much
confusion and noise with the people throughout
the day.
On the next day the missionaries heard that
five of the natives of the Sandwich Islands made
their escape from the ship during the previous
night. The vessel being ill manned, the captains
declared their intention not to sail without them,
and requested the exertions of the missionaries to
recover them, informing us that, should they be
left upon the island, we might expect mischief
from them. The missionaries sent some of the
natives belonging to the settlement in quest of
them, and observe, “ Pomare, Idea, and Otu, are
at Opare; they neither visit us nor the ship, nor
send any food to the vessel.” Towards evening
the people who went in search of the deserters
returned with one of them. On the following day
they were informed that the other four had taken
shelter with the king, who refused to give them
up, expressing his displeasure with the men who
took their companion yesterday. When the de-
serter was taken 6n board, the captain still seemed
unwilling to sail without the rest, and expressed a
wish that Otu might be informed, that if they were
returned to the ship he would give him a couple
of muskets. This was communicated to the king,
and they heard that he promised to send the men
on board.
The missionaries collected for the ship cocoa-
nuts, bread-fruit, &c., and about twenty hogs,
which were sent on board. When the brethren
came on shore, they informed the society that it
was the intention of captains Bishop and Simpson


to sail on the morrow, having a sufficient stock for
their intended voyage; that they expressed their
gratitude for having received such seasonable sup-
plies where least expected ; that they offered to
make any return within the compass of their
ability, and that they should not be satisfied unless
something w r ere received. The next day, however,
which was the 9th of March, they learned that the
king had not fulfilled his promise of sending the
men on board, and refused to do so without a
musket for each man. On the 10th of March the
vessel departed from the island, steering for the
north-east, the captain having taken three natives
of Tahiti to assist him in working the ship in the
place of the deserters.
On the 23rd of the same month the missionaries
were surprised and somewhat alarmed by the sud-
den re-appearance of the Nautilus off the islands,
and, on going on board, they were informed that
she had been among the Society Islands, and had
received considerable damage in a violent gale off
Huahine, which had induced the captain to decide
on proceeding to Port Jackson, instead of Masuer-
fero. To enable them to accomplish the voyage
now before them, they needed a larger supply of
provisions, which they had returned to Matavai to
obtain. These the missionaries promised to pro-
cure, but found, in endeavouring to fulfil their in-
tentions by purchasing from the natives, that a
prohibition had been issued by Pomare, which
frustrated their intentions.
On the 25th of March, two sailors having ab-
sconded from the ship in the boat which they had
hid among the bushes, they received a letter from
the captains, expressing their determination to
L


recover the men, let it cost what it would, and
requesting their assistance in effecting it. The
missionaries, sympathizing with the captains in
their distress, and anxious to prevent the mischiefs
that the dissolute men might occasion if allowed
to remain in the islands, accordingly deputed four
of their number to go to the king and chiefs, who
were then at Pare, and request them to send them
on hoard. The result of this visit was most dis-
astrous, and produced an effect upon the mission
which entirely altered its aspect and operations,
until it was ultimately, for a time, suspended
altogether. In narrating the events of the journey,
Mr. Jefferson, one of those who went to the
chiefs, observes, after stating that, accompanied
by Temare, the chief of Papara, they reached the
king’s house soon after one o’clock: ‘"We found
him seated amidst a number of his attendants,
among whom were some of the Sandwich islanders,
employing himself in cleaning a comb. He re-
ceived us with the usual salutation of friendship,
and asked the occasion of our visit. As Temare
had not followed us into Otu’s dwelling, and as
Pomare was at some distance, we forebore ac-
quainting him till his father should arrive. After
remaining with the king near twenty minutes,
(during which time the young king eyed us, I
thought, with a peculiarly gloomy aspect, and
without saying much,) I conceived in my mind
that the messenger 1 had sent to Pomare might be
dilatory, and our time unnecessarily prolonged;
I therefore proposed to my three associates that
we should ourselves proceed to Pomare, and entreat
him to meet his son and Temare, that we might
unfold our business to them together. To this the


brethren consented, and we took our leave of the
king for a short time, with as little suspicion of
evil as we had entered his dwelling. We passed
many natives, who saluted us with their usual
freedom and tokens of amity, and continued our
course without any apprehension of danger. We
were got about three-quarters of a mile from Otu’s
house, near the edge of a small river we had to
ford, accompanied by about thirty natives. As
this had been the case in former journies, we took
no notice of it, when suddenly three or four of the
natives laid hold on brother BroomhalPs coat,
(which he had taken off and was carrying under
his arm,) and began to wrest it from him. I went
to his assistance, and enquired the cause of this
proceeding. Turning my head round I saw
brother W. Puckey upon the ground, and a number
of Taheiteans stripping him with great eagerness.
Casting my eyes another way I perceived brother
Main in the hands of the natives, who were rend-
ing his clothes from off his back. At that instant
I was seized upon by four or five persons, who
began to pull me violently different ways, con-
tending who should have my dress, which they
would not allow me time to unbutton, but stripped
it off me as they could. In the scuffle they
dragged me through the river, but without much
hurt to my person, though I expected nothing
less than death from such savage brutality. One
was for taking me towards the mountains, another
towards the sea; but I entreated them to take me
to Pomare. During a short contest who should
have me, brothers Puckey and Main were hurried
before me, and I desired those who had charge of
me to conduct me with my brethren to Pomare,


which they consented to do. Having overtaken
brother Main, we now congratulated each other,
and acknowledged the goodness of the Lord in
giving our lives a prey thus far. In a little time
we came up with brother Puckey. After recount-
ing to each other our several sufferings and
escapes, we began to express our fears on brother
BroomhalPs account, who we apprehended had
fared worse than any of us. The natives who now
accompanied us behaved faithfully, and conducted
us to Pomare, whom we foimd under a shed by the
sea-side, with his wife Idea and a few attendants.
Cloth was immediately given us, and we were
made as easy, by promises of protection, and a
speedy return to Matavai, as the state of our minds
would admit. Our doubts respecting brother
BroomhalPs safety continuing, we requested Po-
mare to send in quest of him, which he did without
delay. After resting about an hour, Pomare, Idea,
and we, proceeded on our return towards Matavai.
Just before reaching the spot where the natives mo-
lested us, to our agreeable surprise brother Broom-
hall joined us. The barbarians had more than once
threatened to take his life; but they had not only
spared that, but even a part of his dress and his
watch, and the king, to whose house he had been
taken, secured him his hat again. When we
arrived before Otu’s dwelling, Pomare stopped and
called his son: he came to him, and some ques-
tions were put concerning the treatment we had
received, from which it appeared to us thatOtu was
privy to : whether it were so or not I cannot posi-
tively assert. He said but little, though his coun-
tenance towards us seemed more favourable than it
had been before. On application, some of the


articles of which we had been plundered were re-
stored, and a promise was given of the restoration of
the rest. The two sailors belonging to the Nau-
tilus, who had sheltered themselves under the pro-
tection of the king, made their appearance among
us, as did also the Sandwich islanders. They
continued disposed to remain on the island. One
in particular (Michael Donald) said, i If they take
me on board again, they shall take me dead.’
Pomare insisted on Otu’s delivering them up, and
assured us they should be carried on board the
following day. We now requested Pomare to let
us proceed on our way to Matavai; he consented;
and, in order to expedite our journey, ordered a
double canoe to take us by water, it being the
nearest way. Multitudes of natives surrounded
us during our conversation with the king, &c.
who all appeared friendly towards us, nor did X
hear the least intimation of any intention either
to hurt our persons or the persons of any of the
society at Matavai, or to make any attempt to
plunder them, though brothers Broomhall and
Puckey informed me, that they heard the different
parties which plundered them say one to another,
' Now we have four of them in our possession, and
there are only fourteen of them remaining at
Matavai, we will go and take them also.’ In
crossing Matavai Bay, we boarded the Nautilus,
and informed the two captains of the occurrences
of the day, as also of Pomare’s promise to restore
the men on the morrow. Between seven and eight
in the evening we landed at our dwelling, and
were gladly welcomed by the society.”
The suspicion of the missionaries that Otu was
privy to the assault that had been made upon them
l 3


was not without foundation. Muskets, bayonets,
and gunpowder, were the objects most ardently
desired by every chief; for in proportion as he
was possessed of them he was feared by his rivals,
and trusted by his own adherents. The Nautilus
had abundance of fire arms, and nothing else; and
the king, with his ally, the chief of Papara, natu-
rally expected to be well supplied with these in
return for the pigs and other products of the island,
of which they perceived the crew stood so greatly
in need; while the expectation of decoying some of
the men to remain, encouraged their hope of being
able to compete with Pomare, if not to deprive
him of all share in the government, a scheme
which, it was afterwards ascertained, was cherished
at this time by both these chiefs. The missionaries,
by supplying the ship, had frustrated their projects
for obtaining arms and ammunition; and as they
had interested themselves in obtaining the recovery
of the Sandwich islanders, it is probable Otu sur-
mised the object of their visit, and permitted, if he
did not order, his followers to plunder them. The
effects of this outrage by the natives were such as
to give an entire new character to the mission in
Tahiti. The majority, regarding the affair as an
indication of the treatment they might expect,
should any part of their conduct offend the chiefs,
considered themselves no longer secure from per-
sonal violence and injury, as well as plunder, and
four married and seven single missionaries judged
a removal from the island necessary. The captain
and supercargo of the vessel concurred in the same
opinion, and offered a passage to New South Wales
to as many as were disposed to remove.
The preparations for carrying their resolutions


into effect, soon informed the natives of their
intentions, and the intelligence, which was soon
spread through the islands, appeared to excite very
creneral feelings of regret. Pomare was much dis-
tressed, and used every effort to persuade them to
stay, promising whatever might conduce to their
convenience, and assuring them of protection.
His sorrow was greatly alleviated when he found
that six of the missionaries, one of whom was mar-
ried, intended to remain.
During the night of the 30th of March, 1798,
the missionaries, eleven in number, who had deemed
it requisite to retire from the field, sailed from
Tahiti in the Nautilus, the ship on behalf of whose
commanders they had undertaken the service which
had proved so disastrous to the undertaking which
they had come from the uttermost ends of the
earth to commence, and in the prosecution of which
they had hut just completed their first year. Their
decision will probably appear to many precipitate,
and their conduct not justified by the real or ap-
parent danger. But at this period of time, and with
the accurate knowledge of the people now possessed,
it is difficult to form a just opinion of the path
which would, in their circumstances, have been
considered preferable. They probably had other-
reasons for believing they were not safe among the
people, and that their lives depended upon the
caprice of the chiefs. Those who remained have,
since that period, been repeatedly told by the late
Pomare, that he was frequently instigated, by the
unprincipled foreigners on the island, to murder
them and seize their property.
On the melancholy occasion of the departure of


so many of their brethren, those who remained
addressed to the directors of the Missionary Society
the following letter, which is alike creditable to
themselves and the cause in which they had em-
barked :
“ From the missionaries on the island of Otaheite,
or King George’s Island, in the Great South Sea, to
the directors of the Missionary Society, who, under
the great Prince of all missionaries, for the preach-
ing of his gospel in all parts of the world, were
instrumental in commissioning us to go forth and
teach the heathen in these seas, grace, mercy, and
peace from God the Father, and our Lord Jesus
Christ, to whom be glory for ever. Amen.
“ Dearly beloved brethren, —Time and circum-
stances will not admit us at this present to enter
upon particulars. The change that has taken
place in our situation, by the sudden resolution of
the major part of the society of missionaries to
depart from this island of Otaheite for Port Jack-
son, in New Holland, we trust will nothing hinder
that work, which first induced us to offer our ser-
vices to the directors of the Missionary Society,
supported us under the heavy trial of forsaking
parents, brothers, sisters, friends, &c. &c., and still
encourages us to abide the will of God on this
island. We can only assure the directors of the
society, that our confidence is the strength of the
Lord Jesus Christ, whose aid we depend upon,
and whose servants we desire to manifest ourselves
to be. We also humbly request the directors of
the society not to forget us either in their prayers.


or revisiting us, if any opportunity for so doing
should occur. We do not expect or solicit that
the society should put themselves to any further
expense on our account; but if the directors should
judge it prudent, and find it convenient, to send
eut°a few presents for those who may have showed
themselves most friendly to us, such as knives,
scissors, axes, and such articles, they will be grate-
fully received. Experience has taught us, the
more we are encumbered about worldly things, the
less concern we have for the conversion of the
heathen; and the more we are detached from
secular employments, the more, we trust, our
minds will be attached to the propagation of the
gospel of Jesus Christ. Otaheite affords food and
raiment suitable to its climate, and sufficient to
answer the great end of Providence in granting us
these blessings ; and having these things, we hope
the Lord will teach us to be content. We deem
it needful to inform the directors of the society,
that it appears to us, at present, a reinforcement of
this island with a body of missionaries, consisting
of men, women, and children, and furnished after
the manner of ourselves, when we quitted our
native country in the ship Duff, would nothing
forward the work of God on Otaheite or the
adjacent islands; but if four or six Christian men,
void of worldly encumbrances, will be willing to
hazard their lives for the sake of the Lord Jesus
Christ in the salvation of the heathen, and, led by
the Eternal Spirit, forsake all and follow us, we
shall glory, if spared to give them the right-hand
of Christian brotherly fellowship. We conclude
with our prayers to our God and your God, our
Lord and your Lord, for his blessing on your


labours for spreading abroad the savour of the
grace of Christ throughout the world.
We remain.
Dearly beloved brethren,
Your brethren in the gospel of Jesus Christ,
“B. Bicknell, J. Eyre,
J. Harris, J. Jefferson,
J. Lewis, H. Nott.”
“ Otaheite, Matavai District,
March 29th, 1798 ”
In harmony with these sentiments they pur-
sued the work, still relying on the protection and
care of the Lord. They soon found, however,
that the diminution of their numbers had not been
attended by any decrease of their trials. The
natives became more annoying and daring than
ever in thieving; and a short time afterwards
Poraare visited them, and formally inquired of
them, “ How many of you know how to make
war P” Mr. Nott replied, “We know nothing of
war.” And after the chief had retired, the mission-
aries were led to consider the course they should
pursue, and determined, “ through the grace of
God, not to intermeddle with aims, either for
offence or defence.” They afterwards observe in
their journal, “ Our determination not to engage
in war is made known to Pomare, and we trust,
through the mercy of God, we shall have no more
solicitation on that head.”
The chief had before sent a peace-offering to the
missionaries, to atone for the injury they had re-
ceived in the assault made upon them; and his
people had ravaged part of the district to avenge
the wrong the missionaries sustained, and Pomare


made war upon the inhabitants of the district for
plundering the missionaries; and after the tidings
of peace, the missionaries learnt that fifteen of the
people of the offending district had been killed.
In the midst of these murders, and all the
agitation the war occasioned, the missionaries
pursued the study of the language, forming its
orthography, &c. as fast as they became acquainted
with its construction and peculiarities; though in
these labours they were not encouraged by a con-
sciousness of greater safety among the people, or
any indications of desire for their instruction ; but
they were enabled to persevere, labouring in hope,
often against hope. The conviction daily grew
upon them, that nothing but the omnipotent
energy of the Spirit of God could render their
labours in any measure successful, among a people
whose habits of vice were so confirmed as to baffle
all mere human efforts for their cure.


CHAPTER VI.
Circumstances under which the Missionaries pur-
sued their Labours. —Painful Developements of
native Character. —Singular Custom of dispos-
ing of Presents. —Difference of actual Mis-
sionary Work from the Ideas formed of it be-
fore departing from England. —Notice of the
Missionary Prayer Meeting. —Assassination of
the High Priest. —Remarkable Preservation of
one of his Friends.—Cruelty practised by the
Natives.—Treachery of Otu. — Summary of
the State of the Mission. — Singular Observ-
ances in connexion with the Celebration of
Marriage among the People. —Enquiries of the
People why earlier Visitors to the Islands gave
the People no Information on the Subject of
Religion. —Difficulties attending their Attempts
to teach the People. —Notice of Human Sacri-
fices and Agitation among the People. —Death
of Mr. Lewis. —Instance of savage Cruelly. —
Reflections on the close of the Year.—Second
Voyage of the Ship Duff—Capture of the
Vessel. —Detention of the Missionaries. — Em-
barkation for Rio Janeiro. —Second Capture
by the Portuguese. —Treatment in the Voyage.
—Return to Europe.
Although no change was apparent in Pomares
concern for the missionaries, the people generally
treated them with less respect, and _ manifested
greater disinclination to attend to the instructions


which they were, at this time, able to impart; and
every day brought fresh evidence before them of
the difficulties of the work in which they were
engaged, and the trials they might expect in pur-
suing it.
In the month of May, 1798, they remark :
“ Scarcely a day passes without our suffering from
plunderers. Last night the store-room was again
searched. We have now hardly an axe left for
public use. Every day we see more of this
people’s deplorable situation. Our prospect of
planting the gospel among them is very unpro-
mising at present. It is true, the things impos-
sible with men are possible with God; and not-
withstanding our doubts, fears, and insufficiency,
we trust the Lord will make all grace abound, and
bless us to the conversion of souls. On taking a
survey of our situation, we cannot but acknow-
ledge the signal interposition of the Lord, Jehovah
Jesus, in our daily preservation, and the great
portion of tranquillity we enjoy. Though sur-
rounded by multitudes of untutored heathens, who
carefully embrace every favourable season to com-
mit secret depredations on our property, yet we
go in and out among them without molestation;
and a degree of awe of us seems to be so impressed
upon them, as to restrain them from using any
violence to our persons or our property.”
They were frequently exposed to the influence
of the most distressing apprehension, from the
reports spread among them. One very general at
this time was, that the principal chiefs of the
island were, in a short time, going to the neigh-
bouring island of Eimeo, and that, prior to their
M


going, they meant to bum the house in which
they resided. “ What gave rise to this report,”
they observe, “is uncertain; but from what we
every day see of the natural disposition of the
people, we have no reason to doubt that, if left to
themselves, they would not hesitate to commit
such an act of wickedness, notwithstanding their
many professions of friendship to us, and the
temporal advantage they have reaped by our
visiting their country. The Lord God omnipotent
reigneth, and not Satan. The counsel of the Lord,
that shall stand, and not the devices of the heathen.
We enjoy much peace among the islanders, not-
withstanding the threats which, from time to time,
have been reported to have been issued out against
us. We also partake of as abundant a portion of
the productions of the country as we can desire.
To these blessings are kindly added, by their gra-
cious Donor, good health of body, and the unmo-
lested enjoyment of the means of grace.”
Among the singular customs of the people they
mention the following, as occurring about this time;
and their journal also contains the annexed just
and appropriate view of their work : —“ Pomare
presented us with a large fish, which had just been
caught. According to the custom of the country,
on similar occasions, we presented him with a part
of it again, a part to Idea, and the remainder to
some people about the house.
« Oct. 14, 1798. The eyes of the Lord are still
over us for good we trust, to whom we, by grace,
keep looking, and from whom we every day, and
every moment, receive the help we need. Peace
we continue to enjoy in an eminent degree, which


we endeavour to improve by useful and necessary
employments of various kinds, and acquiring a
perfect knowledge of the language of the country.”
The missionaries were exposed to peculiar trials
during the greater part of the year, partly from
the impression many of the natives continued to
cherish, that they had prevented their obtaining
muskets and ammunition from the ship, and from
the death of Orepia, a powerful ally of the king’s;
yet in the month of November they write:—
“ The work of our mission we keep in view, and
patiently wait for the time of labouring in this part
of the Lord’s vineyard. None but those who are
in similar circumstances with ourselves, know what
it is to live in the midst of professed heathens, and
uncivilized barbarians. By our own experience,
we have reason to believe that many of the true
children of God, in our own native country, formed
in their minds very different ideas of the work of
preaching the gospel to the Otaheiteans, to what
they would were they with us on the spot, to see
and hear what we have seen and heard. The lan-
guage, too, which many thought so easy, and to
be acquired in a few months at most, we find ex-
ceedingly difficult. Thanks be unto God, we are
in his hands, and out of the mouths of babes he can
perfect praise.”
In noticing their monthly missionary prayer
meeting for Nov, 1798, the missionaries write :
“ At nine in the morning we met, we trust, many
of the Israel of God in England at the throne of
grace, and could, we hope, cordially unite with
them in praying for the coming of the kingdom of
God throughout the world.


“We cease not to pray for tlie welfare of our
native country, the happiness of the king, queen,
royal family, officers of justice, and all whom the
word of God has made it our duty to pray for.
Our parents, brothers, and sisters, and other dear
relations, share in our affections and prayers;
though we have forsaken them, we have not for-
gotten them. Our dear Christian connexions,
with whom we familiarly conversed on the things
of Christ, with whom we took sweet counsel to-
gether, and with whom we walked to the house of
God, live in our remembrance, while we desiringly
pray, hope, and wait for the happy period when our
intimacy will be renewed in the happy kingdom
of Emmanuel.”
Before the month which they had thus com-
menced was closed, the missionaries were again
thrown into confusion by the alarm of war; the
district of Matavai was ravaged from one end of it
to the other, and the natives abandoning their
little property to the lawless plunderers by whom
they were invaded, sought safety by flying to the
mountains. One of the sailors who had deserted
from the Nautilus, and the Swede, were among
the most active executioners of Otu’s wrath.
Referring to this event, which occurred on the
17th of November, the missionaries observe, “ Se-
veral natives are around us, with their spears and
clubs, but peace continues within our dwelling.
Hamanemane sent us some hogs, &c., perhaps
the plunder of our poor neighbours. In the af-
ternoon heard that the priest had returned to
Pare, where Otu remains to offer up the bodies
of three men and a child, killed this morning in


sacrifice to their devil gods. These persons are
all that have been hitherto killed : may it please
the Lord to prevent further bloodshed.”
On the third of the following month the district
was thrown into the greatest agitation by the
sudden murder of Hamanemane, and the appre-
hension of the war to which it would lead ; and
the missionaries say, “ Though somewhat alarmed
at the report of Hamaneraane’s death, yet we
were enabled in ‘ our patience to possess our
souls/ and to * stand still and see the salvation
of the Lord.’ At two in the afternoon all quiet.
Hear that Idea is going to send off a canoe to the
Motu, to acquaint Pomare with the events of the
day. The corpse of Hamanemane is carried to
the great marai, called Tabutabuatea, in Pare.
Much confusion in Pare. The friends of the de-
ceased dispersed variously. A relation of Ha-
manemane’s had his life spared in a manner worth
relating. He was sitting in his hut when the
tumult began, which was soon surrounded by a
barbarous mob, which carried all before them. A
savage, thirsting for blood, saw this person, and
instantly lifted up an English axe he had in his
hand to give the mortal blow. The axe was for a
moment poised in the air, when a bystander ex-
claimed, ‘ Hold ! you must not kill him; Idea
says, Spare his life.’ Idea had said no such
thing: a sudden impulse urged him to speak,
and thereby prevented his death. The man who
would have been his executioner, at the sound of
Idea's name dropped his intention and the axe.
The spared victim was hurried to Idea’s dwelling-
on the point, who generously confirmed his safety,
m 3


and received him for her servant. The blessed
God, in his providence, is the Saviour of all men.
“ In looking back on what has taken place in the
day past, we see just cause to w r onder at and ad-
mire the mysterious dispensations of God, who
every day and every hour is clearly evidencing
himself to he the unsearchable Governor of the
world ; the destroyer and preserver of men, as it
seemeth best unto himself. Otu also absented
himself from our habitation to-day, but has given
us another specimen of his despotism and ingrati-
tude, by plundering us of several hogs and other
articles.
“ Returning day brings fresh cause of thankful-
ness. Some of the brethren employed in securing
the bridge ; many natives surrounding us. Heard
Idea was gone to Pare, upon the horrible busi-
ness of sacrificing a relation of Hamanemane’s to
her devil god. The prevailing account of Hama-
nemane’s death is this: Pomare sent word, in a
private manner, to Idea, to have him killed.
Idea went twice or thrice to Otn, to draw him to
consent to his death : at first he was unwilling,
but at length consented to it, at the desire of his
father and mother. Early yesterday morning the
old priest set off to Pare, and was followed by a
native and one of the Sandwich islanders : they
overtook him at the bottom of One-tree Hill, on
the west side, and after a little conversation with
him, Fare-roa smote him on the head with a
stone.
“The conduct of Otu, in consenting to the death
of Hamanemane, at the time he was in close alli-
ance with him, opens the character of the man in


a conspicuous manner, and confirms us in a sus-
picion we have long entertained, but knew not
how to account for, concerning the stripping of
the brethren at Pare. When that circumstance
took place, we seemed assured it was done with
the king’s authority; but when Otu afterwards
joined his father in punishing the poor people for
the same, we could not readily reconcile his au-
thorizing the action, and then destroying those
who did it. But we had seen so much of him
since, that we believe he is capable of committing
any wickedness the devil, his carnal mind, and
blood-thirsty followers may excite him to, if God
did not restrain him.”
Early in the year 1799, in a letter to the di-
rectors of the society, the missionaries thus refer
to the state of the mission, their labours, and
prospects:
“ We apprehend you are made acquainted with
the separation of the society that has taken place.
Since the departure of our brethren, our pre-
servation has been singular and gracious. We
think we may say, without presumption and vain
boasting, God has showed himself in our behalf.
Health of body, peaceable habitations, necessaries
of life, means of grace, and gracious visitations,
we have bountifully enjoyed. We have seen some
awful visitations among the poor heathens, which
have suddenly dispersed; black gathering clouds,
that threatened destruction to many, and ourselves,
apparently among them. The judgments of the
Lord have not been altogether restrained from us.
“ Our knowledge in the language of Tahiti is
growing, and we look forward with a pleasing
hope to a period when we shall speak it tluently.


and through the influence of the Eternal Spirit,
powerfully, for the conversion of some poor souls.
We entreat the continuance of your prayers for
us; we believe they have been heard, and daily
answered. Go on, brethren, to wrestle with the
Lord for us, and for the poor heathen. Remember,
we have your solemn promises to do so. We re-
joice, in hope that the cause of our common Sa-
viour is upon the increase in our native country,
and that your hearts are nothing dismayed from
prosecuting the great work of labouring under the
influence of the Spirit to advance the kingdom of
Christ in distant darkened parts of the earth.
We conclude with our affectionate love to all, in
every place, who call upon the name of the Lord
Jesus in sincerity and in truth.”
In the year 1799, a marriage between two persons
of some consequence in the island took place, of
which the missionaries, in speaking of the customs
of the people, have given the following notice.
“ Early in the morning of the 7th of March,
began the marriage ceremonial between Matea
and Mahei-Anu. As the habitation of the par-
ties is but a few yards distant from our dwellings,
some of the brethren went down to be spectators.
The mother and uncles of Mahei-Annoo were
employed in giving cloth to various of their
friends, who were met upon the occasion. In one
of the houses was erected a kind of altar, covered
with a piece of white cloth, and on it were placed
some old clothes, which had lately covered the
tomb of the deceased father of the bride. After
they had distributed their various gifts of cloth,
the parties went to the family’s marai, where the
ceremony commenced with spreading a large piece


of white cloth across the pavement; this done,
the bride and bridegroom each changed their
dress; after which, the mother of Mahei-Anu,
with two or three female relations, having taken a
sugar cane, and broken it into small pieces, laid
the same upon the leaf of a tree called amai; the
mother and female assistants then wounded their
heads with sharks’ teeth, and caught the blood
upon the leaves on which were placed the broken
sugar-cane, and afterwards male and female rela-
tives presented the leaves, sugar-cane, and blood,
to Matea and Mahei-Anu, who were seated,
the man on the one side of the marai, the woman
on the other, about six yards apart: the whole
was then offered up to the supposed god of the
family, and laid upon the family altar. These
strange proceedings were conducted with that levity
and thoughtlessness which characterise, in a pe-
culiar manner, the Taheiteans. The mother of
the bride appeared a little more thoughtful, being
a woman advanced in years, and increased the
superstitions and wickedness of the ceremony by
producing the skulls of her deceased husband and
elder brother, which, according to the custom of
the country, she had preserved and anointed with
cocoa-nut "oil. The skulls were held before the
leaves, sugar-cane, and blood, at the time of pre-
sentation to the parties. These things being
finished, the cloth spread upon the marai was
folded up, and afterwards presented to the king at
his habitation ; and thus the ceremony ended, and
the parties returned to their dwelling. The clothes
Matea and Mahei-Anu put on after entering
the raorai, are deemed sacred, and are not worn
in common.


“ Notwithstanding all this abominable idolatry,
the marriage tie is no more binding, than if it had
never been performed; so that, if a man thinks
proper, he may put away his wife to-morrow, and
be united, in like manner, to another the next da}'.
“ We continue to enjoy, through much mercy,
a great degree of outward peace ; though, if all be
true that we hear, there are some who envy us,
and would gladly see it otherwise. God is our
preserver, and while he is on our side, we have
nothing to fear from the evil designs of wicked
men. The sick man noticed a few days since is
in a fair way of recovery. Every assistance in
our power has been rendered him, which the Lord
has been pleased to bless: his spirit is as much in
darkness and error as ever, but the Lord Jesus
Christ is all-sufficient to restore that also.'’
On the 16th of March, speaking of the effect of
their labours, the missionaries remark—“ The
preaching of the gospel to these people appears a
more arduous task now than it did some months ago.
None but the Spirit of Christ can arm us with
fortitude, and make us faithful. What little we
have been able to say in the name of the Lord
has drawn this inquiry from one: ‘ How is it
Cook, Clarke, Vancouver, Bligh, and others who
have been here, never told us anything of what
you tell us of Jesus Christ ?’ The answer was,
‘ They knew less of the language of the country
than we do; and though they knew the name of
Jesus Christ, they knew not the customs of Jesus
Christ, and did not hold them/”
At the close of this month they were continuing
to enjoy the blessings of peace ; and they observe,
“How different our present situation from what it


was this day twelvemonths. How wonderful are
the providences of the Almighty ! What monu-
ments of his sovereign power and goodness do we
stand ! We would hope our preservation is not
for nought. We held a prayer meeting, when we
acknowledged the great goodness of God in our
preservation, health, and peace, since this day
twelvemonth, when our brethren forsook us.
Hitherto the Lord has been much better to us
than our fears; and we are still kept hanging
upon him, knowing that, as time, and all events,
are in his hands, the work which he has for us to
do here shall be accomplished in his appointed
hour.”
Speaking, in the month of April, 1799, of one
of their earliest efforts to teach any of the chil-
dren, they thus notice the impediments to success:
" Brother Broomhall’s attempt to instruct the child
of Tearay to read does not succeed: savage ig-
norance and brutal freedom are the delight of
the natives. The children cannot bear to have
their desires crossed, their actions prohibited, or
their wild ramblings controlled. Learning requires
application ; to this they are not only strangers,
but averse.’’
In the month of October this year, they observe,
«We have heard that five human sacrifices have,
within a few days, been brought over from Eimeo
to this island. Also, that many of the inhabitants
of Pare, (of the poorer sort,) have fled to the
mountains, to avoid being seized for human sacri-
fices, as Otu and Pomare are looking out for what
they deem fit objects for this purpose. The vessel
formerly belonging to Hamanemane, and which
Pomare had given to a friend of his, has been


demanded back, with a design to offer it to his god
Oro, the image of which supposed deity is kept
in the district of Atehuru. It appears that these
things are preparations for purposed war, and that
Pomare is doing what other blind heathens have
done before him, labouring to bribe his idol-god
to be propitious to him, and to forsake the districts
of Atehuru. It is said the cause of the present
war with Atehuru is, that the inhabitants of that
district have resented the tyrannical and oppressive
conduct of the chiefs, who exercise with a high
hand their authority over those subject to their
power.”
In the following month they thus refer to the
state of the people: “ The war against Atehuru
still in agitation. We pray for peace, for the in-
troduction of the gospel of peace among the na-
tives, and our preparation for preaching it. Heard
that in every district there is a small portion of
land, the inhabitants of which are appropriated for
human sacrifices. This morning a human sacri-
fice was brought into this district from Hapyano,
which they were taking to Pomare. Two of the
brethren saw the corpse; it was tied up in a long
basket, made of cocoa-nut leaves; his head was
much bruised with stones, with which they had
killed him. It appears that Pomare is sending
to every district of the greater peninsula which is
in his interest to send him a human sacrifice; by
this it is manifest that something great is in agita-
tion among them.”
On the 28th of November, 1799, the mission-
aries were called to mourn over the decease of one
of their members, Mr. Lewis, who had died on the
preceding evening, under distressing circumstances,


in the eastern part of the district, at the house of
a native, with whom he had resided for five months
previously. The brethren prepared the grave of
the first missionary who had died on the shores of
Tahiti, with feelings of peculiar anguish, and car-
ried the body of their former companion to his
burial with sadness of heart, as they had deemed
it requisite to separate him from their sacred fel-
lowship some months before his decease.
Little more than a month had elapsed after the
death of Mr. Lewis, when their number was further
diminished by the removal of Mr. Harris, who
left the island on the Ist of January, 1800, and
followed those who had removed to New South
Wales. This loss, however, was in some degree
repaired by the return from Port Jackson of Mr.
and Mrs. Henry, who joined the mission a few
days afterwards.
Nothing is more clear and satisfactory, than the
evidence which the authentic records of this early
period of the history of the mission furnishes, of
the truly exemplary and regular observance of the
sabbath, and other means of promoting their own spi-
ritual improvement, which was kept up among the
missionaries. They had, however, hitherto assem-
bled for public worship in their dwellings, but now,
with the assistance of some of Pomare’s men,
they commenced the erection of a chapel, the first
building ever erected for the worship of the true
God throughout the numerous islands of the vast
Pacific.
In the month of June, 1800, Pomare sent, by
the hands of a priest, as a peace-offering to Jesus
Christ, a fish, which he requested the missionaries
to hang up in the chapel. His request was of
N


course not complied with; and though, when the
missionaries went to him and informed him that
the true God did not receive offerings of food from
any one, seeing he gives food to every one, and is
to he sought unto for every blessing needed by his
creatures, Pom are affected indifference ; he did not
appear pleased that his offering was refused.
Peace had hitherto prevailed during this year
in Tahiti and Eimeo, hut the missionaries were
grieved by the tidings of savage war raging among
the inhabitants of the Leeward or Society Islands.
They were also severely tried by the delinquency
of one of their own number, and the increasing
evidence of the affecting depravity of heart among
the people around them. In the month of July,
this year, they record the following occurrence,
which, as they remark, affords a melancholy con-
firmation of man’s corruption, and that by nature
our feet are swift to shed blood. “ A young man
yesterday cut the hair of another, (a near relation;?)
and shaved his beard with a keen, sharp-pointed
knife. In the evening, his relation, whom he had
thus obliged, took an opportunity to steal his
scissars. This morning, the owner of the scissars
knowing or suspecting who had taken them, took
his razor-knife and went in quest of the thief.
Having found him, he charged him with the
crime; the other denied it: the former insisted
that he was the thief, and from words went to
blows; the man with the knife stabbed the other
in a dreadful manner in his breast, and wounded
him shockingly in one of his arms, and in the
calf of one of his legs. He would soon have killed
him, had not some by-standers promptly inter-
fered. The man thus stabbed and maimed was


led to the house of a neighbouring priest. Mr.
Broomhall having an intimation of what was done,
immediately went and offered his assistance, which
being accepted, he was led up to his dwelling,
where he sewed up the wound on his breast, and
applied such remedies as be had; after which the
man was led to his habitation. It is probable,”
the missionaries continue, “ that he would soon
have been a dead man, had not Mr. B. been at
hand to render him assistance, for which, how-
ever, the generality of beholders seemed to censure
him, alleging that, as the man was a thief, he
deserved what he bad got, and should be left to
die. Human nature, in its present fallen state, is
the same in all parts of the world; unnatural, im-
placable, unmerciful.”
Long before the close of the year, Tahiti was
agitated from one end to the other by the rumours
of war, the seeking of human victims for sacri-
fice, and other equally atrocious evils. On the
29th of November the brethren write : “ Great
preparations making for war: we cease not to in-
tercede for peace at the throne of grace. Whether
it will be peace or war, we read a compendium of
our duty in Psalm xlvi. 8. ‘Be still, and know
that I am God: I will be exalted among the
heathen.’ Exactly a month after the above date,
they were encouraged by the arrival of the Albion,
a ship from New South Wales, with friendly
letters from some of their former companions, and
the Rev. Samuel Marsden and governor King.
In his letter to Pomare, governor King observed,
“ I cannot too much recommend to your majesty’s
kind protection, the society of missionaries whom
you have taken under your care, which cannot fail


of exciting their gratitude and king George’s
friendship, which I shall always be happy in
announcing lo you.” These friendly notices from
the governor greatly strengthened Pomare’s in-
fluence with the other chiefs, and operated as a
salutary check upon the profligate seamen, who
were perpetually fermenting divisions and w r ars
among them. These things revived their spirits,
and they thus record their feelings at the termina-
tion of the year.
“ Closed another year of many mercies and
much peace. When we consider the safety with
which we were brought over the extensive ocean
from England to these seas, preserved from tem-
pest, shipwreck, and enemies, while the same
vessel that conveyed us, in her second voyage on
a similar occasion, is, by the wisdom of God, per-
mitted to be captured by the enemies of our
country. When we consider how we have been
protected and defended, our wants supplied, and
every blessing insured to us which we could ask
for or desire, while others of our brethren that
came out with us have been scattered, exposed to
dangers, sufferings, and slaughter, we are filled
with astonishment; but while we silently wonder
at the dispensations of the Almighty, with deep
humility and self-abasement, exclaim. Why us,
O Lord ! Though to our views the work of the
mission seems to be nothing advanced with us,
yet we have abundant cause to be thankful that
the whole fabric is not destroyed, and that there
yet remaineth for us a door of hope, though in the
valley of Achor.”
By the captain of the Albion, which had, as
already noticed, arrived on the 29th of December,


1799, they received the painful tidings of the cap-
ture of the ship Duff, on her second voyage to the
South Seas, and the imprisonment and sufferings
of those who had been sent to their aid.
Captain Wilson having landed and established the
first missionaries at Tahiti, proceeded to Canton, ob-
tained his cargo, and, returning to Europe, reached
London the 11th of July, 1798, after a voyage
unusually auspicious. The success of the attempt
to introduce teachers of Christianity among the
islanders of the south, had far surpassed the ex-
pectations of the most sanguine promoters of the
enterprise, and afforded to the friends of the society
the sincerest pleasure. The 6th of August fol-
lowing, the day on which the regular missionary
prayer meetings were held throughout the king-
dom among the supporters of the society, was ap-
pointed as a day of public thanksgiving to Al-
mighty God, for the remarkably favourable man-
ner in which the mission had been commenced.
On that day special meetings were held in London,
and the Rev. John Griffin, of Portsea, the pastor
of captain Wilson, preached in Surrey Chapel in
the morning, and the Rev. Dr. Haweis, one of
the senior ministers in the direction, and who had
proposed the mission, preached at Sion Chapel in
the evening, to numerous and deeply interested
congregations.
A public meeting was convened on the following
day in Haberdashers’ Hall, to consider how they
could best glorify God, by maintaining a commu-
nication with the missionaries, and extending the
gospel to other islands. When the report had
been read by Mr. Greathead, the measure it re-
commended was cordially approved, and it was
N 3


unanimously resolved, “ That the directors he
authorised to employ a ship belonging to the
society on another voyage to the Pacific Ocean,
for the purposes of supplying our brethren who
have settled there with assistance in their labours ;
of adding to their number, where circumstances
may render it necessary; and of planting the
gospel in other islands of that ocean, where it
shall appear most eligible, from their extent, po-
pulation, or other favourable circumstances.”
A special meeting w r as held on the following
day, and it appeared to be their duty to send a
second mission to the Pacific, to reinforce those
already sent, and attempt the establishment of
missions in other islands. The advanced season
of the year rendered it necessary to proceed with
as little delay as possible, and arrangements were
accordingly made. As soon as the intentions of
the society were known, numbers offered personal
service, and in less than three months the ship
was ready for sea, and thirty missionaries, in-
cluding the Rev. W. Howell, of Knaresborough,
were selected, who, it was hoped, were influenced
by a desire to consecrate their lives to the service
of Christ, and who were deemed suitable for the
important and responsible work : ten of this num-
ber were married, and were accompanied by their
wives; the remainder were single.
On the 20th of November the Duff left London,
under the command of captain Robson, an able
and intelligent officer, who had sailed with captain
Wilson in the former voyage. War was then
raging between the continental powers, which ren-
dered a convoy necessary, and this, with other
circumstances, detained them at Portsmouth till


the 20th of December, when they finally left the
shores of England.
The early part of their voyage was peculiarly
tempestuous, and as they lost their convoy early
in the voyage, they were exposed to the frequent
apprehension of meeting with an enemy, and being
taken into a state of captivity. Their voyage,
though perilous, and in many respects uncom-
fortable, from the violence of the gales and tae
sea, was speedy, and on the 25th of January,
1799, they saw the shores of the new world.
They proceeded on their way towards Rio Janerio,
until the 18th of February, when a fair wind en-
couraged them to expect a speedy arrival at their
destined port. The next morning was pleasant,
and there was but little wind, and they were within
sicrht of Cape Frio, with their cables bent ready
to° anchor in the harbour of Rio Janerio: but
how were their hopes disappointed! They soon
discovered a strange sail astern, near the shore,
which appeared to them to be riding at anchor, as
if she had been becalmed. They afterwards saw
her under weigh, and supposed she was bound to
the same port. Different opinions were entertained
as to her force, but the most general one was, that
she was the Porpoise, the ship which was to convey
governor King to New South Wales j for they
had left her behind in England, as they had_ not
arrived in Portsmouth when the convoy sailed.
The Duff had all her sails set as well as she ; but as
there was scarcely any wind, she made but little
progress. All the missionaries were busy ; some
were washing their clothes, that they might be
ready to go on shore ; others were writing to then-
friends in England, wishing to give the earliest
CHAP. Vl.] TAHITI.


information of their safe arrival at the first port.
In short, they perceived no danger, and felt no
alarms, as they had done on former occasions.
After most had supped, the captain and several
who had been on deck, looking unconcerned at
their enemy, retired to bed, and others were re-
tiring, when a sudden squall of wind and rain
coming on, the remainder likewise withdrew be-
tween ten and eleven o’clock. All the children
were asleep, when suddenly was heard the report
of a gun from their supposed friend. The women
began to be somewhat alarmed, while most of the
missionaries, the captain, and seamen, did not be-
lieve her to be an enemy. At the worst they
supposed she might be a Portuguese, and if so, all
was well.
Captain Robson ordered the ship to be laid to,
and then came down to the women between decks,
and exhorted them not to be afraid, as he had no
doubt of her being a friend. The ship not bring-
ing to so soon as they wished, she fired another
shot; and a third gun flashed, but did not go off.
The squall catching her before she felt it, she was
soon abreast, and hailed them in English, “ What
ship ? Whence come ?” and “ Whither bound ?”
This salutation afforded them much pleasure, as it
appeared to confirm them in their opinion that she
was a friend. Captain Robson having given the
desired information, he received an answer to send
his boat alongside directly. Their boats had been
fresh caulked and painted, completely ready, in
expectation of going on shore at Rio Janeiro.
The jolly boat was now hoisted over the side,
when Mr. Smith, the chief mate, with four seamen,
went into her with the ship’s papers, the rest
missionary RECORDS. [chap. VI.


wishing him a safe return. When the boat reached
the unknown ship, several of the missionaries stood
leaning over the side, waiting the return of the
boat, and to hear the true import of this unexpected
salutation, when they heard the next report of this
ship, which was, “Send all the passengers on
board. ” At this several began to conclude that
she was an enemy, although they still faintly hoped
that she would prove otherwise. But soon a boat
came alongside, without either Mr. Smith or the
seamen, and this had a most unfavourable appear-
ance, notwithstanding they derived some hope from
the circumstance that all the boat’s crew spoke
English, When the question was put, “ What
ship w r as she?” they answered, “The Spitfire,
come from the coast of Ireland.” These men
passed for Americans, but it is thought that half
of them were English. They were again encou-
raged to believe that all would soon be well, at
hearing nothing but English voices alongside.
Orders, however, were soon issued, that every
man must leave the Duff and go on board the
unknown ship. In the mean time they saw a
number of men, whose appearance and behaviour
excited their utmost alarm, take possession of their
ship, and seize every article of property they could
lay their hands on.
'On reaching the strange ship, the captain,
officers, passengers, and crew of the Duff, dis-
covered the extent of the calamity that had befallen
them, and found they were prisoners on board the
Buonaparte, a French privateer; and as soon as
they became acquainted vvith their true situation,
captain Robson earnestly solicited that the married
missionaries might be permitted to return to their


wives and children left in the Duff, but this was
peremptorily refused. At his request, however,
and a statement of the peculiar circumstances of
some of the wives of the missionaries. Dr. Turner,
the medical gentleman attached to the mission,
was allowed to return, that the captured females
might not be deprived of his attentions, in the
event of their being required. In the mean time,
those on board the Duff remained in a state of
distress greater than can be described. As soon
as all the men belonging to the Duff had departed,
a French officer, accompanied by a sailor, came
down to, and searched every cabin, putting his
sword under every bed, to see that no persons
were concealed there. When shown into the
cabin of the missionaries’ wives, and observing
in two of them that the children were sleeping
soundly, unconscious of what had passed, he
appeared satisfied; and, assuring them that no
injury should befall them, placed a sentinel at the
door and left them. When Dr. Turner reached
the Duff, the officer, Mons. Bezzard, came down
again, with the joyful tidings that u one English
doctor was come; ” but though this afforded the
prospect of removing the painful suspense in
which they had been kept, the tidings of their
actual circumstances and destination, with the
painful fact that their husbands would not be
allowed to return, only changed the nature of their
sorrow, while it led them to the more earnest
application to Divine mercy for that protection
and comfort which they now felt they so urgently
required.
They proceeded to Monte Video, and during
the passage, the prize-master, Thomas Reviere, and


the officer already referred to, treated them with
the greatest politeness and respect, and spared no
pains to mitigate, as far as possible, the affliction
of their captivity. In this respect they were very
differently circumstanced from those on board the
privateer, who, after remaining on deck till three
o’clock in the morning, when they were forced, at
the point of the sword, down between decks, and
crammed into a small space, in the midst of filth
and damp, and almost suffocated for want of air.
At six o’clock, to their unspeakable pleasure, they
received orders to come on deck. Their first con-
cern was to look after their ship, the Duffi and
their feelings may be easily conceived, when they
beheld her steering a direct course from them, in
the possession of the enemy, and gradually disap-
pearing. Their concern was still more heightened
on receiving the information from captain Robson,
who had been told by the French captain, that the
Duff could not be ransomed, but would be carried
to Rio de la Plata, to the Spanish port of Monte
Video, South America, and that he had come upon
a three months’ cruize, and could not return into
port until that time had expired, or he had cap-
tured two or three good prizes. They now knew
that the ship was Le Grand Buonaparte, pierced
for twenty-two nine pounders, a French privateer,
manned by upwards of two hundred sailors, captain
A. Carbonnelle commander, which information
they had not received on board the Duff The
French captain, when the instructions of the dilec-
tors to captain Robson were read, appeared to feel
exceedingly for their distress. He said, “ that if
he had known who they were, and in what they
were engaged, he would sooner have given five


hundred pounds out of his own pocket than have
met them; but now, the laws of his country, his
officers, and men, compelled him to act as he did.”
He also assured them “ that the women and chil-
dren should be well treated, as the officers whom
he had put on board were men of character, who
would protect both them and theirs. He was sorry
that he had separated their husbands from them,
which he would not have done, had he known as
much as he now did; but that he would send some,
in each prize that he took, after the Duff.” In
addition to the unpleasantness to which their pain-
ful situation subjected them, their distress was
aggravated by the scanty and almost unpalatable
supply of provisions, and the want of water, which
they now experienced.
As they approached the river de la Plata, the
missionaries agreed to write a petition to the French
captain, to grant them their wearing apparel and
beds, likewise to interest himself with the Spanish
governor to prevent their being confined as pri-
soners, and, if possible, to obtain their liberty.
The petition being delivered, they received a
reply that the captain would do for them as much
as lay in his power.
Early in the morning of March 12th they entered
Rio de la Plata. After sailing three miles, they
perceived the wreck of a vessel which had been
but recently lost on that coast. Within fifteen
minutes they passed it on their larboard side,
when the French officers recognized it as part of
the brig, laden with salt, which they had captured
ihe next after the Duff, aboard of which, provi-
dentially, the forgetfulness of the French captain
hindered any of the missionaries from embarking


the night of her capture. The bows of this vessel,
with the bowsprit and nearly half of the hull, re-
mained together, but the other part had been en-
tirely separated, and was no longer visible. When
they approached the anchorage, a boat came off
with the Spanish officers of inspection, accompa-
nied by a person who spoke English. When this
gentleman came to the hatchway, inquiring for
the English prisoners, they received the agreeable
news that the Duff was safely arrived, and all the
women and children were well, yet still on board,
and not on shore, as they expected. This welcome
messenger likewise brought them some apples,
peaches, and melons, all highly acceptable in their
present situation. As soon as they were permitted,
the missionaries hastened to their wives and chil-
dren, who, they were happy to find, had been
treated with kindness and respect. They had
occasional opportunities for communicating with
each other, though it was some time before any of
them were permitted to land. The stores belong-
ing to the missionaries were taken out and sold by
the captors; but captain Robson, being encouraged
to hope that the Duff, or some other vessel, would
be restored to him for bills on the society, wrote a
letter, which was brought on board the Duff for
the missionaries’ answer, observing, if such were
the case, “ he believed it was his duty to prosecute
the mission, and wished to know the sentiments of
every missionary, if he thought it was his duty to
go forward in their reduced state, and wait for a
supply at the South Sea Islands.” The prevailing
opinion among the missionaries was, that if they
could recover their ship, and obtain a sufficient
supply of necessaries, such as were absolutely
o


requisite, they should, by all means, prosecute the
missionary work. The Duff was afterwards sold,
and the only accommodation they could obtain,
was a passage, in a Portuguese brig, to Rio Janeiro.
As this afforded a prospect of returning to England
it was gladly embraced; and having received many
attentions from some of the inhabitants of Monte
Video, they re-embarked, and, on the Blh of May,
1799, all hands were busy in fixing their berths,
as well as circumstances would admit; but they
were rather uncomfortable in consequence of the
smallness of the brig. A bullock’s hide, lashed up
at each corner to the deck, now composed the ge-
nerality of bedsteads.
On the 4th they crossed the line of Capricorn
with a pleasing prospect of reaching the long-
desired port the next evening. But they were
again exposed to the discomfort and peril of a
second captivity, and of making a long voyage in
a man-of-war. Early on the sth a strange sail
appeared in sight, and, from a survey at the mast-
head, soon several others were discovered, till they
counted thirty, which, they perceived, were steer-
ing the same course, and supposed were bound to
the same port Not apprehensive of a second
capture, especially as captain Carbonelle had given
our captain a letter to prove that we were a cartel
of English prisoners whom he had exchanged,
they kept their course. At ten, a. m., a large
frigate was abreast of them, inquiring “ What
ship ? from whence come ? and whither bound ? ”
Having replied to these questions, they were
ordered to take their papers on board, and ulti-
mately their ship was taken possession of, and
they were taken by the fleet to Europe. The


missionaries were now divided; some were put cm
board the Amazona, a Portuguese frigate of forty-
six guns, and others aboard the Medusa, ot
seventy-four guns. Captain Robson was put on
board the brig, De Paccpiatio Postillhio de Ame-
rique. The officers on board the Amazona be-
haved with the utmost kindness and respect, and
appeared to enjoy their company, instead of view-
ing them as a burden. The table was abundantly
supplied with fresh provisions of all sorts, nor
would either the captain or lieutenant be prevailed
upon to be seated till every woman, child, and
missionary had been placed. Their seamen also
were treated with much lenity and kindness, both
by the officers and the men. The commodore
behaved with great haughtiness and unkindness
towards those of the missionary families on board
ids ship; their provisions were exceedingly un-
wholesome, their supply of water scanty, and their
voyage rendered very uncomfortable.
Their minds were mercifully supported by ma-
nifestations of the Divine goodness, and the hope
of speedily escaping from the present trials. On
the 18th, at three p. m. an unusual noise of joy
was heard throughout the ship; when, on inquiry,
they heard the welcome news that terra jirma was
in sight; but, after two hours had elapsed, the
supposed land disappeared. Grateful for the kind-
ness of the captain and officers, those on board the
Amazona agreed, this day, to present a letter of
thanks to captain Garcao, for his humane atten-
tion, of which the following is a copy :
“ Honoured sir,—We, a part of the late cap-
tured missionaries, passengers in the ship Duff, of
London, impressed with a grateful sense of your


unparalleled kindness manifested towards us, and
your unbounded attention to our wives and chil-
dren since we were received on board of the
Amazona, humbly pray your acceptance of this
feeble, but grateful acknowledgement of the same.
We entertain a higher sense of your honour, than
to believe that a multitude of words are necessary
to convince you of the sincerity of these expres-
sions of gratitude from us. Be assured that we
duly appreciate your humanity and kindness, and
consider you as, under God, the instrument of our
preservation ; and shall believe ourselves bound by
every sensation of love, to transmit to the latest
posterity in our native land, the memory of a
man, whom we cannot but esteem ; and pray that
the Lord of heaven and earth, the giver of every
good and perfect gift, may return it sevenfold into
your honour’s bosom.”
This communication they delivered in a body;
and on captain Garcao’s receiving and ascertain-
ing its contents, he returned his sincere thanks,
with this observation: “ I do not merit the re-
spect which you have shown me.”
On the 23d captain Robson, Messrs. Smith,
Howel, and Broughton, went on shore, for the
purpose of laying before the English consul some
particulars respecting their capture, and the con-
duct of the commodore. Their reception at Lis-
bon differed much from that which they had ex-
perienced at the enemy’s port of Monte Video.
As they were there some time after their arrival
before any one appeared to feel the least sympathy
for them in their destitute state. They had not
received any intelligence from their native coun-
try, but Dr. Turner brought them two English


newspapers, containing two accounts, in which
they were deeply interested, and which Mr. Gre-
gory read to the missionaries. These were Mr.
Wilson’s letter from America, relative to their
capture, and the expulsion of their brethren from
Otaheite. From the first, they were satisfied that
their captivity was known ; and the second made
a most powerful impression on their minds, as it
tended to unravel some of the Lord’s dealings
with them ; and each of them could justify the
ways of God to man. They afterwards proceeded
to England, where they received the cordial and
affectionate sympathy of the directors, the mem-
bers of the society, and of a large portion of
the religious public. Some of them sought sta-
tions of usefulness at home, and others, undaunted
by the perils and trials they had experienced,
desired still to enter the missionary field, and
proceeded shortly afterwards in the Royal Admiral
to their original destination.


CHAPTER VII.
Encouraging Tidings from England.—Rapidity
of Depopulation in Tahiti.—Reflections on the
State of the People. —Arrival of additional
Missionaries in the Royal Admiral. — Mis-
sionary Tours of Tahiti and Eimeo. — Wars on
Account of the Image of Oro.—Providential Ar-
rival of Foreigners. —The Mission-House gar-
risoned by Seamen.—Baneful Effects of idola-
trous Wars upon the People. — Treacherous
Mode of obtaining Human Sacrifices. — Con-
temptuous manner in which the Labours of the
Mission were regarded. —Testimony of Turn-
bull in favour of the Missionaries. —Probable
number to which the Inhabitants of the Islands
were reduced. —Death of Pomare the First. —
Origin of his Name.—Practice of burying the
Sick alive.—Human Victims brought from
Eimeo. —Afflictive Privations of the Mission-
aries, and want of Tidings from England. —
Happy Death of Mr. Jefferson. —Outbreaking
of War in Matavai. —Departure of the Ma-
jority of the Missionaries for Huahine.—De-
feat of the King Flight of the remainder of
the Missionaries to Eimeo, and breaking up of
the Tahitian Mission. — Reflections. — Voyage
of the Missionaries to New South Wales. —
Hospitable Reception and kind Treatment from
the Governor and others in the Colony.
The painful impressions which the tidings of the
disastrous capture of their brethren could not fail
to produce in the minds of the missionaries in


Tahiti, were in a degree mitigated by the
opportune visit of a king’s ship, the Porpoise,
commanded by captain Scott, whose arrival at a
remarkable juncture in the affairs of the island,
was the means, in the hands of God, of preventing
one of the most extensive civil wars with which
it had yet been threatened. Captain Scott was
the bearer of encouraging and friendly letters
from the governor of New South Wales, with va-
luable presents for the king and queen, and the
more gratifying intelligence that a ship with sup-
plies and additional labourers was on her way
from England. Thus encouraged, they pursued
their arduous and self-denying labours, supported
alone by the principles and hopes which the gos-
pel implants and cherishes. The aspect of na-
tive society became increasingly distressing ; the
nation appeared fast verging to oblivion.
In the month of January, 1801, after speaking
of the apathy with which their announcement of
the gospel was received, or the hostility shown to
its requirements, they observe, “ Among the na-
tives around us are many objects of compassion,
whose bodies are wasting with disease, and their
souls hurrying into eternity, in a state of the
utmost insensibility. It is surprising what havoc
disease has made. Matavai is almost depopulated,
in comparison with what it once was, according to
the accounts given by the natives; and not only
this district, but the whole island. Stout men are
cut down in a few months; women and children
share the same fate. God must, with his mighty
hand and outstretched arm turn them, or they
will never be turned ; pluck them as brands from
the burning of their lusts, or they will never be


saved. We cease not to pray our heavenly Father
in Christ to have mercy upon the bodies and
souls around us; we endeavour to warn them of
their danger, and show them how it is to be
avoided, and we wait for God to have mercy
upon them.”
At the commencement of the following month,
they add, “ Brothers Eyre and Henry, who were
to-day, February 2d, out about the district, visit-
ing the natives, bring a melancholy report of the
appearances of things. The country very scantily
peopled ; the low lands overrun with long grass
and underwood, which form swamps, stop the
circulation of air, and tend much to the unhealthi-
ness of the atmosphere and sickness of the inha-
bitants ; added to which, the spirit of disaffection
which prevails among the lower classes against
Pomare and Otu, Otaheite is at this moment
smarting very severely under the rod of God; but
they believe it is not, and give very little atten-
tion to our information that it really is so.”
On the 6th of March, the anniversary of their
landing, they have inserted the subjoined record of
the cheerless state of the mission, and the moral
barrenness of the soil they had cultivated, with
the only source whence their sources of confi-
dence and hope were derived.
“ This day four years w r e arrived at Otaheite,
and have hitherto been preserved in a very kind
and gracious manner. At present we see no good
arising from our residence among the natives here,
and feel we have much unprofitableness to lament;
but we rejoice that we have an Advocate at the
right hand of the Majesty on high ; and as we
cannot do any good unless God is pleased to work


in us, to will and to do of Ids good pleasure, we
desire to lie humbly at his disposal.”
The tidings they had received at the beginning
of the year were verified on the i Oth of J uly,
1801, by the arrival of captain W. Wilson, nephew
of the commander of the Duff, in the Royal Ad-
miral, with eight missionaries from England, and
Mr. Shelly, who had been preserved during the
murder of the missionaries at the Friendly Islands.
On the 13th of July the brethren landed, and
were introduced to Pomare and the chiefs, who
appeared to rejoice in their arrival, though it is
probable the chief or only advantage they desired,
was the countenance or aid they hoped to secure
in intimidating their enemies, and rendering the
government more secure.
The missionaries who had arrived in the Royal
Admiral had brought with them a number of
useful seeds and plants, on the culture of which
they bestowed great care. Among these the vine,
the fig, and the peach tree, appeared to thrive well,
but they were all destroyed by the natives in a
disastrous war, which occurred soon after, and with
the rumours of which the island was greatly agi-
tated for a long time. In the midst of these com-
motions the missionaries pursued their labours of
love ; and having acquired sufficient knowledge of
the language to address the people on religious
subjects, they visited different districts for the
purpose of preaching to the people the unsearch-
able riches of Christ.
In the spring of 1802, Messrs. Elder and Nott
commenced the first missionary tour of Tahiti.
Wherever they could gather a congregation they
addressed the people, who often appeared to


manifest great attention; and some of them said
they desired to pray to the true God, but were afraid
the gods of Tahiti would destroy them if they did.
On their way home, in passing through Atehuru,
they found the king and chiefs celebrating a fes-
tival in honour of Oro, and saw the altars loaded
with offerings, and the human victims suspended
on the sacred trees around; and when they saw
Pomare actually engaged in sacrificing to Oro,
they remonstrated with him, and told him the
true God was angry with him for killing men.
The next day, after much altercation about the
idol Oro, now in the custody of the people of
Atehuru, the image of this imaginary god was
seized by force, a human victim treacherously
murdered to prevent his anger at the forcible
seizure that had been made, and a most savage
and destructive war commenced. It was under
these circumstances that the two brethren already
named returned from their journey round the
island after preaching to the people peace on earth
and good will towards men. The war thus com-
menced, was carried on with relentless barbarity
and cruelty; the forces of the king were van-
quished, the idol recovered by those from whom
it had been forcibly taken away, and whose desire
of revenge, encouraged as they supposed by the
god, threatened the annihilation of their enemies.
At one time the mission seemed in imminent
peril; but in this season of their extremity the
gracious and merciful care of the Lord were
evinced in a most singular manner, and in the
greatest extremity of their distress, the Lord ap-
peared as their refuge and strength, a very present
help in trouble. Their numbers were indeed only


few, but Mr. and Mrs. Shelly had, in the beginning
of March of that year, arrived in the Norfolk, an
armed vessel, from New South Wales, to join the
mission. The Venus, another colonial vessel,
came into Matavai, and left captain Bishop and
six seamen on the island, for the purpose of bar-
tering with the natives.
About the 30th of March the Norfolk was driven
on shore in a heavy gale of wind, and destroyed,
though all her stores were saved. Seventeen
Englishmen thus cast on shore, with captain
Bishop and his men, gladly united with the mis-
sionaries for defence against a common enemy;
and by the unexpected, but to them highly ad-
vantageous presence of these men, under God, the
missionaries were preserved from plunder, if not
death, in the commotions which ensued.
The rebels having secured the greater part of
the island, the missionaries inferred that they
would attempt the conquest of the remainder, and
neglected no means of defence, as they could ex-
pect no favour in the event of their succeeding.
The mission-house was converted into a garrison.
The enclosures of the garden were destroyed, the
bread-fruit and cocoa-nut trees cut down, to pre-
vent their affording shelter to the enemy, and the
means of annoyance from their muskets or slings.
Their chapel was also pulled down, lest the enemy
should occupy it or burn it, and from it set fire
to the mission-house. A strong paling, or stock-
ade, was planted round the house ; boards, covered
with nails, were sunk in the paths leading to it;
and thither the missionaries, captain Bishop, cap-
tain House, commander of the wrecked vessel, and
the seamen under their orders, now retired, as


they daily received accounts of the intention of
the rebels to make their next attack upon them.
The viranda in front of their dwelling was pro-
tected by chests, bedding, and other articles, so as
to afford a secure defence from musket-balls ; and
the sides of the house were fortified with similar
materials. Four brass cannon, which had been
saved from the wreck of the Norfolk, were fixed in
two of the upper rooms, and, as far as the number
of muskets would admit, the inmates of the dwell-
ing were placed under arms. The missionaries,
as well as the seamen, stood sentinels in turn,
night and day, in order to prevent surprise. Their
situation at this time must have been most dis-
tressing. Independently of the extending deso-
lation, and the confusion and inconvenience that
necessarily attended their being all confined in
one house, together with the two captains and their
seamen, they were daily expecting an attack.
Sometimes they heard that the rebels were en-
tering Matavai from the east, at other times from
the west, and sometimes they received intelligence
that they had divided their forces, and intended to
commence the attack from two opposite points at
the same time.
Pomare erected some works on One-tree Hill, to
arrest their progress, should they attempt to enter
the district in that direction ; and, hearing they
were still ravaging the peninsula of Tairabu, sent a
strong force to attack their encampment at home.
His party reached Atehuru, without molestation,
late at night; and, falling without mercy on their
defenceless victims, under the cover of the darkness
of midnight, destroyed nearly two hundred men,
women, and children. This unprovoked act of


cruelty on the part of Pomare, heightened to such
a degree the rage of the rebels, that they vowed
the entire destruction of his family.
After a series of murderous conflicts between
these parties, hostilities were suspended, and the
vessels departed from the island, leaving the mis-
sionaries to pursue their work under the discou-
ragement which these heathenish and savage con-
tests had produced. They determined to remain
at their post, and, confiding in the Divine protec-
tion, to pursue their work patiently, waiting in
hope: and desolate and cheerless as every thing
around them appeared, their review of the striking
manifestations of Divine Providence in their be-
half, in the manner in which they had been pro-
tected, inspired them with increasing confidence
and thankfulness. The late events had strength-
ened the disinclination of the people to attend
to their instruction, and led them often to treat
their attempts with marked disregard and contempt.
Sometimes when they had canvassed every house
in a village for hearers, they found the people
depart another way; and, when any did come, it
often appeared to be to turn their persons or speech
into ridicule.
Brainerd remarks on the trial which it was to
him to see the Indians playing with their dogs
w hile he was preaching to them; but the mission-
aries in Tahiti were exposed to greater annoy-
ances, as the natives frequently brought their dogs
to the place where they were preaching, and set
them to fighting; or they would bring their fight-
ing cocks, and set them at each other, and thus
interrupt their speaking, and completely divert
the attention of all around. Notwithstanding
p


these and other trials, they not only travelled
through the districts ot‘ Tahiti, but two of them,
in the month of December, 1802, visited the ad-
jacent island of Eimeo, and preached the gospel
of salvation to its inhabitants.
A short time before this period, namely, on the
23d of September, 1802, the Margaret, captain
Byers, arrived at Tahiti, and afterwards proceeded
on a voyage to the eastward, leaving Mr. Turn-
bull and a number of men at Tahiti, for the pur-
pose of bartering with the natives. The nation,
at this period, appeared to be fast verging to an-
nihilation ; infanticide, intoxication, war, and the
frequency of offering human sacrifices, seemed to
threaten desolation to the country. Turnbull has
given an account which is substantiated by two of
the missionaries, who slept the same night in the
house of the chief, and, in the evening, saw the
man who, before morning, was murdered; which
shows the manner in which victims were often
procured.
" One of the confidants of Otu was advanced
to the command of a district, at some distance
from Matavai. This man had been often impor-
tuned for a human victim, and as often excused
himself, by the difficulty of finding any suitable
object. This passed for a time, but the king, or
rather Pomare, at length insisted on his com-
pliance. This wretch, now put to his shifts, and
apprehensive of losing the smiles of his benefactor,
found he could defer it no longer. He, therefore,
sent a message, requesting the immediate visit of
a near relation. The unsuspicious man obeyed,
and was received with the greatest friendship and
cordiality by the treacherous chief, so that he de


parted enraptured with his reception. But he had
no sooner left the house, than the villain gave
orders that one of his trusty agents should follow
him, and, watching his opportunity, should kill
him when off his guard. This was accordingly
done, when the unsuspicious man was walking
down to the beach. The body was then laid out
in a long basket, made of cocoa-nut leaves, and
conveyed past our door. The natives in our yard
beheld it with the most perfect apathy, and re-
quested me to look at it as it passed; but I ex-
pressed my abhorrence of such an outrage to
humanity, and refused to go out of my doors till
it had proceeded beyond my sight.”
While practices so revolting were increasing
among them, it was not to be expected that any
attention would be paid to the instructions of the
missionaries; still they continued their labours.
In reference to one of their services, on the sab-
bath evening at which he was present, and when
Mr. Jefferson preached, Turnbull observes, “ Their
congregation might amount to about fifty; upon
its conclusion, I demanded of Otu (who had sent
for him) what he wanted with me. He asked me,
upon the departure of the missionaries, whether
it was all true as they had preached. I replied in
the affirmative; that it was strictly so according
to my own belief, and that of all the wiser and
better part of my countrymen. He demanded of
me where Jehovah lived; I pointed to the hea-
vens. He said he did not believe it. His brother
was, if possible, still worse. Idea was looking on
with a kind of haughty and disdainful indifference.
They said it was all haavare, or falsehood.”
On the 27th of May, 1803, captain Byers and


his men were seen approaching Tahiti in a rude
sort of vessel, which they had constructed out of
the planks of their ship. The Margaret had been
wrecked among the low islands, about two hundred
miles to the north-east of Tahiti. By the good
providence of God no lives were lost, though they
were in imminent danger from the natives of the
islands in the neighbourhood of the place where
they were wrecked. They built, in a very rude
manner, having no carpenter among them, a large
sort of chest, seventeen feet long, five feet wide,
and four deep; in which sixteen men, one female,
the wife of one of the officers, and her child,
reached Tahiti. Their preservation was remark-
able, their vessel was quite unmanageable, and
they could only proceed in one direction before
the wind, and then, at the greatest speed, not
more than two and a half miles per hour. Their
provision and water were exceedingly scanty, and,
feeble as they were, it was requisite to keep one
man constantly employed in baling the water out
of the leaky vessel. When they approached the
shore of Tahiti, the missionaries prevented their
being plundered by the natives, and paid them
every attention that their circumstances required.
Before closing his account of his residence in
Tahiti, Turnbull, recording his testimony to the
fidelity of the missionaries, and their diligence in
instructing the people, remarks : “ It may be sa-
tisfactory to the friends of the missionaries to
learn, that their prayer meetings and public or-
dinances were constantly kept up; the morning
and afternoon of every day, and on Sundays, three
times in the day. The natives, however, did not
attend. The brethren took it by turns to visit all


pails of the island within their reach on that day.
The preaching, or rather the example, of the
missionaries is not, however, wholly without effect;
the sabbath is called by the natives, mahana te
Etooa, the day of God; and however little atten-
tion in every other respect they pay to religion,
their conduct in the immediate neighbourhood of
Matavai, on this day, is more sedate and orderly
than on any other. The missionaries have doubt-
less gained a small victory over them in this
point, as likewise in another of still greater con-
sequence; the greater part of their former ob-
scenity in their public dances has disappeared,
and in Matavai the Sunday has something of the
semblance of a Christian sabbath.”
The prospects of the mission became
ingly discouraging. Writing, under date of 29th
of August, 1803, the missionaries observe, “ Hu-
man sacrifices continue to be frequently offered,
and Pomare is practising all the wicked arts in
using them to render his god propitious. The
murder of infants is still continued, which, with
the human sacrifices and diseases, is fast depo-
pulating Tahiti. The number of inhabitants cal-
culated by Mr. W. Wilson, 1797, is now reduced
to less than one-half. There are not 8000 in-
habitants on the island. It is conjectured by some
of us that they do not exceed 5000. The natives
appear to pay but little regard to us when we
strive to point them to Jesus as the only pro-
pitiation for sin. On the contrary, the generality
of them contemn the word of life, and charge it
with being foolishness. The state of Tahiti is
more miserable and pitiable, honoured fathers and
brethren, than perhaps you are aware of; numbers
p 3


are dying upon our right hand and upon our left,
without God, without Christ, without hope, and
without the least appearance of real desire to seek
after God, if haply they may find him ! fretted
with seeing their relatives cut off on every side
with pining diseases. The favour of the chiefs
towards us is still precarious; perhaps but little
more than the fear of consequences, or the hope
of profit, connects them to us. We are ceitain
they are not friends to us for the sake of the
gospel, which they are not so ignorant but they
must perceive militates against their religion, for
the support of which they use every effort in their
power.
“ The slate of the surrounding islands we sup-
pose to be similar to this, that is, that whatever the
number of their inhabitants might once have been,
it is now small. Eimeo does not contain, it may
be, more than 2000 souls. The small island,
called Tetoowa, and others connected with it,
from what we have heard of late, have not moie
than one hundred persons on them ; we may,
therefore, reasonably conclude, that others of the
Society Islands are no better peopled.”
Towards the close of the year, the mission
sustained a serious loss by the decease of Pomaie,
who died suddenly, on the 3rd of Sept. 1803, as
he was proceeding in his canoe towards an English
ship, the Dart, then in the harbour. In his per-
son, Pomare was one of the finest men in the
island; his countenance open, and one of the most
prepossessing that captain Wilson met with ; his
maimer dignified and grave; his physical strength
was naturally great, and had been increased by
activity and labour. He manifested much sagacity.


and great perseverance; and his constant endea-
vour was to improve the resources of the island.
He was the founder of the dynasty which has
since borne his name. That name, like most of
those in the islands, originated rather in what
would he generally termed accident, than in design.
The chief was travelling, with a number of his
followers, in the mountainous parts of the southern
peninsula, where the distance from any village, or
permanent dwellings, rendered it necessary to en-
camp, for the night, among the mountains. The
chief’s tent was pitched in an exposed situation,
and the heavy dew which fell induced a slight
hoarseness and cough. This circumstance led
some of his attendants, or companions, to call the
past night po-mare, from po, night, and mare ,
cough. The chief was pleased with the sounds,
as thus combined, adopted them as his name, and
was ever afterwards called Po-ma-re, which is still
the regal name of the chief ruler of Tahiti. The
monarchical government of Tahiti appears to have
originated with Pomare. Until his time the island
was governed by several chiefs, each supreme in
his own district, and independent of every other.
This was the cause of frequent and desolating wars,
and was happily put an end to by Pomare, who
was the chief of Pare, whose enterprise and
ambition, aided by the attention shown him by
the commanders of British vessels, the fire-arms
he obtained from them, and the aid of foreign sea-
men, especially the mutineers of the Bounty,
enabled him to subdue every rival, and bequeath
to his son the government of the whole island.
He had uniformly treated the missionaries with
kindness, and in his death they felt that they had


lost a sincere, as well as a powerful friend, on
whose regard for their welfare and safety they had
ever placed the strongest confidence, although they
were grieved that he was not influenced by any
desire to attend to the religious instructions they
were so anxious to impart.
No commotion followed the death of Pomare,
and the missionaries pursued their labours with
increasing diligence, endeavouring, especially, to
instruct the young in a short summary of religious
truth, which they had prepared for the purpose.
Mr. Davies, in particular, devoted much time to
the work; and, although hitherto they had found it
impracticable to teach any of the natives to read,
a number of them could repeat, from memory, the
summary, or catechism, which they had prepared.
The gospel was preached in every district of Ta-
hiti and Eimeo, but the people seemed more than
ever disposed to treat it with ridicule, and the mis-
sionaries with scorn. Early in January, 1805, the
missionaries prepared a larger catechism; and, on
the 6th of March, they adopted their Tahitian
alphabet. In forming this, the roman characters
were preferred; sounds, in the Tahitian language,
were attached to them; and, for the purpose of facili-
tating the introduction of letters among the people,
a native name was affixed to each. It was, how-
ever, a long time before any of the native inhabit-
ants of Tahiti could be induced to learn the letters
of the alphabet. Yet the missionaries continued
their labours in preaching to the people, and
teaching the catechism to the children.
Amidst the varied and increasing evidence which
now accumulated before them, of the barbarity
inseparable from the heathenism of depraved and


uncivilized men, which the frequency of infant
murder and the number of human victims offered
to the idols afforded, they record the following,
under date of Oct. 1805 :
“ There is a report in our neighbourhood, that
a sick young man, some weeks ago, was actually
buried alive. He was a native of Raeatea, had
been for a considerable time about our dwelling,
and frequently employed by some of the brethren.
Some months ago he was taken ill, and then gene-
rally staid in a hut near our dwelling, where he
was fed by the boys, and some of the brethren
paid attention to him, gave him cloth to cover
him, and persuaded him to stay here, as he would
be better attended to than at a distance. To this
he would not consent, but went off to an acquaint-
ance inland, who, probably, being tired of him,
went out one day and dug a hole, which the sick
man saw, and inquired what it was for. They
bid him hold his peace, and soon after him
into the hole, and covered him with earth.” A
few days afterward, referring again to this cir-
cumstance, they remark : —“ It appears that the
young man was persuaded, by his acquaintance,
"that he w as going to be taken to the sea-side, that
he might bathe. To this he willingly agreed, and
strove to get upon a board, to be carried between
two men ; but, in going towards the sea, they took
him to the hole already prepared, and threw him
down. When he struggled against going into the
hole, they beat him, and afterwards covered him
with earth. His cries were heard at a distance,
but no aid came to his relief.”
In the month of January, 1806, Pomare returned
from Eimeo, bringing with him the idol Oro,


which was kept in his sacred canoe, while the
human sacrifices offered on his arrival were sus-
pended on the trees around. The missionaries
paid a visit to the king soon after his return; and,
as he had become remarkably fond of using his
pen, he intimated his wish that they should build
him a small plastered house near their own, in
which he could attend to his writing without the
interruption he experienced in his own dwelling.
About this time Mr. Davies was engaged in teach-
ing Pomare to write, by forming letters in the sand
on the sea-beach. This was an entirely new in-
vention to them, long before they heard of Bell
and Lancaster, having been suggested by the cir-
cumstances in which Pomare and myself were
placed, while sitting under the shadow of the
cocoa-nut grove, near Point Venus.
During the early periods of the mission, vessels
from different ports frequently touched at Tahiti.
By many of these the missionaries had been able
to write to the directors, and to their friends in
England, and from several they had secured a
small supply of such articles as they needed; but
since the arrival of the Royal Admiral, in July,
1801, although the directors had repeatedly sent
out articles to Port Jackson for Tahiti, yet the
missionaries had received neither letters nor sup-
plies from England. Many vessels had sailed
from Port Jackson, where the supplies were lying,
and had afterwards touched at the island, but the
captains, having no intention of doing so when
they sailed, had refused to take the goods on board.
Of lea and sugar, and many other comforts, they
had long been destitute, and their apparel was
such as scarcely to enable them to appear respect


able in the company of any of their countrymen
who might visit the island. Several of them were
some years with only one pair of shoes; and often
in journies, undertaken for the purpose of preach-
ing and instructing the natives, they had travelled
barefoot.
In addition to these privations, the gloom and
discouragement which depressed their spirits, on
account of the total want of success attending their
labours, must have been increased, in a. great de-
gree, by the uncertainty and anxiety of remaining,
at that remote distance from home, more than five
years, without even once hearing, by letter, from
their native country or their friends.
From this distressing state of feeling they were
in a great measure relieved, by the arrival of the
Hawkesbury, a colonial vessel, which anchored in
Matavai Bay on the 26th of November, 1806.
Since the year 1804, the society in England
had authorized Mr. Marsden to expend annually,
for the support of the missionaries, two hundred
pounds, and had also sent out supplies. Unable
to meet, in Port Jackson, any vessel proceeding to
Tahiti, Mr. Marsden had at length engaged the
Hawkesbury, a small sloop of about twenty tons
burden, to take out the letters and articles that
had been so long delayed, and the communications
from England, which would convey to the mis-
sionaries the welcome, and the needed assurance,
that they were not forgotten by their friends at
home ; but most of the articles, especially those of
clothing, from the length of time they had been
lying at Port Jackson, and the wretched state of
the vessel in which they w r ere sent, were so injured
as to be almost useless; the packages were wet


with sea water, and their contents consequently
spoiled.
The king, their only pupil, appeared to take
great pleasure in learning to write ; and his corres-
pondence with the missionaries, when at a dis-
tance from them, was regarded with a mixture of
incredulity and apprehension which was often
amusing.
In the beginning of the following year, he wrote
a letter to the Directors of the Missionary Society,
with which the missionaries forwarded the annexed
translation: — s
“ Mafavae, Tahiti , January Ist, 1807.
“ Friends, —I wish you every blessing, friends,
in your residence in your country, with success in
teaching this bad land, this foolish land, this
wicked land, this land which is ignorant of good,
this land that knoweth not the true God, this re-
gardless land.
« Friends, I wish you health and prosperity;
may I also live, and may Jehovah save us all.
“ Friends, with respect to your letter you wrote
to me, I have this to say to you, that your busi-
ness with me, and your wishes, I fully consent to,
and shall consequently banish Oro, and send him
to Raeatea.
“ Friends, I do therefore believe, and shall obey
your word.
“ Friends, I hope you also will consent to my
request, which is this'; I wish you to send a great
number of men, women, and children here.
u Friends, send also property, and cloth for us,
and we also will adopt English customs.
“ Friends, send also plenty of muskets and


powder, for wars are frequent in’ our country.
Should I be killed, you will have nothing in Ta-
hiti. Do not come here when lam dead. Ta-
hiti is a regardless country, and should I die with
sickness, do not come here. This also I wish,
that you would send me all the curious things that
you have in England. Also send me every thing
necessary for writing ; paper, ink, and pens in
abundance ; let no writing utensil be wanting.
« Friends, I have done, and have nothing at all
more to ask you for. As for your desire to instruct
Tahiti, it is what I fully acquiesce in. It is a
common thing for people not to understand at
first; but your object is good, and I fully consent
to it, and shall cast off all evil customs.
“ What I say is truth, and no lie; it is the real
truth.
“ This is all I have to write; I have done.
“ Friends, write to me, that I may know what
you have to say.
“ I wish you life and every blessing.
“ May I also live, and may Jehovah save us all.
“ Pomare, king of Tahiti, &c. &c.”
“ For my Friends,
« The Missionary Society, London.”
The repeated trials with which the missionaries
were exercised, the privations and hardships they
endured, and the protracted discouragements by
which, at this period, they were depressed, were
of no ordinary character. Few, among modern
missionaries, have been called to endure such
afflictions; and it is matter of devout acknowledge-
ment, that, notwithstanding the darkness of their
prospects, and the great destitution of their
Q


circumstances, they were still enabled to persevere,
and leave the event with Him, at whose command
they had entered on their work.
Towards the close of the year, the mission
sustained a heavy loss in the death of Mr. Jeffer-
son. He was one of those missionaries who ar-
rived in the ship Duff. He had borne the heat
and burden of the day, and finished his course on
the 25th of Sept. 1807. He was a man of intelli-
gence and ability, possessing extraordinary devot-
edness and patient zeal. He had laboured unre-
mittingly for ten anxious years, filling, with credit
to himself and advantage to the mission, the most
important station among his brethren, by whom
he was highly and justly respected. Referring to
his death they observe:—“We have much cause
for thankfulness on his behalf. Death was not to
him the king of terrors; he had been, for a long
time past, waiting for, and desiring his dismission
from a sinful and diseased body, yet often expressed
a thankful acquiescence in the will of God; and,
though he did not experience any extraordinary
raptures of joy, he in general, for some time past,
enjoyed a settled peace of conscience, and a firm
persuasion of his interest in Christ. Some of his
last words were, u Comfortable, comfortable! Sweet,
sweet! Glory, glory be to Him.”
On the sabbath-day, the 6th of November, the
district of Matavai was thrown into great confu-
sion, and numbers of men appeared in arms. The
king, expecting that his camp, which was at Ma-
tavai, would be immediately attacked, recommended
that the wives and children of the missionaries
should take shelter in a vessel in the harbour. They
embarked on the 7th, amid much confusion,but with


the eincerest gratitude to God for the refuge so sea-
sonably provided. The night passed without any
attack. Several leading chiefs, whom the rebels
expected, had not arrived; and the Europeans
were permitted to pack up a few articles for their
use on board. The next morning a letter was
addressed to the captain, requesting him to delay
his departure forty-eight hours, that they might
deliberate on the steps necessary to be taken. On
the following day the missionaries, Nott and Scott,
as the messengers of peace, went alone, unarmed,
to the rebel camp at Apaiano, and invited the
leaders to an interview with Pomare. The chiefs
treated them with every mark of friendship, re-
gretted that their establishment should suffer from
the quarrel between them and the king, and re-
quested them not to leave the island. The leaders
of the rebels refused, however, to meet Pomare,
except in battle, and every hope of accommodation
now vanished. Pomare advised the married mis-
sionaries to leave the island. They were unani-
mously of opinion, that there was no prospect of
safety or usefulness, even should the rebel chiefs
prove their friends; and this, together with the
little success that had attended the labours of so
many years, determined them to remove. Four
of the unmarried missionaries offered to remain
with the king, that they might be upon the spot,
should any favourable change take place. The
others, with most of the Europeans on the island,
sailed from Tahiti on the 10th of November, 1808,
and arrived, the following day, at the island of
Huahine, where they were hospitably received by
the chiefs and people.
The affairs of Tahiti continued in the same state


until the 22nd of December, when the king, influ-
enced by Metia, the prophet of Oro, attacked the
rebels, who were not only superior in numbers,
but favoured in the conflict, by the occupation of
an advantageous position. Notwithstanding the
prophet’s prediction of victory, Pomare was de-
feated, and fled with precipitation to Pare, leaving
a portion of his fire-arms in the hands of his
enemies, and several of his principal warriors
among the slain.
The missionaries who had ventured to remain
in Tahiti after the departure of their companions,
now fled to Eimeo for safety, where they
shortly afterwards joined by the king, with whom
they remained for several months. The brethren
who had removed to Huahine continued in painful
suspense, uncertain as to the state of the island,
and the fate of their brethren, until the 3d of April,
1809, when they were joined by Messrs. Scott and
Wilson from Tahiti. Their brethren informed
them of the position of the contending parties, the
violent outrages of the rebels, and the little pros-
pect there was that Pomare would regain the sove-
reignty of the island. On the 22nd of July fol-
lowing, they were joined by Mr. Hayward, who
had left Mr. Scott alone with the king. The
painful and alarming circumstances under which
they had been driven from Tahiti, the total de-
struction of the settlement at Matavai, the little
prospect of the restoration of peace, led them,
after frequent deliberation and prayer, to regard
it as their duty to remove, by the earliest favour-
able opportunity, to Port Jackson. They waited
for a conveyance until the 26th of October, 1809,
when, excepting Mr. Hayward, who remained in


Huahine, and Mr. Holt, who resided in Elmeo
with the king, they all embarked for the colony.
It is not easy to conceive the distress of the last
missionaries who left the islands, when they beheld
their gardens demolished, their houses plundered
and burnt, their pupils engaged in all the hostili-
ties of savage war, and the people doomed to the
complicated miseries of idolatry, anarchy, cruelty,
and vice; but, painful and deeply humiliating as it
was, it now appeared to those devoted servants of
God, who had, amidst protracted and severe priva-
tions maintained their ground, that life no longer
secure; that, after the patient toil of twelve event-
ful years, the scene of their labours must be aban-
doned. But, though Tahiti was then surrendered
for a season, as a prey to the spoiler, and subju-
gated to the rule of ignorance, barbarism, and
idolatry, it was not abandoned by Him, in obe-
dience to whose command, “Go and teach all
nations,” the mission had been undertaken. He
had still “ thoughts of mercy” towards its inhabit-
ants, and was, by this distressing event, teaching
those who had undertaken the work, and instruct-
ing his church, in regard to all their future efforts
to extend his gospel, that singleness of aim, purity
of motive, and patient diligence in labour, were, of
themselves, insufficient for the work; that it was
by his Holy Spirit that the heathens were to be
converted, and that, without his blessing, Paul might
plant, and A polios might water, in vain. After
the victory of the 22nd December, 1808, the rebels
plundered the districts of Matavai and Pare, and,
devoting every house to destruction, reduced the
whole country to the wildest state of desolation.
The mission houses were ransacked and burnt,
q 3


and, whatever the insurgents were unable to carry
off, was destroyed. Every implement of iron was
converted into a weapon of war. The most valu-
able books were either committed to the flames, or
distributed to the warriors, for the purpose of mak-
ing cartridge papers, and the printing types were
melted into musket balls.
The indirect influence of Christian missions on
different parts of the world, has frequently been
most important and decisive in the spiritual benefit
it has conferred on those by whom the stations
have been visited, a gratifying instance of this
occurred at Tahiti, during a most discouraging
period in the early history of that mission. Occa-
sionally some of the crews of the whaling ships
touching at the island, attended the public worship
of the missionaries. Their preaching was made,
by the blessing of God, instrumental to the con-
version of a seaman in one of these ships, who
was afterwards made a great blessing to his ship-
mates. On his return, to avoid being impressed,
he entered on board his majesty's ship Volontaire,
and afterwards removed to the Ganges, where, by
his instrumentality, many were led to seek the
blessings of salvation. His good conduct procured
him the offer of promotion, which he declined,
requesting only to be appointed ship’s corporal, in
which office, having the care of the boys, he hoped
to be useful in training them up in the fear of
God. Grateful to that institution which had been
the means of such abounding mercy to himself, he
was desirous to aid its operations, and, in Sept.
1809, sent, by the late Dr. Waugh, a donation of
fourteen pounds, from himself and fourteen of his
shipmates, to whom God had blessed his instructions.


It has been already seen that perils unexpected,
and almost unprecedented, forced the missionaries
in Tahiti from the field. These continued, even
after they had left the scenes of outrage, violence,
and bloodshed; and the almost hopeless despair
under which they pursued their disconsolate way,
greatly heightened the poignancy of their distress.
Speaking of the same in a letter from Sydney,
dated Feb. 24, 1810, they observe :—“ This mys-
terious and perplexing dispensation cannot be
more grievous and trying to our friends and con-
nexions, than it has been to us. Our voyage,
likewise, has been tedious and dangerous. We
embarked at Huahine, Oct. 26, 1809, and arrived
at Port Jackson Feb. 17, 1810. Among the Figiis
we were in imminent danger, and, on the night of
the 11th of Nov, were shipwrecked on a reef. The
vessel remained on the rocks, after we had quitted
her, about fourteen hours, and it was almost next
to a miracle that she was saved. We also met with
bad weather, and had a great scarcity of provisions.”
On reaching the colony, the missionaries were
treated with great kindness by his excellency, go-
vernor Macquarie, who promised, to afford them
the privileges of settlers, recommending their en-
gaging as the instructors of the youth of the colony.
While the missionaries remained in Port Jack-
son, they received affectionate and encouraging
letters from England, and communications of a
most touching, yet confidential kind, from the
king, who invited their return. In the autumn of
1811, in compliance with his invitation, they
again embarked for the islands.


CHAPTER VIII.
Return of the Missionaries to Eimeo. — Their
friendly Reception by the King.—Painful be-
reavements in the Mission Families. —Public
Profession of Christianity by Pomare II.-
His Request to be baptized. —His Conversation
with the Chiefs. —Extracts of his Letters to
the Missionaries. —Encouraging Accounts from
Tahiti.—Seasons for private Prayer observed
among the Natives.—Names of the first Con-
verts recorded.—Progress of Crime and Bar-
barity among the Idolaters at Tahiti.—Con-
versation with the Votaries of Oro at Eimeo. —
Heath of a native Christian.—Native Chris-
tians, designated " Bure Atua" or Prayers to
God. —Visit to the Society Islands. — Persecu-
tion in Tahiti.—Martyrdom of native Chris-
tians. —Acknowledgment of the true God before
a public Assembly.-Death of Mr. Scott. —
Malice of the Idolaters. —Proposed Assassina-
tion of the Christians. —Their Escape. — Quar-
rels among the Idolaters. —Efforts of Pomare
among the Chiefs at Eimeo.—His Letter to the
Missionaries.
During the absence of the missionaries, Pomare
had remained excluded from his hereditary do-
minions, and in exile on the island of Eimeo.
The melancholy reverses he had experienced,
and the depression of spirits consequent upon the
dissolution of his government, and the desolation


of his family, led him, perhaps, to douht the truth
of that system of idol-worship to which he had
been devoted, and on which he had invariably
relied for success in every military, civil, and
political enterprise. Whether from this cause, or
from the leisure for contemplation and inquiry,
under the influence of such feelings, inclined him
to reflect more seriously on the truth of those
declarations he had often heard respecting the true
God, and to consider his present condition as the
chastening of that Being whom he had refused to
acknowledge, it is impossible to determine; but
these disastrous events had evidently subdued his
spirit, and softened his heart.
When the missionaries who returned from Port
Jackson landed in Eimeo, the king received them
with the warmest demonstrations of joy. Mr. and
Mrs. Bicknell, the first who arrived, resided some
time in the same house with him. He spent much
of his time in reading and writing, in conversation,
and in earnest inquiries about God, and the way
of acceptance with him through Jesus Christ, and
sometimes spoke in terms astonishing even to the
missionaries themselves. One or two other natives
appeared also favourably impressed in regard to
the religion of the bible. Under these auspicious
appearances, although prevented, by the unsettled
state of Tahiti, from resuming their station in
Matavai, the missionaries were enabled to com-
mence their labours in the island of Eimeo. They
also indulged a hope of establishing a mission in
Raiatea, one of the Leeward or Society Islands,
when a series of domestic trials frustrated their
plans of extended usefulness, and confined them
for several years to the island of Eimeo.


On the 28th of July, 1812, Mrs. Henry finished
her earthly career. She had accompanied her hus-
band, from her native country, in the ship Duff,
with the first missionaries who landed in Tahiti.
In all the trials of the mission she had sustained
her part, and, with unwavering devotedness to its
interests, she had endeavoured to perform, with
efficiency and cheerfulness, the duties of her sta-
tion, until her life fell a sacrifice to the privations
and toils of her eventful and perilous career. It
was, however, a sacrifice cheerfully offered on her
part. Her memory was greatly esteemed by those
who had borne with her the burden of the day, and
who survived her. In a letter to the Directors of
the London Missionary Society, dated June 24,
1813, the Rev. S. Marsden thus wrote of Mrs.
Henry :—“ No woman, in my opinion, could be
more sincere, or more devoted to the work, than
she 'was. Her natural disposition was amiable,
her piety unaffected, and her love for the poor
heathens unfeigned. I trust she is now resting
from her* labours in Abraham’s bosom, and that
some poor heathens, among whom she had la-
boured, have gone before, and that some will follow
after to glory.”
This afflictive bereavement was followed by
another equally painful, namely, the death of
Mrs. Davies, which took place on the 4th of the
following September. Her disconsolate partner
had scarcely received the sympathies of his com-
panions in exile and labour, when the newly-closed
grave of the mother was again opened, to receive
the remains of an infant daughter, who survived
its parent but three weeks. In one week more
Mrs. Hayward terminated in death her sufferings.


and was buried by the side of her departed
sisters.
The records of the South Sea mission are not
only deeply interesting, but highly instructive to
the Christian individually, and to the church at
large, in the various efforts of benevolence at
home, as well as in those that are directed to the
conversion of the nation to the faith of the gospel.
Seldom was any enterprise commenced under
auspices more favourable, and, according to the
best of human observation, it promised certain
and speedy success to its friends. The high
excitement of feeling that had been enkindled
at its origin among a large body of holy and de-
voted ministers and Christians, the delightful spirit
of harmony and love which prevailed and led them
to celebrate the event as “ the death and burial of
bigotry/" gave a union to their efforts, and a fer-
vency to their persevering supplications, which led
them to indulge the belief that the work was of
God, and that He would accomplish that for
which he had called to these efforts, and, as they
hoped, had inspired their desires and prayers. The
favour shown in the preparation for the first
voyage, the ability with which it was conducted
by an individual eminently qualified for a service,
as unprecedented as it was delicate and respon-
sible, and the generous liberality with which it
was supported, formed as many grounds of strong
expectation, which all its ardent friends thought
would, under God, be ultimately realized. Yet,
after the labour, sacrifice, loss, disappointment,
and endurance of twelve eventful years, it was
brought to a termination alike disastrous and
afflictive.


The missionaries had gone to save the remnant
of the population from destruction, and to promote
their temporal and spiritual welfare ; but they had
beheld the process of depopulation urging forward
with fearful rapidity, by causes which they deeply
deplored, but were unable to diminish and control;
and, amidst the outbreakings of anarchy, disorder,
violence, plunder, and bloodshed, inseparable from
savage war, they were driven from the field.
The records of the first twelve years of the
mission teach, most impressively, the utter insuf-
ficiency of all mere human instrumentality to
effect any solid advantages in the great work of
evangelizing the heathen. “ Not by might, nor by
power, but by my Spirit, saith the Lord,” is the
impress stamped on the whole of that period.
This truth was fully recognised by those who
commenced the mission; but its close gave a prac-
tical demonstration of its truth, that could not fail
to be alike forcible and salutary.
In the year 1806, when they were in the midst
of distress, on account of the frequency with which
human sacrifices were offered, and infant murder
perpetrated, speaking of their mission, they thus
wrote to the directors : “ The poor natives remain
as before; no success has attended our labours, so
as to terminate in the conversion of any; and there
is no apparent desire after instruction in the blessed
truths of the gospel: the news of salvation is an
idle tale to them; and though they are visited as
a nation with sore afflictions, they still reject and
despise our message.” Things continued the same,
and under such disappointments it is quite re-
freshing to find them writing two years afterwards
to the directors, and encouraging them to continue


the mission, declaring their conviction that “ per-
severance in the use of means, in all probability,
will, sooner or later, be crowned with some degree
of success; and the door is as open now as ever
it was for making use of the means.”
The history of this period teaches the danger
of being carried away by first impressions, or ex-
pecting too much from early favourable appear-
ances ; the progress of the first period of the Ta-
hitian mission was as calamitous as its commence-
ment was encouraging; and with equal force and
greater benefit, it teaches the duty of hope and
faithful perseverance, even under appearances the
most unpromising and afflictive. There were many
grounds to conclude that during the twelve years
the mission had existed in the island, the experi-
ment of raising a savage and heathen people to
a Christian community, had been fully tried, and
had, to all human observation, completely failed ;
and the result, according to the ordinary grounds
of calculation, might be supposed to point out the
impropriety of expending further labour and mo-
ney on an object, for the accomplishment of which
it might be said, the time was evidently not come.
But He, whose ways are not as our ways, neither
His thoughts our thoughts, had decided otherwise.
It is true success in the mission never appeared
more hopeless, yet it was never nearer than at the
present time; and the dark and cheerless night
which now spread over the land, was to be followed
by one of the brightest scenes that has been pre-
sented to the church since the apostolic age. This
was not only adapted to encourage the heart, and
reward the efforts of the patient labourer, who had
so long toiled for the conversion of the people,
a


but to become a lesson and an example of encou-
ragement to the church of God in every sub-
sequent age.
The letters which conveyed to England the
animating tidings of the first dawn of a bright-
er day on Tahiti, conveyed also the sad re-
cital of these inroads of death; and well might
the missionaries on that occasion sing of mercy
and of judgment. When death enters a family,
and removes a wife and mother from the domestic
circle, though every alleviation which society,
friendship, and religion can impart are available,
there is a chasm left, and a wound inflicted on the
survivors, which must be felt in order to be un-
derstood. When death repeatedly enters a family
connexion, the distress is proportionably aug-
mented ; but it is impossible to form an adequate
idea of the disconsolateness of the mission family,
(for such it might be called,) and the cheerless
solitude of those thus bereft of the partners of
their days, and the mothers of their children.
They were left to sustain alone, the sorrows, toils,
and privations, of their remote and isolated station,
and to pursue, in solitary pilgrimage, the arduous
and rugged track, in which the providence of God
had called them to w T alk, far from the sympathy of
the kindred and friends of the departed. They
were equally remote from all the kind attentions
of the tenderest friendship, the rich consolations
of Christian intercourse, and the public ordinances
of that religion which alone is adapted to afford
effectual consolation. Cut off, also, from the en-
dearments of home, the pleasures of society in
civilized life, the satisfaction derived from books,
and the reciprocal interchange of all the offices of


friendship, the only earthly solace a missionary
enjoys, among an uncivilized people, except what
he finds in his work, is enjoyed in the social
endearments of the domestic circle. However
remote from the land of his nativity may be its
locality, however humble its structure, however
rude its appendages, or limited its sources of
comfort, compared with what in other parts may
be enjoyed, around his rustic hearth, and in the
bosom of his family, he finds the scene of his
richest earthly felicity. In any situation, be-
reavements such as befel the little band at Eimeo
at this time, would have been distressing; to the
missionaries they were peculiarly so. The chan-
nels of comfort were dried up; and though they
had free access to the Fountain of all blessedness
and consolation, and were enabled to say, “ He
hath done all things well,” yet their trials were
peculiarly poignant. It is remarkable that, at a
period of such unparalleled domestic distress, the
most encouraging appearances of the Divine fa-
vour towards the nations around them should have
been afforded; and it is probable that the very
cheering prospects under which the missionaries
were called to pursue their engagements at this
time, greatly alleviated their afflictions. They
had established public worship; Mr. Davies had
opened a school; an increased and pleasing atten-
tion had been manifested by several to the in-
structions communicated; and only ten days be-
fore the death of Mrs. Henry, Pomare, king of
Tahiti, publicly professed his belief in Jehovah,
the true God, and his determination to serve
him.
In a letter addressed to the directors of the


society, dated Eimeo, October 21, 1812, the mis-
sionaries thus refer to this pleasing event: “ Hav-
ing (glory he to God) our prospects in some
measure brightened, our hopes exalted, and our
hearts encouraged by an event, which you will,
no doubt, with us deem of great importance in
itself/ and portending a happy result of our mis-
sion, we take the earliest opportunity of making
it known to you. The event to which we refer is
the conversion of king Pomare to Christianity; a
circumstance which will no doubt cause your
hearts, and the hearts of all true friends who may
hear it, to rejoice.
“ On the 18th of July he came to us, and offered
himself a candidate for Christian baptism, declaring
it his fixed purpose and determination to cleave to
Jehovah, the true God, and to us his people, ex-
pressing his desire and willingness to receive fur-
ther instruction in the things of God, and request-
ing us to pray for him. He gave us to under-
stand that his resolution was the result of long
and increasing conviction of the truth and ex-
cellency of our religion. Much interesting con-
versation took place on the occasion, too tedious
here to relate at large; however, we must men-
tion some of it. He said he had been endeavour-
ing to persuade his father-in-law, Tamatoa, and
Japoa, (the two principal chiefs of the Leeward
Islands), to take the same steps he was taking;
but they told him he might do as he pleased, as
for them, they would cleave to Oro, which, he
observed, was cleaving to Satan; and he said that
if no one else would hear us, or embrace our
religion, he would, as he desired to be happy
after death, and to be saved in the judgment-day.


On our observing that we did not cease to pray
to God for him, and that it would rejoice us much
to see him sincerely and truly given up to God
in heart, and that if that was the case, he might
then be baptized, he replied, that we could not
know his heart, nor he ours; but that He who
made us men knew our hearts, and whether we
spoke truth or falsehood to each other. Indeed,
he introduced the subject first, by saying, “ You
do not know the thoughts of my heart, nor I
yours, but God does ” We informed him that it
was customary for those who offered themselves
for candidates for baptism from among the hea-
then, to be for some time further instructed in
the things of God, and their conduct inspected,
that it might be known whether they had truly
forsaken every evil way, and were really turned
in heart to God before they were baptized. All
which he seemed to approve of, saying, he was
willing to do as we thought proper, and that he
left the affair of his baptism entirely with us as
to the time. Another thing he proposed during
this conversation must not be omitted, namely,
the erection of a building for the worship of God ;
and on being told that it would perhaps be better
to defer the building of it till his and our affairs
were more settled, he replied, " Let us not mind
these things ; let us build it at all events.”
After speaking of one of their domestics, who,
previous to his death, appeared to have undergone
a decidedly moral change, and who, they had
reason to hope, had died the subject of Divine
grace, they add, “We trust there are several of
those persons now in glory, who have been taken
R 3


off by death, while apparently the subjects of Di-
vine grace, but before we had obtained satisfac-
tory evidence of this, so as to be able with con-
fidence to pronounce them such. Besides what
we have mentioned, we might notice several other
things, that we feel persuaded you would deem
very encouraging; but we wish still to keep to the
maxim we have hitherto, perhaps too rigidly, ad-
hered to, namely, to say too little about such
things rather than too much.”
A circumstance connected with Pomare’s con-
version, which is noticed by Mr. Henry, in a
letter to the directors, written on the 17th of June,
1813, from Sydney, New South Wales, which he
had visited at that time, is alike encouraging and
instructive. The melancholy tidings from Tahiti
had excited the directors and other friends of the
society to more frequent and earnest prayer unto
God, especially for the king, and they made the
missionaries acquainted with this fact in their
communications. This was peculiarly encou-
raging to the minds of the brethren, and led them,
when they beheld the change in the king’s mind,
to desire to render all the glory unto God, as the
hearer and answerer of prayer. Speaking of Po-
mare, Mr. Henry observes, “ I shall only add here
respecting him, supposing him to be a real con-
vert and made truly a partaker of Divine grace, he
is (not to say the greatest, which I think I might
venture to do) one of the greatest miracles of grace
ever exhibited. To God’s holy and adorable name
be all the praise, who, through his superabounding
grace and mercy, hath effected so great and won-
derful a change in so exceedingly great and won


derful a manner. Reading your observations, in
your last letter, that you had in an especial manner
'been led to pray for Pomare's conversion, I was
much affected.”
Pomare had for some time shown his contempt
for the idols of his ancestors, and his desire to be
taught a more excellent way, that he might obtain
the favour of the true God. The natives had
watched the change in his mind with the most
fearful apprehensions as to its results upon the
minds of his subjects. The conduct and con-
versation of Pomare in reference to the gods on
this and similar occasions, must necessarily have
weakened the influence of idolatry on the minds
of those by whom he was attended; and if it pro-
duced no immediate and salutary effect on them,
it doubtless confirmed his own belief in the vanity
of idols, and the folly of indulging either hope or
fear respecting them. A number of the principal
chiefs of the Leeward Islands, as well as the ad-
herents to his cause and the friends of his family
in Tahiti, constantly resided with the king after
his expulsion from the island of his ancestors, and
accompanied him on his return to resume his
former government. He spared no efforts fa-
vourably to impress them with regard to Chris-
tianity, but to no purpose, for a long time. He
did not confine his efforts to private conversation,
but publicly urged upon the chiefs who accom-
panied him, the adoption of the Christian religion,
hereby publicly evincing his own determination to
adhere to the choice he had made.
Several principal chiefs from Tahiti having in-
vited his return, he left Eimeo for the purpose of
endeavouring to regain his authority, and reinstate


them in their possessions. During his residence
in Tahiti he wrote several letters, which show the
state of his mind. In a letter dated Tahiti, Sep-
tember 26, 1812, he thus expresses himself:
May the anger of Jehovah be appeased towards
me, who am a wicked man, guilty of accumulated
crimes, of regardlessness and ignorance of the true
God, and of an obstinate perseverance in wicked-
ness. May Jehovah, also, pardon my foolishness,
unbelief, and rejection of the truth ! May Je-
hovah give me his good Spirit to sanctify my
heart, that I may love what is good, and that I
may he enabled to put away all my evil customs,
and become one of his people, and he saved
through Jesus Christ, our only Saviour! I am
a wicked man, and my sins are great and accu-
mulated : hut, O that we may all he saved through
Jesus Christ.” Referring to his illness about this
time, he said, “My affliction is great, hut if I
can only obtain God’s favour before I die, I shall
count myself well. But oh, should I die with my
sins unpardoned, it will he ill indeed with me.
O may my sins be pardoned, and my soul saved,
through Jesus Christ! May Jehovah regard me
before I die, and then I shall rejoice, because I
have obtained favour of Jehovah!” In another
letter, written about a fortnight after, he observes,
“ I continue to pray to God without ceasing. Re-
gardless of other things, I am concerned only that
my soul may be saved by Christ Jesus ! It is my
earnest desire that I may become one of his peo-
ple ; and that God may turn away his anger from
me, which I deserve, because of my wickedness,
my ignorance of him, and my accumulated crimes.”
In February, 1813, he wrote to the following


effect: The Almighty can (or will) make me
good: I venture with my guilt (or evil deeds) to
Jesus Christ, though I am not equalled in wick-
edness, not equalled in guilt, not equalled in ob-
stinate disobedience and rejection of the truth,
hoping that this very wicked man may be saved
by Jehovah Jesus Christ. Such was the in-
teresting state of Pomare’s mind, at the close of
the year 1812, and at the commencement of 1813.
At the same time that this event shed such light
upon the prospects of the missionaries, other cir-
cumstances concurred to confirm them in the con-
viction, that God was about to favour, in a signal
manner, their enterprise, to follow with his bless-
ing their labours, and to crown them with still
greater success. Of one or two other natives they
had reason to hope most favourably, while one who
died about this time left a pleasing testimony
behind him of repentance, and firm reliance on
the pardoning mercy of our God.
Frequent reports were brought over from Tahiti
that a number of persons were seeking information
respecting the true religion, and that some had re-
nounced idolatry, and professed themselves the
worshippers of the living God. To ascertain the
nature and extent of the anxiety which had been
excited, and to confer with the individuals under
its influence, Messrs. Scott and Hayward, having-
been deputed by their companions to visit Tahiti,
sailed over from Eimeo, on the 15th of June, 1813.
Although the king was residing in Matavai, they
landed in the district of Pare, and proceeding to the
valley of Hautaua, they learned that the ieport was
correct, and that in the neighbourhood some of the
individuals of whom they had heard were residing*
CHAP. VIII.] TAHITI.


On the following morning, according to the usual
practice when travelling among the people, they
retired to the bushes near their lodgings for medi-
tation and secret prayer. The houses of the na-
tives, however large they might be, never con-
tained more than one room, and were generally so
crowded with people that retirement was altogether
unattainable there. While seeking this, about the
dawn of day, on the morning of their arrival, Mr. Scott
heard a voice at no great distance from his retreat.
It was not a few detached sentences that were
spoken, but a continued address, not in the lively
tone of conversation, but solemn as devotion, or
pathetic as the voice of lamentation or supplication.
A variety of feelings led him to approach the spot
where the sound proceeded, in order to hear more
distinctly. Oh what hallowed music must have
broke on his listening ear, and what rapture must
have thrilled his soul, when he distinctly recog-
nised the voice of prayer, and heard a native using
the Tahitian language, with an ardour that proved
his sincerity, addressing petitions and thanksgiv-
ings to the God of grace. It was the first time
he knew that a native of Tahiti had prayed to any
but his idols ; it was the first native voice in praise
and prayer that he had ever heard, and he listened
almost entranced with the appropriate and glowing
language of devotion then employed until his feel-
ings could be restrained no longer. Tears of joy
starting from his eyes, rolled in swift succession
down his cheeks, while he could scarcely forbear
rushing to the spot, and clasping in his arms the
unconscious author of his ecstacy. He stood
transfixed, as it were, to the earth till the native
retired, when he bowed his knees, and screened


from human observation by the verdant shrubs,
offered up, under the canopy of heaven, his grateful
adorations to the Most High, under all the melting
of soul and excitement of spirit which the unpre-
cedented, unexpected, though long desired events
of the morning had inspired. When the mission-
aries met at the house in which they had lodged,
the good tidings were communicated ; the indi-
vidual was sought out; and they were cheered with
the simple yet affecting account he gave of what
God had done for his own soul, and of the pleasing
state of the minds of several of his countrymen.
His name was Oito, he had formerly been an
inmate of the mission family at Matavai. He had
occasionally been with the king since his return to
Tahiti, and some remarks from Pomare had awak-
ened ctfhvictions of sin in his conscience. Anxious
to obtain direction and relief, yet having no one to
whom he could unburden his mind with hopes of
suitable guidance, he applied to Tuahine, who had
for a long time lived with the missionaries ; hence
Oito inferred he would be able to direct his mind
aright. Tuahine’s mind, on the subject of the
Christian religion, was, at this period, in a state
resembling that of Oito’s. Their conversation
deepened their impressions; they frequently met
afterwards for this purpose, and often retired to
the privacy of the sequestered valleys or shrub-
beries adjacent to their dwelling, for private con-
versation and prayer. The singularity of their
conduct, together with the report of the change in
the sentiments of the king, soon attracted obser-
vation ; many derided them, but several young
men and boys attached themselves to Oito and


Tuahine, and this little band, without any mis-
sionary to teach them, or even before any one was
acquainted with the circumstance, agreed to re-
frain from worshipping the idols, from the evil
practices of their country, to observe the sabbath-
day, and to worship Jehovah alone. They had
established among themselves a meeting for prayer,
which they held on the sabbath, and often assem-
bled at other times for social worship. This in-
telligence was like life from the dead to the mis-
sionaries ; they thanked God, and took courage;
but, before commencing their journey round Ta-
hiti, they wrote to their brethren in Eimeo an
account of what they had seen and heard, declaring
all that they had heard was true; that God had
“ also granted to the Gentiles repentance unto
life;” that some had cast away their idols, and
were stretching out their hands in prayer to God,
&c. The effect of their letter was scarcely less on
the minds of the missionaries in Eimeo than the
recital had been to themselves in Tahiti. ,They
were deeply affected, even unto tears. Mr. Nott
was often heard to speak, with evident indications
of strong feeling, of the emotions with which this
letter was read; and when the long and cheerless
years which he and some of his associates had
spent in long and fruitless, hopeless toil on that
unpromising soil is considered, the reasonable
prospect of an ultimate harvest, which these facts
certainly warranted, was adapted to produce un-
usually exalted joys, emphatically a missionary’s
own joy, “ that a stranger intermeddleth not with.”
During their visit the brethren spent some time
with the king, whom they found active and perse


vering in his endeavours to persuade the people to
cast away their gods; but they much regretted his
remaining separated from them, and in circum-
stances very unfavourable to his own religious im-
provement. In a letter, written Sept. 8, 1813, they
thus refer to him : —“ He is still at Tahiti, and
exposed to many and strong temptations; however,
his example in public, in renouncing the idol gods
and the religion of his country, and declaring his
conviction of the truth, superiority, and excellency
of our religion, has had a powerful influence on
the minds of many, both at Tahiti and at this
island; convictions stifled years ago, and instruc-
tions, as we thought, entirely thrown away, seem
now to take effect. There is a stir among the
people; many doubt and waver, many examine
and inquire; in short, we have witnessed, within
the past six months, what we did not expect, and
scarcely hoped to see in our time; we have cause
for praise and thankfulness, we have cause to re-
joice; yet we rejoice with trembling, lest some of
our present expectations should not be realized;
and we have no doubt that what we have now to
communicate will excite the prayers and thanks-
givings of many in our behalf, as also in behalf of
these poor islanders.”
Having travelled round the larger peninsula,
and preached to the people in every district, the
missionaries returned, accompanied by Oito and
Tuahine and their companions. Previous to their
arrival there appeared some beginnings of good in
Eimeo among their domestics and others. After
several conversations with those from Tahiti, and
others that appeared desirous of instruction, on
sabbath, July 25, at the close of a public meeting


for worship in the native language, Mr. Davies
gave out that there would he a meeting next evening
different from any they had ever had held before.
To this meeting they invited all that were truly
desirous of being instructed in the word of the true
God; all that really and sincerely renounced their
idols, and desired to cast away every evil custom;
all that were willing and desirous to receive Je-
hovah for their God and Jesus for their only
Saviour; all such, it was stated, the missionaries
would he glad to see the next evening, and that
they would write their names in a book, if they
desired it, that they might be known, and receive
particular instruction. At the time appointed,
about forty attended, and after prayer and singing,
in the native language, and an appropriate address
by brother Nott, on the design of the meeting,
thirty-one of those present most cheerfully came
forward to have their names put down as of the
character already mentioned ; others declined for
the present; the missionaries pressed no one,
but urged upon them all attendance on the means
of religious improvement. With those whose
names were written down they held frequent meet-
ings, besides their general meeting for the instruc-
tion of the natives, and had the satisfaction of
adding eleven more to their number, making, in
September, 1813, forty-two. Among these last
was the young chief of Huahine, and a principal
areoi, who was also a priest. Speaking of these,
the missionaries justly remark, “ It is not to be ex-
pected that all of these will turn out well, yet, in
some of them, we found much satisfaction, and
really think them proper subjects for baptism ; yet
we would not do any thing rashly. We have heard


some of them engage in prayer, and have been
astonished and highly delighted with the propriety,
fluency, earnestness, and warmth of their expres-
sions. Their attendance on the means of instruc-
tion has been hitherto encouraging, though some
of them have had a large share of derision and
scorn.
The rebels, idolaters, in Tahiti, during this pe-
riod, indulged in the use of intoxicating liquors to
a most appalling extent, and became more depraved
and brutal than during any former period of their
history. They seized two vessels, and barbarously
murdered the officers of both, the captain of one,
and part of the crew, and rendered it dangerous for
an unarmed vessel to approach their shores.
In their account of the mission, under the date
already given, the missionaries observe, “ These
things are alarming; how far they may affect us
we know not, but one thing we know, and would
rejoice in the thought,—the Lord reigneth, and he
has the hearts and actions of all men under his
control; no weapon, plan, or device formed against
him or his cause can prosper: we trust he has be-
gun a work among these poor heathens against
which the gates of hell shall not be able to prevail.
Our school prospers, and there are between forty
and fifty attending it, chiefly grown up people,
who now begin to see a little of the value of in-
struction. We are much at a loss for want of
Tahitian books; the spelling-book, printed in
England, is now become very useful. The latter
part of the Scripture History, composed some years
ago, has been lately examined, corrected, and en-
larged, with a view of sending it to the colony to
get it printed at Sidney, if possible, as we want


something of the kind very much for the use of the
school, and hope the expense will not be great.
This is an abridgement of the four Evangelists and
the Acts of the Apostles, containing a history of the
birth, life, miracles, sufferings, death, resurrection,
and ascension of our Lord, the commission he
gave his disciples, and their proceedings in conse-
quence of it.”
Prejudice against the gospel was diminishing in
Eimeo, and every effort was made to show the
people the absurdity of their superstitious obser-
vances. Mr. Davies has recorded in his journal
the following account of a conversation with a
party of natives, in the house of Oro, on the sub-
ject. To whom does this house belong?—lt be-
longs to Oro. Does he reside here ? —Yes. What,
by himself? Is he not (moemoe) lonesome ?—No,
the god is not lonesome. In what part of the
house does he reside ? —Look yonder (towards the
western part, where there was a kind of scaffold,
with something on it, which captain Cook com-
pares to the ark of the covenant) —rising up, and
walking to it, I said, is the god in it ? Being an-
swered in the affirmative, I desired the men to take
him out, that I might see him. To this they ob-
jected. I then asked, May I pull him out ?—Yes,
said they, if you please ; but we are afraid of doing
so : do not open it. Looking at it, I perceived
something like a small hammock, tied up, about
four feet long; I pulled it out, and said, Is this
the god ?—Yes, that is the God. Can the god
eat ?—Yes. Where is his mouth ? He has none.
Can he see ? —Yes. Where are his eyes ?—He
has none. Can he hear ?—Yes. But I can find
no ears. —No, he has no ears. Can he walk ■


No, he must be carried. And can this—this, he
the god that you worship ?—The men looted at
one another and laughed, turning to them, with
the god in my hands, 1 said, Look here, is it not
great folly to worship this, to trust in this ? What
power has he ? What can he do ? He has no
power to deliver himself out of my hands. Do
you think I am afraid of him ? No, 1 hid him
defiance, and I could now break him to pieces, and
tread him in the dust beneath my feet: hut I
shall not do so. Why P because I fear him ? No,
no, I fear him not; but I respect the people of
this country : therefore I will put him up again
without any injury, which I immediately did, and
sat down with the men.
A long conversation ensued; and the men ar-
gued strenuously that, although this image could
do nothing, yet the spirit which was present with
it was powerful. This gave a turn to the conver-
sation which they did not expect. I asked. Is
Oro then present in this place, with this image P
—When the Tahua (the priest) prays, said they,
he is here.—Could he know the prayers of the
priest if he were not here ?—N o. And are there
not other images like this, in the different maraes of
Taheite, and Atiapii, Raiatea, Tahaa, and Bora-
bora ?—There is a great number. You say, Oro
is with the too (the image) when the priest prays.
—Yes, he is. Does he then go from Eimeo that
he may he in a marae at Borabora ?—Yes, he flies
(mahuta). Then, at the time Oro is hearing a
prayer at Raiatea, there is no Oro at Eimeo, or
Tahiti ? The men were struck with surprise at
the thought; probably it had never occurred to
them before.
s 3


The year 1814 opened with prospects increas-
ingly bright and cheering to the missionaries.
The people in general continued to attend on the
means of instruction with pleasing diligence; five
or six withdrew from them, but they were joined
by others. Some continued to give the greatest
satisfaction ; but circumstances hindered the bap-
tism of any. At this time a young man, of the
name of Mui, died, apparently cheered and sup-
ported by the hopes of the gospel. He was among
the first whose names had been written, and as
long as his health allowed, his attendance on the
school and public worship and instruction was
exemplary. He was likewise very diligent in the
use of secret prayer, often retiring to the bushes for
this purpose, and when confined to his hut he was
often in prayer to the very last. When confined,
and seeing the people passing to school and to
worship, he would often say, “ My feet cannot go,
but my heart goes with you.” His dying testi-
mony was simple but satisfactory; he did not pre-
tend to much knowledge, (and, indeed, never had
the advantages of of his countrymen,) but
one thing he knew, he knew he was a sinner, and
he knew also that Jesus Christ came into the
world to save sinners, and this knowledge removed
from him the fear of death.
It is impossible to read the communications
from the mission at this period without a feeling of
strong sympathy for the writers, and high esteem
for the devoted men who had so long toiled and
suffered in the cause in which they were embarked.
In a letter dated April, 1814, they thus speak of
themselves and their prospects, “ Yes, unworthy
and unfit as we are for the work, the Lord has


done great things for us and this poor heathen
nation, whereof we are glad; and we doubt not,
what we have now to communicate, will excite the
thanksgiving of thousands in our native land, and
elsewhere. The clouds are scattering; the gracious
purposes of Heaven, in respect to the islanders of
the Southern Ocean, are unfolding; and we look
upon it as ro longer a doubtful question, whether
the good SI epherd has here, at this time, some of
those sheej which he must bring into the fold of
his church, who were given him by the Father,
and purchased with his blood, and shall therefore
hear his voice.
“Our assemblies for worship, when Tahitian,
are numerous and attentive, and it now appears
necessary to enlarge our place of worship. The
number of those who have requested to have their
names written down as the professed worshippers of
J ehovah, the true God, is at present fifty.
“ They have also frequent prayer meetings
among themselves, and are known among the is-
landers by the name of * Bure Atua,’ or ‘ praying
people.’ In a word, they are generally altered in
their moral conduct from what they were some
months ago. Some of them also give a pleasing
evidence that a change of mind has taken place,
that they now love what they once hated, and that
they now hate what they once delighted in; that
they are desirous of having their sins pardoned
and their hearts renewed ; that they appear sensible
that they have an evil heart, and that it is utterly
out of their power to make it good ; that it is God
only who can (as they express it) ‘ cause good
things to grow in their minds.’ ”
The report of what was going forward at Tahiti


had already extended to other islands ; and desirous
of directing, in a proper course, the excitement of
feeling which might he produced, Messrs. Nott and
Hayward made a voyage, at this time, to the Lee-
ward or Society Islands. They travelled round
Huahine, preaching to the people whenever a suit-
able opportunity occurred ; and then proceeded to
Raiatea, whence they write, on the 3rd of May,
1814:
“ Since our arrival here, we have made a journey
round the island, and, also, round the island of
Tab a, assembling and speaking to the natives, at
every place where we could find them, and have
been much pleased with their steady fixed at-
tention.
“ The gods of the natives are fallen, and are fall-
ing, into great disrepute ; they every where call
them, “ bad spirits, foolish spirits;” and our God
they call the “ good Spirit.” At Huahine there is
a young man, a principal chief, who professes to
have embraced our religion. He lately came down
from Morea to Huahine ; has heard but little, yet
endeavours to observe the sabbath among his
people; has cast off his gods, and refuses to pay
them any homage whatever. As we journeyed
round that island we fell in with him ; he treated
us very kindly, and wished that some of the mis-
sionaries might come down to his island to instruct
them. But, alas ! this seems, at present, imprac-
ticable.
At Eimeo the congregation increased greatly.
Upaparu, with his brother, Vaiturai, both chiefs of
Tahiti, came over with a number of their men,
during the summer, to seek instruction. The
king, also ; after an absence of two years, returned.


with a number of people, most of whom professed to
he worshippers of the true God. The greater part
attended the regular meetings; and the place of
worship, which was lately enlarged, was again too
small to contain the people. The number of those
who had their names written as the professed wor-
shippers of Jehovah, who openly renounced hea-
thenism, and expressed their desire to attend the
means of instruction, was increased to ninety-two,
exclusive of seven or eight who had gone to Hua-
hine and Raietea. The scholars increased to up-
wards of two hundred, the greatest number of whom
made a pleasing progress in spelling, reading, and
writing in the sand. The aid of Mr. Tessier, a
truly holy and devout man, who had arrived in the
preceding year, and was much devoted to the
school, was peculiarly valuable at this time.
While the aspect of the mission in Eimeo was
thus encouraging, and the number of the professed
worshippers of the true God was increasing in
Tahiti, the idolaters waxed worse and worse in
their quarrels, impiety, outrage, and barbarity,
and threatened, but for the counteracting influence
of the little band of Christians, to render Tahiti a
desert island. The Christians, especially, were the
objects of the implacable hatred of many of the
heathen chiefs.
More than once, individuals were selected to be
offered in sacrifice to the gods, only because they
were Christians. Mr. Davies mentions one in
the district of Haapape, and another at Papeari,
who were martyrs, or who were sacrificed on ac-
count of their religion. In his journey round
Tahiti, in 1816, he met with the murderer of the
young man who was to be offered in sacrifice by


the people of Taiarahu to insure success in their
last attack upon the people of Atehuru and
Papara, and whose tragical death he justly con-
sidered ought to be recorded, because it was hoped
it was the “ last human sacrifice in Tahiti, and
because the victim was selected on account of his
attachment to Christianity.” Aberahama, an
interesting and intelligent young man, who was
afterwards a pupil in the mission school at Eimeo,
was marked out as a victim; and, when flying
from the servants of the priests, he was shot at,
wounded, and but narrowly escaped with his life.
When he received the ball he fell, and crawling to
some bushes, hid himself so completely as to elude
the vigilance of his enemies, although they often
passed by his retreat. Under cover of the night,
he crept down to the dwelling of his friends, who
dressed his wound and conveyed him to a place of
safety. But, although he had his life given him
for a prey, he will, Mr. Davies observes, “ carry
the honourable scar to his grave.”
Mr. Nott has related another equally affecting
instance of murder. An intelligent young man,
on becoming a disciple of Christ, and a public
worshipper of Jehovah, was subjected to constant
ridicule; this proving ineffectual, flattering pro-
mises were made of temporal advantages, if he
would renounce his faith ; these he also declined.
He then was threatened with vengeance; and,
finally, banished; but the rage and malignant
hatred of Christianity, which is gendered by igno-
rance and idolatry, and cherished by satanic in-
fatuation, pursued him still. A heathen ceremony
was at hand, for which a human victim was re-
quired, and this young man was selected by his


persecutors to be the victim, because he professed
to be a worshipper of the true God. A more
acceptable sacrifice they thought they could not
offer, as the revenge they should thereby wreak
upon him, would not only gratify their own malice,
but be so acceptable to the gods whom he had
rejected. It is probable, also, they expected that
this procedure would deter others from following
his example. On the evening of the day preceding
that on which the ceremony was to take place, the
young man, as his custom was, had retired to a
secret place in the valley where he dwelt, and was
there engaged in meditation previous to offering up
his evening supplications to God. While thus
engaged, his seclusion was invaded by a number of
the servants 'of the priests and chiefs. When they
came to the place where he was sitting, they told
him that the king had arrived, and wishing to see
him, had sent them to invite him down. He
knew of the approaching ceremony, and that a
human sacrifice was to be offered; and he no
sooner saw them advancing to his retreat, than a
sudden thought darted through his mind, intimating
that he was to be the victim. He received it as a
premonition of his doom; and in reply to their
request, told them calmly, that he did not think
the king had arrived, and that therefore it was
unnecessary for him to go down. They then told
him that the priest, or some of his friends, wished
to see him, and again requested him to descend.
Why,” said he, “do you thus seek to deceive me,
the priest, or friends, may wish to see me, but it is
under different circumstances from what your mes-
sage would imply : 1 know the approaching cere-
mony requires the sacrifice of a human victim;


something within tells me that I am to be that
victim, and your appearance and your message
confirm my conviction. Jesus Christ is my keeper,
without his permission you cannot harm me ; you
may be permitted to kill my body, but I am not
afraid to die ! My soul you cannot hurt, that is
safe in the hands of Jesus Christ, by whom it will
be kept beyond your power.” Perceiving there
was but little prospect of inducing him by false-
hood to accompany them towards the beach, and
irritated probably by his reply, they rushed upon
him, wounded, and murdered him; and then, in a
long basket made with the leaves of the cocoa-nut
tree, bore his body to the temple, where it was
offered in sacrifice to their god.
These malicious and barbarous murders did not
seem to have occasioned much benefit to the cause
of the idolaters, nor to have operated extensively,
if at all, in deterring those who were desirous of
receiving instruction from joining the native
Christians in the islands. The blood of the mar-
tyrs has ever been the seed of the church; and we
may reasonably suppose that, under the Divine
blessing, the exhibition of Christian principle, and
the support which the hopes which the gospel
imparted, rendered it such on the above occasions.
Towards the end of 1814, Pomare Vahine, the
eldest daughter of the king of Raiatea, and the
sister of the queen of Tahiti, visited Eimeo. On
the arrival of guests of distinction, it was cus-
tomary, among the islanders, to prepare a large
quantity of provisions, and other property, for the
visitor, which is offered with much form and cere-
mony. Shortly after the arrival of the queen’s
sister at Eimeo, a present of the kind was brought.


At that time almost all the chiefs of Eimeo were
professed idolaters; and it was the custom at these
feeding meetings, as they were called, to make an
offering to the gods before any of the food was
divided or eaten, by taking to the marai the ears
or head of a pig or fish, and some plantains, &c.
The king, Pomare Vahine, &c. had consulted
among themselves privately, and thought it would
he best to prevent the food being offered to the
idols, as in fact the whole of it would be, if the
usual offering were taken to the marai. It was
therefore proposed that a prayer over the food
should be offered up aloud to the true God before
any idolatrous ceremony could take place. But
there was some difficulty in getting a person bold
enough to do this : it was proposed to Farefau,
who, without hesitation, undertook to perform it;
consequently, when the food, cloth, &c. had been
presented, and while the people were expecting
some priest to perform the usual ceremonies,
Farefau boldly came forward, and in the presence
of the chiefs, priests, and people, with an audible
voice, addressed a prayer to Jehovah the true God,
as the Maker of all things, the Giver of food, and
of every other good thing. Many of the people
were astonished; and no one dared, after this
prayer, to offer any part of it to the idols.
Early in the year 1815 the mission was called
to sustain an afflictive bereavement in the death of
Mr. Scott, who died on the 9th of February, after a
few days illness. He had arrived in the Royal
Admiral, and had been zealously devoted to the
work, through all its changes. The missionaries
felt his loss severely, as he was well acquainted
T


with the language, and was an instructive and im-
pressive preacher. But though they mourned their
loss, they bowed with submission to the Divine
will.
In May, 1815, the queen, accompanied by her
sister, went over to Tahiti; and, on one occasion,
when the chiefs had brought food, &c. to them,
perceiving that they appeared to despise the gods,
they (the chiefs) made use of threatening and
insulting language in their presence, magnifying
the power of the gods, and pointing to some bunches
of red feathers which they had set up to represent
them, according to their old custom. Farefau
hearing these speeches, addressed himself to one
of the priests, and looking at the bunches of red
feathers, said, “ Are these the mighty things whose
power you extol, and with whose anger you
threaten us? If so, I will soon settle the business
with them.” He instantly ran and seized them,
and as they were heating a native oven at hand,
he threw them all into the fire, where they were
instantly consumed. The people cried out with
horror and consternation, at what appeared to them
an unparalleled act of impiety.
When the queen went over on this visit, the
king had sent his daughter a book. This was
regarded as a public testimony that she was to be
brought up in the new religion. This, together
with the rapid increase of the “bure atua,” or
“praying people,” excited in the idolatrous chiefs
a violent spirit of persecution. They thought
these things ought not to be endured any longer,
but crushed altogether in time. The idolatrous
chiefs, and the chief of Hapaiano, got some of the


chiefs of Matavai to join them in a conspiracy
against the bure atua; and it was proposed to cut
them off entirely, root and branch. But thinking
themselves unequal to the task, those of the new
religion being already formidable both in number
and respectability, they invited the chiefs of
Atahuru and Papara to join them. These, though
anciently their rivals and enemies, came most
readily into the measure, and prepared to unite
with them without delay; and, on the night of
July 7, these combined forces were to fall without
mercy on those who had renounced heathenism,
and exterminate them; but some of the parties
having been rather dilatory, and secret intelligence
having been conveyed to the party whose de-
struction was meditated, and they happening to be
most of them that evening by the sea side, they
quickly launched their canoes and sailed for Eimeo,
where they arrived and were safely landed the fol-
lowing morning. The disappointed chiefs then
quarrelled among themselves; and the Atahuruans,
&c. fell upon the Porionu party, or inhabitants of
Pare, in Matavai, who projected the scheme, and
had invited them to join. They fought, the
Porionu were defeated, and a number of men killed,
among whom was one of their principal chiefs, and
a promoter of the war. The Atahuruans, and
those of Papara, being joined by Taiarabu, burnt,
plundered, and reduced to a state of desolation, the
whole of the N.E. part of Tahiti, from the
borders of Atahuru to the isthmus. The questions
about religion were now quite forgotten, and the
different parties sought to revenge quarrels of
former years. Some time after the Tairabuans
quarrelled with the inhabitants of Papara, and


Atahuru fought with them, but were driven to the
mountains. The destructive wars of Tahiti caused
great perplexity and confusion in Eimeo; and
writing under date of sth of September, 1815, the
missionaries observe, “ For some weeks past, and
we have not been without our fears and alarms.
The Lord, however, hath been pleased hitherto to
controul and overrule these things in a wonderful
manner; they have taken a turn entirely unde-
signed and unexpected by the first projectors of
the war; and our people, whose ruin was aimed
at, have hitherto escaped : this is a matter for
praise and for thankfulness.”
Pomare was at this time making a journey
round Eimeo, and exerting his influence to per-
suade the chiefs of the several districts to renounce
the worship of the gods. On the 3d of July he
was in the district of Maatea, whence he addressed
the following letter to the missionaries :
“My dear friends, —May you be saved by Jesus
Christ, the only Saviour by whom we can be
saved. This is an account of our journey : —The
raatiras (or chiefs) are inclined to bear and obey
the word of God ; the word of God is now growing
in Moorea (Eimeo.) Jehovah himself; he it is
who causeth the growth of his own word. For that
reason it prospers; it grows exceedingly !
“ Many there are now, that lay hold on the
word of God ; there are thirty-four or thirty-six at
Atimaha of this description. There are others of
the common people that are left; they pay no
attention to these things; but the raatiras, they all
regard the word of God. As for Maatea, they are
all here —the raatiras and common people all of


them have embraced the word of God; ninety-six
new ones are of this description.
“ Not many of Haumi have as yet regarded the
word of God, but Hamuna has; Hamuna is a
man of knowledge; he has been hitherto a priest of
the evil spirit, (that is, a priest of the idols,) he has
entirely cast away the customs of the evil spirit.
I am highly pleased with these things, and parti-
cularly that the raatiras attend so well to the word
of God. This was my business in this journey;
it was to make known to them the word of God ;
and behold ! they have listened to it; they have
regarded it. Had it been otherwise, I should have
been much grieved.
“ We shall not go from this place yet awhile ;
we were to go this day to Haumi, but the raatiras
detained us, saying, ‘ Stay a little, that you may
know that we have in truth hearkened to the word
of God.’ To this I agreed ; we shall not go till
another sabbath is over, then we shall proceed.
They answered, ‘ That is well/ The idols of these
chiefs are committed to the fire, they are all
destroyed.
“ To-morrow is our meeting for prayer, the
commencement of the new month. Should these
men ask me to write down their names, how ought
Ito act ? Shall 1 write them P Write your mind
to me without delay, and give me instructions how
to do. May you be blessed of God.
POMA RE, KING.”
f 3


CHAPTER IX.
Effects of the War on the Christians. —Season of
Fasting and Prayer. — Voyage of Pomare to
Tahiti.—Treachery of the Idolaters.—Assault
upon the Christians. —General Engagement on
the Sabbath.—Death of the Leader of the
idolatrous Forces. —Their entire Defeat and
Flight.—Humanity of the Victors.—Submission
of the Chiefs and People of Tahiti to Pomare's
Sway.—Destruction of the Image of Oro, the
national Idol. —Complete Subversion of Idola-
try, and general Profession of Christianity. —
Missionary Tours among the People.—Invi-
tations to Matavai.—General religious Wor-
ship. — Pomare's Prayer.—Surrender of his Fa-
mily Idols. —Letter from Pomare. —Extension
of general change among the Inhabitants of
the Islands of Eimeo, Hauhine, Raiatea,
Tahaa, and Borabora. —Arrival of Mr. Crook.
—Observance of the Sabbath. —General State
of the Mission.—Arrival of Messrs. Ellis and
Orsmond.—Effect of native Services.—Arrival
offurther Aid from England.
While Pomare continued his tour of the islands
in the manner stated in the foregoing letter,
and the missionaries pursued their labours at
Papetoai, the events at Tahiti occasioned much
excitement and some alarm in Eimeo. Referring
to this, as far as the missionaries perceive, the
balance of power, humanly speaking, was nearly


equipoised ; and it appeared doubtful whether the
heathen party, who had armed themselves in
the cause of the gods and the customs of their
forefathers, would not prevail, and either destroy
or banish all who professed Christianity, together
with their teachers, from Tahiti and Eimeo. In
reference to this period they observe, “ The months
of July and August, previous to the date of our
letter, had been with us and our poor people a
time of trouble and great anxiety. The 14th of
July we had set apart as a day of humiliation,
fasting, and prayer, and were joined by several
hundreds of our people, in seeking mercy and pro-
tection from Him who has the hearts of all men in
his hand, and to whose control all actions and
events are subject. It was ‘ a day of trouble with
us; and we, and our persecuted people, did call
upon Jehovah; and we think there is no pre-
sumption in saying, our supplications were re-
garded, our prayers were answered, and, according
to his promise. He did send us deliverance, though
not in the way that we expected.”
The quarrels between the parties who had com-
bined to destroy the Christians having subsided,
since the people of Atehum had become supreme
in the islands, several of those who had fled to
Eimeo were invited to return. This invitation
they accepted; and the usages of the country re-
quiring the king to be present at the ceremonies
connected with their re-occupancy of their lands,
Pomare and his adherents went over to Tahiti for
this purpose. On the arrival of the king, and
those that followed him, at Tahiti, the idolatrous
party appeared on the beach in a hostile manner,
seemed determined to oppose the king’s landing.


anti soon fired on his party; but, by the king’s
strict orders, the fire was not returned, but a mes-
sage of peace was sent to them, which was pro-
ductive of the exchange of several messages, and
at last apparently issued in peace and recon-
ciliation.
In consequence of this, several of the people
returned peaceably to their different lands, but
still fears and jealousies existed on both sides.
The apprehensions of the king’s friends were by
no means allayed; and the idolatrous party,
although some of the leaders were undecided, were
urged on by their priests to attempt the extermi-
nation of the Christians. In these circumstances
the respective parties continued until the forenoon
of the 12th of November of this year, 1815, when
the heathen party taking advantage of the day, and
selecting the time when the Christians would be
engaged in worship, made an unexpected and
furious onset. Their prophet had assured them of
an easy victory; and expecting, by the suddenness
and impetuosity of their assault to throw the
Christians into confusion, they rushed with con-
fidence to the battle. But the missionaries ob-
serve, “In this they were mistaken. We had
warned our people before they went to Tahiti, of
the probability of such a stratagem being practised
should war take place; in consequence of which,
many of them attended worship under arms.” The
following account of this final struggle is taken
from Mr. Ellis’s Polynesian Researches. “ Pomare,
and the people from Eimeo, probably about eight
hundred, assembled for public worship near Papeatu,
in the district of Atehura. At distant points of
the district they stationed piquets; and, when


divine service was about to commence, and the
individual who was to officiate was about to read
the first hymn, a firing of muskets was heard; and
looking out of the building in which they were
assembled, a large body of armed men, preceded
and attended by the flag of the gods, were seen
marching round a distant point of land towards
the place where they were convened. The cry of
war was re-echoed through the place, as the
approaching army were seen from different parts
of the building. * Those who had met for worship
without their arms, were repairing to their tents to
arm. Some confusion consequently prevailed.
Pomare arose, and requested them all to remain
quietly in their places ; stating, that they were
under the special protection of Jehovah, and had
met together for his worship, which was not to be
forsaken or disturbed even by the approach of an
enemy. Anna, formerly an areoi and a warrior,
now a Christian teacher, then read the hymn, and
the congregation sang it. A portion of scripture
was read, a prayer offered to the Almighty, and the
service closed.
“The king’s army was formed into two or three
columns, one on the sea-beach, and the other at a
short distance towards the mountains. In the front
of the line, Auna, and other Christian chiefs, took
their station, and showed their readiness to lay
down their lives rather than relinquish the Christian
faith. Mahine, the king of Huahine, and Pomare-
vahine, the heroic daughter of the king of Raiatea,
with those of their people who had professed Chris-
tianity, arranged themselves immediately behind
the people of Eimeo, forming the body of the
army. Mahine, on this occasion, wore a curious


helmet, covered on the outside with plates of the
beautifully spotted cowrie, or tiger shell, and or-
namented with a plume of the tropic or man-of-
war bird’s feathers. The queen’s sister, tall, and
rather masculine in stature and features, walked
and fought by Mahine’s side, clothed in a kind of
armour of net-work, made with small and strongly
twisted cords of romaha, or native flax, and armed
with a musket and a spear. She was supported on
one side by Farefau, while Mahine was supported
on the other by Patini, a relative of Mahine’s, and
one who, wdth his family, has long enjoyed the
parental and domestic happiness resulting from
Christianity, but whose wife, while an idolatress,
had murdered twelve or fourteen children.
u Before the king’s friends had properly formed
themselves for regular defence, the idolatrous army
commenced the battle. Their impetuous attack,
attended with all the fury, imprecations, and boast-
ing shouts, to which they had been accustomed,
produced, by its shock, a temporary confusion in
the advanced guard of the Christian army ; some
were slain, others wounded ; and Upaparu, one of
Pomare’s leading chiefs, saved his life only by
rushing into the sea, and leaving part of his dress
in the hands of the antagonist with whom he had
grappled. Notwithstanding this, the assailants
met with a steady and determined resistance.
(i Overpowered, however, by numbers, the front
ranks gave way. A kind of running fight com-
menced, and the parties w r ere intermingled in all
the confusion of barbarous warfare.
“ The ground on which they fought, excepting
that near the sea-beach, was partially covered with
trees and bushes, which, at times, separated the


contending parties, and intercepted their view of
each other. It was under these circumstances
that the Christians, when not actually engaged,
knelt on the grass, either singly, or two or three
together, and offered up an ejaculatory prayer to
God, that he would cover their heads in the day
of battle, and, if agreeable to his will, preserve
them, but especially prepare them for the results
of the day, whether victory or defeat.
“ The battle continued to rage ; several were
killed on both sides; the idolaters still pursued
their way, and victory seemed to attend their
march, until they came to the position occupied
by Mahine, Pomare-vahine, and their companions,
when the advanced ranks of these united bands
arrested the progress of the idolaters. One of
Mahine’s men, Raveae, pierced, with a musket
ball, the body of Upafara, the chief of Papara, and
the commander-in-chief of the idolatrous forces.
The wounded warrior fell, and shortly afterwards
expired. As he sat gasping on the sand, his friends
gathered round, endeavouring to stop the bleeding
of the wound, and afford every assistance his cir-
cumstances appeared to require. “ Leave me,”
said the dying warrior; “ mark yonder man, in
front of Mahine’s ranks ; he inflicted this wound;
on him revenge my death.” Two or three athletic
men instantly set off for that purpose. Raveae
was retiring towards the main body of Mahine’s
men, when one of his pursuers, having outrun his
companions, sprung upon him before he was aware
of his approach. The idolater, unable to throw
him on the sand, cast his arms around his neck,
and endeavoured to strangle, or, at least, to secure


him until his companions should arrive, and de-
spatch him. Raveae was armed with a short
musket, which he had reloaded since wounding the
chief; hut of this, it is supposed, the man who held
him was unconscious. Extending his arms for-
ward, Raveae passed the muzzle of his musket
under his own arm, suddenly turned his body on
one side, and pulling the trigger of his piece at the
same instant, shot his antagonist through the body,
who immediately lost hold of his prey, and fell
dying the ground.
“ The idolatrous army continued to fight with ob-
stinate fury, but were unable to make any impres-
sion on Mahine and Pomare-vahine’s forces. These
not only maintained their ground, but forced their
adversaries back; and the scale of victory now
appeared to hang in doubtful suspense over the
contending parties. Tino, the idolatrous priest,
had, in the name of Oro, promised his adherents a
certain and easy triumph. Thus inspired, they
were more confident and obstinate in battle than
they would otherwise have been ; but the tide of
conquest, which had rolled with them in the onset,
and during the early part of the engagement, had
already turned against them ; and as the tidings
of their leader’s death became known, a panic
spread through the ranks he had commanded. The
pagan army gave way, and soon fled precipitately
from the field, leaving Pomare, Mahine, and the
princess from Raiatea, in undisputed possession
of the field.
“Flushed with success, in the moment of victory,
the king’s warriors were, according to former usage,
preparing to pursue the enemy. Pomare ap


preached, and exclaiming, “ Atira ! it is enough !”
strictly prohibited any one from pursuing those
who had fled from the field of battle.
“In the evening of the day, when the confusion
of battle had in some degree subsided, Pomare and
the chiefs invited the Christians to assemble, to
render thanks to God for the protection he had so
mercifully afforded. From the peaceful exercise of
sacred worship, they had that morning been hurried
into all the confusion of murderous conflict with
enemies, whose numbers, equipment, implacable
hatred, and superstitious infatuation, had rendered
them unusually formidable in appearance, and ter-
rible in combat. Defeat and death had appeared,
during several periods of the engagement, almost
certain. They now celebrated the subversion of
that idolatry which, but a few hours before, had
threatened their own extermination, with the over-
throw of the religion they had espoused, and on
account of which their destruction had been sought.
The Lord of hosts had been with them, the God
of Jacob was their helper, and to him they rendered
the glory and the praise for the protection he had
bestowed, and the victory they had obtained. In
this sacred act they were joined by numbers, who,
heretofore, had worshipped only the idols of their
country, but who now desired to acknowledge
Jehovah as God alone.
“ The noble forbearance and magnanimity of the
king and chiefs, in the hour of conquest, when
under all the intoxicating influence of victory and
conscious power, were honourable to the principles
which they professed. This generous temper did
not terminate with the command issued on the field
u


of contest, but it was a prominent feature in all
their subsequent conduct.
“ The king afterwards despatched a select band to
demolish the idol temple ; and, in giving them this
command, he said, ‘Go not to the little island,
where the women and children have been left for
security; turn not aside to the villages or planta-
tions ; neither enter into the houses, nor destroy
any property, but go straight along the high road,
through all your late enemy’s districts/ His
directions were attended to. The bodies of the
slain were not wantonly mangled, nor left exposed
to the elements, or to be devoured by wild dogs
from the mountains, and the swine that formerly
would have been allowed to feed upon them, but
they were all decently buried by the victors; and the
body of Upafara was conveyed to his own district,
to be interred among the tombs of his forefathers.
“ The party sent by the king to the national
temple at Tautira, in Taiarabu, proceeded to their
place of destination. The soldiers of Pomare,
soon after reaching the district, hastened to the
temple; they entered the depository of Tahiti’s
former god, brought out the idol, stripped him of
his sacred coverings and ornaments, and threw his
body contemptuously on the ground. It was a
rude uncarved log of aito wood, about six feet long.
The altars were then broken down, the temples de-
molished, and the sacred houses of the gods, to-
gether with their covering, ornaments, and all the
appendages of their worship, committed to the
flames. The temples, altars, and idols, all round
Tahiti, were shortly afterwards destroyed in the same
way. The log of wood, called by the natives the


body of Oro, into which they imagined the god at
times entered, and through which his influence
was exerted, Pomare’s party bore away on their
shoulders, and, on returning to the camp, laid in
triumph at their sovereign’s feet. It was subse-
quently fixed up as a post in the king’s kitchen,
and used in a most contemptuous manner, by
having baskets of food suspended from it; and,
finally, it was riven up for fuel. This was the end
of the principal idol of the Tahitians, on which they
had long been so deluded as to suppose their des-
tinies depended, and which had been the occasion
of more desolating wars, for the preceding thirty
years, than all other causes combined. Their most
zealous devotees were, in general, convinced of
their delusion, and the people united in declaring
that the gods had deceived them.
“Thus was idolatry abolished in Tahiti and
Eimeo, the idols destroyed, and the remnant of the
people liberated from the bondage in which, by the
cunningly devised fables of the priests, and the
* doctrines of devils/ they had been for ages held,
as in fetters of iron. It is impossible to contem-
plate the mighty deliverance thus effected, without
exclaiming, ‘ What hath God wrought! ’ and de-
siring, with regard to other parts of the world, the
arrival of the promised era, when the gods ‘ that
have not made the heavens’ shall be destroyed,
and ‘ the idols shall be utterly abolished/
“ The conduct of the victors after the battle had
an astonishing effect on the minds of the van-
quished, who had sought shelter in the mountains.
Under cover of the darkness of night, they sent
spies from the retreats to their habitations, and to
the places of security in which they had left their


aged and helpless relatives, their children, and
their wives. These they found remaining as they
had left them on the morning of the battle, and
were informed that Pomare and the chiefs had,
without any exception, sent assurances of security
to all who had fled. This intelligence, when con-
veyed to those who had taken refuge in the moun-
tains, appeared to them incredible. After waiting,
however, some days in their hiding-places, they
ventured forth, and singly, or in small parties, re-
turned to their dwellings; and when they found
their property secure, and their wives and children
safe, they were utterly astonished. From the king
they received assurances of pardon, and were not
backward in unitedly tendering their submission to
his authority, and imploring his forgiveness for
having appeared in arms against him. Pomare
was now, by the unanimous will of the people, re-
instated on the throne of his father, and raised to
the supreme authority in his dominions.
“ The family and district temples and altars, as
well as those that were national, were demolished,
the idols destroyed by the very individuals who had
but recently been so zealous for their preservation,
and in a very short time there was not one pro-
fessed idolater remaining. Messengers came from
those who had hitherto been pagans, to the king
and chiefs, requesting that some of their men might
be sent to teach them to read, and to instruct them
concerning the true God, and the worship and
obedience required by his word. Those who sent
them expressed, at the same time, their determina-
tion to renounce every evil practice connected with
their former idolatrous life, and their desire to be-
come altogether a Christian people. Schools were


built, and places for public worship erected ; the
sabbath was observed, divine service performed ;
child-murder, and the gross abominations of idol-
atry, were discontinued.”
Tidings of the result of the battle were speedily
sent over to Eimeo, where the missionaries and
people, who had been in a state of considerable
anxiety ever since the departure of the king, waited
the arrival of the messenger. As his canoe touched
the beach, the chief, who had been sent, leaping
on the sand, exclaimed, ‘"Vanquished! vanquished !
by prayer alone.” From this they simply inferred,
that there had been an engagement, and that the
heathen party were defeated ; but when he told
them that the whole of the idolatrous forces had
been overcome, their chief slain, that the worship
of the gods had ceased, that many of the idols were
destroyed, the temples burnt or demolished, and
that all the people of Tahiti were now anxious to
receive instructions, they were almost overcome
with astonishment and gratitude. The mission-
aries and their people repaired to the place of wor-
ship, and united in thanksgiving and praise unto
the Lord, who had wrought this great deliverance.
Mr. Nott and Mr. Hayward immediately went
over to Tahiti. Five years ago they had been
driven, in peril of their lives, from the island ; now
they were invited to return by the same people,
who, though then furious idolaters, were now pro-
fessedly Christians. Describing this journey, Mr.
Hayward, who also accompanied Mr. Nott round
the Leeward Islands and Eimeo, says, “ In every
district we found a house erected, where the
natives, on the sabbath, meet three times, and on
every Wednesday evening for prayer, and here
u 3


they met with us to hear the words of the true God.
Our congregations often exceed four hundred,
and never less than one hundred, all, in general,
attentive hearers. We commenced our mission in
Pare, and closed it at Matavia, our old residence.
We had not been long in the district before many
of our old neighbours came, and requested brother
Nolt to preach to them, and also gave us an in-
vitation to stay and spend the sabbath with them ;
they likewise informed us, that the ground where
our houses and gardens formerly were, and the
whole of the district from Taraa to Tapahi, the
boundaries of the district, should be ours, if we
would return to reside among them. This occurred
on the 6th of March, the day on which, nineteen
years before, the first missionary landed on Ta-
heite, from the ship Duflf. We experienced kind-
ness and hospitality wherever we stopped. Our
continuance in each neighbourhood was according
to circumstances; in some places a longer, and in
others a shorter period; but our time was fully
employed. Brother Nott, besides preaching to
them, spent much time, and frequently to a late
hour, in hearing and answering the numerous
questions put by the natives, relative to their con-
duct under their new profession, both in civil and
religious concerns; and my employment was to
teach them to read, &c. We distributed all the
spelling-books we had, and might have given away
many hundreds had we possessed them.”
The more intelligent among the pupils of the
missionaries were generally requested to read a
portion of the scriptures, detached parts of which
many of them possessed in manuscript, and also to
engage in prayer at their meetings, on the Wednes


day evenings, and the sabbath, which was now uni-
versally kept as a day appropriated to rest and re-
ligious worship j many wrote out texts of scxipture
to read on these occasions, and also wrote the
prayers they offered. Mr. Nott has given the fol-
lowing translation of an excellent form of prayei
used by Pomare on one of those occasions :
“ Jehovah, thou God of our salvation, hear our
prayers, pardon thou our sins, and save our souls.
Our sins are great, and more in number than the
fishes in the sea; and our obstinacy has been very
great, and without parallel. Turn thou us to th}-
self, and enable us to cast off every evil way.
Lead us to Jesus Christ, and let our sins be
cleansed in his blood. Grant us thy good Spirit
to be our Sanctifier. Save us from hypocrisy.
Suffer us not to come to thine house with careless-
ness, and return to our own houses and commit sin.
Unless thou have mercy upon us we perish. Un-
less thou save us, unless we are prepared, and
made meet for thy habitation in heaven, we are
banished to the fire —we die ; but let us not be
banished to that unknown world of fire. Save thou
us through Jesus Christ, thy Son, the Prince of
life; yea, let us obtain salvation through him.
Bless all the inhabitants of these islands, all the
families thereof t let every one stretch out his hand
unto God, saying, Lord, save me! Lord, save me !
Let all these islands, Tahiti, with all the inhabi-
tants of Moorea, Huahine, and of Raiatea, and of
the little islands around, partake of thy salvation.
Bless Britain, and every country in the world. Let
thy word grow with speed in the world, so as to
exceed the progress of evil. Be merciful to ns,
and bless us, for Jesus Christ's sake. Amen,


In the general destruction of the maraes, places
of heathen worship, many of the idols in Tahiti
and the adjacent islands, were burnt; others were
cast into the sea; the wood of others appropriated
to various uses; some were buried, and others were
hidden in the caverns or other secret places. The
national idols were destroyed. Pomare sent over
to the missionaries the idols of his own family,
with a letter, telling them to destroy them, or send
them to England. The missionaries sent them to
this country, observing that they were a good spe-
cimen of the idols of the people. They also sent
the following translation of the letter from the
king, which they received with the idols.
“ Friends, —May you be saved by Jehovah and
Jesus Christ our Saviour. This is my speech to
you, my friends. I wish you to send those idols
to Britane, for the missionary society, that they
may know the likeness of the gods that Tahiti wor-
shipped. Those were my own idols, belonging to
our family from the time of Taaroamanahune even
to Yairaatoa; and when he died he left them with
me. And now, having been made acquainted with
the true God, with Jehovah, he is my God ; and
when this body of mine shall be dissolved in death,
may the Three-one save me! And this is my
shelter, my close hiding-place, even from the anger
of Jehovah. When he looks upon me, I will hide
me at the feet of Jesus Christ the Saviour, that I
may escape. I feel pleasure and satisfaction in
my mind; I rejoice, I praise Jehovah, that he
hath made known his word unto me. I should
have gone to destruction if Jehovah had not inter-
posed. Many have died, and are gone to destruo


lion, kings and common people; they died with-
out knowing anything of the true God; and now
when it came to the small remainder of the people,
Jehovah hath been pleased to make known his
word, and we are made acquainted with his good
word; made acquainted with the deception ot the
false gods, with all that is evil and false. The
true God Jehovah, it was he that made us ac-
quainted with these things. It was you that
taught us; but the words, the knowledge, was
from Jehovah. It is because of this that I re-
joice, and I pray to Jehovah, that he may increase
my abhorrence of every evil way. The Three-
One, He it is that can make the love of sin to
cease; we cannot effect that; man cannot effect
it; it is the work of God to cause evil things to
be cast off, and the love of them to cease.
“ I am going a journey around Tahiti, to ac-
quaint the ratiras with the word of God, and to
cause them to be vigilant about good things. The
word of God does grow in Tahiti, and the raatiras
are diligent about setting up houses for worship;
they are also diligent in seeking instruction, and
now it is w 7 ell with Tahiti.
« That principal idol, that has the red feathers
of the Otuu, is Temeharo, that is his name, look
you, you may know it by the red feathers; that
was Vairaatoa's own god, and those feathers were
from the ship of lieutenant Watts ;* it was Vai-
raatoa that set them himself about the idol. If
you think proper, you may burn them all in the
fire ; or, if you like, send them to your country,
for the inspection of the people of Europe, that
* Lieutenant Watts visited Tahiti in the Lady Penrhyu,
1788.


they may satisfy their curiosity, and know Tahiti’s
foolish gods !* We have had our prayer-meeting
the beginning of this month February; it was at
Homai-au Vahi; the raatiras and all the people of
the district assembled, leaving their houses with-
out people. They said to me, c Write down our
names.’ I answered, ‘lt is agreed.’ Those names
are in the enclosed paper, which I have sent for
your inspection. Have I done wrong in this ?
Perhaps I have: let me, my friends, know the
whole of your mind in respect of this matter.
“ May you, my friends, be saved by Jehovah
the true God. I have written to Mahine for a
house for the use of the missionaries; when they
arrive, you will let Mahine know where the house
is to be, and he will get the people to remove it
there. Let it be at Uaeva, near you.
“It is reported here, that there is a ship at
Moorea, and I was thinking it might be the ship
with the missionaries; hut it may be that it is
only an idle report. However, should the mis-
sionaries arrive at Moorea, write to me quickly,
that I may know. Let me know also, what news
there may be from Europe, and from Port Jack-
son. Perhaps king George may be dead, let me
know. I shall not go around Tahiti before the
month of March.
“ May you be saved, my friends, by Jehovah,
and Jesus Christ, the only Saviour by whom we
sinners can be saved.
“ Pomare, king of Tahiti, &c. &c.”
“ Tahiti Motuta, Feb. 19, 1816.”
* These idols are deposited in the Museum of the Lou-
don Missionary Society.


In communicating these tidings the mission-
aries, after referring to the destruction of the idols,
add : —« But this is not all, we have also good
news to communicate about the Leeward islands.
Tamatoa, or, as he is now called, Tapa, the prin-
cipal chief, has also publicly renounced idolatry,
and embraced Christianity. His example has been
followed by most of the other chiefs, and a large
majority of the people throughout the four Society
islands, Huahine, Raiatea, Tahaa, and Borabora.
Two chiefs of Borabora, named Tefaaora and Mai,
have distinguished themselves by their zeal in
destroying the gods, and erecting a house for the
worship of the true God. The chiefs of these
islands have sent letters, and repeated messages to
us, earnestly entreating us to send some of our
number to them, to teach them also : and Mai, a
chief of Borabora, sent us a letter, to remind us
that Jesus Christ and his apostles did not confine
their instructions to one place or country.”
Although the change that had now taken place
was chiefly external, being a national or political
change with a large majority of the people, the
history of the South Sea mission, from its com-
mencement in 1797, to the subversion of idolatry
in 1815, a period of eighteen years, supplies a
number of most important lessons to the attentive
observer of the Divine procedure. It shows the
necessity of moderating our expectations from the
most auspicious commencement of any important
enterprise, and of persevering, even under the
greatest discouragement. It manifests, in a re-
markable and instructive manner, the Divine so-
vereignty ; and shows that the failure may be most
complete, when, according to human appearances,


there is the greatest probability of success; and
also the reverse. It furnishes a fresh instance, in
the arrangements of Infinite Wisdom, of events
to us the most dark and discouraging, immediately
preceding the most decisive and glorious
festations of Divine mercy. It is a most ani-
mating instance of the faithfulness of the Most
High, in the fulfilment of his own word, and in
answering the prayers of his people. It also
teaches us, in a remarkable manner, that all the
minor arrangements and details of operation con-
nected with the advancement of the kingdom of
Christ in the world, are peculiarly under his con-
troul. He stirred up the hearts of his servants in
Britain to pray especially for the conversion of the
king, and while they were speaking, he answered.
The missionaries, reduced by sickness and deaths,
were altogether unequal to the delightful work to
which, by the overthrow of idolatry, they were
called; but before the churches at home were
made acquainted with the change, a reinforcement
was on its way to their aid. Viewed as a whole,
or in its several parts, the subversion of heathenism
in the South Sea Islands, is one of the most
striking manifestations of the Divine faithfulness,
and one of the most unquestionable sources of
encouragement to the church of God, that has
been vouchsafed in modern times.
Mr. Crook, who originally sailed to the islands
in the ship Duff, in 1797, and had been left by
captain Wilson in the Marquesas, returned to
England after remaining there but a short time;
he then left England to return, but in consequence
of the unsettled state of affairs in the islands,
remained in New South Wales, until tidings ar


rived of the wonderful change that had taken place,
when, accompanied by his family, he proceeded to
the aid of his brethren, and reached Eimeo on the
Bth of May, 1816. As the vessel approached the
shores of Tahiti, all on board were much surprised
that not a single native could be seen all along the
shore as the vessel sailed; nor could they perceive
any smoke arising from their dwellings. This ex-
cited in the mind of Mr. Crook and others a pain-
ful suspicion that the island had been subdued, and
all the inhabitants cut off in the wars.
In the midst of this agitation of mind, one of
the sailors, an Otaheitan, who left Port Jackson in
the Active, observed that the natives were keeping
the sabbath-day; that of late they did no kind of
work, nor cooked any victuals, nor went out of
their houses, except to worship God; and that the
whole of the day was employed either in religious
worship, or in teaching one another to read.
At length the vessel came to anchor in Matavai
Bay ; but not a native made his appearance until
monday morning; when great numbers repaired
to the brig, bringing with them their usual testi-
monies of hospitality, in food and fruit of all kinds,
with other presents of cloth, &c. &c. &c., being
highly pleased and thankful to God, that he had
sent another teacher among them; and thus fully
satisfying all on board that they had been ob-
serving the sabbath.
In no respect is the change that has taken place
in the South Sea Islands more conspicuous than
in the general and exemplary observance of the
sabbath, and the universal attention which was at
this time given to the important duty of prayer.
Many striking illustrations of attention to the
x


sabbath might be adduced. When the natives first
professed Christianity, there was not perhaps an
individual who did not cease from labour; and, ex-
cepting those who were by illness or other causes
prevented, attend public worship. No fire was
lighted, no food cooked, all this was done on the
Saturday afternoon; when their garments were
prepared, their water brought from the river, the
whole of the hours of the day were devoted to re-
ligious worship and instruction. They generally
assemble at their prayer meetings about sun-rise,
and six or eight hundred people often assembled
at these seasons. Morning service took place
early, the sabbath-schools occupied the middle of
the day, and the afternoon service closed shortly
before sun-set.
Among the numerous and interesting facts re-
lative to the conscientious observance of the Lord’s
day, the missionaries at Eimeo, at one of their
meetings for inquiry, asked in what they might
with propriety engage on the sabbath day, and
stated that a man of Taiarabu, the southern
peninsula of Tahiti, had a canoe lying on the
beach. The tide flowing higher than usual one
sabbath day, the canoe was drifted out to sea. A
native who observed it, ran and told the owner
of the canoe, who replied, that it was the sabbath
day, and that he, therefore, thought it would be
sinful for him to secure the canoe. The conse-
quence was, that the canoe, though to him ex-
ceedingly valuable, was carried by the current out
to sea and lost. Brother Davies took this oppor-
tunity of explaining the difference between works
of ordinary labour and those of necessity and
mercy; and told them, with respect to the man in


Taiarabu, that, although his motive was good, he
was mistaken as to the point of duty; and that he
ought to have secured his canoe.
Besides this observance of public religious ser-
vices at this time, the attention to family and
private devotion was very general; and as their
houses formerly were destitute of all partitions,
which consequently rendered retirement unattain-
able, a small house was built in the garden, or in
some secluded spot near their dwellings, for the
purpose of secret devotion, which was usually
performed before sun-rise in the morning and by
daylight in the evening. It was not to be sup-
posed that all, or even more than a very small
minority of those who were thus scrupulous in
observing the stated seasons of devotion, were in-
fluenced by a just sense of the nature and design
of these services; doubtless, with many it was but a
customary engagement, which they supposed would
lead God to regard them with favour; still the
extent to which it long prevailed must have been
salutary in its general effects, leading their
thoughts frequently to the subjects of their pray-
ers, and restraining from the open indulgence of
sin in practice, from which they were accustomed
to pray that they might be preserved. With
others, however, there was every reason to believe
God was worshipped in spirit and in truth, and
the blessings asked earnestly, and habitually de-
sired.
The missionaries were sensibly alive to the very
critical state of the natives, and how much they
needed instruction and guidance in every part of
their conduct; and, as far as possible, to meet this
new and delightful state of things, made frequent


tours of the island of Eimeo and Tahiti, for the
purpose of praying and conversing with the people.
The Lord continued to bless their labours, and to
extend the profession of his name among the
people.
In the beginning of the year 1817, Mr. Davies,
in a summary of the progress of the work of God
among the people, observes, “The revival and
change, which commenced in 1813, 1814, con-
tinued and increased in 1815-16-17, so that the
whole of the inhabitants of Tahiti, Eimeo, Tapua-
manu, Huaheine, Raiatea, Taha, Borabora, and
Marua, have renounced idolatry entirely. The
gods, altars, &c. are utterly destroyed. The of-
fering of human sacrifices, and the practice of
infanticide, are altogether abolished. The worship
of the true God, and the profession of Christianity,
are general throughout all the above islands. In
Tahiti there are sixty-six chapels built, and in
Eimeo sixteen. The people assemble for worship
thrice every sabbath, and on every Wednesday
evening. The LordVday is strictly observed
throughout the whole of the islands. Private and
family prayer are general among the people.
About 4000 persons have learned to spell and
read, and many to write. The change far exceeds
all our expectation.”
The year 1817 was one of great encouragement
to the missionaries, not only from the animating
prospects of increasing usefulness among the peo-
ple, but the arrival of a very seasonable reinforce-
ment of labourers from England. On the 13th of
February, Mr. and Mrs. Ellis, who had left Eng-
land the previous year, in company with Mr. and
Mrs, Threlkeld, arrived at Eimeo. They were


gladly received by the king and many of the
people, as well as by the missionaries, although
some disappointment was naturally experienced
that only one had arrived, Mr. and Mrs. Threlkeld
having been detained by illness at Rio Janeiro. Few
missionaries have entered their appointed field of
labour under appearances more encouraging. The
following is the account which he forwarded home
of the first sabbath he spent in the islands, and the
impression the services made upon his own mind.
“ Early this morning I assembled with the
brethren at their prayer meeting; I afterwards
attended the native service. It had not commenced
when I arrived at the place of worship, yet that
and the enclosed ground around it were so crowded
that I could scarcely gain an entrance. The ser-
vice commenced by singing, when the praises of
God were sounded by many of the native voices.
Brother Davies offered up an extempore prayer;
he then delivered, in an affectionate manner, a
discourse to about seven hundred hearers, and
concluded the service with prayer. So attentive
were the hearers, so solemn and interesting the
appearance of the congregation, such the emo-
tions of pleasure excited in my mind, that I felt
quite overcome. I wished, by means of brother
Crook, as my interpreter, to tell some of them
how happy I was to see them so engaged, and
what joy it would afford the friends of missions in
England, to learn that they had been made par-
takers of the blessings of Christianity; but my feel-
ings were too powerful, and I was obliged hastily
to retire in silence from this delightful scene.”
Mr. and Mrs. Orsmond reached the islands on
the 27th of April following, and entered with
x 3


spirit and 4ilig ence upon the study of the native
language, impelled to the utmost diligence by the
necessities of the people, and their earnest desires
to be more fully instructed in the doctrines and
precepts of the Bible. In one of his early com-
munications, Mr. Orsmond mentions the following
occurrence, as showing the state of feeling among
the people: “ A little time since there was some
uncommon lightning at Tahiti, and the natives
went to the mountains and caves, and brought
out the gods that had not been consumed in the
fire, and prepared to burn them, supposing that
God was angry with them for keeping them all.
Conscience is a faithful monitor.” Utami, the
chief of Atehuru, in writing to Mr. Davies, in re-
ference to the same occurrence, says, “ The peo-
ple thought the day of judgment was come.”
On the 17th of November the missionaries were
gladdened by the arrival of six additional mis-
sionaries: Messrs. Threlkeld, Barff, Williams,
Bourne, Darling, and Platt, and their wives, who
had proceeded from New South Wales, in the
Active, a vessel employed by the Rev. Samuel
Marsden, in visiting the missions in New Zealand
and the Society Islands. Their arrival not only
cheered the hearts of the labourers, who had so
long borne the heat and burden of the day alone,
but enabled them to make arrangements for the
more effectual instruction of the people, than their
inadequate numbers had before enabled them
to do.


CHAPTER X.
Formation of a new Station in Eimeo.—Esta-
blishment of the Press.-First Printing in the
Islands.—General desire for Books.—Pleasing
instances of earnestness to obtain Copies of the
Scriptures. — Completion of the Vessel.—Re-
occupancy of the Missionary Station in Tahiti.
—Establishment of new Stations. — Commence-
ment of Missions in the Islands of Huahine
and Raiatea. —Formation of Tahitian Mis-
sionary Society.—Speech of Pomare.—Esta-
blishment of a Missionary Society in Huahine
and Raiatea. —Probable Cause of Attention to
Religion at this time. —Attempt to introduce
the Culture of Sugar in the Islands. Erection
and opening of the Royal Mission Chapel at
Tahiti.—A Code of Laws prepared. —Conduct
of the Missionaries in reference to the same.
-Establishment of a Code of Laws.—Baptism
of Pomare. —Formation of Christian Churches
in Tahiti.—Remarkable Effects of the preach-
ing of the Gospel in Huahine. Desire for
Copies of the Scriptures. —Blind Hiro the
converted Priest. —Encouraging State of the
Mission in Raiatea in 1819.
The comparatively few books hitherto in use,
were printed in England or in New South Wales ;
hut Mr. Ellis having taken out a printing-press,
it was set to work as soon as a suitable building
could be prepared ; and as it was desirable to extend
instruction as widely as possible, and arrangements
CHAP. X.] TAHITI.


could not be made for forming a settlement on
any other island, it was agreed to set it up on
the opposite side of the island of Eimeo, where
there were a large number of people anxious for
instruction. The king was much gratified with
the prospect of having books printed in his coun-
try, and requested that he might know when the
work of printing would commence. The people
were in great need of books, and many of them
most anxious to receive them. Speaking of the
circumstances under which the press was set to
work, and the interest the king took in the same,
Mr. Ellis states, “ that in many families all were
scholars with but one book, while others were en-
tirely destitute. Many had written out the whole
spelling-book on paper, and others, unable to pro-
cure paper, had, with a reed, written the alphabet,
spelling and reading lessons, on pieces of cloth,
made from the bark of a tree. Many of them
might also be seen with portions of the scripture,
or the texts they had heard preached from, written
on pieces of paper or fragments of cloth, pre-
served with care, and read till fixed in the memory
of their possessors. Within three months after
Mr. Ellis’s arrival at Afareaitu, every thing was
in readiness, and on the 10th of June, 1817, the
operations preparatory to printing were com-
menced. A letter having been forwarded to Po-
mare, according to his request, to inform him that
w'e were nearly ready, he hastened to our settle-
ment, and in the afternoon of the day appointed,
came to the printing-office, accompanied by a few
favourite followed by a large concourse
of people.
Soon after his arrival, Pomare himself put to


gether the capital letters of the alphabet; he put
together the small letters in the same manner;
and the few monosyllables composing the first
page of the small spelling-hook, were afteiwards
added. He was delighted when he saw the first
page complete, and appeared desirous to have it
struck off at once; hut when informed that it
would not he printed till as many were composed
as would fill a sheet, he requested that he might
be sent for whenever it was ready. He visited
the printing-office almost daily until the 30th,
when, having received intimation that the work
was ready, he came, attended only by two of his
favourite chiefs. They were, however, followed by
a numerous retinue, who had by some means
heard that the printing was about to commence.
Crowds of the natives were already collected about
the door, but they made way for him ; and after
he and his two companions had been admitted, the
door was closed.
Mr. Ellis, in his Polynesian Researches,has given
the following account of the first printing in the
islands: “ The king examined with great mi-
nuteness and pleasure the form, as it lay on
the press, and prepared to try to take oft the
first sheet ever printed in his dominions. Having
received directions how to proceed, he jocosely
charged his companions not to laugh should
he not do it right. The printer’s ink-ball was
put into his hand, and he was directed to strike
it two or three times on the face of the letters;
this he did, and a sheet of clean paper being
properly placed, and the whole put under the
press, the king was directed to pull the handle:
he did so, and when the paper was removed from


beneath the press, and the covering raised, the
chiefs and assistants rushed forward to see what
effect the king’s pressure had produced. When
they beheld the letters black, large, and well-
defined, there was one simultaneous expression of
wonder and delight. The king took up the sheet,
and having looked first at the paper, then at the
types, with attentive admiration, handed it to one
of his chiefs, and expressed a wish to take another.
He printed two more; and while he was so en-
gaged the first sheet was shown to the crowd with-
out, who, when they saw it, raised one general
shout of astonishment and joy. When the king
had printed three or four sheets he examined the
press in all its parts with great attention.
“ On being asked what he thought of it, he
said it was very surprising; but that he had sup-
posed that the paper was laid down, and the let-
ters by some means pressed upon it, instead of the
paper being pressed upon the types. He remained
attentively watching the press, and admiring the
facility with which, by its mechanism, so many
pages were printed at one time, until it was near
sun-set, when he left us, taking with him the
sheets he had printed to his encampment on the
opposite side of the bay.
“ The spelling-book was first put to the press,
and an edition of two thousand six hundred copies
soon finished. The king, with his attendants,
passed by the printing-office every afternoon, on
their way to his favourite bathing-place, and seldom
omitted to call and spend some time in watching
the progress of the work. He engaged in counting
several of the letters, and was surprised to find
that in sixteen pages, of the spelling-book there


were upwards of five thousand of the ‘letter a. An
edition of two thousand three hundred copies of
the Tahitian Catechism, and a collection of texts
or extracts from scripture, were next printed;
after which St. Luke’s gospel, which had been
translated by Mr. Nott, was next put to the press.
« The edition of three thousand copies was com-
pleted in the beginning of 1818 ; it was entitled,
‘Te Evanelia, na Luka, irilihia ei parau Tahiti.’
Literally, ‘ The Gospel of Luke, taken out to be, or
transferred to, the Language of Tahiti.’ ‘ Epareau
hae-rehia te parau maitai o te hau nei e ati paatoai
te ao nei ai ite te mau fenua atoa,’ was the motto.
' This good word (or gospel) of the kingdom, shall
be published in all the world/ Matt. xxiv. 14 ;
and the imprint was, ‘ Neneihia i te neneiraa
parau ate mau misionari, 1818.’ ‘ Pressed at the
(paper or book) presser of the missionaries.’ There
being no term in the native language answering to
the word translated gospel, the Greek word evan-
gelion was introduced, omitting some of the con-
sonants in conforming it to the native idiom.
“ The curiosity excited by the establishment of
the press, was not soon satisfied; day after day
Pomare visited the printing-office; the chiefs ap-
plied to be admitted inside, while the people
thronged the windows and doors, and every cre-
vice through which they could peep, often invo-
luntarily exclaiming, Beritani e fenua paari. O,
Britain ! land of skill or knowledge.
« Multitudes arrived from every part of Eimeo,
and even from other islands, to procure books, and
to see this astonishing machine. So frequent
and numerous were the visits of strangers, that
for some weeks before the first portion of the


scripture was finished, the district of Afareaitu re-
sembled a public fair. The beach was lined with
canoes from different parts of Eimeo and other
islands; the houses of the inhabitants were
thronged, and small parties had erected their tem-
porary booths in every direction. The school
during the week, and chapel on the sabbath, though
capable of containing six hundred persons, were
found too small for those who sought admittance.
“It was found almost impossible to keep the
books from the people; and as some of the natives
had been taught bookbinding, the copies were many
of them given out in sheets. Those among the
natives who had learned to bind were now over-
whelmed with business, and derived no inconsi-
derable emolument from their trade. Great havock
was made among the cats and dogs for the sake of
their skins.
“ The books hitherto in circulation among the
people had been gratuitously distributed; but when
the first portion of the scripture was finished, a
small quantity of cocoa-nut oil, the article they
could most easily procure, was demanded for
each book, and was cheerfully paid by every native.
This was not done with a view of deriving any
profit from the sale of the books, but merely to
teach the people their value; as no higher price
was required than was supposed would cover the
expense of paper and printing materials. It was
cheering to behold the people so prepared to re-
ceive the sacred volume, and anxious to possess it.
I have frequently seen thirty or forty canoes, from
distant parts of Eimeo, or from some other island,
lying along the beach, in each of which five or
six persons had arrived, whose only errand was to


procure copies of the scriptures. For these many
waited five or six weeks, while they were printing.
Sometimes I have seen a canoe arrive with six or
ten persons for books, who, when they have landed,
have produced a large bundle of letters, perhaps
thirty or forty, written on plantain leaves, and
rolled up like a scroll. These letters have been
written by individuals at a distance, who, unable
to come and apply personally for a book, had thus
sent, in order to procure a copy.
“ One evening,” Mr. Ellis observes, “ about
sun-set, a canoe from Tahiti, w ith five men, arrived
on this errand. They landed on the beach, lowered
their sail, and, drawing their canoe on the sand,
hastened to my native dwelling. I met them at
the door, and asked them their errand. * The
word of Luke/ w r as their reply, accompanied with
the exhibition of the bamboo canes, filled with
cocoa-nut oil, which they held up in their hands,
and had brought as payment. I told them I had
none ready that night, but if they would come on
the morrow, I would give them as many as they
needed; recommending them, in the mean time,
to go and lodge with some friend in the village.
Twilight in the tropics is always short: it soon
grew dark ; I wished them good night, and retired,
supposing they had gone to sleep at the house of
a friend ; but, on looking out of my window about
day-break, I saw these five men lying on the
ground, on the outside of my house, their only bed
being some platted cocoa-nut leaves, and their only
covering the large native cloth they usually wear
over their shoulders. I hastened out, and asked
them if they had been there all night; they said
they had. I then inquired why they did not, as
y


I had directed them, go and lodge at some house,
and come again. They answered, c We were
afraid that, had we gone away, some one might
have come before us this morning, and have taken
what books you have to spare, and we should have
been obliged to return without any; therefore, after
you left us last night, we determined not to go
away till we had procured the books/ I called
them into the printing office, and as soon as I
could put the sheets together, gave them each a
copy. Each wrapped his book up in a piece of
white native cloth, put it in his bosom, wished me
good morning, and without, I believe, eating or
drinking, or calling on any person in the settle-
ment, hastened to the beach, launched their canoe,
hoisted their matting sail, and steered, rejoicing, to
their native island.”
This is only one instance of the many that oc-
curred at the time, both at Afareaitu and Papatoai,
exhibiting the desire of the people in general to
possess the scriptures, as soon as they could be
prepared for them. They frequently expressed
their apprehension, lest the number of books should
not be sufficient for those who were waiting for
them; and they have often told us, that the fear of
being disappointed has deprived them of sleep.
With the majority it was, doubtless, only a desire
to gratify curiosity, or possess an article of property
then generally esteemed; but with others it arose
from a desire to be made wise unto salvation.
Speaking on this subject, in connexion with the
general state of the mission, the brethren, in a let-
ter dated May 30, 1818, remark :
“ The impression of St. Luke’s gospel, in the
Tahitian language, is now completed, namely, three


thousand copies ; and although we demand, as for-
merly mentioned, a quantity of cocoa-nut oil, as
the price of each copy, to help in defraying the
expense of printing more, yet the people manifest
the utmost eagerness to obtain them. Indeed, the
miser’s thirst for gold cannot exceed the desire of
these people for this portion of the word of God, and
it is matter of much concern to us, that great num-
bers must go without any for the present. Many
of the inhabitants of the PallisePs, and other
islands, to the eastward of Tahiti, have also de-
molished their idols, and become professed wor-
shippers of the true God, and three hundred and
twenty of them have lately come to these islands
in order to obtain books.
“ Much readiness is manifested by the people
in general to assemble to hear the word of God.
Our congregations are large and attentive, and we
have reason to believe, that the interests of that
kingdom which ‘ cometh not with observation,’ are
advancing here. We are frequently opening new
places of worship, which, on such occasions, are
generally crowded.”
While some of the missionaries were thus em-
ployed in furnishing books for those who were
able to read, and multiplying the means of educa-
tion, others were employed, on the opposite side
of the island, in finishing the vessel which, con-
jointly with the king, they had been some time
employed in building, for the purpose of obtaining
supplies from the colony of New South Wales,
and promoting enterprize and industry among the
people. The vessel, being finished, was launched
on the 17th of December, this year, 1817. The
king, on that occasion, designating the vessel the


Haweis, in honour of the late Rev. Dr. Haweis,
the early friend, and almost the founder, of the
South Sea mission.
The state of the people rendered it desirable
that the missionaries should form as many different
stations as possible, so as to have access to the
largest number of the natives, and the completion
of the vessel now left them at liberty, and fur-
nished the means of their doing so. Mr. Wilson,
who had joined the mission in 1801, removed to
Tahiti in Dec. 1817, and resumed his labours in
Matavai, the original seat of the mission. Messrs.
Bicknell and Tessier commenced a station at Pa-
para, in the south-west of Tahiti. Mr. Crook and
Mr. Bourne settled in the district of Faa, at Pe-
peete. Mr. Darling became the teacher of the
people of Atehuru, whose country had been the
chief scene of the war by which idolatry was over-
thrown in the islands. Messrs. Henry and Platt
remained in Eimeo, and the rest of the mission-
aries removed to the Leeward or Society Islands.
On the 20th of June Messrs. Davies, Williams,
Orsmond, and Ellis, reached Huahine, where they
were shortly afterwards joined by Messrs. Noit
and Threlkeld. A short time after their arrival,
at the earnest solicitation of the Tamatoa, the king
of Raiatea, Messrs. Williams and Threlkeld remov-
ed to the latter island, for the purpose of commenc-
ing missionary operations among its inhabitants.
The natives of these islands manifested a desire
for instruction, received the missionaries with glad-
ness, rendered them every assistance in the erec-
tion of their houses, and the acquisition of the
language, while they gave encouraging attention
to their instructions, which were not unattended


with the Divine blessing; though with the ma-
jority it was purely a civil and political change;
they renounced their idols, attended Christian in-
struction, because their rulers had done so, and
wished them to follow their example.
Christianity is an expansive system, wherever
its influence is not counteracted by apathy or self-
ishness; it stimulates to regard for the souls of
others, and efforts for the manifestation of the Di-
vine glory in their salvation. This was strikingly
exhibited in Tahiti, where, as soon as a number of
the people became experimentally acquainted with
the blessings of the gospel themselves, they showed
their desire to communicate them to others. In
the few who were under the decisive influence of
the truth, this arose from the motives which the
gospel inspires, but in the multitude it was simply
a desire to communicate the temporal advantages
Christianity imparted, or to follow the example of
their superiors.
The means by which the expence of missionary
operations was defrayed by Christians in England,
together with the essentially missionary character
of Christianity itself, had been frequently made
known to the king and other early professors of
the Christian faith ; and as it appeared that, by the
formation of a voluntary association in aid of the
operations of the society that had sent the gospel
to themselves, they could render the most ef-
fectual aid in diffusing the gospel, it was agreed
to hold a general meeting for the purpose of es-
tablishing and organizing the same. The 13th of
May, 1818, the season of the year at which the
society holds its annual general meeting in London,
Y 3


was fixed for the purpose. On this occasion
the missionaries held their services in commemo-
ration of the formation of the society in England,
and in the afternoon the natives assembled. The
place of worship was soon found too small to con-
tain the numbers who attended, and they adjourned
to a grove of cocoa-nut trees in the neighbourhood
of the chapel, where Mr. Nott delivered a suitable
discourse to an attentive auditory. After he had
closed, Pomare addressed the assembled multitude
in a forcible and appropriate manner, on the sub-
ject he had to propose. Mr. Williams, one of the
missionaries who was present, has thus described
the ting’s address;—
“He began his address in a very judicious
manner, telling them how much of their time was
taken up in worshipping idols, what a deal of work
they did for their false gods; the whole of their
property consumed, their cloth, their pigs, their
fish, their canoes, and all their strength, time, and
property, were spent in the service of an idol, a
piece of wood or a cocoa-nut husk, and even their
own lives, in hundreds, were sacrificed, and this was
all for a false god. He had a subject to propose
to them, which he thought it was right for them to
agree to, and if they did, well; but if not, it was
still good; but he had to propose to them, that
they should collect a little property for assisting
in spreading the gospel. He explained the means
by which we were brought here; it was by giving
money to the captains of ships; for the natives
think that we can go on board of a ship as they
go on board of one another’s canoes, and go where
we like; but the king told them that was not the
case, but a great quantity of money was given to


the captain before they would bring us, and that
was obtained by good people, who wished the
word of God to grow, giving money; all the little
monies was collected to one big money, by which
means they now enjoyed the blessings of the gos-
pel, and he thought it was right that they should
use their endeavours to send the gospel to other
lands who are as they once were. He said, al-
though they had no money, yet they might give
pigs, arrow-root, oil, and cotton, to buy money
with. He then alluded to the people of Africa
collecting elephants’ teeth, or giving a sheep, and
concluded by reading the rules of the society.
One thing rendered his speech peculiarly in-
teresting, he insisted upon its being done freely;
and recommended those who did not wish the
word of God to grow, not to give their property.
He likewise contrasted the greatness of the time
and property which was spent formerly, with the
littleness of what they were now called upon to
give; the one was done for a false god, the other
was for the true God. He added, that those who
gave should by no means despise those who did
not give, and giving must be wholly a voluntary
act. After he had spoken, he proposed that those
who agreed to it should hold up their hands;
when not one, I believe, was down in this large
congregation. It would have warmed the coldest
heart to have beheld so large a congregation of
Tahitians assembled for the purpose of praying for
the spread of the Redeemer’s kingdom, and uniting
to promote it.” The rules of the auxiliary, names
of officers, &c. were afterwards printed, and a copy
placed in every place of worship in T ahiti and E imeo.
Mahine, the chief of Huahine, and many of the
CHAP. X.] TAHITI.


people belonging to the Leeward Islands, were
present at the above meeting; and shortly after
the commencement of the mission in Huahine,
namely, on the 6th of October, a public meeting was
held at Fare, the principal settlement, for the for-
mation of an auxiliary society for that island and
Tabuaemanu, or Sir Chas. Sanders’ Island, which
is politically connected with it. Several of the
chiefs addressed the people, and all appeared
heartily to concur in the proposal.
In the month of September, 1819, a similar so-
ciety was formed in the larger island of Raiatea, of
which the king became the president, and over the
interests of which he watched with much vigilance
until his death. For many years these auxiliaries
were exceedingly popular, and were liberally sup-
ported ; the first proceeds, consisting in cocoa-nut
oil, which they sent over, realized about one thou-
sand eight hundred and sixty pounds. They were
also beneficial in another respect, they led the pious
among the community to consider the obligation
they were under to attempt the conversion of
others, and in some degree familiarized their
minds with this important subject. Many of
their addresses, delivered at the public meetings
held among themselves, are peculiarly figurative,
striking, and instructive, and show the just views
they entertained of the Christian duty of spreading
the gospel, and the strong feelings which they
cherish in reference to their former state, as con-
trasted with the present. At first, the greater
number of the inhabitants were contributors, but
it could not be expected that this would continue ;
the excitement of the meetings, the novelty of the
enterprize, and example, probably, influenced


them, and as soon as the effects of these subsided,
they found other means of disposing of their little
property. The auxiliaries are still supported by
the pious portion of the community, and though
the amount of subscriptions they now furnish is
but inconsiderable, they keep the great duty of
seeking the salvation of others before the people,
and have led to the sending out of a number ol
useful native teachers, who have proved valuable
pioneers to the missionary, and, by the blessing
of the Lord, the means of great good to the inha-
bitants of the islands in which they have been sta-
tioned.
The inhabitants of the islands of Tahoa, Bora-
bora, and Maurua, had renounced the worship of
idols on hearing what had been done at Tahiti
and Eimeo, Huahine and Raiatea; and though no
missionary resided among them, the brethren in
Raiatea visited them as frequently as other duties
would admit, until the year 1819, when Mr. Ors-
mond went down to Borabora, and became the
stated teacher of the people. Thus the whole of
the two clusters, usually called the Society Islands,
were brought under instruction, and became in
profession Christians. It should, however, never
be lost sight of, that the Christianity of many of the
people was merely nominal; multitudes knew little
more of Christianity, at the time they assumed such
profession, than that it enjoined the worship of
one God instead of many, required no human
sacrifices, or other offerings, but the abstaining
from labour every seventh day, and the offering
daily prayers. It was a political change, a na-
tional conversion, a revolution in the civil polity,
rather than in the opinions and feelings of the
CHAP. X.] TAHITI.


people, and this will account for all that ultimately
followed. For some time every thing wore the
most favourable aspect.
It was now deemed of the greatest importance
to promote useful industry, and Mr. Gyles, a gen-
tleman who had resided many years in the West-
Indies, was sent out by the Missionary Society to
instruct the natives in the cultivation and manufac-
ture of sugar. He reached Tahiti in August, 1818,
and shortly after commenced his operations in Eimeo,
In the close of the same year Mr. Hayward left the
islands on a visit to New South Wales, and ulti-
mately to England. Early in the following - year,
the captain of a ship called at Tahiti, and so
prejudiced the mind of the king against the opera-
tions of Mr, Gyles, that they \vere discountenanced ;
and in the course of the summer, at the recom-
mendation of the missionaries, he returned to
England.
Numbers continued to flock to the schools, an
increasing desire was manifested for the scriptures
and other Christian books, and the attendance on
the preaching of the gospel and other means of
spiritual improvement was regular and almost
universal. The king still took the lead, and in
some respects his zeal was rather extravagant, and
the exhibition of it somewhat ludicrous, though
the motive was commendable. He had heard of
the cathedrals of England and Rome and other
places, as well as of the extent and splendour of the
temple at Jerusalem, and determined on the erec-
tion of a national temple for Tahiti. Many large
national maraes had been built at a great cost of
labour and human life; and as all parties felt that,
even in regard to the present life, the Christian


religion was so superior to that which they had
abandoned, it was resolved that the building for
Christian worship should surpass, in dimensions at
least, every building heretofore erected in the is-
lands, It was built at Papaoa, in Pare, the he-
reditary district of the reigning family; and, ac-
cording to the native inode of proceeding in erec-
tions of the kind, the work was apportioned among
the several chiefs of Tahiti and Eimeo. The
building was 712 feet long, and fifty-four feet wide.
The centre was supported by thirty-six massy
wooden pillars of the bread-fruit tree. The build-
ing was round at the ends, the sides or walls were
boarded from the top to the bottom; the lower
end of the rafters on which the roof was laid
being supported by 280 smaller wooden pillars.
There were 133 windows with sliding shutters,
and twenty-nine doors. In describing its interior,
the missionaries observe, there are three square
pulpits, about 260 feet apart from each other, and
the extreme ones about 100 feet from the ends of
the house. It is filled with forms or benches,
except an area before each pulpit, and the floor
spread over with dry grass. The rafters are co-
vered with a fine kind of fringed matting, which is
bound on with cords of various colours in a very
neat manner; and the ends of the matting are left
hanging down, give the interior of the roof a
singular and neat appearance. The whole build-
ing is surrounded with a very strong fence of wood,
and the space between it and the building is filled
with small stones and fragments of coral.
In the month of May, 1819, the king, chiefs,
and people, assembled at Papaoa for the purpose
of holding the annual meeting of their Missionary


Society, which they held on the 10th of the month.
The people, who had come from different parts of
the island, formed a temporary encampment in
the place, which, including habitations erected on
both sides of the king’s dwelling, extended nearly
four miles along the beach.
In a letter, dated May 18, 1819, the missionaries,
who had come together to attend the missionary
meeting, having the services connected with the
preliminary meeting, in which the king wrote
down the amount of donations and subscriptions,
give the following account of their further pro-
ceedings at this period :
“ Tuesday, the 11th, was the day appointed for
opening the Royal Mission Chapel. About eleven
o’clock we repaired to the chapel, where the
people, neatly dressed in their best native apparel,
had already assembled.” The missionaries con-
tinue —“ We took our stations according to ap-
pointment ; brother Platt in the west pulpit, bro-
ther Darling in the centre, and brother Crook in
the east. The service commenced by Mr. Bourne
giving out, from the central pulpit, a suitable
hymn, which the united congregations rose and
joined in singing. Each preacher then read Luke
xiv. and prayed. The sermons commenced about
the same time. Brother Darling’s text was, “ 1
will make them joyful in my house of prayer,” &c.
Isa. Ivi. 7; brother Platt’s text, “ And yet there is
room,” Luke xiv. 22; and brother Crook’s, “ lit
all places where I record my name, I will come
unto thee and I will bless thee,” Exod. xx. 24.
The sermons being ended much about the same
time, all the congregation sung again, and the
whole was concluded with prayer. The scene was


striking beyond description ; no confusion ensued
from three speakers preaching at once in the same
house, they being at such a great distance from
each other. The congregations around each pul-
pit were distinct. We suppose the number of
hearers to have been between five and six thousand.
Every thing exceeded our most sanguine expec-
tations. Many apprehensions were entertained from
bringing so many parties together, who formerly had
ever been at variance. Pomare had been informed
that some people would come with guns, and fire
in upon them from the windows ; and he had taken
the precaution to place two principal persons on
whom he could depend, at each door and window;
but every thing was peaceable, and not the least
disturbance occurred. ' Surely/ said some, ‘ there
will be no war; for all the people have left their
arms at home, and have brought the old and de-
crepid, the children, the lame, and the blind ! ’ a
thing that was never done in any of their great
meetings before. We met together in the after-
noon to attend to the business of the society; and
departed to our lodgings much gratified, and praising
God for what we had seen and heard.”
The 12th, was appropriated to public services,
in connexion with the annual meeting of the
Missionary Society, when sermons were preached
by three of the missionaries, to numerous congre-
gations, in the large building which they had
opened on the preceding day.
The transactions of the next day, though of a
political character, were among the most impor-
tant, so far as the people themselves were con-
cerned, of any they had engaged in, since their re-
ception of Christianity. All their former civil usages
z


were so interwoven with their idolatry, that, when
the latter was abolished, the former were entirely
broken up, and both the rulers and the people
were at a loss how to act in many of their civil
transactions. They had frequently requested in-
structions from the missionaries, but the latter had
always manifested great unwillingness to interfere
in the political affairs of the people, excepting,
occasionally, when they had acted as mediators,
or given their advice to those who sought it.
Writing on this subject, under date of July 2,
1817, they thus refer to their own views and con-
duct, and the circumstances of the people. “ Such
a complete revolution having taken place now
through the islands, the king, chiefs, and people
from all quarters, apply to us for advice and direc-
tion, not only in regard to moral and religious,
but also civil and political affairs of every de-
scription. The religious and political systems
of the islanders having been blended together in
every affair of life, the change affects every custom
and usage. During the many years of our resi-
dence in these islands we most carefully avoided
meddling with their civil and political affairs,
except in a few instances where we endeavoured to
promote peace between contending parties. At
present, however, it appears almost impossible for us
in every respect to follow the same line of conduct.
We have told the king and chiefs, that, being
strangers, and having come to their country as
teachers of the word of the true God, and of the way
of salvation by Jesus Christ, we will have nothing
further to do with their civil affairs than to give
them good advice, and with that view several
letters have passed between us and the king. We


have advised him to call a general meeting of all
the principal chiefs, and with their assistance and
approbation, adopt such laws and regulations as
would tend to the good of the community and the
stability of the government; and that in these things,
if he desired it, we would give him the best advice
in our power, and inform him of what is contained
in the word of God, and also of the laws and
customs of our own country, and other civilized
nations. The king having been used to arbitrary
proceedings, and wishing to be exclusively at the
head of every thing, did not seem to approve of
the proposal of a general assembly of chiefs ; how-
ever, he expressed a great desire that might be
informed of proper laws and regulations.”
The subject was frequently brought under the
notice of the king and chiefs, in consequence of
the embarrassment in which many of the petty
chiefs were placed in their respective districts ; and,
assisted by Mr. Nott, and the rest of the mis-
sionaries/a code of law was prepared, few in
number and simple in their nature, but apparently
suited to the circumstances of the people. It was
proposed to bring them publicly under the notice
of the people, at the present general convocation.
The 13th of May, being Thursday, was the day
appointed for promulgating the laws. The mis-
sionaries observe, “ About noon we all assembled
in the centre of the Royal Mission Chapel. The
king requested brother Crook to open the business
of the day. He ascended the pulpit, and Pom are
followed. After singing, reading the scriptures,
and praver, the king stood up, and looked upon the
thousands of his subjects on his right hand and on
his left. Addressing himself to Tati, the pious chief


of the southern part of the island, he said, ‘ Tati,
what is your desire P what can I do for you ? ’
Tati, who sat nearly opposite the pulpit, arose and
said, ‘ Those are what we want, the papers you
hold in your hand—the laws; give them to us,
that we may have them in our hands, that we may
regard them, and do what is right.’—The king
then addressed himself to Utami, the good chief of
the Teoropaa, and, in an affectionate manner, said,
‘ Utami, and what is your desire ?’ He replied,
‘ One thing only is desired by us all, that which
Tati has expressed—the laws, which you hold in
your hand.’ The king then addressed Arahu, the
chief of Eimeo, and Veve, the chief of Taiarabu,
nearly in the same manner, and they replied as
the others had done. Pomare then proceeded to
read and comment upon the laws respecting mur-
der, theft, trespass, stolen property, lost property,
sabbath-breaking, rebellion, marriage, adultery,
the judges, court-houses, &c. in eighteen articles.
After reading and explaining the several articles, he
asked the chiefs if they approved of them. They
replied aloud, ‘We agree to them; we heartily
agree to them.’ The king then addressed the
people, and desired them, if they approved of the
laws, to signify the same by lifting up their right
hands. This was unanimously done, with a re-
markable rushing noise, owing to the thousands of
arms being lifted at once. When Pomare came
to the article on rebellion, stirring up war, &c. he
seemed inclined to pass it over, but after a while
proceeded. At the conclusion of that article,
Tati was not contented with signifying his appro-
bation in the usual way only, but standing up,
he called in a spirited manner to his people to lift


up their hands again, even both hands, he setting
the example, which w r as universally followed.
Thus all the articles were passed and approved.
Brother Henry concluded the meeting with a short
address, prayer, and blessing. This interesting
scene may be better conceived of than described:
to see a king giving laws to his people, with an
express regard to the authority of the word of God,
and a people receiving the same with such uni-
versal satisfaction, was a subject very affecting
to us all.”
For some time after the general profession of
Christianity, no native was baptized, but as there
were several whom the missionaries regarded as
proper subjects for that ordinance, it had been dis-
pensed unto them, and during the present general
assembly of the people, it was deemed proper to
administer it to Pomare, who had been one of the
earliest applicants. The second sabbath in May
was fixed for this purpose ; and the ceremony is
thus described by the missionaries in the account
of their general proceedings.
“On sabbath-day, the 16th inst., the congre-
gations were again assembled in the chapel royal.
The people were not so numerous as before;
owing to their having been so long from home,
and the scarcity of food, many had returned.
However, we had still between four and five thou-
sand hearers. Brother Wilson occupied the east
pulpit, brother Henry the west, and brother
Bicknell the middle. They all preached from the
same subject—the commission of our Lord to his
disciples, to disciple and baptize all nations. Matt,
xxviii. 18—20. The sermons being ended, we all
closed around the king, he being seated on the
z 3


occasion in the centre, near the middle pulpit.
Brother Bourne commenced by giving out a hymn,
which was sung by the congregation. Brother
Bicknell engaged in prayer, which being ended,
the king stood up. Brother Bicknell stood on the
steps of the pulpit, and taking the water from the
basin, held by brother Henry, poured it on his
head, baptizing him in the name of the Father,
Son, and Holy Ghost. Pomare was observed to
lift up his eyes to heaven, and move his lips with
an indistinct sound. The sight was very moving,
especially to our elder brethren, who had been
watching over him for so many years. Brother
Bicknell addressed the king with firmness, yet not
without a degree of tremour, entreating him to walk
worthy of his high profession in the conspicuous
situation he holds before the eyes of men, angels,
and God himself. Brother Henry addressed the
people, exhorting them to follow the ex<ample of
their king, and to give themselves up to the Lord.
Another hymn was sung, and brother Wilson
concluded the whole with prayer. Pomare shook
hands affectionately with all the missionaries, they
being stationed, by his own desire, at his right and
left hand. After the ceremony the king returned
to his camp. The brethren, after taking some re-
freshment, assembled for divine worship among
themselves; brother Platt conducted the service,
and preached from John xiv. 15, ‘lf ye love me,
keep my commandments.’ Toward evening we
held our last sendee with the natives in the Mission
Chapel. The king sat in his usual place at the
east end. Brother Bourne preached in the east
pulpit, from Acts ii. 38, * Repent, and be bap-
tized* &c.brother Crook in the middle, from


Luke iii. 10, * Bring forth fruits meet for repen-
tance, &c.and brother Darling, in the west
pulpit, from Acts viii. 36, 37, ‘ See, here is water,
what doth hinder me to be baptized, &c.’
“On monday, the 17th inst., all the brethren
and sisters met at Wilks’s harbour, and celebrated
the Saviour’s dying love with much affection and
Christian union. The afternoon was spent in
arranging the affairs of the society, drawing up
rules for the baptized, &c. A considerable number
of the natives of Tahiti and Eimeo, including
several chiefs, have been baptized. After which
the brethren returned to their respective stations,
with renewed vigour, to press forward in the work
of the Lord.”
In a subsequent letter, Mr. Darling, speaking of
the progress of the good work in Tahiti and Eimeo,
since the above period, observes, “ A number of
people have been baptized at each station in the
windward division of the mission. We have baptized
twenty-two adults and seventeen children on this
island, and there are many more whom we intend
to baptize soon. On examining those whom we
have baptized, we were delighted and astonished at
the answers which they gave to our questions. All
expressed a deep sorrow for sin, and seemed to be
sensible of it in their own hearts; they also pro-
fessed to trust alone in the Lord Jesus Christ for
salvation ; and to desire to live to the glory of God
upon earth, that they might live for ever with him
in heaven.
Those who have been baptized on this island,
have been formed into a church, and have received
the Lord's supper. Oh 1 how it delighted our
hearts to behold them sitting down with us,
CHAP. X.] TAHITI.


commemorating the dying love of our dear Re-
deemer. We cannot find language to express our
feelings, especially when we reflect upon what these
people were, and how long they refused the gospel
which was preached unto them ! To God be the
glory ! Not unto us, O Lord, not unto us ! ’
Such was the cheering and apparently pros-
perous state of this mission in the year 1819. In
the Leeward or Society Islands, the aspect of
things was scarcely less encouraging, the schools
were regularly attended, the places of worship
well filled, and the people desirous apparently to
engage with vigour in sending the gospel to others.
Several remarkable instances of the powerful effect
of the word of God on the consciences of the people
occurred at this period, among which the following
may he mentioned : “ One sabbath morning Mr!
Nott had been preaching from the words, f Let
him that stole, steal no more.* He had refuted
the idea they formerly held, that theft was no
crime, but rather an act of merit, if committed
with dexterity; and had shown that the circum-
stance of detection or escape did not alter the
moral quality of the act in the sight of God ; that
restitution ought to be made for past robberies, as
well as honesty practised for the future. The
next morning he saw a number of natives sitting
on the ground in the front of his dwelling. Their
appearance was rather singular, and the unseason-
able time of their assembling led him to inquire
the cause. They answered, *We have not been
able to sleep all night; we were in the chapel
yesterday; we thought, when we were pagans,
that it was right to steal when we could do it
without being found out. Hiro, the god of thieves.
MISSIONARY RECORDS. [cHAP. X.


used to assist us. But we heard what you said
yesterday from the word of God, that Jehovah had
commanded that we should not steal. We have
been thieves, and all these things that we have
brought with us are stolen goods/ One then
lifted up an axe, another a hatchet or a chisel,
and exclaimed, ‘ I stole this from the carpenter of
such a ship,’ naming the vessel, &c. Others held
up a wooden howl, or a saw, or a knife; and, in-
deed, almost every kind of moveable property was
brought and exhibited, with confessions of its hav-
ing been stolen. Mr. Nott said, ‘What have you
brought them to me for? I do not want them/
(The sentiment had often been circulated, that the
receiver of stolen goods was as bad as the thief.)
‘ You had better take them home, and, if you
have stolen any from your own countrymen, re-
turn them ; and when the ships come again from
which any of the goods have been stolen, take
them back, together with a present to the captain
or the carpenter, expressive of your desire to make
restitution.’ They all said, ‘ Oh, no, we cannot
take them hack; we have had no peace ever since
we heard it was displeasing to God, and we shall
have no peace so long as they remain in our
dwellings ; we wish you to take them, and give
them back to the owners whenever they come.’
Such was the power of conscience, that although
they were tools which the natives value even more
highly than gold, and although Mr. Nott re-
quested them to take them back, he could not
persuade one of them to do so ; they left them all
with him, to be returned to their owners.”
At the first anniversary of the Auxiliary at
Huahine, held in May of this year, the amount of
261
CHAP. X.] TAHITI.


contributions was 3,985 measures of cocoa-nut oil,
98 hogs, and 95 measures of arrow-root. In the
month of September, fifteen of the natives were
baptized ; and in October an edition of 2000
copies of the gospel by Matthew were issued from the
press. Among the applicants for copies of the scrip-
tures, were several blind persons, who were desirous
to possess copies, for the benefit of having them
read to them by others.
It is a most pleasing fact, that in the South-Sea
Islands, a number of blind persons have not only
had their understanding enlightened by the pre-
ceptive parts of scripture truth, but, that to many
it has proved the “ light of life.” Some have died,
and we have reason to believe have entered those
realms of day, where night and darkness are
unknown. One remarkable instance was, in the
case of Hiro. He was the priest of one of the
principal temples of Parea, in the lesser peninsula
of the island of Huahine. He was a priest of
Hiro, the god of plunderers, and in perfect accor-
dance with the spirit of his office, was the captain
or leader of a band of robbers, who spread terror
through the surrounding country. He was one of
the most determined opposers of Christianity in
Huahine, reproaching its adherents, and defying
the power of its Author. He was in the prime and
vigour of manhood, being at the time between
thirty and forty years of age. When the number of
Christians increased in his neighbourhood, and the
sabbath-day was first publicly observed, in order to
show his utter contempt of Christian institutions,
he determined to profane that day, “ in defiance of
Jehovah.” For this purpose he repaired to the
grounds in the neighbourhood of the temple, and


engaged in erecting a fence but, while thus em-
ployed, the career of his impiety was suddenly
arrested. The twig of a tree came in contact with
his eyes, almost instant blindness followed, and he
was led home by his affrighted companions, who
considered it a visitation from the Almighty.
His spirit was subdued, he subsequently became a
humble, and we trust sincere disciple of that blessed
Redeemer whom he had persecuted. He died
trusting in the merits of Christ for acceptance with
God the Father. The history of the conversion
of the great apostle of the gentiles, interested him
much, and though the scales on his bodily eyes
were not removed —but blindness continued till his
death —such was the impression which analogy
of circumstances produced, that, when he presented
himself for baptism, he desired to be called Paul.
Messrs Threlkeld, Williams, and Orsmond, give
the following account of the mission in Raiatea at
the close of 1819: “ Since the formation of the
mission on Raiatea, we have had to mingle tears
of regret with our rejoicings ;* and it is with sorrow
that we view the prevailing influence of sin over
multitudes of the natives. While, therefore, vye
admire the astonishing effects of Divine power in
constraining the natives to abolish their cruel and
sanguinary rites, we cannot but weep over those
who are not only unacquainted with repentance
unto life, but who evince a total unconcern about
the salvation of their souls.
« After great labour, we have obtained comfort-
able dwellings. Several also of the natives have
* Mrs. Orsmond had been removed by death in the
month of January this year.
263
CHAP. X.] TAHITI.


built neat dwelling-houses, and plastered them
inside and out. We hope soon to make them
utterly ashamed of their former practice of sleeping
together as a flock of sheep ; and we are earnestly
desirous of introducing among them those habits
which will contribute to their temporal comfort and
raise them to the blessings of domestic life.
“A little time since, the king and chiefs assem-
bled, of their own accord, to advise as to the best
means to be adopted for the suppression of those
vices to which the people were most addicted.
The happiest results have followed. The people
call loudly for books, and to obtain them they
spare no pains. Many have made considerable
progress in learning —can repeat the multiplication-
table off hand, work the most difficult long-division
sums, and sums in reduction, without a mistake.
Thus they not only evince towards their teachers
the most affectionate attachment, hut encourage
them to greater diligence, and invite them to press
forward in their work.
“ We are soon to have a new chapel built, which
the natives say shall be plastered within and without,
and floored. Our prospects of usefulness are
pleasing ; and, though our difficulties are many, we
believe we ‘shall reap, if we faint not.’ God has
not only enabled us to tell of Jesus in the Tahitian
language, but he has conducted us into a field
‘ ready for harvest,’ and which calls for the most
vigorous exertions. Pray for us, that we may
‘ hold fast the profession of our faith steadfast unto
the end’—that our ‘garments may be unspotted
from the world,’ and that we may go down to the
grave with ‘a conscience void of offence, both
towards God and towards man.’


“ The islands adjacent present an extensive
field for usefulness, and occupy part of our time
and labours. On Tahaa we opened a new chapel
a short time ago, and in the largest and most popu-
lous district, called Paateo, there is a large neat-
made place of worship nearly finished. We need
more time, more strength, and more zeal, for the
natives all around are calling for our assistance.
“ Our people seemed determined not to be behind
their neighbours; and after repeated solicitations
from them, we have agreed to further their wishes
in forming a Missionary Society.
“We were anxious that they should take the
lead, lest they should ultimately say that the gospel
is a tax on their benevolence ; the chapel was made
doubly large, against the day appointed for the
meeting, and some who from disease had not seen
the light of the sun for years, came forth. The
place of worship was soon crowded to excess ; and
one of the natives exclaimed, ‘ This is a day of
rising from the dead. See, here are the sick, the
lame, and the blind all coming out to-day.’ Every
person appeared in the best clothes he could obtain,
and good order pervaded the whole ; but the people
soon exclaimed, ‘ Take out the sides of the house,
that we may see our teachers, and hear their voice/
Their request was immediately complied with;
and as soon as all were comfortably seated, brother
Williams gave out a suitable hymn, and engaged
in prayer. It was delightful to hear two thousand
natives singing the praises of the Lamb of God,
and to see the expressions of joy that beamed in
their countenances.
"On the 12th of May, 1820 a code of laws
was unanimously and publicly adopted in Raiatea,
2 a


and recognized as the basis of public justice by the
chiefs and people of Tahaa, Borabora and Maupiti.
The substance of the Raiatean laws was copied from
those enacted by the government of Tahiti, during
the preceding year. They extended to twenty-five
articles, embodying several most valuable enact-
ments omitted by the Tahitian code. The most
important of these was the trial by jury. This was
certainly the greatest civil blessing the inhabitants
of the Pacific had yet received; and future gene-
rations will cherish, with gratitude, the memory of
the missionaries of Raiatea, at whose recommen-
dation, and with whose advice it was established
by law in these islands; a code of laws similar in
principle, but more ample in its details, was es-
tablished by the chiefs and people of Huahine,
at a public meeting held in the month of May,
1822. These have been modified and enlarged
at the successive meetings of the chiefs, and have
proved the means of preventing many disorders
in society, that would otherwise have prevailed.


CHAPTER XI.
General state of the Windward Missions.—Com-
mencement of a Mission in Borabora.—Forma-
tion of a Christian Church in Huahine. —
Destruction of the Idols in Raivavai. — Profes-
sion of Christianity by the Inhabitants.—Voyage
and Wreck of the Austral Chief—lntroduction
of the Gospel to Rurutu.—Letter from the Native
Teachers.—Visit of a Deputation from the Mis-
sionary Society.—Death of Pomare.—Voyage
to the Sandwich Islands.-Commencement of a
Mission in Tahaa.—Public Meeting on New
Year’s Day, 1824, at Raiatea. —South Sea
Academy established. — Testimony of the Depu-
tation after leaving the Islands. Progress of
the Missions in 1825. —Arrival of Messrs.
Pitman and Pritchard.—Voyage of Mr. Crook
to the Marquesas. —Subsequent Efforts to in-
troduce the Gospel among the Inhabitants.
The general attention to the means of religious
instruction was widely extended, and the external
circumstances of the several missionary stations
were remarkably prosperous during the year 1820.
At Matavia, a Christian church was formed; and on
the first sabbath in January, twenty-two individuals
united in Christian fellowship. In the month of
July, 1819, Mr. Nott had joined Mr. Wilson at
the station for the purpose of securing the aid of
Pomare in the revision of those portions of the
scriptures which he had translated, and continued
CHAP. Xl.] TAHITI.


aiding in the general work of the mission. At Wilks’
Harbour, on the borders of Pare, the station occu-
pied by Mr. Crook, fifty men and nineteen women
were regular communicants; three hundred chil-
dren were daily instructed in the school, and at
times two hundred adults. At Burder’s Point, is
the large district of Attehuru, the station occupied
by Messrs, Darling and Bourne. The Christian
church here contained ten members, and the daily
school one hundred children. A printing press
was established at this station, and an edition of
nearly three thousand copies of the gospel by Mat-
thew was printed at this station, and distributed
among the inhabitants of Tahiti and Eimeo. At
Papara, where Messrs. Bicknell and Tessier pur-
sued their labours, the school under the care of the
latter, contained between two hundred and three
hundred scholars ; a large number, at most of
the stations, had been baptized, and twenty-seven
united in Christian fellowship. This was the
pleasing state of the Papara station in May; but in
the month of July Mr. Tessier was rather suddenly
removed from the scene of his labour to his rest
and his reward. He was an eminently holy man,
and his death was peaceful and happy ; Mr. Bick-
nell officiated at his interment, and at the time felt
indisposed, returned, and after a short illness
followed his fellow-labourer to the mansions of
blessedness on the 7th of August in the same year.
He was one of the earliest, if not the first mis-
sionary engaged by the society for this mission,
and bore in the hour of his departure a honourable
testimony in favour of the gospel of Jesus.
In Eimeo the schools were well attended, a
Christian church had been formed, which numbered


in the early part of the year sixty-five commu-
nicants.
In the Leeward, or Society Islands, the work
was scarcely less prosperous; a number of the
inhabitants of Tahaa, Borabora, and occasionally
some from Maupiti, came to the Raiatea for in-
struction ; and the missionaries observe that, though
the inhabitants of the station did not exceed one
thousand, their congregation frequently amounted
to one thousand four hundred, or one thousand
eight hundred persons; great attention was also
given to the education of the children, and the
promotion of industrious habits among the people,
by teaching them a number of useful mechanical
arts, and encouraging them to erect more comfort-
able dwellings. Speaking of the occupation of the
natives, the missionaries observe, “they are em-
ployed in useful arts, some sawing boards, some
carpentering, some boat building, some as black-
smiths, some as plasterers, &c. In the month of
November, this year, Mr. Orsmond removed to
Borabora, comparatively a populous and fertile
island, and commenced a distinct mission among
its inhabitants.
Seldom has the mission in the island of Huahine
appeared more flourishing than during the year
now under review. The people, with commendable
zeal, had engaged in the erection of a large place
of worship, the walls of which were plastered, and
the floor boarded, while the interior was fitted up
with pews and benches, and opened for public
worship on the 3rd of May, when nearly one
thousand six hundred persons were present; the
average attendance on the sabbath was at this lime
between one thousand and one thousand four
2 a 3


hundred. The number of scholars in the school at the
same time being about four hundred and fifty. In
the early part of this year it was also the privilege
of the missionaries here to witness the formation
of a Christian church, the first established in the Lee-
ward or Society Islands. The mode of practice on
these occasions was similar in all the stations, and
the substance of a detailed account of their proceed-
ings in this important and delightful part of their
sacred duties will not be uninteresting. Mr. Ellis,
in his work on the islands, Polynesian Researches,
speaking of the views of the nature of this fellow-
ship, observes:—“ A Christian church we considered
to be a society of faithful and holy men, voluntarily
associated for the purposes of public worship,
mutual edification, the participation of the Lord’s
supper, and the propagation of Christianity: the
Lord Jesus Christ was regarded as its spiritual
head ; and only such as had given themselves unto
the Redeemer, and were spiritually united to him,
members. These were our general views. In
England we had belonged to different denomina-
tions, and however adapted the peculiarities in
discipline, of those communions might appear to
the circumstances of British Christians, we did not
deem it expedient to take any one altogether for
our model. It appeared to all more desirable, in
the existing state of the people, to divest the
churches we might be honoured of God to plant
among the gentiles, of every thing complicated or
artificial, that they might be established in the
purest simplicity of form, and, as far as possible,
according to the directions of the scriptures.
‘‘General good, however, was our object; and
that line of procedure, which, as a whole, we could


unitedly pursue, in closest accordance with scrip-
lure, and at the same time with greatest advantage
to the people, was more desired by every one, than
any peculiar views on minor points. There was
no agreement previously entered into among the
missionaries, but those of each station were left,
with the people around who might be brought to
a reception of the truth, to assume for themselves
such form of constitution and discipline, as should,
in their views, be most accordant with the word of
God ; and yet I am not aware, that in any material
point there is the smallest difference among them.
« Those who had been baptized, now desiring to
be more particularly informed how they were to
observe the injunction of the Lord, to commemorate
his death, we proposed to devote one afternoon
every week to the instruction of such as desired to
be united in church fellowship. Fifteen individuals
attended the first meeting, and were afterwards
joined by others. We met them regularly, and
endeavoured to instruct them as fully as possible
in the nature, design, and scriptural constitution
of church-fellowship, the discipline to be main-
tained, and the advantages to be anticipated.
“ Next to the personal piety, which in church-
members is considered indispensable, it appeared
most important to impress the minds of the people
with the distinctness of a Christian church from any
political, civil, or other merely human institution.
“ The duties which those who united in church-
fellowship were required to perform towards each
other, towards those desirous of uniting with them,
and to the careless or irreligious, were also fre-
quently brought under their notice, together with
the paramount duty of every Christian to endeavour
CHAP. Xl.] TAHITI.


to propagate Christianity, that each church might
become a kind of nursery, from which other
churches might be planted in the extensive wilder-
ness of paganism around.
Next to this, the institution, nature, design,
administration, and uses of the Lord's supper, were
familiarly explained, to enable them to understand,
as far as possible, the engagement into which they
were desirous to enter, and the observances con-
nected therewith.
“ Having been for some months engaged weekly
in imparting this kind of instruction to those who
had expressed their desire to receive the ordinance
of the Lord's supper, the month of May was selected
for forming the church. Sixteen individuals, who
in the judgment of charity we had every reason to
believe were sincere Christians, then met us, and,
after imploring the blessing of the great Head of
the church, offering a suitable address, and receiving
their declaration of faith in Christ, and desire to
enjoy the privileges of church-fellowship, a volun-
tary association was formed, the right-hand of fellow-
ship was given, and they recognized each other as
members of the first church of Christ in Huahine.
“We did not present any creed or articles of
faith for their subscription on this occasion. Sensi-
ble of the insufficiency of all mere human writings,
however excellent, to control the opinions of men,
we thought it best to dispense with them, lest the
bare assent, or subscription to certain articles of
faith, or doctrines of truth, should be substituted,
as grounds of confidence, for an experience of the
influence of those doctrines on the heart. Their
names only were entered in a book provided by
the missionaries, and called the church-book.


This little meeting was held in the chapel at Fare,
on Friday evening, the sth of May, 1820.”
On the following sabbath. May 7, an unusual
number attended the large place of worship. Mr,
Davis preached in the forenoon from Luke xxii. 19.
In front of the pulpit a neat table covered with
white native cloth was fixed, upon which the sacra-
mental vessels were placed. Wheaten bread was
an article of diet we did not very often obtain our-
selves, and which the people seldom tasted; we
should have preferred it for this ordinance, yet, as
we could not, from the irregularity and uncertainty
of our supplies, expect always to have it, we deemed
it better to employ an article of food as nearly
resembling it as possible, and which was at all
times procurable; and we felt no hesitation in
using, on this occasion, the roasted, or baked bread-
fruit, pieces of which w r ere placed on the proper
vessel. Wine we were also thankful to possess for
this purpose; and although we have sometimes been
apprehensive that we might be under the necessity
of substituting the juice of the cocoa-nut, for that
of the grape, or discontinuing the observance of
this ordinance, (to which latter painful alternative
some of our brethren have been reduced,) we have
been providentially favoured with a sufficiency.
Mr. Davies, the senior missionary, or pastor of
the church, took his station between the pulpit and
the communion-table ; Mr. Barflf at one end of the
table, and I at the other. When the communicants
had seated themselves in a line in front, we sang a
hymn. The words of institution, namely, passages
of scripture, containing the directions for the obser-
vances of this hallowed festival, &c. were read,
a blessing implored, and the bread, which was then


broken, handed to each individual; the wine was
then poured into the cup, a blessing again sought,
when the wine was handed to the communicants.
After this another hymn was sung, a short prayer
offered, and the service closed.
The season was one of peculiar spiritual enjoy-
ment, especially to the senior missionary, who had
toiled so many years among the people without the
least prospect of ever beholding the delightful scene
then presented. Some who thus united, for the
first time, in showing forth the Lord’s death, have
departed, there is every reason to believe, to be
with Christ, which is far better; others of them have
walked in Christian fellowship now for fifteen years,
striving to adorn the doctrine of God their Saviour
in all things. Tn October, this year, Mr. Davies
removed to Papara, to take charge of the important
station vacant by the death of Messrs. Bicknell
and Tassier.
The tidings of the remarkable change in Tahiti
had already extended to islands situated at a dis-
tance far beyond those to which the Missionaries
had access, chiefly among the low coral islands to
the east, but in other directions also. In the end
of 1819, Pomare visited Raivavai, or High Island,
situated between three and four hundred miles to
the south of Tahiti: the inhabitants acknowledged
his authority and placed themselves under his
government. Here he left a native of the name
of Para, as a sort of political agent, who also taught
the people to read. Early in 1821, the natives of
this island also renounced the worship of the false
gods. Mr. S. Henry, son of one of the mission-
aries, commanding a brig belonging to Pomare,
visited the island on his voyage from New South


Wales. It was the sabbath, and he landed as the
people were assembling for worship. Eight hun-
dred and forty-eight persons attended, seven hun-
dred of whom entered the place, the remainder
continuing round the doors. “ Each individual, on
entering the church, kneeled down and uttered a
short prayer.” In reference to their deportment,
capt. Henry observes, in his letter to the mission-
aries, “ The very quiet, devout, and orderly man-
ner in which they conducted themselves, not only in
church, but during the sabbath, excited my highest
admiration.” The open renunciation of idolatry,
and the general profession of Christianity, were
effected at a public festival which occurred about
four months prior to capt. Henry’s visit; all the
inhabitants, with the exception of about twenty-five
persons, had declared themselves desirous of Chris-
tian instruction, and every one in the island had
renounced idolatry. Most of their former objects
of worship were removed from the temples, and
some of those mutilated stone figures were actually
converted into seats, or benches, at the doors of the
building erected for public worship. In 1822,
suitable teachers from Eimeo were stationed in this
island ; these have shown the utmost diligence and
fidelity in promoting the temporal and spiritual
improvement of the people. In 1829, when they
were visited, it was found that a contagious epi-
demic, a kind of malignant fever, had destroyed a
great portion of the inhabitants. This disease was
originally brought from Tabuai, an adjacent island,
and for a considerable time after it appeared, there
were from ten to fifteen deaths daily. During the
first stages of the progress of the disease, whole
families, from attending the sick, were attacked
CHAP. Xl.] TAHITI.


simultaneously with the dreadful complaint, and
often buried in one common grave. Those who
visited them after this calamity, observe, *•' Ndver
have we witnessed a more melancholy spectacle;
houses are left without inhabitants, land without
owners, and that which was formerly cultivated has
now become desolate.” The teachers first sent have
returned to Eimeo, and the station is at present
under the care of Patii, the converted priest of
Eimeo, who was among the first publicly to burn
his idols.
In the month of March, a large canoe from
Rurutu, one of the Austral islands, about three
hundred miles to the south of Tahiti, drifted past
several of the Society Islands, and at length struck
upon the reef around Maupiti, the most western
of the group. On board this canoe was a chief of
the above island, and a number of his people ; they
had been some weeks at sea, and were in a state
of great exhaustion when they were taken on shore ;
as they recovered they proceeded to Borabora, and
finally to Raiatea, where they became pupils in
tne school, and attended the other means of in-
struction. In the month of July, the Hope, which
had arrived at Tahiti in the previous April, called
at Raiatea, on her way to England, with about
eighty tons of oil on board, the subscriptions of the
native Christians to the Missionary Society. As
the chief was exceedingly anxious to return, and
to take native teachers to his country, and a pas-
sage was kindly granted by the captain of the
Hope, they left Raiatea on the 4th of July, fol-
lowed by much affection and many prayers, and
reached Rurutu on the 7th. The prayers offered
on their behalf were answered; they were not only


preserved, but honoured to be the instruments of
turning the inhabitants of the island from the dumb
idols to the worship of the living God. The native
teachers were truly devoted men, and God has re-
markably blessed their labours. A church was sub-
sequently gathered, and many have remained stedfast
in their attachment to the truth and holiness of the
gospel; and, under God, few stations present a more
cheering and satisfactory result of missionary
efforts than the island of Rurutu. A large boat
belonging to Mr. Throlkeld was taken down to
Rurutu, by the Hope, and in little more than a
month after their departure, the boat returned
laden with the renounced idols of Rurutu. The
following is an account of the introduction of the
gospel to this island, as contained in a letter from
the two native teachers, addressed to the mission-
aries in Raiatea, it is dated July 13, 1821 :
<< May you two have peace through God in your
residence at Raiatea. We think God has heard
your prayers, because we received no ill treatment
on board the ship, and because we are both now
alive at Rurutu. Behold ! they have given to us
this land, not because we asked it, but because of
their own hatred to the evil spirit. Pray earnestly
to God that we may have a permanent residence
at Rurutu, whilst we are teaching them their letters,
and to know the name of the Son of God, and
showing them the evil of their ways. On the Bth
of July the meeting of the chiefs and king was
held, when Auura spake thus to the chiefs and
king: ‘ Friends, this is my desire, and therefore
am 1 come to ibis land, that you may know the
name of the Son of God, and the work of the Holy
Spirit, in enlightening our hearts, and the mercy
2 B


of God towards us. This is my desire, let the evil
spirit be this instant cast into the fire. Is it
agreeable to you kings and chiefs; shall we burn
the evil spirit even now; shall we overthrow his
kingdom ? Do not any more let us worship him;
never more let us implore him; let him have no
more reign in our hearts. Let the government of
these little lands become Jehovah’s, and his alone,
then my heart will rejoice through you. Behold !
you thought I had been eaten up in the depths of
the sea by the evil spirit; but lam not destroyed
by him: he is the great foundation of all deceit.
I did not know that God would guide me to that
land (Raiatea) where the teachers are; there the
word of God flourishes and grows, and behold, God
has guided me back again. Will it be agreeable
to you that we should all assemble together at one
place, and all eat together ?’
'•The king and chiefs answered thus, 'lt is
perfectly agreeable to us, we will receive and hold
fast the word of life. We are pleased because of
your saying. Burn the evil spirits in the fire. Let
every thing made by our hands (as a god) be
charred in the fire. Behold, you say, O Auura,
that we have spirits or souls, we never knew that
man possessed a spirit—no ; never, never/
" Auura then answered thus: ' I have one more
word to say to you. These two men (the teachers)
are chosen by the church at Raiatea. God caused
the thought to grow in the hearts of the mission-
aries, and behold they have sent them to teach us
to read : because of their great love to us these two
are sent. The missionaries think very much of
them ; for the missionaries are very compassionate
towards us. The people of Raiatea thought, in


their regard to these two men, that they would be
killed in our land, and that the boat would he seized
by us. The Raiateans think our land is a barba-
rous land; therefore do not ill use these men, but
behave with the greatest kindness to them, and
then it will be welV The king and the chiefs
answered, ‘ It is perfectly agreeable to us.’
“ Now, lo ! up started two men inspired by the
evil spirit. One of the evil spirits said, ‘ It's agree-
able, it’s agreeable : we will hold the good word. *
The other man who was also inspired by the evil
spirit, thus spake, ‘ I have seen the foundation of
the firmament, up in the sky. Taaroa (the great
idol) brought me forth.’ Auura then answered the
evil spirit thus, ‘ Do you leap up then, that we
may see you flying up into the sky. Do so now,
immediately. Truly thou art even the very founda-
tion of deceit. The people of Rurutu have been
completely destroyed through you, and through
you alone, and now you shall not deceive us again :
we will not be deceived again through you. We
know the true God : begone.
“ The two teachers then addressed them, exhort-
ing them to forsake every evil practice and attend
with sincerity of purpose to the instructions they
would impart, and to appoint a public occasion, on
which, as a proof of rejecting their former gods,
men and women should eat together food hitherto
prohibited to the latter.”
In the latter part of this year, Mr. Williams,
being under the necessity, on account of his health,
of proceeding to New South Wales, called, on his
way, at the Island of Aitutake, and left among the
* Speaking ironically.


people two native teachers, members of the church
at Raiatea.
The important duties which devolved on the
missionaries, in consequence of the general pro-
fession of Christianity, and the altered circumstances
of the people, led the directors of the Missionary
Society to send out two of their own body as a
deputation to the South Sea Islands, for the pur-
pose of conferring with the missionaries, and aiding
and promoting the great objects of the mission.
The Rev Daniel Tyennan, formerly of the Isle of
Wight, and George Bennett, Esq. having been
selected for this important trust, left England
on the 18th of May, and reached Tahiti on the
26th of September, 1821. They were cordially
welcomed by the missionaries, who were happy to
avail themselves of all the assistance, the knowledge,
and experience of their friends could afford, in the
prosecution of this important work.
The impression produced on their minds, was
powerful and cheering. In writing to the directors,
some time after their arrival, they observe : “We are
in health and comfort up to the present moment,
and have been more delighted with the victories
and blessed results of preaching and living the
gospel of Christ than we are able to express at
every station where we have already been, namely,
at Matavai, at Papeete, at Bunaauia in Tahiti; and
at Papetoai in this island. Truly, “the half
was not told us !” God has indeed done great
things here, in a civil, moral, and religious view.
The people here exhibit as literal and pleasing a
proof of being "turned from darkness unto light,
and from the power of Satan unto God,’ as can be
conceived ”


They were accompanied by Mr. Jones, who labour-
ed for some time as a missionary at Papara, and by
two artisans, Messrs. Armitage and Blossom, who
were sent out with a view to promote industry and a
knowledge of the mechanical arts among the people.
Having spent some time at Tahiti and Eimeo,
Messrs. Bennett and Tyerman visited Huahine, and
in company with the missionaries made the tour
of the islands.
In the end of the year an event occurred, one
of the most important to the people that had yet
taken place since the renunciation of idolatry; this
was the death of Pomare, which took place on the
7th of December, on the little island at the mouth
of Wilks’ Harbour. The last words he uttered were
an expression of his conviction, that Jesus alone
was able to save him. Many parts of his conduct,
during the latter period of his life, had given the
missionaries much pain, but they could not re-
member, without gratitude, the important favours
which he had been instrumental in conferring upon
the nation, and the benefit they had derived from
his countenance and aid in prosecuting the great work
to which their lives were devoted, and offer their
fervent prayer to Him, by whom kings rule, and
princes decree judgment, that the government of
the country, which Pomare had held with a firm
hand, might be so conducted as should present no
impediment to the progress of the cause of truth
and righteousness. Mr. Nott, referring to the
death of Pomare, says, “He was a prince who never
had an equal in these islands; the friend of all
foreigners, and the protector of the missionaries.
In knowledge of every kind he was among his
countrymen unrivalled. Had he enjoyed the
2b3
CHAP. Xl.] TAHITI.


advantages of education, he would have attained to as
high a degree of eminence as some of the greatest
men have reached : and, with respect to myself, I
have in his death sustained an irreparable loss, as
he was so valuable an assistant in the work of
translation.”
A regency was appointed to arrange the govern-
ment of the island, in the name of the infant son of
Pom are, who inherited his name, and was recog-
nized as the future sovereign of Tahiti. No ma-
terial change in the state of the country occurred
immediately after the death of the king, but there
was a general relaxation of the ties, by which, in
a political view, the nation had been held together.
The queen and her guardian at that time were
consistent professors of Christianity, and this ren-
dered them popular with the most important por-
tions of the community. The several stations were
tranquil, and each enjoyed a large measure of out-
ward prosperity, while there were some evidences
of the effectual blessing of the Most High, resting
on the labours of his servants, in the conversion of
souls to the obedience of the faith. The important
island of Tahaa, politically connected with Raiatea,
included within the same reef, and separated only
by a strait about four miles across, had adopted
the profession of Christianity, and had been fre-
quently visited by the missionaries of Raiatea; but
the attention given to the moral improvement of
the people, was hut irregular and very inadequate,
until the month of February, 1822, when Mr.
Bourne removed from Tahiti, and took up his resi-
dence on the island, as the stated religious teacher
of the inhabitants, and prosecuted his labours for a
long time with the most encouraging prospects of


ultimate success. In this year two native teach-
ers were sent from the church at Borabora, to
Maupiti, a fertile island about forty miles to the
west of Borabora.
In the early part of this year, the deputation, m
company witb Mr. Ellis, of Huahine, visited the
Sandwich Islands, and after an absence of neaily
eight months, reached the Society Islands again in
safety. This visit led to the settlement of the
native missionaries, intended for the Marquesas, in
the Sandwich Islands, and to the removal of Mr. and
Mrs. Ellis to the Sandwich Islands, as their future
sphere of labour, where they ultimately arrived on
the sth of Feb. 1823. After their return from the
Sandwich Islands, the deputation visited the
islands of Raiatea, Tabaa, Borabora, and Maurua,
and were exceedingly gratified by the high general
estimation in which the missionaries were held by
the people, the industry, improvement, and intel-
ligence of the people generally, as well as by the
tokens of the Divine approbation of their labours
in the extensive prosperity of the Christian churches
which had been formed at the several stations.
During the year 1823, most of the stations were
visited by the “deputation, who rendered the mis-
sionaries every possible aid by the encouragement
and advice in the discharge of their important
duties. It is proper to remark, that the missions
in the South Seas never were in so apparently
prosperous a state as at this time; no reaction
had then taken place, and none of the political
agitation, and the relaxation of civil regulations,
for which the death of Pomare had prepared the
way, had then occurred. Ardent spirits had not
been introduced. The schools were well attended.


the sacred scriptures were generally desired, the
chapels, though frequently enlarged, were well
attended, and the churches received large additions
of such as it was hoped were sincere in their pro-
fessions of attachment to the Lord Jesus. One great
advantage which followed the general profession of
Christianity, was the improved social intercourse it
introduced and cherished among the people.
On the Ist of Jan. 1824, a delightful friendly
meeting was held by the inhabitants of the mission-
ary settlement at Raiatea, on which occasion the
blessings of the gospel, as contrasted with the miseries
of the former state of idolatry, were very forcibly
represented by several native speakers. The day
following, the children pf the schools belonging to
both stations had a feast. They were first assem-
bled in the chapel, where Mr. Bourne addressed
them. They afterwards walked, about six hundred
in number, to the end of a large stone pier,
built out into the sea, where tables were spread
as on the preceding day. When the' feast was
ended, several of the elder boys delivered short
addi esses, most of them founded on sermons they
had heard. These speeches, which were unpre-
meditated, as it was not previously known, that
the boys would be called upon to speak, were
delivered with much fluency and propriety, and
appeared to give peculiar pleasure to every one
piesent. After partaking of further refreshment,
(a substitute for tea,) the children again assembled
in the chapel, where Mr. Williams delivered a short
address, and concluded with prayer. They after-
waids all retired to their respective homes, ap-
parently much delighted.
Mr. Williams, contemplating this delightful spec


tacle, asks, in reference to the former horrid custom
of infanticide, “Would one quarter of them have
been in existence if the gospel of Christ had not
been brought to these islands ? ” and then answers
his own question, “No: the hands of their mothers
would have been imbrued in their blood.”
Early in the year 1824 the mission in the Lee-
ward Islands sustained a heavy loss in the death
of Mrs. Threlkeld, who was removed to her rest
and her reward in heaven, on the 7th of March,
after a short but painful illness.
The increasing duties of the missionaries had
for some time past so fully occupied their thoughts
and time, as to interfere very painfully with the
claims of their own children; and had, in some
cases, prevented their giving that attention and
care to their domestic education, which the age
and circumstances of many of them rendered now
absolutely necessary.
In order to obviate, as far as possible, the dim-
culties attending the mission families in this re-
spect, the South Sea Academy was established by the
deputation and the missionaries, in March, 1824.
In compliance with the earnest recommendation ol
the deputation, and with the solicitations of his
friends, Mr. Orsmond removed from Borabora to
take charge of the institution, over which he con-
tinued to preside, to the satisfaction of the parents
and benefit of the pupils, until the summer of 1831,
when he removed to Taiarabu, and the charge of
the academy devolved on Mr. Simpson. The first
annual meeting was held in March, 1825 \ the
children had not only been taught to read the
scriptures, and to commit some of the most
approved catechisms to memory, but they had
CHAP. Xl.] TAHITI.


likewise received instruction in writing, grammar,
history, &c. During the examination, portions
of scripture were read and recited, copy books
examined, problems in geometry worked, and
various lessons repeated. The proceedings of the
meeting gave general satisfaction, and left an im-
pression on the minds of all present of the great
attention that had been paid to the pupils by those
under whose charge they were placed.
The institution is under the superintendance of
a committee, and its primary design was to furnish
a suitable, and so far as circumstances would admit,
a liberal education to the children of the mission-
aries—“ Such an education as is calculated to pre-
pare them to fill useful situations in future life.”
Native children of piety and talent have access to
its advantages, and it is designed as preparatory to
a seminary for training native pastors to fill dif-
ferent stations in the South Sea Islands. It is an
important institution, and will, it is hoped, exert a
beneficial influence on the character of the natives,
as well as the children of the Missionaries. Seve-
ral individuals have kindly enriched its library with
suitable elementary books, philosophical apparatus,
&c.; but these are stated to be still inadequate
to the accomplishment of the design contem-
plated.
In the month of April, 1826, the young king
of Tahiti was publicly recognized by the people as
Pomare the Third. The coronation took place at
Tahiti, and was attended wdth considerable pomp
and show. The deputation and many of the mis-
sionaries were present, and took part in the cere-
monies observed on the occasion.
On the 7th of June, the deputation having accom


plished the objects of their mission, took their final
departure from the islands, accompanied by Mr.
Threlkeld, who proceeded with them to New South
Wales. On their way, they touched at some of the
islands to the westward, and left native teachers on
the island of Mitiaro, and among the ferocious in-
habitants of Mangia. The explicit and ample
reports forwarded by the deputation of the mission-
ary stations, as they were successively visited, were
published in the Transactions of the society, and af-
forded abundant ground for undiminished confidence
in the missionaries. Their statements of the great
work they had been made by the great Head of
the church instrumental in effecting, were found
to be much below the truth, and excited among the
friends of missions throughout Great Britain, the
liveliest feelings of gratitude, and give a fresh sti-
mulus to the efforts and prayers of all engaged in
promoting the kingdom of Christ upon earth.
The gospel was professed, and Christianity generally
adopted in the Georgian and Society Islands, in-
cluding Sir Charles Sanders’ Island, and Maurua.
By means of the labours of native teachers it vyas
also extended to ten distinct islands, in which
twenty-one native teachers were employed, besides
two among the Palisser or Paumotu Islands to
the east, and six that had been sent to the Friendly
Islands, and the Navigators in the west.
In the Georgian and Society Islands, the number
of adult natives baptized was about nine thousand ;
the number admitted to church fellowship was
upwards of one thousand ; the number of children
under school instruction was about two thousand;
that of adults about two thousand five hundred;
but nearly the whole population of these islands


might be considered as under instruction, since
those who did not attend the adult schools taught
each other at home. The people, in general, were
able to read well, and by a frequent perusal of those
portions of the scriptures which have been translated
and printed in Tahitian, by committing catechisms
to memory, and from hearing the gospel, have made
considerable attainments in religious knowledge.
The following account of the state of the people,
and the progress of the gospel among them was
forwarded by the deputation from New South Wales,
after they had left the islands, and had carefully
and leisurely reviewed the scenes through which
they had passed, and the inquiries they had pur-
sued while sojourning among them ; speaking of the
islands, they observe :—“ Immediately before leav-
ing the islands finally, we had an opportunity of
paying a short visit to all the missionary stations,
after our official visits had been completed; and
we rejoice to say, that we left all the churches in
entire peace and harmony, and favoured with great
and growing prosperity. The number of commu-
nicants was rapidly increasing in the several
churches, while not only the members of the
churches, but also the baptized who had not yet
been admitted to the Lord’s table, were, generally
speaking, conducting themselves with great pro-
priety. There were, indeed, very few exceptions
to this statement. No errors in doctrine had been
suffered to appear; and all the brethren were not
only sound in the faith, and regularly devoted to
their great work, but held in high esteem by their
several flocks, and enjoying great harmony and
peace with each other, striving together for the
faith of the gospel.


The whole population of all the islands may be
considered as under school instruction. Ihe ge-
nerality of the people read with a propriety and
fluency seldom known among the common peo-
ple of our own country. Many, both childien
and adults, are acquainted with one or more
catechisms. Their progress, indeed, m knowledge
of scriptural and religious subjects is extra-
ordinary; and, considered as congregations their
knowledge is not surpassed, and we think not
equalled by congregations of the same magnitude
in England. Multitudes can write well, both men
and women, and not a few are acquainted with the
common rules of arithmetic.
Civilization has already made great progress in
all the islands, and is making rapid advances.
The two settlements of Border’s Point, and Haweis
Town, are nearly equal to any.
On taking a minute and deliberate retrospect ot
the state of the mission in the South Seas, the
character and talents of both the brethren and
their wives who are engaged in the work, the state
of the churches and congregations, in both a spi-
ritual and moral point of view, the condition ot
the schools, and the various religious and civil
institutions now in full operation; the political
state of the different islands, and the progressive
improvements which the natives are making in the
arts of civilized life, and the estimation in which
the missionaries are held, both as pastors and
friends, we find so little to deplore, and so much
to admire, that our souls are filled with joy, while
we exclaim, ‘ Blessed, indeed, are the people who
are in such a case. Let the whole earth be thus
filled with the Redeemer’s glory I’”
2 c
CHAP. Xl.] TAHITI.


In the month of March, 1825, Mr. Nott, one
of the senior missionaries, left Tahiti to visit his
native country, which he had left in the Duff in
the year 1796. The care of his station, during
his absence, devolved on Mr. Wilson, who laboured
in the adjacent district of Matavai. A large mea-
sure of outward prosperity appeared in most of the
stations; numbers were added to those who made
a public profession of their faith by baptism, and
large accessions were made to the churches which,
during the last six years, had been gathered in the
islands. The congregation at Binder's Point, in
Tahiti, amounted on an average to one thousand
persons; and to the church, which contained one
hundred and nine members, thirty-nine had been
added during the previous year. Within the same
period one hundred and sixty-two were baptized
at Haweis Town, and one hundred and thirty-one
were admitted to the fellowship of the church at
that station, which now included two hundred and
eighty-three members. In the course of the year
one member had fallen under the censure of the
church, and another had been separated from com-
munion ; but of the members in general, it was
stated that their conduct was in hannony with
their Christian profession, while the contributions
of this church and congregation to the Missionary
Society amounted to about 1,743 gallons of cocoa-
nut oil. A new station was occupied by Mr.
Jones, at Hidia, on the north-east side of the
island.
Twenty-five persons were received into Christian
fellowship with the church at Eimeo, where the
total number of those thus united amounted to
two hundred and seventy.


In the Leeward Islands the stations continued
to wear a pleasing aspect. Much harmony and
affection appeared to prevail among the inhabitants
of Huahine. The church contained between three
and four hundred members, whose consistent de-
portment continued to be a source of much en-
couragement to the missionary labouring amongst
them. Industry seemed to be increasing among
them, and their settlements at the head of the
chief harbour in the island contained about four
hundred neatly erected dwelling houses. In Rai-
atea, while civilization was making rapid progress,
the Divine blessing seemed to rest in an abundant
manner on the religious instruction imparted to
the people. The total number of those who had
received the rite of baptism was nine hundred, of
whom one hundred and fifty were members of the
church. About four hundred children were under
instruction. The people had commenced a new
settlement on the northern side of the island, and
had enclosed with fences about three hundred
allotments of ground. The missions in the other
islands appeared equally prosperous, and favour-
able intelligence was received from the out-stations.
During the year the mission was reinforced by
the arrival of the Rev. Messrs. Pritchard and Pit-
man ; the latter commenced the study of the lan-
guage under the guidance of Mr. Orsmond, at the
academy; and, in the month of November, the
former undertook the duties of the station at Pa-
peete, which had been vacant since the removal of
Mr. Crook to Bogue Town, in the smaller pe-
ninsula, and had suffered greatly in consequence.
Mr. Pritchard has been able to maintain his post,
through much difficulty and many discourage


merits, arising, in a great measure* from the cir-
cumstance of the station’s being in the chief port
in Tahiti, and the resort of a larger number of
vessels than any other in the islands. One of the
earliest and most constant sources of trial to the
missionaries has been the intemperate and vicious
conduct of many of the seamen, who have visited
the shore while their vessels were in harbour, or
have absconded and remained among the natives
after their departure.
In the month of January, this year, Mr. Crook
made a voyage to the Marquesas, for the purpose
of endeavouring to establish native teachers among
the people. “ These islands form two clusters,
which were discovered at different periods, and are
politically, as well as geographically, distinct.
The south-eastern cluster comprehends five is-
lands. The northern division consists also of five
islands; including Nuuhiva, or Nukuhiva, the
largest ifi the group, called by Hergest, Sir H.
Martin’s Island. They extend, according to Malte-
Brun, from seven degrees, fifty-one minutes, to
ten degrees, twenty-five minutes, south latitude;
and from one hundred and thirty-eight degrees,
forty-eight minutes, to one hundred and forty de-
grees, twenty-nine minutes, west longitude.
“ Their geographical extent is less than that of
the Georgian and Society Islands; the largest is
much smaller than Tahiti. The islands are not
protected, like most others in the Pacific, by coral
reefs. The sea extends to the base of the moun-
tains, and prevents the formation and preservation
of that low border of prolific alluvial soil, so valu-
able to the Society Islanders. Extensive valleys
abound in the Maqruesas, and in these the inba


bitants generally reside. The vegetable produc-
tions correspond with those of the islands to the
west, and are cultivated in the spacious valleys.
The bread-fruit is the chief article of support to
the inhabitants, it is cultivated and preserved with
peculiar care, and probably is obtained in greater
perfection among the Marquesas than in any other
islands of the Pacific.
“ Notwithstanding the fertility of the valleys,
and the superiority of the bread-fruit, which grows
spontaneously, seasons of famine are frequent and
severe; they are occasioned by the indolence of
the people, and their dependence on the bread-
fruit crop; a failure in which reduces them to a
state of the greatest destitution, and often leads to
the perpetration of the most revolting and un-
natural crime of murdering and feeding upon each
other. It would be a source of much satisfaction
could we believe the report of their cannibalism
destitute of foundation; but the testimony of the
natives of Tahiti, and of foreigners who have
resided among them, of the missionaries and voy-
agers by whom they have been visited, seems to
be not less decisive than distressing. Krusenstern,
in his voyage round the world, touched at Nuuhiya,
on his way to Japan. He obtained much in-
formation from Roberts, an Englishman, who had
resided some time on the island, and states that, in
times of famine, the men kill their wives, and
children, and aged parents, and devour their flesh
with the greatest satisfaction. Even the female
will join, if permitted, in the horrid repast. Most
of their recent visitors seem to think the popula-
tion is diminishing, and that the remnant is much
2 c 3
CHAP. Xl.] TAHITI.


deteriorated. They do not probably amount to
more than ten thousand.
“ Physically considered, the Marquesans are
described as among the most perfect of the human
species. The men are said to be tall and strong,
while many of them exhibit the finest symmetry
of form : they are frequently upwards of six feet
high, their limbs muscular and firm, but not
heavy. Their movements are always agile, often
easy and graceful. The females, though inferior
to the men, yet often present agreeable models of
the human figure, and are distinguished by the
liveliness of their disposition. The complexion of
the Marquesans is lighter than that of the Tahi-
tians, though the natural colour of their skin is
seldom discernible, on account of the manner in
which their bodies are tataued, and the frequent
application of a preparation of turmeric and oil.
“ In the practice of tatauing they surpass all
other nations, both as to the extent of the human
body to which it is applied, and the varied images
and patterns thus impressed. The colouring mat-
ter itself is of a jet-black, but, as seen through the
white skin beneath which it lies, it gives the limbs,
and those parts of the body to which it is applied,
a blue or dark slate-coloured hue. The face is
sometimes divided into different compartments,
each of which receives a varied shade of colour;
sometimes it is covered with broad stripes, crossing
each other at right angles; and sometimes it is
crowded with sharks, lizards, and figures of other
animals, delineated with considerable spirit and
accuracy, frequently so as to give the countenance
n most frightful aspect. The operation of per


forating the skin and injecting the colouring mat-
ter must be exceedingly tedious and painful, as the
most tender parts of the face, such as the inner
surface of the lips and the edges of the eyelids are
thus punctured. .
“ The testimony of almost all who have visited
the islands, concur in inducing the belief that the
morals of the Marquesans are exceedingly debased,
that their licentiousness is of the most shameless
kind; that their propensity to theft is universal,
and that they are quarrelsome and murderous.
Since Mendano first anchored off their shores,
few ships have visited them, during whose stay the
blood of Europeans or natives, or both, has not
been shed; and fewer still whose crews have not
been engaged in violent quarrels. Ihe Russian
navigator, whose testimony has been already re-
ferred to, observes, that, though they manifested
some degree of honesty in barter, they appeared to
have neither social institutions, religion, nor hu-
mane feelings.
“ Wars are frequent and cruel; and appear to
be pursued chiefly from a desire of plunder, or ot
feasting upon the bodies of their enemies. The
skulls of the captured are sometimes worn as
trophies of a warrior’s prowess. Human bones
constitute part of the furniture of their dwellings,
and human hair ornaments most ol their imple-
ments of war. According to the testimony of the
European missionaries, by whom they have been
most recently visited, part, if not all, the bodies of
the slain furnish the victor’s banquet.
“ Conduct more diabolical than that attributed
to them, in connexion with this revolting prac-
tice, cannot easily be conceived of ; and however
CHAP. Xl.] TAHITI.


reluctant we may have been to admit the cannibalism
of any of the Polynesian tribes, the testimony of
foreigners of every nation, by whom the Marque-
sas have been visited, and of the native teachers
from the Society Islands, who have resided for a
long time among them, forces upon us the belief
that they perpetrate this unnatural crime to as
great an extent, and under circumstances as aggra-
vating, as it has been met with among any portion
of mankind.
“ In 1797 a mission was commenced in Ta-
huata, but after a residence of about twelve months,
Mr. Crook was unexpectedly removed from the
islands, and the effort was not repeated until 1821,
when two natives from Huahine were appointed to
the Marquesas, but were unexpectedly detained in
the Sandwich Islands. In the beginning of this
year, 1825, the attempt was renewed, and Mr.
Crook conducted thither two native teachers from
Huahine, and one from Tahiti. Several natives,
who had known Mr. Crook during his former abode
among them, welcomed his return. The greater part
of the inhabitants of the islands, however, were ex-
ceedingly vicious and disorderly in their behaviour.
After remaining about a month" among them, hold-
ing repeated conferences with the chiefs and
priests, Mr. Crook left the native teachers under
the protection of a friendly chief in Tahuata or
Santa Christina. Their prospects of usefulness
were at first encouraging; but the wickedness of the
people was so great, and their conduct so violent,
even to the Tahitians, that they returned. They
were succeeded by others, who were obliged to
leave in 1828. In 1829, Messrs. Pritchard and
Simpson proceeded to the Marquesas, with a view


of ascertaining the state of the people, and the
practicability of commencing a mission: this, how-
ever, it appeared to them, could not at that time
be effected. In August, 1831, Mr. Darling visited
all the islands.
“ Fatuiva, or La Magdelena, is the most southern
and easterly island of the group, and is usually the
first seen by vessels approaching the islands from
the eastward. On the 2d of August, 1831, Mi.
Darling and his companions, in the Olive Branch,
saw this island, and at daylight the next morning
found themselves within about twelve miles of its
south-eastern shore, which appeared exceedingly
precipitous and rocky. When they reached the
north-west side of the island a number of canoes
approached the ship. From the natives in these,
Mr. Darling learned that the inhabitants on shore
were living in peace, and that it was nearly two
years since war had existed among them. En-
couraged by the account which the natives in the
canoes gave of the state of the island, the boat was
sent on shore for supplies. Fana, a native of the
Marquesas, who had resided many years at Tahiti,
and had, it was believed, become a decided Chris-
tian, accompanied by another Marquesan, pro-
ceeded to the shore, and soon returned, bringing
with them the chief of the valley off which the
vessel was lying. He had been made acquainted
with the object of their visit, and came to request
that some of the teachers might be left among his
people. As he stated that they had for a long
period been exempt from wars, seemed desirous to
receive instructors, in which it was ascertained the
people also concurred, promised to protect those
who might be left, to supply them with the means
CHAP. Xl.] TAHITI.


of support, and afford them every facility in his
power in the prosecution of their work, Mr. Dar-
ling communicated the subject to the teachers, and
two of them from the church at Paofai in Tahiti,
agreed at once to remain on the island. Towards
the evening of the same day, after a suitable ad-
dress from Mr. Darling, they were commended to
God in prayer, in the presence of the chief and
people from the shore, who were on board at the
time; and having received from Mr. Darling a
paper, stating that they were placed there as Chris-
tian teachers by the missionaries in Tahiti, under
the patronage of the London Missionary Society,
they affectionately took leave of the teacher and
their companions, and with a few useful articles of
clothing, tools, and a supply of spelling books,
&c., they left the ship, and accompanied the chief
and people to the shore. Having passed the bois-
terous surf at the landing place, they found the
people assembled. Fana explained to them the
object of the friends from Tahiti in coming
amongst them, and recommended them to the
favourable regard of his countrymen. The people
having promised to treat them kindly, Fana re-
turned on board, and the vessel proceeded to the
other islands.
“ Mr. Darling remained among the islands
about fifteen days, removed the survivor of the two
teachers left in 1828, at Uapou, and left native
teachers at Tahuata. The teachers in the latter
island, through the defection of one of their num-
ber, have since left the island, but those in Fatuiva
remain; and though at times surrounded by war,
and exposed to many perils, refuse to leave their
station, and hope ultimately to accomplish their


important object ; but the ferocity of the natives,
their insatiable desire of fire-arms and ammunition;
their love of war, its sanguinary character, and the
inhuman practice of cannibalism with which it is
usually concluded; their inveterate attachment to
a system which sanctions every vice and cruelty;
their abominable licentiousness and fickleness of
disposition —appear to present almost insurmount-
able barriers to the success of the native teachers.
The chiefs of all the islands have, however, ex-
pressed their desires that white men should go and
reside among them as religious instructors. The
attention of the directors of the London Missionary
Society has been for some time past directed to
these islands. They have also been visited by a
deputation of the American brethren from the
Sandwich Islands, whence a mission was com-
menced by three American missionaries, in the
northern cluster, in August, 1833, but it was re-
linquished in March, 1834, when they left the
Marquesas and returned to the Sandwich Islands.


CHAPTER XII.
Retun of Mr. Nott.—Death of the Young King.
—His Sister Aimata acknowledged as Queen.
—Relaxation of Morals among the People. —
Introduction of ardent Spirits. — Rise of vi-
sionary Heresies. — Wreck of an American Ship.
—Conduct of the Natives at Huahine and Ru-
rutu.—Happy Death of Maoae.—Advancement
of Civilization. Disturbance in Tahiti. —
Arrival of the Pitcairn Islanders.—War in the
Leeward Islands.—Death of the King of Rai-
atea.—His Letter to a Lady in England. —
General State of Society. — War in Tahiti. —
Retrospect of the Progress of the Gospel. —
State of the Mission in 1834.
Mr. Nott, who had left the islands in the pre-
vious year, reached England on the 7th of July,
1826, and received the most cordial welcome from
the directors, and many friends of the missionary
cause, whom he visited in different parts of the
country. On the 13th of March, 1827, he re-
embarked for the scene of his important labours,
accompanied by two missionaries, Messrs. Simp-
son and Buzzacott, who had been appointed to the
South Seas. On this occasion a free passage was
kindly granted by Alexander Birnie and Son, es-
quires, for the mission families. Favours of this
kind have been several times afforded by those
generous individuals who do business in great
waters; and by aiding the diffusion, of the gospel
of Christ among the inhabitants o'F-lhe remote


portions of the earth visited by their ships, not
only promote the facilities for honourable com-
merce, but become most efficient coadjutors with
all who are honoured to he employed in the con-
version of the world.
On Mr. Notts arrival he found the government
of Tahiti in the hands of Aimata, the daughter of
Pom are 11. Aimata, who now received the regal
name, Pomarc, had been regarded as queen of
Tahiti since the death of the young king, which
took place on the 11th of January, 1827. The
regency appointed for the minority of her brother
still continued to act; and though this fresh breach
in Pomare’s family weakened the force of the re-
gulations under which his influence had held many
who were disaffected towards the new order of
things which Christianity had introduced, it pro-
duced no material political change. When the
profession of Christianity was most general, and
the attention to its external requirements most
scrupulous and regular, there were multitudes en-
tire strangers to any moral or spiritual change;
and the difficulties which the precepts of the
gospel opposed to their indulgence in those vices
to which the unrenewed heart is ever strongly
addicted, had made them ill at ease under the
mask they were, and impatient for the time when
circumstances or public opinion might allow them
to cast it from them, and appear and act in their
true characters. This feeling was greatly strength-
ened by the increased number of vessels that
now resorted to the islands for refreshments.
These were chiefly whaling ships, that were
forced by the uncertainty of obtaining supplies,
and the exorbitant charges of the South American
2 D
CHAP. XII- J TAHITI.


ports, also the duties and prices charged at the
Sandwich Islands, to visit the southern islands.
Some of these remained many weeks in harbour,
introducing all the vices by which a sea-port
is generally defiled, and increasing the licentious-
ness of the people. The progress of declension
among the natives, at the ports especially, was
greatly accelerated by the increasing quantities of
ardent spirits which these vessels brought among
the people.
When Christianity was adopted, the stills pre-
viously employed by the natives were all destroyed,
the use of ardent spirits was generally disconti-
nued, and for a long time the chiefs, with the
most commendable decision and self-controul, re-
sisted all the efforts of their foreign visitors to
revive a practice which the natives were convinced
had been more destructive of human happiness
and life than their wars, sacrifices, or even their
infanticide. The late Pomare had been among the
first who had secretly indulged in this his beset-
ting sin; after his death, other chiefs followed his
example, and although judicious regulations were
adopted by the more intelligent chiefs, and gene-
rally enforced, increasing quantities of spirits were
supplied by the ships, and intemperance, as the
natural consequence, began to prevail.
In addition to these causes, in the year 1826,
two men, of some influence among their country-
men, Teao, at Wilks’s harbour, and Hue, at Bin-
der’s Point, led many of the people into error and
sin. These visionaries pretended to be the medium
of direct communications from heaven, and under
the influence of infatuation, or subtlety, or both,
affirmed that the millennium was come, that moral


evil no longer existed, that the force of the pre-
ceptive parts of the scripture had ceased, and con-
sequently every one might safely follow the course
of life most agreeable to his own inclinations.
These causes produced, in some of the stations,
°reat irregularities, and a defection among many,
who it was hoped had found the gospel a savour
of life unto life. The feeble church in Maurua
was broken up by the prevailing licentiousness
introduced by the visionaries from Tahiti.
The Lord, however, did not leave himself with-
out witness among the people; several instances of
the conversion of men, notorious for their wicked-
ness, and in whose temper and conduct the effects
of Divine grace were strikingly exemplified, oc-
curred at this time; and some of the natives mani-
fested, under circumstances of peculiar difficulty,
the strength of their principles, and the decisive
influence of the gospel. Among these may be
justly mentioned the conduct of Mahine, the king
of Huahine, in restraining the people under his
government, and repairing, as far as possible, the
injury they had done in his absence.
On the 21st of November, 1825, an American
vessel, the Hyxeo, in entering Fare harbour,
struck upon the reef, and was in this situation
abandoned by the master and crew, who requested
a number of the natives to take charge of the ship,
and save as much of the property on board as
possible. Left in charge of the ship, the natives
began to examine the stores, and found a large
quantity of ardent spirits, the prolific source of
almost every crime; the temptation, under the ex-
citement of feeling which the circumstance had
occasioned, was too strong; they drank till they
CHAP. XII.] TAHITI.


became intoxicated, and as one crime leads to
another, added theft to drunkenness, and carried
off a number of articles. As soon as Mahine, who
was on the other side of the island at the time,
heard of the wreck, he hastened to the place, and
on learning the conduct of the natives, went him-
self and watched the vessel, till so much of the
cargo as could be saved was taken on shore; and
then had his tent pitched close by the place where
it was deposited, that it might be preserved from
depredation. He secured the return of part of the
articles that had been taken, and made the captain
a present, as a compensation for the rest.
The conduct of the natives of Rurutu was
equally honourable to their Christian profession,
when the Falcon, also an American vessel, was
wrecked on their shores. When the commander,
captain Chase, departed from the island, he left
the following testimony: “The natives gave us all
the assistance in their power, from the time the
ship struck to the present moment. The first
day, while landing the things from the ship, they
were put into the hands of the natives, and car-
ried up to the native mission-house, a distance of
half a mile; and not a single article of clothing
was taken from any man belonging to the ship,
though they had it in their power to have plun-
dered us of every thing that was landed; which
fully proves the honesty of the natives of this
island. Since I have lived on shore, myself,
officers, and people, have received the kindest
treatment from the natives that can be imagined,
for which I shall ever be thankful. Myself and
officers have lived in the house of Buna, who,
together with his wife, has paid us every attention


to make us comfortable, for which I return my
unfeigned thanks, being the only compensation I
can make them at present.”
Among the instances in which the power of
faith was strikingly manifested in the dying cir-
cumstances of some who had for a number of
years maintained a holy walk and conversation,
Mr. Barff, in his interesting report of the state of
the people at the close of 1&26, mentions
« Paea was another most pleasing monument of
Divine grace. He was an aged man, and had
been, for several years, a consistent church-mem-
ber; he was always ready to every good work.
The morning he died, I was sent for quite unex-
pectedly. When I arrived, he observed he was
almost free from pain, but that he was leady, and
just upon the point of death ; after which be took
no further notice of any of us, but was either re-
peating texts of scripture, or engaged in prayer,
with a countenance peculiarly pleasing, and his
eyes directed towards heaven. The shoit prayei
he continued to repeat with an audible voice, as
though he suspected no one near, was the fol-
lowing; * May the name of Jehovah be praised
from the rising to the setting sun, who hath
looked upon us in mercy, and sent his Beloved to
save us from our sins and God’s anger. Have
mercy on me, and save me, both soul and body,
for Christ’s sake. Amen.’ I asked him, * Upon
whom are your hopes fixed for acceptance with
God ?’ He replied, with peculiar earnestness,
‘ Upon Jesus, who died for me;’ and afterwards
added, * I count not my life dear to me, so that I
might finish my course with joy ?’ His speech
was then interrupted, and he died almost instantly;
2 d 3
CHAP. XII.] TAHITI.


giving a striking testimony that his end was
peace.”
The labours at the stations visited by shipping
were still subject to interruption, and irregularities
continued to prevail among the people; the other
stations throughout the islands were externally
prosperous, though but few of the young gave
indications of piety, and many were led into the
paths of vice. In the end of 1828, Messrs. Dar-
ling and Wilson furnished gratifying reports of
their stations, and Mr. Nott, in reference to his
labours, thus writes:—
“ The translation of the New Testament was
finished before I arrived in England, though se-
veral parts of it were not printed. These have
since been prepared for the press, and are now
printed. A new and uniform edition is also in hand,
which is very necessary, as the first edition was
published at different times, and in detached parts,
and consequently uniformity was not attainable.
“ PREACHING AND SCHOOLS.
“ Our congregation fluctuates according to the
movements of those of the royal family who reside
here, and who frequently journey from place to
place, followed by many of the people. Since my
return about twenty-one members have been added
to the church, and upwards of twenty have been
baptized, including adults and children. The
school is attended every morning and afternoon,
and the sabbath is observed as usual.
“ STATE OF THE ISLANDS, &C.
“ The islands are in peace, and the missionaries
at every station labouring with faithfulness and
diligence'. Much of my time is employed in


translating and revising the scriptures, I am
also engaged in attendance at the schools every
morning, in meetings with the natives several
times in the week, and in preaching twice every
sabbath.”
And in the ensuing year the state of the mis-
sions is thus described by Mr. Platt:—
“ 1 have been supplying the churches at Eimeo
for a month, and have visited most of the stations
on Tahiti. Those who have embraced the truth
at all the stations, continue apparently steady;
and though there are a few difficulties and per-
plexities in the mission, yet the prospects are
pleasing. Large and attentive congregations at-
tend at almost all the places of worship. I think
there is much ground for hope. There are, or
rather there have been, a few little things dis-
couraging ; and little things we must call them,
when we consider the great rage which the ad-
versary of souls must feel at such a breach in his
kingdom, as has been made here, and which, by
all his wiles, he has not been able to prevent.
Faith and patience in the workmen will overcome.
I trust the good work is advancing; and 1 hope
that all who are disposed to find fault, will find
that even now, nothing in the state of this mission
is contradictory to former reports respecting it,
though some enemies are, from the present state of
things, charging us with deception; but on that score
I trust we shall not be afraid to meet them before
the great God and our Lord Jesus Christ.”
In 1830, in reference to Tahiti, Mr. Crook
writes:—
“ Tahiti is advancing in civilization. Not only
are the chiefs Tati, Hitoti, Paofai, Paraita, and


others, accumulating property, but many among
the common people raise money to buy a cow,
and some a horse. This is more especially the
case at Pare, where the ships anchor. Several
men and women appear on sabbath days com-
pletely clothed in European apparel, when they
attend Mr, Pritchard’s chapel. There are several
decked vessels, from twenty to forty, or more,
tons, belonging to the natives. The people at
Wilks’s Harbour, Pare, seem to be more advanced,
generally, in the knowledge of men and things than
the rest of the natives of Tahiti. Tati, Hitoti,
Paofai, and Paraita, have their horses which they
ride. A Sandwicli islander keeps a shop at Pare,
and has his counter and drawers in complete order.
This spirit of accumulating property causes the
people to spend more time than formerly on their
own lands, which being situated many miles dis-
tant, the meetings and schools are, by some, less
regularly attended. When the first sabbath in
the month approaches, all assemble at the mission
station.”
Mr. Orsmond conveyed, about the same time,
accounts of the happy effects of the gospel, in the
death of some who had long lived in the enjoy-
ment of its purity and peace 3 among which were
the following: —
“ Maoae, who has lately quitted this world of
sorrow, was one of those whose office it was to rally
dispirited warriors. Whole nights he used to walk
from house to house, to stimulate the halting, and
give assurance from what some god had told him
of success in an approaching war. From the day
of his embracing the gospel till the day of his
death, he maintained a profession, which even the


tongue of envy could not impeach. He was an
ornament to the little sphere in which he acted.
To the sacred ordinances of religion he always
attended with apparent delight, and from his habit
of treasuring up passages of scripture in his mind,
though his eyes were so affected that he could not
read, he had obtained a sound knowledge of the
essential doctrines of the gospel. Several times
he appeared to be near his end, but always happy.
The blessing which maketh rich was upon him.
He did not know, he said, nor did he feel, that
death had a sting. At length, age and increased
infirmity brought him down. I often visited him,
and never left him without desiring the same pla-
cidity and contentment.
“ On seeing that his end was fast approaching,
I said to him : ‘ Maoae, are you sorry that you
ever cast away the lying gods, by which you used
to gain so much property ? ’ He was aroused from
his lethargy, and tears of pleasure sparkled in his
eyes, while, with vehemence, he said, ‘ Oh, no,
Otamoni !—oh, no, no, no. What! Can Ibe
sorry for casting away death for life ? Whole
nights I have walked about to encourage others in
the devil’s work, and had well nigh lost my own
soul. I wonder that I was not levelled by club or
spear before I heard of the name of the Messiah.
He is my great rock, the fortification wherein my
soul takes shelter from all foes. ’
“ I said, ‘ Tell me on what }’ou build your hopes
of future bliss P ’ He said, *lam a vile man ;my
life has been vile; but a great King sent his ambas-
sadors from the other side of the skies to our shores
with terms of peace. We continued to fight, nor
could we tell what those ambassadors wanted, for


many years. At length Pomare obtained a vic-
tory, ordered all maraes to be broken up, and in-
vited all his subjects to come and take shelter
under the wing of Jesus, of whom those ambassa-
dors spake, and wdio had given them victory. I
was one of the first to do so. The blood of Jesus
is my foundation. You tell us that it is the only
way to God. I believe that Jesus will save me.
He is my staff now. What I grieve at is, that all
my children do not love him. Had they known
the distress we used to feel in the reign of the
devil, they would be glad to take the gospel in
exchange for their follies. Jesus is the best King;
he gives a pillow without thorns.’ Here he seemed
overcome.
“ A little after I said, ‘ Maoae, are you afraid to
die ?’ ‘ No, no,’ he replied, with almost youthful
energy, “the ship is in the sea, the sails are
spread, she is ready. I have a good Pilot, and a
good landing-place before me. My outside man
and my inside man'differ. Let the one rot till the
trumpet-blowing time; but let my soul go to the
throne of Messiah.’ Here the tears gushed into
my eyes, I thought myself by the side of some
experienced Christian in England, and said in my
heart, ‘ In my last moments, may I feel as happy.’
Thrice blessed gospel, thrice blessed people, who
by means of Christian benevolence, are led to
results so precious. Here is one going down to
the shades of death, supported by a hope full of
immortality, and saying, ‘But for English Chris-
tians, I had died a miserable slave of sinJ Will
he not through eternity sing hallelujah to God
and the Lamb, because of the South Sea mis-
sion P ”


lii describing the state of his people for the
same year, Mr. BarfF remarks :—“ The duties of
the sabbath continue, as usual, to form a promi-
nent part of my labours. The services in the fore-
noon and afternoon are well attended, especially
the former. The average attendance may be esti-
mated at from one thousand to one thousand four
hundred. Early in the morning the natives have
their prayer-meeting, and the interim between the
forenoon and afternoon services is devoted to cate-
chetical exercises with the native children. Since
vessels have begun more frequently to touch at this
island, I have made it a practice to give an exhor-
tation to the officers and crews of such ships once
on the Lord’s-day.
“ Two adults have been admitted to baptism
during the past year, and forty-five children of
baptized parents; making the total of adults bap-
tized at this station, seven hundred and fifty, and
of children, seven hundred and sixty-seven.
“ The church has received an addition of fifteen
members during the past year; making the total of
communicants four hundred and seventy-seven.
Five individuals have been dismissed for improper
conduct, and a few have been restored to fellowship,
having afforded grounds for hope that their repent-
ance was sincere.
“ Our exercises for the improvement of the
people in the things of God are numerous. In
addition to the services of the Lord’s-day, as already
mentioned, we have two lectures during the week;
one on Wednesday, and the other on Friday; the
latter for those in particular who make a credible
profession of religion. A catechetical exercise is
held on Monday evenings, at which all the church


members are expected to attend in classes. In
order to impress more deeply on the minds of the
people the importance of the religion of the heart,
than can be done at public exercises, we visit the
people at their houses.”
The industry and enterprize of the people
was gradually increasing; the number of vessels
visiting their islands creates a demand for a
more abundant supply of vegetables, live stock,
and other supplies; it also stimulates the natives
to pay attention to- the building of small vessels,
for carrying on traffic among themselves between
the different islands.
Up to the close of the year 1830, public tran-
quillity in the islands had remained unbroken, since
the last struggle in favour of idolatry, in 1815; but,
in the commencement of 1831, serious differences
arose between the queen of Tahiti and her ad-
herents, and the hereditary governors or chiefs of
the principal districts of the island, and the parties
appear to have been on the eve of enforcing their
respective claims by an appeal to arms, when his
majesty’s ship Comet providentially arrived at
Tahiti." The commander, with great promptitude
and kindness, united with the missionaries in their
endeavours to restore tranquillity to the island ;
their efforts were successful ; and when the mis-
sionaries wrote to the captain, to inform him of
the same, he addressed to them, in reply, the fol-
lowing letter: —
“ H.M. Sloop Comet, Papeete Bay, April 4, 1831.
“ Gentlemen, —I have the honour to acknow-
ledge the receipt of your esteemed letter of the 2d
instant. I very sincerely congratulate you upon


the amicable arrangements which have been so
openly declared between quoen Pomare and the
chiefs of this island; and that thereby the evils
and horrors of a civil war have been prevented.
“ Gentlemen, I return you my most cordial ex-
pression of thanks for the promptitude with which
you were pleased to make known my sentiments
to the queen and her chiefs, upon the existing dif-
ferences, in which I had the happiness to concur
with you all; and if they were received with respect,
I must sincerely ascribe it much more to the intel-
ligence and ability displayed by you, at so mo-
mentous and interesting a time, than to any in-
trinsic merit that my proposals possessed; and it
is a circumstance affording me the highest satis-
faction, to observe the great estimation you are all
held in by the queen and her chiefs, which could
not have been obtained but by a faithful discharge of
your duties, as ministers of Christ and teachers of
our holy religion; and it will be peculiarly grati-
fying to me to make known these circumstances
most fully to those authorities whom it is my duty
to inform of this transaction.
“ Gentlemen, I am joined by my officers and
captain Walpole, of H. M. thirty-ninth regiment,
in offering to you every expression of our respect
and esteem. “Alex. A. Sandiland, captain.’’
Ever since the retreat of the mutineers of the
Bounty has been discovered, and the interesting
circumstances of their descendants made public, a
lively concern has been very generally felt for
their welfare, and so far back as the year 1817
they engaged the attention of the directors, who
sent out, for their use, at that period, Bibles,
2 E


Testaments, prayer-books, and spelling-books,
which were duly received, and an acknowledg-
ment, signed by the late John Adams, transmitted
to the treasurer.
In consequence of the limited means of com-
fortable subsistence afforded by the natural re-
sources of the island, they were, at their own re-
quest, and in pursuance of an application made
to the British government, all removed, in the
spring of 1831, from Pitcairn’s Island, by captain
Sandiland, of H.M. S. Comet, (accompanied by
the Lucy Ann, store ship, from New South Wales,)
to Tahiti, of which island, as is well known, their
maternal progenitors were natives, and where
many of their relatives still dwell. Their number,
(including their little ones, and three seamen, who
had settled on the island,) amounted to eighty-
seven individuals. They reached Tahiti at a very
critical juncture in the affairs of the island, and
found the people under circumstances adapted to
produce a most unfavourable impression on their
minds. The queen and her adherents, on the one
side, and the principal chiefs, with their followers,
on the other, were encamped in a hostile attitude,
within two miles of each other, and the issue of
existing disputes appeared doubtful. Both parties,
however, concurred in expressions of good will
towards the strangers. A piece of land, in the
neighbourhood of the missionary station, at Pa-
peete, was appropriated to their use; arrangements,
were made by the captain for supplying them with
provision for six months ; and, before the Comet
left, temporary accommodation had been provided
for them by the queen.
The unfavourable state of things in Tahiti, at


the time of their arrival, appears to have produced
uneasiness in the minds of the strangers, and a
desire to return. This was greatly increased on
their being attacked by a disease that proved fatal
to twelve of their number, and which so alarmed
them that they resolved to remove by the first
opportunity. They were treated with great kind-
ness by all so long as they remained, but as they
were desirous to return, a small vessel was char-
tered, by subscriptions raised on the spot for this
purpose, by which they have been conveyed to
their native island.
Serious differences also occurred in the Leeward
Islands, from the treachery of a number of the chiefs
of Raiatea against the king. These disaffected
men persuaded the young chief of Tahaa to trans-
fer the government of that island to Borabora, and
involved all the Leeward Islands in the most dis-
astrous war that has occurred since the abolition of
idolatry. It has at length terminated, but it will
be many years before the injuries it has produced
are repaired.
Tamatoa, the venerable king of Raiatea, died in
the month of May, 1831. The agitation and
fatigue connected with the preparation for war, and
the excitement which the unhappy difference be-
tween himself and the young chief of Tahaa had
occasioned, appeared greater than his frame, en-
feebled by age, could sustain. He was among the
first who embraced the gospel in Raiatea, and was
a principal instrument in promoting its extension
among his people. He was friendly to the cause
of religion throughout his subsequent life, and his
dying charge to his people was, to preserve the


word of God with vigilance, and to be careful that
it was not driven from their shores.
He wrote several letters to the directors of the
Missionary Society; and the following was ad-
dressed to a Christian lady in England, not very
long before his death :
“ May you have health and salvation through
Jesus Christ our Saviour! I have received the
neat writing-desk you sent for me. My heart is
much pleased that you sent me this present, I
am rejoicing greatly, and praising God that you
and other friends think of me; but my greatest
joy, and greatest cause for praise, is, that I know
the gospel of Jesus Christ, and the merits of his
death, for which I am indebted to the compassion
of the believers in Britain. Through their prayers
I am become a human being, and 1 now know the
goodness of His word. You know that I was for-
merly a heathen; now I know the blessedness of
the gospel of Jesus our common Lord. My
dwelling is now comfortable; it is now well with
my land; it is now well with my people : all this
is from the goodness of the gospel of Jesus, which
is come to my land. All our former evil customs
are abolished totally. I myself was formerly in
Satan’s hand ; I was his property. I worshipped
idols, and was a faithful servant of his. Now I
am seized by Jesus, and am as a brand plucked
out of the burning. Your prayers and your com-
passion have brought to me a knowledge of the
love of Jesus Christ our Saviour. I was formerly
a heathen; now lam a brother to all who believe
in the Lord Jesus. I was formerly an idiot; now


my understanding has returned unto me. To the
compassion of British Christians I am indebted :
they prayed, and Jesus heard their prayers, and
brought a missionary to my land, to teach me and
my people the way of salvation. Formerly I slept
like the pigs; now 1 sleep on a bedstead, like a
human being. Formerly I ate bad food [alluding,
perhaps, to their heathen state]; now 1 know the
sweetness of the gospel of Jesus. My praise is
great towards God, that he has revealed his great
compassion to me; to your prayers and kindness
am I indebted for the knowledge of Jesus our
Saviour, and his love to us.
“ If you [christians] had not thought of me, I
should not have known the gospel of Jesus, and
his compassion to sinners. I should have been
still ignorant of the way of salvation; now I know
the preciousness of Jesus’ blood and word.
“ My heart is wondering at the goodness of God,
in causing the thought to grow in the heart of the
Missionary Society to show compassion to us, who
were in darkness, and in the shadow of death.
You did show true kindness; and now we know
Jesus and his precious word.
“ Although your face should not see my face,
and although my face should not see your face, in
this world, may we both meet at the right hand of
our Lord Jesus at the judgment day; may we both
sit at the right hand of our Lord, and unite in
praising him there ! This is my earnest desire in
God. Now, my sister in the faith of Jesus Christ,
pray to Jesus our Lord to give me much of his
Holy Spirit, to make good my evil heart.
“ May you have health and salvation, my sister
2 e 3


iii Jesus Christ our Lord, and may the Lord reward
you with life and salvation !
“ (Signed) T amatoa, king of Raiatea.”
At the close of the year 1832, on reviewing the
general aspect of the missions, it was evident that
though external observances were general, those
whose religious profession was sincere, formed a
distinct class in the community, and were but a
minority; that there was a line of distinction
drawn between the righteous and the wicked, and
they formed two separate classes. That this should
have taken place could not be matter of surprise,
and that there existed cause for such a separation
need excite no astonishment.
It has been already remarked, that one of
the earliest causes of trial to the Christian com-
munities in the South Seas, next to the out-
breaking of vicious propensities but feebly re-
strained, was the appearance of the most absurd
and injurious heresies. Visionaries pretended to
be favoured with special revelations from heaven,
not to supersede the scriptures, but to add to what
they contained. It was not long before the secret
of this delusion became apparent, by some of its
leaders declaring, that when they were under the
influence of inspiration they were not accountable
for their actions. A flood-gate for the practice of
iniquity was thus opened, whilst the guilty perpe-
trators of vice sought, by these delusions, to per-
suade themselves that they were tree from its
penalty. Those who had no root in themselves
fell away in this time of temptation; and several,
whom a desire to possess the good opinion of


others had induced professedly to regard the pre-
cepts of the scriptures, now availed themselves of
the pretext this afforded to return to the filthiness
and sin of their former state. The churches were
afflicted by a partial defection, and their enemies
triumphed.
Within the last few years the people had been
exposed to another great cause of demoralization ;
the importation of large quantities of spirituous
liquors, which had been retailed in the different
settlements. The baneful effects of this, on a
people among whom intoxication was formerly one
of their most easily besetting sins, cannot be de-
scribed, and few causes were likely to occasion
greater sorrow to the missionaries or distress to the
churches. Those who were thus induced to use
ardent spirits, if they had departed from the paths
of Christian virtue, became reckless of the excesses
into which they were hurried; while others, who
had hitherto maintained consistency of conduct,
now exposed themselves to shame. A number,
on this account, were separated from the fellowship
of the church; and though some of them continued
the victims of the habits thus induced, the greater
part of them were, after satisfactory indications of
penitence, and a return to consistency of deport-
ment, restored to the privileges which they had
forfeited.
The agitation and irregularities, inseparable
from civil war, during the years 1831 and 1832,
prevailed in the islands, and interrupted for a time,
at some of the stations, the attendance on the
schools, and on the means of public Christian in-
struction. The majority of the church members,
especially in the Westward Islands, had, through


all these perils, remained steadfast; many who
had been separated had returned to their commu-
nion, and a number, from time to time, continued
to seek admittance to its privileges, of whom it
was not too much to hope, that they were living
in the exercise of repentance towards God and
faith in our Lord Jesus Christ
The members of the churches appeared intelli-
gent, industrious, exemplary, and sincere. They
had to contend against the sinful inclinations of
their own hearts; were exposed to the reproach of
their own countrymen, whose conduct appeared in
humiliating contrast with their own ; and were also
the objects of ridicule, contempt, and misrepresen-
tation, from the irreligious who resorted to their
shores; and the majority of those who visited them
had no prepossession in favour of religion. Their
preservation, under these circumstances, and not-
withstanding the present immaturity of their Chris-
tian character, was no unimportant cause for thanks-
giving unto God. The numbers that were every
year added to these churches, showed also that the
Lord had not forsaken the work of his own hand.
The defections had not, it is presumed, rendered
the missionaries less circumspect in their proceed-
ings, nor less careful in their endeavours to ascer-
tain the suitableness of those received into Chris-
tian fellowship; yet, besides two hundred and six-
teen individuals who were united to the churches
in the out-stations among the Austral Islands,
during the year 1832, the accounts reported the
addition of three hundred and fifty-five to the
churches previously established at the several sta-
tions. In the islands there were, in 1832, thirty-
nine stations, fourteen missionaries, two artisans,


fifty native teachers, thirty-seven schools, seven
thousand scholars, thirty-nine congregations, the
average attendance at which was twenty-two thou-
sand, and twenty churches, containing three thou-
sand three hundred and seventy-one members.
Were these proofs of the Divine goodness and
benediction on the labours of the missionaries the
only ones the missionaries could record, in the
balances of the sanctuary, in the estimate of eter-
nity, it would be found to be a benefit that would
infinitely repay all the efforts and contributions em-
ployed in the missionary cause ; the true value of
which will only be understood in the regions of bless-
edness, where these results will prove the source of
unmingled felicity, and the subject of unceasing
praise. Another proof of the genuineness of the
faith of the native Christians, might be adduced
from the concern the churches manifest to com-
municate a knowledge of the gospel to the inha-
bitants of other islands who are still the subjects
of ignorance and idolatry, their zeal in accom-
plishing this object, and the grateful pleasure they
manifest when God is pleased to accompany their
endeavours with his blessing.
In the year 1833, the causes from which the
chief discouragements had arisen continued to
operate; the increasing number of ships resorting
to the islands for refreshment and traffic, and, with
the increase of commerce, the consequent profli-
gacy, from the increased intercourse of seamen
with the most depraved portions of native society;
and the large importations of ardent spirits, in
English and American vessels, chiefly the latter,
consisting of what is denominated New England
rum ; ijjany vessels conveying this, and, with the


exception of fire-arms and ammunition, no other
article of barter with which to traffic among the
natives. The activity and perseverance manifested
in promoting the sale and use of these pernicious
drugs, by hawking them about the islands, induc-
ing the chiefs to engage in the trade, and the es-
tablishment, by foreigners, who had left ships
touching at the islands, of a number of grog-shops
on the shore, occasioned the missionaries much
distress. By the retail of ardent spirits, these
houses became the greatest pests in the country,
the resort of the most abandoned men in the islands,
and the most indolent and depraved among the
crews of the shipping; proving alike seductive and
injurious to all within their influence, exhibiting,
at times, in the conduct of foreigners, scenes of
outrage and bloodshed unknown among the natives
since their renunciation of paganism.
Besides this, in the commencement of the year
1833, Tahiti became the scene of actual conflict
between the inhabitants of the northern and south-
ern peninsulas. The ostensible cause of the war
was the late marriage of the queen of Tahiti to a
second husband, under circumstances which the
assailants declared to be contrary to law. When
the people of Eimeo heard that the marriage had
taken place, they went over to Tahiti to protest
against it, insisting* on bringing the judge who had
proposed it to trial. They were told that the
nation had given its sanction befoie the marriage
had taken place; but, as they still insisted on
bringing the chief judge to trial, they were them-
selves impeached, tried, and, being pronounced
guilty of disaffection to the government, were sen-
tenced to public labour. A declaration or promise


was subsequently made by the people of Eimeo,
that, in consequence of the act of the national
assembly, the marriage would be considered legal,
and the whole of the sentence was revoked.
When the judges of Tahiti had silenced the
people of Moorea, they proceeded to Tautira, in
Taiarabu, to arraign the chiefs who had taken up
arms against the queen. In this they did not
succeed. Tati, the chief judge, was seized and
bound with ropes, and, after being roughly handled,
effected his escape with considerable difficulty.
The original ground of offence seems now to have
been forgotten, and the dispute to have assumed a
different form; the judges of Tahiti insisting on
the trial of those who were impeached as traitors,
and the latter setting the officers of justice at de-
fiance. The people of Taiarabu, with the exception
of a small minority, who were members of the
church, and adhered to the missionary, gathered
round their chiefs, and encouraged their resistance.
The circumstances of the mission family were at
this time peculiarly distressing. The peaceful
labours of the missionary were interrupted; and,
although the numbers who attended the means of
religious instruction were not diminished, the ex-
hortations to peace and submission to the laws, as
well as the repeated messages from the government,
appear to have been treated with reckless and ob-
stinate disregard. The queen had promised Mr.
Orsmond protection for himself and family as long
as it was in her power to afford it; but the circum-
stances of the mission-family became every day in-
creasingly perilous, and its ultimate preservation, at
least from plunder, in the event of actual hostilities,,
doubtful. The people from the opposite side now


joined those at Bogue Town. Mr. Orsmond thus
describes their arrival, and narrates the events
which followed:—
“ At 10, a. 7n., on the 2d of February, the people
from Paiuma came in their warlike equipment.
Vahamai, it seems, and Taviri, had sent for them.
They crowded into the place of worship, and sent
several messengers for me to go and pray with
them, and for them. I prayed to God for them,
and addressed them from Proverbs xx. 22. They
seem deaf to all reason and argument, and con-
sider my efforts to show them that they are doing
wrong as so many stratagems to mislead them.
Scarcely had this hostile party dispersed, when the
brethren, Davies, Darling, and Pritchard, arrived
in a canoe. They came to try to effect submission
to the laws; if not, to induce me, in compliance
with the wishes of the brethren, to remove from
the Peninsula. A messenger from the queen ar-
rived at the same time, bringing a letter, officially
requesting me to remove to Papara, stating that
she could no longer give me protection, as the
chiefs and people would no longer regard either
her requests or her laws. We have used every
means, both in private and in public, but with no
apparent success, and I must, I suppose, prepare
to move.
“At 6, a. m., February 3d, Mr. Pritchard
preached; at 1.0, a. in., Mr. Davies preached; at 4,
p. in. Mr. Darling preached.
“ February 4th.—Finding every means useless,
and it appearing that the members of the church were
joined in a league with the insurgents, we called a
church meeting, to inquire who were for the law, the
gospel, and for the king, and who were not. About


forty males spoke, testifying, ‘ We are for the gospel,
the teachers, the law, and the king; and, if our
teacher go first, we mean to follow him.’ These
things gave us a little, though very little, comfort,
for all seem infatuated with the idea that they are
in the right, though they have hound the chief
judges with ropes, and have joined in a bond to
take up arms against the queen, and have volun-
tarily broken covenant. They say that, if the
queen wish, they are quite willing for war.
“ As soon as they were gone I began the dreaded,
discomforting task of packing up every thing in
order to a hasty departure, to make room for the
army coming to enforce the prostrate laws, and to
punish the offenders. At 2, p. m., Mrs. Orsmond
and family left.
“ At sun-rise, in the morning of February 6th,
I preached from ‘Weep not for me, but for your-
selves, and for your children.’ At the time of ser-
vice many wept; yet none seem willing to give up
their foolish confidence, and their delusive trust in
their skill and arms.”
On the following morning Mr. Orsmond left his
station, and joined his family. Another week
passed away, but the chiefs and people of Taiarabu
obstinately refused all proposals from the queen
and fhe chiefs to allow the ringleaders to be brought
to trial; and, on the 11th of February, Mr. Ors-
mond continues:—
“ At sun-rise the men started from Papeari to
Teahupoo. The queen’s party halted close by my
house, and waved their flags for action; but the
insurgents retired, waving theirs as they went.
The ringleaders were connected, by family ties,
with Tati, and he wished to screen them from
2f


evil; while, therefore, the army halted, he went off
in a boat for Taviri and Vahamai; he succeeded
in obtaining Tiviri, who was brought before the
troops, disfranchised, and sentenced to work on
the king’s highway. At this the higher powers
expressed themselves satisfied; said, ‘ The law is
now respected; there is peace for the rest, and
pardon for all parties; return all to your homes,
and follow what is good/ The queen's army at
once retreated, having done no more injury than
taking every thing they could find. The insur-
gents were not present when Taviri was put to the
bar. On hearing it, therefore, they disdained the
peace that had been offered, and the forgiveness
that had been declared, and determined, after all,
to try their valour. They, therefore, hastened
down on the retiring army, which they overtook
close by my garden fence, and commenced their
fire. Fourteen of the insurgents fell, and five
from among the queen’s party; nineteen in all.”
Such was the melancholy result of these unhappy
differences; the tranquillity, which the influence
of Christianity had preserved for eighteen years,
was broken; Tahiti became the scene of violence
and bloodshed, and her inhabitants exposed to the
influence of all the evil passions with which intes-
tine war, especially among tribes partially
emerged from idolatrous barbarism, is invariably
attended. The missionaries, who unitedly deplored
the misery and evil which the pride and obstinacy of
the insurgents has produced, speak in commendable
terms of the great forbearance and clemency shown
by the victors, and the striking difference between
their conduct on the present and on former occa-
sions, which can only be ascribed to the influence


of the gospel in softening the natural ferocity of
their dispositions. In mourning over the blind
and cruel infatuation of the insurgents, Mr. Ors-
mond observes: —
“ 1. They violated their public testimony of ap-
probation of the marriage (if they really gave it).
2. They bound the principal judges in ropes. 3.
They employed means, and sent messengers, to
induce other parties to engage in the war. 4.
They took up arms against their sovereign. 5.
They despised more than twenty offers of peace
and reconciliation. No sermon, advice, nor warn-
ing, could move them. The queens multiplied
offers of peace were despised as frequently as they
were made. Neither compassion for myself and
family, which I frequently pleaded, nor love to
their wives and families, could induce them to give
up the foolishly contested point.”
Before this disastrous event occurred, the causes
already noticed had been long in operation. The
insubordination, confusion, and disregard to the
ordinary restraints which the occurrence of actual
war produced, as was to be apprehended, increased
these evils. In reference to the effect of the war
upon many of the people, Mr. Orsmond, after
speaking of their intemperance, observes, “ I have
seen more wickedness within the last two weeks
than in sixteen years before.”
When the consternation had somewhat subsided,
Mr. Orsmond returned to Taiarabu, but was not
able to collect the people to attend to religious in-
struction. In consequence, also, of the influence
of the war, and the baneful effects of the activity
with which the retail of ardent spirits was carried
on, the ordinances of the church were discontinued


at the station at Papeete; and the other stations,
although they appear to have suffered less than
those above referred to, were greatly injured.
1 he progress of the evils arising from the use of
araent spirits, led the missionaries to use special
means for diminishing the traffic in this destructive
article. Temperance Societies were formed, in-
cluding many of the chiefs and other persons of
was established in August,
1833, and Mr. Wilson, of Matavai, states that,
be ore the close of the year, one thousand indi-
viduals were associated as members.
|he indolence, irregularities, insubordination,
and growing evils which resulted from the war,
and were aggravated by the extending use of
ardent spirits, began, in the year 1833, to excite
serious apprehensions among the chiefs them-
selves; and, after Temperance Societies had been
formed, at the recommendation of the missionaries,
and their good effects perceived, the chiefs of
ialnti, at a public meeting, in April, 1834, passed
a law prohibiting the use or sale of ardent spirits,
and prohibiting its importation. Tati, the intelli-
gent chief of Papara, and his people, were among
the earliest to adopt the recommendations of the
missionaries, and, in a short time after its forma-
their Temperance Society included three
hundred and sixty individuals. The chief de-
stroyed a large quantity of ardent spirits, which he
had received from traders in exchange for native
produce. The following is the account of the
result of the Temperance Society, as communicated
liy the Rev. J. Williams, shortly after his arrival
in this country
<s lhe vacant seals in chapel began again to fill.


the schools were well attended, and attention to
religion revived; the happy state of things prior
to the introduction of ardent spirits re-appeared.
This gave the people so much delight, that they
called a meeting of the inhabitants of their popu-
lous district, and agreed among themselves that
they would not trade with any vessel or boat that
should bring ardent spirits to their shores.
“ The chiefs and people of other districts, who
earned this agreement into effect, began to follow
the good example, and the effect so great, that
instead of an importation of rum to the almost
incredible amount of twelve thousand dollars,
which had been the case at Tahiti during the pre-
vious year, not one-third of that sum was thus
expended, during an equal period, after the forma-
tion of Temperance Societies.”
This revival of attention to the observances of
religion continued among the people of Tahiti
and Eimeo to the close of the year 1834, the date
of the latest communications that have been pub-
lished.
At Matavai, the original station, now under the
care of Mr. Wilson, one of the senior missionaries,
the prospects were, in September, 1834, more en-
couraging than for some time previous. At Hankey
city, a station under the care of Mr. Nott, the
school was well attended, and a few members had
been added to the church. At Wilks’ Harbour, a
station occupied by Mr. Pritchard, though no
visible change had taken place in the spiritual
state of the people, the attendance of the people
on the means of religious improvement had in-
creased since August, 1834, when regulations
were adopted for this purpose. Burder’s Point,


an important station, where Mr. Darling has
laboured ever since its formation, in 1817, presented
an encouraging aspect. The heart of the mis-
sionary was cheered by the indications of temporal
and spiritual improvement among the people,
among whom the growth of habits of industry
were pleasingly manifest. The church was in-
creasing; many were restored who had been ex-
cluded, and the schools had greatly revived. At
Bogue Town, in Taiarapu, where the people had
suffered much on account of war, Mr. Orsmond
reported the station in peace, the schools in active
operation, a new chapel nearly finished, and the
whole presenting a cheering prospect of usefulness.
Roby Town, the station occupied by Mr. Henry,
one of the oldest missionaries, was also reviving;
industry was on the increase, and the people
manifested greater attention to the means of reli-
gious improvement.
Haweis Town, the sphere of Mr. Davies’s labours,
continued to manifest many tokens of the Divine
blessing on the labours of the devoted missionary.
The church contained upwards of four hundred
members, while the average attendance on public
worship, including two out-stations, was upwaids
of eleven hundred. The school contained three
hundred and eighteen adults, and ninety chil-
dren.
In Eimeo, at the station under the care of Mr.
Simpson, who also had the superintendence of the
academy, signs of improvement appeared in the
growing industry of the people. The average
congregation on the sabbath amounted to seven
hundred persons, and the church numbered two
hundred and forty-eight members. The schools


contained upwards of four hundred scholars, be-
sides those at three flourishing out-stations. At
Sir Charles Sanders’s Island, Anna, the devoted
native missionary, continued to labour with fidelity
and success.
The mission in Huahine, under Mr. BarfT,
appeared to enjoy the blessing of the great Head of
the church. The average congregation on the
sabbath was between seven hundred and eight hun-
dred. In the course of the year forty-seven per-
sons had been baptized. The church consisted of
three hundred and six members; four had been
admitted to communion ; six had been for a time
separated, but, with two others, were restored ;
four had been separated, and ten had removed to
other churches. Ten of the church-members, all
advanced in years, had been removed by death.
They died in peace; and pleasing instances had
occurred of the happy manner in which some of
them departed this life.
Raiatea and Tahaa have, since the return of
Mr. Williams and the death of Mr. Laxton, been
destitute of the means of religious improvement,
excepting as missionaries from other stations have
been able to visit them. The church in the former
island contained about one hundred and ten, and
that in the latter about thirty members. The
station in Borabora, under the care of Mr. Platt,
had suffered much from the war and its attendant
evils, more especially the profligacy of one of the
principal chiefs. The church had been, by fre-
quent defections, reduced to about eighty-six ; but
the missionary, though faint and discouraged, was
pursuing his work with commendable perseverance.


Painful as the state of things had become in this
station, considering the powerful causes of destruc-
tion-war and intemperance —which have been in
such fearful operation here, nothing has occuried
that ought to excite surprize; and there is every
reason to believe that, in answer to the many
prayers of his people, He, who alone is able to
bring good out of evil, will give that wisdom,
energy, and devotedness to his servants, the mis-
sionaries, which the circumstances of the people
so urgently require. God can make darkness light
before them ; can cause the wrath of man to praise
him, while the remainder of that wrath he restrains;
and thus he can promote the stability, purity, and
enlargement of his church, in those far distant
islands, which “ shall be unto him for a name and
an everlasting memorial that shall not be cut ofi.”
In the South-Sea islands, including the stations
in which missions have been commenced from Tahiti
and the adjacent islands, there were, at the close of
1834, thirty-eight stations and out-stations, fifteen
missionaries, three European and sixty-nine native
assistants, twenty-two churches, two thousand
three hundred and ninety-one communicants,
thirty-nine schools, and seven thousand five hun-
dred and seventy-six scholars. .
In the Report of the London Missionary Society
for 1835, the subjoined retrospect of the progress
and results of the mission is given, which will not be
regarded as an inappropriate conclusion of the
preceding records of the mission in Tahiti and
the adjacent islands : #
« portv years ago, when this society was formed,
the islands of the South Seas had been discovered,


visited, explored, and abandoned, as presenting no
objects worthy of further regard. Their inhabit-
ants were sunk still lower in wretchedness, by
intercourse with foreigners, and left a prey to the
merciless idolatry that was fast sweeping them
from the face of the earth. To them the attention
of our venerable fathers in this cause was first
directed, and a mission was auspiciously com-
menced. But a series of disasters followed; some
of the missionaries lost their lives in the field;
in 1809, all, with two exceptions, were expelled,
and success seemed hopeless. In 1811 the mis-
sionaries returned; the Lord smiled upon their
efforts, and idolatry was subverted, infant-murder
and human sacrifices ceased, education was pro-
moted, converts flocked around the missionaries,
churches were gathered, missionary societies
formed, and teachers sent forth. Now, the people,
fast rising in the scale of nations, have, as fruits
of the Divine blessing on missionary perseverance,
a written language, a free press, a representative
government, courts of justice, written laws, useful
arts, and improved resources. An infant navy is
rising on their shores, commercial enterprise is
promoting industry and wealth, and a measure of
domestic comfort, unknown to their ancestors, now
pervades their dwellings. Besides these and other
blessings of the present life, multitudes have
received the grace of God in truth ; numbers have
entered the regions of eternal felicity; and others
are walking in the fellowship and holiness of the
gospel, as heirs of immortality. A nation has
been born at once, surrounding nations are blessed
through their mercy, and, according to the latest


intelligence, the prospects of usefulness, especially
among the Navigators’ Islands, were never so
encouraging as at the present time.
“ Since the year 1817 the printing-press has
been in operation, and, among a people heretofore
destitute of a written language 105,400 copies of
portions of the scripture and Christian hooks have
been put into circulation.”
the end.
Printed by J. Rider, Little Britain, London.








