

MISSION TO WESTERN AUSTRALIA,
COMMONLY CALLED
THE SWAN RIVER SETTLEMENT.
At a Meeting held in the Vestry of St. John’s Chapel, Bedford-row, on the 23rd of
September, and by adjournment at 32, Sackville-street, Piccadilly, on the 30th,
THE HON. AND REV. BAPTIST W. NOEL IN THE CHAIR,
Captain Irwin, late Acting Governor of Western Australia, having stated in detail the
claims which the Aborigines and Colonists have upon the sympathy of British Christians •
and having also shown that, while facilities for Missionary exertions are presented in that
region, the spiritual wants of the inhabitants are left almost wholly unsupplied ;
It was unanimously resolved :
1. That a Society be formed for establishing- a Christian Mission (in conformity with the principles of the
Church of England) to the Aborigines and more destitute of the settlers; and that its designation be,
The Western Australian Missionary Society.
2. That the system to be adopted is to include the instruction of the Aborigines in the arts of civilized life,
on the plan pursued in the Moravian Missions.
3. That, as the Meeting consider a gentleman , who has offered to conduct the Mission duly qualified, a
fund be raised for the purpose of sending him out, together with his wife, who will afford valuable
assistance in the work, and two Catechists, of whom they also approve ; and that, with a view to this
object, an appeal be prepared, and submitted to the public, embodying the principal points in Captain
Irwin’s statement, and based upon the Resolutions now adopted.
4. That a Committee be appointed to conduct the general business of the Society, and the following gentle-
men be appointed Members for the ensuing year, with power to add to their number :
Hon. and Rev, Baptist W, Noel. Capt. Bazalgette, R. N.
Rev. G. Harker. Capt. Gascoyne.
Rev. S. Jones. Capt. Cates.
The Rev. H. R. Maude. B. Smith, Esq.
The Rev. M. Hobart Seymour. Lieut. Maynard, R.N.
Gen. Tolley, V. P. J. Woolley, Esq.
Thomas Meux, Esq.
C. E. Mangles, Esq., Treasurer.
Capt. Irwin, Honorary Secretary.
5. That an Annual Subscription of 10s. constitutes the Subscriber a Member of this Society.


6. That application be made by the Secretary to certain noblemen and others, now or hereafter to be named,
to solicit their patronage in aid of the Society.
(Signed) BAPTIST W. NOEL,
Chairman.
Subscriptions and Donations will be received by the Treasurer, at 27, Austin Friars; Messrs.
Drummond, Bankers, Charing Cross; and by Lieut. Skinner, Assistant Secretary of the Naval and
Military Bible Society, 32, Sackville-street, Piccadilly.
APPEAL.
The Colony of Western Australia, commonly called “ The Swan River Settlement,” which
was established in 1829, now consists of an European population exceeding 2000 persons,
scattered over a tract of country more than 200 miles in extent. The Aborigines in the
district occupied by the Colonists may amount to about the same number. For the spiritual
instruction of the Settlers there is only the Colonial Chaplain, stationary at Perth, the seat
of Government: it is evident therefore that all who reside in the remoter parts of the Colony
must be destitute of the advantages of religious ordinances ; while the Natives of the country,
who are still in the lowest state of barbarism, continue in the grossest heathen darkness,
without a single Christian teacher of any denomination among them.
In the year 1832, an application made to His Majesty’s Government on the part of the
Colonists for additional Chaplains, and a memorial for Missionaries to the Natives, addressed
to the Church Missionary Society, were equally without success. By a communication
recently received from a Gentleman holding a high official situation in the Colony (dated
18th of March last), it appears that the religious feelings of some of the Settlers themselves
are beginning to decline. After inquiring whether any thing had been arranged in the way
of Missionary aid from the existing Societies in England, the writer adds, “ We are fast
lapsing into a state of indifference in that respect, both as regards ourselves and the Natives.
Indeed, we, who have known better, are in a most deplorable state, from the gradual fading
of those impressions which habitual exercise tends so much to keep distinctly marked.”
Every one who appreciates the blessings of the Gospel will be desirous to extend them
to those who, constrained by circumstances to settle in this distant region, are severely
feeling the privation of the means of grace to which they are now subjected ; and as regards
the Aborigines, it is plainly a moral duty to train them in the habits of civilized life, and to
prepare them, by religious culture, for the great social change to which their intercourse
with Europeans has given birth. Impressed with these considerations, a Society was
organized in Dublin at the commencement of the present year, for sending out Missionaries
to the Colony; but it was subsequently deemed more expedient, on many accounts, that the


principal or Central Society should be in London; the Association in Dublin still co-operating
with the friends of the object in England, and undertaking to contribute liberally towards
the funds required for the purpose.
The Spiritual interests of the Colony have also awakened the sympathy of several
friends of religion in Glasgow, Members of the Church of Scotland, whose pecuniary
assistance has been generously offered for the object. It is due to the latter to state, that
this Mission originated in a proposal on their part to the Church Missionary Society, to
send to the Settlement a Missionary of the Church of England (the Colonists being mostly
of that persuasion), and that the necessary funds would be raised by the Glasgow Association
and friends of the cause in other parts of the United Kingdom. The Society, in lamenting
their inability to accede to the proposal, expressed their deep sense of the “ liberal and
catholic spirit” that suggested it; a spirit which, it is confidently expected, will be evinced
by the friends of religion of other denominations in answer to this appeal. The Committee
are happy in being able to state that an interest has been excited in Germany, through the
instrumentality of the Rev. J. Fjellstedt, of the Church Missionary Society. That Gentleman
writes from Stuttgard, the 2/th of August last (after communicating with some friends
on the subject), his expectation that a corresponding Association could be formed there,
that would take much Christian interest in the Mission. As various attempts to obtain the
desired advantages from several Missionary Institutions have failed, and as the spiritual
aspect of the Settlement, unless speedy measures of relief can be adopted, must become
gradually more distressing, it has been resolved to establish a separate Society, the express
object of which shall be the religious and moral improvement of the Colony. The progress
which has been already made may be learned from the foregoing resolutions; and it
is earnestly hoped that Christians of all denominations will lend their countenance to an
undertaking, the design of which is the perpetuation of pure and undefiled religion among
those of our countrymen who have emigrated from their native land, and the propagation of
the Gospel among the benighted heathen in the midst of whom they are settled.
By Order of the Committee,
(Signed) F. C. IRWIN,
Honorary Secretary.
Those friends who feel disposed to assist in this Christian work by their contributions , —
and the smallest will be thankfully received,—are requested to place them in the hands of
, who has kindly offered to receive and transmit
them to the Treasurer.


