

Mission and Accomplishments of the Occupation
in the
Civil Information and Education Fields
GENERAL HEADQUARTERS
SUPREME COMMANDER FOR THE ALLIED POWERS
CIVIL INFORMATION AND EDUCATION SECTION
1 JANUARY 1950


TABLE OF CONTENTS
I. General 1
11. Information 1
111. Education 11
IV. Religions and Cultural Resources 20
V. Public Opinion and Sociological Research.•. 27
Charts
Chart 1* Map Showing CIE Information Centers 5
2. Interests and Occupations of Patrons of
CIE Information Centers 6
3. Humber of Licensed Radio Receivers and
Average Humber of Listeners per Receiver 7
4. Documentary Film Attendance 9
5. Exhibits 10
6* Former and Hew Systems Leading to
Higher Education 13
7* Ministry of Education 14
8* Schools, Teachers and Students in Japan...ls
9. Production of TextbooVs 16
10, Private vs Ministry of Education TextbooVs
Approved for Publication 17
11. Cultural Travel of Japanese 21
12* Steps in the Conduct of a Research Project 28


MISSION AND ACCOMPLISHMENTS OF THE OCCUPATION
IN THE CIVIL INFORMATION AND EDUCATION FIELDS
I • GENERAL
1* The Civil Information and Education Section was activated by
General Orders 193, 22 September 1945, and currently operates under
this same charter except for minor amendments embodied in General
Orders 27, 3 June 1946. It is a staff section of General Headquarters,
Supreme Commander for the Allied Powers, with responsibility for the
accomplishment of Occupation objectives in the fields of information,
education, religion, culture, fine arts, and public opinion and socio-
logical research. These responsibilities are generally referred to as
reorientation and reeducation. Overall policies which pertain to the
activities of this Section are determined by the Supreme Commander for
the Allied Powers on authority granted by basic post-surrender docu-
ments and directives based on decisions of the Far Eastern Commission.
2. The activities of the Civil Information and Education Section
are centered in fields where the results cannot be measured easily or
objectively. They deal largely with intangibles, with matters closely
related to the thought and culture patterns of the Japanese people.
These patterns have existed for years, even centuries, and it was
recognized in the beginning that attempts to alter them overnight
would result in misunderstanding and confusion. Intensive study and
careful planning have been and are prerequisites to any action under-
taVen. Changes of necessity have been gradual and are in the main the
result of action by the Japanese themselves. The personnel of this
Section serve in advisory capacities to Japanese agencies and groups.
Patience and persistence, in addition to enthusiasm and understanding,
have been and are considered indispensable to accomplish reorientation
and reeducation of the Japanese people.
11. INFORMATION
1. The Information Division is that part of the Civil Informa-
tion and Education Section which is concerned, firstly, with a flow
to the Japanese people of such information and cultural materials as
will advance the objectives of the occupation and, secondly, with the
nature and performance of such Japanese informational and cultural
media as newspapers, the radio, motion pictures, magazines, booVs,
exhibits, stage plays and music.
2. The Information Division is the agency through which the
headquarters of the Supreme Commander for the Allied Powers releases
to the Japanese people statements of policy and reports on what it is
doing. It plans and carries out informational campaigns. It prepares
material* needed in such campaigns. It counsels Japanese Government
offices and private organizations on their informational efforts.


3. The Division maintains close relations with the Japanese who
produce radio programs, newspapers, magazines, boovs, feature films,
newsreels, documentary films, filmstrips, stage plays, music and other
media* It seeks to imhue them with understanding of their role in a
democratic society and their responsibilities as well as their rights#
to guide them in making reforms and in originating and using construc-
tive materials, and to help them in overcoming difficulties.
4. The Division procures and makes available to the Japanese
such materials as documentary films, press and magazine articles,
photographs, boovs, periodicals, exhibits, filmstrips, plays, and
music from the United States and other countries which are needed
to supplement what the Japanese themselves have or can obtain from
abroad through commercial channels to familiarize them with the con-
cepts, institutions and accomplishments of the democracies* When
necessary, it adapts these materials to the Japanese audience.
5. The Division encourages and arranges for the importation of
American and other Allied commercial publications, motion pictures,
news and photograph services, and translation and performance rights
and for the donation or exchange of useful foreign publications and
other media*
6. Information Programs! a* One of the explicit purposes of
the Occupation has been to give the Japanese an opportunity to dis-
card those of their past ways which made them a menace to the rest of
the world and to establish democratic principles in all spheres of
political, economic and cultural life. It was recognized from the be-
ginning that this opportunity could not be left to chance. It re-
quired—and would require for some years —systematic endeavors to make
as many Japanese as possible conscious of the significance of the
opportunity and understand the changes which were taving place.
b. To give form and direction to such endeavors, information
programs have been in operation since 1945, with appropriate revisions
from time to time, in such broad fields as political education, eman-
cipation of women, and labor-management relations. These have been
supplemented with programs on such subjects as land reform, industrial
democratization, civil liberties, the civil code, local autonomy, edu-
cation boards, and agricultural and fisheries co-operatives, all in-
volving emphasis on democratic principles.
c. Problems less political in character also have required
information programs or campaigns of varying duration. For example,
when it became imperative to stimulate coal production and crop de-
liveries, information campaigns were launched. To reduce disease and
acquaint the public witn the benefits of the new health centers, an
educational program was worved out. Such programs have been conducted
on public safety, fuel conservation, fire prevention, reforestation,
price stabilization and rationing, tax payments, housing, wild life
conservation, the repatriation of war prisoners, and utilization of
imported foodstuffs.


d. In principle, no information program is formulated or
implemented by the Information Division if it can he handled effec-
tively hy a Japanese agency. Thus increasing attention has been given
to assisting government offices, political parties, and nrivate organi-
sations in informational activities. Institutes have been conducted
for the men and vomen engaged in such worV, with emphasis on tne
difference between telling people what they must thinv and providing
them with the information with which they can do their own thinVing.
Counsel is given on their programs and the materials prepared to im-
plement them*
7. Newspapers t a. Japan at the end of the war had 53 daily
general newspapers with a combined circulation of about 13,500,000, or
a copy for every 5.4 persons in the population. They immediately were
liberated from the tight governmental control which had prevailed for
years. Tutelage was started which had three broad objectives* to
have editors comprehend and cooperate with SCAP policies, to develop a
sense of responsible journalism, and to elevate professional standards.
b. New newspapers came into existence, and by the end of
1946 there were 132 dailies, a number which remained fairly constant
until an increase in the newsprint supply in the autumn of 1949 made
possible another upward climb to 165 with the total circulation esti-
mated in excess of 27,900,000, at the close of the year, or a copy for
every 2*9 persons in the population. Weekly general newspapers, trade
papers, labor union and political party organs, and other special news-
papers are estimated to have a combined circulation of about 18,000,000.
c. Continuous guidance in the form of talvs with individual
editors and newspaper staffs and national, regional and local insti-
tutes has resulted in the adoption by the Jaoanese press of a code of
ethics modeled after that of the American Newspaper Publishers Associa-
tion, greater objectivity in reoorting news, simplification of the
language used in editorial columns, and increased accuracy.
d. Available to the Japanese press are the news and features
of most of the major world agencies, including the Associated Press,
United Press, International News Service, Beuters, and Agence France
Preese. What they provide is supplemented with documentary, bacVground
and interpretive materials supplied by the Reorientation Branch of the
Department of the Army and by the Department of State.
e. To Veep the Japanese public informed of Occupation
policies and developments, at least three press conferences are held
weevly, each usually devoted to a single topic presented by a special-
ist, and from thirty to fifty press releases are distributed weevly to
all Japanese news agencies and major newspapers.


8* Magazine 8t a. The lifting of controls after the war brought
an increase in the number of Japanese magazines, popular and special-
ized, from about 600 with a combined circulation of 5,900,000 to nearly
3,000 at one time* Many of these failed to hold readers and went out
of existence, leaving about 2,400 at the end of 1949 with a total cir-
culation estimated at possibly 55,000,000,
b* Many of these magazines regularly solicit articles ob-
tained for their consideration from American magazines, more than 100
of which have given permission for use of anything they print, from
Department of the Army and Department of State writers, from United
States Government and United Nations publications, and from the
British and Australian Governments. Such articles embrace all sub-
jects, political, social, literary, economic, scientific and technical*
In 1949, Japanese magazines took approximately 7,500 articles* Prob-
ably never before has a comparable volume of foreign material appeared
in the periodicals of any country.
c. With a circulation of 1,300,000, greater than that of any
other magazine in Japan, Header* s Digest is published in Tovyo in the
Japanese language. Printed in English in Japan within a few days of
their appearance in the United States are Time. Newsweek, and the
overseas weekly of the New York Times* On sale also are Life.
American. Woman 1 s Home Companion, and various other magazines shipped
in commercially from the United States, as well as various British
periodicals*
9. Translated Books; a. Copyright complications delayed until
May 1948 arrangements for making selected contemporary books of the
United States and other countries available to Japanese readers in
their own language. By 31 December 1949, contracts had been concluded
through the Information Division with Japanese publishers for 374
foreign books, of which 324 were American, recommended because of
their value in furthering occupation objectives* Publication of 95
of them had been completed by the same date*
b. Typical of the titles on the translation program were
Abe Lincoln Grows Up. by Carl Sandburg, Of Human Freedom, by Jacques
Barzun, Liberal Education, by Mark Van Human Leadership in
Industry, by Sam A. Lewisohn, The Miracle of America, by Andre Maurois,
The Republic, by Charles A. Beard, American Labor Unions, by Florence
Peterson, The Babe Ruth Story, by Bob Considine, Freedom and Culture,
by John Dewey, Preventive Medicine and Public Health, by Wilson
Smillie, Science in Childhood Education, by Gerald S. Craig, Blueprint
for World Conquest, by William H. Chamberlain, 0* Pioneers, by Willa
Cather, Speaking Frankly, by James F. Byrnes, Darkness at Noon, by
Arthur Koestler, Life with Father. by Howard Lindsay and Russell Crouse,
Peace of Mind, by Joshua Liebman, and Animal Farm, by George Orwell*


c. In parallel with this officially sponsored translation
program, American and other foreign copyright proprietors licensed to
do business in Japan assign boov translation rights under private con-
tracts with Japanese publishers* By the end of 1949, such contracts
had been concluded for 271 boo Vs.
d* In addition, 584 other foreign copyrighted booVs have
been made available for publication in translation without royalty
payments, as well as 192 booVs in the public domain*
10* Information CentersB a. As English is read easily by many
Japanese, it is possible through booVs and periodicals in that lang-
uage to maVe accessible to them much of what they need and want to
Vnow about the rest of the world. This is being done in seventeen
information centers located, as shown on Chart 1, in major cities on
all four of the main islands of Japan. The reading and reference
materials in each include at least 6,000 booVs, 400 periodicals, and
several thousand documents and pamphlets covering all fields*
b* In charge of each center is an American professional
librarian, who doubles or triples the value of the materials by help-
ing readers locate what they want and by answering questions* Uy
collecting no admission fee, by having a minimum of red tape, by
Treeping booVs and magazines on open shelves, and by providing refer-
ence assistance, the centers are models for the Japanese to follow
in slaving their own archaic libraries better able to meet the needs
of a democratic society.
CIE INFORMATION CENTERS
Chart 1.


c. The centers are more than libraries. In an average four-
week period, they sponsored 34 inspection tours for special groups, 68
children’s story hours, 159 English language classes, 46 lectures, 120
meetings of various groups, 103 showings of documentary films, 85 con-
certs of recorded American music, and 14 square dances. These activi-
ties were participated in by 36,832 Japanese.
d. From the opening of the first in ToVyo in 1945, 3,494,369
Japanese had used the centers by the end of 1949, and monthly atten-
dance was averaging about 180,000. As shown on Chart 2, more than
half of those who used the centers were students, but also drawing in-
formation and inspiration from American boovs and periodicals were in-
fluential editors, government officials, physicians, industrialists,
teachers and organizational leaders.
e. Circulation of boovs and magazines for home use was made
possible in 1949, and during the year Japanese borrowed 126,346 books
and 173,025 magazines.
f. To extend the usefulness of the centers beyond the cities
where they are located, a system of book and magazine deposits in
Japanese school and public libraries is being developed. Some com-
munities have provided special quarters for such deposits.
g. At least five new centers will be opened during 1950.
Two will be in ®ovyo, and the others have been allocated to Nagano,
Okayama and Matsuyama.
CIE INFORMATION CENTERS
Chart 2.


11. Radio; a. Radio broadcasting to the Japanese people, pend-
ing legislation which will permit the licensing of private broadcasters,
is conducted exclusively by the Japan Broadcasting Corporation, a pub-
lic body freed after the war from governmental control which operates
two networvs of 114 stations of varying power covering the whole coun-
try*
b* The corporation is maintained by fees collected from all
owners of radio receivers. Many receivers were destroyed during the
war, and others long were Inoperative because tubes and other parts
could not be replaced. By 31 December 1949, however, there were more
than 8,000,000 registered sets, more than ever before. (Chart 3)*
c. The Information Division originates no radio programs.
It maintains close liaison with the corporation and provides guidance
and assistance in its programming* Special assistance is given to the
corporation in the carrying out of its desire to have the radio used
to advance democracy in Japan. Objectivity has been achieved in
newscasts. New types of programs have been developed, notably a
number with public participation. Machinery has been created to
determine what radio listeners want to hear, and much has been done
to modify programs to satisfy their preferences. Broadcasting for
classroom reception has made radio an educational tool which has
broadened the horizons of both school children and teachers.
THE NUMBED OF LICENSED DAOIO RECEIVERS
IN JAPAN
Chart 3.


d. fire staff members holding responsible positions in the
corporation hare been sent to the United States to observe advances
in program techniques and the public service potentialities of radio*
For other staff members* institutes have been held in the writing of
program scripts and direction of programs* With more sVilled per-
sonnel available* increasing autonomy has been encouraged for local
stations* resulting in greater variety and originality in what is
heard by the radio audience*
12* Motion Pictures t a* The potentialities of motion pictures
as a reorientation medium have been exploited fully. In this field
perhaps more than any other* it has been necessary to supplement the
facilities and materials available to the Japanese from their own re-
sources* Through visual libraries or centers* one in each of the 46
prefectures, sosie 1,300 16-millimeter sound projectors from the United
States are being lent to schools* citizens 1 public halls* parent-
teacher associations, youth groups* labor unions* farm cooperatives
and other organizations for the showing of documentary or educational
films*
b. For the nationwide distribution networv made possible by
these projectors, films which further occupation objectives have been
obtained from the United States* Canada* Great Britain, Australia and
Hew Zealand* Many of them are of government origin, but others are
acquired from commercial producers or private organizations* In-
tended originally for audiences with different bacvgrounds, they often
must be adapted for the Japanese through elimination or addition of
scenes and changes in the commentary. For all* the language of the
sound tracv is translated into Japanese*
c* By the end of 1949* 133 such films had been released*
and new subjects were being prepared for release at the rate of five
a month* Distributed through the prefectural visual libraries,
16-millimeter prints had been seen by 155*050*167 Japanese* usually
under circumstances which permitted discussion of what had been seen*
d* Of most of these same films* 35-millimeter prints had
been shown also in commercial motion picture theaters on their re-
gular programs* By the end of 1949, they had been seen toy an esti-
mated 231*726,078 Japanese. Theatrical and non-theatrical showings
combined had been attended by at least 386*776*245 people* nearly
five times the 81*000*000 population of Japan. (Chart 4)


DOCUMENTARY FILM ATTENDANCE
Chart 4.
«. The films thus made available to the Japanese people
shoved the cities, towns and farms of the United States and other
countries. They showed schools and factories. They showed people
living and worVing together in a democratic society. Some focused
attention on such universal problems as the world food shortage, the
fight against disease, and soil conservation.
f. Useful though they are, these films from other countries
alone cannot communicate all of the information or ideas needed in
the reorientation of the Japanese. Thus the Japanese themselves are
encouraged and guided in the production of original documentary films
dealing specifically with their own post-war problems.
g. Feature films, though primarily entertainment, also have
reorientation value. From 1,963 in 1943, the number of motion picture
theaters in Japan had declined to 1,008 at the end of the war, but by
the end of 1949 there were 2*217 in operation. For distribution to
them, Japanese producers were providing about ten feature films monthly,
in many of which the Information Division had given counsel.


h. More than a third of the playing tine in these theaters
was given not to Japanese films hut to pictures from abroad, princi-
pally the United States. American feature films and newsreels re-
turned to Japanese screens early in 1946 and by the end of 1949 nine
or ten feature films were being released monthly, films from other
countries were being imported at the rate of 24 yearly from France,
14 from Great Britain, 7 from the Soviet Union, 5 from Italy, and 2
from the Argentine.
13* lxhibits! a. Perhaps the most flexible and easily pro-
duced reorientation media are picture displays, posters and exhibits.
Under American direction, a staff of Japanese artists is engaged in
producing such materials on virtually every subject or theme on the
reorientation program. Distribution is principally through the pre-
fectural visual libraries to schools, factories, department stores
and organizations of all vinds, as shown on Chart 5.
Chart 5.


b. Photographs* cartoons* charts and other pictorial de-
vices are employed. Some materials taVe the form of a simple series
of placards for projection by a stereoptican or display on the walls
of a small room. Some may be in the form of a story for use by
itinerant "paper theaters*" which show pictures one at a time in a
wooden frame with a running commentary by the operator. Others are
elaborate displays requiring a large hall*
111. EDUCATION
1* The Education Division is that part of the Civil Information
and Education Section which is concerned primarily with the reorgani-
zation and rehabilitation of the entire system of education in Japan*
comprising more than 42*000 schools* almost 19,000,000 students and
approximately 650,000 teachers.
2. The Division furnishes advice and assistance to the Japanese
Government in effecting the decentralization of educational controls
and power and the return of schools to the people, and in the training
of leaders who will understand the purposes of and be professionally
qualified to advance the new educational program. It also furnishes
guidance in the economic and physical rehabilitation of school facil-
ities to provide for an extension of basic education and for construc-
tion required because of war damage.
3. The Division is charged with responsibility for insuring • • •
•the inclusion of such new courses of instruction in school curriculum
as are necessary to accomplish the mission of proper dissemination of
democratic ideals and principles," and offers professional advice in
the modification of the system of writing and publication of textbooVs
for elementary and secondary schools.
4. It encourages programs of adult education aimed at meeting
the challenge of conflicting ideologies by maving clear the fundamen-
tal principles of democracy* programs of vocational education to provide
sVilled personnel needed for post-war national recovery, and the de-
velopment of teacher training and higher education to meet the ever
expanding need for democratically trained professional leadership.
5. The Education Division maintains close liaison with organi-
zations concerned with educational activities, both in and out of
school, and contributes professional guidance and trained leadership
so critically needed in the field of youth organizations. It offers
technical assistance in the preparation of visual media used in the
educational program. It also serves as liaison between this head-
quarters and Japanese nationals who desire to travel abroad for
cultural purposes.
6. School Administration; a. At the beginning of the Occupa-
tion, the Supreme Commander directed the Japanese Government to es-
tablish immediately a normally operating school system and to


eliminate militarism and ultranationaliem both in content of instruc-
tion and educational personnel* Jrom the beginning, personnel of the
Education Division have worved with enlightened Japanese educators
toward this goal* Progress is being made through guidance of Japanese,
both official and non-official; and through these efforts and the
genuine interest of the Japanese people in an improved educational
system, there has been written into law a new definition of the direc-
tion for education* The totalitarian pattern of a national school
system, with a high degree of control vested in the Ministry of educa-
tion, has been changed since the end of the war through the enactment
of Vey legislation and the introduction of new educational administra-
tive practices* The fundamental Law of Education, passed by the Japa-
nese Diet in 1947, provides a legal basis for equality of opportunity
in education, definitely and unequivocally, as follows: "The people
shall be given equal opportunities for receiving education according
to their ability • • • and they shall not be subject to educational
discrimination on account of race, creed, sex social status, economic
position or family origin* *
b* Another major step in this new direction was the estab-
lishment of the system of boards of education elected by the people*
Boards are already functioning in all prefectures and in the larger
cities, and will be in operation in all local communities by Novem-
ber 1952* To these boards of education has been entrusted the admin-
istration of the elementary and secondary schools of the country; they
also have a considerable amount of autonomy over the nature of the
school program* Left to the national government is the legislation
of only those essentials of minimum standards required to assure an
adequate type of education for all youth*
c* Starting in the fall of 1948, three sessions of an
Institute for Educational Leadership have been operated under the
sponsorship of this headquarters and the Ministry of Education. In
addition to a faculty of Japanese educators, this Institute was staffed
by educational specialists from the United States brought to Japan
under the Visiting Experts Program* The services of 33 American
educators have thus far been utilized in the Institute. As a result
of this intensive training course, over 3500 Japanese educators were
qualified for administrative positions including the posts of school
superintendent and school supervisor, new categories of educational
administrative and supervisory responsibility brought into being by
the new system of boards of education. A fourth session of the In-
stitute is scheduled to begin in March 1950, to train additional
numbers of educational administrative personnel and supervisors*
d* The School Education Law, passed by the Japanese Diet
in 1947, abolished the old discriminatory educational ladder* The
old education progression system had been designed in such a way that
the final choice of an educational future had to be made by a student
at the end of the sixth grade of elementary school; and once the choice
was made, the student could not change his course. This resulted in


only the fawred few having any opportunity to reach the higher edu-
cation levels of the ladder. In actual operation this system assured
the perpetuation of educational privileges as a possession of the ex*
tremely small upper class. The School Education Law, with the abolish-
ment of the old ladder, established a new ladder which is simplified
and flexible, affords each student equality of educational opportunity
and removes the "blind alley" characteristic of the old system.
(Chart 6) It provides for an elementary school of six years, a lower
secondary and upper secondary school of three years each, a higher
education program of four years, and for further graduate study. By
law, the first nine years of schooling are made compulsory and free.
(The old system provided for six years of compulsory education.)
Chart 6.
•* The Ministry of Education, no longer an agency of can*
tralized administration and control over the nations* school system,
has reorganized itself along the lines of an effective professional
service agency to assist institutions and educators in their manifold
problems. (Chart 7)


MINISTRY OF EDUCATION
3 DEC 1949
Chart 7.


7. School Financet a* While the Japanese people hare shown an
overwhelming enthusiasm for the development of an effective school
system that will satisfactorily fulfill its obligations to a demo-
cratic society and have indicated complete faith in the long-time
value of universal education, it is undeniable that slow progress in
the realization of their ambitions has been forced by the present
economic trend of Japan* Trom the viewpoint of the Occupation's edu-
cational specialists the economic obstacles have seriously handicapped
the accomplishment of their mission in the field of education.
b* School plants were badly damaged during the war; the ex-
tension of basic education requires a large program of new school
construction; more and better trained teachers are essential to the
success of the program; and the salaries paid to educational per-
sonnel have been and remain inadequate* Ifforts are being made, con-
sistent with the other urgent financial needs of the country, to meet
these problems* The principle of equalization of the burden for the
support of education and the financial implications of the principle
of equality of educational opportunity are engaging the deep atten-
tion of Japanese educational leaders and of Occupation personnel*
If forts are being made to translate these principles into practical
programs assuring sounder and better support of education which the
Japanese people so earnestly desire* (Chart 8)
SCHOOLS, TEACHERS AND STUDENTS IN JAPAN
Chart 8.


8* Curriculum and Textbooks. a. The elimination of militaristic
and. ultra-nationalistic ideas from education and the need for develop-
ing a program of education befitting a democratic nation necessitated
the introduction of new curricula, both general and specific. During
the next few years there is need for improvement, revision and refine-
ment of these curricula in the light of actual school practice. Text-
book- writing and production have been removed from the Ministry of
Education and opened to the free competitive market on the basis of
approved standards. The number of manuscripts has increased greatly
and need for a careful watch is indicated to insure that sub-standard
textbooks are not used and that this unfamiliar freedom, though demo-
cratic in principle, does not result in a resurgence of ultra-national-
ism or an intrusion of communistic doctrine into textbooks. Thirteen
Textbook and Curriculum Centers scattered throughout Japan are stocked
with hundreds of modern American textbooks and professional books on
education, and scores of educators and others interested in writing
textbooks visit these centers daily. Despite the critical shortage
of paper over 200 million textbooks were produced for use during the
1949- school year and 250 million are scheduled for production for
1950- The total number of textbooks distributed since the begin-
ning of the Occupation is illustrated in Chart 9 and the ratio between
privately produced and Ministry of education texts is shown in Chart 10,
PRODUCTION OF NEW TEXTBOOKS
Chart 9


PRIVATE VS MINISTRY OF EDUCATION
TEXTBOOKS APPROVED FOR PUBLICATION
Chart 10.


b. To meet the challenge of conflicting ideologies during
this period of educational reorganization, increasing emphasis is
being placed on the development of such curricula and leadership as
will contribute to the understanding and support of true democratic
principles and practices. Outstanding among the publications which
Japanese scholars have produced toward this objective is the '•Primer
of Democracy", a textboov for students of secondary school level and
widely used in the adult education programs. Approximately 5,000,000
copies of this textboov, which has been described as an outstanding
indictment of communism, are being distributed by the Ministry of
Education*
9. Vocational Education; Reorganization of the school system
has included increasing emphasis on the development of those pro-
fessional, semi-professional and technical sVills necessary to the
rehabilitation of the Japanese economy and the sound educational pre-
paration of Japanese citizens for the great variety of occupations
required in a complex modern society. The extension of required edu-
cation to the end of the ninth year of schooling has necessitated a
searching examination into the curriculum programs of the secondary
school, particularly those related to vocational objectives. New
courses of study and improved textbooVs, with increasing emphasis on
practical methods of instruction, have been developed in the fields
of agriculture, fisheries, forestry, industries and commerce. In
addition a comprehensive and adequate program of vocational guidance
has been initiated.
10. Teacher Training* Economic conditions have tended to mave
teaching an unattractive profession. Problems of recruitment of
sufficient, high-calibre personnel are expected to continue for some
time. Extensive programs of reorientation and reeducation for teachers
have been carried out since the early days of the Occupation, and
national, regional and prefectural worVshops will be continued to
provide in-service training. Teacher training institutes are being
reorganized and the content of their instruction is undergoing major
reform. Much effort has been expended toward the development of pro-
fessional associations as distinctly different from the Japan Teachers 1
Union whose members have concerned themselves largely with the improve-
ment of their status economically rather than professional betterment.
Steps toward the establishment of a sound program of certification
have been taVen through the passage by the Diet of laws and government
ordinances. Relating the unique demands of the profession of educa-
tion to the general requirements of the Civil Service, provision has
been made for the certification of those entering the teaching pro-
fession in the future and for the recertification of those already
teaching. A close relation has been maintained between developments
in this field and those in the reorganization of institutions devoted
to the pre-service training of teachers.


11. Higher Educations a. With the establishment of the new
educational ladder and the provision for a single four-year program
of higher education, there arose the tasV of reorganizing some 350
colleges and universities into a new system of four-jear institutions
through amalgamation and revision of programs in order to raise stan-
dards and provide facilities for a greater number of students. These
institutions began operating as new universities in April 1949. A
second problem which is being studied by Japanese educational author-
ities is that of a reorganization of the pattern of administrative
control over institutions of higher learning, to replace the present
control exercised by the Ministry of Education. Japanese higher edu-
cation officials are maVing efforts to increase opportunities for
higher education and to equalize them. Attention is being given to
the development of effective programs of guidance for university
students so that they will be able to combat extremist tendencies
among student minorities.
b. Paralleling the administrative developments there have
been significant improvements in the curricula and content of inr>
struction in all fields of learning. In addition there has been
vigorous and healthy development of the professional and research in-
terests of professors in all the disciplines found at the higher edu-
cation level.
12. Adult Education; a. Direct governmental control of adult
education organizations has been eliminated and efforts have turned to
the extremely difficult problem of developing independent programs
among organizations unaccustomed to democratic responsibility. Parent-
Teacher Associations face obstacles and require advisory assistance in
their efforts to function soundly. The program of Citizens 1 Public
Halls, hundreds of which have been started during the past two years,
will be extended further during the coming year. Correspondence edu-
cation and extension programs are growing and will require special
attention in the immediate future. Programs of general education for
worVers to further the orientation of an informed electorate are being
encouraged.
b. Special programs of education have been developed and
utilized to reorient Japanese who have been repatriated from areas
outside Japan since the end of the war. The manifold and complex prob-
lems of adjustment which face repatriates have required the coordinated
efforts of a number of agencies of the Japanese government, including
the Ministry of Education. The educational responsibilities to such
groups of returning Japanese have been increased with the renewal of
repatriation from zones under the control of Soviet Russia. Repatriates
from these areas have shown the effects of deep exposure to ultra-com-
munistic propaganda, including a vast amount of misinformation regard-
ing events in Japan since the end of the war. A carefully developed
plan of reeducation has already demonstrated its effectiveness in
maVing clear true facts about Japan today and in assisting these re-
patriates in their readjustment to life in their homeland.


13. Youth Organisations! a. The economic and social disruption
of the post-war period has given rise to extreme confusion among
Japanese youth. Japanese leadership is faced with the problem of
proriding strong and constructive programs and projects which will
challenge youth organisations and minimize the danger of domination
by extremist minorities. Government domination of youth groups has
ceased and sound leadership is beginning to emerge, as well as a
nucleus of trained personnel.
b. Organisations with international roots, such as the
Soy Scouts, Girl Scouts, YMCA and YWCA, are undergoing a healthy
and vigorous period of reorganization and rehabilitation.
14. Audio-Visual Education: a. Xxtensive use of radio is made
in programs of teacher education and in programs especially designated
to reach students. Guidance problems are treated as well as materials
relating to the curriculum. More radio sets and replacement parts are
needed, however, to obtain maximum efficiency from the use of this
media. Documentary films, both of American and Japanese origin, have
an important place in the educational program at all levels.
b. In the various prefectures, film libraries have been
established by the Japanese authorities with active programs for the
dissemination of visual and audio materials to schools and groups
outside the schools.
15. Cultural Travel Program! Funds appropriated by the U. S.
Government are being used to assist Japanese national and cultural
leaders and teachers to travel to the United States for purposes of
reorientation. This travel includes visits lasting from two to six
months to be spent in observing democratic institutions in action as
well as one-year scholarships for graduate study and specialized
training. It is anticipated that these opportunities will enable
more leaders to contribute more effectively on their return to the
growth of Japan as a democratic nation. In addition, assistance is
furnished to expedite tne processing of travel papers of Japanese
students and cultural leaders who are able to go to the United States
under private sponsorship with full financial support guaranteed. It
is anticipated that these Japanese as disciples of democracy will be
an asset to the educational objectives of the Occupation. (Chart 11)
IV. BSLIGIQHS AND CULTURAL B3SSOURCIS
1. The Religions and Cultural Resources Division is that part
of the Civil Information and Xducation Section which is concerned
with the establishment and fostering of freedom of religion, the
separation of religion and state, the removal of militaristic and
ultranationalistic influences in religion and the fine arts, the de-
vising of such measures for the facilitation of Christian mission
wor>r as are not inconsistent with the principles of religious freedom


CULTURAL TRAVEL OF JAPANESE
Chart 11.


and separation of church and state, and the initiation of programs
for the protection, preservation, and advantageous utilization of
cultural properties and the coordination of UNESCO activities with
Occupation agencies and responsible public and private Japanese
agencies.
2. Establishment of Religious Freedom! a. During the period
1868-1945 Shinto, the primitive indigenous religion of Japan, was con-
verted V the government into a cult or civil institution termed
"State Shinto, * As such, it was taught in the schools and sponsored
and supported by the State, Other religions, while permitted to
exist, could exist free of molestation only if their doctrines did
not conflict with State Shinto as to political and social morality.
Acceptance of Shinto became a test of loyalty to the state, and to
express disbelief was to invite inevitable persecution for H dangerous
thoughtß."
b. Since the beginning of the Occupation, all restrictions
on religious freedom appearing in laws and regulations have been re-
moved, legal equality of all religious groups before the state has
been established, and an unequivocal constitutional guarantee of
religious freedom has been provided,
c. Discrimination against any citizen for failure to pro-
fess the doctrines or participate in the observances of Shinto or
any other religion has been prohibited. All persons detained because
of their religious beliefs have been released from prison. The
notorious laws and regulations under which the government persecuted
or exercised control over religious individuals and institutions
have been abrogated. In their place, a new Beligious Corporations
Ordinance was promulgated which liberalized procedures for incorpora-
tion of religious groups, removed the necessity for government approval
of doctrine as a prerequisite to incorporation, and deprived govern-
ment administrative agencies of control over the internal organiza-
tion and activities of religious bodies. Authority of the government
to supervise solicitation of contributions has been terminated and
regulations which virtually established a Buddhist monopoly over the
Nation's graveyards have been revised. The veystone in the arch of
the new religious liberty is Article 20 of the new Japanese Constitu-
tion, which provides that "freedom of religion is guaranteed to all"
and that "no person shall be compelled to taVe part in any religious
act, celebration, rite or practice,"
d. Although a maximum of freedom on the part of individuals
to select and practice a creed of their own choice has been provided,
and though all religions and creeds are now entitled to precisely the
same opportunities and protection, time will be required before the
Japanese people, long accustomed to government paternalism and police
scrutiny, can understand the true meaning of religious freedom. The
activities of the Beligions and Cultural Besources Division in this


field, therefore, are new directed towards indoctrination of the
Japanese people in the understanding, appreciation, and proper
exercise of their new religious liberties*
3* Separation of Religion and State* a* Two of the basi c re-
quirements for establishment of religious freedom were the disestab-
lishment of Shinto as a state religion and the prohibition in future
of state sponsorship of control of religion. These purposes were
accomplished by issuance of a directive to the Japanese Government
prohibiting governmental sponsorship, support, perpetuation, control,
and dissemination of State Shinto or any other religion*
b* In the implementation of policies designed to separate
religion from the state, the following actions have been taven;
financial support from public funds of Shinto and Shinto shrines has
been prohibited; dissemination of Shinto doctrine in public educa-
tional institutions, including compulsory worship at Shinto shrines
and daily ceremonies of veneration of the emperor, has been prohibited;
teacher*s manuals and texts used in public schools have been examined
to insure deletion of Shinto doctrine; circulation by the government
of official volumes and commentaries on Shinto has been forbidden;
all physical symbols of Shinto have been'removed from educational
institutions and public buildings; all public educational institutions
having as their primary function the teaching of Shinto doctrine or
the training of a Shinto priesthood have been dissolved; the use in
official writings of terms whose connotations are inextricably con-
nected with Shinto ideology has been forbidden; official visits to
Shinto shrines by government officials to report on government matters
or to participate as representatives of the government in ceremonies
or observances have been prohibited; special custodial arrangements
for management of state-owned forests by religious institutions have
been terminated; and a program has been instituted for the appropriate
disposition of some 200,000 acres of state-owned land at present
occupied rent-free by approximately 110,000 Shinto shrines and 40,000
Buddhist temples, approximately 50 percent of the cases having been
settled as of 31 December 1949*
c* In consonance with the principle of separation of re-
ligion and state, Article 20 of the new Constitution provides that
no religious organization shall receive any privileges from the
state or exercise any political authority. It provides further that
the state and its organs shall refrain from religious education or
any religious activity. In addition, Article 89 prohibits expenditure
or appropriation of public funds or property for the use, benefit, or
maintenance of any religious institution or association*
d. In clarification of the policy regarding treatment of
religion in the public schools, a notification was issued by the
Ministry of Education on 25 October 1949 permitting the following:
school-Bponsored visits to shrines and tenroles, with the exception


of shrines dedicated to veneration of war dead* for the purpose of
studying National Treasures or for other cultural purposes; objective
use of teaching materials on religion* religious leaders and religious
institutions; use of school buildings outside of school hours on a
non-discriminatory basis by voluntary school groups on the secondary
school level; use of school facilities for religious meetings outside
of school hours by religious groups other than pupil groups at the
discretion of competent school officials; and lectures to students by
community religious leaders provided they do not wear religious garb
and discuss only subjects outside the field of religion* Private
schools are naturally exempted from the application of these regula-
tions*
e. Although much remains to be done before separation of
religion and state may be considered complete, it is in effect as
complete in Japan as in any country in the world*
4. Elimination of Militarism and Ultranatlonalismt a. In pre-
war Japan, militarists and ultranationalists utilized perverted Shinto
ideology to engender a military spirit among the people, to justify
wars of expansion, and to surround the doctrines of militarism and
political absolutism witn the final sanction of religious belief*
Regardless of what other religion a Japanese might believe in, he
was committed as a loyal subject to profess belief in the State
Shinto doctrine of a land divinely created, of an imperial family
descended in unbroVen line from the Sun Goddess, and of a nation of
people descended from the gods collateral with the ancestors of the
imperial family, destined by divine right to rule the world*
b* In order to prevent a recurrence of tnis perversion of
Shinto theory, all propagation of militaristic and ultranationalistic
ideology in Shinto doctrines, rites and observances, as well as in
the doctrines, rites and observances of any other religion or creed
has been prohibited* The term Militaristic and ultranationalistic
ideology" as utilized in this prohibition embraces all theories which
advocate or justify a mission on the part of Japan to extend its rule
over other nations and people by reason of the doctrines that the
emperor, the people, or the islands of Japan are superior to other
rulers, people or lands because of ancestry, descent, or special
origin, or by reason of any other doctrine which tends to delude the
Japanese people into embarving on wars of aggression or to glorify the
use of force as an instrument for the settlement of disputes with
other peoples* In connection with this prohibition a small number of
religious organizations have been ordered dissolved by the Japanese
Government for preaching doctrines identifiable with the above defini-
tion of militaristic and ultranationalistic ideology*
c* The use in designs of postage stamps and currency of
portraits of military and ultranationalist leaders, symbols of
militarism and ultranationalism, representations of Shinto shrines


or symbols, and scenes from territories no longer under Japanese
sovereignty has been prohibited. In connection with funerals,
memorial services, and other ceremonies for the war dead, militarists
and ultranationalists, the following practices have been prohibited:
sponsorship by local public officials or bodies; participation in
private ceremonies by public officials acting in their official capa-
city; presentation of condolence money or wreaths by local public
bodies, use of public facilities such as school houses and public
halls; coercion by local public officials or bodies to attend or
give financial support to such ceremonies; holding of public cere-
monies at the time of return of ashes to bereaved families; and any
governmental or official connection with such ceremonies*
d. The erection of new loyal spirit pagodas, war memorials,
and other monuments and statues for the war dead, militarists and
ultranationalists, has been prohibited. Those located in schools and
on school grounds, and those obviously intended to propagate militar-
istic and ultranationalistic ideology have been ordered removed or
altered. Of these, 5,613 monuments and 354 statues have been removed,
890 monuments and 17 statues have been moved to less conspicuous lo-
cations; and 908 monuments and 29 statues have had their appearance
altered or the wording of their inscriptions changed in such a way as
to minimize the possibility of arousing militaristic or ultranational-
istic sentiments*
e* The former schedule of national holidays, some of which
were closely associated with Shinto and utilized for ultra-national-
istic propaganda purposes, has been revised by the Japanese Govern-
ment, certain objectionable holidays having been replaced with new
celebrations more in Veeping with the democratic objectives of the
new Japan*
f* Of utmost significance to the eradication of militaristic
and ultranationalistic ideology was the issuance of an imperial edict
on 1 January 1946 in which the emperor labeled as false the Hconcep-
tion that the emperor is divine and that the Japanese people are
superior to other races and fated to rule the world."
5. Assistance to Christian Missions; a* The surrender in 1945
found the Christian missions in Japan at a very low ebb* A large
percentage of Catholic, and virtually all Protestant, missionaries
had either left Japan just prior to the war or had been interned and
later repatriated* Some mission residences and other properties such
as churches, schools, and hospitals had been burned during air raids*
Many undamaged residences of missionaries who left Japan at the out-
break of war had been turned over to Japanese churches or sold.
Practically all furniture, and much necessary equipment, had been
sold, stolen, or permitted to deteriorate* Facing missionaries
desiring to return to Japan, in addition to housing there were also
the major problems of transportation to and within the country, and
procurement of food.


b. It has been the constant policy of the Occupation to
devise and implement such measures for facilitating Christian mission
worV as are not inconsistent with the principles of religious freedom
and separation of religion and state. Missionaries were the first
class of foreign personnel not attached to the Occupation to be per-
mitted entry to Japan, their first clearance for entry having preceded
that of businessmen by almost a year and a half. Such entries were
at first limited to missionaries with prior experience in Japan who
were designated as representatives of church organisations which
maintained missions in Japan prior to the outbreaV of war. Every
possible measure was taven, however, to expedite the early arrival
in Japan of large numbers of Christian missionaries, and there are
at present virtually no restrictions on their entry and that of their
dependents. No discrimination is made because of sex or nationality.
The only requirement for clearance is a guarantee that the entrant
has logistic support outside of Occupation resources, that he will
not become a burden on the Japanese economy, and that he will not
engage in unauthorized commercial or other activities.
c. The services of advisors on the Beligions and Cultural
Besources Division staff are offered to missionaries in the finding
of solutions to personal and mission problems involving relationships
with the Occupation and the Japanese Government.
d. The impetus given to revival of Christian mission worV
in Japan may be seen in a comparison of the numbers of missionaries
cleared for entry during the past three years: 1947 - 315; 1948 - 707*
and 1949 - 980.
6. Protection. Preservation and Utilization of Cultural Propertvi
In the field of cultural resources, the Religions and Cultural Be-
sources Division has been responsible for initiation and recommenda-
tions regarding management and financing of numerous projects for the
protection, preservation, restitution, salvage, or other disposition
of worVs of art, antiquities, cultural treasures, museums, archival
repositories, historic and scenic sites, and historical and natural
monuments. Damage to cultural properties has been investigated, and
field inspections have been made of as many as possible of the 15,039
collections, structures, and separate objects registered as National
Treasures or Important Art Objects. Twelve of the fourteen national
parVs of Japan have been surveyed and programs have been initiated
for the reorganization of their administration and the expansion and
improvement of their equipment and facilities for the public benefit.
Uses of cultural properties in the reorientation program have been
devised, and recommendations have been made concerning use of the
fine sorts in familiarizing the Japanese people with the history, in-
stitutions and culture of the United States and other democracies.


7* United. Hations Economic. Social and Cultural Organization?
Oyer 80 UNESCO cooperative societies have been organized and are
carrying on activities in all prefectures of Japan* UNISCO materials
and programs are used to further the reorientation objectives of the
Occupation and the UNESCO activities of Japanese Government and
private organizations are coordinated with Occupation agencies• the
United Nations Association, and the representatives in Japan of
UNESCO headquarters*
V. PUBLIC OPINION AND SOCIOLOGICAL BESEARCH
1* The Public Opinion and Sociological Research Division is
that part of the Civil Information and Education Section which is
concerned first, with conducting research on Japanese social or-
ganization and public attitudes relative to the Occupation and the
rehabilitation program* second, with providing training and technical
guidance to Japanese research agencies; and third, with maintaining
liaison with Japanese research organization and staff sections of this
headquarters in the planning and conduct of research*
2* The Division cooperates with the National Public Opinion
Research Institute of the Japanese Government, in the conduct of
attitude surveys* This Institute was established as part of a pro-
gram of democratic opinion assessment* The Division also assists
the Radio Culture Institute of the Broadcasting Corporation of Japan
in the development of surveys on listener habits and program popu-
larity*
3* Major sociological research projects have been conducted
on the following subjects; The fishery rights system; neighborhood
associations (tonarigumi)* family and household composition; the
social basis of the labor boss system* and a comprehensive study of
the results of the Land Reform in 13 Japanese villages* Among the
major public opinion studies are* problems of urban worvers and
consumers; the changing status of women; and the democratization of
Zaibatsu securities. A special research project on literacy levels
and problems of language learning in the Japanese population has also
been conducted*
4* Reports of the surveys and studies made by th© Division are
compiled for use in this headquarters, and copies of those of general
interest which are published are made available to Government agencies
in the United States*


Chart 12.




