

VIISS BILLY
. ii -v




MISS BILLY


u*
raM iF,( s
/ '
j
fry
X
>r^— <x
y
14 y
Kr
rs <
)
r^^fcQlXj
~ J "" : * *wSri
V ~ J
j, • x
-t /ll
V
>y
1 c\\
cv
y^3
#v>\%
a 1
i sjjk
“r, lU
l\ 1
” V\
= ’ r T | )\
sSKJHSr m\ J
(\ UiMiM
itoW
L (r\* w -*' i
V V
'
Wi\ '
1/
,» .4
— ■ / - III
. \
\ r < <*
Jo \ t* I •
p yf « 1
j
t 1 Wif
1 K" 1. J
MW
W
Kk
V' v
“Wish you’d show me hoiv to darn f”


MISS BILLY
CONSTANCE MACKNESS
Author of Gam of the Flat, The Blossom Children, etc.
AUSTRALIA:
CORNSTALK PUBLISHING COMPANY
89 CASTLEREAGH STREET, SYDNEY


NAT c
* 9 PPR *' ~ ’ r
+
Wholly set up and printed in Australia by
Eagle Press Ltd., Allen Street, Waterloo
for
Cornstalk Publishing Company
89 Castlereagh Street, Sydney
Registered by the Postmaster-General for
transmission through the post as a book


1
8
20
29
45
57
63
75
86
105
116
129
141
157
•*
167
176
191
199
208
(17041
CONTENTS
A STOLEN SMOKE .. • - • • - 1
AN AFTERNOON CHAT . . • • ■• 8
WILL’S WORRIES .. . - • - • • 20
TOM TAKES HIS GRUEL .. •• •• 29
A SENSE OF HUMOUR .. .. •• •• 45
WILL TURNS TUTOR .. . • • • ■ • 57
THE HAND OF CHANGE . . • • • • 63
TEACHING AN EXPERT .. •• •• 75
BLACK DAYS .. .. •• •• •• 86
SPOILED PROGRAMMES . . • • • • 105
MENDED PROGRAMMES - - • • ■ • 116
A LANDMARK PASSED .. .. . . • • 129
THE PARTING OF THE WAYS .. .. •• 74 1
ENTER THE INSECT .. .. . • .. 157
THE TAMING OF THE INSECT . . . . • • 167
BUSY DAYS .. .. . • • • • • 176
NATURAL HISTORY .. .. . . . . 191
A PAIR OF EPISTLES .. .. .. ..199
THE AWAKENING .. •• •• ..208
THE CROCODILE SHOWS HER TEETH . . . . 221
RIVAL PHILOSOPHIES .. .. •• ..228
THE INSECT ESCAPES . . .. . ■ 234
IN WHICH TOM DANCES .. . . 245
A HURRIED MATCH .. .. - ■ -.252
BON VOYAGE .. .. .. • • 262




BOOK ONE




CHAPTER I
A STOLEN SMOKE
It was Saturday morning and Willa was
helping Will cut sandwiches in the white-
washed kitchen of Mortondale Station. He
had promised to bike up to Needy Flat and
leave a message there for her father.
“Sorry I can’t be back for dinner,” he
said. “A feed by the road-side always tastes
good though.”
“Wish I had a bicycle and were going
too,” said Willa.
“That’s about my idea of paradise,”
grinned Will; “but no heaven is dropped into
easily up this way. I’ll be back before three
anyhow. You’ll be ready for a read-oh then,
won’t you?”
“If I can,” she answered doubtfully.
“Poor old Kate’s tooth is playing up again,
and she has a cruel headache on top of it to-
day from lack of sleep. I’ll have to help
more than usual in the house.”
“Well, get a hustle on, old kid,” he
pleaded. “I’ve got a beaut of a book —My


Tropic Isle, all about North Queensland —
and I'll be at our usual spot on the tick of
three. Till then, cheerio, chicken!”
‘‘Good-bye, Billy Boy,” she said, with a
smile for her latest title. “Give my very
bestest love to my own particular view.”
“From the top of the Long Hollow, eh?”
“Yes; when you look out from the top of
the ridge over miles and miles and miles of
hills, all brown and grey and smoky-blue,
and looking as if they knew a million secrets
if only they could be bothered to tell them.”
“Well, so long, romancer!” grinned Will
from the doorway. “Three o’clock, mind
you, or I’ll do some talking—for a change.”
From the window Willa watched him ride
away, with a backward smile for her —
young, strong, confident, kindly, the cheeriest
thing she knew in her narrow, busy little
life. She turned to tidy away the sandwich
materials. Then there was her invalid
mother’s room to do out, the dining-room
table to set, and finally some supplies to get
in from the station store.
Her father, William Morton, owner of
Mortondale Station, was in charge when she
got there, and interviewing a tramp who had
just come in, a typical old sundowner, with
rusty beard, tanned face, spare limbs, and
dingy garments.


“Any chance of a job?” he asked, as he
eased his swag for a moment and put his
black billy” down beside his panting dog.
“No,” grunted Morton.
“A bit of tucker then?”
Morton measured out in silence sparing
doles of flour, sugar, and tea and added a
slab of cheese.
What about a stick of tobaccer ?” in-
sinuated the tramp. “I bin out for two
days.”
“I don’t give tobacco away,” said Morton.
“Enough to fill me pipe wouldn’t hurt yer
none,” pleaded the tramp.
\ou ve had all you 11 get here. Now get
out,” said Morton shortly.
“Oh, father!” pleaded'Willa.
ou mind your own business, child,” he
snapped.
Willa turned away forlornly, forgetting
the jam and salt she had come for. A
minute after, she heard her father slam the
front door of his store, come out through
the back one, and go down to his black-
smith’s shop.
A smile came into her eyes and unhesitat-
ing she slipped back into the store, seized two
plugs of tobacco from a drawer, opened the
front door, ran down the dusty path to the
gate that opened on to the main road, and


then pursued the tramp along that road till
he heard her calls. She was breathless when
at last he turned back to meet her.
“Here’s your tobacco,” she panted. “I
hope you enjoy it.”
He looked at her in grateful surprise. A
rather plain child with beautiful eyes to
redeem her other features, a child who
looked about twelve but was really fourteen,
hatless, in a faded print frock and dusty
leather shoes, that was what he saw.
“So you got it out of him?” he queried.
“I’d have thought a charge o’ dynamite
couldn’t.”
“I took it,” explained Willa. “That’s why
I hope you really did want it badly and
will enjoy it —to make it worth while, you
know.”
He turned out dramatically a pocket
empty save for a piece of string, a wreck of
a knife, and a battered pipe.
“No smokes hidin’ away there, sissie,” he
drawled; “so it’s real obliged I am. Me
dawg an’ me pipe are all the fam’ly I ve got.
“Some men’s luckier, but mine’s a mighty
satisfyin’ fam’ly all the same- at least,
when the pipe’s full and I’ve a bite on hand
for the poor ole dawg. You might tell your
pa he didn’t sniff twice at his cheese.


“I’m glad I took the tobacco,” said Willa,
and treated him to one of her friendly smiles.
“I’ll be gladder if he don’t find out,” he
said.
“But, of course, I’ll tell him,” said Willa
proudly, and drew herself up almost an
inch taller.
An amused grin crinkled the old man’s
eye-corners at her assumption of dignity.
“Well, here’s thankin’ you, sissie!” he
said. “You mayn’t be no one-act beauty-
show yet, yer know, but you ain’t no need
to be ashamed o’ your smile, nor your heart
neither. Wag your tail to a lady, Yankee
Doodle, ole dawg; ’tain’t often you meet one,
you black heathen.”
The cattle-pup came up obediently and
licked Willa’s hand.
“He improves on his teachin’, that dawg
does,” said his master proudly. “So long,
little mate!”
Willa returned his farewell greeting and
then hurried home.
Rather shrinkingly she went in search of
her father. Rough and gruff as he was, she
had no fear of physical correction, for
Morton did not even strike his boys. It was
what he would say that hurt even in antici-
pation, Impudent young hussy —she could
feel the words lashing her sensitiveness


before they came. She did not understand
why his pet term of abuse hurt like a knife-
thrust, did not realize that in the exquisite
refinement of her child-soul she felt de-
graded by it, but she shrank in anticipation
from its sound.
Morton was still at his forge, where Peter
Lane, his blacksmith, was shoeing one of
his horses. And Willa, keyed up to face his
anger, did not wait for privacy.
“Father,” she began.
“Well, what’s the matter?” he snapped.
“\V hat do you want to come worrying for
now?”
"I gave that tramp the tobacco he
wanted, she blurted out. “I took two cakes
out of the drawer.”
“You thieving little hussy!” he cried.
“You impudent young baggage!”
Willa’s face whitened. “Please, father,
he wanted it,” she said; “he wanted it
badly.”
“And you want half-killing,” he retorted,
“you impudent, interfering young hussy!”
“I’ll pay for the tobacco,” said Peter Lane
cheerfully. “I’ll enjoy giving the old chap
a smoke.”
Peter drew the princely wage of a pound
a week and his keep, and Willa looked at him
gratefully.


“Don’t be a fool,” growled Morton.
“Willa chooses to make presents, so she
must pay for them. You’ll get no pocket-
money, my girl, to-day, and none next
Saturday. Be off with you now.”
“Yes, father,” said Willa meekly.
But she did not feel meek as she hurried
away to get her little sisters tidied-up before
dinner. “I’m glad I did it,” she told herself
defiantly; “yes, glad, even if Billy Boy’s
birthday gift has gone up in smoke.”


CHAPTER II
AN AFTERNOON CHAT
Mortondale Homestead was situated on
a tributary of the Lachlan, not far from the
village of Needy Flat. It was an unpreten-
tious and, indeed, a rough place, seeing the
many square miles of hill and gully and
river-flat the squatter owned. Yet he was
perfectly satisfied with it, and with what he
had made of his life, for his own childhood
had been spent in a slab-and-bark hut.
No man ever doubted himself less than
the big strong man of fifty. He believed
himself a good husband, a good father, and
a good employer, and was just according to
his lights. Yet, to one pair of clear_ young
eyes on the station at least, he was just an
ignorant boor, with no comprehension of the
finer side of life, and not enough sentiment
to stock the heart of a stray cat. His one
pleasure was making money. He made it
faster than anybody guessed, but he grudged
spending it. That was why the homestead
was just a clumsy collection of separate


why there was no nurse to look
after his invalid wife and younger children,
why there were only two maids to do the
work of half a dozen.
\\ 00l was the chief source of his wealth,
but he grew wheat and potatoes on the river-
flats, and ran a store, a butchering business,
and a blacksmith’s shop as well. The homes
of his employees were on his land, forming
quite a village where they clustered near the
river-bridge. The men were all overworked
and underpaid. To that quiet little spot in
the earliest nineties the breath of unionism
had never come, and men toiled long hours
as boundary-riders, stockmen, storekeepers,
farmers, scrub-cutters and what not, for his
unvarying “pound a week and keep,” Mor-
ton was the unliked and unrespected deity of
the small settlement. On him all depended
grumblingly. He thought of them as right-
fully at his beck and call, though he did his
duty as he saw it —provided work for the
inefficient as well as the efficient, and even
gave sparing help in time of sickness.
His wife, as the result of a riding acci-
had been for two years a helpless
invalid. She had married him for his
money, only to find herself buried in a lonely
part of the bush, away from luxuries and
even comforts. Morton honestly considered


she had no reason for her fretfulness. Did
she not always have plenty of mutton and
potatoes to eat, and actually servants to wait
on her ? Art, culture, beauty, refinement, the
things she missed at Mortondale, were a
sealed book to him. And indeed her own
love of them had not proved deep enough to
fill her soul when days were dull and grey,
for she occupied her weary invalid hours
with a bitter brooding on what might have
been rather than with any dreams of bright-
ening her lot.
It was on Willa’s thin shoulders the
mother’s dropped task had fallen. For what
was the use of a girl in the house if she could
not make a cup of tea, or patch her brothers’
coats, or wash the baby’s face? And Morton
judged everything, daughters included, by
the standard of usefulness. The other
children were too young to be very useful
yet. There were six younger than Willa —
Tom, Sid, and Rob, and then three fat
dumplings of little girls, known as Tibbie,
Tottie, and Bubs.
Willa was willing slave to them all, the
rough father, the fretful mother, the selfish
boys, the ordinary little girls. Where she
got her nature nobody could tell; certainly
not from her parents, for the basis of it was
a desire to serve, a hunger for affection, a


warm sympathy. She loved the things her
father scorned and her mother took a luke-
warm interest in—books and flowers, human
liking and laughter, pictures and dreams.
Yet her days were made up of lessons, sand-
wiched between waiting on her mother,
doing odd jobs for her father, mothering the
little ones. Will Curtis called her the
changeling child and never could understand
how, with such few and such pale gleams of
sunshine to brighten her lot, she could smile
out bravely, and even happily, on life.
At three on that spring Saturday, the
afternoon’s warm sunshine danced among
the yellow buttercups and orchids, the purple-
fringed violets, and blue bachelor’s buttons
that lent a fleeting glory to the rocky hills
round Mortondale. The outdoors called, and
Willa was hurrying to respond to its invit-
ing voice. The boys were safely fed and out
at play, the little girls were hatted and left
waiting in the garden while she finished a
few last tasks. She was heating something
on the kitchen stove when her father came
in.
He flung his hat on a chair, his bridle on
the table, and demanded, “Where’s Lizzie?”
“It’s her afternoon off, father.”
“Afternoon off? Don’t I pay her for her
time?”


“But, father, she always has Saturday
afternoon off to go home and see her
mother.”
“Well, where’s Kate?”
“She’s lying down with bad toothache; I’m
just getting this hot salt for her.”
“Two women in the house and a girl, and
I’ve been out riding for hours and must get
myself a cup of tea, I suppose! What’s the
use of a man paying servants or having
daughters, I’d like to know.”
“I’ll get it for you, father, in two
minutes,” said Willa, with unmoved gentle-
ness. “I was going to make mother a cup
anyhow.”
She took the hot salt to the suffering Kate,
returned and made a pot of tea. Her
mother’s cup she put, with a plate of thin
bread-and-butter, on a tray covered with a
neat cloth.
“Can’t you take your mother a cup of tea
without wasting time on that tomfoolery?”
he inquired.
Willa smiled. “Sick people like things to
look dainty,” she explained; but he grunted
as he attacked the corned beef and bread she
had spread on the end of the kitchen table,
too wise even to venture a cloth in his case.
His meal consisted primarily of hunks of


fat beef, secondarily of strong, sweet, milk-
less tea, and only in a minor degree of bread.
“I want this coat mended again,” he said,
as Willa returned. “I caught it on the
barbed wire.”
“Do you think it’s worth it, father?” she
asked, as she examined the much-patched
garment he had taken off. “You really
ought to have a new one.”
“New one? Senseless extravagance, child!
Darn it up, I tell you,” he growled.
As he spoke, Tibbie, aged seven, came
rushing in from the next building. “Mother
says, can’t she have a little rest from our
noise, Willa?” she cried.
“Oh, Tibbie!” protested Willa. “You
promised me you’d keep the babies in the
garden till I could take you for your paddle.
Poor mother’s head, my pet!”
“Well, Tottie wanted us to play chasings
through the house; it was her fault,” said
Tibbie virtuously.
Willa seized a huge work-basket full of
undarned socks and stockings, put her
father’s coat on top, found her hat, collected
the little girls, and set off for the river.
When they got there Will was discovered,
curled up under a mighty oak, with a seat of
rushes ready for her.


‘‘Look out for squalls, young woman;
you’re late,” he cried.
‘‘And the worst of it is, I’ll have to be
early back, so don’t waste time scolding,” she
replied.
Between them, they divested the little girls
of shoes and socks and set them to paddle
in a shallow stretch of water or play in the
warm sand. Then Willa settled down to
darn and patch industriously, and Will read
to her, as he generally did on Saturdays.
A scholar’s son, he was born with a love
of books, but Willa’s appreciation was one
of the things about her that never ceased to
surprise him. Her father, he knew, studied
nothing beyond stock quotations and wool
prices. Her mother read books in plenty,
but in his youthful intolerance he despised
the complaining invalid too much to dream
that any good gift could come to Willa from
such a source. Yet the child’s native gifts
of thought and sympathy made her appre-
ciative even where he was but mildly in-
terested.
This afternoon, though, his interest was
anything but mild. North Queensland was
to him the Promised Land, the Mecca after
which his heart yearned, and his book was a
charming sketch of a lonely man’s happy life
on an island off the North Queensland coast.


It touched so close to his own hopes and
ambitions that, without realizing it, he
drifted from reading to talk, mostly talk of
his own air-castles.
“Wish you’d show me how to darn, Billy
Girl,” he said at last. “When I’m up there
on my own, I won’t have you to keep me tidy.
A chap that camps out in the wilds has to
learn to cook and mend.”
“But that’s a long time off yet, Will.”
“Never mind; I mightn’t have another
chance to learn. Here’s a sock of my own
I can cobble at.”
So Willa found a second needle and
started him. His darn proved neat enough,
for he was quick of hand and eye; but she
did not understand his eagerness to learn till,
in the weeks to come, she found never again
a sock of his or his father’s to mend.
Five-year-old Tottie came up uncalled as
he was taking his lesson.
“I are tired of making houses in the
sand,” she said. “Tibbie are a mean sneak.
She alters my chimberleys into old men’s
noses and puts mouves and eyes on my
houses. I want to talk to you, Will.”
He sent her back relentlessly. “No glory-
glide to-night, old woman, if you don’t leave
us in peace,” he decreed.
Tottie pouted, but she dared not rebel,


even though she knew herself Will’s pet.
There was a rounded knob of a hillock just
back of the homestead, and every night he
used to drag the little girls down its side on
a great piece of thick canvas. The “glory-
glide” was akin to flying. They sat one be-
hind the other, squealing with delight as they
clung to the raised sides of the canvas, one of
which Will held in each hand as he raced
down the hillside. As far back as Tottie
could remember, it had given a golden finish
to her day, and the mere threat of losing it
was enough to ensure her submission,
though she punctuated her backward steps
with the indignant, “I don’t love you, Will,
I don’t; not so much as green apples or that
nasty Tibbie, I don’t.”
“Poor little kiddie!” pleaded Willa.
“No you don’t, Billy Girl,” said Will
firmly. “I’ll trouble you to remember that
I manage those youngsters for you when I’m
about —and lucky for them they do get saved
from your spoiling once in a blue moon too!”
Instead of the playful retort he expected,
a sigh answered him.
“What’s the row, kid?” he queried. “I
spotted you were mopy as soon as I saw you.
Your eyes are only trying not to look glum,
you know,”


“It’s nothing to make a fuss about,” said
Willa.
“Oh, yes!” he retorted, grandly sarcastic;
“chums are made for keeping out in the cold,
aren’t they? You cough it up, young inno-
cent, and you’ll feel ten shades less blue.”
So she gave in and told the tale of the
tramp and the smoke she had stolen for him.
“Father was angry, of course,” she con-
cluded.
Will whistled. From experience he could
guess the exact terms in which the paternal
wrath had expressed itself. Often enough
he had seen the pitiful red and white chase
each other across Willa’s face at her father’s
abuse to know why her eyes were only trying
not to look glum.
“Suppose you copped it,” he observed
sympathetically. “But, look here, Billy Girl,
you don’t think it right to take a thing even
to give it away, do you ?”
“Oh, no!” she said, and sighed. “I just
don’t care if it is wrong. I’m afraid that’s
just how I’m built. There are wrong things
I’d be more miserable for not doing than for
doing, that’s all.”
“You’re a queer little lump of sentiment,
you are,” he said.
She resented the patronizing note in his
voice. “I’d not just be miserable for not


doing them,” she added defiantly, “I’d be
downright ashamed. Two can play at being
sublimely sure of themselves, you know.”
“Did I sound beastly self-righteous?” he
grinned. “Rub it in if I did. I know you’d
rather have a load on your conscience than
your heart any day, and it’s quite likely the
recording angel feels the same way about it,
you unselfish little soft-heart.”
“I’m not unselfish,” she corrected. “I did
it because I wanted to. I thought of all a
smoke-oh meant to poor old Tired Tim till
I just had to get it for him. And you
needn’t think I’m conscience-stricken either.
Once I’d squared myself with father by
owning up, I didn’t care a rap. But he
stopped my pocket-money for a fortnight,
and I wanted to-day’s shilling and next
Saturday’s extra badly.”
‘To give away, I’ll be bound,” he said.
“May I lend you a couple of bob?”
“No,” said Willa decidedly. Then she
laughed.
“I don’t see the joke,” he protested.
“How many weeks oflf is your birthday?”
she asked. “The tie I meant to buy you
went up in Tired Tim’s smoke, you see.”
He kicked the trunk of the river-oak
vexedly. “Look here, Willa,” he cried, “I
wish to heavens you wouldn’t be a donkey.
Couldn’t you learn to think of yourself


sometimes? Do you imagine I like you rob-
bing yourself for me? And, as for your
father, why don’t you stick up for yourself
a bit sometimes?”
“Please, Billy Boy,” she pleaded gently.
“You did promise once not to go kicking
over the rails of my private paddock, you
know.”
“Oh, hang!” he growled. Then he
relieved his feelings privately by telling him-
self that her father was a rough boor, her
mother a selfish creature, and her brothers
fat young asses.
Willa looked at his grumpy face wist-
fully; but he kept silence.
“Please don’t be cross, Bill,” she begged.
“Pm afraid we must be going too; I want to
get the tea for poor old Kate.”
A smile that was all sunshine lighted up
the boy’s face. “Right oh!” he said. “I’ll
whistle the nippers up for you, old kid. Sup-
pose I wasn’t very amiable. There are times
when I feel savage, that I’m not a man yet
and haven’t a bit of cash to bless myself
with.”
“Why do you want money so badly?” she
asked, packing up her mending.
“To have the pleasure of carrying you ofif
and spoiling you for a change,” he vowed;
then grinned, to belie the fierceness of his
words.


CHAPTER 111
WILL’S WORRIES
Will's father was an Oxford man who had
been brilliant and was still so sensible and
kindly that everybody liked him.
Yet he was one of life’s failures. Ever
since his wife’s death, when Will was a
baby, he had been a victim of drink. Thus
it was that he had lost an old home, a modest
fortune and a good position, and drifted out
to New South Wales and into a bush tutor-
ship. He knew that he was only safe when
away from temptation and had accepted the
post at Mortondale just because the station
was eight miles from the nearest hotel.
Morton had a genius for taking advantage
of people’s bad luck and weaknesses and so
getting them to work for him for less than
nothing; and Curtis did the work of book-
keeper and secretary, as well as the tutorial
duties for which he had contracted, all for
seventy pounds a year and a home for him-
self and his boy.
The Morton boys envied Will. Was he


not the very apple of his father’s eye, with
a gun, a bicycle, a camera, and other pos-
sessions their hearts yearned for in vain?
Besides, he used his gun to such purpose
that the sale of wallaby and possum skins
left him well supplied with books, photo-
graphic materials, and even sweets. They
knew too that their tutor did not trust him-
self with money, and that what remained
from his scanty salary, after the purchase of
clothes, was Will’s to bank. What they did
not know was that the boy sometimes had
an account to settle for drink obtained on
credit, when his father for any reason went
up to Needy Flat. To prevent such excur-
sions was one of the boy’s constant cares.
Will was even more popular than his
father at Mortondale, which for six years
had been the only home he knew. Ah Bun
—otherwise Bunny—the Christian-hearted
old heathen who tended the pigs and poultry,
cut the wood, grew the vegetables, and did
countless other odd jobs, all for ten shillings
a week and his keep, adored the boy, who
saved his old back many an ache by voluntary
labour at the wood-pile. Lizzie and Kate
dished up his favourite puddings till the
other children were sick of them. But then
it was Will, and Will only, who often
sauntered into the kitchen, as they were


beginning the huge evening wash-up, and
cried, “Now then, Kate” —or Lizzie, as the
case might be —“the boy’s waiting at the
gate for you. So give me your dish-towel
and go and make yourself pretty. No keep-
ing his manly heart on the break now!”
_Even the squatter liked the obliging
youngster who had not a lazy bone in his
body and broke the station horses in, just
for the joy of mastering them. Yet, when
Morton gave him orders, Will had an un-
boyish habit of setting him right courteously
but quite plainly. Sometimes he even
politely refused a service demanded; gener-
ally he granted it, but as a favour.
On the morning of his seventeenth birth-
day, the milestone that Willa had hoped to
mark by the gift of a tie, he promised to
bicycle to a neighbouring station with a mes-
sage about some cattle that had gone astray.
So Willa set the table for the customary
midday dinner rather earlier than usual, to
enable him to get away in good time. In
honour of the day, which Kate was celebrat-
ing with a special plum-pudding, she put a
bowl of sweetbriar at each end of the table.
As the tutor, who always carved, began to
serve out boiled mutton, potatoes, and
pumpkin, Morton got up from his seat and


threw the bowl nearest him out the window
•it had hidden the salt-cellar from his view.
“What do you want to litter the table up
with that rubbish for?” he inquired angrily.
“It’s so pretty, Father,” pleaded Willa.
“Pretty? A pretty sight of money it costs
to root the stuff out!”
Willa ventured no reply, so he subsided,
to eat mutton and think sheep. The tutor,
the storekeeper, and a shearing expert talked
quietly together, Tom and Sid started a
competition as to who could eat the most in
ten minutes, the little ones squabbled, Will
helped Willa keep peace between them and
privately kicked Rob, who had promised her
that he would not saucer his tea and was
doing it again, safe in the knowledge that
open correction would not be visited upon
him when his father was a fellow-sinner. It
was not a cheerful meal, and the squatter,
as usual, pushed his plate away and his chair
back and stalked out when he had finished.
A moment after, he returned to remark
casually, “Tve brought you some lambs for
pets, Willa, eleven of them. Their mothers
are dead, and I’m bothered if that useless
Bennett meant to save the lambs. Look
after them properly and I’ll give you five
shillings when they are fit to turn out.”
Willa’s heart sank; eleven lambs meant


a big additional burden on her young
shoulders. “Oh! dad, I don’t think I have
time to look after them,” she said. “Couldn’t
you give them to the boys?”
“No you don’t, miss!” said thirteen-year-
old Tom hotly. “No fooling round with
silly lambs for me!”
“You know perfectly well the boys would
forget to feed them,” said Morton in-
dignantly. “What’s the use of having a girl
if she can’t do a trifle like that?”
“I’ll take them on if you like, Mr Morton,”
volunteered Will. He had no interest in
lamb till it was baked, but he had seen signs
of tears in Willa’s eyes.
“Thank goodness, there’s one youngster
about the place who isn’t lazy!” commented
Morton.
“More fool him!” Tom retorted rudely.
Half an hour after Will had finished feed-
ing his reluctantly-adopted pets and had
started on his way, Willa heard her father
ask Curtis to drive up to Needy Flat for him.
When the kindly old gentleman had gone to
see about the horse, she tried a protest.
“Please, dad, couldn’t somebody else
go?” she entreated. “You know what hap-
pens when Mr Curtis gets up town.”
“If he likes to be an idiot, it’s his own
look out,” said Morton. “Nobody else but


the boy has brains enough for the business
I want done, and you know quite well the
boy isn’t here.”
“And —and he won’t like it, dad, if we
send his father right bang into trouble when
he isn’t here to keep an eye on him,” she
urged.
“You mind your own business,” he re-
torted sharply.
With the gentlest heart in the world,
Willa had never been meek. She walked
determinedly out to the yard between
the numerous station buildings, where she
expected to find her tutor harnessing up.
“Please, Mr Curtis, will you do me a very,
very great favour?” she asked.
“I should like to Willa,” he said. “The
question is, can I?”
“Please don’t go up to Needy Flat for
father,” she coaxed. “Tell him you can’t.
Oh! Please, because —because of Will, you
know. I can’t bear him to be worried.”
A dull flush of shame mantled his face at
what her words implied.
“I have promised your father,” he said.
“I will not go back on my word; but you
need not worry, little kind-heart —ITI re-
member my lad.”
Willa could do no more, but she was sadly
aware that in him love and will alike were


weaker than the craving for drink that near-
ness to it always inspired, and she went off
to her afternoon duties with the feeling that
she had failed her chum.
He was home in time for the evening
meal, and miserably she told him the reason
for his father’s absence. Will said nothing,
but he went off without his tea, and she
hated the grim look on his usually merry
face. It was long after dark when she heard
him drive back and from her window
watched him guide his father’s staggering
steps into the building that held their room.
She had left tea set in the dining-room, but
scarcely expected him to come in.
And indeed, after unharnessing and feed-
ing the tired horse, Will went off at once, to
tramp till he was exhausted and so work off
some of the shame and anger that oppressed
him. The bond of affection between lonely
father and lonely son was deep and strong,
and the fact that he yet could not conquer his
young, intolerant disgust at his father’s
weakness always had the power to fill the
boy with self-reproach and make him acutely
miserable. That he felt anger instead of
pity, made him savage with himself. Willa’s
heart ached for him, but she guessed enough
of his feelings to keep out of his way.
It was nearly midnight when he returned,


too weary to feel anything but a desire for
food and bed. He came into the dark
kitchen to forage for a meal and found
Willa asleep, crouched up close to the stove-
fire for warmth.
She wakened up as he lighted a lamp.
“The water’s boiling, Will; I haven’t been
asleep, really,” she said, trying to rub her
eyes open. “I —I’ll have tea made in a
minute.”
But Will reached down the enamel pot
from the mantelshelf, made the tea in
silence, and then poured out the first cup for
her. He had punctuated his walk with bitter
bursts of feeling against her father. “I’ll
tell the boor he doesn’t pay the pater to run
his errands anyhow, and I’m hanged if I’ll
ever go off on another for him,” had been the
thought with which he entered the kitchen,
indeed. Now he saw just the sympathy and
the shame in Willa’s eyes, and a rush of
tender feeling swept the bitterness out of
his soul.
“Oh! Billy Girl, I wish you wouldn’t, I
wish you wouldn’t,” he said. “You’re dead
tired and frozen stiff, and all because I’m a
bad-tempered ass.”
“You’re not,” she protested.
“Yes, I am. I was just too savage to stop
in the room with the poor old pater, and I


ought to be kicked for it. He’d cut himself
into little bits for me, the unselfish old dear;
and here I’m mean enough to demand of
him, just the one thing he can’t do! I know
he can’t. The hateful thing has got him
down, and I know it. I’m plain pig, Bill;
that’s the truth about me.”
“But father sent him up,” she replied
miserably. “Oh! Will, I know what you
must think.”
He was pouring out a cup of tea to take
in on the chance of finding his father awake.
“I’m thinking you’re always a brick to me,
Billy Girl,” he said; “and, if ever I forget it,
I hope there’ll be a good hobnailed boot
handy for stirring my memory up.”


CHAPTER IV
TOM TAKES HIS GRUEL
Mrs Morton's chief relaxation was read-
ing. In the station store there were paper-
covered sixpenny editions of wildly sensa-
tional books, all open to her use before sale.
That she might care for a different class of
literature did not enter her husband’s head,
and she could not buy books herself, for he
kept the family purse in its entirety. That
it was the family purse and not absolutely
and solely his own was an idea he would
have scouted as absurd.
However, Will’s books often found their
way to her, via Willa, and so it came about
that she spent two happy days with The
Pocket R.L.S., a book of Stevenson extracts.
Her nobler emotions, which, though shallow,
had been real enough till they largely burned
themselves out in the atmosphere of a love-
less marriage, occasionally were fanned into


fresh life. Now they were kindled into a
passing flame by those fine, brave words:
If I have faltered more or less
In my great task of happiness;
If I have moved among my race
And shown no glorious morning face;
If beams from happy human eyes
Have moved me not; if morning skies,
Books, and my food, and summer rain
Knocked on my sullen heart in vain,
Lord, Thy most pointed pleasure take
And stab my spirit broad awake.
So it was that Willa, coming in one Satur-
day morning to brighten up the invalid’s
room, found a placid patient.
“Tell Will I loved his little book,” she
said. “And, child, why don’t you go with
him to-day to that Bible Class picnic they
asked you to?”
“But I couldn’t,” said Willa. “Who
would look after you and the babies? Be-
sides, father may want me.”
“I just told him I was sending you out,”
said the mother. “You haven’t a nice dress,
of course, but that doesn’t matter for a
picnic. Tell Kate to send the babies in to
me all day.”
There were glad tears in Willa’s eyes.
“Oh, mother!” she said. “Oh! I’d just
love to go; I’ve never been anywhere. But
it doesn’t seem right.”


“Nonsense!” said her mother, quite enjoy-
ing - her fairy-godmother feeling. “I’m
rather well to-day. Sometimes I fear you
have a very dull time of it, my poor child.”
“Oh, no!” exclaimed Willa. “Oh, no!
Everybody’s good to me.”
She kissed her mother, with soft young
arms clinging fondly to the thin neck, and
even a grateful tear to wet the faded cheeks.
Mrs Morton generally objected to being
“mussed over;” but for once she even found
a thrill of gladness in it, a thrill that lasted on
and helped her through a weary morning with
her three talkative little daughters. It
vanished, however, and left only a cross
woman before the wearier afternoon was
over, for the children relieved the monotony
of their imprisonment by squabbling and
weeping.
Willa, meantime, was young enough to
have few worried thoughts as to how they
were faring, and she flung herself whole-
heartedly into the day’s enjoyment. The
girls of the Bible Class had invited her for
form’s sake, but never expected to see their
employer’s shabby little overworked daugh-
ter at a pleasure party. Despite the small
wages of fathers and brothers, they could all
appear in some cheap bit of finery that put


her faded blue print in the shade, and pity
made their welcome an extra warm one.
When she arrived, they had already begun
a game on the grassy flat by the river, but
every player paused to greet her and Will,
and somebody shouted, “Come along and
join in. It’s good old folly Miller ”
It was a pastime unknown to Willa, but
instructors were not lacking, and she was
soon marching round, singing with the rest,
We’ll catch a fox,
And put him in a box,
And a-hunting we will go.
After two hours’ steady tramping in the
sunshine, she began to wonder where the
fun came in; but the rest seemed as eager as
ever, and she was certainly enjoying the
chance to watch and hear other young
things, with the little jokes and the fond
glances that crept in. Still she was tired
enough to feel relieved when a lanky lad
rang a cowbell and cried lustily, “Dinn-her!
Dinn-him! Dinn-all-of-us!”
“There’s enough din for all of us any-
how,” laughed Will, as half the girls put
fingers in their ears.
“Of course, there is,” said Bessie Lane
solemnly. “We made six whole loaves into
sandwiches.”


Willa exchanged a glance of fun as they
sat down together for the meal. It was in-
deed a plentiful one, and a happy one too,
seasoned with poor jokes made good by the
kindly spirit in which they were tossed round
the table. At its conclusion the provisions
left over were re-basketed.
“Surely there will be another game now,”
thought Willa.
But no! “Who’s on for more Jolly Miller ?”
cried the billy-boiler of the party.
And everybody eagerly shouted, “Me!”
except one, who preferred “I!”
So, till four o’clock, Willa was whirled
hither and thither at the same old meaning-
less game, and she began to wonder whether
her day’s novelty could compensate for its
weariness. At that hour, tea came as a wel-
come relief, and then everybody prepared
for home.
Suddenly a lanky youth rang the cowbell
for silence.
“Ladies and gents,” he shouted, “open
your mouths and I’ll pop a nice surprise in
for yer. This mornin’ I asked Mr Morton”
—a variation of the usual Old Scrape-and-
Save, made for Willa’s benefit —“to lend us
the hall this evenin’ and let us wind up the
day in style, and he never said no. Roll up


then, everybody, at eight, and we’ll have a
bit o’ fun.”
As they walked home laughing at the
day’s monotony, Will remarked, ‘you’ll have
to come to-night, Bill. I must find out if our
Bible Class can do anything besides playing
Jolly Miller
“Do you think I could?” said Willa.
“Why not? Your father doesn’t care a rap
what you do when he doesn’t want you, and
we needn’t start till your mother and the
nippers are safely snoozing.”
“Well, I’ll ask Father,” said Willa.
They were about a quarter of a mile from
home when they suddenly came upon Tom,
busy eating oranges from a basket beside
him.
Willa knew at once whence his booty came.
At Mortondale there was no fruit between
winter apples and the cherries and apricots
of December. It seemed to the squatter
wicked extravagance to order such a luxury
from Sydney or elsewhere, yet that was what
Willa, worrying over her mother’s small
appetite, begged him to do. He did not see
how any reasonable being could want any-
thing more than beef and mutton, potatoes
and bread; but women were not reasonable,
and the child was unreasonably persistent in
her entreaties. So he gave in for peace


sake, with the feeling that he was being very
noble, and every Wednesday the mailman
took eighteenpence away in his coach, to bring
a bag of fruit in its place on Thursday. It
was one of the troubles of Willa’s life to
keep it safe for her mother. The babies
begged for it till she almost wept to refuse
them; the boys searched for it openly; and
now Tom had evidently made a successful
raid.
“Oh! Tom, how could you take Mother’s
oranges?” she asked pitifully. “Please give
me back the basket and what’s left in it.”
Will gazed at the greedy boy in disgust.
Years of constant association made him
take the elder Morton for granted; the
younger one he still regarded with contempt
and dislike.
Tom laughed rudely at his sister’s plea.
“Will I?” he said. “I guess you often
sample it on the sly, but I got in ahead of
you this time, Miss Smarty.”
Willa tried to seize the basket, but he
grabbed it up and ran. Will caught him.
“Don’t be more of a pig than you can help,
Tom Morton,” he said.-- “Give Willa the
basket, or I’ll jolly well make you.”
Tom’s sulky temper blazed into wrath at
losing his spoil. He flung the basket with


all his might into Willa’s face, shouting,
“All right! Take it, you cat!”
Will’s eyes were blazing as he caught the
boy again. “Unfortunately you are three
years too young for me to fight, you little
cur,” he said, “but I’ll thrash you till you
roar, for that. When I want you, I’ll find
you; so you needn’t bother to hide.”
“You don’t dare,” shouted Tom, pulling
himself free.
Will took no further notice of him.
“Come along, Willa,” he said. “Give me
the basket,”
Willa, who had mechanically gathered up
the bruised fruit, turned to him with eager
entreaties.
“It’s no use,” he said, striding along with
grim face; “if you talked from now till
doomsday, I wouldn’t listen.”
“But he didn’t hurt me; he didn’t really,”
she urged.
“That’s a fib,” he retorted.
“Oh! Billy, how can you say such a rude
thing?”
“Well, I apologize; but it’s true all the
same. You’ve owned up to me before, Billy
Girl, that you do tell little fibs to get others
out of a row; now haven’t you?”
“And I don’t care if I do,” she retorted
defiantly. “You are not to touch Tom, do


you hear? It’s my business what he does to
me, and I won’t have you interfering and
making trouble all round.”
Then she burst into tears, half because she
was scared of the explosion that might re-
sult in the home if he carried out his threat,
half from deliberate desire to move him by
her weeping.
She knew that Tom was selfish and a
coward; but, with her, condemnation was
always swallowed up in understanding pity.
She knew too that her father believed
his duty done when he fed and clothed his
children as cheaply as might be, that her
mother was too indolent and indifferent to
guide them, and that Tom was just an un-
trained young animal, handicapped as Will
himself had never been.
Will did not enjoy her sobs; but, with a
boy’s inability to see anything right in the
views of the other side, he merely indulged
in the private prayer that she might cease to
be such a soft-hearted little ass, set his lips
obstinately, and strode on.
He was glad, when they reached the home
paddock, to find a bitter battle raging between
Tibbie and Tottie, who had been turned out
by their despairing mother. Willa rushed
in to stop the blows and yells, flinging one
pitiful “Oh, Bill!” at him.


“I’m not going to kill him, you little idiot,”
he said, and escaped, to intercept Tom before
he could shelter behind his father.
It took some time to find and catch his in-
tended victim, but he ran him to earth at
last in the low oak-scrub that filled up a bend
of the river-valley. Then, holding his yell-
ing prisoner by the collar, he broke off a
switch and thrashed him with considerable
vigour, for the howling boy’s kicks added to
his wrath.
“There, you young beast!” he exclaimed,
as he released him. “You won’t forget that
in a hurry, I wager.” And he left the boy
to weep in pain and helpless rage.
As he walked home, Will’s lips were still
set in an obstinate line, for he did not know
how Tom’s father would take the chastise-
ment, and he meant to abide by what he had
done. If Morton made a fuss, he would
“clear out” and get his father to do the
same; that was all there was to it!
He found Morton fixing up the vegetable
garden fence, the wire of which had grown
slack.
“I’ve come to tell you, Mr Morton, that
I’ve just thrashed Tom hard,” he announced
curtly.
“What’s that? What’s the matter?” asked
the man, impatient at being disturbed.


Will repeated his statement as curtly as
before.
“Ain’t you pretty big to fight him?” asked
the man.
“I didn’t fight him; I thrashed him.”
“What for?”
“For throwing a basket at Willa’s face.”
“Ain’t she big enough to take her own
part? She’s older than Tom.”
“She’s a girl, and you know she’d put up
with anything.”
“Then why didn’t you let her? Anyhow,
don’t expect me to interfere if Tom makes
himself disagreeable. I’ve got no time for
that. You must fight things out amongst
yourselves. Now, if you’re so fond of doing
things, hold this wire for me.”
Will took the wire with an alacrity that
held relief. The close-up view of leaving
Mortondale, the only home he knew, had, to
his own surprise, not appealed to him. At
all events, he proved a willing and efficient
helper.
When his task was done, he asked, “May
I take Willa over to the hall to-night to the
finish-up of the picnic?”
“I don’t want her for anything that I
know of,” was the gracious answer.
“Of course, I’ll take care of her,” said the


boy; but the squatter seemed entirely in-
different.
Not so the three little girls, who were
eagerly waiting for their glory-glide. “Oh!
Will, we was so misable all day,” confided
Tottie. “Willa was away, and so was you,
and I couldn’t even find my cat, and we was
awful bad, wasn’t we, Tibbie?”
“Willa’s forgived us though,” said Tibbie.
“Then so will I,” he said. “Come along
and I’ll give you two extra glory-glides to
make up for it all.”
It was after seven, and quite their bed-
time, when he took the little ones in, and
Willa straightway carried them off to bed.
In the dining-room he found Tom, with eyes
swollen from weeping, eating the belated tea
she had made ready for him.
“I’m going to tell my father on you, you
big brute,” Tom muttered darkly.
“I told him myself,” said Will.
“Nice account you’d give him.”
“Well, you’re free to give him your own.”
Willa came hurrying back with a worried
look from boy to boy. Will grinned at her
rather anxiously. “I’m not eating him, Billy
Girl,” he said.
“Billy Girl and Billy Boy and billy-goats!”
sneered Tom.
“She was goat enough to get a little beast


like you a late tea anyhow,” said Will; “you
might remember that.”
“Well, why shouldn’t she?” asked Tom.
“What else are girls good for?”
“Shut up,” said Will, more forcibly than
elegantly. “You think you’re a little tin god
on wheels, and you dare to look down on
Willa, when the wonder is, how she can be
sister to a fat lump of greediness like you,
so dull that, if you met a stale bun and a
fresh cake out walking, you wouldn’t know
which to make up to.”
Tom put his tongue out at him, then car-
ried his sulks and bruises off to bed, while
Willa sat down and began to mend a dress
of Tottie’s.
“Your father says I may take you down
to the hall,” said Will; “aren’t you coming?”
“I think I’d better not,” said she.
He leaned his elbows on the table and
looked across with a coaxing smile. “Don’t
be huffy with me, Bill, old mate,” he
pleaded.
Willa’s lips trembled. “I—l’m not,” she
said. “I ought to be grateful to you for
sticking up for me, and I really am; but —
but you knew it would hurt me.”
“I suppose I did,” he admitted uncomfort-
ably; “but you’re such a little donkey over
things like that, Bill. He had to get pulled


up, or he’d hurt you a jolly sight more some
day.”
But when you know how I can’t bear
anybody to be hurt,” she persisted.
But hang it all! —a chap’s only human,
he has a beastly temper, he has one;
that’s all. Of course, I shouldn’t have let
you know what I had in store for the young
horror, but I was so stirred up that I blurted
it out like an ass. I can’t say I’m sorry
about licking him. I’ve ached to do it so
often that I enjoyed it. But I could kick
myself now for making you miserable, so
do forgive me, old kid. You know you’d
come with me if you weren’t annoyed,”
“I’m not cross, really,” said Willa, “only
miserable. I’ll see if the kiddies are all
right.”
She was back soon. “Tom’s asleep,” she
said, with a brave attempt at a smile, “so I
guess he’s right now, and I may as well stop
moping.”
“Hope he’s not all right,” grinned Will;
“hope he has a few sore spots left as re-
minders.”
“Oh, Bill!” she protested. “Oh, don’t! I
can’t bear you to—to be spiteful like that.”
“Well, race me down to the first gate,” he
suggested, quite unrepentant. “If I win,


you call it quits; if you win, I pat sweet
Tommy lovingly on the head to-morrow.’’
And Willa flung her scruples and her
cares to the wind and raced madly down the
dusty bridle-track, to be outdistanced, of
course. Still she was laughing when she
caught him up at the gate, and somewhat
breathlessly they went their way to the hall.
As they approached it, they heard the
piano going and the tramp of many feet, and
out were wafted the words,
We’ll catch a fox,
And put him in a box,
And a-hunting we will go.
“I’ll bust,” said Will inelegantly, “if I
can’t make them change their tune. Let’s
get them dancing.”
Having picked up the art of dancing
locally, he had taught Willa; so she offered
no objection when he entered, exclaiming,
“Say, folks, let us vary things with a dance.
Have a waltz with me, Willa?”
As they started without music, the girl at
the piano struck up a waltz-tune and, as
though some spell had been broken, the
young men eagerly sought partners. Trip-
ping feet, flushed cheeks, and laughing eyes
were soon the order of the night.
“Whenever you’ve had enough, I can go


home happy now, Bill,” said Will, as he
steered her to a seat for a spell. “Jolly
Miller might have got monotonous if they
had kept on much longer.”


CHAPTER V
A SENSE OF HUMOUR
Lessons at Mortondale were a morning
institution only, though Will studied in the
afternoon too. However, when November
was over, with the Senior Examination for
which he had been preparing, he felt free to
neglect his books entirely.
One Thursday afternoon, therefore, he
set out with the Morton girls and his camera,
intent on photographing some of his familiar
haunts. He had started an album in antici-
pation of the new year, when he was to go
to the University if he won a scholarship or
bursary. He carried the camera, and most
of the time carried Bubs as well, for her
chubby legs were not equal to a long walk.
They took a view of their usual riverside
seat and one of the babies paddling.
“Now one of my fishing-hole,” said Will,
“and one of the willows under Lee’s Bluff.”
They were almost at the latter spot when
they met Lulu Lee, who lived there.


“What luck meeting yous!” she cried. “I’m
to be married this afternoon at four, you
know, and I wanted to ask you both to the
wedding breakfas’—not to-day, you know;
we ain’t keeping it up, nor nothink now, as
we can’t afford it. But mother give me a
clutch of turkey aigs and a young pig, and
we ’ope be next Easter to ’ave turkey and
’am of our own, and we’ll ’ave the breakfas’
then. Besides, we expec’ to ’ave two rooms
of our ’ouse ready be then, for Tom’s ole ’ut
ain’t scarcely fit to ’ave no party in. You’ll
both come, now won’t you?”
They accepted the invitation with sober
thanks, wished her luck in her new life, and
moved on. But, when she was out of hear-
ing, the laughter that had been heroically
suppressed came out, and Willa sat on a log
and indulged it to the point of tears.
“Good luck to you, Lulu, old girl!” cried
Will, taking off his cap in honour of the dis-
tant bride-to-be. “You’re a plucky one, and
no mistake, to take a helpless, good-natured
old softy like Tom Ferris, minus a house and
a farthing. May you make a man out of him
yet!”
“Isn’t the breakfast funny?” laughed
Willa. “But doesn’t poor old Lulu look
happy about it though? And I bet Tom will
have to borrow a coat to get married in.”


“You’ve hit the nail on the head; he’s
borrowed Alt’s,” said a merry voice near
them, and there was the bride’s cousin,
Maggie Miller from Needy Flat, down for
the wedding.
They greeted her happily. Everybody for
forty miles round liked pretty Maggie
Miller.
“I was just cornin’ up to the station,
Will,” she explained, “to see if you’d join
the Flat Progress Association.”
“I have,” said he; “hiked up to Saturday
night’s meeting and paid my half-crown sub,
honour bright.”
“But since then we’ve got a lovely
plan,” said Maggie. “You know, we’d like a
proper church at the Flat, instid of jest
havin’ service in the little Methodist hall.
Well, our Association wants a hall for
dances, and the men on the Church Com-
mittee are willin’ to sell us theirs for ten
pounds down, if we give a dance every
Saturday—gents a shillin’, ladies with gents
free —and for three years give them, for the
church they want to build, all our profits.
Now will you come every Saturday night
reg’lar? Remember it’s a religious duty.”
Will promised solemnly to neglect his duty
as little as might be, and Maggie went back
to the Lees’ cottage.


“If we meet many more people, I’ll never
get home again for laughing,” vowed Willa.
“I foresee you hunting me up to those
dances each week, you’re such a terror for
duty,” laughed Will. “Anyhow, I’ll have
my bob’s worth of bliss —always supposing I
can scrape up the bob —by taking you along.
We can drive up late, after you get the
nippers to bed.”
“I’d love to, if mother wouldn’t mind, and
if I can manage anything in the way of a
frock,” she said wistfully. “People interest
me so much, Billy, that I just love going out.
Curiosity must be my besetting sin—poking
my perky nose in, as Tom calls it.”
“Curiosity?” said Will. “Generosity, you
mean.”
“I’ll give you a nasty one if you are not
careful,” she laughed.
“Oh! I know mine all right,” he replied;
“self-righteousness and self-conceit. Beauts,
aren’t they?”
Willa hotly denied his charges against
himself.
“It’s only too true,” he laughed, somewhat
ruefully. “I made that same remark to the
pater the other day, and you know well the
old dear would have buttered me up if he
honestly could. Instead, he simply said they
were both faults that went with youth and


could be grown out of. I scarcely expected
him to take me seriously, and I admit it was
a bit of a nasty knock when he did. All the
same, I’m glad he never lets me down lightly
out of weak affection. I’m sure I owe a few
grains of moral improvement to his constant
candour.”
“I don’t think you have any faults, Billy
Boy,” said Willa soberly.
“Oh, of course not!” he laughed. “I’ll
find your estimate a pretty hard one to live
up to. All the same, your good opinion
bucks me up as much as the Pater’s rare
compliments do, so don’t develop clear eyes,
old lady.”
Having reached Lee’s Bluff and photo-
graphed the willowy stream beneath it, they
continued their quest of potential pictures.
“When we are miles apart, I’ll like a peep
at the old spots,” said Will. Hallo! There’s
a fine subject for us.”
A big grey-black iguana, mottled with a
lighter grey, was extended along a log,
making a meal off a rabbit. When he saw
them, he lifted his small head indignantly,
gulped half the rabbit down at a mouthful,
and made off. Will put Bubs down and gave
chase, but the iguana took refuge near the
top of a tall box-tree.
“He’s too high up now,” he cried dis-


gustedly. “He would look only a couple of
inches long in the picture. Hold the camera,
Bill, and I’ll haul him lower.”
As the boy climbed up, the iguana went
farther out on a branch. That brought Will
to a stop. “Hang him!” he exclaimed. “The
pesky limb will soon break, with me and my
dinner plus him and his on it. Pass us up
a long stick, Tibbie, there’s a good chick.”
Tottie found one and handed it up while
her slower sister was still looking helplessly
around. The iguana, his tail lifted forcibly
off the limb by the stick, showed fight, his
head raised, and battle plainly written in his
beady eyes. The boy leaned over, and catch-
ing him by the tail, pulled him clear of the
tree and swung him back and forth laugh-
ingly. The babies squealed in mingled fear
and delight.
“I’ll let him up that dead tree-trunk,” said
Will, as he descended. “Its light colour will
show up his dark body beautifully.”
The indignant creature, liberated on a
fork of the stump, climbed to the top and
put its tongue out savagely. The boy fixed
his camera on its stand, got his focus right,
put in a plate, requested his subject to “look
unpleasant, please,” and finally took the
picture.
“Now His High-and-Mightiness is wel-


come to hunt up a second rab for dessert,”
he laughed. “He ought to make a better
picture for his wrath.”
“Isn’t it time we made tracks for home?”
demanded Willa regretfully.
Will had to confess it was, and they
turned their steps stationwards.
At the kitchen door they were met by Old
Silly, a Chinaman whose name described his
local reputation. He had been awaiting
their return for an hour, refusing to go at
Bunny’s indignant commands, for he re-
membered the meals that Willa gave him.
“There’s one of your pets making him-
self a nuisance as per usual,” grinned Will.
“Look at the green pumpkins, as big as
apples, he has brought to present you with.”
Old Silly indeed had about two dozen tiny
green pumpkins, which he had persisted in
piling on the kitchen doorstep. As often as
he put them there, Lizzie had shoved them
away with a laughing “No wantee pump-
kin !” or Bunny had angrily returned them to
his compatriot’s baskets. Now the old man
turned to Willa with an eager flow of
Chinese.
She smiled and shook her head as he tried
to force the pumpkins into her arms; but,
when she promised to get him a meal, he left
her in peace and squatted down in the dust


beside his baskets, with a contented grin on
his broad face.
Bunny was still for driving him off, but
Will exclaimed, “Let him alone, Bunny, do.
He’s rare sport when he gets a feed.”
“Him not silly, him lazy,” protested
Bunny, but in vain.
Soon Willa brought out three boiled eggs,
thick slices of buttered bread, some salt, and
a cup of tea. Old Silly took them with
chuckles of appreciation, ate the bread in
huge mouthfuls, devoured the eggs, shell
and all, drank the tea, and finished up with
the salt. Will snapped him with a whole
egg disappearing into his capacious mouth.
The meal over, Old Silly insisted on pre-
senting Willa with three apple-sized pump-
kins, and then allowed himself to be escorted
out on to the main road.
Will had made a dark-room out of an old
shed, and in the evening, after giving the
babies a double dose of glory-gliding and
dazzling Sid and Rob with an amateur cir-
cus, walking on his hands, balancing a
broom on his nose, and riding his bicycle
lying across it, he went out to develop his
plates, while the little ones went off to bed.
When he returned to the dining-room,
where his father and the squatter were
drawing up some contracts, he sat down be-


side \V ilia, who was busy with the morrow’s
lessons, and whispered, “Every negative is a
howling success, especially Old Silly’s egg.
What price his table manners, eh?”
Willa laughed at the recollection, and
soon the two were exchanging whispered
comments on the prints he had brought in.
“I wis h you youngsters would be quiet,”
said the squatter impatiently. “What you’ve
got to cackle about like that for, I don’t
know.”
“Sorry, Mr Morton,” said Will. “It’s my
fault; but such a lot of funny things hap-
pened to-day.”
“What funny things?” demanded Mor-
ton.
So Will told him of Lulu Lee’s invitation
to her wedding-breakfast.
The squatter gazed at him rather pity-
ingly. “What on earth is there in that to
make you go on in such a silly fashion?” he
asked. “She can’t afford a party now; why
shouldn’t she have one later, if she’s stupid
enough to waste money feeding strangers ?”
“But what do you think, Dad?” said
Willa, and gave an account of the church-
building that was to be done on the proceeds
of Saturday dances. “I bet the minister will
have something to say to their plan,” she
concluded.


“Now, what better way could they raise
the cash?” said her father. “The foolish
young people of to-day are always ready to
throw away their last sixpence on a dance.”
Will knew by experience that the squatter
“had no funny-bone in his pack-bag,” as he
put it, so he took refuge in silence. But
Tom, with a spiteful grin from the floor,
where he was playing with two pups, broke
in.
“What amuses them most, dad,” he said,
“is the way Old Silly eats. Willa was feed-
ing him again, after all you said last time.
She always feeds him when he comes hang-
ing round.”
Will rushed in, for he saw the blackness
gathering on the squatter’s face. “He really
is the queerest old card,” he said. “If you
had seen him eating eggs whole, shell and
all, and swallowing a spoonful of salt as a
last tit-bit, you would have had to laugh.”
“Who expects a Chow to eat like a
Christian?” growled Morton. “And, Willa,
I won’t have you encouraging that lazy
scoundrel about the place and wasting food
on him. Let him work for his tucker.”
“But he’s only half-witted, father,”
pleaded Willa.
“Nonsense! Now you give him no more to
eat. Do you hear me, girl?”


‘‘\es, father,” she replied, with every in-
tention of disobeying, if necessary.
“And now you get away to bed, my girl,
and leave us in peace without your magpie
chattering,” he concluded.
Will scowled darkly at Tom.
“The chattering was entirely my fault,
Mr Morton; I’m sorry if it annoyed you,”
he said, then added rebelliously, “but I’m not
sorry I was born with a sense of humour.”
“Sense of silliness!” corrected Morton
contemptuously.
Tom giggled appreciatively, but Will’s
eyes flashed. His father, who saw the
danger-signals in them, interposed in his
gentle voice, “Please, my son, we really shall
be grateful to you if you settle down to read
and let us have the silence we need.”
Will found a book somewhat sulkily and
settled down to it, as Tom took his pups out
and went off” to bed, his going greeted with
a good-night glare from the older boy that
promised a future settling-up.
Presently Morton reached the point at
which he could leave the rest of the work to
Curtis, and he too sought his bed. Will
looked up penitently as the door closed be-
hind him.
“I’m sorry I cheeked him, pater,” he con-
fessed. “I know you think a chap should


be able to keep his self-control whatever
happens.”
“After all, it is my fault,” sighed his
father. “It is thanks to my lack of self-
control that you have such humiliations to
put up with.”
Such a weary, hopeless old face gazed
across at him, ruefully, lovingly, that dis-
comfort and pity swept over Will. He
closed his book, gathered up his photographic
prints, ready to go off to bed. But he paused,
as he passed, to rest a hand affectionately on
his father’s shoulder.
“All I know is, I wouldn’t change my pater
for any other ” he said; “but, on those rare
occasions when I’m not a self-satisfied ass,
I wish I could provide you with a better son,
sir.”
Then he grinned shamefacedly, made a
hurried remark about the morrow’s probable
weather, and withdrew.


CHAPTER VI
WILL TURNS TUTOR
Next morning, as Will was printing and
fixing his photographs, Morton came out
and asked him if he would give the children
their daily schooling.
“I want your father particularly to finish
drawing up the contracts with those fellows
who are taking my old sheep to fatten and
sell,” he said, “and I’m sure you can manage
the youngsters. Your father says you have
no study yourself now.”
Will privately styled the request “a bit
rich,” but he was obliging by nature and was
about to agree when a sudden idea made him
accept with alacrity.
“Of course, I don’t mind for once,” he
answered cheerfully; “but see here, Mr
Morton, if Tom cheeks me while I’m bossing
the show, I’ll reduce him to order.”
“That’s his own look out,” said the
squatter with complete indifference.
“Ah! Tommy Tattle-Tale, my boy,” said


Will grimly to the empty air, “I wonder
which of us will enjoy the morning most.”
He did a little printing and fixing, then
heard a clock strike nine, the hour at which
lessons started. He hurried to the school-
room, but only Willa and the babies were
there to note that he was three minutes late.
Rob and Sid followed almost immediately,
to be let off with a half-hearted reprimand,
but Tom strolled in at nine-thirty.
‘‘Nine o’clock is starting-time,” said Will
severely.
“Who said it wasn’t?” inquired Tom
rudely.
“Nobody,” answered Will sweetly; “but
this afternoon you are going to say it is, five
hundred times, in decent handwriting, too,
to pay you out for your cheek.”
“Rats!” said Tom.
Will caught him by the collar, boxed his
ears, and made him stop his consequent roar-
ing by threatening to repeat the dose. The
young rebel had perforce to relapse into
sulky silence, though he tried to get a little
of his own back by assuming a stupidity of
the densest variety. Will left him to his pre-
tended puzzlement over work that was quite
simple, merely remarking that anyone so
deplorably thick in the head might at least
put in an appearance at the proper hour, see-


ing he needed all the schooling possible. Tom
began a retort, but thought better of it; he
had discovered that Will’s fingers could
sting painfully.
Meanwhile, Bubs sat on Will’s knee and
played with her doll, while Tibbie and Tottie
stumbled through a reading-lesson, and
Willa did a French exercise. When it was
handed back to her, corrected, she found
written under it: “Please don’t look at me so
accusingly, Billy Girl. I vowed I’d make
him smart for getting you rowed last night.
Say! our friend the goanna has a sense of
humour himself. He sent an army of cock-
roaches last night to eat the gelatine emul-
sion off his negative. Now he is minus a
head and minus a tail and spotted with
nothingness all over, but I did a print of him
just for a lark. Do give me half the shadow
of a grin when you read this, so that I’ll
know you’ll forgive me when I am penitent
—which won’t be till I have paid Tommy
the Tattler out properly.”
Willa had begun some equations and re-
turned to them virtuously, not lifting her
head for the requested smile. Ten minutes
later, he put Bubs down and strolled around
to see how the algebra was getting on.
Willa’s pencil guided his eye to a note at the
top of her page.


“Please, please, Bill,” it read, “don’t be so
hard on poor old Tom. He can’t help being
disagreeable at times, and I hate the way you
just enjoy hurting him. Why must you
keep on prodding at him? Please, please,
Bill!”
He found the values of x and y that
eluded her, for Willa always floundered
helplessly in mathematics. Then he set a
piece of Latin for translation and wrote
under it, from a boy’s inborn desire to tease,
“I’d like to prod him up with a fish-hook on
the end of a pole, so there! You watch me
knock his head into the wall presently for
pretending that he can’t do the sum Rob and
Sid have both got right,”
“Oh, no!” she cried, forgetting virtuous
example in alarm. “Oh, please, no, Will!”
“Right oh!” he said, as small eyes looked
up in surprised inquiry. “I suppose it is too
hard a bit for you to translate yet. Try the
next passage in the book then. Rob, why
aren’t you getting on with your sums? You
are a lazy young beggar, you are.”
Rob and Sid, awed by the vengeance
visited on Tom, buried their heads in their
books again, and silence reigned in the
schoolroom, for even little busybody Bubs
had fallen asleep on the floor, and Tottie and
Tibbie, with tongues curled round their


cheeks, were intent on truly wonderful
attempts at drawing a teapot.
After the midday dinner, Tom appealed
to his father, who actually took the trouble
to ask for details. He saw the advantage of
having Will as an unpaid tutor while he piled
other tasks on the paid one, so he dismissed
Tom’s appeal.
“If you didn’t turn up at the proper time,
you must take the consequences,” he de-
creed; “and don’t bother me about it any
more; I’m busy.”
Will exacted his pound of flesh in-
exorably. He even insisted on the re-
writing of any lines not neatly done. A
miserable boy, who both loathed and feared
him, was the result, but he found a malicious
pleasure in it all.
“Now, if you have brains enough to see a
hint as plain as the nose on your face,” he
remarked, as he finally let his prisoner go,
“perhaps you’ll leave Willa alone for the
future.”
His sense of gleeful triumph deserted
him, however, when he came across another
result of his vengefulness and found Willa
weeping.
“But why, you little donkey?” he asked.
“You—you know, Billy,” she sobbed.


“So I have cultivated some faults since
yesterday, have I?” he asked.
“Oh no!” said Willa. “It’s just a way of
yours I don’t like, Billy. Most likely it’s my
own silliness; but oh! please, Bill ”
“All right,” he said, “You have got me
beaten, old kid, so cheer up. I promise faith-
fully that I’ll keep my hands off him for the
future and leave him in peace as far as I
can.”
“Oh, you dear!” she cried. “Oh, Billy,
you dear!”
“You needn’t worry to admire my mag-
nanimity any,” he said, with an attempt at
a clearing grin. “Tom’s down and out
already—knows his master for all time, I
hope. I’m quite safe in promising hands
off.”


CHAPTER VII
THE HAND OF CHANGE
Summer had almost gone and March had
brought in its pleasant days. Willa came
happily into the room she shared with the
sleeping Bubs, where a kerosene-lamp of the
cheapest type gave out a sickly light from
the pile of butter-boxes draped in coarse
muslin that served her as a dressing-table.
All through the long afternoon, when her
mother had been fretful, the babies quarrel-
some, and her father intent on finding tasks
for her, she had carried down the neck of
her dress a treasure for the bedtime’s hour
of peace, her first letter from Will.
For the old days had gone, and the new
year had doomed boy and girl alike to feel
the hand of change, and the hand of sorrow,
which makes older. For Will, the vanished
year had closed in gladness. An unknown
uncle had left him three hundred pounds, a
nest-egg for a future start in life. Then he
had won a University scholarship for


classics, which meant free lectures and text-
books, and fifty pounds a year besides.
But, before the academic year began, he
awoke one January morning to find that he
was fatherless. All unannounced, the Angel
of Death had come while the household slept,
and in the morn the tired old man, old before
his time, lay very still there, with the smile
of some last happy dream on his face.
To Will it was a staggering blow. If the
boy had been the man who watched over his
father, and the man had been a gentle child
leaning on his son’s strength, it only made
the loss the deeper. With youth’s sublime
self-confidence, Will was ready to stand
alone; but that there was no one to need his
support left a bitter ache in his heart.
When the first few days of stunned grief
were over, he began to pack his things, and
Willa found him at the task. Into her heart,
sore with sympathy for him, there entered
an element of personal dread. Save for his
understanding friendship, she knew herself
as much alone as he was, who had neither
kith nor kin; so she could not bear the
thought of losing him. She went to her
father straightway.
“Dad, do you know that Will is packing
up to go away?” she asked. “Couldn’t you
ask him to stay till he goes to the University


in March? You owe Mr Curtis a lot, you
know.”
“What do you mean, girl?” he demanded.
“I never owed any man a farthing. I paid
him every penny he earned.”
Willa looked at him patiently. “Not what
he earned, Father,” she said; “only what you
agreed to pay him.”
“You’re an impudent young hussy,” he
retorted angrily. “But, of course, the boy
will stay; he is always useful. If he wants
to earn his keep regularly, he can teach you
youngsters. Your mother is already fus-
sing about a new tutor or governess for
you.”
The upshot of it was that Will agreed to
stay till March and do his father’s work for
half his father’s pay. The little children
adored him, Tom feared him, Willa loved
him, so school hours were orderly and in-
dustrious. But a time came when he and
Willa had their last long talk together, as
they strolled in the moonlit paddock after
tea.
“I wish my scholarship were for Science
or Engineering, not for Arts,” said Will. “I
have even been wondering if I’d chuck it at
the last minute and make for North Queens-
land instead. But the poor old pater had his


heart set on the Varsity, and I can’t let him
down.”
“But how will you manage?” she asked.
“Will the money your uncle left see you
through ?”
“That? Oh! I’m not touching that, thank
you! Nor yet the two hundred we had saved
up ourselves. That’s for my sugar-farm or
sheep-farm after I get a couple of years’
bush experience. My scholarship fifty must
cover everything. Jock Macdonald’s mother”
—Jock was storekeeper at Mortondale—“has
his room to spare and is going to take me as
a boarder for the small sum of sixteen shil-
lings a week —hope she knows what an
appetite I’ve got, though—and I am only to
pay when I’m there. During the vac., I can
bike into the bush or on to some quiet beach,
to camp out and shoot or fish for most of my
eats.”
But Willa silently registered a vow that
her father should ask him to Mortondale.
“Look!” said the boy. “There’s old Orion
smiling down at us, so don’t be dumpy, little
kid. See that red star that makes one of his
hands? That’s mine, my own particular star,
and when it does a wink in at your window
at nights, I hope it will make you do a think
of me.”
“You know I’ll never need anything to re-


mind me of you, Bill,” she said reproach-
fully. “But I will take your star for mine
too. I’ve always loved Orion. I used to call
part of him the Saucepan. His sword makes
the handle, and there’s a rim of stars for the
edge of the pan. It seemed such a nice
homely bit of the sky that I used to enjoy
thinking God was there —heaven seemed
such a big cold place to find Him in.”
“If you notice,” said Will, “our star is an
extra twinkly one; so it is up to us to
be chirpy.”
Willa attempted a laugh, but ended it with
the confession, “I’ll be so terribly lonely
without you, though, and I’m so terribly
afraid you’ll forget me.”
He laughed back, but he guessed how her
heart was aching, and he alone knew all she
meant to him.
“Oh, little donkey!” he said. “I’m not
likely to forget all the family I’ve got, am I?
You can be grandmother, or aunt, or bestest
chum, or anything you choose, till you’re old
enough for me to come back and run off with
you, for a wedding-breakfast and a honey-
moon and that sort of business, you know.”
“Marry you?” she queried, and laughed
out in astounded surprise. “Oh! Bill, fancy
thinking of things like that already—when
I’m barely fifteen indeed!”


“It’s not a thought that hurts me any,” he
said. “I hope it doesn’t strike you as too
dull a proposition.”
“Oh, no!” she said. “Oh, no! Of course,
I love you better than anybody in the world,
Bill; I always have.”
“All serene then,” he said. “You’re mine,
young lady, till Orion gets tired of twink-
ling; and you are going to be afflicted with
shoals of letters from me.”
The laughing threat comforted Willa at
the time and had been comforting her ever
since; but he, being a boy, took a fortnight
to write the first epistle. And now, seated
near the open window, where his star —and
hers —could smile in upon her, she read it:—
Dear Old Billy,
A fortnight ago I sent a postcard to inform
you of my safe arrival, and I have been meaning
tp write ever since. But leisure time has been
scarce, and I am such a hayseed that what I
haven’t devoted to exploring the city has gone
to feeling homesick; that means that I have
thought about you too much to find the time
to write to you. When your letter came this
morning, I felt as ashamed as a youngster sent
off to school in Father’s old suit cut down. But
you are going to forgive me, aren’t you, Bestest
Bill?
Mrs Macdonald is an old dear, very Scotch,
very nervous about burglars, very sure it is bad
for a “laddie” to work after nine-thirty at night,


so off goes the gas at the meter then! Needless
to say, I have invested in a reading-lamp.
Her daughter, Miss Jennie Mac, openly pro-
claims herself forty, but she is still slim and
young-looking and young-hearted. She is a
typist in town, and already my mind is stored
with a gallery of entertaining oddities —the men
in her office, as described by herself. She has
forbidden me to darn my own socks, an accom-
plishment beneath the dignity of an undergrad
and the skill of a mere man. Like that last word,
Billy Girl? I do. I’m grown up at last, really
and truly and honour bright.
The Varsity is a fine old place. I have matri-
culated now and proudly sport a gown, which a
gay spirit in Second Year has kindly robbed of
its unfamiliar look by tearing for me. Some of
the lecturers never make a joke, and one gets
tired of them; some joke for ever, and one gets
tired of them. On the wffiole, though, they are
a fine set of men, and I mean to imbibe some of
the knowledge with which their heads are
crammed. We are going to be a rowdy year
they tell me; it is a pity for a dull old sobersides
like myself, who never could see much humour
in noise, and who certainly does not want to
waste Saturday mornings being brought back
for interrupted lectures. One of our profs is
just engaged, and, when he darkens the room
to show us lantern slides, the chorus of kisses
certainly is rather funny.
I did not mean to go in for friends, for they
are an expensive luxury, yet here I have been
and gone and made two in two weeks! Two
worth paying for though! Harry Dent is an
ugly, cheery, brainy chap; he can twist his face


into grimaces that would make a coward laugh
on his way to get a tooth out. He is a bursar,
and as hard up as most; Dick MacPherson is
just as “stony” as Dent, and just as fine a fellow;
his special line is mimicking anybody and any-
thing. He takes lectures at St Andrew’s College
also, as he is to be a minister some day. He is
the only one of our trio who ever swears, so you
see what a paragon I am keeping in spite of the
awful temptations of city life—same old Billy
Blowhard, riest-ce-pas ?
What do you think? I have got a job! Dick
Mac nobly put me on to it. He used to coach
a governess in arithmetic two evenings a week,
but, with Theological Hall lectures on top of
Varsity ones, he can’t spare the time to tackle
her, and has passed her on to me. She speaks
French and German well and was offered an
ideal post if only she could manage a little arith-
metic. Her employer offered to pay five shillings
a week coaching fees for her and, instead of an
hour with a regular coach, she prefers two with
somebody cheaper. The poor old dame is so
dense that she will drive me crazy yet, and I
understand how Dick Mac learned to swear. In
the fortnight, I have just about convinced her
that two and three make five, but that two from
five must therefore leave three is still a matter of
doubt to her.
The chocs I am sending by this mail are for
Tottie’s birthday, and mind! no bullying me
about them. They come out of my first coaching
fee, and I earn that hardly enough to be entitled
to do as I like with it.
Give the nippers all a hug from me, and a
specially affectionate pull of the pigtail to my


own Tottie. Tell them I’d be so delighted to
see them again that I’d stand them a dozen
glory-glides on end. But, look here, young
woman! You shouldn’t have tackled that job
of mine. Sounds callous, but the young folks
would have got over weeping for it before they
died of old age.
There is a buckjumping show on in town and
lots of the Varsity fellows went last night. We
three holey-pockets scraped up a bob each and
got in to the cheapest part. In fact, Mac was
financial and shouted us tea in town first. After
four hours of hard toil each afternoon, I some-
times get a real hankering for the good old
corned beef that graced every meal at home.
Mrs Macdonald treats me to bread and scones
and cake—the last item just sometimes. I am
getting acclimatized fast, but not so much so
that I didn’t enjoy Mac’s cold tongue and salad.
But, to get on to our muttons, or rather, our
buckjumpers, one nag has a very uncivil reputa-
tion, and the management have been offering five
pounds to anyone who could stick it for three
minutes. Of course, I jumped at the chance. I
blindfolded its near eye with my hat, as I did
with that vicious little Bess your father got me
to break in, and mounted it before it knew what
I was up to. It got me off pretty soon, but I got
on again and stuck it safely—not much credit
to me really, for I caught the reins up so tight
that the little beggar couldn’t get its head down
to buck.
Anyhow, I got my fiver, and to-morrow it is
my shout to As You Like It. A hen who has
surprised herself by hatching her first chick is
not in it with me for first-class conceit just now.


I wish you were here to share in my shout. I
can imagine how you would love a play —and
love good old MacPherson and Dent too.
I have found a second-hand bookshop where
shabby good things go for a song, and have
treated myself to a dozen battered volumes. As
I finish them, I’ll send them on to you, I have
packed a tiny Omar Khayyam in with the chocs.
It is a translation by a bosker chap called Fitz-
gerald and a real delight, even if it has lost half
its front cover. Jolly nice old heathen Omar
must have been —leaves a pleasant, sad sort of
feeling behind him, like a curlew’s wail, or wind
in the river-oaks.
Guess I must to bunk, Billy Girl, so I’ll just
add, be a little less good, but still good enough
to forgive me and write me a cheerer. I hope
your mother is not having one of her bad times,
and that the nippers are not driving grey my suc-
cessor —Miss Chester, did you say she was?
My kind regards to the family, and a hug to
you—if you will have it
From Billy.
P.S. —Keeping chirpy, chum? If not, Orion will
hear about it from me.
Willa read the epistle through three times
on end, kissed it, for she was always a senti-
mental little person, laughed a little, because
it made its writer seem so near, then shed an
odd tear or two to think he was really far
away. Then she risked ruining her eyesight
by reading Omar Khayyam through in the


poor light. Finally she slept with letter and
book both beneath her pillow.
Her life was full of the old duties. In-
deed it was harder than of yore, for an
underpaid governess had come, who could
not manage the boys. It was Willa who had
to bribe them into a semblance of order; she
too who needed all her powers of strategy
to save Miss Chester from being imposed on
by her father, with his incurable habit of
expecting everybody to do anything. Miss
Chester’s scant stock of knowledge was little
use to an eager mind developed by a ripe
scholar such as Curtis had been, but Willa
read on alone at the books Will had left be-
hind for her, and her heart, in tune with
beautiful thoughts and fancies, appropriated
much that was good in them.
When Will’s first vacation drew near, she
asked her father to invite him to spend all
his holidays at Mortondale.
“Of course he can come,” said the squat-
ter irritably. “He’s mighty handy about the
place, isn’t he?”
“He won’t come unless he is asked,” she
urged.
“Well, write and ask him, if he is so
blamed particular.”
“But he won’t come for my asking, dad.”
“Now why?”


To explain how Will’s pride would keep
him away from Mortondale unless he were
made entirely sure of his welcome by its
owner, was difficult when such pride was
absent from the squatter’s own composition.
However, Willa’s persistence won the day,
and she was even allowed to dictate the letter
of invitation.


CHAPTER VIII
TEACHING AN EXPERT
It was not till the June vacation that Will
returned to Mortondale. Then the babies
had glory-glides galore, while the squatter
got two unmanageable fillies properly broken
in. For Willa it was a time of shining eyes
and happy laughter, though the fortnight
passed all too quickly for her, and for Will
too, till one morning they realized it was the
last but one of their breakfasts together.
“Time has been playing us tricks,” said
Will. “It was only yesterday I came,
surely!”
“Perhaps it is just a horrid old nightmare
worrying us,” sighed Willa.
Morton cut their lamentations short. “I
wish you’d ride that bad-tempered Bess to-
day, Will,” he said. “She has been playing
up again. Mick and Mart are afraid of her,
and she knows it,”
“Right,” said Will cheerfully, “if Willa
will come out to keep me company. I sup-


pose Bess will be worse to manage than
when I first broke her in, though; a spoiled
horse is never a treat.”
“It’ B no use giving her half an hour’s
canter,” said Morton, “she wants a good
solid day’s work to take some of the flash-
ness out of her.”
Well, I can spare most of the day, I sup-
pose, if you can, Willa,” said the boy, with
an understanding wink across the table.
If Miss Chester will look after the babies
for me,” said Willa doubtfully.
Of course she will, girl. Why do you fuss
so?” said Morton.
And Miss Chester, who loved Willa
already, hastened to agree.
Will indulged in a grin of triumph and,
immediately after breakfast, went after
Bess and the big bay horse that was Willa’s
favourite mount. It was a green winter
with grass everywhere, and the brown filly
was as round and sleek and spirited as any-
thing equine could be. She was spoiling for
want of work, for she had recently bucked
every second man about the place off, and
nobody cared to ride her. However, she knew
her master still, and Will experienced a thrill
of boyish pride when she actually came at
his whistle. He did not even trouble to put
a saddle on her, but just the light pad he


used for a quiet horse. As they rode along
through the paddocks, she was naturally the
first subject of conversation, and the boy
told again the tale of how he had first tamed
her.
“The little beggar made for every tree in
the paddock, to try to rub me off,” he said.
“She gave me a few nasty spills, too, but in
three weeks she was as quiet as a lamb, and
now ”
A rabbit sprang unexpectedly from its
burrow right under Bess’s nose, and in the
early nineties rabbits were still rare. The
mare’s head went down instantly and she
started to “pigroot.” The pad slipped over
her round shoulders, and Will had to come
off with it. He had realized in time what
was happening and so was able to land on
his feet.
Hiding his surprise, he went on with his
tale, “and now, as you see, she is as mild
as milk and moonlight.”
Willa laughed in relief. “What a scare
you did give me!” she cried. “But I under-
stand now why Jock Macdonald calls you
Cucumber Bill.”
“The sad truth is, the cucumber coolness
was nearly all put on for your benefit, old
lady,” he confessed, “though a bit of it w T as
to ease my self-respect after the chestnut


colt hurt it yesterday by getting me off, and
that ass Peters hurt it more by offering me
advice on horse-breaking.”
He whistled to the mare, which had scam-
pered off in alarm, but it was so nervous that
he had some trouble in catching it again.
Even then it needed all his attention for a
time. When he had it soothed at last, Willa
pleaded, “Billy, I wish you’d get Jock to
leave that poor Peters alone.”
Will laughed unsympathetically. “As a
shearing expert Peters may be all right,” he
said, “but I’d enjoy seeing Jock knock out
some of his stuffing of conceit. You can’t
deny he’s an ass on horses —if I may drag
in a third animal in the shape of a sort of
Irish bull.”
“I suppose he is a bit of a donkey to boast
so much about his skill with them,” she ad-
mitted. “All the men reckon he knows
nothing about them, and that teasing Jock is
always drawing him out, just to make fun
of him.”
“Where’s the harm?” queried Will.
“But Jock is going too far. He has got
Peters to promise to break in tame old
Darby, the horse even Tibbie rides bare-
backed, and has represented Darby as a fiend,
guilty of half a dozen men’s blood.”


“What a lark!” said Will. “When is the
interesting show to come off?”
“It isn't a lark, it’s cruel,” she retorted. “I
believe it’s to happen this very afternoon on
Sandy Flat, though I have only heard hints
about it. Bill, do stop it.”
“No fear!” he laughed. “I told you Peters
had the cheek to sit on the fence and offer
me advice about breaking in the chestnut yes-
terday—beastly bad advice too! When I de-
scend to walking a horse round with a bridle
on it for a week, an empty saddle for another,
and an empty pair of trousers tied over the
saddle for a third, and then mounting it on
the sand, where it can’t show what’s in it,
PH count my riding days done. I’ll be in at
the death this afternoon, in spite of your soft
heart, old lady; that know-all ass is enough to
make a saint savage.”
Willa put in another plea, but Will broke
into a gallop.
When she caught him up, she asked,
“Won’t you even do it to please me, Bill?”
He shook his head laughingly. “I’ll do
almost anything to please you,” he said,
“except help you to be a soft-hearted little
goose—it is curbing, not help, you need in
that line, Billy Girl.”
“I’d rather be a goose than be hard, so


there!” she retorted, but pleaded no further,
for she knew it was useless.
At dinner-time Will had a private word or
two with Jock Macdonald, with the result
that he was back from his afternoon ride
and down on Sandy Flat by four. There
every man about Mortondale who could
manage to steal away for an hour was wait-
ing to see Peters ride Darby.
Three anxious-faced men held the scan-
dalized old horse, secretly stimulating him
with pin-pricks to a mild show of kicking
and prancing. Others were urging the
shearing-machine expert not to make the
attempt.
Grandly refusing to be daunted, Peters
talked of how to mount a savage horse, and,
after five minutes of cautious approaching
and retreating—to wait for the right moment
meant half the victory, he explained—got a
foot half in the stirrup and vaulted up. A
pin in his shoulder sent Darby off with a
bound, and the fact that Peters held his head
at such an uncomfortable angle that his
mouth suffered made him restive; still,
horse and rider got safely round the flat
and back again.
“He tried to play up a couple of times,”
said Peters proudly, “but I was one too many
for him.”


“Oh! he never did buck much,” confessed
Jock, “but he has killed three men as they
got off —kicked them to death. He kicks
out as you dismount, and so viciously that
I feel worried about having let you tackle
him. For heaven’s sake, old man, be careful!
I’ll never forgive myself if anything happens
to you.”
“I say! Does old Scrape-and-Save know
your people’s address, if there is an accid-
ent?” asked Bob Barnes.
“Don’t make him nervous, you idiot!”
growled Mart Simmonds. “Take him on to
the sandiest patch, Peters, where he has no
firm footing and can’t kick up properly.”
Looking rather worried, the demonstrat-
ing horse-breaker took the advice. He spent
ten minutes waiting for “the moment,” then
released one foot till its tip alone was in
the stirrup, pulled the other leg up, and gave
a tremendous jump outwards.
At such unexpected performance, Darby
sprang three feet into the air, while Peters
fell flat on his face and then scrambled hur-
riedly off on hands and knees.
“Did you see the wicked lunge it made at
me?” he cried. “Fortunately, I was too
quick for it, but it might have brained a
slower man.”
The onlookers relieved their feelings by


cheering him, but not a word did they say
to explain their trick. Instead, they led him
home in triumph and helped him tell and re-
tell the tale to absentees. It was after tea
that evening that Jock let a sudden flood of
light into the boaster’s mind, as he followed
him out into the home-paddock.
ou’ve tamed the outlaw for ever,” he
grinned. “Look!”
And Peters looked, and saw Sid, Rob, and
Tibbie perched on Darby’s bare back, saw,
and understood, and packed his bagf to eo
next day. S
“Well, the trick worked,” said Will to
Willa, when he heard what Peters was
doing. “There’ll be a happy party to see
him off by the coach to-morrow and invite
him to come back and give us another lesson
in horse-breaking. I’ll bag a seat in his car-
riage, too, and get a few extra digs in before
the train reaches Sydney.”
Willa talked of other things at the time, but
she found an opportunity next morning to
get in a private word of warning.
“If I were you, Mr Peters,” she advised
gently, “I’d walk the short cut to Frenchy’s
Gap and join the coach there. The boys
don’t mean to be unkind, but I feel sure they
are planning to tease you over something.”
So the prey escaped, and all the practical


jokers got for their pains was a farewell note
that read, “Good-bye friends. I hope you
enjoyed your little joke. You can’t say I
didn't play up to it well enough to take you
all in. Next time I come up, I’ll bring a
decent mount with me, not the caricatures
of nags you fellows are used to, and then I’ll
show you some riding.”
The mailman read the note aloud, to a
mixture of hooting and laughter from the
crowd assembled at the tiny post office, but
quite half the station-hands believed that
Peters had really played the fool to fool
them, and they went off, feeling what they
called “cheap.”
Not so Will. He sought out Willa before
setting off on his bike-ride to the nearest
railway-town.
“Well, old lady, you were a spoil-sport—
and a brick —as per usual,” he laughed.
“Did any ass ever get into a hole without
your trying to pull him out ?”
“I’m glad you don’t mind, Bill,” she said;
“not that it would have made the slightest
difference if you had, you know.”
“Oh! I know that, little tartar,” he
laughed, “We’re a pretty pair for obstinacy,
aren’t we?”
“We direct it rather differently though,”
she retorted, with a teasing smile. “If the


“Will you walk as far as the bridge?”


world has got to be made up of what you call
asses, Bill, can’t you see it is better they
should go round feeling pleased with them-
selves rather than crushed-wormy?”
“You’re right every time, of course, you
blessed old kid,” he said, “I always know
where to look for comfort when I’m a
crushed worm anyhow. I’m feeling one
now at the thought of saying good-bye. Will
you walk as far as the bridge with me, to
take a bit of the sting out?”
Willa agreed, but the parting had to come
all the same.
At Christmas Will returned to Morton-
dale for a glad month, during which Willa
spoiled him in every way she could. It was
because he wished to do well in the honours
examinations in March that he went back
long before the vacation ended, to consult
books in the University library. He was in
the midst of his examinations when a letter
came telling him of Mrs Morton’s death.
Scarcely a fortnight later, a telegram from
Willa conveyed the news that she was father-
less as well. Will flung some clothes into his
bag, hurriedly made a few necessary
arrangements, and caught the Western Mail.


CHAPTER IX
BLACK DAYS
Mrs Morton was dying, and her family
knew it. The doctor summoned from a
town fifty miles away held out no hopes. “It
will be a couple of days at most,” he told the
squatter. “There is no use trying to get a
trained nurse here in time. That capable
little girl of yours will have to manage,
though it is certainly hard on a child,”
Even Morton seemed to realize that it was.
“Can you stay yourself?” he asked.
The doctor shook his head. “If my stay-
ing could do the least good, I might manage
it,” he said, “but she is past mortal help.”
So the doctor went, and a child not yet
sixteen, who had never known pain and
death at close quarters, was left to tend her
mother in her last hours and to see her suf-
fering cruelly from the acute heart affection
that was beyond cure and almost beyond re-
lief.
Morton was honestly sorry at the prospect


of losing his wife, and showed his esteem by
preparing a special resting-place for her. As
soon as the doctor’s verdict was known, he
ordered her grave to be dug, that it might be
cemented in time.
“The cemetery is a regular bog,” he said.
‘“The drainage off Thompson’s Ridge soaks
right through it. A cement lining to the
grave will keep the coffin dry.”
It was to Willa he explained his plan, and
he would not have understood, even had he
realized, the wave of shuddering horror that
went through her. A young glad thing, in
love with life as young glad things ever are,
she was wilfully refusing to contemplate the
inevitable death and was pouring out every
tenderness on her mother’s last days of life.
Morton went about his work as usual,
though his manner seemed to have grown
gruffer. The boys hung about the hushed
house uncomfortably for the two days pro-
phesied by the doctor, but on the third
slipped away into the paddocks from its
terrifying atmosphere of waiting. Willa
had begged them to remain. Without dar-
ing to admit it to herself, she felt that her
mother’s added weakness and more laboured
breathing meant that the end was near.
But the healthy young animal’s instinctive
shrinking was too much for Tom. He told


her to mind her own business, caught his
pony and rode off, followed by Sid and Rob.
As Willa sat beside her mother, tenderly
caressing her thin hand, she listened
anxiously for returning hoof-beats.
“Where’s Tom?” asked the mother at last.
It was the question Willa had dreaded. She
knew that Tom, with all his faults, was yet
his mother’s darling.
“I’ll see if I can find him,” she promised.
But, though she sent out searchers, she
had to admit, when her mother grew rest-
less at the delay, that Tom had gone out.
“And his mother dying?” asked the fret-
ful voice. “Yes, I know it; and you know
it too. I have seen it in your frightened
eyes, child. The rest —they are too selfish to
give me a thought even now.”
Willa pityingly kissed the hand she was
fondling. “Oh, mother dear, no!” she
pleaded. “Tom didn’t mean it. It is just
that boys don’t understand. He just didn’t
think, darling; that’s all.”
But the mother burst into weak and pain-
ful sobbing, weary of the world that had
failed to satisfy her, yet afraid to leave it,
and aggrieved that fate should deal her such
an unkind parting blow.
“Tell your father I want him,” she said.
Willa brought her father, then raised her


mother’s head with the help of an extra
pillow, and prepared to go.
“Don’t —don’t leave me, child,” panted
the mother. “Put your arm under my head.
I —l don’t feel so choky then.”
Willa complied. Then, held in her strong
young arms, the dying woman poured out
on her husband all the pent-up bitterness of
her disappointed married life. For long and
weary years she had nursed a grudge
against him, had almost enjoyed the feeling
of being an ill-used wife, had fed on it, and
in her queer pride had been silent to him as
to others about it. Now she reproached him
for the things he had never known he should
do, and she had scarcely tried to show him
he should. She bade him remember how
little of the money that was the be-all and
end-all of life to him had ever gone to
brighten her days.
“You —you’ve left me without a nurse,
and without a doctor —till —till Willa made
you send for one. When I am —in my
grave,” she concluded, “remember—that you
—helped—helped to —send me there,”
“Oh! Mother, please, little mother, don’t!”
sobbed Willa.
But the dying woman went gasping on,
merciless to herself as to others. “And Tom—
takes after you,” she continued. “He is out


—amusing himself—while I die. Selfish
father—selfish children—all selfish —except
Willa. She is worth all the rest of you —put
together, and you make —make a slave of
her.”
Her strength failed her, and her head
sank back on to the pillow, but tears of slow
bitterness kept welling out of her eyes for
Willa to mop up gently. For ten minutes
she lay silent, save for her choking breath,
then she tried to struggle up. Willa lifted
her head higher again, and she clutched
feebly at the child’s arm, as though to hang
on to life a little longer.
Morton looked at her in stupefied silence,
but not a word could he find to say. Once
the breathing grew so faint that Willa
thought she had gone, but her eyes flickered
open again, sought her husband’s stricken
face and filled with motherly pity. “My
dear!” she whispered, “Oh, my dear, I’m
sorry!”
And with that light of forgiveness in her
eyes, in a moment she was gone, without
pain, without struggle.
Willa gazed with tear-wet, horror-
stricken eyes from dead mother to living
father. But above pity for the dead, who
had done with suffering, rose pity for the
living, who could suffer yet. She understood


his natural limitations that lay at the bottom
of his wife’s true charges. So she put her
mother’s head down gently and went to him,
to fling her arms round his neck, remember-
ing even then how he had hurt her when she
was tiny by refusing her embraces as “baby
foolery.”
“Father! Father dear! Mother didn’t
mean it,” she sobbed. “She was in pain; she
didn’t know what she said.”
He sat there, nervously twisting and un-
twisting his hands, not offering to return
her embrace, apparently not noticing it or
her, his face still wearing the dazed look that
had been on it since his wife’s attack.
“I never understood,” he said dully at
last; but it was the quiet figure on the bed
he addressed.
“Oh! I know you didn’t, father,” sobbed
Willa, “and she knows too.”
Without response, he continued to gaze at
his wife, till at last he roused himself, as
though by a painful effort, and went off to
give directions and send telegrams.
In the days that followed, Willa ached
with pity for the silent, lonely man, but come
near him she could not, for all her efforts.
He shied away from every offered embrace,
from every attempt at intimate talk. Till
his wife’s dying words started ringing over


and over again in his memory, he had not
known there was a heart in his anatomy.
Now that its aching made its existence a
painful reality, it was too shut-in by his
habitual gruffness and matter-of-factness to
be reached by any warming rays of sym-
pathy. Yet he felt the need of the comfort
he repulsed. A glimmering of light had
come to him. With the days it grew, till at
last he saw himself, not rich as he had
always fancied, but very poor indeed, with
a full purse and an empty heart; not the suc-
cess he had been so sure of, but a miserable
failure in the sight of God and man. He
went about his work, once the cemented
grave was occupied, but his face wore that
bewildered, hurt look that touched Willa’s
heart.
She too knew him for a poor man, to
whom the golden glory of sunset, the tender
roselight of dawn, the happy songs of the
birds, had never brought joy; a poor man,
who had never found the treasures that lie
hidden in books, or felt his soul kindle at a
noble thought nobly expressed; a poor man
who had missed the glad sweetness of friend-
ship and love; a poorer still, who was tor-
tured by doubts of himself. She longed to
comfort him with the sympathy she felt, but
he repulsed her advances. Not either of


them could loosen that obstinate tongue of
his that had never learned the speech of feel-
ing.
Because of its silence, no one else realized
the deep waters he was passing through. "If
one of his prize ewes had died, perhaps he
would have minded a little more,” said
Lizzie bitterly; and none of the station-
hands felt her words unjust.
The night after the funeral, he burned the
old will that had provided for his wife,
wrote a new one and asked Miss Chester and
Jock Macdonald to witness his signature to
it. "Fancy having the heart to alter it when
she is only just in her grave!” said Miss
Chester scornfully. "He is a cold-blooded
fish!”
It was a queer will too, if she could have
read it, but he left it sealed, with instruc-
tions that it was not to be opened till Willa
married or reached the age of twenty-four.
Two others witnessed the further document
that provided for the contingency of his
death before Willa reached the appointed
age. By it a manager was to look after
Mortondale, the profits from which, and the
interest on his various investments, might
be used for the children’s education; in
addition, each child was to receive a hundred
a year on reaching the age of eighteen. Dr


Leonard, the husband of Mrs Morton’s
sister Isobel, was to be their guardian.
It was scarcely a week after he wrote it
that Miss Chester reversed her verdict and
said, “What a mercy he made that will!”
For Morton of Mortondale caught a cold
that turned to pneumonia and was dead in
two days.
Times without number he had been wet,
never bothering to change into dry clothes,
and nothing had happened. But a man who
carries round with him a black burden of
mental distress is peculiarly liable to bodily
ailments; so the cold came, and pneumonia
followed. Heart-sick, he made no fight for
life, and the doctor, hurriedly summoned
back to Mortondale, could not save him.
It was Willa, with the memory of her
mother’s outburst burned into her im-
pressionable brain, who felt it most. Her
tragic face frightened kindhearted Lizzie
and Kate. They wept over her themselves,
they begged her to cry, but not a tear came.
Only, she shivered in spite of summer’s heat
and paced her floor all night long. She
looked after the children mechanically, but
was too stunned to wire for Dr Leonard, the
uncle and guardian she did not even know.
It was Jock Macdonald who saw to that and


many another thing, Jock indeed who sent
the wire that reached Will in her name.
A gleam of comfort seemed to light up her
eyes when the boy arrived by the midday
coach with Dr Leonard, but it faded
speedily, and she seemed scarcely conscious
of his presence through that long afternoon
when they laid her father to rest beside her
mother.
Dr Leonard was shocked at her white
strained face, but his strongest sense was
one of discomfort at the guardianship of
seven unknown children, nephews and nieces
of the wife who had been too indifferent to
agree to accompany him. In the evening,
when the younger ones had gone to bed, he
tried to become acquainted with his elder
wards. He told Willa and Tom the con-
tents of their father’s will, in so far as that
will could be known.
Willa said dully, “Thank you, uncle.”
Tom growled, “What a lot of foolery and
mystery about it! And what’s it got to do
with Willa anyhow? She’s only a girl. Why
didn’t he say when I was twenty-one?”
“I do not know your father’s reasons, my
lad,” said the doctor; “but, of course, he
must have had reasons.”
“Tomfoolery!” muttered the boy.
The doctor deigned no reply, but he won-


dered if the necessity for action would rouse
Willa from her dull despair.
“I cannot spare long from my work,
Willa," he said. “Can you children be ready
to go with me in two days’ time ?”
"Yes, uncle,” said Willa lifelessly. “I’ll
pack to-morrow.”
"Of course, you will come to us at first,”
he said; "but, later on, you will be better and
happier with other young people at board-
ing-school.”
Willa glanced up with the first show of
real comprehension he had seen on her face.
“Did father leave enough money for that?”
she asked.
He seemed surprised at her question.
"Of course, I have not gone into your
father's affairs fully as yet,” he said, “but
he has at least a hundred thousand pounds
invested in government securities. There is
a big bank balance too, I think, and this sta-
tion is bound to bring in some thousands a
year.”
“Thank you, uncle,” said Willa and
shivered. She had just remembered that it
was the cheapest roll of black material in his
store that her father had brought her to
have the babies’ frocks made from when
their mother died.
“Well, I’m going to bed,” said Tom. “My


lamp isn't filled, Willa, and the glass on it
has been left smoky for days."
“I’ll fix it now," said Willa meekly, and
went off to do it.
Lizzie chose the opportunity her going
afforded to come in with a request to Will.
“Oh! Will, I’m fair worried about that
poor child,” she said.
“She looks dreadful," he admitted miser-
ably.
“When her mother died, she just fretted
like any other girl," said Lizzie, “and she
was so busy comforting the little ones that
we felt she was bound to get over it easily
herself. But I never thought old Scrape-
and-Save’s going would ha’ bowled her over
so —him that never spoke a word to anybody
’cept to growl or give ’em something to do.
Yet she ain’t shed a tear since he died, nor
slept a wink, nor eaten a bite. You know,
Dr Leonard, she’s a bit obstinate, is Willa,
for all she’s so sweet and good, and me and
Kate could do nothing with her last night;
she just walked up and down her room with
her hands to her head till morning."
“A sleeping draught," suggested the
doctor.
“Unless you have brought one with you,
where will you get it?" said Will.
“Well, unfortunately, I don’t carry a


pharmacy round with me,” sighed the
doctor.
“I’ll see if I can get her to come for a
walk,” suggested Will. “To get out of the
house for a bit may do her good.”
“He’s got more chance than anybody to
make her talk about it,” said Lizzie. “If she
could once talk it over and cry her heart out,
she’d feel better, I know; and Will can
manage her better than anyone else, she’s
that fond of him.”
The doctor looked with some show of
interest at the young undergraduate who
had been his travelling companion, but whose
position at Mortondale he did not under-
stand. However, he liked what his keen
glance revealed —a frank, honest face,
miserable in its sympathy.
“Take her by all means, my lad,” he said.
So it came about that Willa found herself
walking almost mechanically across the
home-paddock with Will, He was rather
merciless, for he remembered how physical
exhaustion had always been his own best
medicine when he was sick at heart.
“Come along, old kiddie,” he pleaded,
when she began to drag behind after they
had gone little more than a mile, “If you
get tired, you will sleep the better for it.”
“It’s no use, Will,” she answered wearily,


and sank down on a log. “I know I can’t
sleep, so you may as well let me rest. I can’t
get things out of my mind.”
“My darling! My poor little darling!” he
said, and put his arm round her.
But Willa seemed to notice neither the
arm nor his new name for her.
“I’d bear it for you if I could, you poor
little old Bill!” he continued. “I know how
you feel.”
“No you don’t, Billy,” she said; “you
can’t. I saw them die, both of them, and it
hurt them—oh, Bill!”
He held her tight in the circle of his arm,
felt her shiver, and called himself a clumsy,
stupid ass because he could find no comfort
for her.
“Oh! Will, I think I must be a wicked,
unfeeling girl,” she continued. “You all
think I’m heart-broken, and inside me is just
sort of frozen up.
“I don’t feel anything at all but the horror
of it. If I shut my eyes, I see mother gasp-
ing for breath, or hear father raving. No-
body else knows what really happened, and
it haunts me.”
“Tell me, old kid,” he pleaded.
To Willa there came an irresistible
temptation to share her burden with the one
who had always understood.


“I —I oughtn’t to tell you,” she faltered.
“It was private, between mother and father.
I just happened to be there, holding mother
up.
“But, if you tell me, it isn’t telling any-
body,” he urged. “It will sink right down
into my heart where you are —you know you
are there, Bill, and can keep guard over it.”
Willa yielded, and shuddered while she
told her tale. “Oh! Bill, it was dreadful for
them both,” she said. “Mother killed her-
self to tell him, and she killed him by telling
him. She told him the hard truth about
everything, Bill —how he hadn’t got good
doctors to see her after her accident, and
how poorly we lived, and what few comforts
she had, and no nurse, and —and —you know,
Bill.”
Certainly he could fill in the details from
her outline.
“And it was too much for her strength?”
he asked.
“Yes, she just faded out after she finished.
But poor father! He had never meant it,
Bill, but he understood then, and he just let
go of life and didn’t seem to care any more.
I know he would be alive to-day if mother
were.”
Believe it the boy could not. It seemed so


totally opposed to what he knew of Morton’s
nature.
“That’s an absurd notion you have got
into your head, kiddie,” he said, almost
roughly. “You must just get it out, so that
it can’t worry you, by remembering what a
sensible unimpressionable sort of man your
father was.”
“I can’t,” she said. “I was there, Bill.
Besides, I heard what he said when he was
delirious. It was, over and over again, ‘Oh!
Rosie, why didn’t you tell me sooner ?’ ”
“Poor little old pall Poor old kiddie 1” he
comforted.
“And I must be an unnatural daughter,”
she continued. “I ought to be too miserable to
think of anything but my own loss, yet I
keep blaming them both for mulling things
so. Bill, I didn’t love them properly,”
“Rubbish!” he said. He could under-
stand the pain her tender heart felt as the
result of the morbid self-analysis that had
occupied her sleepless hours; but he could
scarcely explain that between such a “change-
ling child” and her parents there could never
have been that perfect love that is based on
sympathy and affinity of tastes.
“Poor little old kid, you are getting
nervy,” he continued. “How can you expect
to feel full of your own loss when you are


just brimming over with pity for them and
what they missed? If you are unnatural, so
am I. Heaven knows I blamed the poor old
pater more than I had any call to. And I
felt just as you do —too frozen up inside to
be really grieving at first. Why, it’s more
than a year now, but when I went to my old
room to-day and saw his empty bed, it
knocked me all of a heap.”
“Poor old Bill!” she said pityingly. “I’ve
brought it all back to you. And how selfish I
am to keep you here when you must be dead
beat after travelling last night! Let us go
back at once.”
He yielded, only too grateful that he had
turned her thoughts for a moment from her
own trouble.
As they came into the deserted kitchen,
the clock pointed to eleven. “I wonder if
Lizzie keeps the tea in the same old tin,” he
said. “I’m dying for a cup.”
Willa found the tin for him, but Lizzie,
who had been waiting for their return,
appeared suddenly with the teapot.
“What a brick you are, Lizzie!” said Will.
And he chatted to her as she spread bread-
and-butter, but Willa sank listlessly into a
chair.
Will took her tea over. “Come along,
Billy,” he said gently. “Lizzie sat up on


purpose to make this tea, so it’s up to you to
drain the cup dry and eat the plate bare.”
Willa took it with a wan smile of thanks,
ate a mouthful or two, and then burst into
sobs.
“Let her be,” whispered Lizzie, as Will
got up to go to her.
So Willa wept away some of the burden
pressing on her heart, then dried her eyes,
and said, “Please, I’m sorry. I’ve been silly.
I'll drink my tea now.”
Lizzie poured out a fresh cup, and Willa
drank it all and ate a whole slice of bread.
“Now you’d better go to bed, old pal, and
try hard to get to sleep,” advised Will.
“I can’t,” said Willa pitifully. “Oh! I
can’t go in there again.”
“Why, you poor dear!” said kindly Lizzie,
understanding in a flash. “It’s because your
room is all alone by your ma’s and your pa’s,
isn’t it ? And we’re such stupid creatures
we left you there last night. Some boy
oughter make a football outer my head, so he
ought.”
“When I put my head down on the pillow,
I hear them.” confessed Willa —“the way
they breathed when it hurt them, and father’s
cough and —and —”
“I know,” said Lizzie; “we’re fatheads,
we are.” Then she put her head on one side


reflectively. “You can’t come along with
me, dearie,” she decided, “because there’s
Kate, and she snores all night like a steam-
injin; but I’ll make us beds in the sitting-
room, you on the lounge and me on the floor.”
Willa agreed, but it was on the floor,
close against kindhearted Lizzie for comfort,
that she fell asleep and slept till long after
the sun was up.


CHAPTER X
SPOILED PROGRAMMES
Will and Willa had just stepped out of a
suburban train on to Sydney station, and the
clock pointed to half-past four of a Friday
afternoon in November.
For months Willa had been a boarding-
school girl, but each hour of each day was
full of regular duties and recreations and
the time seemed to fly. Yet the old life
seemed far away from her. The boys were
at boarding-school too, but at the opposite
end of the city, and she rarely saw them. As
for Tibbie, Tottie, and Bubs, they had van-
ished even more completely from her world.
Aunt Catherine, their mother’s youngest
sister, wife of a wealthy Riverina squatter,
had taken them home with her, and Mrs
Leonard had been glad to get rid of them.
Aunt Catherine had been in town when the
black-clad waifs arrived, and their chubby
faces and fair curls had speedily worked
their way into her heart. Her only child


was dead, and the little Kitty had been
plump, and golden-haired and irresponsible
as a kitten. So, when after a day the babies
stopped weeping and smiled at so many new
sights, she loved them for the baby smiles
that had once been the joy of life to her.
“I’d like to take Willa too,” she said, for-
getting that the elder sister with the dazed
manner was in the next room and could hear,
“for it doesn’t seem nice to part sisters; but
she’s not my style, Isobel; for all her baby
face, she seems too old and solemn for her
years. Anyhow, Rose was your sister as
well as mine, and it won’t hurt you to mother
one of her girls.”
Willa, hearing, knew that she had grown
old for her years by bearing burdens not laid
on many so youthful, and a sense of injustice
filled her. Being Willa, she made excuses
for Aunt Catherine and forgave her; yet the
memory of her hurt quickened her already
lively sympathy with life’s handicapped.
Aunt Catherine seemed like a fairy-god-
mother to the babies. She took ofif their
shabby black frocks and gave them filmy
white muslins, dainty dresses such as they
had never even dreamed of. She loaded them
with caresses and toys, and they almost
forgot to kiss good-bye the sister who had
been a mother as well. And because they


were young and petted, and Aunt Catherine
really set herself to make them more her
own by breaking the old ties, they soon for-
got her. Little notes in baby round-hand
came at first, but ever at rarer intervals, and
Aunt Catherine made no mention of Willa’s
spending a holiday in the Riverina.
Often the girl’s arms ached for the feel of
their chubby little persons pressed tight
against her, though along with the heartache
there was a not altogether unpleasant sense
of freedom from responsibility. She grew
gayer and younger with other young things
at school, but she constituted herself the
special friend and champion of all the little
boarders, helped them out of scrapes, in-
vented games for them, shielded them from
punishment, comforted them in disgrace.
It was their affection, along with Dr
Leonard’s kindly interest and Will’s loyal
friendship, that soothed her heart when a
sense of being unloved and unwanted
oppressed her. Mrs Leonard was absolutely
indifferent to her; called her “my love,” bade
her do exactly as she pleased, and yawned,
only half-behind her hand, if Willa tried to
talk a way into real intimacy with her. The
fact was, she had no interest to spare in
nieces and the rest of humanity, for she gave
it all to the somewhat rare combination of


geology, entomology, and dress. Willa might
come and go as she pleased at Blandford, the
Stanmore home of the Leonards—that is, if
she could get anyone to go out to school for
her, for Mrs Leonard had no time for such
trivial tasks. When she had first taken the
child to school, she had been very amiable
about everything. “Let her learn what she
likes, have what visitors she likes, buy what
she likes, go where she likes,” she said; for
such generosity saved a guardian’s wife
trouble.
Willa’s clear young eyes saw through her
amiability, but she was grateful that it gave
her the chance to see much of Will. At first
the school authorities had been inclined to
see no reason for intimacy with a brother
who was not a brother nor even a cousin.
But Mrs Leonard had insisted, realizing his
usefulness in bringing Willa to Blandford at
holiday times, when it was impossible to
avoid having her there. These holidays had
not proved the burden she expected. Willa
certainly slept and breakfasted at Bland-
ford, but she gave her days to Will, and they
visited together happy nooks new to her and
dear to him. The cook at Blandford packed
them up generous lunches, and the readings
and talks of the old days at Mortondale were
renewed as often as Willa’s monthly holi-


day week-ends came. The doctor made no
objection to their programme. There were
no secrets between him and Will. He knew
the boy’s dreams, had taken his measure, and
felt that he could trust him to guard Willa’s
happiness.
Now as they walked from their platform
to get a tram for the Quay and a boat for
Manly, Willa spied a forlorn little figure
under the clock.
“Why, there’s Christine!” she exclaimed.
“She came in by the train before ours and
was to have been met at four. Do wait,
Billy, till I see what is the matter.”
Will looked at the pretty child of eleven,
standing with pouted lips and worried eyes,
under the big clock, and he could not help
hearing the tale of woe;
“Auntie couldn’t have got my letter, and
so she isn’t here. And I promised faithfully
that I’d go back to school if I weren’t met.
All the same I’d go to Drummoyne alone,
only they’d be sure to ask on Monday if I
had been met, and I can’t tell fibs without
going as red as beetroot and being found out,
and of course, I’d get into an awful row.
Oh! Willa, couldn’t you take me out? Then I
could truthfully say a friend had met me.”
“Of course,” said Willa, and off she went
to tell Will his fate.


He did not look exactly happy at the news.
He always did give in to Willa, but he
generally enjoyed a grumble first.
“Don't see why we should drag the little
beggar all the way out to Drummoyne,” he
protested. “Let her pack back to school;
serves her right for not making proper
arrangements.”
But Willa looked at pretty Christine, the
pest and pet of her school, naughty and
sweet and altogether miserable. “You don’t
mean anything so unkind, of course,” she
said. “Leave my suit-case in the cloak-room
and then come and be introduced, old griz-
zler. You know perfectly well you’re com-
ing with us when you’ve finished pretending
to growl.”
Will went with a grin of submission, re-
turned to tell the now smiling Christine that
escorting her to her destination was a plea-
sure, took possession of her suit-case, and led
the way to the tram.
“Oh! well, there’s one pretty little person
the happier for it,” he remarked as they left
the house that had gratefully welcomed their
small charge, “but it has cut out our blow
on the harbour. All we can do now is get
tea in town and then stroll about till it’s time
for the play.”
“Well, I like tea,” said Willa, “and I like


strolling - , and I like plays, and you do too, old
grumbler.”
“I like to-morrow’s programme anyhow,”
he grinned. “We’re going to Penrith by
train and then up through the Nepean Gorge
by boat. Near the Warragamba Junction,
we’ll have a couple of hours to boil the billy
and walk. It’s our dear old bush, but made
lovely by some fairy’s wand —the deep green
river beneath, sandstone cliffs and tree-clad
slopes above, chattering gullies, flowers in
plenty, carpets of maidenhair underfoot, and
scarcely another picnicker to spoil the scene
with ginger-beer bottles. Have you ever
reflected how your own bottles never spoil
the scene and the other fellow’s always do?
I'll swallow our bottles if you don’t love to-
morrow, old lady.”
“Oh, Billy, don’t!” she cried. “You make
me just ache to go, and I can’t. I’ve promised
to take poor little Lois Dale to Bondi for the
day. Playing in the surf is her idea of
heaven.”
“Who is this perfect pest Number Two?”
asked Will crossly.
“She lives in the small house next door to
Blandford,” Willa explained eagerly, “and
she is such a dear, loving, miserable mite.
Her mother affects being stylish and has no
money left over to see to Lo’s eyes. She is


cross-eyed, and the mother just says she is
ugly instead of getting glasses for her. Of
course, she sees things in wrong places and
is always falling down or bumping some-
thing over, and Mrs Dale pities herself for
having a clumsy child! Think of it, Billy!
Poor Lo just accepts her position as a per-
son of no importance, but I guess her heart
aches for a bit of liking now and then.
Uncle Ken has promised to test her eyes
some day and give her glasses, if we can
manage it without offending her mother. It
would be just like that woman to resent our
doing what she neglects.”
“Look here, Billy Girl,” he demanded
sternly, “haven’t I warned you that I’ll shake
you yet if you don’t stop being so disgust-
ingly noble? Do you ever think of yourself,
young woman?”
“Of course, you silly boy! Every time
anyone treads on my pet chilblain, for
example. Seriously, Bill, it’s just one of
your queer notions that I’m unselfish. If I
do things for other people, it’s not from
choice, but because I can’t help it; often I
grudge it, indeed. I’d far rather go with
you up the Nepean to-morrow; I’m longing
for a big dose of gum-trees and you; but
Lois really needs me, and there I am, help-


less! Now be good to me and don’t make me
feel I’m being a pig to you.”
“If ever anybody had a queer power of
self-analysis, it’s you,” he said; “I call it
jaundiced, nothing less. Now stop talking
nonsense and board this tram, and let us
hunt up some tea; and just you remember all
the time that you are the dearest and most
unselfish little goose in the world, even if
you do need a weekly shaking, or I’ll lose my
appetite and forget to order ice-cream.”
“Ice-cream?” she queried. “Did anybody
sort of hint at blues? Sure, it wasn’t this
particular goose anyhow.”
“Right!” said he, as they climbed on to
the vacant front seat of the tram. “Now
may I inquire, in a perfectly disinterested
way, of course, if you have any act of
charity on foot to prevent your giving Sun-
day to the society of the MacPhersons and
myself? Dick’s sisters are nice girls and
dead set on knowing you.”
She smiled, but with eyes troubled at
thought of disappointing him again. “Ah!
Billy, you will be writing me down worse
than a goose in urgent need of a shaking,”
she confessed. “Aunt Isobel has a poor
maid, too old to get a place easily, and so
afraid to give notice. The younger girls
have to be bribed to stay on with a large


measure of their own way, and she gets im-
posed on every time. They all want Satur-
day or Sunday off, so she has to put up with
an ordinary week-day. The trouble is, she’s
sure she can’t get to heaven without going
to church, and she’s not the sort who could
make her own church, any old day in the
week, out of some green garden, with the
blue sky for roof, the birds for musicians,
and the flowers for preachers. This Sunday
morning, I’ve promised to do the rooms, set
the dinner-table, and so on, while she has a
good big breather of kirk. Then, Uncle Ken
wants us to have tea at Blandford. He
relies on me as an excuse to get away from
the bug-hunters and stone-breakers Aunt is
entertaining. A walk with his ‘little girl,
just home from school for a day or two, you
know/ has been the excuse for his escape
before now. He brings his pipe and a box
of sweets for me, and we sit in the dark in
Petersham Park and chat till most of the
bluestockings and bigwigs have gone home.
Uncle Ken is an old dear,”
Will laughed forgivingly. “Friday after-
noon’s programme spoiled by a brat in dis-
tress ; Saturday’s spoiled by a brat in greater
distress; Sunday morning’s by a brat-that-
long-ago-was in distress; Sunday evening’s


by a second brat-that-long-ago-was!” he
counted up. “Where do I come in?”
“In my heart,” she said, “for a dear, for-
giving old thing. Don’t be crabby, Bill. I’ll
take afternoon-tea with the MacPhersons, if
they’ll have me, and I wrote and asked cook
to pack us a basket to-morrow of all your
special eats —good old corned-beef sand-
wiches, hard-boiled eggs, cinnamon cakes,
and apple-tarts.”
“After that,” he laughed, “there’s nothing
for me to do but go like a lamb to the
slaughter of those dainties, with the un-
appreciated Lois thrown in.”
“I knew you’d be a brick,” she said.
“Well, if the brick has thrown brickbats
too hard, please imagine his growls un-
growled,” he laughed. “I suppose Ido try
to be a greedy grab-all where your time is
concerned, little lady with the big heart, but
you’re all the family I’ve got, you know.”
“Poor old Bill! dear old Bi'll!” she cried
remorsefully.
“So I worked the sob-stuff in effectively?”
he laughed. “Bill, you little soft-heart! you
little goose!”


CHAPTER XI
MENDED PROGRAMMES
Will went on Saturday to Bondi, petted and
teased the small Lois, helped her up when she
fell over, and enjoyed every minute of his
day.
On Sunday afternoon he took Willa to
make acquaintance with the MacPhersons
and had difficulty in getting her away in
time to reach Blandford for the high tea that
took the place of dinner on Sundays. As
they boarded trains and trams or walked
through the streets, he could not help notic-
ing the heads that turned to look at her, but
they yielded him no pleasure.
“Look here, young Bill.” he said, “you are
getting annoyingly pretty, you are. What
do you mean by it?”
“Am I really?” she asked delightedly, “I
did think I wasn’t as plain as I used to be,
but you never told me so before, and I’m
such a paltry scrap of a thing. Why I can’t
look more than thirteen when I’m over six-


teen, I don’t know. I’m so glad you think
I’m improving, kind sir.”
“I’m not,” he retorted.
“Don’t be cantankerous,” she laughed,
“Well, I’m not glad, so there!” he re-
peated. “You always were beautiful, Billy.
It’s your eyes. They’re not bright like stars,
for I can’t abide hard glitter. They’re just
soft and wonderful and sort of overflow in
rays of kindness that flood all your face.
Your smile always was a thing to melt an
Arctic frost, but your nose does turn up a
wee bit, and your mouth is rather big.”
“Index to my country appetite,” she
laughed.
“And in the old days,” he continued, “you
wore blue print and never had time to brush
your hair. You dragged it back tight and
tied it with tape, or left it hanging down like
rats’ tails. Now you fluff it out and brush it
till it waves all round your face like a soft
golden frame, and you’ve got a bow like a
huge butterfly skewered on to the back of
your head somehow, and people turn and
look at you. Senseless idiots without souls
wouldn’t have realized you are beautiful if
you hadn’t taken to being pretty too. And
now every one that meets you wants to go
adoring you. And when you know people
want a slice of your affection, you’re such a


“Am I really?” she asked


soft-hearted little donkey that you butter it
up nicely and hand it out to them, and there’s
less left for me every time.”
Willa laughed at him. “You’re the most
absurd boy that ever lived,” she said, “but
you’re such a soft-hearted old donkey your-
self that I forgive you.”
“I’m not a boy, absurd or otherwise,” he
retorted. “I’m a man, aged eighteen and a
decent bit, and for two years master of my
own fate. Of course, I’m penitent and all
that, but I’m not going to be glad the other
girls have taught you these pretty, new-
fangled ways of doing hair and making
frocks.”
“I don’t make my own frocks nowadays,”
she protested laughingly. “This was five
guineas in town.”
She did not understand Will’s crotchety
mood, for she was still a child at heart, who
saw him just as the beloved comrade of the
dead years. As for the boy, there was no-
thing of which he was more certain than
that he was a man and loved her. Yet she
was so little and indescribably precious that
he continued to play the brother and chum,
leaving her to the innocent dreams of girl-
hood. Still, there were times when he re-
membered how sweet she was, and how far-
off the day when he could have a home


worthy of offering her, and then he was
wont to puzzle her by such outbursts of
moodiness.
Mrs Leonard welcomed her truant niece
with an absent-minded kiss and extended
towards Will a hand that held a fossil
brachiopod brought by one of her visitors.
“Mr Carter, is it?” she asked, “or Curtain?”
“Curtis,” corrected the doctor, who came
to greet him with a smile and handshake of
real welcome.
Will had often been to Blandford before,
for Aunt Isobel was perfectly amiable when
amiability was no bother. When her husband
had first invited the boy, he explained,
“Young Curtis is Willa’s greatest friend,
and I must be sure that he is worthy of her
affection.”
“How kind of you, Kenneth, to take such
an interest in the child!” she had
He had not bothered to refute her praise.
He had married her for love of what he
thought she was, and she had married him
for love of what she rightly thought he could
get her —money. It had not taken him long
to find out his mistake. She gave him a
stone when he asked for bread, but he soon
saw she had no bread to give, and never by
word or deed did he let her or the world
know that he did not find stones satisfying.


The boys were rarely allowed to come to
Blandford, but Mrs Leonard made no objec-
tion to Willa’s visits. A girl, she said, did
not upset the house. Still she was glad
that Carter—or was it Curtain? —anyhow,
that hobbledehoy whose name was such a
nuisance to remember —so often took the
child off her hands. She was glad too that no
children had come to her, to interfere with
the pursuit of her scientific studies. Once
she congratulated the doctor on his child-
lessness, but he did not tell her that he was
easing some of his heart-hunger for sons
and daughters of his own by lavishing a
fatherly love on Willa.
Now, though he did not imitate his wife
and call her “my love,” he pinched the girl’s
ear affectionately and gave the heartiest
welcome to her friend.
“Not that you are not in my bad books,
Curtis,” he explained. “You have robbed me
of my little girl all afternoon, and I have
missed her.”
Willa rubbed her fair head lovingly
against his grizzled one. “Uncle Kenneth
Leonard, Uncle Ken-Len, you’re a pre-
tender,” she said. “I’ll wager you’ve been
asleep half the afternoon, and would have
done the same if I had been here.”
“So I have, puss,” he confided in an under-


tone. “I was wide awake while supposed to
be snoozing upstairs, and have been half
asleep since, talking fossils, and entertaining
them. You and Curtis are to sit beside me
at tea and keep me awake, or I shall disgrace
myself by snoring.”
By a little manoeuvring, he carried out his
own programme for tea, and soon after-
wards he excused himself to his wife and
her guests.
‘“There are some things I have to talk over
with my little girl before school claims her
to-morrow,” he explained; “and I have a big
favour to ask of my young friend Curtis, so
I mean to keep him strolling in the garden
till he is tired enough to grant it. Come
along, young people; it is roses and moon-
shine for you, willy-nilly.”
Delighted to escape, they followed him,
and the three found a secluded seat at the
far end of the big garden, beneath a spread-
ing gum, whose silvery stem had a purple
tinge and a lemon scent even by night. The
stronger odour of port-wine magnolia filled
the air, and the tweet-tweet of a family of
sleepy birds alone disturbed the stillness.
“I really did want to ask a favour of you,
Curtis,” said the doctor, as he lighted his
pipe. “I am worried about what to do with
the boys at Christmas. They would find the


old fogies at Blandford very dull company,
I am afraid.”
Will understood at once that their aunt
had refused to have them.
“I guess three young barbarians at once
would be rather a handful for Mrs Leonard
too,” he agreed soothingly.
“Well, perhaps,” admitted the doctor. “At
midwinter I got a tutor to take them up
to Mortondale for the vacation, look after
them, and see they had a good time. It
worked very badly.”
“I know,” said Will. “Rob told me about
it one day when I went across to see him.
Your Mr Leeton refused to let them
associate with working-people, and there
wasn’t a soul left at Mortondale for them to
know. Of course, the poor little beggars
wanted to show off their town clothes and
school slang to all their old friends, and he
kept an eye on them every five minutes of
the day. It was jolly hard on them, I
reckon.”
“So do I.” said the doctor. “I apologize
every time I see them and give them tips
twice as big as I used to. What I want to
know is, will you undertake to look after
them up there for their six weeks at Christ-
mas? Your own long vacation will be on.”


“I?” said Will. “The fact is, I don’t get
on too well with Tom.”
“Well, he hailed the mention of your name
with approval of a kind —said you weren’t
an ass if you were a beast. It was Rob,
however, who entreated me to ask you. That
young man has a great admiration for you.”
“Based on my ability to ride a bike lying
down and balance a broom on my nose,”
laughed Will.
“And a few lesser virtues as well, so I
gathered,” smiled the doctor. “Still, you
are second fiddle now. There’s a Captain of
the school, named Clifford, a wonderful
youth whose taste in ties and slang is per-
fect. He began by boxing the young man’s
ears for cheeking him, and ‘was awfully
decent to me about it afterwards, uncle, and
really is a top-notcher, and you ought to see
the way his hair stands on end when he plays
footer,’ and so on. Anyhow, Clifford the
Peerless will never fail of a good word from
me. He is making a man out of Rob, and
out of Sid too, for you must admit, little
daughter, they were too fat and too lazy and
a bit on the selfish side. I wish he had had a
chance at Tom a few years earlier.”
“He would have found him a tougher job
at any age,” growled Will.
“Oh! Billy, how can you?” asked Willa,


who saw the world already as a world of
mothers who grew cross through suffering,
of fathers who were unkind only because
they had never understood, of Toms who
need not have been Toms had those in
charge of them been wiser.
“I beg your pardon, Billy,” he said. “I
might have known such a remark would
hurt you. The fact remains though, that
Rob and Sid always were goodnatured little
cubs without an ounce of spite in their make-
up.”
“Don’t you think you can oblige me?”
said the doctor.
“If I don’t say yes at once,” Will con-
fessed, “it is because I am strongly pre-
judiced in favour of your proposal on
personal ground. You are offering me a
holiday at my old home, free of expense.
Looking after the youngsters would be prac-
tically a sinecure, but the fact remains that I
don’t hit it too well with Tom.”
“He hasn’t mentioned any violent attach-
ment to you,” said the doctor, “but he has
expressed the opinion that you would be a
big improvement on my unfortunate experi-
ment. Leeton.”
They left Willa on the seat and walked up
and down to discuss it.
“Nobody expects you to like Tom,” said


the doctor, ‘‘but just be a little kinder to him
than to the other two on that account. If
he were interested in anything, I should have
more hope of him; but he regards football
and cricket as unnecessary work, hates
books, never sees a joke, even thinks the
theatre a bore.”
“Try him at a dog show,” advised Will.
“I have never known a youngster better to
his dogs. He is fond of horses also, but too
abominably lazy to ride much.”
“Compulsory sport at school has thinned
him down a bit,” said the doctor. “Now, my
lad, I’m not afraid of your being anything
but good to him. You will tackle the task,
will you not?”
“I will, since you are good enough to con-
sider my conscience entitles me to,” said the
boy. “The awful truth is, I have been
extravagant lately and have been wondering
how I could work in the most economical of
holidays plus a very necessary new suit.”
“Extravagant?” Willa chimed in from
her seat. “I should think so! Tram-fares,
and ice-creams, and theatre-tickets and
such-like for me! Uncle, won’t you tell him
he is foolish not to let me pay my own way
when my pocket-money is always more than
I can spend?”


“Foolish, but very human,” laughed the
doctor.
Will joined in: “And for my birthday
Willa gave me two pairs of socks, two ties
and a dozen handkerchiefs,” he remarked.
“The only thing that worried her was that
she didn’t quite dare add a shirt and a pair
of boots. Then she wondered why I was
annoyed.”
“Annoyed?” laughed Willa. “Annoyed?
Uncle, he >vas —well, a roaring lion would
have been tame compared with him.”
“All the same, you tamed him, I have no
doubt,” said the doctor, “and the socks and
co. did not go back to the shop that provided
them.”
“Yes, this lion always turns ass when the
taming is tried on him,” admitted Will.
“I forgot to mention that Leeton had a
salary,” said the doctor.
“Not for me, thank you!” said Will firmly.
The doctor could scarcely understand his
objection, but he argued the point in vain.
“Payment for looking after Willa’s brothers?
No, thank you!” was Will’s final word.
“I wish I could go home too,” sighed
Willa.
But the doctor shook his head.
“Your aunt doesn’t like the bush,” he said,
“and Mrs Grundy would scarcely be satis-


fied otherwise. Besides, lam not going to
attend the Science Congress in New Zealand
without you to keep me in countenance when
I feel young and frivolous.”
Willa sighed, but the fates had been un-
kind; and to New Zealand she went while the
boys picked up the threads of the old life
again, and Will made even Clifford the Peer-
less lose a little of his lustre by teaching
them new gymnastic feats and telling tales
of how “’Varsity chaps” acquitted them-
selves with ball and bat and in their “rags.”


CHAPTER XII
A LANDMARK PASSED
The annual Speech Day at Willa’s college
had come round. To her it was a mo-
mentous occasion, for she was seventeen and
leaving school.
That very morning the results of the
University Senior Public Examination had
come out, with her name in the list of passes.
Yet, her weakness in mathematics robbed
her of the chance to matriculate and take the
University course she wanted. She had
long been reconciled to giving it up, so the
failure in mathematics did not dim her joy
in the measure of success that came to her.
She had won her form prize for English too,
and one that mattered more, the School
Good Conduct Prize, awarded by vote of the
students to the finest girl in the school.
Now she looked round the crowded
assembly hall, where two hundred girls in
snowy frocks and red ribbons were crowded
into the minimum of space. Members of


their Council and other distinguished visitors
fronted them on the platform, while fond
mammas and proud papas, admiring uncles
and aunts, brothers and sisters, cousins and
friends, filled the rest of the hall and over-
flowed into passages and corridors next it.
Her heart was a riot of mixed emotions —joy
that her schoolmates liked her so, sorrow at
leaving them, and a dull ache of loneliness.
Other girls who had no prizes, naughty and
even unloved at school, had friends and
relatives to beam proudly on them and ex-
plain away their failure with loving logic;
and she expected no one. Aunt Isobel, of
course, had no time to waste on “getting a
good dress crushed among a pack of noisy
children,” Uncle Ken was out of town, the
boys were at their own prize distribution,
and Will had his last examination for the
year, a Latin paper that did not end till five,
though he had promised to call for her as
soon as it was over.
Musical items, long speeches, the Princi-
pal’s annual report, a display of eurythmics,
all came before the prizes were distributed.
Even then, the tiny tots went up first for
their rewards, and it was five o’clock when
Willa’s name was called and her prizes
announced. As the Principal handed her
books over to the genial chairman, he ex-


plained, “This Conduct Prize is awarded by
the votes of the other girls. It is not merely
a popularity prize, for they are asked to vote
not necessarily for the girl they like most,
but for the one they most honour and ad-
mire. 1 his time their verdict was unanimous
and met with the hearty approval of the
teaching staff.”
Then trembling, blushing like a rose, a
slim little slip of a thing, Willa came up a
lane between the girls, while the fine old hall
shook with applause. The girls clapped and
even stamped. Prim and proper maidens
might not have done it, but they were just
big-hearted Australians who loved her and
meant that she should know it. Mothers
and fathers caught the infection, and there
were murmurs of “What a sweet face!” and
‘‘lsn’t she a dear?”
The kindly chairman held her hands and
turned her round to face the audience.
“Don’t be in such a hurry to get away, little
girl,” he said. “This is one of the glorious
moments that do not come often to any of
us. Enjoy it to the full.”
He held her hands, shaking them ener-
getically all the time; and, in the light of his
genial smile, she managed to keep back the
tears that were trembling in her eyes. Then
a smile of glad surprise irradiated her face.


Latin examination might not be over till five,
but there was Will, standing at the far end
of the hall, red-faced from the energy of his
applause. After all, some one dear to her
had cared enough to come, cared enough
even to deserve a scolding for a scamped
examination paper!
There were no tears as Willa sought her
seat again, just a song of gladness in her
heart. But soon the last speech was over,
and the ordeal of saying farewell came, so
that it was a red-eyed and forlorn little figure
that finally handed over to Will at the door
a suit-case, two fat prize-books, a tennis-
racquet, a hockey-stick, and a motley collec-
tion of parting gifts just received.
“And the carrier took all your luggage
this morning, old lady —you told me so!”
laughed Will. “Well, it is a consolation the
station is only ten yards and a bit off. Hand
over the rug and coats too and watch me do
the Sandow act. Houses removed at lowest
rates, no extra charge for a few pianos!”
Willa answered his nonsense with a stray
sob or two and kept dabbing at her eyes as
he stuffed into his pockets her trinket-boxes,
photo-frames and other souvenirs, and
laughingly loaded himself up with the bulkier
luggage.
“If you don’t grin, Bill,” he remarked as


they started off, “I’ll drop all your thinga-
majigs in the gutter and bang the first silver-
haired and saintly clergyman that catches us
up over the head with your hockey-stick.”
“Am I being silly, Bill?” she wept.
“The paper must have been mistaken this
morning when it prophesied drought condi-
tions,” he vowed. “Here’s a final warning,
Bill—you grin, or I’ll walk right down to the
station with your hockey-stick balanced on
my nose. Think how humiliated you’ll feel,
with all your friends looking on.”
Willa laughed shakily the while she
dabbed her eyes with a very wet handker-
chief.
“I’m silly,” she confessed, “I know I’m
silly. But isn’t the world full of nice people?
Oh! Bill, isn’t it just full of them?”
“Look at me, for example,” he grinned.
“\ es, you for one —an extra special one,”
she agreed, forgetting to weep in her eager-
ness. “Oh! Billy Boy, you were an angel to
come out to-day, but oh! I shall be vexed if
you do badly in Latin through it!”
“Hope I looked well in wings,” he grinned;
“but you needn’t worry about the exam. The
prof, always gives us twice the time we need,
and I made my pen fly to get out in time to
catch the four-fifteen from Newtown. I
had a cabby waiting to get me there in time,


and he flogged up his poor old moke for me
till I wonder a soft-hearted sentimentalist
like you condescends to know me. I just
couldn’t have missed being there to clap you,
old lady.”
“Even if that poor old horse dies of heart-
failure, I won’t disown you just yet,” she
promised.
“Feeling chirpy again?” he queried.
“That’s good. I have never yearned to be
wiped out in a deluge.”
“Chirpy? I’m not,” she retorted. “I’m
just too miserable for words.”
“Oh! well, it is a safe motto to keep on
smiling even if your heart is broken —or
your nose, which would be a sight worse,”
he declared, “or should I say a worse sight?”
“Preach at me, do!” she retorted. “I
could smile all the time too, if so much of
life weren’t made up of bearing things.
There’s saying good-bye to the people you
love, and all the things that we can’t set
right —the people that suffer, and the little
children nobody loves or wants. Oh! Billy,
I can’t bear to think of kiddies with natures
twisted all crooked because nobody cares.
“Well, don’t think of them,” he advised,
with such comical matter-of-factness that
she laughed again. “What an excitable,
emotional, soft-hearted little donkey you are!


And the tip of your nose is red, and you have
put your hat on with its badge to the back.”
“Oh! Have I?” she cried in alarm, and
righted it. “Billy Bully, if it weren’t that
I’ve spent every farthing I possess on keep-
sakes to distribute round and haven’t the
price of my fare home left, I’d pack you off
for your rudeness. As it is, I can’t.”
“Glad to hear it,” he said. “You’ll do as
I tell you for once. I telephoned Mrs
Leonard that I’d spare her the infliction of
your good conduct for the evening, as Mac
and Dent and I want to take you for a moon-
light row up Middle Harbour—that is, if
you are not too tired to come, little old kid. I
suppose you have had a trying day, poor old
Billy Bullied.” & Jr
“Tired? Now don’t be absurd, Bill. I’m
not the frail and fainting female of fiction;
I’m a healthy young person with a shocking
appetite for the things not included in a
boarding-school bill of fare. Is Denny really
coming? When he makes funny remarks
with the most solemn face in the world, or
practises his side-splitting grimaces, I could
just hug him, I love him so. Do you think
he would be very horrified if I did hug him
some day?”
He helped her into the train and found
seats for them both before he replied.


“Well, he stood your transforming his name
into Denny very amiably, and I dare say he d
stand for the hugging too,” he said; “but if
consideration for the good of his morals led
me to take a little of the conceit out of him
afterwards by punching his nose, I don t
know whether he’d take that quite so
amiably.”
Then she did laugh at the vision he con-
jured up of himself scrapping with one of
his beloved pals, and there was little trace of
unhappiness left on her face when they
joined Dent and MacPherson at a boatshed
across the harbour. From afar, both under-
graduates worshipped Willa, the girl with
the golden sunshine heart and silver moon-
shine smile, as Dent described her in poetical
mood. But they knew Will and recognized
that they must be content to worship from
afar.
“Welcome, Billy Both!” MacPherson
greeted them. “Miss Billy, we’re proud of
you. We have heard about your halo, and
Dent has invented a new grimace to cele-
brate it. He makes his face look so exactly
like a fish’s head that I long for a hook and
bait.”
“That’s a fishy tale,” said Dent; “but you
know Mac’s an ass, don’t you? Seriously
though, wia belle Billy” —and the new


grimace appeared—“we didn’t need the
news of your prize to know you could lick
even good old baccy in any charm contest.”
“Oh! Denny, you dear!” she laughed.
“That’s your best ever. Will says he’ll may-
hap punch your nose if I hug you for love
of your funny faces. Think it over for
a week and let me know if you consider the
risk worth running.”
“A week?” said Dent scornfully. “Who
wants a week? I think, I have thought, and
even thinked and thunk, and I’m ready.”
But Willa was not and laughingly got into
the boat. They made her a seat away from
reach of the oars, with Will’s coat under her,
Dent’s to keep her warm, and MacPherson’s
for a pillow, and they fed her with buttered
tea-cake out of one bag and bananas out of
another.
“But I want to row,” said Willa presently,
“while Denny takes a rest and sings to us.”
“No, you don’t,” said Will. “You’re too
fond of your own way, Billy. You’ve got
the perkiest, wilfullest chin, and it’s good for
you not to get your own way every time.”
“Yes, my fair child,” said Dent, with a
grin and then a grimace that twisted his nose
round to meet his ear, “obey your elders, and
they’ll keep on bullying you, same as Curtis
does.”


“I’ll easily stop them if they are no worse
than Billy,” she said. “I’ll howl. He
shrivels into meekness at the mere threat of
a tear.”
“Then give him one now,” advised Mac-
Pherson. “He is so conceited that he isn’t
satisfied with rowing decently, so he’s trying
a new way of feathering and has splashed
me twice.”
Will splashed him again deliberately and
MacPherson dropped an over-ripe banana
down his back in revenge. After that
exchange of civilities they settled down to a
steady stroke together while Dent steered.
“Dent, my boy, don’t hide your light —no
reference to the colour of your hair, old man
—under a bushel,” said MacPherson; “it
has been hinted that a song from you would
be acceptable.”
“Must the brute bawl?” grinned Will,
with the rudeness that cloaked affection
amongst the trio.
“We’ve got to bear it, so bear it like a
man, can’t you?” growled MacPherson.
Dent took no notice of their pleasantries.
He smiled at Willa and started, for he would
cheerfully have tried to stand on his head in
the boat to please her. Song after song he
gave them in a voice that was deep and true
and full of feeling. They all joined in the


choruses, though Will’s voice was poor and
MacPherson’s idea of tune rather a queer
one. As they sang, they rowed up the wind-
ing, lovely course of Middle Harbour, and
then they drifted down again talking —talk-
ing mainly of the Antarctic world that Dent
longed to visit but could not, because of his
widowed mother and her girls. Willa
proffered no further request to row, but lay
very still and listened to it all. She was tired
out, as Will well knew, mainly with the
stress of the day’s emotions; but the peace
of the moonlit water, the star-gemmed sky,
and the gum-scented breezes soothed her
excited nerves and throbbing head till she
felt just a quiet sense of happiness and rest.
Will left her at Blandford at ten o’clock.
It was good-bye for weeks, for next morn-
ing he was again taking the boys to Morton-
dale for their vacation, and she was off to
the Riverina, an invitation from Aunt
Catherine having reached her at last.
“Good night, little old kid,” he said, “and
mind you make tracks for bed soon.”
But her hand on his sleeve detained him.
“Thank you for to-day and to-night and
everything,” she said. “I never can catch
up with all the thanks I ought to say. Oh!
Billy Boy, you are so good to me.”
“Here! cut out the thanks, old lady,” he


commanded. “They’re taboo in this estab-
lishment. If you look at me so with those
big misty eyes, you adorable little —little
pest, you! I’ll be kissing you, I will.”
“Oh, Bill!” she called.
But he was half-way to the gate.


CHAPTER XIII
THE PARTING OF THE WAYS
On the veranda of a big Riverina homestead
Willa was smiling over a letter from Will at
Mortondale.
“Young woman,” it read, “here is a lec-
ture coming, aimed fair at your fluffy head,
so duck, my dear, if you don’t want your
hair to fly. I have been hearing things
about you, sad things, and I shan’t be happy
till I shake you per post.
“Lately I have been putting two and two
together and wondering why, for all the
pocket-money you boast of, you never have
a penny to spend on yourself. Fortunately,
Mrs Leonard orders your frocks and fur-
belows, or blue print would still be your
wear. You love sweets, yet —now own up;
do you ever buy yourself a jelly-bean even?
You don’t, so you need not bother answer-
ing.
“Well, I have found out the reason.
When not stewing for my final honours


exams in March, I have been visiting
old bush folks, and it is jolly to see again
the mothers who petted me because I was
motherless, the girls I piloted round at many
a dance, and the boys I fished with and
fought. Anyhow, everywhere I have called
in there has been some hurried attempt at
the fatted calf for me, and much talk of your
kind heart —kind fiddlesticks, you little
donkey!—and of generous gifts from you.
Lulu Lee who used to be —whose belated
wedding-breakfast we never did sample, by
the by—set the ball rolling by telling of a
fiver you sent ‘to make up for our cow that
the snake bit and she died’ —cow’s funeral
to snake’s unspecified. Lizzie’s sister Nell
followed up with the tale of a tenner sent by
you, ‘to buy timber for our new ’ouse when
the ole one burned to blazes, and thank good-
ness it did! It was tumblin’ about our ears,
and the bark roof full of centipedes. And
now we got a fine ’ouse—two rooms beside
the kitchen, and a lovely tin roof, and we’ll
have it ceiled, if Jack makes any extra
money rabbitin’ this season.’
“Then I got an invite to Dolly Miller’s
wedding—the bride in gorgeous pink silk,
her two sisters as bridesmaids in bright blue
and lilac —all three frocks bought with the
money you sent as a gift—and would I tell


you how lovely they looked? Willa, take
shame to yourself and desist. I never saw
such monstrosities of frocks in my life. I
forgot to mention they were trimmed two
yards deep in yellow lace, caught up at the
side with bunches of artificial roses, all
colours. You can’t deny that particular
fiver —or tenner —would have been better
munched up in chocs.
“Billy, my child, when will you learn
moderation in what you do for other people?
Gifts in reason to anyone and every one I
don’t grumble at, of course —I’d be bound to
get the boots as well as the socks for my next
birthday if you couldn’t let off steam some-
where else, I suppose. Little dear old kid,
you must think of yourself sometimes. I
hereby order you to, and I’ll bully you till
you do.
“In the meantime, I don’t deny there is a
good deal of stray happiness running round
up this way, all scattered by you.
“What else is running round? Rabbits,
firstly. They have come to our part of the
world to stay. The boys, secondly; and they
spend half their time running round after
the rabbits with pea-rifles. Now, don’t
worry over possible accidents. There won’t
be any. Those imps are quite safe with any
sort of firearm, and I have lectured them


into carefulness, I assure you. And don’t
sit down and weep over their cruelty—either
the rabbits or the sheep must go, and a pea-
rifle makes for a happier exit than a trap
does. Besides, Sid and Rob are fine young-
sters. If Dr Leonard’s version of their sal-
vation is correct, young Clifford deserves a
statue. You may be interested to know that,
out of their own pocket-money, without any
suggestion from anyone, they gave Dolly
Miller as a wedding-gift six easy chairs for
her sitting-room. Dolly hasn’t a sitting-
room nor yet a dining-room, but think of the
grand kitchen she will have to entertain in!
“And don’t start worrying because I left
Tom out of the list of fine youngsters. He
and I have not been scrapping. If you care
to know, it was he who asked Dr Leonard
to try to get me again for this year’s vac.
All the same, I am not going to enthuse over
Tom, even to please the dearest little goose
that ever lived, though he is an improvement
on the bear’s cub I once got into your bad
books by licking.
“If the nippers remember me, give them
a hug apiece for me, with one over for
Tottie. As for yourself, here’s cheerio
from


That Part of Billy Both
That isn’t an Angel,
And isn’t Beautiful,
And isn’t Adorable.”
Willa wrote an answer before she went
inside. She thought a long time over its
conclusion, but finally ended, “As for those
gifts to the old Mortondale folk, I couldn’t
explain to anyone but you, Bill, I have been
sending them every farthing 1 can rake up,
but it is for father. You know how the men
on the station were all underpaid? Well, I
know he knows what I do, Bill, and is glad.
So now, growl all you want to; you won’t
make the slightest impression on
That Part of Billy Both
That isn’t the Only Donkey.
“P.S. Have I been a pig? Bill, dear old Bill,
please forgive me. Some day I’ll be old and
have perfect manners and be quite polite to
my friends, especially to the ones who are
so much better to me than I deserve, B.W.
C.B.H.Y.R. (That means, The Billy who
couldn’t bear to hurt you really.)”
Willa had already spent a month in the
Riverina. Had she known it, it was Will
who had engineered the trip for her. He
had sent, along with a birthday gift, a note
to Tottie, which said, “Once you were


my little sweetheart, who promised to love me
always, but I suppose you have forgotten
me as you have forgotten Willa. She was
better to you little people than you ever
dream of, and yet you never write to her
and never try to see her. lam disappointed
in you, Tottie, and once I thought there was
quite a big heart under your holland pina-
fore.”
Aunt Catherine —Mamma now —read the
note and felt a guilty twinge. “Would you
like me to invite Willa up for Christmas?”
she asked.
And the little ones, easily moved to re-
member, if quick to forget, had begged, “Oh,
please, Mamma!”
So Willa had come, with an invitation to
stay three months. She found Tibbie a big
girl of nearly eleven, and even Bubs making
haste to be seven. They were somewhat
plainer than of yore, but their baby charms
had lasted long enough to make Aunt Cath-
erine love them, and the love outlived the
charms. They were good and happy, if a
little commonplace; but sometimes there was
a gleam in Tottie’s eye, a decision in the
poise of Tottie’s head, that promised
a quicker, brighter spirit than her senior or
her junior could boast.
The old sense of hurt where they were


concerned soon left Willa. She had thought
of them as needing her and forced to be
without her. She found them happy in a
new world of their own, and was content to
leave them there. She liked Aunt Catherine
too, for she was gayer and more human than
Aunt Isobel. She too had married for
money, but had come to give her love in re-
turn to the big-bodied and big-hearted
squatter of her choice.
As for Willa herself, she took their hearts
by storm. Aunt Catherine often looked at
her, with her dainty frocks and tender smiles
and gracious ways, in a kind of dazed un-
belief.
“I didn’t know you were going to be pretty,
dear,” she confided one day.
And Willa laughed. “I’m not, really,”
she said. “My nose turns up and my mouth’s
too big. I’m just a fraud in the beauty line.”
Aunt Catherine had made her choice and
abided loyally by her love for the little ones,
yet she felt her heart dancing to the tune of
Willa’s gay laugh; and the squatter re-
sponded to the added brightness of the home
atmosphere.
“That merry child is like a bit of spring-
time in the midst of summer drought,” he
told his wife one day.
Willa made no attempt to win their hearts.


Yet there had been born in her an eagerness
to please and help; and the little tendernesses,
the little attentions, the loving caresses she
lavished on the middle-aged couple gave
them both at times the queer feeling that the
dead Kitty was nestling in their arms again.
When she first talked of a return to Sydney,
their hearts sank.
“She seems happy enough here. What if
you ask her to stay with us altogether?” sug-
gested the squatter to his wife.
Aunt Catherine passed the entreaty on
that very day and seconded it eagerly, Willa
was touched by their wish to keep her, yet
she felt no desire to make their home hers.
They had health and comfort; they had one
another and the babies; they did not really
need her, and needed she must be. In a
world that was full of drab lives and aching
hearts, surely every one was urgently needed
somewhere, and she must find her where.
Besides, when they made their request, the
boys were back at school, and Will was in
Sydney again, sitting for his last examina-
tions. All too soon he was going to North
Queensland, and nothing would have induced
her to let him go with no one who cared to
bid him God speed.
So she shook her head and then kissed her
aunt affectionately.


“You dear, dear people to want me!” she
said. “But, of course, Uncle Ken would not
hear of it. Besides, the world was made for
work, and I mean to find mine. I never
could be happy just being happy, you know.”
So her boxes were packed, the babies
squeezed, their elders kissed, and she was off
in Uncle Robert’s first motor-car to catch an
evening train.
Tibbie sobbed, Bubs openly howled, but
Tottie crept silently away and wrote in the
diary that had been Will’s birthday gift, “I
am going to grow up like Willa. I am going to
dip my hare in shugar and water to make it
wave like hers, and I am going to be as nice
as she is, and I am going to stick a pin in my-
self every night I fourget.”
Then she went out to the somewhat de-
pressed elders on the veranda, rubbed her
head against the man’s sleeve and kissed the
bald patch on his head, in imitation of Willa,
put a little fat arm lovingly through the
woman’s and said, “Now you dear peoplies”
—with a quavery voice that tried bravely to
catch the coaxing note of Willa’s—“don’t
you sit out here a-moping; you come in till I
spoil you. I’ve put your table ready for
cribbage, and my darling curly-legged chair
for you to-night, Mamma; I can do with
another, really.”


Aunt Catherine squeezed her fondly.
“You little blessing, Tottie!” she cried.
And they played their accustomed evening
game, Aunt Catherine sitting valiantly in
the uncomfortable chair so dear to Tottie’s
heart. They played till the babies’ bed-time
came and Uncle Robert was due to tell a
bed-time story. It was Tottie who held the
post of honour on his knee.
“Catherine, don’t you think she’s a little
like Willa?” he asked, as he kissed her and
put her down.
And one little girl at least in the wide
Riverina went to bed as happy as a queen.
But Willa was speeding Sydneywards,
and four days later, in the moonlit garden at
Blandford, she said her farewells to Will,
whose boat sailed for Burketown next morn-
ing.
“Do you know, little kid, that one of the
profs, told me yesterday that a travelling
scholarship was mine if I cared to apply for
it?” he confided. “It would have meant a
couple of years in Europe.”
“Europe?” she repeated. “Oh! Billy,
how could you refuse?”
“Oh! I mean to get in Europe some day,”
he replied confidently, “but not just yet. In
fact, I’m sorry I ever went to the ’Varsity.
I’m a B.A. now, with a first in classics and a


first in maths, and how does it help me when
I don’t want a profession? I have chosen the
land and haven’t the least desire to change
my mind. It’s the bush for me always, the
fresh air and God’s own sunshine. I should
have lighted out for North Queensland three
years ago. That’s where I want a home of
my own, and I have to earn the biggest part
of it.”
“But can’t it wait a year or two?” she
queried.
“It jolly well can’t,” he said. “Perhaps it
is because I have never had a home of my
own that I want one so. At first I am
just going to rake in bush experience—
station-life and then the coast, but I be-
lieve it is on the coast I’ll end up. The vision
I have most times is of a big sugar-farm
somewhere between Cairns and Mackay, a
home with wide verandas, fine crops flourish-
ing around me, and the dearest girl in the
world sitting with me in the evening’s cool
beside our own pawpaw tree.
Willa laughed rather shakily. “Oh! Bill,
dear old commonsense Bill, are you turning
sentimentalist?” she asked. “A girl?”
\es, a girl,” he said; “a girl with golden
hair and a golden smile, and a mouth that’s
supposed to be a bit too big, and the aggra-


vatingest little obstinate chin, and all my
heart in her keeping.”
Unhappy enlightenment came to Willa.
“Oh! Bill, I forgot,” she said, “I forgot what
you said long ago about wanting to marry
me some day, and I thought you had for-
gotten too.”
“Well, I haven’t, and I’m not going to,”
he said. “Don’t get the miserables about it,
little kid. I know what a baby thing you are
yet, and I should have kept my hopes to my-
self till you were older. But, hang it all! what
if another chap got in ahead of me? Now
you forget most of what I’ve said; but some-
times at night, little old Billy, when Orion
shines in at your window and reminds you
of me, will you remind my little golden girl
that I’m loving her mighty hard and waiting
for her to love me?”
“But I do love you, Bill,” she protested.
“I know quite well I’ll never love anybody
better, and I’ll be as lonely and as miserable
as can be without you. But I don’t want you
to spoil things with getting sentimental. Oh!
there are millions and millions of things to
do in life. All the time I have been at school,
I’ve felt like a prisoner behind prison bars
because I couldn’t get out to tackle them.
I don’t think I’ll have time for marrying—
not for years and years anyhow; but, if I


ever do, it’s bound to be you, Bill, if you’ll
still want me.”
“All right,” he said; “I won’t worry you
any more. It’s ten too, and I’ll have to go.
I don’t want the doctor to kick me out on
my last night. It may be years before I see
you again, Billy Girl. You’ll give me a kiss,
won’t you?”
“Of course,” she said and put up her arms
and her face obediently.
“That’s how you’d kiss the doctor or
young Rob,” he protested, “I’m not your
uncle, Billy, nor yet your brother.”
Her eyes filled with tears.
“There, I’m a beast!” he said. “If you
can’t give me the kiss I want, any old kind’ll
do.”
He scarcely dared touch her lips with his,
then laughed shakily. “Me for the melo-
drama, eh?” he said. “But I hate it like
castor oil, this saying good-bye to you.”
“And I hate it worse,” she said, “and I
hate to feel I have disappointed you. Oh!
Bill, I love you so that I’ll try to feel senti-
mental if you want me to.”
At that he had to laugh, but he held her
hands in a grip that hurt. “If ever there
was an angel on earth,” he began.
“She wouldn’t have my shocking appetite


for ice-cream, would she?” she interposed
shakily.
“She would, and every other blessed thing
about you,” he retorted. “God bless you,
Billy Girl, and forget to bless any man, my-
self included, who isn’t always good to you!”
With that he dropped her hands and was
gone. Willa sobbed on the garden seat; but
only because the best of chums and brothers
had gone, and with him much of life’s sun-
shine.


BOOK TWO




CHAPTER I
ENTER THE INSECT
Miss Angela Dickson, 8.A., Principal of
Leighton College, on the Milson’s Point line,
was in her small drawing-room, on a Mon-
day evening in early February, receiving the
new science mistress.
For weary years Miss Angela had been
a teacher, a helpless one who wept when she
could not control her classes and who put
up with endless tyrannizing from an un-
generous principal. For a year she had been
mistress of Leighton, but she wept still when
things went wrong. She was tall and thin,
with a receding chin, a large appetite, weak
nerves and a weaker will. Like most who
are weak and get a taste of power, she had
tried to act the tyrant in her turn. But a
young science mistress with a sharp tongue
had turned on her in public, reducing her
to tears, and walked straight out of Leighton
School, with head held high, a week before
the Christmas term had ended. Even in the


long holiday, Miss Dickson had scarcely got
over the shock. Though she was almost
popular with her sixty day-girls and eighteen
boarders, since the fear of losing them made
her indulgent in many ways, the relations
between her and the staff were certainly not
happy. She was afraid of them, and they
despised her. They laughed when she had
high words with her domestic staff, especi-
ally when the maids walked out in a body
and left her to weep over dishes unwashed
and dinner uncooked.
At last she had summoned to her help her
mother, a lady of stronger will and less lach-
rymose tendencies, who smiled amiably at
everybody, but was discovered to have a
genius for spying and a mania for cutting
down the food bills. The teachers, who had
christened Miss Angela the Angel, named
her mother the Archangel, and proceeded to
make merry at the expense of both.
“You are very young, my dear,” said Miss
Angela to the new science mistress. “I
wanted somebody older, but I hope you will
be able to manage.”
She really did hope so, for the girl with
the wavy hair and look of bright goodwill
appealed to her.
Willa smiled, for Willa it was. “I am


twenty,” she said; “I love little children and
am not afraid.”
‘‘l hope you won't need to be,” the elder
woman said, and added wistfully —for even
a gaunt spinster with blouse undone and chin
mainly missing can be wistful —"and I hope
we shall get on well together.”
“Of course, we shall,” said Willa cheerily.
“I like at least nine out of every ten people
I meet.”
“Then I hope I shall manage to be no lower
than ninth on your list,” Miss Angela said
in a heavily joking way. "Now I’ll take you
to meet the other teachers, my dear. They
use the dining-room to sit in of an evening,
and the children use the schoolroom.”
Three women were round the table of the
dining-room talking or drinking coffee. Willa
was presented to them in turn, to Miss Lloyd,
Miss West, and Miss Green, and then left
to make their further acquaintance.
A handsome woman of thirty, with red
lips and flashing dark eyes that held a
friendly smile, looked her over frankly.
“You poor little pretty kid!” she said.
“What did a guileless babe like you come to
this abode of weeps and growls for? You
don’t look big enough to stand up for your-
self. Are you sixteen yet?”
“I am twenty,” smiled Willa.


“Hope you don’t mind us looking- sceptical,”
said the other; “we’ll have to get used to
your age by degrees. Pour the poor lamb
out some coffee, Kindy. She has been in the
Angel’s clutches for half an hour and wants
a reviver. Let me introduce us over again.
This” —indicating a plump girl of twenty-
three with red cheeks, staring brown eyes,
and wavy brown hair—“is the Kindy. She
spanks the babes and prides herself on being
able to make any infant from two to twenty
howl, so look out for your pretty self. This”
—indicating a neat, elderly, colourless
woman —“is the Musicker, who spanks our
three cheap pianos. lam the Grad, a queer
cuss plus a tongue and a temper —part of
that you have gathered, haven’t you?”
“The tongue?” asked Willa. “Please let
it wag on,”
“But you have met us all,” laughed the
Grad, “except the Archangel, our Prin’s
mother, who retires at eight. Be comforted
though, you’ll meet her snores as soon as you
mount the stairs. As for you, we’ll find you
a name when you earn one. Your pre-
decessor was the Sci, for she was outspoken
enough to make us all sigh with jealousy.”
“What about the children?” asked Willa.
“They don’t count, of course,” said the
Kindy. “Only two boarders are back any-


how. They are rather a scraggy lot. If
their parents cared much for them, they
would be sent where higher fees entitle to
better fare. However, they are an easily
snubbed set, except the Insect. The day-
girls are all right.”
“And who may the Insect be?” asked
Willa.
“Definition —An Insect is a little beast,”
said the Grad solemnly. “She is a wizened,
sharp-tongued, unlovable small person, who
had the bad luck to be left alone in the world
with a fortune. Her mother died when she
was born, her father died without a will
when she was two, and her only relative, a
cousin called Mrs Corkendale —the Croco-
dile, that brat calls her —nominally has
charge of her. She is too wary to kill the
youngster off openly, but she neglects her
health shamefully and evidently hopes to
enjoy the fortune when consumption carries
off the Insect.”
“When the youngster came here at Mid-
winter, in a thin cotton frock with no wool-
lies under it,” the Kindy went on, “she had
never been kissed in her life, and jeered at a
girl who introduced her to the custom out of
pity. The fact is, she is not human. She
alienates the others by biting remarks about
their appearance, and treats us to rudeness


i± we are sorry enough to try to pet her.
When she was going to bed to-night, I nobly
told her a tale about a witch, for I have never
known a youngster with such a thirst for
stories. W hen I finished, she demanded
solemnly, ‘You're a black old witch too,
aren’t you?’ That’s the Insect all over.”
“The only other boarder back yet is a new
one called Ena Abbott,” said the Musicker.
“I took them for a stroll in the bush before
tea. Ena got ahead and I sent the Insect to
ask her to walk more slowly. The message
I heard passed on was, ‘Rabbit! Fat Rabbit!
don’t waddle so quickly, fat duck!’ Ena is fat
and does waddle, I’ll admit.”
“After all, the brat has pluck,” said the
Kindy. “She looks as if a puff of wind
could blow her away; but, though I’ve
shaken her at times to make her give in, she
never budges and never howls.”
“Poor little unlovely, unloved creature!”
said Will a.
“You are welcome to her,” said the Kindy.
“It’s one of the Angel’s grievances that I
won’t brush the little horror’s hair and that
sort of thing; but I was engaged as a kinder-
garten teacher, not a matron or nursemaid,
thank you! And I’m not a lover of insects.”
“The poor little freak is called Josephine,”
said the Grad, “One can pity her, but not


pet her. I like them round and soft and
chubby, putting up their faces trustingly to
be kissed.”
That’s all very well for those born pretty
and bright,” said Willa slowly; ‘Tut little
hearts may be lonely and eager for affection
when the little faces are not lifted trustingly
for kisses.”
“Well I wish the Insect’s lonely heart
didn t sleep in the same room as my hard-
natured self,” yawned the Kindy.
“We have rooms to ourselves,” explained
the Musicker, “but the Kindy—poor girl!
has a curtained off part of the big dormi-
tory.” S
“She doesn’t appreciate her blessings,”
laughed the Grad. “She has two whole
window sto herself, a pair of folding-doors,
a bit of the balcony, and a view of the
garden. We face the playground and have a
poky window apiece.”
“Who’d pine for my blessings, offset by
the Insect & Co. ?” growled the Kindy.
«nl f ™if, Dickson doesn,t mind ” said
Willa, ‘ 111 change with you, Miss West.”
“Don’t jest, pretty kid,” said the Grad.
It s a sore subject with poor old Kindy.”
“But I mean it,” said Willa.
• T^ x . beds in a row, to be jingled at
night just when you want to sleep, six


tongues to chatter you awake in the morn-
ing, six pests to pester you all the time, and
you calmly talk of undertaking them when
you needn’t”
But Willa smiled again and said, “If you
would really like the change, I’ll ask Miss
Dickson.”
The Kindy eagerly assented, but the Grad
protested: “It isn’t fair to you, you little
scrap of a thing. If you had any working
knowledge of insects, you wouldn’t make the
offer.”
Willa, paying no heed to her warning,
found the Angel and easily won permission
for the change. Indeed, one of the Angel’s
grievances against the Kindy was her objec-
tion to mothering the younger boarders.
So the three escorted Willa up to see the
quarters she had chosen and helped trans-
port her luggage thither. The big dormitory
was a long room facing south, with three
sets of folding-doors opening on to a bal-
cony. One set and two windows that looked
to the west were her curtained-off recess.
When she had received the Kindy’s con-
science-stricken thanks and had bidden the
three good night, Willa unpacked her lug-
gage, then stepped out on to the balcony.
Opposite her lay part of the school garden,
full of tall, white-trunked gums.


A tennis-court, the netting round it
covered with honeysuckle, occupied part of
the space, and beyond were the gums and
camphor laurels of a neighbour s garden.
Flooded in the silvery light of the rising
moon, rich with the scents of trees and
flowers, it was a place of delight, and she
decided to carry her mattress out and sleep
on the wicker lounge.
Afterwards, with her hair waving loosely
round her childish face, and a dressing-
gown of blue muslin falling softly from her
throat, she ran the curtains up to the end of
the partitioning rod, to let the two children
asleep in the room share in the breezes from
her windows. A small child, with pale
peaked face and narrow chest, sat up in bed
and regarded her solemnly, a child who
answered to the Insect’s description.
Willa went over to her, tenderly smiling.
“Oh! I am so glad you are awake, little girl-
girl,” she said.
The child looked at her, bewildered.
“I am the new teacher,” said Willa, sitting
down on the edge of the narrow bed, “and
Miss West has let me change rooms, to be
in here with you. Isn’t it lovely, little Jo-Jo
girl? We’ll have such jolly times together.”
As solemn as a little owl, the child con-


tinued to stare. Willa lifted her out of bed
and kissed her.
Sweetheart,” she said, “come out with
me and see the moon. There’s a lovely
moon-path from it right down into the
garden, and a moon-fairy slid down and told
me the loveliest secret.”
A fairy?” repeated the child eagerly.
“Yes, my Jo-Jo girl,” said Willa. “I’ll
tell you about it to-morrow morning. Come
out to m 3 bed on the balcony when you wake
up, pet, for it is too late for stories now.”
She carried the child out and showed her
the garden bathed in its moonlit beauty, and
all the time she fondled her, though her
caresses were not returned. Then she
popped a big ginger chocolate into the little
mouth, carried its owner back to bed, and
kissed her good night.


CHAPTER II
THE TAMING OF THE INSECT
From the eastern end of the balcony the sun
streamed in to Willa’s couch and awakened
her early. She pulled out from under her
pillow for a second reading a letter from
Will that had reached her the day before:
Urandangie,
January 18th.
Dear Billy,
This is written from our kangaroo-shooting
camp, which is quite a hundred miles from Uran-
dangie, though we have to make in there for our
mail.
After being two years busy with cattle, as
stockman or drover, I am not sorry to change my
job. Sometimes one feels it is the only life for a
man, and I love the riding, the open air and the
risks; but there is not a little cruelty associated
with it. I don’t refer to branding calves, which
one of your letters lectured me about, for that is
no worse than having a tooth out. But, when
you have a mob of wild cattle in the yards, and
one or two show fight, it is hurt or be hurt, and
dehorning a poor beast is a sickening job. Then,


I have seen cattle die of thirst in hundreds around
a wretched apology for a well, into which about a
bucket of water soaked per day. And I have
cursed the man that owned the station and risked
thousands of dumb beasts dying in agony when
he risked a really bad season and spared himself
the expense of a proper bore.
However, it is because I hope to make this
new venture pay better that I have given cattle
the go-by, and I don’t suppose you would care to
hear about my new job either.
There are four of us camping together, a hun-
dred miles from anywhere and fifty from
nowhere, yet we have had two visitors in the new
year!
One was a famous local identity, Peter Short.
He is a great horse-lover and owns about three
thousand horses on different stations in the Ter-
ritory, just across the Queensland border. Yet
he neither owns nor leases a square inch of land.
He brands them himself, but sometimes brings
them calmly to the branding-yards on somebody’s
station and asks the boys to give him a hand.
The station-owners object, of course, but the
only pound to which they can take his horses is
at Darwin, eight or nine hundred miles away.
Twice the police have come down and rounded
up some hundreds to take them to Darwin, but
heavy rain flooded the rivers each time, and they
had to let them go. Peter has no home, not even
a tent, but up every hollow log or stump for
hundreds of miles around he keeps a bit of flour,
sugar, and tea. No fear of the niggers touching
his stores —they think him mad and give him a
wide berth! He would rather see his horses die
than sell them. Queer sort of miser, is he not?


He came to our camp for a meal, but we did not
find him lively company.
Our other visitor was the Governor of yueens-
land, touring the back country by motor He
happened along on Rorky s birthday, and a
celebrated the occasion by cooking a damper with
an extra dose of ammunition in—baking-powder,
you would call it —and a cake. Eggs are an
unknown quantity out here, so I coloured the
cake with curry-powder, and we had kangaroo
steak for first course. Our little yellow boy,
Charlie, heard the horn tooting, saw the car com-
ing, and took to his heels. In a straight-out race
he would have licked a hurricane. He hid behind
Rorky’s old pants that were hanging out to dry
and demanded pantingly—no pun intended.
“What the matter that one all day go meself, no
more horse sit down?” By that we knew it was
a car that had nearly turned him into a white
boy and presently the Governor and his party
were turning out beside our tents. They shared
our meal and gave us the news of the outside
world. Poor old Rorky was as funny as a play.
He is a born snob, with a mighty opinion of a
“Mister,” let alone a “Sir,” and no opinion of a
man. He could not answer His Ex. at first for
trembling, could scarcely keep off his own knees,
and sirred him with an awe-filled “Sir ’ every two
minutes. Anyhow, His Ex. will pass as a man,
and a fine one. He left us two dozen oranges in
return for our curry-powder cake, and we could
scarcely wait till he had gone to fall on them. I
did strike oranges out here once before, but it was
a year ago, and they were ten shillings a dozen—
not for this saver-up, of course!
Charlie had rounded up a mob of niggers and


yellow kids, half-caste ones like himself, I mean
- full up nigger, t’ousands, close up a hundred,”
US ~ to , see th e car drive off, minus a horse
P v an , °, d ° ur - The Governor goodnaturedly
d o\e him half a mile, since when the youngster
has gone round with such an air of pride that his
nose is turned up too high to spot lizards for his
Ginger George, our new-chum mate, would
am !l Se / 0 V- He is the slowest > steadiest, most
methodical man I ever struck. Guess he was a
slogger-m and plodder-on at school. I watched
him shooting an old man Too yesterday He
took his sight carefully, got up and moved a tuft
of grass in front, fetched a stone to make him-
self a comfortable seat, took aim again, moved
some more stones, and shifted his rifle slightly
Then he walked five hundred feet to the creek for
a drink, came back, sighted again, moved again
aimed again. The old Too had been watching
interestedly, with his head on one side, and there
he obligingly stayed till Ginger’s bullet ended his
career.
We take the cooking week about, and it hap-
pens to be Ginger’s turn now. Our meals are
might} late happening along, but luxurious when
they do arrive. We have had “browny” three
days running, while puftaloons and roly pudding
have both graced our board.
I am not the only scribe to-day, for Rorky has
written to Brisbane for two flannel shirts and a
pair of pants. He hurried Ginger George up with
the breakfast, that he might have the table in the
lignum shed to write at. I was out riding for a
couple of hours and, when I came home, crumpled
sheets of paper blew to meet me for half a mile,


and the air was thick with cuss words. Poor
Rorky had devoted three hours to his task and
had not yet composed his epistle! “Glory be.
says Ginger. “Here’s the Seckerterry back to fix
you up. Now I’ll get the table for me dinner, and
Watson will be able to hear himself play the
mouth organ when your swearing thins down.
So I wrote the order and thereby saved the last
half of my writing-block —he had used his own,
Ginger’s and part of mine! .
Look here, little girl, what is this mad idea of
yours about teaching? I don’t like it at all, so
there! Drudgery is what it will mean. There is
sure to be some lazy teacher to leave her work
to you, some crabby old cat of a principal to
impose on you, or a pack of unfortunate infants
to worry you with their woes.
Billy, I should like to put you on an allow-
ance of self-sacrifice, as I used to with ice-creams.
One whole day per week and two hours in every
other day you should be free to scatter sunshine.
The rest of your time you would have to enjoy
or give me! There is the ugly secret out. lam
jealous of the sour-faced spinsters and un-
mothered youngsters you lavish so much affec-
tion on. Don’t tell me about your fellow-teachers;
I dislike them cordially in advance, for they are
sure to leave half their work to you. Don t tell
me about your infants; I dislike them cordially
too, for you are sure to wear yourself out pam-
pering them.
I am glad you liked the stereoscope and stereo-
scopic photos I sent. They will give you a real
idea of what my part of the world is like; and,
in spite of its flies and mosquitoes —and lack of
y 0U —it is a fine old place with fine people in it.


Of course, I had to get a new camera to take
stereoscope views, but photography is my only
luxury, and now it is beginning to pay for itself.
I had some decent half-plate views of niggers
in the Territory and stockmen in Western Q.,
and the happy idea came to me to illustrate with
them a series of articles on life up here. I wrote
one set about the oddities I have described to
you, introducing their best yarns, and called it
Around Our Camp-Fire. An English mag. gave
me twenty pounds for it and an order for a
detailed account of life in the Territory.
Did you notice the group of niggers in their
scanty Sunday best? They were wild with delight
when I showed them a print. Each recognized
his fellow-tribesmen, but not one knew himself,
never having peeped into a mirror.
Guess I have written your patience away, little
old lady, so I’ll just add every good wish for your
health, happiness, and growth in selfishness.
W ILL.
P-S. —What about that pawpaw proposition of
mine? I hope you are not forgetting it. Please
remember it is not in the postscript for me, but
is the very core and centre of all my desires.
Have you been letting Orion talk to you lately of
my little golden girl? W.
Willa smiled as she lay amongst her
pillows, her thoughts far in the North. Will
was as dear to her as ever, but he hid his
heart-hunger for her so loyally that she did
not believe in it enough to be worried by it.


So his postscript evoked no more than a
smile and a head-shake. .
And out came tripping timidly, as though
not sure of her desire to come, a little white-
robed figure, with long, fair hair framing
her thin face.
“Come along, Jo-Jo girl, said Willa, with
the brightest smile of welcome^
She gathered the child up into her bed.
“What pretty, pretty hair you have, my pet.
she exclaimed, setting out to lavish a
mother’s fond foolishness on the child who
had never known it. .
I id Li IIL-Y^l
The Insect smiled back with self-conscious
delight. “You promised to tell about the
fairy,” she said.
“And I will,” said Willa, and proceeded to
manufacture a tale of a moon-fairy. And
this is the secret it told me,” she concluded,
“that you and I are going to be chums, and
that I can trust you anywhere.”
The obstinate little lips crinkled into a
smile again, and Willa popped a chocolate
between them.
“Darling,” she asked, “will you let me do
your lovely hair every day?”
“Will you?” asked the child wondenngly.
“Miss West savs she isn’t paid to be my
nursemaid—as if I’d hire a staring-eyed owl
anyhow! She makes Annie comb my hair,


and me clean her boots in return; and Annie
pulls my hair on purpose and puts all the
mud she can on her boots.”
“And now she’ll have to clean them her-
self,” smiled Willa, “Is Annie the other
girl in our room now?”
“Why no!” laughed the child. “That’s
Ena Abbott—the Rabbit!”
“What a clever name for her!” said Willa,
with the giggle of a child appreciating
another’s daring wit. “Who thought of
calling her that?”
“Me,” claimed the Insect proudly.
Did you really ? It’s such a lovely name
that I’m afraid I’ll forget and call her by it.
Of course, that might hurt her, so it would
never do, would it?”
The Insect gazed in mute bewilderment
at this queer teacher who seemed innocent of
the knowledge that there might be pleasure
in hurting people.
“Sweetheart,” said Willa, “you will have
to frown hard at me if I look like forgetting,
and I’ll frown hard at you. That’s our first
little secret, Jo-Jo.”
She sealed the compact by kissing the
child, who looked up to ask, “Are you the
Miss Morton who was coming?”
Willa pleaded guilty.


“Well, I like you,” said the child solemnly,
“more than the rest, tons more.
Willa’s giggle of appreciation for the pun
was ready. ...
“And I like your hair too,’ said the child;
“it’s like little whispers —all soft and curly-
Afterwards, when she had buttoned up
the child’s frock, brushed her hair and sent
her down with a kiss, Willa laughed at re-
membrance of the compliment. M
“I wonder did she mean to say whiskers,
she mused, “or was that pretty fancy about
whispers intentional?”


CHAPTER 111
BUSY DAYS
One afternoon a month later, the Musicker,
on duty for the day, had taken the children
for a walk. Before that compulsory outing,
Willa had been playing ludo with the Insect,
and so was late in joining the Kindy and the
Grad in the latter’s room, the usual resort
of teachers after school.
They were lying down, one on the bed, the
other on a bunch of cushions, but both
turned to smile as she entered. The Grad
passed her a box of sweets and commanded,
“Now, little wicked, pretty thing, little Saint
Sinner, come and have some sweets while
we lie in judgment on you for various high
crimes and misdemeanours.”
Willa settled herself in the cane rocking-
chair, extracted a chocolate and asked:
What laws of the Medes and Persians have
I been breaking this time?”
“Why do you spoil the Angel ?” continued
the Grad.


“Not guilty,” said Willa smilingly. “I like
her, I’m sorry for her, and I try to atone for
your rudeness in ignoring her.”
“She likes her!” exclaimed the Grad. “Oh!
Kindy, come and hold me or I’ll faint; she
likes the Angel!”
“I do like her,” said Willa stoutly,
“though I see her bad points as well as you
do. It was really laughable to-day when she
insisted on having the rice-pudding made
with egg-powder and wept because Cook got
even with her by putting in so much that the
pudding went green and no one would eat it.
But you need not have gloated so openly.
You show her in every way that you dislike
her, and then you expect her to be amiable.”
“My turn now,” said the Kindy. “Why
do you favour the dunces in class and help
them to marks they could never honestly
earn?”
“Yes,” chimed in the Grad. “I can stand
a bad child, but a dull one drives me dis-
tracted. If I could begin a class by saying,
‘ldiots, stand; go out and play,’ I should love
teaching —if I got a decent salary, of course,
and could drown off all parents. But you
take as much interest in dullards as if they
were brainy.”
“And you humiliate a child for what it


cannot help —often a sweet-natured and sen-
sitive child,” said Willa gently.
“Well, why weren’t they born amiable
cows or something of the kind?” demanded
the Grad. “I could like them as cows, but
not as humans.”
“After all, you are getting something out
of them,” admitted the Kindy. “You ask
them easy questions and help them out in
their answers till they rake in respectable
marks. The result is, they are so pleased
with themselves that they are working like
niggers now at your botany and geology.
Still, you can’t get away from the fact that
picking questions is unfair.”
“The unfair thing,” protested Willa, “is
the way all the sugarplums at school go to
the brainy. They get the praise and the
prizes while the dullards get detention and
ridicule. I pick the most difficult questions
for the brightest girls, and the easiest ones
for my poor dunce’s brigade; that’s quite
fair.”
“Well, why do you spoil all the boarders
so?” demanded the Grad, launching a fresh
attack. “You let them worry you for help
when you are off duty, you waste your
energy entertaining them instead of leaving
them to their own devices, and you are
always mending their scratched fingers or


their heartaches —the Angel’s job, if she
can’t or won’t, afford a matron. You are
letting them impose on you till you never get
a moment to yourself.”
“A moment to oneself —a moment wasted,”
said Willa sententiously.
“Stuff and nonsense!” retorted the Grad.
“And, if you had a proper sense of pride, my
pretty kid —have another sweet to make this
more palatable —you wouldn’t potter round
doing odd jobs for the Angel. Why did you
make her that hot lemon-drink last night?”
“She has a cold,” explained Willa.
“Well, that doesn’t incapacitate her from
waiting on herself,” said the Grad sternly.
“Perhaps I haven’t a proper sense of
pride,” retorted Willa, “but I don’t want
one; I like doing things for people.”
“Do you?” persisted the Grad. “Well,
don’t you slip in and take my oil of cloves
another night for that horrid Rabbit’s tooth-
ache. Let her buy her own.”
“You know you don’t really grudge it, you
cross old darling,” said Willa. “It was mid-
night when the child came to me in pain, and
I had nothing to relieve her. Of course I
confiscated your bottle, and I’d do it again,
even if you meant what you say.”
“Turn her out, Kindy,” commanded the
Grad. “She is a bad, impenitent little thing,


and she is bound to go in a minute anyhow,
for there is her precious Insect home again
to be petted.”
Willa went laughingly, but came back
from the door to kiss the Grad, whose hand-
some face, Hashing eyes, and pretence of
cynicism fascinated her.
“Silly little sentimentalist!” jeered the
Grad, but her eyes were gentle. “You cer-
tainly have no proper pride, or you would be
throwing books at me. Go away and offer
yourself up, as per usual, on the altar of
self-sacrifice. By the by, I have christened
you Tray-Bit, for threepence is about the
value you set on yourself. Perhaps Tup-
penny would suit you better, but I’ll be
generous.”
The Insect was waiting confidently at the
top of the stairs, and arm-in-arm they went
along the corridor to the big dormitory.
There, five other girls, a little older than the
Insect, were taking off hats and gloves or
beginning to change their dresses for tea,
and each had a word for Willa. One had
brought her a bunch of buttercups, one had
a question to ask, one wanted to borrow a
safety-pin, one had her hair caught in the
buttons at the back of her frock, and would
Miss Morton please get it loose?
When she had finished with them all, she


took the Insect into her own recess, helped
her into a fresh frock, and brushed the hair
that was getting silkier every day. Then she
showed the child some of Will’s Queensland
views and sent her down when the
Musicker’s bell rang.
After tea, study claimed the Insect till
half-past seven, when she came out from the
schoolroom to go what had once been her
lonely way to bed. But Willa caught her up
on the stairs for a good-night talk and play.
Then there was a doll she had promised to
help dress for the Rabbit’s little sister’s
birthday, and the frugal supper of coffee and
soda-biscuits came into the dining-room by
the time its last frill was frilled. Half an
hour’s chat with the teachers followed, and
then a general good night was said.
But Willa did not seek her bed. The
garden was too full of the magic of moon-
light and scented flowers for that. She
slipped out of the house, then out of the gate,
and soon was walking fearlessly along a
white road, bordered now with beautiful
homes, now with hawthorn hedges that sur-
rounded apple-orchards, now with paddocks
full oi white-trunked gums. Soon she struck
out into the bush till she reached a waterfall
where the children often went for picnics.
The moon shone full down, and the air,


heavy with woodland scents, almost intoxi-
cated her. She sat there for more than an
hour, lost in an ecstasy of glad emotions.
She had a passion for beauty in its every
form. Music did not merely give her artis-
tic pleasure. It seemed to whisper to her of
things beyond time and space that almost,
almost, she grasped. And nature was a real
and living thing. The scent of damp ferns,
the wail of a curlew that had drifted within
hail of the busy city, the slender gums sil-
houetted against the sky, the water babbling
down its rocky bed —there was magic in
them all. Almost they lifted the veil of mys-
tery and let her peep into the secret cham-
bers of God. And the girl sat and breathed
it in, feeling through all her senses the
truth of Browning’s line:
How good a thing is man’s life, the mere living!
She returned to find the Grad waiting on
the edge of her bed to scold her.
“Where have you been, you wicked little
thing?” asked the Grad. “Like the rest of
the world, I brought my woes to you, and
found you vanished.”
“Oh! Grad dear, I am so sorry. What
was it?” cried Willa.
“Only an eyelash in my eye, and it has
long since dissolved itself away. Where have
you been?” persisted the Grad.


“I walked to Lovers’ Leap,” replied Willa,
a smile of mischief curving her mouth-
corners.
“Child, you are mad, you really are! Four
miles along a lonely country road at mid-
night!” cried the Grad. “Weren’t you
scared?”
Willa laughed at her concern. “The fairies
that presided over my outfit for this world
were kind enough to leave scared feelings
out,” she said. “The world was too beauti-
ful, and I seemed too much alive to-night,
to stay in. School is such a busy place by
day ...”
“To you, of course, you little donkey,
always letting yourself be pestered by some
pestiferous brat!” interrupted the Grad.
But Willa went calmly on: “School is such
a busy place, and by day one doesn’t get a
chance to know one’s own soul —yes, I have
one, Miss Doubter, and I often steal an hour
or two at night for its refreshing. Out of
doors to-night walking was a joy, so was
breathing.”
“Well, work ofif your energy another time
at a respectable hour,” said the Grad severely.
“I don’t deny the bush here is green and
gracious; one can’t help loving it after the
bare, dry back-country we both happened to
spend our childhood in.”


“Love this better than my own dear old
bush?” cried Willa hotly. “Indeed I don’t.
Do you love fascinating acquaintances more
than your own home circle ? Think of those
brave old twisted trees, gnarled and stunted,
but living on through drought and frost, on
stony hillsides and sunbaked flats! It is just
my dunces and ugly ducklings again versus
your chubby little charmers. Oh 1 Grad, how
can you help being a wee bit fonder of the
handicapped?”
“Let us get to bed,” laughed the Grad, “or
I shall be so handicapped by crabbiness to-
morrow that even your sunshine will wear
cool.”
But Willa watched her go, then curled up
under the gas jet and wrote to Will;
Dearest Billy,
I sent you a scrap of a note yesterday, but I
can’t be mean enough to let that pass for my
week’s epistle, for you have never treated me so
badly yet, and never will if you guess how glad a
thing it is to get a coo-ee from you. Perhaps it
is because our school atmosphere is so aggres-
sively feminine, and your talk of station life is so
refreshingly masculine, that I enjoy your letters
so. Already I find myself listening with delight
to the morning greetings of our cook and the
man next door, though “How the d — are you this
morning, old thing?” is the form that greeting
invariably takes. But no, Billy Boy; it is just


because you are still you that I should be alto-
gether forlorn without frequent word of you.
Last Sunday, when I was home for the week-
end, I ended up by having tea with Mrs Dent.
Denny’s sister, the curly-headed laugher, is mar-
ried and away, you know, and only Mollie is
left. Of course, Mac was there, and after tea
he and Denny would insist on escorting me all
the way back to school. Likewise of course, you
were the chief subject of our conversation. Poor
old Denny! By his eager interest in your work I
can see how he envies you. I am sure he loathes
that old office where he makes a living for his
mother and Mollie, though they will never be
allowed to guess at his loathing. I wish I were
a millionairess. Mrs D. would have a comfort-
able income, and dear old Denny would be let out
of his cage to fly off to the Antarctic, though why
penguins should seem such charming society to
the average active youth I can’t imagine—yes, I
can, Bill; that would-be smartness is just piffle.
I know exactly how the poor old lad feels, and
I’d give a lot to be able to give him his desire.
He would be happier if he settled down and mar-
ried ; but, when I gave him some sisterly advice
on the subject, he told me so gruffly that he
wasn’t the marrying sort that I am sure the poor
boy has loved some girl who died. Why have
you never told me about it, bad Bill?
Your friend Mr Loxton came to see Uncle
Ken on Saturday and brought us the case of paw-
paws you commissioned him to get in Towns-
ville. He told us, too, how you fought that fire
till every other man was exhausted, and then
drove a hundred miles over roadless roads to get
that poor woman and her burnt baby to a doctor


in time. I was so proud of you that I just went
away and howled, Bill. Oh! I wish you would
take care of yourself, Boy. You know you are
most all the brother I have, for the boys haven’t
much time for sisters. And, Billy, why don’t you
tell me about thing's like that? Never a word
did you breathe, and now, when I get the blues,
I shall see visions of you facing perils I know
nothing of.
Now, listen, Boy, and take heed! You just
must not try to dissuade me from teaching. If
Uncle Ken were older and needed me, perhaps I
could not have endured to leave him. But,
though he made no end of a fuss, he is still happy
in his work. And I can’t bear an empty life. The
atmosphere of Aunt Isobel’s home suffocates me.
I can’t believe life is a dead thing, its greatest
interests fossilized millions of years ago, or ticketed
ten guineas and displayed in a draper’s window.
Nobody needs me at Blandford, and I need to be
needed. Here I am happy, for my life is as full
as I could wish it. I have told you already of
my poor Insect. I did not dream she would yield
so readily to a little love, but I can make the
obstinate lines fade away from her tight little
mouth, and the trusting smiles come into her dis-
trustful eyes, any time I please. It is pathetic to
see how she follows me round, how glad she is
of my liking, how anxious to merit it.
Then there are the Dales. You have not for-
gotten my poor little Lo, have you? She lived
next door to Aunt Isobel, you know, and had
the bad sight and the worse mother. Uncle Ken
gave her glasses that corrected the defect in her
vision, and long ago she ceased to be cross-eyed
and clumsy. Now that she can leave off the


glasses, she is as pretty as a picture, and Mrs
Dale has taken to petting her. Poor Kathleen,
who used to be her darling, has developed
freckles and prominent teeth. Now that woman
is always wringing her hands and wondering
what she has done to deserve an ugly, sulky child.
Anyhow, when she heard I was teaching here,
she sent the two as boarders —Billy, the poor old
Angel’s consequent affection for me is funny,
really it is. Little Lo is as happy as the day is
long now, but Kathleen has the hurt and hard-
ened look of an idolized darling suddenly picked
upon and taunted. I’ve just got to find enough
love for her to make her forget her mother’s lack
of it. I have told Lo in secret why she and I
must be good to the Insect; and I have told the
Insect in secret why she and I must be good to
Lo, and they are understanding and helping me.
Each thinks I love her and pretend to love the
other, and both are happy in the thought. To
tell the truth, Billy, I am a heartless creature.
If I knew both were well and happy, I should
not care twopence if I never saw either again.
There are so many other lovable humans in the
world that one need never leave a bit of one’s
heart empty. Poor little unhappy chicks! oh!
Bill, I love them all, whatever I say.
Then there’s the Angel. She needs me too, for
she is a lonely old soul. I can’t lose my sense of
humour in sympathy, and often I have a secret
laugh at her woes. She does so lack dignity in
her dealings with the maids. Mary, the house-
maid, gave notice last week, and the poor Angel
insisted that she must beat the carpets before
she went, or go without the week’s wages. So
Mary carried the carpets out and put them on


the line. Then, while the Angel was lying down,
the man next door soundly beat his, as he had
promised, and Mary sat by hers and read a novel-
ette, till she judged it time to carry them in. The
Angel announced triumphantly at tea that firm-
ness soon brought maids to reason, and the
boarders had to invent a joke to account for their
giggling. At present the Angel is not on speaking
terms with the cook, so she leaves messages for
her on a slate in the kitchen. Yesterday she
wrote, “Only a dirty woman leaves her pot-lids
about.” This morning she found in its place,
“Only a mean woman goes prying.” Then she
came and wept on my shoulder, poor old soul!
and I had to repress my smiles and comfort her.
How good of you to send those new views
ready mounted for the stereoscope! I noticed
the one of the pawpaw-tree particularly, as you
bade me to. Its beauty seems to lie in its fruit,
for its shade is a negligible quantity. Yet—don’t
be disappointed, Bill—l didn’t like the fruit. It
has the taste of an inferior rock-melon. We
tried it in fruit-salad though, and it made a sub-
stantial background to happier flavours.
Bill, if your dream of love and marriage
includes eating fruit, doesn’t it strike you that it
is just a juvenile one? I haven’t said calf-love,
so don’t be hurt about that suggestion. In bald
black and white it looks worse than in my mind
that loves you—for don’t doubt that, dear old
pal; I do; I always have; and if you still want
me to marry you, when your own pawpaw-tree
is shooting, I shall give in to you, of course. But
only because you want it—that’s what I have got
to make clear. You are such a dear that I know
I should be perfectly happy with you. You never


did bully me into going out with you, when I
hankered after doing something for somebody
else, without my enjoying every minute of our
day together. But don’t you understand how 1
feel about it, Bill? I want to live my own life
and help others—not just one other—to enjoy
theirs more. The world is so full of aching
bodies and aching hearts, and I have just one life
to give my sympathy in. Oh! Billy, be good to
me, as you always are, and understand, as you
always do, and love me still, for you are just my
own dearest bit of this good old world.
I wish you were here to-night, Boy, till I could
see your cheery face and feel sure I was not
hurting you overmuch by talking out plainly
what is in my heart. Oh! it is beautiful outside
now. The moon is nearly setting —don t calculate
how late that is and scold me! —and the stars
are twinkling dimly, and such a magic world of
gum-branches, night dews, and honeyed scents
they are twinkling over! If I twist my neck
round half a turn, I can see Orion, and that brave
red star of ours that makes his hand is pointing
north to you.
God be good to you, Billy Boy, and give me a
glimpse of you soon!
Yours as ever,
Willa.
When the letter was written she sat for
a time, her thoughts following Orion’s red
star, then hurriedly prepared for bed and fell
asleep.
It was only six in the morning when the
Insect crept trustfully into her bed. Willa,


roused from slumber, did not let the child
guess the effort it was to open the eyes that
smiled such love upon her.
“Why, my Jo-Jo girl! my precious! my
little sweetheart! my bonny one!” she cried,
cuddling her and tucking her under the bed-
clothes.
Then she turned over and fell asleep
again, one arm round the child, and did not
wake till half-past seven, when the children
were supposed to be downstairs. The Insect
was still there, wide awake.
“Miss West’s on duty,” she whispered,
“I s’pose she’ll rouse at me for being late,
but I don’t care; I wasn’t going to wake you,
my darlingest, by moving.”


CHAPTER IV
NATURAL HISTORY
The Musicker was slow and dull, without
the least understanding of child nature. Her
playing was correct, but dull as herself, and
in discipline she failed hopelessly. She kept
her post because, secretly conscious of her
own limitations, she was cheap and never
independent. Neat and conscientious, she
might have been a shining success as a
dressmaker. But as a teacher! Willa pitied
the slow torture her life must be and tried
often to protect her from the children’s lack
of mercy.
“She won’t dare report us, for fear of
being blamed herself,” was the just argu-
ment that encouraged them to make mock of
her authority. To start a pillow-fight or
other bit of mischief, and then watch her
fuss round frantically, like a hen that has
hatched ducklings and discovers them in the
water, was one of their delights. It was one
they liked to enjoy, however, when the


Kindy was not by to talk and stare them into
tears, or the Grad, to make them feel small
and silly by her sarcasms. Most of all they
liked to enjoy it when the Darling—Willa—
was not by to make them feel uncomfortable
with her hurt or pleading looks.
One night they discovered that the Angel
and all the teachers off duty were going to
help at a Wahroonga church bazaar. It
meant that the Musicker would be alone and
at their mercy, and a plot was quickly
formed. But Willa heard a whisper of it,
and squeezed in a hurried protest before she
left.
“Ah! Miss Morton darlingest, don’t stop
us,” pleaded Annie Mitchell. “We’re only
on for a bit of fun. We’re going to call out
slangy things in our sleep, because she thinks
the most harmless words are crimes. And
Lettie’s going to walk in her sleep, and we’re
going to stuff a pillow-case with books and
drop it over the balcony and squeal and pre-
tend it’s Lettie dead or dying.”
“And, darlingest, she is so funny,” coaxed
Lettie Leywood. “She wrings her hands
and runs up and down and cries.”
“Oh, unkind little scamps!” said Willa.
“Why don’t you try your pranks on Miss
Lloyd or Miss West, who could reduce you
to tears in ten seconds? Or on me, who


would not care? But it is not fair fun to
worry Miss Green. Children dear, if you
do such a mean thing, you will make me really
miserable.”
After that, she knew and they knew that
virtue would be the evening’s programme.
But twenty-four hours later, when the Angel,
the Kindy, and the Grad set out for a second
session of the bazaar, and she was left on
duty, the demon of mischief came whisper-
ing to Lettie Leywood.
“Let’s kick up a rumpus to-night and see
what the Darling will do,” she suggested as
evening study ended. “Come on! Just for
a joke! she said she wouldn’t care.”
Half reluctantly, the others agreed.
When Willa was helping Lois, the moni-
tress, tidy up the schoolroom, a half-hearted
caterwauling floated down from upstairs.
She hurried up to investigate and found the
whole tribe locked in the two bathrooms
meowing, while the Insect, in bare feet and
white nightgown, had got out of bed to pro-
test and was frantically hammering, first at
one door, then at the other.
“Pigs! Pigs!” she was shouting, in a voice
that could be heard above their din. “I hate
you! I hate you all! And I’ll make you sorry!
I’ll make you sorry for worrying my darl-
ingest! I’ll hide your shoes and tear your


books and cut holes in your stockings for
you to mend and make faces till you laugh
in prayers, and —and—and—and —”
Willa picked her up, stuttering, sobbing
with wrath, kissed her and plumped her
down in her own bed on the balcony.
“Why, my sweetheart, my little sweet-
heart, hush!” she soothed her. “It’s only a
joke, and I don’t mind it, my pet; I don’t
really.”
“I hate them,” the child stormed. “I hate
them for being bad to you.”
Willa had to leave her, to get back
and quell the riot. One bathroom door was
open, with Lettie’s head round its corner to
see why the Insect’s storming had ceased.
Willa caught the door and stepped half in-
side to keep it open,
“Silly little chicks!” she laughed. “Why
do you go in for a natural history exhibition
if you can’t keep your illustrations in char-
acter? Donkeys don’t meow; they bray; and
geese don’t meow; they hiss. As the science
teacher, I shall have you down at dawn to-
morrow for a little instruction in animal
noises, unless you speedily mend your ways.
I prefer sleeping in till fast bell, I confess,
and you are another lazy lie-abed, Annie.”
A giggle interrupted her.
“Anybody else not desperately fond of


early rising,” she continued, “had better come
along now. Delay, and you may not find me
a duck about it. I may choose to model my-
self on the cat too.”
One by one, they came out sheepishly.
“ ’Twas only a bit of fun,” said Lettie, not
quite sure of what lay in store for them.
“Why, of course,” Willa smiled reassur-
ingly. “For all your meowing, dear little
scamps, I know there isn’t a bit of the un-
kind scratch-and-bite puss in one of you.
Run ofif to bed and be your good selves
again.”
She walked downstairs to show her trust
in them, and they slipped off to their rooms,
undressed with scarcely a whispered word,
put their own lights out, and soon were
asleep.
At the bottom of the stairs the Musicker
confronted Willa. She had slipped out from
the dining-room, where all evening she had
been preparing a theory lesson an intelligent
child would have mastered in half an hour.
There was joy on her wrinkled face, for it
soothed her self-respect to find some one else
in difficulties.
“Fancy! They played up on you! And you
so good to them! The wicked, ungrateful
children!” she cried.
Willa was about to confess that she had


practically invited the prank, but saw in
time the Musicker's pathetic look of triumph.
“Yes, the little monkeys!” she replied
solemnly. “There is no knowing what
children will be up to, is there?
When the bazaar-helpers came home, the
Musicker passed on the news, as one ex-
pressing sympathy for a fellow-sufferer.
The Kindy looked sceptical, and the Grad
winked an unbelieving eye at her, but the
Angel was worried. Willa seemed her one
friend in a household of foes, and she deter-
mined to uphold her science mistress’s out-
raged authority, even if firm measures re-
duced herself to tears. She sought out Willa
who was correcting exercises in the school-
room.
“What is this, my dear, about those
naughty children giving you trouble?” she
asked. “I won’t have that, when you are so
kind to them. You may trust me to come
down hard on them.”
“Please don’t, Miss Dickson,” said Willa.
“It was my own fault entirely. It was just
a joke, and I brought it on myself by a
foolish remark I made.”
The Angel was relieved to find there was
no need to exert her authority.
“You understand children,” she said. “I
wish we were all like you, my dear.”


She hurried contritely upstairs


“What a world of scatter-brains it would
be!" laughed Willa.
It was then that she remembered suddenly
that she had forgotten her Insect’s very
existence. She hurried contritely upstairs
and found the child huddled up still in her
balcony bed, wide awake and unhappy.
Willa sat on the bed beside her and put an
arm round her.
“Darlingest,” sobbed the child, “I know
you were mis’ble and just p’etended you
weren’t, or you would have come back to me
long ago."
“Oh! Jo-Jo girl, I’m not," Willa said ten-
derly. “I’m glad, glad as anything, that the
girls were a wee bit naughty; for now I
know you love me, same as I love you.”
The weeping child hugged her tight, and
Willa lay down on the bed beside her and
held her in her arms till she fell asleep.


CHAPTER V
A PAIR OF EPISTLES
Somewhere in the warm November of that
year a letter from Will hobnobbed by chance
with one from Willa in the sorting-room of
a Townsville post office, hobnobbed for a
moment and then passed on, each whence the
other had come.
Said Will’s, that was headed Camooweal,
Dearest Billy,
I have changed my vocation again. Kangaroo-
shooting paid us remarkably well till we thinned
out our district. Now I am a carrier out in the
wilds. My waggon and team —I am sending some
snaps of the horses—were so cheap that I could
sell them at a profit any day, and I am making a
good thing out of the trade meantime.
I am looking about for land all the while, but
have not had the luck to get a block yet. Wis-
dom says I should make my home in this cattle
country that I know, for it is healthier than the
beautiful sugar country of the coast —not that
that is bad, whatever croakers say. However,
very big blocks are necessary to make a do of it


out here, where a man is so far from his market,
and every time the blocks are balloted for, I
happen not to get one. I haven’t enough capital,
of course, to buy a settled station. I must get a
block of new country opened by the Government
and paid off on easy terms.
I have just had a most exciting trip. Out in
the wilds I met a team loaded with bananas and
whisky. The three men along with it were
camped, to sample the latter commodity. They
invited me pressingly to join them, but you know
why I bear whisky a big grudge and have no
dealings with him. They took my refusal as a
personal affront and almost tore my waggon to
bits, looking for me, to make me join in. I was
in theirs, safely covered up and wiring in to their
bananas—hadn’t paid my respects to a banana
for a year. They were too blind to find me, and
before morning they were all dead drunk. I
bundled them in where their bananas had been —
there was room, I assure you —and brought their
team into Camooweal with my own, for they had
told me they were under contract to arrive
to-day. They woke up as grateful as their head-
aches would permit—shouldn’t be surprised,
though, if their feelings alter when they discover
how close bananas are to being off.
One of the three was Rorky, who was recently
’roo-shooting with me. Poor old Rorky! He
keeps sober for nearly a year, then flings up what-
ever job he is at and makes for a shanty. A
hundred pounds goes in a week, but he never
whips the cat about it afterwards. “I’ve done it
in like a man,” says he; “it’s not the last time I’ll
be a fool either, but there’s plenty more money


waiting to be made.” He has just left a big
cheque behind him now. A mate got him away
before it was quite blued, and the old dame who
keeps the shanty gave him the usual shin-plas-
ters —1.0.U.’s —that we get up here for change.
Being a lady of dodges, she bakes them for a
drunken man too blind to notice things. So poor
old Rorky’s change has crumpled into nothingless
in his pockets and left him on his uppers.
He ought to know the old dame’s wiles too.
His brother died at her shanty a few years back.
Rorky buried him on a sandhill opposite the pub
and put a railing round. She thought a grave in
evidence advertised her spirits too well, and got
the blacks to pull the railing down. Each year
Rorky goes back to replace it; each year it dis-
appears again, and his cheque does ditto.
It is the misfortune of the men out here that
most of them have Rorky’s weakness. Otherwise,
they are a fine set of fellows, hard-working, loyal,
plucky, generous. They travel a great deal as
drovers and get broader minds than the average
country worker. Indeed, I have heard the big
questions of the day discussed more intelligently,
though mainly minus aitches, in a Queensland
branding-yard than in a University debating
club. Another weakness of theirs is cattle-duffing
—plain stealing to a Southerner, though you will
understand their point of view, I suppose, my
little lady with the big sympathies. Cattle run
wild on these huge stations and breed in thou-
sands, so they come to be regarded as the earth’s
natural increase, belonging to who ever has the
pluck and luck to get them. Many a small man
first stocks his land with stolen calves, and his


neighbours applaud, if he merely robs the big
man.
I finished my cooking before I sat down to
write, and a huge goanna has just made off with
a big piece of crackling that I threw out after
rendering down a piece of suet. He helped the
lump down by putting his nose to a stump and
pushing it in; now he is up a tree, sleeping the
meal off.
I hope you took my growls to heart and had a
rest during your Michaelmas vacation. I have
not forgiven you yet for burdening yourself with
the Insect at midwinter.
Billy Girl, I must come down and see you soon.
Sometimes I feel I cannot hang on another week
without a sight of you. And, when I do come,
every hour of your time is mine and nobody
else’s; mark you that and remember it, little girl.
Have I been worrying you with too much of
what you misname sentimentality lately? Any-
how, your last letter bids me not be a silly boy.
After changing that “boy” to “man,” I shall try
my best to obey your instructions. All I shall
allow myself is to vary Bubs’s farewell greeting,
“taw-taw, darling,” by one letter. Paw-paw, darl-
ing!
Will.
Said Willa’s, which passed on with the
Cloncurry mail:
Dearest Billy,
We are back at school again after our brief
vacation. I dared not ask Jo-Jo to spend it with
me, for the Crocodile is beginning to think the


child is getting too much kindness —spoiling, she
terms it —at Leighton and even threatens to take
her away. At midwinter, fortunately, the Cork-
endales were taking a trip round the Islands and
asked to leave her at school. The Angel sug-
gested that perhaps one of the teachers would
take her for a weekly consideration, most of
which Jo-Jo had to spend on the joys children
love. I let her invite Lois and Kathleen to the
pantomime and other outings, and she enjoyed
giving them pleasure. My dear little Insect is
coming on, is she not?
I was glad to have her, for her health’s sake.
I had bought some woollies for her and had lined
the lace yokes of her winter frocks with warm
things, and was afraid the old attire would be
insisted on, under the pretence of making her
hardy. As it is now, my little weak-chested child
was sent out to a party on Michaelmas night in
the thinnest of frocks and minus a coat. “It was
such a cold night, but the Crocodile said a coat
looked silly on a warm evening,” Jo-Jo explained,
when I tried to find out the wherefore of the
shocking cold she brought back. Bill, is that
woman wilfully criminal or just senseless? I
can’t bear to think a woman could be so wicked
and cruel; I keep telling myself she is only stupid.
After all, it would have been awkward if I had
had Jo-Jo this time, for I spent the vac. looking
after Mrs Denison, the mother of the famous
artist, you know. She is a strange woman, a
genius not of the perfectly sane order, hardened
by a hard life till she has no patience with others
and no mercy on herself. Aunt Isobel has a new
maid who had just come from Mrs Denison and


told me that she was alone and very ill. Her
queer temper had driven her daughter and then
her maid away. I found her too ill to get out of
bed, almost starved, and full of grievances. As
she grew better, sometimes she talked in a most
wonderful way; I have never met anybody quite
so interesting. Isn’t it a mercy I was there
though, Bill? One of her sons came home one
night and acted in such a queer way that we
both realized he had gone out of his mind. All
that night I had to coax and humour him like a
little child, to keep him from killing his helpless
mother. Funny, isn’t it, he didn’t want to hurt
me at all? I kept him talking and doing things
for me till at daybreak he dropped asleep. The
milkman came and brought help, and they got the
poor fellow away. I hear that it was only a tem-
porary mental derangement, brought on by drink,
but think if I hadn’t been there, Bill! I stayed
eight days with his mother, secured a woman to
look after her, and sent for her daughter. Then,
when I had to get back to school, she turned on
me —told me I had got all I could out of her and
now was abandoning her heartlessly! Oh ! Bill,
isn’t it pitiful? What hard things there must have
been in her life to distort her vision so!
Of course, I had to manufacture a few harm-
less tales to pacify Aunt Isobel. It would horrify
her to know the scrubbing and sweeping and
cooking jobs on which I really spent the time she
thinks devoted to a pleasant visit to a lady of
prominence in the artistic world. Now don’t start
out here to preach truth to me, Billy Boy. I am
a no-account person and quite wrong, but I pre-
fer telling a few harmless fibs to worrying and
hurting folks with my aggressive veracity. Why


do I always ’fess to you, Boy? Is it because you
know my tray-bit character so well already ? Is
it because I couldn’t bear you not to know the
real me —and forgive her, of course?
I wish you could see this part of the world with
its springtime garb on. It seems too beautiful
for the real world of work and worry, but when
I think what a far cry it is from its greenness
and grace to you —oh! Bill, you think I am a
heartless little wretch, but sometimes I want a
sight of you pretty badly. Why should you be in
such eager haste to get that home that you won’t
leave your work and spend your precious savings
on a trip South?
The last photos are the best yet. I like most
the one where you are rowing on a waterhole and
look for all the world like a Mexican cowboy
minus some of his fancy dress. How strong and
big you have grown! You did not have such
broad shoulders in the years when we had golden
days together.
Our poor Angel talks of giving up the school
next year, to keep house for a bachelor uncle. The
teachers rub along with her much more amiably
than of yore. She is kinder to them and they are
more willing to give her a chance. However, I
had a bit of tough uphill work first, and the
atmosphere can be electric still. You would laugh
at the last thunder-fit. The Angel objects to our
keeping food on hand, and we should be rather
hungry if we didn’t. She has meals with us, folds
up her serviette ostentatiously while we are still
ravenous, then goes off and has a more substantial
and tempting feast behind the locked door of her
sitting-room. Anyhow, the Grad will persist in


keeping her cake-tin much in evidence. The
Angel is afraid to risk an explosion by objecting
openly, but she gives hints about people who
encourage ants and mice about the place. A few
days ago, she placed a huge rat-trap in the cor-
ridor outside the Grad’s room. Of course, that
little wretch —but you can’t guess what a darling
she is underneath, Billy!—avoided it by day and
marched out at midnight to fall over it. The
uproar wakened all the grown-ups and, just as
the Angel popped her head out inquiringly, there
came a loud, exasperated query, “What idiot put
this thing out for people to fall over in the dark?”
Of course, the poor Angel lost her temper, slam-
med her door, and left that wicked little Grad
grinning.
Now, Billy, I know you are going to make a
fuss, so here’s out with it! I mean to be a nurse
and have put my name down at the Children’s
Hospital. Of course, I may have to wait a long
time. The thing that hurts me is that I shall have
to leave Jo-Jo, but it is one against hundreds, and
I don’t think she will ever be again the unhappy
little outcast I found her. I know that you will
agree with Uncle Ken that nursing, with its long
hours and lack of pay, is worse drudgery than
teaching. But what does drudgery matter when
there is scope to compensate for it? Think of the
slum children, hurt and suffering, wanting love
as well as medicines! Boy, I can’t resist them,
so just be good to me about it and forgive
Your ever-loving
Will a.
P.S.: lam glad lam mad, so there! And don’t
dare get mad in another way and lecture me over-


much about Mrs Denison and the nursing, or I
just won’t read your letter. I’ll poke it in the fire
and shove it into the hottest spot with the poker
too! W.
P.S. to the P.S.: Billy, you are a dear, and I
am an ungrateful little cat, but I am loving you a
big bit all the time. Orion just peeped in and
made me own up. Bother him and his red star!
It is always there when I look out. W.


CHAPTER VI
THE AWAKENING
After that, events moved swiftly for Will.
In December Willa received a hurried note
from Charters Towers that told of altered
plans:
Billy Girl—What do you mean by having
such beautiful eyes—so soft, and sweet, and
radiant? They have just lost me a bonny
block of land, old lady. For two years I have
had no luck. At last the Government surveyed
some land on the Leichhardt and opened it for
selection—good land too —and in the ballot the
best block fell to me. For ten seconds I was
ready to stand on my head for joy, then the flies
started worrying me, and I knew in a flash that
I could not take it —ass that I am not to have
known it three years ago!
Have I ever told you how bad the flies are up
here? I don’t suppose so, for a man doesn’t
worry much over drawbacks of that kind. How-
ever, they are bad, and very bad at that. The
children bred out here are all weak-sighted—that
is flies. The babies live under mosquito nets all
day—that is flies. Often you will see an old


stager sit reading in camp at night, with one hand
mechanically fanning his face all the time —that
is to swish away the ghosts of the flies that have
kept the hand going all day. And your wonder-
ful eyes, little old kid! Bill, if they had been
ordinary, I might have had the cheek to bring
you up here and expect you to endure them. I
have decided there is a big amount of unconscious
selfishness in me which I must just keep a wea-
ther eye out for in the future. Anyhow, I could
not face life in the West for you, you little soft-
eyed, shiny-eyed thing, and somebody else is
happy with the block I refused.
My friends tell me I am mad. I am mad —mad
with myself for wasting years getting cattle
experience when the kind fates mean me to be a
sugar-farmer. Flies are almost an unknown
quantity, you know, on the North Coast, and
mosquitoes are only bad in the scrub. As you see
by the address, I am making for Townsville.
From there, I shall light out for some part where
sugar land is being opened up.
Bill, I have been an ass, and so for once I con-
fidently count on your sympathy and affection. I
know you will be good to me because I am justly
sore with myself.
Will.
P.S.: All the same, I wish you cared enough to
be angry that I have, by my stupidity, delayed
the building of that home I am in search of. W.
In January came a letter from the town
that had been Geraldton and was beginning
to be Innisfail. It told how he had secured
a block of virgin land on the Johnstone River,


close enough to the coast to catch the sea-
breezes, and in country lovely beyond de-
scription. He had bought it outright from
an old man who had used part of it for
banana-growing. That part could soon be
cleared and planted with sugar, but the rest
was covered with tropical jungle, which had
to be cut down before the land could be used.
Will calculated that it would take two years
at least to get most of it under cultivation.
“Then,” he wrote, “I’ll have a home of sorts.
It won’t be worthy of you, Bill; but, all the
same, I am coming down to Sydney to snatch
a sight of you and make you promise to come
and share it, when it is ready and my paw-
paw tree duly planted by the door.”
It was on Easter Monday that his boat
reached Sydney and, though it was due
before sunrise, Willa was waiting on the
wharf. She could not bear the thought that
no familiar face should smile him a wel-
come. A drizzling rain fell on her umbrella
as she waited and watched the ship round
the point and come into view; but she did not
notice it in her joyous eagerness.
At last she saw him in his broad-brimmed
felt and shabby suit, saw the familiar face,
browner and thinner, with wrinkles left by
Northern suns round the eves that flashed
with sudden joy at sight of her. There had


been a cheery greeting and a happy laugh on
the tip of her tongue; but her knees began
to tremble, tears choked her, and a suffocat-
ing feeling seemed to hold her paralysed.
Then, sweeping over her in a great wave,
came a flood of rapture, half painful, and
with it enlightenment. It was Will who was
coming to her, Will who loved her —oh,
thank the fates for that! —and whom she
loved —oh, he need never doubt it again!
He did not wait for the gangway to be put
down, but sprang ashore from the railing of
the lower deck. Willa did not know how it
happened, but her umbrella was fluttering
and flapping unheeded across the wet
wharf, and she was in Will’s arms, laughing
and weeping at once.
“There’s one young woman glad to see her
sweetheart anyhow,” said a bearded old
steerage passenger as he gathered his traps
together.
“And that explains why a flash cove like
him —not that he didn’t show himself a real
nice chap—came steerage. He’s savin’ up
for her; don’t blame him much neither,”
replied his mate.
Will had been whispering foolish baby-
names and endearments, but he changed his
tactics when Willa’s tears did not stop.
“Silly little bubble-pot!” he declared.


“Boiling over, as per usual, with weeps and
smiles! What is the matter now?”
“Oh! nothing, Billy,” she cried, and wiped
her eyes and smiled and blushed all rosy red;
“at least —oh! Bill, I thought you weren’t
going to kiss me.”
He kissed her again. “You blessed little
kid! you darling!” he whispered, then
laughed and added, “Small chance I had to
escape anyhow, when you threw yourself
right into my arms, old lady.”
“Oh! Bill, I didn’t,” she protested, “I
didn’t. There! I knew you’d begin to bully
me as soon as } r ou arrived.”
“Well, I won’t,” he said. “I’ll own up I
was going to dare the kiss anyhow. You
were such a scared little kid when I went
away, that I couldn’t frighten you; but, after
all these weary years, I reckoned I deserved
one. I counted on your soft heart for for-
giveness, even if you didn’t like it quite. Oh!
Bill, Bill, why have you been so unkind to
me? Why have you kept me on tenterhooks
so long? Don’t you know that, when I have
had the blues, I have been scared down to the
depths of my soul with the fear that you
never would care for me? Cruel little Bill,
why didn’t you own up?”
“I —I didn’t know before,” she said; and
he thought how sweet and strange it was to


see Willa shy. “I’m not sure that I like it
either,” she added. “There are so many
things I meant to do, and it is very upsetting,
very, to one’s plans. Besides, I never had
such a queer, thrilly, choky feeling before.
If that’s what you call being in love, Bill, it’s
uncomfortable.”
“Is it?” he laughed. “Is it? You wait till
I make love to you in earnest —I have never
dared yet, you know.”
“Silly Billy!” she jeered, with the tender-
est and shyest of smiles.
“Just now I’m going to lecture you in
earnest though,” he said. “Little blessed
girl, little dear old kiddie, why did you come
down here alone at such an unearthly hour ?”
“Bullying me again!” she reproved.
“And I ought to know by this it has no
effect on such a wilful little thing, oughtn’t
I?” he asked.
“Well, I ask you,” she said, “could I pos-
sibly tell Uncle Ken and have the poor old
dear tear himself away from the morning
nap he loves, just to escort a young person
who would rather have you all to herself?”
At that, what could he do but murmur
more endearments, only after which did a
sudden realization of the state of the
atmosphere come to him.


“Hang it all! I am an ass/’ he said, “keep-
ing you here in the rain. Haven’t you an
umbrella, kiddie?”
She pointed laughingly to the upside-down
one that had pulled up against the edge of
the wharf, and he retrieved it and then
slipped on board again for his bag.
“I didn’t dream of your coming down to
meet me,” he explained. “If I had known
the bliss in store for me, you would have be-
held me in unaccustomed glory —the new
suit ordered in Brisbane in your honour and
picked up on the way down. We wear no
coats up our way, and this antiquated one is
a relic of my Varsity days.”
Willa looked at her own cotton voile frock
and laughed. “Well, lam not very elegant,”
she said; “three-and-eleven the material, and
made it up myself. I’ve stopped Aunt Isobel
ordering my dresses, you know.”
“Well, I am glad you are not too fine to
breakfast with a sun-browned bushie in a
clean little restaurant that used to live here-
abouts,” he said.
They found the restaurant and ordered
coffee, grilled chops and toast, but the meal
was so punctuated with questions and
answers, and periods when they looked at
one another and forgot to eat, that the waiter
resented the long time they occupied his


table. After that they drove out to see Mrs
Macdonald, with whom Will was to stay
again; and, when she had had her turn at
questions, the tw r o women talked him over
lovingly while he disappeared to unpack his
bag and change into the clothes he had
bought specially for his holiday.
“Behold the transformation!” laughed
Willa when he reappeared. “You might
have been faithful to your old boots though,
Bill, or your broad-brimmed hat, to keep my
frock in countenance.”
“But then, Aunt Isobel wouldn’t invite me
to dinner,” he protested.
However, when they went to Blandford
to lunch, Aunt Isobel, carefully tutored
beforehand, did ask Mr Carter—no, Curtain,
of course —why no, Curtis, to be sure! —to
give them the pleasure of his company as
often as he could. “We shall expect you to
dinner every evening,” she said.
Will thanked her duly and then sat out on
a sunny veranda with Willa and talked while
she put occasional stitches in a cream serge
frock she was supposed to be making.
Mainly he talked of his land and the work
that must be done to it before the wilderness
could be turned into a home.
“Two years is a long time to wait,” he
sighed, “but I can’t be ready sooner. lam


going to build most of that home myself,
Bill, to make it come cheaper and leave more
over for furnishing it for you, I have been
picking up every wrinkle I can about car-
pentry and building. But, when the house
is there, and the pawpaw-tree beside its door,
little big-heart, little sweetheart, you won’t
keep me waiting, will you?”
“Oh! Bill, of course I’ll go,” she said,
“though it does seem selfish of me just to
think of my own happiness and neglect all
the things I want to do. Two years seems
very, very soon for all the work I ought to
do first.”
“I don’t believe you do love me,” he said
unhappily. “If you did, you would just ache
for the time to pass, as I do. Bill, you must
not come to me reluctantly. I have never
been quite such a selfish fellow as to contem-
plate that.”
“Don’t be horrid to me, when I am learning
to be good,” she pleaded. “I do love you, you
foolish old Bill. Last week Lettie Leywood
gave me a piece of her aunt’s wedding-cake
to put under my pillow, and dream of my
future husband, you know. First night I
dreamed of a pug-dog —there is an ugly
one for ever snuffing and growling next
door to the school. Second night I dreamed
of the pug again, so I gave the Insect the


cake to eat and had no further nightmares.
I didn’t have to toss up between you and the
pug, Billy; you won on points, really.”
So he stifled his doubts to rest and exacted
a kiss as penalty for the teasing.
And Willa, with rumpled hair and rosy
cheeks, demanded, “Who is being sentimen-
tal now, I wonder?”
“Guilty,” he said, “but I shall take a leaf
out of your never-penitent book, old lady,
and assure you that I have enjoyed it so
much that I’m bound to offend again.”
It was only the arrival of a maid with
afternoon tea that prevented him repeating
the offence immediately. Then, in spite of
the day’s glad excitement, he did brave justice
to the dainty cakes that differed so widely
from the “browny” of his own bush baking.
“There’s one thing that worries me,” he
admitted, when he could eat no more, “and
that is that your father may have left you
an heiress, Bill. The chances are that the
boys get most of what he left, but there is
no being quite sure —and I want to provide
for you myself, old lady. I am not going to be
poor always. In fact, lam going to be com-
fortably off quite soon. Sometimes I think,
though, that in fairness to yourself I should
leave you free till you are twenty-four and
I know your father’s will. But —oh! kiddie,


I do want you so, and it would mean waiting
three years instead of two.”
‘'Silly Bill! Silly Bill!” she laughed. “You
can be quite sure that I am not an heiress.
Poor father! he thought girls were of no
account. Anyhow, Bill, it is easy to get rid
of money. If he did leave me any, couldn’t
we invest it and get the interest to spend on
orphanages and things each year ? Oh!
wouldn’t you love just to waste money on
little orphans? To ring the doorbell some
day and give them parties and presents such
as they never dreamed of—for the boys,,
knives that would really cut; for the girls,
dolls rich fathers would hesitate to buy; ice-
cream for everybody, buckets of it; and the
girls just one dress each, all filmy muslin
and lace and dainty ribbons ? Oh! I remem-
ber still how I used, when I was a youngster
running round in blue print, to take drapers’
catalogues to bed and weep over the dresses
in them.”
“Why don’t you indulge yourself more
now then, instead of wasting some of my
precious week stitching?” he suggested slyly,
fingering the frock she was supposed to be
making.
“Because I don’t like expensive dresses
now,” she explained; “at least, I prefer to
spend the money they cost on other things.


And I do look nice in my three-and-eleven
voile, now don’t I?”
How could he reply but in the accepted
way of accepted lovers? Dent came out
before he had finished explaining how sweet
she did look, and there was a hastily-removed
grey tweed arm round the blue voile to
explain away.
“Denny dear,” said Willa, red as a rose
again—“oh! you tell him, Bill.” And she
rang for fresh tea.
But Will’s arm went shamelessly back.
“Old chap,” he said, “Willa and I have agreed
to own a mutual pawpaw-tree on the North
Queensland coast, which is to say, this dear
little girl has promised to marry me some
day. You’ll wish us joy, will you not?”
“Good old Denny, you are glad, aren’t
you?” asked Willa. “You do know I’ll try
not to let your pal down, don’t you?”
Glad? Dent’s hand that wrung theirs
was somewhat unsteady, but he told the lie
manfully. He had always known that the
girl with the golden sunshine heart and silver
moonshine smile was not for him. Now her
loss was irrevocable, that was all. He drank
his tea, discussed their plans all over again
with them, and at last found an excuse to
get away and face it.
Manfully he had told the lie, but sadly he


started home. How was he to know —poor
lad! —that, walking blindly on, with eyes
that saw only Will’s look of proud pro-
prietorship and Willa’s look of glad content,
he should bump heedlessly into the girl who
had come to live next door to his mother ? A
girl with a cheerfully freckled face, a cheer-
fully snub nose, a pugnacious mouth, and
the least pugnacious nature in the world? A
homely, cheery little thing, with a kindly
heart and a capacity for cooking tasty
dinners, who would, when thus uncere-
moniously introduced, go on to heal the ache
in his heart, make the old office a desirable
spot, and cure him of all desire to rove? How
was he to know, he whose heart was pain-
fully full of Willa yet?
But she was waiting, unknown to herself
and him, for that introductory bump and
their happy life together.


CHAPTER VII
THE CROCODILE SHOWS HER TEETH
After a week of glad companionship, Will
went to see MacPherson, who was in charge
of a church on the Blue Mountains, and then
on for a day or two to Mortondale, while
Willa, with his ring on her finger, took up
the new term’s work at Leighton under a
new principal.
The Angel had gone, and in her stead
reigned the Angle. Miss Rushton-Firth,
B.A. was tall and lean, with pointed nose,
high cheek-bones, and a variety of sharp
corners in her build.
The Grad, who had found christening her
no trouble, remarked to the other teachers
in the empty schoolroom on the first morn-
ing of the new term, “Well, my dears, I’ll be
walking on soon. A cruel mouth, shifty
eyes, and bad English, in spite of her degree,
make a happy home at Leighton look a very
unlikely proposition.”
Willa had no time to enter a protest


against such a crushing verdict, for the
Insect came in at the door and flew into her
arms, too upset for ordinary greetings.
“Oh! Darlingest,” she cried, “the Croco-
dile’s in there, and she’s telling the new
Angel to be cruel to me. You won’t let her,
will you?”
There was a look of trust on the unhappy
little face that brought a lump even into the
Grad’s throat as Willa took the child in her
arms and asked, “What did you do to vex
her in the holidays, little girl-girl?”
“ ’Twas yesterday,” said the Insect
wearily. “I just wanted to nurse the Croco-
dile’s new baby. ’Twas such a dear teeny-
weeny, and I did want to hold it. But she
said she wouldn’t have a clumsy little monkey
like me near her precious, and she smacked
me away. I went straight back and pinched
it till it squealed, and I laughed and laughed;
and she whipped me drefful hard, and I said
I’d catch measles and give ’em to her baby
till it died.”
“Oh, Jo-Jo! Oh, my Jo-Jo girl!” protested
Willa.
The child set her lips in the old obstinate
line. “I only wanted to nurse it a teeny bit,”
she said; “and she’s in there now, asking the
new Angel to be cruel to me, ’cause I’m such


a wicked child. She said she'd tell her I
needed a stern hand all the time.”
“My Jo-Jo!” comforted Willa. “My little
bonny girl! But, darling, it really was wrong
to hurt the poor little baby. Little sweet-
heart, it makes me unhappy when you do
things like that. Won’t you tell her you are
sorry?”
The child wriggled away from her appeal-
ing glance uncomfortably.
“Perhaps I’m sorry for the little Croco-
dile,” she said. “It’s arm was so little and
so soft, darlingest. But I hate the big
Crocodile all the time. Yes, I do, I do,
’cause she hates me.”
At that moment the Angle walked into the
room. “You wouldn’t pet that child, Miss
Morton,” she said tartly, “if you knew how
wicked she has just been at home. You’ll
have to learn to be better here, Josephine.
It’s not me that will put up with such con-
duct. Stand over in that corner till school
begins, cruel child.”
“Go, darling, please,” whispered Willa;
and the child went.
All through morning school Willa’s heart
was heavy for the little one who sat so list-
lessly in her seat; but midday dinner
brought worse things. The Angle plunged


from a mumbled grace into a fresh attack
on the child.
“This bad Josephine is to have no soup,”
she told the maid who was waiting at table,
and then added, by way of general explana-
tion, “Yesterday she cruelly pinched a poor
little baby, and she’s got to be made to feel
how wicked she was.”
The Insect stared at her indifferently.
“And I hope you other girls,” the Angle
continued, with an amiable grin at those of
her flock with whom it was policy to be
amiable, “will have nothing to do with her
till she is sorry.”
“Jo-Jo is sorry now,” pleaded Willa.
But the child broke in quickly, “Darling-
est, I’m not, I’m not! I’m sorry I didn’t pinch
it harder.”
The Angle leaned across the table, rapped
her knuckles with a fork, and sent her
dinnerless into the corner.
For the child’s sake, Willa controlled her-
self and kept her seat, though she could not
touch her meal. All afternoon her eyes kept
seeking the Third Form, where the Insect
sat listlessly. She herself taught the form
for its last lesson.
At its close she kept the child back. “Jo-
Jo darling, I want you up in my room all
afternoon,” she said. “Your sums are


wrong, my pet; by and by, I’ll work them for
you.”
The Angle met them on the way up.
“That child is not to be petted, Miss Mor-
ton,” she said. “When out for a walk, she
is to be in silence.”
“Josephine’s sums were wrong to-day,
Miss Rushton-Firth,” said Willa coldly. “I
should like her to miss the walk and stay in
my room till they are correct.”
“Oh! I beg your pardon then, Miss
Morton,” purred the Angle. “Of course,
she must be detained if she has been lazy and
troublesome in school. She is a very bad
girl and needs a firm hand,”
She turned back to whisper with a
malevolent grin, “between you and I, her
people will support us in that. We needn’t
fear trouble in that quarter.”
Willa shrank from her as from some evil
presence. “Oh! Billy Boy, you hate fibs,
and I’m acting a big one,” she apostrophized
his image in her heart, “but I don’t care.”
Having closed the dormitory door, she
took the child into her curtained-ofif quarters,
unearthed a tin of biscuits from her still
packed trunk, and said, “there, my poor
hungry darling, eat all you can.”
The Insect attacked the food hungrily, but


soon left it to bury her head on Willa’s lap
and break into helpless sobbing - .
“Baby,” said Willa, with trembling lips,
“I am going to try and help you! You must
not think that lam not minding, I will do
something, dear, never you fear. But it is
harder than you know, my pet. If I tried
to take you away, my darling, they would
only take you from me.”
“Policemen?” asked the Insect miserably.
“Yes, policemen, big policemen, dear,”
said Willa sadly, “because you don’t belong
to me. But lam going to see if something
can’t be done to save you from the Crocodile;
and, if you have to wait for a time, my
darling, you must be patient, and as good as
you can.”
“I can’t be good,” said the child piteously.
“I can’t be good when peoples hate me.”
Willa petted and soothed her till the child
fell asleep, worn out with emotion. At five
she wakened her, bathed the little hot face,
put her into a clean frock and sent her down
refreshed when the bell went.
“Take your sums, darling, in case any-
body asks you for them. They are right
now. I worked them for you myself,” she
said.
When the child had gone, she refastened


her trunks, sent down an excuse for not
appearing at tea, slipped out and arranged
for a carrier to take her luggage to Bland-
ford, then went into the Grad’s room. The
Grad found her weeping there when she
came upstairs after tea.


CHAPTER VIII
RIVAL PHILOSOPHIES
“Grad,” said Willa, with a brave attempt at
wiping her eyes, “it’s good-bye. I am off
to let the Angle know that I am not going
to stay here a single night and be an acces-
sory to ill-treating children. I mean to warn
her too, and tell her to warn the Crocodile,
that I shall make a fuss in the right quarter
—when I find out what that is—about the
way Jo-Jo is treated.”
“Well, of all the tempestuous whirl-
winds !” exclaimed the Grad. “And you, our
Lady Meek and Mild!”
“Oh! Grad, I didn’t think I should care so
much, but I feel as if she were my own
child,” said Willa pitifully.
“And isn’t she?” asked the Grad. “It is
you, anyhow, who have made her a human
from an insect.”
“I never was a proper person, and I know
you all despise me for a soft-hearted simple-
ton,” began Willa, “but ...”


“Despise you?” said the Grad, putting an
arm round the girl. “You little blessed
blockhead! Don’t you know we all love you
because your heart is big enough to cover the
sins and misfortunes of all the world —
minus the Angle and the Crocodile, of
course? Why, when I see your big eyes
shining with sympathy for dunces and dul-
lards and dumpy duffers of every degree,
even I know there is something besides the
sun and the moon and the stars in heaven,
dear. But, you poor little simpleton, the
world is a hard place and you must get
hardened in it, or be for ever hurt. If you
were an undertaker, you’d weep all the way
to everybody’s funeral, you would. Your
idea of never-failing sympathy may be all
very well in a sheltered life, but it breaks
down for women who work. We all have
to trample or be trampled on, and the former
is more comfortable.”
“I don’t believe it,” said Willa, hotly.
“God would not have put beauty and music
in the world if He had not meant love to
rule in it.”
“Life’s a fight, pretty kid.” retorted the
Grad, “and you must learn to battle for your-
self and not let other people’s bumps and
bruises hurt you so much. I don’t treat
youngsters unkindly, but I don’t lose any


sleep over woes of theirs that I can’t mend.
I am sorry for your Insect, and I’ll certainly
go the length of bidding the Angle good-bye
at an early date —working under a human
being suits me better. Honestly, I should
like to see what sort of a woman you could
make out of that child.”
“Like to see!” repeated Willa, even scorn-
fully. “Yes, it is a matter of idle curiosity
to you, and to Jo-Jo it means death or worse.
I don’t believe in your heartless philosophy.
I’d rather suffer anything than freeze and
deaden my sympathies. You poor unwise,
wise person, you! It is you to be pitied, not
I —you with your dark eyes that have always
that restless look behind their smiles! Any-
how, I get pleasure out of life that you have
no conception of.”
“If shiny eyes are any criterion, you often
do,” smiled the Grad, “but I am a prosy per-
son who never went in for thrills. Oh! you
have your triumphs, pretty kid! It is you the
children worry with their aching teeth and
aching hearts, but they would one and all go
down in the dust for you to walk on them;
and the Angel piled on you the odd jobs she
dared not ask us to do, and wept her woes
out on your neck, which must have been a
moist and messy proceeding for you, but —
could angelic attachment go further? —she


actually gave you big serves at dinner 1 And
you have put in five hours’ solid work per day
in the sympathy and soft-soap line with the
Insect, but it is pathetic to see her perched
on the gate-post each morning, begging the
day-girls to give you every flower they bring
—and poking faces at them if they save one
for poor me!”
“If I can’t do anything else, I’ll kidnap Jo-
Jo,” announced Willa fiercely.
The Grad laughed. “And our little
impetuous lump of love will languish in gaol,
will she?” she asked. “Whatever shall Ido
without her? Grow more sarcastic with the
years, I suppose, and sour into a spinster
schoolmarm of the dowdy and dispirited
type.”
“You won’t,” said Willa. “Some day
you’ll marry and sweeten into a perfectly
adorable mother.”
“When you talk of marrying,” said the
Grad, “it makes me smile —to hide my own
pet heartache, maybe. Men? Well, yes, I
like them all right, and think a vac. badly
spent if I can’t work up a bit of a love-
affair. But the only man I could ever care
for year in year out is—you will smile at his
profession in conjunction with my cynical
self —is a Methodist parson. I never could
be good in a long-faced way and, though Jim


was ready to risk his parish’s horror, my
sense of the ridiculous put a stop to that.
Once I asked him to give up his church, but
he loved it more than he loved me, while I
loved the world, the flesh, and the devil more
than him, as you see. And there’s all the
romance there is ever likely to be for us —
Jim ruining his digestion with heathen food
as a missionary in Samoa, and myself knock-
ing a few grins out of life yet, though they
are beginning to leave wrinkles behind them.
Perhaps, when I am a lean and bony in-
dividual of sixty, we shall be wed.”
“You poor little big woman!” said Willa
pityingly. “You lonely-hearted little Grad!
Didn’t I know that you might pose as a gay
scoffer, but those dissatisfied eyes of your
couldn’t lie?”
“I always was a dibble-dibble for telling
the truth even when I didn’t mean to,”
laughed the Grad. “But don’t waste sym-
pathy on me, Tray-Bit. I have an admirable
appetite left —if only the Angle’s sour face
doesn’t steal it away —and the beginnings of
a red nose, by the by. Go away, you little
wretch, and don’t make me disgrace myself
any further.”
“I won’t,” said Willa firmly. “Grad, you
don’t believe in your own philosophy. You


sit on your heart and tell yourself you
haven’t one.”
“I believe in my own wiles anyhow,”
laughed the Grad. “I’ve cheered you up by
making you argue, till now you feel fit to
face the Angle. Go and get it over, pretty
kid —no, wait till I powder your nose first 1
And remember, I’ll be as good to your Insect
as she will let me. I’ll see that woman
doesn’t eat her alive, and I’ll slip out and
telephone you the news each day.”


CHAPTER IX
THE INSECT ESCAPES
The Angle was powerless to prevent Willa
going or to prosecute her for breaking her
contract, for she dared not face a lawsuit.
So Willa went back to Blandford that
Monday evening. Next morning, knowing
that the Insect’s father had appointed no
guardian for his child and left no will, she
went to see the Curator of Intestate Estates.
Two other officials she saw on his advice,
and all three were kind-hearted men, really
moved by her tale. A doctor was sent
straightway to examine the child. He re-
ported that she was threatened with tuber-
cular trouble and bore on her poor little body
ugly marks of the Crocodile’s last cruel
punishment.
Willa had to spend two restless days
before official red-tape was satisfied, but on
Thursday afternoon an Important Person in
Grey and a Slightly Less Important Person
in Brown, called in person to let her know
what had been done.


“I am glad to be able to tell you, Miss
Morton,” said Grey Importance, “that we
fixed things up satisfactorily with Corken-
dale. It would be difficult to prove that the
unhappy Josephine has suffered criminal
neglect, but he is too wise to risk a showing-
up for his wife and agrees to surrender all
control of the child.”
“For the future she will be well cared for
and happy,” said Brown Importance.
“The doctor recommends she should be
sent out West for her health’s sake, so she
is to go to an estimable lady in Orange, who
will educate her privately till she is strong
enough to mix with other children at school
again,” explained Grey Importance.
“She will be running wild on a farm,”
continued Brown Importance, “and we have
arranged for the best of medical attention to
correct whatever weakness is there. She
will have every comfort and every care.”
“The lady who is to take charge of her is
personally known to me,” said Grey Import-
ance. “She has mothered half a dozen
children of her own, but has enough love in
her composition to go round a dozen more.”
“Besides, we shall see to the child’s well-
being every now and then ourselves,” said
Brown Importance.
Willa, knowing the Insect’s queer dis-


position, doubted such easy happiness for
her and begged earnestly to be allowed to keep
her. But official red-tape could not be
stretched so far. Formal recommendations
had been made and must be acted upon. So
Willa’s heart was heavy as she showed them
out.
They said good-bye and turned to go, but
up the garden path came flying, her pale
face flushed by the daring of the deed she
had done, her eyes wide with fear and en-
treaty, her thin lips pressed into a tight line
to hide their quivering, the Insect! They
knew her by the pinched little face and
narrow chest, and wonderingly they paused
while Willa sank down on the red stone
steps, gathered the child in her arms and
kissed her.
“Oh, my Jo-Jo girl! My Jo-Jo girl! How
did you get here? How did you?” she cried.
And the tale came tumbling out, with a
queer little catch in the voice sometimes, but
with never a tear: “I’ve run away, darling-
est, and I want to live with you. Those big
policeman men, they said I was to be sent
ever so far away in the train to-morrow, but
I want to live with you. So I slipped out the
front gate and got into the train for Milson’s
Point. When the man came for my ticket,
I p’etended to cry and said my mother had it


and she got left behind; and the man said,
‘Well, don’t howl, little goose; I’m not going
to eat you; when you get to the Point, you
wait on the seat for your ma.’ Then I went
across on the boat and ran off the wharf
through the place where the tiny children go
without paying a penny, and a man called
out, but I ran right in among the crowd.
Then I followed a railway tram right up
from the Quay, and told a big girl I lived in
Stanmore and was lost, and would she put
me in a train for there, and she did. When I
got out, I ran past the man taking tickets, so
he couldn’t ask for mine. Then I knew the
way here from that lovely time I stayed with
you. And oh! please, I can live with you,
can’t I? I’ll never wear my dresses out, and
I won’t eat a lot even when I’m hungry.”
The Important Person in Grey and the
Slightly Less Important Person in Brown
both felt an uncomfortable twinge at the
child’s tragic face and queer rush of words;
but official arrangements are sacred.
“You are going where you will get strong
and well, little Josephine, and where you will
be very happy,” said Grey Importance.
The child shook her head, then buried it
against Willa again.
“In the matter of health, climate counts
for less than happiness,” said Brown Im-


portance to Grey. “Could not holidays with
Miss Morton be made possible for her.”
“Easily,” said Grey Importance. “Miss
Morton, would you care to have the child for
a month twice a year? We could arrange
that.”
“Oh!” said the Insect. “Oh! please, my
darlingest, please.”
“Why, Jo-Jo darling, of course I want
you,” said Willa. “Think what happy times
we’ll have together!”
“If Josephine is good, of course,” said
Brown Importance. “Only good little girls
get holidays.”
“I’ll be good, of course, oh! you stupid big
policeman man,” cried the child, almost
weeping in her eagerness to convince him.
“Then you may stay with Miss Morton to-
night,” he promised; “but when I bring out
in the morning the kind lady who is to take
you to Orange, you must remember about
being good.”
They shook hands all over again with
Willa, then with their small charge, and
went. As they passed out the gate, Grey
Importance said to his companion, “If I fol-
lowed my natural inclinations, I should go
back and ask that big-hearted girl to marry
me.”
“If I followed mine,” said Brown Import-


ance, somewhat acidly, “I should stouch you
for not playing up to my lead and giving her
the child. Your recommendation would
have carried it.”
Grey Importance grinned. “I was think-
ing it might be a bit awkward for the hus-
band she is bound to take sooner or later,”
he said. “The youngster will feel the
wrench now; but, if Mrs Trevor doesn’t
cure her heartache in a month, I am no judge
of human nature.”
Willa agreed with him when Mrs Trevor
came next day to claim the Insect. So
capable, motherly, and full of unexpected
fun, so understanding and so little given to
fuss, was the sweet-faced, grey-haired wo-
man that, after a talk with her, almost all
worry about the Insect’s happiness left her.
She saw them off at the station and kept
the Insect talking almost happily till the
train moved out. As the bell rang and she
kissed her a last good-bye, she noticed that
the child’s eyes were suddenly tragic with a
woe never meant for baby eyes; but Mrs
Trevor’s arm was round the little thin
shoulders. “Next week we’ll send you her
Photo ,on a pony, Miss Morton, won’t we,
Josie?” came her cheery voice.
And the child passed out of view with a
watery smile illumining her face.


But Willa walked away from the busy
station with a feeling of loss and emptiness.
She took a tram out to the Children’s Hos-
pital, to inquire how long she would have to
wait before beginning her work there as a
nurse. The kind-hearted matron pitied the
disappointment so plainly written on her
face when she learned that it would be more
than a year.
“My dear,” she said, “it is money, not
nurses, we need. There are such hundreds
of girls who wish to take up the work. Just
look at the list of those whose names were in
before yours.”
Willa went sadly away, with the old feel-
ing of being unwanted in the world she so
longed to serve. She had not the heart to
take up teaching again; and the new work
she longed to undertake was closed to her.
As she walked up from George Street to the
Central Station, somebody touched her arm,
and there was the Grad, in town in the
middle of a school day!
“Tray-Bit, I was coming out to see you,”
she cried. “I’ve chucked it too, kiddie. I
have just had a cable to say Jim met with an
accident while trying to save some of the
children in his mission-school during a hurri-
cane. They think he will be crippled for life,
and that is the end of his beloved work. For-


tunately, he has a small income of his own.
It may be enough for us to live on; but, if
it isn’t, I’ll manage somehow. Of course,
I’m going across to Samoa to marry him and
take care of him. Oh! Tray-Bit, I can’t bear
to think how he may have suffered.”
The Grad’s eyes were shining with tears,
but there was no tragedy left behind their
blackness.
“Oh! my dear old Grad,” said Willa, “I
am sure there is happiness ahead for you
both.”
“There is for him,” said the Grad fiercely.
“I’ll make it. Do you think lam going to
let him suffer and not force the fates to make
it up to him?”
They talked of her future all the way out
in the train; but, when lunch was over and
they sat over a cosy fire in the den that Dr
Leonard had fitted up so daintily for his
niece, it was Willa’s they discussed.
“I feel just all crushed and broken now
my Jo-Jo has gone,” Willa confessed. “I
can’t bear to begin at another school, and I
can’t get a start at the hospital for over a
year. There is so much to be done in the
world, and I can’t bear to be sitting here
with idle hands waiting.”
“If you can’t be happy without scattering
sunshine,” laughed the Grad, “Why not


shed a bit on somebody really deserving - ?
Marry your Boy Billy from the backblocks
right away and save him from going back to
loneliness,”
“Marry Billy right away?” repeated Willa
in bewilderment.
“Why not?” said the Grad. “I like that
lad. In fact, I think him nearly good enough
for you. Kindy asked him last week, when
you had us out to meet him, when he fell in
love with you. He said that he was fourteen
and you were twelve. Your frock was brown
holland and your hair was tied back with
tape, \ou slapped him for laughing when
your brother trod on a hornets’ nest and got
stung.”
“He didn’t tread on it,” said Willa, re-
membering. “It was a wax-nest that grew
on an apple-tree, and there was one extra
rosy apple that I had promised Bubs. Tom
went to take it, just to tease me, and put his
hand right on the nest. I think half a dozen
hornets got him—poor old lad!’
“My sympathies are with the poor back-
woodsman,” laughed the Grad. “He ad-
mitted he had been in love with you every
single day since. Marry him, pretty kid.”
“But lie hasn’t a house,” said Willa.
“There is just a two-roomed hut on his
land.”


“I suppose Jim hasn’t a house either,”
laughed the Grad. “Well, interlaced coco-
nut leaves will make a cool and airy shelter,
will they not? I shouldn’t wonder if your
Billy killed himself before the two years are
up, in his eagerness to get that home done to
time. Sugar-farmers work like slaves as it
is—from daylight to dark scrub-falling,
grubbing out roots of great forest giants,
chipping weeds, planting crops.”
“Oh! Grad, no!” cried Willa.
“They do,” said the Grad wickedly. “He’ll
probably catch cold from the wet and die too,
with no one there to look after him. It is
the wettest part of Australia, you know
—rains nine months and then the wet season
sets in.”
“And Bill is careless,” said Willa for-
lornly.
“Then marry him,” said the Grad.
“And the things I have planned to do?”
asked Willa.
“If you want to serve the world, silly little
goose,” said the Grad, “give it sons and
daughters with your capacity for sympathy,
to help on the next generation. Don’t be a
fool, child. You wouldn’t have a heart
abrim with mother-love if you weren’t meant
to marry. Then, follow your heart, and it


will lead you to all the opportunities for ser-
vice you could want, never doubt that.”
“I hope you are right,” said Willa; “I just
hope you are. I can’t bear to think of Bill
overworking and not taking care of him-
self.”
The Grad went away smiling.


CHAPTER X
IN WHICH TOM DANCES
It was shortly after dinner next evening
that Tom Morton and Will rang the bell at
Blandford and asked to see Doctor Leonard.
“Back again, Bill?” asked the doctor.
“Why, Tom, we did not know that you were
contemplating a trip down.”
“I —no —” said Tom. “The fact is, I—
you tell him, Bill.”
“It is this way, doctor,” explained Will.
“Tom is still under age and your ward. He
wants your consent to his marriage and asks
you to use your power as his father’s
executor to get him a little more than a
hundred a year to set up house on.”
“But, if you can’t,” interrupted Tom, we’ll
manage on the hundred all right. Kitty
has always been poor, and she thinks that’s
a lot.”
“Forgive my being knocked all of a heap,
Tom,” said the doctor. “I never imagined
you falling in love; but, though you are such


a youngster, I rather fancy I am glad about
it. May I have a private pow-wow with Bill
before I say any more though?”
“Oh! I’ll make myself scarce all right,”
said Tom, only too eager to escape. ‘Tm
not afraid of good old Bill queering my pitch.
Kitty thinks the world of him.”
“So it has got to good old Bill , has it?”
smiled the doctor, as Tom escaped through
the French lights, to walk anxiously up and
down a side veranda. “Now tell me your
real opinion of this astounding news of
Tom’s.”
“Honestly, I think it is the best bit of luck
that ever happened to him,” said Will. “He
is scared to tell you that Kitty Lane, the girl
he wants, is a daughter of the man who has
been blacksmith at Mortondale for a quarter
of a century. But Kitty is Tom’s equal
except as regards money. She is decidedly
intelligent, looks well, speaks quite well, is
cheery and capable, and downright good to
her old father and mother.”
“I have had a few yarns to the father
when I have been up there—nice old chap
too,” said the doctor; “but didn’t I hear
something of his being crippled with rheu-
matism?”
“Yes, he has been unable to work for a
year past,” said Will. “Crofton, the


manager, has given Kitty a job in the store
under Jock Mac Donald, and she has been
supporting the old couple and a bit of a
young brother. She has told Tom flatly that
the old folks are her job as long as they need
her; if he wants her, he has to take the
family too.”
“Good for her!” applauded the doctor.
“The point is,” said Will, “that, though
she may not succeed in making a nice fellow
out of Tom, she will make a man out of him;
and that is more than we could do, for we
never believed in him and admired him, as
she does. All the same, commonsense Kitty
may be trusted to look out for herself.
There are two Lane girls already married;
each rules the roost, but has a very happy-
looking husband on it. Kitty will alter Tom
by degrees, and I prophesy they will grow
fonder of each other with the years.”
“It is more than I ever hoped for,” said
the doctor.
“Can’t you arrange it, sir, that Tom
manages Mortondale?” asked Will. “Crof-
ton is eager to go now he has his own big
farming block. With the homestead to take
Kitty’s family to, and the manager’s salary
to swell out his yearly hundred, Tom will
feel set up. Crofton declares he is quite
equal to managing the place. He has taken


a wonderful interest in work since he fell
under Kitty’s spell.”
“That arrangement can easily be made,
till the final reading of Morton’s will upsets
it, I suppose,” said the doctor, ending on a
sigh. “Bring the lad in, Bill, till I set his
anxiety at rest.”
“It is awfully decent of you, uncle, to
take it so well,” said Tom, re-entering,
radiant. “I thought you’d kick up a fuss
about Kitty’s family. But, you see, I’m not
the town sort, and I can’t get on with ladies.
I never can remember whether you let them
go in at a door first, or go in ahead to show
them the way, and it makes you feel a fool
if they grin. Kitty wouldn’t care whether I
went in first or she did, as long as I liked her.
And she’s a stunner of a girl; you ask Bill.”
“He has already testified to the fact,”
smiled the doctor. “I am sorry poor little
Kitty has had a hard time of it lately.”
“She’s been a brick to the old couple,” said
Tom, “but our Willa’s done quite a lot to
help them along too. Kit says she sends
money every month. I must say that, though
she does a few mad things, Willa’s turned
out not too bad. Kit says she’s the right
stuff, and I mean to tell her so when I see
her. You’ll let me marry when Crofton


goes, won’t you, uncle? You needn’t be
afraid I’ll ever change my mind about Kit.”
“If you really are sure of your own mind,”
promised the doctor.
Tom repeated his former statement and
amplified it at length. “We won’t want any
cash for the honeymoon,” he added re-
assuringly. “Kit doesn’t think it right to
leave the old people, though I reckon she's
played out and wants a holiday.”
“Then see that she gets one, my boy,” said
the doctor, “and I’ll see that you get the
money to foot the bills. Engage a nurse to
look after the old people for a time, and give
Kitty her fill of the pretty things girls love.
A man’s wife has a right to the things she
likes, whether he likes them or not; remem-
ber that, old chap.”
“I should think so!” agreed Tom. “Kit
always tells me what’s the thing for an
engaged chap to do, and I do it, of course.
Haven’t I taken her to every dance for
months past, though I never could see before
what fun there was in capering round? It’s
queer how you enjoy dancing too, once you
know the way the trick’s done.”
“Then don’t forget how the trick’s done,”
laughed the doctor.
“I don’t see Kit letting me,” grinned Tom
sheepishly.


“Well,” said the doctor, “there is no
reason why you shouldn’t manage Morton-
dale and live there. Whether your father has
left the place all to you or not, I don’t know;
but it is certain that Sid and Rob will not
want to live there. They are not particu-
larly brainy, but they are plodders, the dear
old lads! and both determined to be
engineers. That means, Tom, that Kitty
may pick any date that suits you both, and
you may tell her that I’m looking forward to
having another pretty niece to kiss.”
“It is no end decent of you, uncle,” said
Tom, wringing his hand. “If you don’t mind
me slipping up to Strathfield now, there’s to
be a wool-classer for Mortondale on the
the train to-night, and I want to give him a
message for Kit that —well, that our cake
isn’t dough.”
“Right, old lad,” laughed the doctor. “In
case you are late back, I’ll tell them to leave
your usual room ready. Are you staying
with us, Bill, or making back to your usual
diggings?”
“You may get to your chess-problems in
peace,” laughed Will. “I’m off now, but not
for long. I am to meet Willa at Milson’s
Point to-morrow morning when she comes
down for the week-end.”
“Willa?” said the doctor. “Why! didn’t


I mention that she is here? She is in the
garden somewhere. By the by, my boy, I
forgot to ask if you would like some refresh-
ments. Did you as much as have dinner
before you came out?”
But Will had gone, and the doctor sat
mischievously grinning at a closed door.


CHAPTER XI
A HURRIED MATCH
Willa was in her favourite seat at the
bottom of the garden, and a lopsided red
moon was just rising above the city.
Something of peace had came back to her
after the crowded emotions of the last few
days, but a dull ache persisted under her
calm. It comforted her, however, to think
that the train must have already brought
Will back within her reach. There was no
telephone at Mrs Macdonald’s, so ringing
him up was out of the question, but she
would meet him at Milson’s Point on the
morrow, as arranged. And Will was big
and strong, and knew exactly the right pro-
portion of teasing and petting that brought
balm when the world hurt.
Hurried steps sounded on the gravel path,
and he was on the seat beside her, with his
arm round her, kissing her, laughing in be-
tween the kisses with sheer joy of possession.
By her very unresponsiveness he guessed
that something was wrong.


“Little old kid, what is the matter? There
is something worrying you, I am sure,” he
said.
Willa nestled into his sheltering arm and
told the tale of the Angle, the Crocodile, and
the Insect.
“And they took my Jo-Jo away to-day,
though she lied and schemed to get to me,”
she concluded; “and oh! Bill, don’t you
understand? I feel all broken up about it.”
He stroked her hair lovingly. “Poor little
old kid! —No, I don’t mean the Insect; I
mean you,” he said. “I can quite guess how
the strain of having to fight for the kiddie
upset you, little soft-heart, and I am cross
that you didn’t wire me to come back and
stand by you. But it is over now, dear, and
you say she looks like being happy with Mrs
Trevor. Then why let it worry you any
further?”
“I thought I just pitied her,” she ex-
plained, “and, you see, I was stupid enough
to get to love her till losing her hurts cruelly.
And I don’t want her to love Mrs Trevor
and be happy with her —not just yet anyhow.
Now you know how horrid I am under-
neath.”
“I’m abnormal,” he laughed, kissing her
again; “I like them horrid underneath then.”
“And oh! Bill, lam just tired of it all,” she


went on. “I am tired of women who are
cruel to little children. lam tired of school-
marms who cut out sentiment and take
wrong things as none of their business
—though that’s not fair to my dear old Grad,
I know! I am tired of Aunt Isobels, who
won’t remember your name even now, and
who don’t care for anything alive. And —
and Bill—yes, I am; I am tired of you.”
“Oh! Billy Girl,” he pleaded, hurt, un-
happy, “you don’t mean it, little old kid.
You don’t, surely. You are just worn out,
beloved. You’ll let me try to make you love
me again—you will, my darling, won’t
you?”
The hurt in his voice was too much for
her. She put her hand over his lips, to stop
further appeals, and laughed a comforting,
if shaky, little laugh. For a second he
wondered wildly if hysterics were coming—
girls did get hysterical, of course, when up-
set, and what on earth did a fellow do?
Thank goodness there was a doctor in the
house; even if he were an oculist, he would
surely know a little thing like that! Then
Willa began to speak.
“There you sit calmly, Bill,” she said, and
the unconscious irony of her adverb drew a
twisted grin from him. “There you sit
calmly, and know I’m at a loose end and


haven’t the heart to take hold of things
again, and yet you don’t ask me to marry
you right off the reel and get away from it
all and be happy, and —and you say you love
me.”
“Billy!” he cried, and she could feel the
arm that held her trembling. “Oh, Billy.”
“And it is rathed awkward,” she con-
tinued, “when Uncle Ken has booked my pas-
sage on your boat as Mrs Carter —no, Cur-
tain ! —why no, Curtis, to be sure! And, Bill,
you were going steerage again, you were!
And after I wasted an hour lecturing you
for roughing it and not taking proper care
of yourself! Well, you are in a different part
of the boat now, and you’ll be sorry yet,
young man, that you let me down so. Bill,
aren’t you going to ask me? Are you really
scared of being henpecked? Wilfred Curtis,
did you mean to plant that pawpaw-tree for
me, or for some dream-girl you don’t really
want in the way at breakfast-time?”
“You precious little girl!” he cried. “You
know I want you every hour of every day.
But, child, is your uncle mad to let you be
so good to me? Do you know wdiat you are
going to face?”
“Uncle Ken w r as easy to convince,” she
said. “He seems to have respect and affec-
tion for you and faith in you —laughable,


isn’t it? He even thinks I’ll find darning your
socks and cooking your meals less strenuous
than hospital nursing and less nerve-racking
than comforting Angels and standing up to
Angles. And, Billy, how can you say I
haven’t thought things out properly when I
have been so eminently practical as to pay up
my stray debts and get uncle to ring up old
Mac and ask him to come and marry us to-
morrow ?”
“You tempt me almost past my strength,”
he said. “I have just been cur enough to tell
myself that it was your uncle’s job to look
out for your interests, and that there was no
reason why I shouldn’t snatch at paradise if
he failed you enough to put it within my
reach. But, little dear girl, I must think of
you; you have never thought of yourself in
all your life. Are you both forgetting that I
am a poor man? My land was a bargain, but
it left me with only six hundred in the bank,
and my house not built, and my crops not
planted. I meant to live on next to nothing,
to do most of the building myself, to have
my first returns from the mill in two years’
time, and then to dare the life for you. I
meant to spare you the hard things and the
rough places.”
“Silly Bill! Silly Bill!” she laughed.
“Won’t we have a roof to cover us, your


tropical jungle around us for beauty—and
something to eat, I hope? Isn’t it fortunate
our tastes are inexpensive? You know you
like corned beef and suety dumplings better
than any fare; and I —why, with fried
potatoes and even one nice human that needs
me, I can be happy anywhere.”
“Taking you to that,” he groaned, “and
you may be an heiress!”
“You make me cross, Bill,” she said.
“Have we either of us ever over-valued
money? If father were to leave me thou-
sands, can’t you see that I should never love
any home as well as the one you made for
me? Why were you so stingy out West that
you cut out even smoking, Bill? Was it just
to save a few pounds, for the money’s sake?
Or was it to make a better home for me? I
know it was, Silly Bill. Then can’t you see
that I’ll love the home more if I help to make
it for you? Have you forgotten I’m a bush
girl? Sometimes I think you think I’m a
sort of useless hothouse plant. There! What
a sermon! It’s Mac I ought to marry and
write his for him. Well, to sum it all up, I
have Saturday morning till the shops close
at one to buy my trousseau in, and Uncle
Ken is sending Aunt Isobel as a bodyguard,
to make sure I go well beyond the thirty-four
pounds, seven-and-seven-pence halfpenny,


which is all I really own. So you won’t see
me till the afternoon, sir, but you may turn
up and marry me at six, if you feel inclined.”
“If I dared believe you were not doing it
on some sudden impulse, to repent it after-
wards,” he said, “But I know what an
emotional bubble-pot you are, Billy Girl. You
had forgotten the world could be cruel; it
has hurt you again, and you turn to me in
the moment of the hurt,”
She interrupted him by getting up to put
her hands on his shoulders and look into his
troubled face, with eyes ashine with tears
and smiles at once, but doubts and regrets
behind her for ever.
“Do you want me to shake you, you dear
old donkey?” she laughed. “Listen to my
confession, Bill. When you booked your
passage, I wanted to go, but was sorry that I
wanted to. Now I want to go and am glad
that I want it. Mr Ungrateful, are you
going to marry me to-morrow?”
“I am,” he said, “and I am going to see
you never regret making earth into heaven
for me.”
For a time they sat on in the quiet garden,
forgetful of the flying minutes. Willa leaned
her head against his shoulder, like a tired
child that had found rest, and softly he told
her of the love that had fed his dreams for


years, or whispered foolish pet-names in her
ear.
“I’m glad you didn’t swear off being senti-
mental when I used to scold you for it,” she
laughed. “It’s very comforting to a down-
and-out feeling.”
Of course, he proceeded to be sentimental
again. She was a rose, he told her, a soft
moonbeam, a shy fairy mouse, a lily-flower,
a sweet bird making music on Life’s tree, the
shine out of all the sunbeams that had ever
warmed the earth, and half a dozen other
things, all impressed on her with kisses.
Though her impish sense of humour, even
in love’s crowning hour, registered his mixed
metaphors on her mind for some private
hour’s tender amusement, yet she thrilled at
every foolish endearment. Dear old Billy!
How sweet it was to have him so absurd!
It was the garden gate closing on some
one who entered that recalled them to the
world of mundane things.
“Why, that’s Tom back!” said Will. “And
here have I been, enjoying my own heaven,
and forgetting the dear old chap and his!”
Willa thrilled again to think she had the
power to make the world all golden for her
lover, even as she smiled to hear him style
Tom a dear old chap. Hurriedly he told
Tom’s news, and she was all eagerness to let


her brother know how she sympathized with
his gladness.
‘“But, dear old boy, I want to ’fess some-
thing first,” she said. “You will understand,
won’t you? It’s about our honeymoon.”
“Well, that is for you to do as you like
about,” he said. “There isn’t much of it to
arrange for anyhow —our boat sails at ten
on Monday night.”
“At ten on Saturday evening we get a
train to Orange,” she said. “That gives us
Sunday there, and we return by Monday’s
day-train.”
“Why as far as Orange?” he queried.
“Oh! Bill, don’t be dense.”
“I see. The Insect is there. Well then,
Orange be it, by all manner of means.”
“Bill, you dear! The first days may be
hard for her, and I want to surprise her with
a happy one that she didn’t expect. But that
isn’t all. Whatever I said, Ido want her to
be happy with Mrs Trevor. Don’t you see,
I can’t stop hating the Angle and the Croco-
dile till she is happy? Bill, it is the most
dreadful feeling not to be able to love or pity
everybody—it hurts. And how can I start
our life together with any hard feeling in
my heart? You do understand, don’t you?”
“You feel it would put a blight on our
pawpaw-tree; is that it?” he asked.


“I knew you’d understand,” she cried.
“And you do forgive me, don’t you, Bill? I
know it’s all wrong to be thinking of any-
body but you on our honeymoon, but —
but- ”
“Blessed little kid! Of course, I under-
stand,” he said. “See here now! Just you
get it into this pretty fluffy head that what-
ever you want is what I want from now on.
As for your Insect, count me into any plan
for spoiling her. And, if there are any more
lame dogs to lift over stiles, just remember
there is plenty of lift in the shoulders of a
man as happy as I am.”
“The happiness isn’t all yours,” she said.
“It spreads as far as Billy Both, and farther
too. I’m glad there was enough left over for
Tom.”


CHAPTER XII
BON VOYAGE
They were married at six on Saturday, just
as darkness was creeping over the city. Mac-
Pherson married them in the Stanmore
church, which a brother minister put at his
disposal for the occasion. Tom was best
man and far more awkward and uncomfort-
able than the bridegroom, who felt too happy
for any other feeling but bewilderment — so
dazedly happy indeed that the shops were
almost closing when he had remembered to
buy the wedding-ring. Willa would not have
thought herself properly married if orange-
blossoms had been missing, so it was in
bridal white and filmy veil that she walked
in on the doctor’s arm, with Tibbie and
Tottie to attend her, too overcome with im-
portance to realize that they were also over-
come with sleepiness after a night of travel-
ling and a morning in the city shops.
Instead of a formal breakfast, they had
dinner at Blandford, but the wedding-cake


came on with the coffee, and in informal
fashion the guests sampled it and voiced
their good wishes. When the few outsiders
had gone, the family group retired to the
library, for a grey-haired lawyer had come
out to read the will that was to be made
public when Willa married. Morton had
drawn it up himself, in simple language that
even the little bridesmaids could understand.
There was hushed silence as the lawyer
read; “I leave Mortondale Station and all
my other lands” (here followed particulars)
“to my three sons, Thomas, Robert, and
Sidney. If they prefer to divide the land, I
append instructions as to how the division
is to be made. It would please me better if
my son Thomas managed the station, at a
salary of three hundred pounds per annum,
and if all profits over and above that sum
were divided equally between the said
Thomas, Robert, and Sidney.
“To my eldest daughter, Willa, who, my
wife has told me, is worth all the rest of our
family put together, I leave fifty thousand
pounds, and I thank her for her goodness to
her mother, to my other children, and to me.
She is too fond of giving things away, so it
is my will that this sum be invested for her
by my sole executor, Doctor Kenneth
Leonard, and that only the annual interest


be subject to her control. That interest she
may spend as she pleases, and I hope she will
get more pleasure from spending than her
father had from making and saving.
“Whatever other money or property of
any kind remains to me, when all claims on
my estate have been met and all succession
duties paid, is to be divided equally between
my six youngest children, Thomas, Robert,
Sidney, Catherine, Isobel and Rosemary.
There should be at least three thousand
pounds each.”
“About seven thousand rather,” the
lawyer interrupted himself. “Doctor Leon-
ard and I have gone carefully into the
matter this morning. That completes the
bequests in the will, ladies and gentlemen. It
is duly dated, signed and witnessed, and
there will be no difficulty in proving it. May
I congratulate Mrs Curtis, who is certainly
the chief legatee?”
Willa had to wipe her eyes before she could
thank him, for the wording of the will had
brought back the tragedy of her father’s
last days.
Tom wrung her hand next. “Good for
you, old girl!” he cried. “I think poor old
dad summed you up pretty well. As for me,
I’m quite content. Kitty will feel a queen
with all that, bless her!”


The other boys came next, more pleased
than if they had been chief legatees them-
selves; sincerely so, indeed, for, as Rob put
it to Sid, “A chap gets slack on his job if he
hasn’t a bit of his own way to make.”
“I’m glad it’s good old Bill to help you
spend it too,” said Sid; and the others echoed
his pleasure
But Willa had seen the trouble on Will’s
face. “Yes,” she said; “even the interest on
fifty thousand will be a burden to spend
wisely. lam glad that I have a husband to
help me. The wrong orphanage or the
wrong hospital might get it otherwise-
after the old Mortondale employees are
properly pensioned off, of course.
Afterwards they went off to their train in
a taxi. The twentieth century was still in
its veriest infancy and taxies were so much
a novelty on Sydney streets that the heiress
of fifty thousand had a feeling of almost
culpable luxury as she drove in one.
“I don’t know why people cry at wed-
dings.” she laughed. “Billy Boy, aren’t you
enjoying Billy Both’s?”
When he had satisfied her on that point,
she went on, “and you were a dear, in spite
of all your pricklv pride, to take Uncle Ken-
Len’s big cheque. He—he hasn’t a daughter
of his own, you know, Bill.”


“As if I could refuse it,” he replied, “when
he loves you so, Bill, and has been so good to
me! I don’t even grudge it the honour of
furnishing our home.”
“And about that other money, Bill; it is
there for us if ever we both want it, but only
if we both do,” she explained. “Spending it
will be just heaven. We’ll help the Grad
first, and some will come in handy too for
the holidays I am to give the Insect, as long
as she continues to want them. I did think
it would be what Rob calls ‘rich’ if you had
to foot the bills for those; but of course, I
should have let you, if father had left me
nothing. You would feel—wouldn’t you,
Bill?—that a pledge given by one of us is
binding on both now.”
“Why, of course, silly little wife,” he
laughed.
To them both life for the next couple of
days seemed a whirl of fence-posts flying
past train windows, and of hurried greet-
ings and leave-takings.
The Insect had her happy day on Sunday.
There was no mistaking her passionate de-
light in Willa’s presence, but she was an
eager, bright-eyed child, who could not rest
satisfied till they had seen her on her pony
and admired the way she kept her seat when


it walked gently round, at a real smart
canter.”
“Aunt Nan says I may order a little rid-
ing-suit with real proper leggings, my
darlingest,” the child cried, “and we’re not
going to have real lessons at all, just prett}
books with stories about hist’ry and jografy,
and read them out in the garden among the
cherry-trees, and play ’most all the time.
Don’t you think Aunt Nan is a very lovely
lady, darlingest?”
WHla agreed heartily; the more she saw
of Mrs Trevor, the more she liked her.
When the day was over and they were
back at their hotel, she said, “Bill, I’ve laid
my ugly ghosts. Jo-Jo is happy, and I can
believe now that the Crocodile and the Angle
were only unconsciously cruel. I can pity
them for owning distorted natures, which
play them tricks like that and leave them un-
happy when they wake up and see \v hat they
have' done, I’m sure. < Please forgive the
Angle and the Crocodile.”
“I love them both,” he laughed; “they
helped to give me my wife.”
“Seventeen times, Bill! Seventeen times
to-day!” she teased. _
“That I have said wife?” he queried. 1
could say it seven hundred and se\ enteen
more and not grow tired of the sound.”


On Monday night they were back in the
city for a hurried visit to Blandford. Their
friends saw them off at the wharf and loaded
the little bride, as friends always do, with
flowers her cabin could not hold, and sweets
mainly not wanted on the voyage.
It was eleven when they steamed out be-
tween Port Jackson Heads and watched the
great light on the southern one flashing over
the peaceful harbour and the restless ocean
outside. Husband and wife were alone,
standing at the front of the ship, wrapped
in their great coats, enjoying the feel of the
chilly wind on their faces.
“Oh! Billy Boy,” she said, “I feel wickedly
happy. It must be wrong to be so glad,
when the world is full of sorrow and pain,
and everybody needs pity so.”
“Do you?” he asked.
“I? Oh! no, no!” she protested.
“That’s one exception then,” he said; “and,
as for me, don’t you dare pity me. Love me,
little wife, as much as you can. Forgive me
for falling so far short of deserving you.
But pity me! Don’t you dare!”
In love with life, in love with love, in love
with one another, their future bright with
the radiance of their hope, they stood for
a time in silent delight. Willa broke the
silence first.


“I’m hungry, Bill,” she said.
“Hungry?” he laughed. “Hungry, you
dear little, queer little girl?”
“Yes,” she answered; “hungry for a taste
of the first ripe fruit off our pawpaw-tree.”
His laugh rang out again across the water.
“Do you know, I haven’t even planted
that tree yet,” he confessed.
She laughed merrily back —oh, life was a
happy joke!
“It knows a thing or two,” she said. “One
Billy might have gone wrong. It is waiting
to be planted by Billy Both.”
And, low down near the horizon, in Orion,
their star, his and hers, winked redly and
pointed north.


Eagle Press Ltd., Allen Street, Waterloo


f.






-




