

Mission Work in Collingwood
LIFE OF THE LATE
Rev. C. M. Yelland
AND THE HITORY OF
St Saviours Church, Collingwood
PRICE * OHS SHILLING


MISSION WORK IN COLLINGWOOD
LIFE OF THE LATE
REV. CHAS. M. YELLAND
AND THE HISTORY OF
ST. SAVIOUR’S CHURCH, COLLINGWOOD
PRICE - ONE SHILLING
Melbourne
MELVILLE, MULLEN AND SLADE, PUBLISHERS
262 and 264 Collins Street
1891


DEDICATED
TO
Mr. WILLIAM EDWARD MORRIS,
REGISTRAR OF THE DIOCESE
OP MELBOURNE,
IN GRATEFUL ACKNOWLEDGMENT
OF THE
DEEP INTEREST EVINCED BY HIM IN THE WORK
OF THE REV. C. M. YELLAND, AT
ST, SAVIOUR’S CHURCH,
COLLINGWOOD,
FROM ITS INCEPTION.


[?]


INTRODUCTION.
So should we live, that when the sun
Of our existence sinks in night,
Hy traces of the good we’ve done
Our names may shine in memory’s light,
And the blest seeds we’ve scattered, bloom,
A hundred fold, in days to come.”
Bowring.
story of the rise of the Mission
Church of St. Saviour’s, in Collingwood,
is indelibly interwoven with the life
history of the late Rev. Charles May Yelland,
whose earthly form was laid to rest in the
city of the dead, as it were but yesterday.
And it is of him, and of the effort which
planted, nourished, and brought into full fruition
that noble mission organisation which has ac-
complished such untold good, more especially
among the humbler classes, that these pages
are designed to speak. An Australian by birth,
and a bright and studious boy, he early gave
promise of that ability which characterised his
after life. He was yet but a child when he


was converted, and thereafter his thoughts ap-
peared to centre more and more upon the great
work of ministering in the name of the Christ
of whom he was a devoted follower. Liberally
educated, and passing through a collegiate
course with honor, he became a teacher under
the old denominational system, and finally yielded
to the advice of Bishop Perry to become a
lay reader in connection with the Church of
England, subsequently receiving his ordination
as a priest. When the Mission Church was
founded in Collingwood in 1874, he offered
himself for the work among the poor, and from
that time labored on with an earnestness and
zeal, and an unswerving fidelity to those grand
principles of love, and meekness, and self-
sacrifice which hung with lustrous light around
his Master’s earthly career. The thought of
human reward was far from him. Preferment
to richer parishes, though offered, was pul aside;
a goodly portion of his moderate stipend went
to feed the hungry and to clothe the naked.
He went about among those who had slunk
into the byeways of life, and expostulated with
them, entreated them, prayed with them, until
he won them to the Saviour’s cause, and saw
them clothed in righteousness, and sitting in
humility at the feet of the Master. A cultured
and forcible speaker and writer, he labored in
the pulpit to put before his people truth in a


plain practical fashion, and to feed Christ’s
lambs with the pure food of the gospel.
With precept and practice so much in
harmony, is it to be wondered at that the Mission
Church of St. Saviour’s attracted multitudes to
it, that the original forty worshippers grew until
three years after the building was first opened
(where accommodation had been provided for
200, a congregation of upwards of 300 attended),
that many were turned away from the doors,
and that the pastor had to temporarily suspend
his labors in the outside world for lack of room
in which to bring together his converts. And
it must be remembered that of the goodly
number which crowded within the sacred walls
the majority were those who were entirely dis-
connected with any church, self-outcasts some,
others simply indifferent, who gathered there
together to hear the old old story of the Cross,
and to feel the stirrings of a new and glorious
life.
And with the enlargement of the building,
with the subsequent formation of a new parish
of St. Saviour’s, with the consecration of the
building, opened a new epoch in the history of
the church, distinguished by increased energy,
added prosperity, and a more zealous work, in
which multitudes were gathered together, and
in which the plan of salvation and holiness,
instinct with life and beauty, was made clear


to many a doubting mind, and rest won for
many a weary soul.
Fighting the good fight, the Rev. C. M.
Yelland was struck down in the very zenith of
his usefulness. He died in harness, being laid
low at the termination of his labors on Sunday,
10th May, 1891, and entering on his rest the
following day, mourned by thousands who had
learnt with him to look through death’s shadowy
valley to the glorious Christ-won Kingdom
beyond, wherein he, their friend and human
guide, has joyously entered.


CONTENTS.
CHAPTER I. Page
Boyhood, Conversion and Early Successes ... 7
CHAPTER 11.
Foundation of St. Saviour’s Mission Church .. 13
CHAPTER 111.
The Progress of the Work and Hinderments
THERETO ... ... ... ... ... 17
CHAPTER IV.
Additions, Improvements, and Extension of the
Work ... ... ... ... ... 25
CHAPTER V.
Personal Work in Collingwood ... ... 30
CHAPTER VI.
Personal Characteristics of the Rev. C. M.
Yelland ... ... ... ... ... 38
CHAPTER VII.
The Presence of the Angel of Death ... 49
Funeral Sermon by the Bishop of Melbourne 55


ILLUSTRATIONS.
1. Portrait of the late Rev. Charles May
Yelland,
2. St, Saviour’s Church, Collingwood.
3. The Church Font.
4. The Church Lectern.


CHAPTER I.
BOYHOOD, CONVERSION AND EARLY SUCCESSES.
child, who was afterwards to bear the
name of Charles May Yelland, was born
in the township of Burra Burra, Adelaide,
on October 4th, 1848. He was the eldest son of
a large family born to Mr. and Mrs. William
Yelland, who had come from a good old South
of England stock. When he was five years of age
his parents removed to Ballarat, then the centre
of the gold-mining fever which had broken out
in Victoria, and he was yet but a child when the
Eureka Stockade Riots—those ebullitions of popular
protest against the tyranny of officialism, and
which gave the keynote to Australian politics—
took place, and impressed themselves upon his
memory with a fulness, to be in after years
exemplified by his lectures upon the causes and
incidents of that strife. He was a bright, intel-
ligent, and studious boy, full of ingenious thoughts,
affectionate, and conscientious; endowed with
inventive and organizing faculties, and with a
taste for mimicry which foretold the future orator.


The story of his conversion is a very
beautiful one. He was an apt Biblical student,
and the scriptural lessons which he received at
St. Paul’s denominational school, Ballarat, where
he attended, would appear to have been ex-
ceptionally impressive. One day the lesson was
upon the subject of the Transfiguration of Christ
upon the Mount, and the boy carried home
with him, and even into dreamland, the thought
of that radiant vision. In the soft slumbers of
the night there came to him a vivid dream - may
we not in all reverence think of it as the hand
of the Divine Master laid on the spirit of the
young lad —and he thought that he was in
St. Paul’s Church, in the building he knew so
well ; but in the pulpit there stood the One who
had filled his thoughts that day—that Saviour
in all the beauty of His transfiguration as it had
shaped itself in the boy’s mind; and still he
dreamt that as he looked the Master spoke to
him, and said “You must be Mine;” and
everywhere he turned the voice repeated “You
must be Mine.” The lad woke in the morning
with new thoughts awakened in his heart. In
the still watches of the night his soul had been
kindled into a knowledge and acceptance of
Christ as his Saviour; and to his mother he
confided the dream which had hovered round his
head by night. From that day the mother’s
loving eye noticed the change in her boy, the


deepening of his thoughts, the growth of spiritual
feeling, and it was to that night, when but ten
years of age, that he attributed his conversion.
Years afterwards he stood in that same pulpit
of St. Paul’s, and told the story of the Saviour’s
appearance to him.
His parents, who afterwards settled down in
the Creswick district, where they still enjoy a
ripe old age, noting his studious disposition,
determined to give him a liberal education, and
at fifteen years of age he was sent to the
Horton Wesleyan College, at Ross, Tasmania.
As showing his aptitude for study it may be
noted that at this college he was reported
deficient in Latin, and his parents were advised
that he had commenced the study of that
language too late in years to become proficient.
Yet afterwards he passed at the Melbourne
University with credit. After two years’ study
in Tasmania he was sent to the Scotch College,
Melbourne, and having chosen the teaching
profession as his career, was appointed assistant
teacher to the Wesleyan denominational school
at Creswick. Some time afterwards he was
transferred to a new school at Happy Valley,
which was very . successful under the young
teacher, now arrived at manhood’s age.
It was here that he reaped the first-fruits of
his spiritual work. Summoned one night to the
bedside of a young man who had been fatally


injured, he remained with him the whole of the
night wrestling in prayer, the morning dawn
coming with the sweet assurance that another
soul had been won for heaven.
At Happy Valley, also, he entered into one
of the dearest bonds of his life, being united
in matrimony to Miss Mary Newman, the second
daughter of Mr. C. T. Newman, of Melbourne.
He was subsequently promoted from Happy Valley
to Kingston, where he demonstrated his ability
as a teacher. The Rev. James Wagg, writing
on October 19th, 1870, to the Creswick Advertiser,
said
school during the nine months that Mr. Yelland
has had it will, I think, bear comparison with
most schools in the district. The inspector’s
per centage is 66.760 compared with 37.473 for
the inspection of j 86g, giving an actual increase
of just 30; but the actual passes are 83.757.
Considerable losses were sustained, viz,, for non-
passes 51; absence 40; average 26. Considering
that Mr. Yelland has only had charge of the
school since January of the present year, and
that he has had such uphill work all the time,
only 37.473 having been obtained for the previous
year, and 1868 being even worse, for that year
every class but one failed, I think some credit
is due to the master who has been fighting
almost single handed against such fearful odds.”
The school being under the control of the


Church of England he was brought into constant
contact with the Rev. Mr. Wagg, and with Bishop
Perry, and his thoughts again turned to an idea
which he had entertained prior to his marriage
—to offer himself for the ministry; and he was
here led to resign his charge, and to become a
lay reader at Egerton, whence after 18 months’
labor he went as a student to Moore College,
Liverpool, New South Wales. He was ordained
deacon in 1873 by Bishop Perry, together with
the Revs. Horace F. Tucker and George I. Arm-
strong, and was appointed curate to the Venerable
Archdeacon Tucker, to officiate in the archdea-
conry of Beechworth and Wangaratta. He was
sent to the Wangaratta parish and stationed at
Oxley.
From the local press we extract the following
reports: —“The arrangement lately made by the
Bishop of Melbourne and Archdeacon Tucker
that the Rev. Mr. Yelland should reside in
Oxley, appears to be a good one, as far as the
outlying districts are concerned, for not only
are services held at Oxley every Sunday after-
noon, and at Whorouly and at Moyhu every
alternate Sunday morning, but we learn that the
reverend gentleman preached to a numerous
congregation at Red Camp, and in the afternoon
conducted the usual service at Oxley Plains.
The distance between the two places is about
twenty-six miles. The organ just purchased by


the inhabitants of Oxley was played for the
first time last Sunday afternoon by Mrs. Yelland.
The sermon was listened to with the utmost
attention for nearly an hour by an audience
occupying every available sitting in the church.”
And again, “We are glad to be able to chronicle
the rapid progress being made by the Episcopal
Church at Oxley. Since the advent of the
Rev. C. M. Yelland, as resident clergyman, the
congregation has been largely augmented; a new
parsonage has been erected; congregations have
been formed at various outlying places; and,
generally, the church has greatly prospered.”
At Whorouly, which had been greatly neglected,
so far as its spiritual wants were concerned, the
Rev. Mr. Yelland began by preaching in a barn,
but so much success attended his ministrations
that a neat weatherboard church was speedily
erected. From thence he was removed to Bright,
and had already commenced a work, the effects
of which are still enshrined in many hearts,
when a new sphere of labor was opened before
him.


CHAPTER II.
THE FOUNDATION OF ST. SAVIOUR’S MISSION
CHURCH.
fOR years the necessity of some means for
reaching the poor of Collingwood and
Fitzroy had been felt by the Clergy of
those districts and by the Church authorities,
and the establishment of a Mission Church was
projected.
“The objects in view,’’ said the Argus when
some years afterwards giving a brief history of
the mission, “ were fully explained at a meeting
held in Trinity Church in February, 1873, by
the chairman, the Rev. H. N. Wollaston, the
Rev. Canon Handheld and Mr. W. E. Morris.
The clergy of the parishes of St. Peter’s, St. Mark’s,
St. Phillip’s and Trinity had, it was admitted,
been utterly unable to overtake the work which
had been laid upon them.
“There were thousands of people living in
those districts whom their ministrations did not
reach, and it had been for a long time felt
that it was absolutely necessary, in order that


gospel ordinances should be brought in amongst
these, that some special work of a missionary
character should be undertaken.
“‘ It was contemplated,’ said Mr. Morris,
“that the clergyman of the proposed church should
visit as his flock the very poor. There was only a
small proportion of free seats in the churches,
and to these seats many poor people did not
like to go and mix with the fashionably dressed.
“A real want was thus undoubtedly admitted
to exist, and it was to supply this want that
the erection of St. Saviour’s was decided on.
The movement for its erection did not progress
with any extraordinary rapidity, and it was over
two years after the date of this meeting —on
the 27th August, 1875 —when a small portion of
the original design was first opened for service.
The minister to whom the charge of the church
and the prosecution of the mission in connec-
tion with it were entrusted was the Rev. Charles
May Yelland, a young clergyman then in charge
of a church at Bright. The position of min-
ister of a church only partially completed, without
as yet any congregation, and to be supported
chiefly by voluntary contributions (all the seats
being free) was not a very enticing one from
a worldly point of view. Mr. Yelland, however,
being evidently an enthusiast in his calling, had
long ardently desired to be placed in charge of
some such mission, and on his offering his


St. Saviour’s Church, COLLINGWOOD.


services there was little hesitation in perceiving
that he was the right man for the position,
and his offer was soon accepted. Mr. Yelland’s
first work was of course to collect a congrega-
tion, and this he set about with a vigor that
could not but be crowned with success. His
hard work, indeed, was soon fraught with tangible
results. From two to three dozen hearers, in
six months there were some 150 regular at-
tendants at the services, and at the end of the
first year the church each Sunday was crowded.
With the opening of the church a Sunday-
school was also of course started. In a few
weeks the number of scholars averaged 40. A
small library was also established, and it in-
creased proportionately. It is hardly necessary
to point out that such results, from the material
at hand, argued in themselves an amount of
energy and ardour on the part of the minister
which spoke in the highest terms of his fitness
for the post of a missionary. And it was by
thoroughly missionary work that these results
were obtained. Mr. Yelland commenced in the
common-sense manner by taking street by street
and house by house throughout the district,
urging those who did not go to church, either
to attend their parish church, or if they would
not do that, to come to St. Saviour’s.”
The memorial stone of the church had
been laid on the 18th November, 1874, by the


Very Reverend the Dean of Melbourne, and the
building was opened on Friday morning, 27th
August, 1875, by the Right Reverend Samuel
Thornton, D.D., Lord Bishop of Ballarat. The
opening services were continued the same
evening, when the Rev. Canon Chase officiated;
on the Sunday by the Revs. Canon Handfield
and R. Barlow, and on the next Sunday by the
new incumbent, the Rev. C. M. Yelland. It
was on the following Sunday, 12th September,
that the Sabbath-school, since become perhaps
the most distinctive feature of the work at St.
Saviour’s, was opened by the incumbent with
42 scholars, and with Mrs. Yelland, Mrs. Morris,
Mrs. Peart, Miss Armstrong, and Mr. Rain as
teachers. It was on the 26th September that
holy communion was first administered to the
congregation proper by the incumbent to 20
persons, and in little more than a week after-
wards, the Wednesday evening services were
commenced. It may, in this connection, be
interesting to note that the first marriage in
St. Saviour’s was celebrated on 30th October,
in the same year, the happy couple being
Henry Hines and Agnes Goodyear.
Prior to the opening of the church, the
subject of our sketch had been ordained as
priest by Bishop Bromby, of Tasmania, the
Revs. G. I. Armstrong, H. F. Tucker, and H.
F. Scott, being ordained at the same time.


CHAPTER III.
THE PROGRESS OF THE WORK, AND HINDERMENTS
THERETO.
the work went on and prospered. With
* untiring energy the pastor souglit out
the poor of the district, and “ compelled
them to come in,” and having brought them
into St. Saviour’s, kept them there by the force
of his earnest preaching, and that personal
magnetism which wins hearts. Necessarily, as
time went on, there also gathered around him
many who were not poor in the strict accep-
tation of the term, and some who deserted
the neighbouring parish churches in order to
sit under him ; so that within from two to three
years the little building was found to be too
small for all who came; and in the fact
that those attended who, it was contended,
ought rather to have supported their respective
parish churches, there arose heartburnings—not
that the living then, or at any time since,
became a rich one, for by the trust deed the
sittings at St. Saviour’s were to be for ever


free and unappropriated. By the minister’s
special desire no collection was made on Sun-
days, but a box was placed at the door so
that all who chose might contribute according
to their inclination, the largest stipend received
by the incumbent, during those early years,
being less than /'3OO. But there was the
obvious fact that the church was successful in
its mission, and that its services had a tendency
to attract the congregations of the parish churches.
It occupied, indeed, the anomalous position of
being a church without a parish, but working
among those adherents of the church of
England, and the general poor, who would not
attend their own regular place of worship.
“ The Church of England at Collingwood,”
wrote a correspondent to the Daily Telegraph, “ is
being vexed and disturbed. Some time ago a
Mission Church was erected in the most aristo-
cratic and fashionable part of the embryo city, in-
tended especially for the poor; but there happens
to be no poor in the immediate neighbourhood
of the church, the houses being first class, and
without exception, the best in the whole of
Collingwood. The minister appointed is an
excellent self-denying young man, but finds
himself in a fix as to his work, having no
paroch’al boundaries or allotted sphere wherein
to labor. He asks for a definition of duties,
and is informed he is to seek out the poor


wherever he can find them. Acting on this,
he writes to the incumbent of the parish of
St. Phillip’s, intimating the same, and without
asking his sanction, makes known his intention
to labor in his parish, or anywhere else. This
is in violation both of the law and custom of
the church. The Vicar-General is supposed to
have defined the duties of the Mission Church
pastor, or at all events, to side with him.
The consequence is, the incumbent has been
compelled, in defiance of the laws of the church,
to inhibit the Pastor of the Mission Church t°
labor in his parish, unless his permission is
given. If such an innovation be tolerated, it
will affect every parochial clergyman in the
diocese, and destroy the church’s parochial
system. Several of the neighbouring clergy
have offered to support the incumbent in re-
sisting the step taken by the worthy young
pastor of the Mission Church. It is said that
the Bishop of Ballarat, who opened this church,
expressed his fears that it would lead to epis-
copal independency; and he appears to be right.
It is the opinion of all that the Mission
Church for the poor is a mistake; is away from
the class it was intended for, and is frequented
by those well able to pay for their church
privileges, and who are clothed in purple and fine
linen. The present dispute is being carried on
in a friendly spirit, and the contending parties


avoid all personalities.” Such is one aspect of
the story of difficulties which ultimately were
brought under the notice of the new Lord
Bishop of Melbourne, Dr. Moorhouse.
At this space of time it is possible to
look back upon the troubles of that period, and
to see in them but the inevitable outcome of
growth upon the part of the new church, and
to observe how well all things have been
ordered.
But at that period there seemed but little
hope of a solution of the difficulties which had
arisen—difficulties, however, which, while they
hovered around the church, never for a day
hampered its usefulness, nor interfered with its
steady growth and prosperity. The Argus his-
torian, from w'hom we have before quoted, in
taking a contemporaneous view of the question,
referred to the report of the reverend incumbent,
in which Mr. Yelland said, “The church was
erected with the intention of gathering together
those persons who, for various reasons, did not
attend any place of worship, and whilst it was,
and always has been, the earnest desire of the
promoters of the church to gather in the poor,
they did not intend to exclude any, whether
rich or poor, who chose to come to the ser-
vices.” And the critic went on to observe:
“ Obviously the declaration contained in the
latter part of this extract is one which is not


only reasonable in itself, but it would evidently
be impossible to adopt the converse policy, and
prevent a man or woman from attending the
church simply because he or she, in the
opinion of the minister, ought to attend the
parish church. The minister, at an early stage
of his missionary work, endeavoured to draw
some such distinction from the pulpit, but he
was soon led to see the imprudence of any
such course, and learned that there were more
people than the very poorest and most ignorant
class who were not willing to attend the parish
churches. We are satisfied that the congre-
gation of St. Saviour’s contains a very large
proportion of persons who, before the establish-
ment of that chinch, and the arduous efforts of
its minister, hardly ever saw the inside of a
church. Indeed, many persons who had ceased
to attend any church for five, ten, fifteen, and
twenty-five years are now regular attendants at
St. Saviour’s, and one instance, at least, has been
given us in which a man who had never been
inside a church before became a regular wor-
shipper at St. Saviour’s until he left Melbourne.
Several instances, which we cannot doubt, have
also been afforded us, in which the efforts of
the minister have been successful in reclaiming
drunkards, reforming the vicious, and replacing
domestic misery and filth by comfort and
cleanliness. With such facts, even if well-to-do


people will insist on attending St. Saviour’s instead
of their own parish church, it is impossible not
to admit that since its establishment the Mission
Church has been doing the work set down for
it. And one may think, after hearing one of
Mr. Yelland’s sermons, that there may be other
reasons for the attendance of ordinary church-
goers at St. Saviour’s than merely the desire,
somewhat uncharitably imputed, of ‘ getting their
religion on the cheap.’ A pretty severe test
of the success of a Church of England clergy-
man’s ministrations is afforded by the attendance
at the week-day services. On Wednesday
evening there were between 70 and 80 present
at St. Saviour’s—or over one-third of the whole
congregation. Few Episcopal Churches in Victoria
could boast a higher proportion—very few,
indeed, so high. Among Mr. Yelland’s audience
was a man who, on that occasion, made his
first appearance in church for twenty years. If
in the past, however, St. Saviour’s has been
undoubtedly performing missionary work, there
is also as little doubt that it is not doing so
now. The explanation is simple, and it need
hardly be said, from what has already been stated
by Mr. Yelland, the minister is in no way to
blame. The portion of the church which has
been built is crowded to excess every Sunday—
intended for 200, the average attendance is
27S —and, therefore, until the building is enlarged,


it would be absurd for ibe minister to attempt
to increase his congregation, seeing that if any
new convert responded to the invitation to come
to St. Saviour’s, he would only get as far as
the door.”
At a subsequent date the same influential
paper dealt in its leading columns with the ne-
cessity for more accommodation at St. Saviour’s.
“It is useless” it wrote, “for Mr. Yelland to
seek to enlarge the sphere of his influence by
inviting the poor and wretched to attend his
church in greater numbers, and forget the
misery of their lot for a few hours during the
week, in the contemplation of a coming rest.
The building at his disposal is already full to
overflowing, and scores who come in search of
the consolations of religion have sometimes to
go empty away.” The Argus estimated the
amount requisite to provide the necessary church
room and a schoolhouse at £ 2,000; and it
asked, “Is this too much to ask from the
liberality of wealthy churchmen ? We are in a
position to know that the poor people who at
present attend the services are willing to give
their pence —pence which, perhaps, in some
instances, represent sacrifices as great as that
made by the widow who cast her mite in the
treasury —but their utmost exertions and their
most strenuous self-denial can accomplish little
towards the objects in view. This mission is


doing a good work, and doing it, be it re-
membered, in our own national household,
amongst our own countrymen, to our own kith
and kin. That those considered appreciate the
provision made for their spiritual wants is
evidenced by their constant attendance in num-
bers ; and it would be a crying shame if, while
providing funds for missionary effort in connection
with the aboriginal race, the Chinese, the natives
of the South Seas, and other aliens, the Anglican
Church should shut its eyes and close its purse
against the wants of those who are its legiti-
mate responsibilities. We trust soon to be able
to inform our readers that all obstacles to its
progress and efficiency have been removed by
the liberality of those who recognise their duty
towards their neighbours.”
The hope thus expressed was shortly to be
fulfilled. The public ear was won by the story
of the energetic work in connection with the
Collingwood mission; its sympathies awakened
by the tale of the miseries relieved and lives
brightened, and towards the end of 1878, three
years after the first opening, the necessary ex-
tensions were put in hand.


CHAPTER IV.
ADDITIONS, IMPROVEMENTS, AND EXTENSION
OF THE WORK.
expenditure necessary to give the
11 requisite accommodation was estimated
at £ 550, a sum far more modest than
that which the Argus had appealed for; and of
this sum the greater portion, viz., £ 375, had
been collected by October, 1878, and to raise
the balance a bazaar was opened in the Foresters'
Hall, Smith-street, on the 24th day of that
month. The venture proved very successful,
the sum needed was raised, and it is recorded
that some ladies of the congregation even dis-
pensed with new bonnets for the season in order
to contribute a little more to the fund. Messrs.
Terry and Oakden, the architects, at the same
time called for tenders for the extension, which
was shortly afterwards put in hand. It com-
prised the extension of the building as far as
the present chancel, and gave accommodation
for a congregation of 500 persons.


The opening services took place on Friday,
March Bth, 1879, the Rev. H. B. Macartney
officiating. On the following Sunday three
services were held, the preachers being the
Revs. R. Barlow, B. Rodda, and C. M.
Yelland, the church being thronged. The
customary tea meeting was held in the
Fitzroy Town Hall on the Tuesday evening,
the attendance on that occasion being about
600 persons.
Furthermore, the occasion was signalized by
some handsome gifts. A lady friend, whose
name through all these years has remained un-
known, presented a magnificent font, a fac-simile
of the one in Lichfield Cathedral, sculptured
from New Zealand stone. It is a curious and
elegant piece of workmanship, devils being
represented at each angle escaping from the
waters of baptism. An engraving of the font
is published in these pages. Various other
articles necessary to the proper furnishing of
the church were likewise presented by various
friends. Among others, the elegant lectern, of
which we also give an engraving.
The progress of St. Saviour’s, after the re-
opening, was as satisfactory as previous to that
event, and the incumbent was enabled to report
at the anniversary gathering in the following
August that the church had over 230 communi-
cants, and that 125 persons had been confirmed.


St. Saviour’s Church FOSE.


By the advice of the Bishop and the Dean,
Sunday collections had been instituted, though
ihe incumbent himself was not partial to them.
The Sunday-school was in a flourishing state,
there being 364 children on the roll and 23
teachers, whilst it also possessed a fine library.
The winter of 1879 had been a specially
trying one, and the destitution in Collingwood
and Fitzroy was very great. A worthy philan-
thropist, Dr. Singleton, stepped forward in the
cause of charity, and with the Rev. C. M.
Yelland and a few other workers, established
the Collingwood Relief Fund. Writing of his
investigations, in company with Mr. Bendy, into
the cases brought before the committee, Mr.
Yelland said, “The sights we saw would move
hearts of stone. lam accustomed to sad scenes,
but the last fourteen days have been the sad-
dest days of my life. House after house was
entered by Mr. Bendy and myself, wherein
there was not an article of furniture. We saw
families who were clad in rags, and whose only
covering by night were sacks. Nearly every case
visited by us, and we at random selected cer-
tain streets, arose from want of employment or
sickness. In only three very extreme cases has
money been given. One man had an empty
basket replenished with goods, and so he has
been enabled to help himself. Another had a
muffin basket bought, and he is maintaining


his family by this means. Many girls have
been clad and sent out to service, and several
men have been found employment. Dress-
makers have been sent to every suburb of
Melbourne. Scores of men, women and child-
ren have been enabled to attend divine service,
the first time for years with many of them,
thanks to the splendid presents of clothes given
to the fund.” In one fortnight 890 persons,
representing 347 families, had been relieved,
yet there were not wanting those captious critics
who not only cavilled at the distribution of
relief, but asserted that there were no poor in
Collingwood. Yet the names of Dr. Singleton,
the Rev. C. M. Yelland, and other workers are
even to-day enshrined in the hearts of many
who experienced the rigors of that pitiless
winter.
The months sped on, and at length, after
much discussion and the exercise of a great
deal of diplomacy, it was resolved to create a
new parish in Collingwood, to be known as St.
Saviour’s, by excising portions from each of the
adjacent parishes. Meanwhile, a parsonage had
been purchased on March 25th, 1880, at a cost
of £ 1,250, and on the 27th October following,
an Act was passed by the Church Assembly,
constituting St. Saviour’s a Parish Church, and
was assented to on the Ist November. On
Thursday, December 16th, 1880, the building was


solemnly consecrated by the Right Rev. the
Lord Bishop of Melbourne, James Moorhouse,
D.D. The trustees at that date were Messrs.
H. Henty, W. E. Morris, and W. E. King;
the churchwardens, Messrs. J. D. Carruthers,
J. B. Dowdle, and W. E. Morris; and the vestry-
men, Messrs. F. W. Amsinck, A. B. Hedger, and
T. J. Lamble. The Sunday-school numbered 540
scholars, with 41 teachers and officers; the
library containing 880 books; the number of
communicants during the preceding year being
1887, with an average of nB. These figures
fully show the growth which the church had
made during the six years of its existence.


CHAPTER V.
PERSONAL WORK IN COLLINGWOOD.
separate existence of St. Saviour’s as
11. a Mission Church had now closed.
The necessity for its establishment was
proved by the success which attended it. It
had formed a centre, around which clustered
many who would never have resumed their left-
off church-going habits but for its open doors;
many who had shunned the sacred edifices of
God for years; many who had first received the
spirit of the Gospel from the ministrations of
its pastor, and still others who had been
stirred into a life and warmth which they had
never experienced in their desultory attendances
at the surrounding parish churches. Again
there were those who had settled down in the
district, or found the location convenient, and
who all contributed to swell the crowd of wor-
shippers. And so St. Saviour’s had become a
parish church, and, as it never was cursed with
internal dissentions, the records of the next


few years possess little of interest beyond in-
dicating the steady progress made.
At this stage, therefore, it may not be
inappropriate to introduce a condensation of
an article which appeared in the Australasian
about three months after the consecration of
the church, and which gives a graphic sketch
of St. Saviour’s, and of the Rev. C. M-
Yelland, under the fictitious names of St.
Sylvester’s and Mr. Heilig. “In spite of the
so much talked of decadence of the pulpit,”
said the writer in question, “ there is, even
now, perhaps, no man so powerful as a minister
of the gospel, who has earned the love and
esteem of his congregation. He is a spiritual
force among his people. In my wanderings
lately I met with a clergyman of this stamp,
and having had experiences of others, who
really, except in the cut and color of their
garb, differed in no respect from other men, I
warmed to him and liked him. Mr. Heilig,
for such let us call him, I found on Sunday
evening, preaching to a crowded congregation,
in one of our suburbs. The church was in a
shabby little back street, and was in thorough
keeping with its humble surroundings. The
place was devoid of ornament, the music was
not of the best, and the service was as simple
as the Church of England liturgy will permit.
But the people seemed as interested and devout


as the pastor was earnest and fervent. He
was a youthful looking little man, of ruddy
complexion, with fair hair and beard. The
first thing that struck me, after listening to
him for five minutes, was his genuineness.
Sincerity spoke in every tone of his not un-
musical voice, and in every glance of the
kindly grey eyes which looked at us behind
his spectacles. He preached the old-fashioned
doctrines which have so little meaning for so
many now-a-days, and I have gone to sleep
over sermons quite as good, from an intellectual
point of view, as he gave us ; but there was
that strange life and power in his utterances
which are ever present when a warm, loving
soul speaks to other souls.
‘‘ The man’s work was not confined to
preaching, for more eloquent than his sermons
was his living. He lived in and among his
people, sharing their sorrows and troubles, if
he did not rejoice when they rejoiced. His
soul was in his work, and he labored as the
artist labors, who, under the impulse of some
master thought, can find rest for neither heart
nor brain till the ideal has taken life and
form and become the actual. Such is the
power of a spiritual man that he put life into
dry bones, and blew dead hearts into flame by
his very presence. The poor people gave of
their poverty joyfully, to help their pastor and


his schemes, and seemed never the poorer.
Those better off, who would have grudged both
time and money to a mere pulpit declaimer,
now readily gave both; and thus this man
proved himself verily to be a spiritual power
in St. Sylvester’s.
“ The matter of the stipend raising is a
serious one to the churchwardens, but I was
told the pastor is rather indifferent about it.
He is always giving to those poorer than him-
self, and his friends have to hedge him round
in many artful ways to save him from the
designing, and lazy, and thriftless. His wife,
I am given to understand, has frequently been
reduced to sore straits through his too liberal
alms giving ; but the sin—if it be one —is in
his bones, and he cannot refrain. He can
flame out into righteous wrath, however, when
he finds his bounty abused. Thus, when told
that one of his pensioners was wont to spend
his alms on drink with dissolute companions,
he set a trap for the delinquent, and laid
in wait like an amiable detective, and lurked
about surreptitiously behind his spectacles till
he caught him sitting carousing with the
companions aforesaid. He delivered to the
astonished group a few fiery and scathing words
of rebuke, and shaking the dust from his
feet, left them—let us hope, abashed and
crestfallen.


“At Christmas tide he refuses to benefit
by one of the Sunday night collections, and
devotes the money as a Christmas box for the
poor of the parish. I was told that once
when some restless spirits were creating a dis-
turbance in the congregation, he paralysed them
by threatening to resign. It then came out
that he had received oflers to go elsewhere at
a higher salary, but had refused, upon the
preposterous and extraordinary ground —to quote
a churchwarden’s words— ‘ because he likes the
work upon which he is engaged.’
“ Besides preaching work, and Sunday-
school, and lecturing work, Mr. Heilig is a
diligent house-to-house visitor. In St. Kilda or
Toorak this last would doubtless be a very
pleasant duty, but in the parish of St. Sylvester’s
it is far otherwise. Within St. Sylvestei’s
there lurks as ugly a brood of crime and
misery and poverty as is to be found around
Melbourne. But this dauntless little soldier of
the Cross beards sin in its den, and sits by
the bedside of disease, and comforts poverty
and affliction, and prays over the dying and the
dead, as if the duty were not only a necessary,
but a pleasant one. Such dreamers as Novalis
can write, ‘Life is a disease of the spirit; a
working incited by passion. Rest is peculiar
to the spirit.’ But Mr. Heilig, plunged as he
is in ‘ the concrete,’ and seeing so much sin


and misery around him, cannot rest. He
apparently agrees with the words of the Chinese
sage, ‘ While you are not able to serve men
how can you serve their spirits ? ’
“ Such ministrations, as may be expected,
have not been without their fruits. The man
is poor, and probably will always remain so,
for his business in life is not to amass riches.
Probably he would address sneering Midas in
something like brave Jean Paul’s words : ‘ What
is poverty ? Who is the man that pines under
it ? The pain is but as that of piercing the
ears of a maiden, and you hang jewels in the
wound.’
“ But if he has not gotten wealth he has
made dark homes full of light, and brought
people to live well-ordered and decent lives,
who were literally existing as the beasts that
perish. His church and his personality are
as a light shining in the darkness, and the
centre from which radiate healing and com-
fort all over the district. It is when we
see such lowly lives, consecrated to such
high employments, that we feel how im-
perishable religion is. Creeds may wax and
wane, and liturgies and systems grow obsolete
and pass away, but ‘ religion cannot pass away.
The burning of a little straw may hide the
stars of the sky; but the stars are there,
and will re-appear.’ Religion will survive, so


long as there is found pleading for her in
the gates —
* Sweet charity, the child of God.’”
Little now remains to be said to complete
this brief history of St. Saviour’s. In the year
1882, the congregation found itself in a position
to carry out still further extensions, and the
chancel was built with a neat vestry room, and
a commodious hall underneath the chancel. In
addition to this, the church was thoroughly
renovated and plastered, the re-opening services
taking place on Christmas Eve, 1882, the
incumbent preaching in the morning, and Dr.
Macartney, the Dean of Melbourne, in the
evening.
Henceforth the history of the church is that
of a highly successful parish church, the
members of which worked with enthusiasm to
complete its organisations, and to extend its
good work. In 1884 the incumbent established
the S/. Saviour's Church Record, an illustrated
monthly journal, the first parochial Church of
England paper published in Melbourne, and
which gave a mirror of the progress of the
church. The same year saw a Gospel Tem-
perance Union organized; a branch of the Girls’
Friendly Society established, as also a Young
Men’s Friendly Society, and street preaching
was essayed with very successful results. The


growth of the Sunday-school was very marked,
the Bible class for adults being a distinctive
feature, in which a large number of married
folks clustered around the incumbent and
listened with very great profit to his teaching.
To the day of his death this class was con-
tinued with unabated interest. The progress
of the Sunday-school library was also a noted
feature of the school, increasing by leaps and
bounds until a collection was gathered together,
containing a large proportion of valuable works,
available not only to the children, but to the
adult members of the church.


CHAPTER VI.
PERSONAL CHARACTERISTICS OF THE
REV. C. M. YELLAND.
who have read the foregoing pages,
11, being personally unacquainted with the
Rev. C. M. Yelland, will have been
enabled to form a pretty accurate conception of
the personal characteristics of the late pastor of
St. Saviour’s Church—of his untiring energy, his
indomitable zeal, his self-sacrificing spirit, his
charity, and of his unostentatious personality.
As a preacher it is apparent that he
possessed a wonderfully attractive influence.
Unfortunately, he has left no manuscripts behind
him which might have been interwoven in this
narrative. In early years he prepared manuscripts
of sermons, but once he really set to work as a
minister, he gave up the practice, and preached
extemporaneously. He dealt in a practical
direct way with religion as a force to be intro-
duced into ordinary life, as a living every day
necessity, illustrating his remarks by homely


instances, and pointed sentences which some-
times cut through error and prejudice with
rapier-like keenness.
One not acquainted with him might hazard
the thought that a clergyman so eminently
practical and so unceasingly busy had but little
time to devote to scholastic pursuits. Yet, on
the contrary, few studies held a more devoted
disciple of literature. The taste for books
was developed in his earliest years. We have
before us, as we write, his scrap book, con-
taining the gleanings of a year while at
Kingston, dating from 1870. It is a thick
volume, opening appropriately enough, for one
who spent the best year's of his life in imitation
of his Master, among the low, depraved, and
outcast, with “A Fallen Woman’s Story.” The
contents of the book indicate his varied taste
and his deep thirst for knowledge. In the
course of his ministry he collected a splendid
library of works, in which is evidenced the
thoroughness of the preparation which he went
through in fitting himself to expound the scrip-
tures, and to deal with the many historical and
social subjects which came under his purview.
The Victorian Churchman, writing recently of the
disposal of this library, says :
“ Mr. Yelland, as all who were acquainted
with him are aware, was a great lover of books,
and during the term of his incumbency at


St. Saviour’s he had been continually adding
to his collection. As a icsult, one of
the largest and most valuable libraries in
the colony is now to be disposed of. The
collection embraces all branches of literature —
science, biography, travel, and discovery, etc.
The most valuable, however, is the very careful
selection of theological works, both ancient
and modern. All the best authors are re-
presented, including such writers as Lightfoot,
Trench, Westcott, Milman, Bruce, Liddon, Alford,
Farrar, Smith, Geikie, Lewin, Edersheim, and
Salmon; commentaries, including the Pulpit,
Speaker’s, Lange’s, and Trapp’s, and the People’s
Bible; encyclopaedias, including Dr. Smith’s,
Dr. Kitto’s, M'Clintock, and Strong’s; and a
large and varied assortment of minor theological
works—critical, homiletical, and devotional.”
To the love of the bookworm was added a
taste for kindred pursuits, and nothing came
amiss which could, with any appropriateness, be
added to his collection, whether it was an
ancient Egyptian idol taken from the tomb of
a mummy, a lamp from Pompeii, specimens of
Australian minerals, the paper currency of
various countries, or photographs of people and
places. And to very good use he turned his
studies, apart from his pulpit work. His large
fund of knowledge, and aptitude for unfolding
it in interesting form was vastly appreciated in


his Bible classes ; in his addresses to the various
societies in connection with the church; and
especially in his public lectures.
As a lecturer he was very popular, and
augmented the church funds frequently by his
efforts in this direction. The lecture most in
demand was the one on the “ Eureka Stockade,’’
in connection with which he was accustomed to
exhibit a large and interesting collection of
views of early Ballarat, models of mining cradles
and other appliances, photographs of the more
conspicuous early colonists, and many other
interesting mementos, among them specimens
of the paper money issued at the time of the
scarcity of the gold and silver currency, and a
copy of the “Goldfields’ Commission of Inquiry,”
bearing the autograph of J. P. Fawkner. By
means such as these, and by the introduction
of quaint touches of humour, peculiarly his own,
he succeeded in enchaining the attention of
his auditory.
He was always ready for work, and a
pleasing instance of this is recorded in the
pages of a little work entitled “To Lome and
Back, with Gossipings by the Way,’.’ by R. G.
M'Cutcheon, published in 1880. Describing
the scenery at Lome, the writer says, “Another
leafy chamber on the Erskine is the Sanctuary.
The river is split into two branches by a bank
of rocky soil, and the ferns and tall trees


growing on this island form a sylvan drapery,
which divides two pretty spots. On entering
the Sanctuary, it is seen to have been gradually
formed by the oft-repeated action of the winter
floods, the stream having cut its way by slow
and ever narrowing degrees down through the
solid rock. When the waters are low, as in
summer, they leave bare a great portion of the
shelving floor of the stream, from the margin
of which rocky ledges rise in a succession of
well-defined tiers, until the bank is reached;
and even a portion of this has been gradually
excavated by the action of the stream, so that
visitors can sit comfortably underneath and find
shelter. The rocky ledges make capital
seats for a congregation, and dip down towards
the minister in the most approved modern
fashion. One comforting thought is that there
is no debt upon the building, that the seats
are at least free, if only leaf cushioned, and
that there are no collections. The place is
exceedingly beautiful, and thither comes, every
fine Sunday morning throughout the season, a
very fair congregation. On the Sunday of my
stay we were in the unfortunate position of
having no minister appointed to conduct the
service. To our satisfaction, however, a minister
turned up, almost at the last moment, in the
person of the Rev. Mr. Yelland, of St. Saviour’s
Church of England, Collingwood; and though


he intimated that he had come down to rest
from hard ministerial work, and not to do it,
yet he very kindly consented to officiate. The
congregation and the place formed a picturesque
and pleasing sight. Mr. Yelland took his
stand on the margin of the Erskine, while in
front and on either hand, forming a semi-circle,
were the congregation, to hearken to the beauti-
ful and good old words of Psalm and prayer,
and join in the creed, the responses, and the
hymns. The latter were from Moody and
Sankey’s collection; and so the words of the
grand Hebrew poet of three thousand years
ago, and of the American revivalists of to-day,
were again uttered in unity of service by the
worshippers, and proclaimed the one immovable
foundation of all religious truth. The music,
if not elaborate, was very sweet, and its volume
was greatly added to by the peculiar confor-
mation of the spot. Mr. Yelland’s discourse
showed that it does not require a preacher to
be lengthy in order to be effective. In a
brief but suggestive outline of Christ’s early
life, and the homely scenes in which He was
accustomed to move from day to day, he
demonstrated the patience and the humility
of the Saviour, and therefore His perfect
ability to sympathise with and succour all those
who are ready to faint and grow weary while
endeavouring to walk uprightly under the many


burdens of life. The day, the place, the
simplicity of the open-air service, the novelty
of the whole scene, and the earnest words of
the minister, were all in harmony, and made
the service eminently refreshing, and, I have no
doubt, useful. If such deliciously pure air
could be breathed every Sunday, and such un-
conventionality of meeting secured, and such
short practical sermons preached, perhaps we
should see larger and more attentive congre-
gations than we do now—at all events, during
the summer.”
In his preaching, and speaking, and writings,
the Rev. Mr. Yelland was accustomed to go
direct to the point. When it was objected
that his Mission Church was neatly and com-
fortably fitted with all the appliances of a
well-appointed parish church, he retorted, “Is
this not what should be ? There are some
persons who would give to the poor a rancid
piece of meat instead of that which is whole-
some and sweet. If we wish to do good to
the poor, don’t let us give them the meanest,
dingiest churches we can build, but let us find
comfortable ones for them, in which they can
take a pleasure and a delight, and to which
they may well point with feelings of satisfaction
and pride.” He was an ardent advocate of
total abstinence, and hated shams. Thus he
wrote, “ Certain young ladies in the suburbs


went to a party. They were all wearing the
blue ribbon because it is fashionable. But
they were sinful enough to drink wine. We
hope that no one belonging to our Union will
claim relationship with either Mr. Formality,
who will do what others do, or Mr. Hypocrisy,
who pretends to be one thing and is another.’’
He could be humourously sarcastic sometimes.
“ Ophthalmia seems to be very prevalent,” he
wrote in his paper, The Record , “it has
attacked some people so severely that they have
not seen the collection plate, although it has
been held up very closely to their eyes. The
doctors call the disease ‘ Collectional Sabbatic
Ophthalmia!'” Or again, “Will some kind
friend explain how it is that so many people
get ill on Sundays, and on Mondays are re-
markably well ? An old man, who loved God.
said, ‘Ah, sir, the heart’s bad.’ Yes, this is
the secret of most of the Sunday illnesses,
especially of those severe pains that come on
about 10.45 * n morning, and about 6.30 in
the evening.” Though, as a scholar, he could
take delight in many abstruse studies and specu-
lations, his thoughts ran rather on the practical
side of life. Writing of the fondness of
children for the street, he said, “We sympathise
with the children, and believe that there must
be something wrong in the home that fails to
keep the children in it. They have no cheer


ful fireside, and no pleasant company. Mother
is busy and father indifferent, and no companions
are allowed in the house. What is the con-
sequence ? Children were born to be happy,
and if you try to make them otherwise they
will rebel sooner or later. To make the home
happy, parents should encourage their children
to love home by making them take an interest
in it. Set the children something to do. We
don’t mean work; but something to employ
their hands and minds about. Encourage
singing. Try to get a little instrument, and
never mind at first how badly it is played.
Urge your lads and girls on to success, until
everyone in the house can sing what the eldest
lad plays. Discord will soon give place to
harmony. Get a box of games; make them
if you cannot buy them. Encourage your
children to keep pets, such as birds. Don’t
prevent them from cultivating a little garden if
they wish to. Assist them in forming little
collections of curiosities, such as coins, fossils,
moths and butterflies, shells, autographs, grasses,
ferns and scraps. Many parents discourage all
attempts on the part of the little folk to find
pleasure such as this for themselves. No wonder
that the children find home dreary and run
into the streets to get there what is denied
them at home Don’t strangle any attempts
of your children to do as we have suggested,


St. Saviour’s Church Lectern.


by considering all such collections as rubbish.
To have your children around you ought to
be your noblest ambitionand of order in the
home he said, “ Many parents say, * How can
you have your house in order when there are
so many children to disarrange everything ?’
Give the devil his due. Children are what their
parents make them. If father be an untidy
man, and mother be a slatternly woman, little Willie
and Mary will be facsimiles of the old folks.
Children are great mimics. When father never
puts things in their places, and is always in a
muddle, little Willie will be a perfect chip of
the old block. When mother’s hair is never
tidy, and she has the knack of leaving the
wash-tub on the doorstep, and the broom on the
diningroom table, and the mop on the bed.
look out if you don’t see Mary the very picture
of her mother. We have seen some homes as
neat as a new pin, and there have been a
dozen dear little ones about; but there the
parents have been orderly people, and so, like
parents like children. Father and mother
never leave things where they ought not to be;
but everything has a place, and everything is
in its place. The example being thus re-
ligiously set, the consequence is, like the measles
or smallpox, it is catching. An orderly house
is, generally speaking, a happy one. What is
wanted is at once found, and nothing puts one


in a better humor than to be able to place
one’s hand immediately upon the thing wanted.
Father never gets out of temper when putting
on his shirt, for he always finds that the
orderly wife has not neglected the runaway
button —and what man can calmly contemplate
a shirt with the button gone ? We believe
Job himself would have lost patience had he
been thus tried. However, in the orderly home
a disaster such as this is unknown. Remember
that trifles disturb us more than great things.
An elephant laughs at a bullet, but is driven
mad by a mosquito. Attention to little things
makes or mars our earthly comforts.”


CHAPTER VII.
THE PRESENCE OF THE ANGEL OF DEATH.
“Shed not in vain the silent tear,
Nor weep with deep regret.
’Tis but the casket that is dead.
The gem is sparkling yet,"
gracious messenger of the Heavenly
Father found the incumbent of St
Saviour’s in full harness when he smote
him with the sword of death. On Sunday,
May 10th, 1891, he had officiated in the church
as usual, and though in somewhat delicate
health, no thought of the nearness of the end
of his earthly career entered the minds of his
beloved ones, or of those among whom he had
built up the living church. Yet in his own
mind there were premonitions. He preached
that evening from the Saviour’s words, “ 1 will
never leave thee, nor forsake thee ” —words
which to him had a deep significance, and as
he left the church to go home, he said to his
wife, “My work at St. Saviour’s is done.” He
was shortly afterwards seized with an attack of


internal inflammation, and an unsuspected abscess
on the liver was developed on the succeeding
day. But, for the time, no danger was antici-
pated, and though his friends gathered around
his bedside, they had every hope that he would
recover. His faith was bright in Christ. He
constantly repeated the words which had formed
the theme of, as it proved, his dying address
to his parishioners, those words so redolent of
hope and promise—“l will never leave thee,
nor forsake thee.” And to his brother, who
was watching by his side, he said, “It is a
beautiful theme. It is one of my favorites.”
Yet his mind was not free from anxiety.
He was leaving behind him a beloved wife and
family for whom he had been enabled to make
no provision. He had given freely of his sub-
stance to the poor and needy. He had sought
not riches for himself but souls for his Saviour.
The words of a writer previously quoted had
come true: “The man is poor, and probably
will always remain so, for his business in life
is not to amass riches.” Yet it was hard to
go away and leave his loved ones but a legacy
of care. This was the only shadow on his
spirit, and though he was not on earth, to see
the light shining behind the cloud he knoweth
well now as he moves among the shining throng
which surround the Throne in heaven that his
last wishes have been realized, and that the


deep sorrow felt at his passing away has
blossomed forth into a generosity which has
removed anxiety from, and given comfort to,
his widow and orphans. On the Monday even-
ing he entered into his rest, his last words
being a repetition of the words of the hymn—
“ Oh. happy day that fixed my choice
On Thee, ray Saviour and my God.”
From the Victorian Churchman we extract
the following obituary notice: —
“ The death of the Rev. C. M. Yelland in
the prime of life, and in the midst of his many
and arduous labours, has come with a shock to
all those who knew him. We learn that although
the reverend gentleman had for some time felt
unwell, yet there was nothing which would lead
his many friends to expect so sudden a termi-
nation to his busy and useful life. He had
taken the ordinary duties of his sacred office
on the Sunday preceding his death, and after
the conclusion of the evening service he was
seized with an attack of internal inflammation,
and the remedies used to subdue the inflam-
mation caused the rapid development of an
unsuspected abscess upon the liver, which
resulted in his death on the following Monday
evening.
“ His funeral took place on the Wednesday
afterwards. The church was crowded to excess,


and the coffin, covered with floral tributes from
many friends, was placed in the chancel, where
also were gathered a great number of the clergy-
The Rev. J. A, Ball, of Avoca, an old friend of
the deceased gentleman, conducted the service,
and briefly bore testimony to Mr. Yelland’s
sustained and self-denying labors in his Master’s
cause. During the service the sound of sup-
pressed sorrow could be heard throughout the
church, and bore witness to the sincerity of the
grief with which the pastor’s death is regarded
by the congregation. The streets were lined
by a great but orderly assemblage of onlookers,
and it will be many a long day before the
name of Charles May Yelland, for so many
years the minister of St. Saviour's, Collingwood,
will be forgotten.
“On Sunday large congregations assembled,
both morning and evening, when special sermons
were preached in memory of the late incumbent.
The Rev. J. A. Ball delivered a pathetic address
in the morning, and an eloquent and impressive
sermon was preached in the evening by the
Bishop of Melbourne. The church was crowded,
and hundreds were unable to gain admission.
The Bishop took his text from Hebrews xiii.,
7 (revised version) —‘ Remember them that had
the rule over you, which spoke unto you the
Word of God; and, considering the issue of
their life, imitate their faith.’ In the course


of a very able sermon (a resume of
companies this biography), His Lordship referred
in a touching manner to the noble and self-
sacrificing labours of the deceased, and bore
testimony to the great work which he had
succeeded in accomplishing at Collingwood.
At the close of the service, which will not
soon be forgotten by those who were present,
over two hundred persons partook of the Holy
Communion.
“ Mr. Yelland was himself a man of a quiet
and retiring disposition, and only those who were
brought into close contact with him could know
how great his abilities as a speaker and as an
organiser were. His work in those country
parishes in which he at one time ministered
lives to-day; and many to whom his ministry
was an honored means of grace will feel keenly
the loss which has been suffered by his sudden
death.
“We join with his friends far and wide in
sympathy with his bereaved family, to whom we
feel assured the long-tried promises with which
the husband and father comforted many troubled
hearts will not be vain, nor forgotten by the
wife and children in their sad hour of human
grief and loneliness.
“We have spoken of his death in human
terms as a loss, and yet we know that God
makes no mistakes, and when he calls upon


His servants to ‘come up higher’ it is best
for them and best for us.”
It but remains to be added that the
following week a numerously attended meeting of
parishioners and friends was held to express
respect for the deceased gentleman, and sym-
pathy with the bereaved ones. Mr. W. E. Morris,
the Registrar of the Diocese, who was one of
the first helpers Mr. Yelland had when he
undertook the charge of the parish, occupied
the chair, and spoke in the highest terms of
the faithfulness and energy of the deceased,
and of the loss which the diocese and parish
had sustained by his death. Resolutions were
passed expressing sorrow at the loss of the
pastor, and a committee was formed to collect
subscriptions for the widow.
The movement thus initiated was so highly
successful that a sum approximating to £ 1,000
was gathered in the course of a few weeks, a
sum which, with the proceeds from the sale of
his valuable library, will place his family in
comfortable circumstances, and will thus form
the most fitting tribute to the memory of one
who passed his life in doing good.


FUNERAL SERMON BY HIS LORDSHIP
THE BISHOP OF MELBOURNE.
“Remember them that had the rule over you, which spake unto
you the word of God; and, considering the issue of their life, imitate
their faith.”— Hebrews xm. 7 (Revised Version).
exhortation has reference to the departed
11 spiritual guides of the Hebrew Christians,
to whom this epistle was addressed.
Although they were dead they had not been
very long dead ; they had lived and laboured
and taught within the recollection of the first
readers of the epistle. In penning these words
the writer may have had in his mind Stephen,
the proto-martyr; James, the brother of John;
and James the Lord’s brother, the Bishop of
Jerusalem. And though, perhaps, his chief
reference was to such as had closed their course
on earth by martyrdom, his words are applicable
to any eminent saints who have endured to the
end, and are now at rest in Paradise. As our
assembling together this evening in such large


numbers is occasioned by the recent death of
your beloved minister, such a passage as this
may suggest to us thoughts in harmony with
the event. We are called upon in the text to
remember, to considtt, and to imitate the saints of
God departed hence.
I. “ Remember ” them, the writer says.
And this exhortation fully warrants such a
scriptural observance of Saints’ days as that
which our church provides for. These com-
memorations are enjoined in our Prayer Book,
not in order that we may glorify, worship, or
invoke the saints, but that we may glorify God
who made them what they were, and be stirred
up to follow their good examples. Surely none
will deny that by this means a great variety
and richness are imparted to our services. The
leading characters delineated in the Gospels
and in the Acts are thus brought under pro-
minent notice year by year, and are made to
furnish profitable illustrations of Christian practice ;
while on one special festival (that of All Saints)
we remember not this saint or that, but “the
great multitude which no man can number,”
of those “of whom the world was not worthy,”
including some, perchance, whom we ourselves
have known ; the memory of those holy lives is
still to us a living power. To reflect on the
multitude of the saved is of itself a salutary
and cheering theme.


11. “ Consider the issue of their life.” The
word “ issue,” signifying close or termination,
may point more particularly to the death of
martyrs. Most men die because they must.
Martyrs die because they choose death rather
than life; and that, not like the man who com-
mits suicide either in a fit of madness or
because he labours under a burden which renders
life intolerable; but martyrs- choose to die,
rather than be false to the claims of conscience.
They voluntarily submit to death, yea, to a
violent death, in compliance with their Lord’s
solemn saying, “If any man come to me, and
hate not his own life, he cannot be my dis-
ciple.” What food for contemplation there is
in the spectacle of one who, in the fulness of
strength and vigour, calmly faces the wild beasts
or the stake, or the burning fiery furnace,
rather than purchase life by the sacrifice of
religious principle! Well may we “ consider
the issue ” of such lives
But, on the whole, I think it well to give
a more general sense to the words of the text,
and to regard them as conveying an exhortation
to consider how nobly, how faithfully, the de-
parted saints finished their course of diligent
labours; how they endured to (he end, not
tossed about by divers and strange doctrines;
not yielding to the temptations of the world,
the flesh, and the Devil; but always found on


the Lord’s side, and fighting His battles; and
how they did this to the very close, and
could say with St Paul, “ I have fought the
good fight, I have finished my course, I have
kept the faith.” Of such persevering servants
of Christ, whether they die by a natural or a
martyr’s death, whether by a sudden visitation,
or by the slow ravages of disease, it may be
said, “ Precious in the sight of the Lord is
the death of His Saints.” Be it that “ fools
accounted their life madness, and their end to
be without honour, yet are they numbered with
the children of God, and their lot is among
the Saints.”
111. “ Imitate their faith.” Contemplation
should lead to action. Imitate; then we may,
and by the grace of God we can, imitate
saints.
In former ages a ceremony called the
Canonization of Saints was introduced. This
practice, besides being mischievous in other
respects, had a tendency to produce the im-
pression that saintliness is almost unattainable
by the ordinary Christian. Memory is prone to
forget the imperfections and shortcomings of
the departed, and to represent them as having
been all but faultless. Thus many men fall
into the habit of idealizing the saints. Painters
have fostered the illusion by depicting saints
with a supernatural halo around them, the effect


of which is to remove them still further from
the common walks of life. But this idealizing
of saints is not true to Scripture, or to the
facts of the case. Elijah was a man of like
passions with us, escaping for his life from
Jezebel, and imagining himself to be the only
faithful one left. A sharp contention arose
between Paul and Barnabas. Peter proved a
coward when he withdrew from the Gentile
believers through fear of the strict Jewish
party. Yet all these were saints. “We forget,”
says a pious writer, “ that even the holiest of
the saints, even the blessed Virgin herself,
only entered Paradise as forgiven sinners, accepted
freely on the sole ground of the sacrifice and
righteousness of the Lamb of God.”
What, then, is a saint ? He is one who
makes the will of God the rule of his life, and
whose great aim is to please and serve Him.
Such an one is a saint, though he may be com-
passed with infirmities, and has faults and
imperfections. Saints are not to be found only
in the spirit world, where they are free from
this mortal coil. They are to be found on
earth, perchance occupying the same place of
business with you, and kneeling by your side
in church, and beset by the same temptations
as you are. Perhaps you will hear one day
that a certain man among these is no more on
earth ; and then some fact about him may come


to light, which will convince you that he was
a saint, and you will regret that you had not
appreciated him while he was still fighting
life’s battle side by side with you.
But there is no doubt a special propriety
in the exhortation to imitate those saints whose
course is run, and for this reason; —there is now
no fear of their making shipwreck of faith and
of a good conscience. The ancients said that
no man was to be accounted happy till after
his death; for who can say what temptations he
may be subjected to, or what storms may rise,
even just as his barque seems about to enter the
haven ? But when a man has passed through
the gate of death, his life story is complete,
and if it was a life spent in the service of
the Lord Jesus Christ, it may be safely held
up for imitation.
Such a life was that which we have met
this day to remember, and for which we have
met to thank God. There are many present
who will remember your late beloved minister
as long as they live, and, I trust, hereafter in
a brighter world. Some may remember his
earnest teaching when they were scholars in
his Sunday-school, or were being prepared by
him for confirmation. Others may cherish his
loving counsels given to them when he joined
them together in holy matrimony. Others,
again, are recalling his Christian sympathy with


them in times of sorrow, and his faithful in-
structions when they were laid on the bed of
sickness. There may be some, also, who will
have cause through life to bless his memory
for words of solemn warning addressed to them,
which kept them from the paths of the des-
troyer when about to take some fatal step.
And all of you can bear witness to his earnest
ministrations in this church, to his unremitting
labours in this parish, and to the Christian
consistency of his life.
Very much of what has just been said
concerning him, whose loss we now deplore,
belonged to him as a minister of Christ. I
have regarded him chiefly in his pastoral
character; and some may ask the question, how
can we, as private Christians busily engaged in
secular avocations, imitate our departed guide ?
Probably the persons to whom the words of the
text were addressed were lay people like your-
selves ; yet they were bidden to imitate their
departed teachers who ‘‘ spake unto them the
word.” Now observe that the writer did not
urge his readers to imitate their spiritual guides
in the details of ministerial duty; but he says,
“imitate their faith?' All cannot be clergymen,
but all may, by divine grace, practice and
cultivate that grand principle which alone
brings forth the fruit of good works to the
glory of God. That simple faith, which is


“ the substance of things hoped for, the evi-
dence of things not seen,” can make us all,
whether we be clergy or laymen, useful servants
of the Lord Jesus.
Such a faith was the foundation of your
late pastor’s holy and fruitful ministry; therefore,
return home to imitate his faith, remembering
that “ all things are possible to him that
believeth.”
CRABB AMD YBLLAND, PRINTERS, PrAHRAN AND St, KILDA.
