

f I
fib*
jflitrcb Ulottuteknb
LAY AND SURPLICED LUNACY:
A LECTURE DELIVERED IN SYDNEY ON
SATURDAY, OCTOBER 25.
By DAVID BUCHANAN, Esq., M.L.A.
BRISBANE:
PUBLISHED BY WILLIAM ROWNEY, QUEEN STREET.
MDCCCLXXIX.




ptmt pountfltjuilw and ptjj and
Mb. David Buchanan, delivered an address on Saturday
night, October 25, at the Temperance Hall, Pitt-street, choosing
for his subject “ Mitred mountebanks and lay and surpliced
lunacy in contention with sound principle and common sense.”
The hall was crowded, and a large number of persons who could
not obtain seats congregated around the doors. On the platform
were Mr. John Davies, M.L.A.; Mr. J. Hurley (Hartley),
M.L.A.; Mr, J. Shepherd, M.L.A.-; the Hon. J. B. Wilson,
Messrs. I. Josephson, A. Cane, P. R. Holdsworth, W. Hezlett,
D. M'Beath, A. Newman, and others.
The Hon. John Stewaet, M.L.C., occupied the chair. He
referred to the establishment of the Public School System, and
to the satisfaction which it had given. He then remarked that
the people, the Parliament, and the leaders of public opinion
were satisfied with the schools, but had been recently told that
they were an imposition, and instead of being suitable for
children to be taught to read and write in, they were becoming
places in which children were taught immorality, lawlessness,
infidelity, and other vile things calculated to debase the standard


of human excellence. If the people had been suddenly plainly
told that they were all scoundrels and villains they could scarcely
have been more astonished. The Archbishop of the Roman
Catholic Church in Sydney thought to pacify them by issuing a
few more pastorals, but, in formulating his thought, be had been
greatly mistaken. Rinding this to be the case, he called to his
assistance a magnificent orator. It was a pity to see this gentle-
man under the circumstances, for many persons thought better
things of him. However, Mr. Dailey had responded to the call
made upon him, and his efforts had not been very successful.
The people would not be quieted until these reverend slanderers
could be called upon to prove the truth of what they alleged.
It surely was the duty of some members of the Legislature to
call for a select committee, and to summon those gentlemen
before them to ascertain on what ground their slanders were
based. It was impossible to say what these gentlemen might do
next. They might slander the people and their institutions still
further. If they could sustain the truth of their allegations* let
the State reform its schools. If they could not do so, let the
slanderers be punished. He would not detain them any longer,
but would call upon Mr. Buchanan to proceed with his address.
Mb. Buchanan, who was received with prolonged cheering,
said that they had no doubt observed that when Mr. Dailey or
Archbishop Yaughan expressed their views in public, they re-
ceived marked attention from the Press (hear, hear) the
leading journal awarding thirteen columns to the one and nine-
columns to the other—privileges which were out of all proportion
to the value of these gentlemen’s utterances. He did not anti-
cipate so much attention, but he would have the satisfaction of
conclusively proving, in the estimation of the meeting, the over-
throw of all that either of those gentlemen had ever said—(hear,
hear) —and he dared to say that they would have the extreme
satisfaction of passing, by the unanimous vote of that very


large meeting, a resolution entirely condemnatory of another
farthing of the State’s money being spent in the support of
Denominational schools. (Cheers.) Mr. Dailey had the char-
acter of being a man of great accomplishments. He did not deny
the truth of this, although his opinion was moderate in comparison
with that of other persons on the subject, and he always carried
with him the thought of the mental disability or defect that
accompanied every man who seriously believed in such a creed
as that of Home. He used the word “ seriously ” because thou-
sands of persons who pretended to believe in that creed did not
believe in it at all. The man who seriously stated that he
believed in the monstrosities of such a creed had a serious men-
tal defect about him. Mr. Dailey had opened his address
with an unmanly whine as to the treatment the Catholics
were receiving. He complained of their being insulted. (“ He
lies.”) He probably referred to criticisms on their religious and
political views. Now, whatever was exhibited for the acceptance of
human belief was subject the moment it was offered to the severest
ordeal of human criticism. Moreover, just in proportion as a man
was devoted to the truth was he bound to go forward on all
occasions, and with all his might denounce that which he believed
to be a wrong and unmitigated falsehood. There could not be a
more scandalous libel than that of Archbishop Vaughan’s, which
denounced the Public schools as seed plots of immorality, law-
lessness, and crime. A more scandalous falsehood was never
uttered. (Loud cheers.) Did Mr. Dailey for one moment
suppose that the fathers and mothers of the children attending
the Public schools could sit tamely by and listen to the foul,
false, scandalous libel which this Archbishop Vaughan had
launched at their heads. When Archbishop Vaughan uttered
this libel against the Public school system, he uttered a wicked
and unjustifiable lie. (Cheers ) He furthermore perpetrated a
gross and foul insult of the people who regarded the schools as
doing an incalculable amount of good in the country, and, there-


fore, he and those who believed in him need expect no quarter if
it came to that sort of thing.. If they commenced to use this
sort of language, and lived in such miserable glass houses, they
must not be surprised if their tenements were shattered. Another
remarkable feature in this extraordinary address of Mr. Dailey’s
was the references to toleration. * How dare any Papist take such
a word in his mouth ? That gentleman belonged to a Church
that was the most intolerant institution in the world —(hear,
hear) —a Church which, when it was in the majority, prohibited
all other worship than that which it taught itself. All Pro-
testantism was stopped in Home and in Spain by it, and
Protestants could not even bury their dead in the towns
there. And yet Mr. Dailey, with an insensibility to the character
of the Church to which he belonged, put the word “ toleration ”
in his mouth. (“.He does not know what it means ”) Suppos-
ing that New South Wales was a dependency of a Catholic
power, and had a Catholic Governor, and that out of the
seventy-two members of the Legislature only eight were
Protestants, what toleration would the people get then? The
Catholic Church would force its system down the people’s
throats, would prohibit their right to worship in their own way,
would put them down by violence. It had resorted to such
courses in other countries. Tracing Mr. Dailey’s utterances a
little farther, there was nothing he more horrified or shocked
at, than that gentleman’s eulogy of the Jesuits. Mr. Dailey in
one paragraph, after extolling their praises to the highest point,
stated that they had blessed every portion of the globe on wdiich
they had resided. (“ Cursed it he meant.”) Why every one knew
that “ Jesuitism ” had become an English word. And what did
it mean ? Fraud, deception, double-dealing, and being—(cheers)
and not only so, but the Jesuits adopted a system by which
every crime in the calendar, from murder downwards, might be
extenuated and pleaded as a virtue. (Hear, hear.) They had
made themselves detested in Europe, and Catholic Governments


had expelled them from Catholic capitals. "What could Mr.
Dailey say to that ? What could he say to their being expelled
from Rome, Austria, France, and Spain, not by Protestants, but
by Catholics—and expelled for their monstrous designs against
self-government and civil society. Their immoralities were so
gross that they could not be tolerated, and the result now of
their conduct was that they obtained no footing or recognition
in any capital in Europe. What could have taken hold of Mr,
Dailey when he could go before an intelligent Sydney audience,
and tell them that the Jesuits blessed every spot on earth
which they visited! It might be thought that he had ex-
aggerated the bad character of the Jesuits, in giving a descrip-
tion of it —he but spoke the opinion of enlightened Europe,
They had been destroyed in England, and would never get a
footing there again. He had uttered the opinions of two very
distinguished men on the subject. One of those was Mr. Thomas
Carlyle, who, beyond all doubt, w r as the most distinguished living
intellect. The other was General Garibaldi, the purest minded
public man in Europe. Garibaldi had addressed a letter to him,
which ran as follows :
Caprera, 16th March, 1870.
My dear Buchanan, —The principal obstacle to human progress is the
Romish priest, and those who think civilisation will destroy him easily, are
mistaken. An impure emanation of evil in the human family, he is like that
herb that spreads the more you apparently destroy it. Look at the Jesuits
—hated, insulted, trampled upon, and expelled from every city in Europe—
they are at present the absolute masters of the Pope and his imbeciles, and
in France they are all-powerful. It is a pity that a generous people like the
Irish should fail to see that the Romish priest is the main cause of their
abasement, their misery, and their degradation.
I trust that you will not suffer the presence of this human reptile in your
beautiful and virgin country; and if anyone says there must be liberty to
all, answer him that you will not give liberty to vipers, assassins, and
crocodiles —and the Jesuit priest is worse than any or all of these.
Yours ever sincerely,
G. Garibaldi.


The writer of that was not like Mr. Dallev. (Laughter.) He
had lived amongst Catholics all his life. He was an Italian who
knew what he was saying, and thoroughly knew the man he was
speaking about. He had found Popery to be the principal down-
drag of his country. Knowing the enormous insight he had had
into the Jesuitical system his language was not surprising
There was no mistaking his language, and there was no doubting
his knowledge. (Hear, hear.) He saw eighteen millions of his
countrymen unable to read and write. He saw r the priest con-
stituting the government, the judge, the prosecutor, the educator.
He saw the people growing up in absolute ignorance, and crime
going unpunished ; and he saw the priest taking bribes in order
that criminals might not be prosecuted. Well might Bishop
Vaughan quote the'statistics of Home under a secular Govern-
ment to show that crime was more frequent there than it used to
be. That gentleman forgot that crime was just beginning to be pun-
nished there. Hitherto the amount the Church received from bri-
gandage has been surprising. Kmety-nine out of a hundred
criminals used to go free. If a robbery w ? as committed half the
proceeds was given to the Church, and the Church took care that
nothing was said about the matter, while priestly prosecutors
saw that the criminals went free Garibaldi knew all this. He
saw his nation cursed and ruined by this Popery, and he devoted
his life to the active denunciation of priestcraft, wherever it
appeared. Then Carlyle, the man who would die sooner than
utter what was not’true —than whom no greater truth ever lived
—wdiose brilliant genius burned in England with all its original
lustre, who in other countries-"-France and Germany —was re-
ferred to as a man of the moat powerful and splendid intellect ;
—w r hat did he say F They had heard Mr. Dailey affirm that the
Jesuits blessed every spot they visited. They should now hear
what Mr. Carlyle had to say concerning them. When that


gentleman came to the subject of education, what did he say ?
That the Catholics constituted a third of the community, and
were entitled to a third of the education vote. Supposing that
to he the case, would the Catholics, from whose ranks was
supplied a half of the criminals of the country, pay half the cost
of maintaining them. (Laughter and cheers.) He did not think
he was out in this matter. He had had occasion to know some-
thing about it. Half of the criminal population was Roman
Catholic. Was the small Roman Catholic portion of the
community prepared to subscribe half of the police vote,
half of the gaol expenses, and half the cost of the ma-
chinery by which these scoundrels where brought to justice ?
The Press had argued and maintained a thousand times
that the State takes no cognizance of sect. People were
taxed as citizens; and it was the height of presumption and of
folly for any particular sect to say they wanted their share of
public money to spend as they liked. Such a proposition was
untenable and absurd and insolent. What would it lead to ?
Chinamen were pretty numerous in the colony, and they would
come forward and say that they would have their share of the
education vote whatever it w r as. The god worshipped in the
Chinese joss house was made of wood. That worshipped in the
Roman Catholic joss house w r as made of flour and water —(loud
laughter and prolonged cheers) —which was the most barbarous
of the two? The Chinese could not swallow their god —
(laughter) —but the Roman Catholic could swallaw and digest
theirs, and otherwise dispose of it. (Laughter.) Was he speak-
ing the truth, or was he not ? (“ The truth,” and cheers.)
Then other sects —the Buddhists, the Mahommedans, the Jews,
and even the Infidels, would arise—(hear, hear)—to claim their
share of the education vote; and, if Mr. Halley’s views were
carried out, the State would be subsidizing the Buddhists, the


Romanists, the Infidels, and all other conflicting and extraordi-
nary creeds with the money of New South Wales. A system of
public education was already established in the colony; and he
had always argued that it should be of a secular character only,
and that if the State imparts education it must be secular, and
secular only. And this did not imply that religion was to be
ignored. The State would say that it had the greatest possible
regard for religion, but that in a community like that of New
South Wales could not undertake to teach it. There were a
variety of sects ; therefore it w r ould propose to leave to the
Churches, the Sabbath-schools, and the parents of the children
the duty of imparting instruction in religion. If the community
was composed of only one sect he would still object to religion
being taught in schools, because schools were not proper places
for it to be taught in. The noise, the levity, and the bustle of a
schoolroom were not calculated to inspire religious feelings or to
promote religious principles. The accomplishments of reading,
writing, and doing arithmetic were incalculable advantages to the
community, and the State would rely upon the clergy of the
various Churches, the teachers in the Sabbath-schools, and the
parents to inculcate doctrines and belief in creeds in the minds
of the children. Could the common sense of the meeting or the
whole community suggest any more rational course ? (Hear,
hear.) This subsidizing of Denominational schools wmuld lead to
the subsidizing of every conceivable creed, and therefore it would
lead to a system so monstrous that men of intelligence could
not tolerate it with patience. Besides, State aid to religion
had been abolished in the colony —(hear, hear) —and that being
accomplished by Act of Parliament, and the fact being recognised
as one of the great political principles of the colony, how could
it be said that it was right to teach religion in the schools with
the money of the State ? If they agreed to such a course they


would be guilty of tbe most glaring inconsistency. These
Papists had no purpose or object in view but to grapple with a
third of the £345,000, the greater part of which, if they got it,
would go to line the pockets and stomachs of the priests. When
Ai’chbishop Vaughan’s first pastoral appeared, it evoked an
universal howl of disgust from one end of the country to the
other. It was torn to shreds, as he had said, by every paper in
the community. Public meetings were held, and speakers
volunteered to come forward to cut the ground from under the
Archbishop’s feet. The Archbishop in his next pastoral said—
and his insolence seemed absolutely sublime—(laughter.)—that
the reason for this commotion was, that the people were dazed by
the Catholic truths they had heard from him. (Loud laughter.)
The Archbishop must have estimated the intellect of the people
of this colony at a very low rate if he supposed that they did
not know what his system was. The people knew that the chil-
dren would leave Lis system of elaborate lies, and would leave his
schools too, if they were left to themselves. There was not a
greater obstruction to the people’s rights than the atrocity of
which this gentleman is the head here. (Cheers.) Archbishop
Vaughan thought that his effort to gain Bishop Barker over to
his cause was a mighty one. Bid he imagine that the Protestants
of this country were slaves, and did he forget that the leading
principle of Protestantism was the right of private judgment?
Bid he think that if he had twenty Bishop Barkers at his back
he would gain one Protestant worthy of the name ? Bid he
think that he was dealing with the slaves of Ireland ? Bid he
imagine that if he gained over Bishop Barker he would gain a
solitary adherent of that gentleman ?, He would make Arch-
bishop Vaughan a present of Br. Barker and of all that gen-
tleman’s clergy, and yet the whole of the people of the Church
of England would remain sound to the core. What was their


policy to be ? Archbishop Vaughan had spoken about fighting
the matter out at the elections. Let him do so. (Hear, hear.)
If these Papists went into Parliament and voted in a body at the
dictation o£ the priests, they dishonoured the Parliament, and
should be deprived of the franchise. They were not freemen,
and no slave should be allowed to enter a free Parliament. If
there was to he a struggle let free people organize, let them
unite.
—o —
Mr. J. Hurley, M.L.A., said that he had been entrusted with
a resolution which he believed would receive unanimous support.
It was as follows : —“That in the opinion of this meeting all
pecuniary aid from the State to Denominational schools should
be abolished without delay ; ” and he begged to move it.
Mr. P. R. lloLnswoßTii seconded the motion with much plea-
sure.
It was then put, and carried unanimously, with acclama-
Mr. J. Davies, M.L.A., proposed a vote of thanks to Mr.
Buchanan.
Mr. W. Hezlett seconded the motion.
Carried with acclamation.


Mr. Buchanan appropriately thanked the meeting for its kind
expression of opinion concerning his remarks, and he asked them
to return a vote of thanks to the chairman for his good offices
during the evening. His solicitation was heartily responded to,
and the meeting was then dissolved.
Reprinted from the Protestant Standard, November 1, 1879.


vin i p
BlgLlO
BRISBANE:
PRINTED BY G.*AND J. BLACK, EDWARD STREET.
1508
00074439




I
TRACTS FOR THE TIMES.
—*—••
Just Published —New Edition,
WITH PORTRAIT,
PRIEST, WOMAN, AND CONFESSIONAL;
Including the. Confessional in Australia.
Price 45.; posted, 4s. 6 d.
AURICULAR CONFESSION IN AUSTRALIA.
Price 9 d. ; posted, 10 d.
WHO IS CHINIQUY?
Important original documents, establishing the high character and standing
of Pastor Chiniquy when in the Church of Rome.
Price 9 d.; posted, lOd.
PAPAL IDOLATRY:
An Exposure of the Dogma of Transubstantiation.
Price Is.; posted, 15.,2d.
PAPAL DOMINATION :
Being the Present Claims of the Papacy.
Price Is.; posted, Is. 2d.
CHINIQUY versus HENNEBERY.
Price 2d.; posted, 3d.
ROME AND EDUCATION:
Being Archbishop Vaughan’s Pastoral, and Replies by Rev.
T. J. Jefteris, LL.B., and Canon Smith.
Price Gd.; posted, 7d.
COOK’S BOSTON LECTURES,
SIX VOLUMES, ON
Biology, Orthodoxy, Heredity, Transcendentalism, Conscience,
Marriage.
Price, each volume, 4s. Gd.; posted, ss. Gd.
CHURCH OF THE PERIOD;
Or, Priestcraft and the Confessional in the Church of England;
with the Author’s Reasons for leaving the Church of England.-
Price Is. ; posted, Is. 2d.
MITRED MOUNTEBANKS AND LAY AND SUR-
pliced Lunacy in contention with sound principles and
common- sense. Price Gd.; posted, 7d.
Stamps may be sent for any of the above to
WM. ROWNEY,
BGSEBB&J.Sa,
BRISBANE.
mu i ml
4439
