

modern poets,
a SATIRE;
TO WHICH IS PREFIXED
A dedication
TO THE MONTHLY, THE CRITICAL, AND THE ANALYTICAL
reviewers.
« Pindarum qui/quis Jiudet amulari .”
Printed jor J. RIDGEWAY, York-Street, St. James’s Square.'
M.DCC.XCI.




DEDICATION,
To the Authors of the Monthly, the Critical,
and the Analytical, Reviews.
o YE, who, high enthron’d, omnifcient fit.
And rule, fupreme, this wicked world of wit,
Who, mid the clouds, are veil’d from mortal view,
Like Jove in pow’r, and felf-created too!
/
Two urns befide your thrones have ever flood,*
<c 7 'he fource of evil one , and one of good”
One flows with warm edulcorative praife.
And one black cenfure’s bitter gall difplays.
From each the cup of mortal bards ye fill,
tc Bleffmgs to thefe , to thofe dtjlribute ill
A 2 Andt
Vide Pope’s Iliad, book xxiv.


[ iv ]
And oft ye mix them with fuch artful pow r,
We know not if the draught be fweet or four.
Oh ! in the nectar of the better vafc,
Dip, dip, your pens! the cordial drop of praife
Expand:—Praife, the fweet balm which never cloys,
Is ftill repeated with returning joys;
And, like the golden bough Eneas bore,
Tranfports the mortal to a heav’nly fhore.
But, if in vain the Mufe attempts to bring
The fruits of fummer with the blooms of fpring,
Oh! from my thirfty lips, indulgent, turn
Th’ungrateful current of the fable urn,
Left in th’oblivious ftream with fhame I fall,
And writhe in torture at the unmix’d gall.
As the fond lover ftill his mlftrefs fceks,
Whofe coy refcrve no dread denial fpeaks;


C V ]
But, frowning, finding, fhuns a rude embrace,
And only yields, to years of toil, her grace;
Or, as the hero, who, by glory fir’d,
Too bold, advanc’d, repuls’d, awhile retir d ;
When bright with arms, again, the campaign (bines,
Again his fcpiadrons leads, and ranks his lines
Thus I, ye arbiters of tafte! would claim
More than the lover’s blifs, or hero’s fame,
The Poet’s feelings in the mutual hour,
When the pleas’d Critic owns bis magic pow r.
MODERN




MODERN POETS,
A SATIRE.
U R modern poets, famiih’d into fenfe,
Rage not with luft of fame, but luft of pence.
See them a rival’s envious glances dart
Upon the huckller’s box and huckfter’s art I
Crouding to London, as to fome great fair,
Pedlars, and Jugglers, Andrews, Cheats, repair;
Numerous as leaves in Vallombrofa ftrown,*
Or ftinking mack’rel heap’d in Margate’s town.
f Thick as autumnal leaves that ftrew the brooks
In Vallombrofa, where th’Etrurian (hades.
High overarch’d, embower, Milton.


As thwarting multitudes their force combine,
’Tis hard for genius in this age to fhine
So oft upon the torrid zone’s domain,
Where infeds thrive, tumultuous, o’er the plain;
Should there a taper break its glowing light,
The living clouds diffufe a fudden night;
Whole tribes, defcending on the vengeful wing,
Enrag’d, and mingling, round the taper fpring.
Where can I fly for refuge from the mufe !
Th’Exchange, the Inns, the Court, nay e’en the flews,
All rave alike ! the Venus of the flreets,
In verfe Ovidian , her betrayer greets.
•In feme countries the infeft-tribes are fo numerous that they almoft dark-
en the air; a candle cannot be lighted without their conflantly flying up-
on it and putting out the flame. Goldsmith.
See


See Phoebus clouded, by a learned gown!
Immortal Bards , who never fhall be known.
Addifons , of Spectators unperus’d,
And Shakfpeares too, whole plays have been refus d.
All, all, can rhime ! e’en men who cannot fpell,
Who meafure verje in meafuring out their ell.
All at 'the India-hou/e their transfers quit,
And value India flock, much lefs than wit.
How many a poet at a counter perks!
What flutt’ring orators in bankers clerks!
What dirty Garricks , yet apprentic’d, roar!
What mlleners on their own novels pore!
Never a Dilworth for a Virgil quit;
And learn, by Corins fate, the fate of wit.
renown’d in the delicious arts
Of clearing jellies and of creaming tarts;
Whofe


[ IO ]
Whofe Ovens twelve Herculean bakers bleft;
Around whofe fhop the crouds eternal preft.
While neighbouring men of pafte, with envy faw
His beaux and belles, and phyfic, trade, and law.
Pompous as Birch the paftry-cook, would fwell;
He fmil’d and talk’d —meanwhile they eat —’twas well
He grows fo rich, the man pretends to wit;
And Corin (for his fins} fome verfes writ.
To try their credit all the Mufes hafte j
Their praife he took as flerling for his pafte.
To friends, to bakers, Corin would recite;
Th’aftonifh’d crouds for ever take their flight!
Children with cuflards Corin bribes to hear,
To bear his epic’s credit for a year!
None
* A paftry-cook in Cornhill, who, however, to do him but bare juftice,
is not guilty of writing verfes, or even of reading them.


C 11 ]
None but the Mufe’s famifh’d fons remain.
Exhauft his ovens, and extol his vein.
Unpaid by all his creditors demand
Their pay!—The men of profe pour forth their band.
Corin in prifon raves of <c Mufe and fame,
Give him but Trujlers rhymes* the man’s the fame!
“ Tie mind no walls can circumfcribe” he fwears;
Invites his friends —they fneer—whereat he flares.
The rhyming trader fees, ’twas paft a doubt,
Corin in prifon’s not like Corin out.
Yet once with fear they ftruck the learned lyre,
And Genius mark’d from impotent defire.
B 2
• This luminary of the church hath compiled a wretched diclionary of
rhymes; and, having long pradifed the nefarious arts of a literary pirate.
Heals and lives. N.B. I prefer his filler’s to any of his own com-
pofitions. Mifs trufier (mere Trader as Ihe is) is yet too modeft to dabble
in ink.
And


[ » ]
And this their creed. That never art could teach
The haunted Helicon’s fweet hills to reach,
If natal flars no heavenly influence rain;
The feeds of fancy fcattering in the brain.'
To a deaf Phoebus the rafli witling fings,
And the wing’d horfe denies to fpread his wings.
But ah! with Wolcot try’d, how guiltlefs thefe !
TVolcot who deigns difgracefully to pleafe.
As once Vfipafian tax’d the human dung,
From the Town s filth his ill-got treafures fprung,
* * i »
With tafte obfcene his fordid hoards admit
Old tales*, new lies, the excrements of wit!
* Thefe old tales are nor meant for thofe which are ingenioufly revived,
and which with their flaflies fet the table in a roat. Such are ever welcome!
but thefe are of the kind in which the loquacious old gofiip and the invidi-
ous old maid delight.
Though


Though the half-crowns on Kearfley s counter fwell,
Genius with 'Titus cries <c I hate their frnell!
Not dry wheels creaking; amorous Cats that meet;
The clafli of crafhing carts in Watling-ftreet;
Jew brokers jabbering; Nymphs who fcream their joys
When fafe at Billingfgate arrive the Hoys, *
At London’s tavern, not that noife malign,
When for the rights of men-—we met to dine.
The Welchman’s French, the Pathos of the Dutch,
Like his rude rumbling rhimes my ear can touch.
Oh let no more the ftudent wafte his prime,
Grow pale and feveriih o’er fome ftubborn rhime;
Gur Tafle reje&s the fruits in gardens hung,
Melting like ne£tar on a thirfty tongue,
His fruits poetic, ever rais’d in hafte,
With crude afperities that fhock the tafte,
With


C *4 ]
With harlh-fharp-bitters fct the teeth on edge,
As four as wild crabs on the common hedge /
'Yet his facetious Mufe oft pleas’d I hail.
Her novel fimile, her curious tale ;
The cafy grace that Hill provokes the fmile;
The quaint remark; the fharp yet laughing ftyle.
The wit, that doubly pleas’d, as fatire times,
The naivete of Fontaine , in Butler s rhimes,
But oft th unfinew d verle is void of force;
And Critic candour feels the humour coarfe.
Genius with magic pen ftill writes his jells;
His freed: humour delicacy zells.
Read in the country, and carefs’d in town,
See IVoicot rais’d, the idol of renown 1


[ i 5 ]
Like ancient Egypt we too oft have bow’d
To a mere monkey, turn’d into a God ;
Our judgements ( let me own )fo fenfelefs too t
Divinity in ranked onions view.
The poifon’d fweetnefs of the public praife
His brain intoxicates, his honour fways;
With Pitt he tried Churchillian war to wage,*
The empty thunder burfl: with harmlefs rage.
Thus the Buffoon attempts the tragic art;
So guick once whin’d in tyrant Richard’s part.
Gnats,, that can teize, no afpic’s venom bring,
Nor wafps, howe’er they rage, like fcorpions ding.
* Vide his poetical epiflle to a falling minider! with an ode of . Horace
lurlefauedl Peter's warmed admirers confefs this to be the mod powerlefs of
his produdions. They are not aware that when he attempts to write well he
cannot help writing ill. The finer touches of a portrait are not to be caught
by the fign-pofi dauber, whofe likenefles however do well enough for the mob.
My fentiments may appear lingular, to fome per chance (hocking, but, as
Bentley faid, I fet them down mo periculo .
When


[ I« ]
When Charlotte s virtues madly he would faife,
Yet Meffalina for each virtue praife
When drunk to treafon, reeking from the flews.
The wine’s black lees infpire his belching Mufe,
When rolling, raving, on the midnight floor,
Cries <c thefe are virtues that fublhmly foar /”
And when with impious wit I fee his Mufc,
Not Lords and Dukes , but Heavn itfelf abufe !f
Too young —I feel foflie warmth for virtue yet,
And in the rafcal all the wit forget.
• If I were afked for an inftance of the depravity of this age, I know of
none greater than the eulogiums bellowed on a certain Queen. Mr. Burke ,
with fome puerile fcmiments concerning her character, has blemilhed a very
beautiful compofition. Such are the whom the Wolcots would rejoice
to lee on the throne ; that they might indulge “ their tun of man” on the
moft infamous debaucheries, and accumulate wealth on the ruins of a nation;
+ Vide Expoftulary Odes, page 12, the virtuofo’s prayer, and other nu-
merous paffagesj where, when he has exhaufted his coarfe railleries on hu-
man characters, he pours the dregs of his wit on the holinefs of his Creator.
When


When a fair Miftrefs bleffes with her love,
To feek fome firumpet who the ftreets would rove ?
Who, when the Attic Mufe is all his own,
Can praife the common lib’ller of the town ?
While Pope and Boileau my rapt bofom warm,
Like me, he mufl improve , e’er he can charm.
Peter! thy rapid rhimes I envy not;
No ! not a hundred lines without a blot 1
Thy Mufe along th’unrafur’d page proceeds,
And ev’ry month a little volume breeds *
Much like that fertile dame whofe tale flie penn’d,
It looks like “ pigging” more than breeding, friend !*
Immortal Matters! who ne’er blufli’d to tell
Of time and pains, the coft for writing well.
C Too
* See in his Subje&s for Painters his humorous talc of“ The Gentleman
and his Wife,” page 87,


[ IS ]
Too modeft, not lome model to purfue,
\
Too bold, that model ftavifhly to view.
Hence Genius loves the drefs of Attic tajle ;
Correct yet daring, luminous yet chafte;
Exa6t with purity, with clolenefs clear;
The verfe harmonious though the truth fevere.
1 hus Horace fports in Popes enlighten’d page,
/ind *yuv nal burns in Churchill*s fervid rage.
Immortal matters I ye arraign d each crime,
Not for the vicious vanity of rhime;
9 Twas holy hate of vice and folly gave
The ardent verfe that iham’d the fool and knave.
Yet he, who only knows to chide in verfe.
Does half his talk, and of each half the worfe;
For the fame hand that Satire’s fteel unflieaths
Hangs Virtue s modeft brow with fragrant wreaths.
Immortal


[ 19 1
Immortal Mailers ! not with Nature’s ftore
Content, you feven times purg’d of lead the ore,
The thought Hill lifted, Hill refin’d the ftyle,
And held unweary’d Art s laborious file.
But not alone Art’s polilh’d touches Ihine,
Truth, facred Truth, illumin’d every line.
Her rigorous hand the faithful pidure drew.
And fatire mull be fear’d, when fatire’s true.
Alarm’d, the horrid portrait as they blame,
7 heyblujh, and fo infcribe it with their name.
’Twas thus great Churchill bade controulment fpeak,
And blanch’d with guilty fears the villain’s cheek.
Flatting refledion on the mental eye,
See Sandwich blutt !-and haplefs Hogarth die!
And Pope , farcaftic in his poignant llyle,
Exhal’d in wit the vapours of his bile;
C a With


[ 20 •]
With glowing Ipirit through his Attic page,
He hifles Cibber to a future age.
Debarr d from proud preferment’s crouded gate,
From mines of commerce, and from feats of (late;
Pale as fome failing Penitent, and thin!
Hunter could ledure through thy glafly fkin:
What man of Genius , is thy fplendid prize ?
Thou tread’fl; where Bafilijls fhall dart their eyes.
To be fucccfsful is to be a foe ;
It is the funfhine makes the adder glow.
While Eunuch Critics , to their watch ailign’d,
Are faithful out of envy to mankind—
“ Sure, to write ill may juflly give offence —”
But, to write well, why fhould it more incenfe ?
Mark


[ 21 J
Mark Bramble s fate !* a poet of renown,
Whofe verfe fo long amus’d th’ungrateful town.
A grealy Lexicon, his vein of wit,
And then a Tragedy!—unaded yet —
This the foie wealth the Bard his own could call;
Or, rather, Bramble had no wealth at all.
With loads of fterling verfe he trudg’d to town;
Like Jacob made a pillow of a Hone;
For, Hill he found, where’er he fought abode,
Mere Genius has no credit on the road.
After pale fafts, completed on the plan
Of rigid Mahmud's monthly Ramazan,
The Bard arrives—with Grecian foul he dares
The hege of Trojan managers, ten years ..
’Tis
* The late ingenious Mr. M‘Donald, under the fignatureof Matthew
Bramble, long afforded the town much entertainment. He did not leave any
thing behind him but his wife and children.


t «■ ]
’Tis play’d at length. The flar that rules the Pit
Has long refus’d to (Line on fenfe or wit.
A weeping farce, a pantomimic piece,
A filly op’ra, had not fail’d to pleafe.
Nothing lik e poetry, in this vile town,
So tames and wears the proudefi. fpirit down.
See him refign his elegant defin es.
Th’impetuous wifh for fame, the mental fires;
For bread ,he gives the fcandal-loving time
Each miracle of wit, each pointed rhime.
How few the intellectual toil can rate.
And, ftarv’d, he envies the mechanic’s fate.
Curling his doom that left his Highland fare %
(Oatmeal and milk, the fun, and wholefome air.)
A friendly fever took the Mufe’s fon,
And did, what famine fcarcely left undone.


C a 3 ]
See Phoebus trembling on th’Aonian hill,
The clamorous Fair furround —en defhabille ;
Like flocks of geefe Saint Michael’s day that blefs.
Not lefs their numbers, nor their cackling lefs.
What troops of Druidejfes now aflail,
Their meteor-hair ftreams round their vifage pale, \
All grim with fnuflTtheir nofe, and black their length of nail !)
Once Rome's own heroes quit with dread our land,
Nor bore the horrors of the female band\
Legions, till then unconquer’d, heard and fled;
For, who can combat when they ling you dead?*
By Magazines be-prais’d, fee Mifs y with Ml,
Invades the realms of verfe with defperate quill.
* For an account of the Roman invafion at the ifle of Mona, and their
Bight at their wild appearance , and the noife of the recitations of the poelefles
that age, my fair readers mayconfult Hume,
Some


[ *4 3
Some riddle firft indites the tuneful maid,
Or in acrojlic wakes the vocal fhade.
Through the bright fcale of verfe her Mufe afcends,
Begins in riddle, but in epic ends.
So, if the wintry blaze 100 they fit,
(The wintry blaze as dangerous as wit,)
Some little f parky <c a trifle light as air*
Kindles along the apron of the fair.
Her filken petticoat, her linen gown,
Buffont, and cap, and flays, and furs, and down,
Stuff'd rumps, and greafy wool, and bones of whale,
Flame out, and, crackling, catch the fanning gale.
Now far and wide the conflagration firays,
Till all my lady trembles in a blaze.
Bold is his talk, who now adventurous fhews
How others fail; how verfe difguifes profe.


[ 3
And that ten feet, with rhimes exa& and tcrfe,
May form anejfay , all in profe , not verfe.
When Hayley gives, with claflic charms I own,
The traits that mark cc the children of renown j* *
Profufe, the ornaments of verfe he flings.
And pleafing turns and fubtle graces brings;
Polifli’d, repolifli’d, fee thVerlabour’d line
(The thin gold wire) elaborately fliine.
Pow’rful his critic {kill, acute his tafte,
But what, of tuneful Art, an endlefs waftel
A hard unnatural birth, that woeful ftrains,
And not th’effed of poetry, but pains.
What fplendid trifles! what a low fublime I
To wed with honeft profe the foppifli rhime;
But the ftern maid, the flippant beau to fhame,
Difdains his gewgaws, and preferves her name •


[ »« ]
No glowing images, entrancing, roll,
Deliriums of the fancy-kindled foul!
More poetry i n johnforis profe we glean,
When high his fancy decorates the fcene,
Than in that llyle that neither ebbs nor flows,
No faults, no beauties, —foon we yawn, we doze.
So poppies, pillow’d in a beauteous heap,
Are fine to look at, but foon lull to fleep.
Had Arifiotle criticis’d in verfe,
Though juft his fentiments, his di&ion terfe,
We ne’er had read, till one more fage had rofe*
And, pleas’d, by turning all his verfe to profe.
But better thus to fee our labours pour.
With cats and puppies, down fome common fewer,
Than


[ *7 ]
Than for the fleet-ditch Naiads quit the Nine,
And dare the pillory in every line.
See hardy IVolcot long that feat to climb,
Efcapes, and fears it is for want of crime !
Infane of wit, no decency can awe 1
’Tis not for want of crime , but want of law.
Come, let me drag thee to the public fight,
Let thy foul blacknefs feel the fearching light.
TVolcot through depths of infamy can wade.
Nor has one blufli a timid guilt betray’d.
No foft compunctions bafer minds can feel!
As is the face of brafs, the foul’s of fteel;
D 2
* The publiffier of Peter is intimately acquainted with thefe Powers,
and refides in their precinft. If the report is true which I now hear, this
man can fin no more !—He was, in every refpeft, the modern Curb, Peter
will find it difficult to meet fo congenial a difpofuion in apubliffier.
Sweet


C ]
Sweet Madefy! how pure thy glowing joys!
Nymph of the beating breaft, the filver voice!
Sever’d from him, who bafely founds his praife
On fouls unmanly by unmanly ways.
Who Ipares nor feeble age, nor riling youth;
Who tells no truth, but the malignant truth.
Who calmly plots around the friendly bowl
As the warm wine refleds the naked fouh
Who puts a family’s affairs in verfe;
And, juft to Ihew his talent, will afperfe.
With Hander on the virgin’s foul will prey ;
And by the oath of friendlhip will betray.
Whole tongue fo loudly fpreads the wide offence*
Yet is fo filent in his own defence.
Who tells the oldeft lies the neweft ways.
And feeks for fhame “ as good men feek for praife.”


[ -9 ]
To pour the ftreams from Fadion’s turbid fpring,
* ' •*
To mock his God, and to defame his King,*
Such are the arts the public ear to hold ;
Such is the putrid link that teams with gold!
Should I, like him, nor man nor God revere.
But in one daily courfe of guilt appear ;
If all my tendernefs of blood Ihould fail.
And, like a demon, I but knew to rail.
Then heap on me, oh folid earth, thy load I
Snatch me from man, and hide me from my God.
♦ The atheift Aretin puflied his temerity fo far as to lampoon his God in
an epigrammatic epitaph; perhaps, imitating him, (fuch are his models of
imitation !) Peter would turn into ridicule the moft aweful of Beings. In-
ftances of this kind have already been pointed out. Should then his infamous
treatment of the monarch excite our furprife ? Such are the flanderers
who will arife in a mild reign; it is the gentle heat of the fun that impreg-
nates filth, and awakens into being the noxious infeft. On a Roman
Wolcot , Augujlus thus writes to Tiberius . « Let us permit that wretch to
“ fP eak evil of us; is it not fufficient he cannot do it? God himfelf is not
“ Altered the blafphemies of the impious,” Let us apply this with
truth.


[ 30 3
An artificial fame our Poets raife,
■With zeal they praife, for ’tis themfelves they praife.
Laura Maria fings fweet Arno s powers.
And Arno the foft dews of flatt’ry Ihowers.
Yenda to Evelind , and, back again,
Fair Evelind returns th abundant drain.
■’Tis “ Mufe immortal' —’tis « 0 ’
’Tis “ your mellifluousftrain' —“
With fuch profound refpe£t, fo grave a face,
They treat themfelves, fome fwear they’re Popes and Grays ;
Congenial fouls, the Mufe can wifli no ill!
May every Bavins find his Mesvius ftill!
As one who in the Park fees “
Whofe “ rills" are kennels, and vvhofe ‘ ‘Jlorms arefliowers,
* All thefe are immortal writers, who fill up an idle column in the news-
papers. For this we might forgive them , but they have lately become m-
fufferable by their continually Havering each other with the mod d.CguK.ul
and hyperbolical encomiums.
Whofe


[ 3« ]
Whofe <c Alpine height ” is Highgate’s toilful fteep,
And Greenwich-mount cc the lover s dreadful leap f
Thus little Nature’s awful forms appear,
To fuch lean wits Minerva fcorns to rear.
None yet a fcribbling privilege pofleft,
And 1 may make wafte paper with the beft.
Yes! be it known! while thefe indulgent times
Alford me follies, I can give them rhimes ;
And Satire s meaning line is worth whole loads
u ■
Of Laura s fomicis and of Arno s odes*
Come, honeft Satire! hear thy fuppliant’s call!
Come, tinge my verfes with fome little gall.
On this proud the town, with gilded wing.
Like fome keen gad-fly , point my goading fling.


[ 3 2 ]
Tie horfe , though generous and of noble blood,
So fed, fb pamper’d, with luxurious food!
Sees all his vigour in foft eafe decay,
Nor bends his nerve, nor gives his limbs to play ;
But, if awaken’d by the poignant pain.
He rears his arched neck, and fhakes his graceful mane I




