

February 8, 1883.
■
.
<z% m
,’4k>
—gffgfiiir
%vWF
.
'stMaifcf :
MODERN BEEKEEPING
?ern-
r m
.A. PAPER
MR. A. E. BONNEY,
Read Before
The S.A. Chamber of Manufactures (Incorporated), on
W. K Thomas & Co., Printers, Grenfell Street.


■
,«, r


©Sill pillliFllGs
[Reprinted from the “Adelaide Observer,” February i 6, 1884,]
A “ Gossip Meeting” or Bee Convention was held at the Chamber of Manufacture,
on Friday evening, February 8, under the presidency of Mr. Samuel Davenport, J. P,,
for the purpose of listening to remarks by Mr. A. E, Bonney upon the subject of
modern beekeeping, and indulging in a gossip or discussion upon beekeeping in general,
with which intent all persons interested were cordially invited to attend. A proof of
the great interest that is now felt in this matter was afforded in the large number of
persons who attended, the room being full beyond all sitting accommodation, and
several had to stand during the whole evening.
Mr. S. Davenport introduced the lecturer in a very happy manner with one of
his instructive speeches, alluding to the valuable services rendered to mankind by
some of the members of the insect world, particularly instancing the silkworm and the
honey-bee, and referring to the wonderful advances made in our knowledge of the life-
history and the management of bees during the past few years.
Mr. J. F. Conigrave read the paper in the place of Mr. A. E. Bonney, as
follows :
Introduction. —ln the following paper Ido not intend to give such descriptions
of the appliances required in modern beekeeping and the methods of using them as
would prove sufficient to enable a beginner to successfully embark in this useful and
interesting industry, because, in the first place, as this is purely a gossip meeting it
would take up far too much of our time ; and, in the second place, as every beekeeper
must have a good manual on the subject, I think there is hardly any necessity for my
doing so. Moreover, hives and the complete requisites for modern beekeeping have
been brought here for your inspection, and I am sure that this will enable you to
understand their construction and use better than any written description. What Ido
propose is to show you some of the advantages to be derived by adopting the movable
comb hive, and other modern inventions, which enable the skilled apiarist to make the
best use of the wonderful instincts of the honey-bee, trusting that it may help to
remove some of the prejudices at present held by many beekeepers. Also, to give
beginners the benefit of my observations with regard to the treatment of bees in
South Australia. The numerous questions I have received relative to the working of
the movable comb hive are a gratifying proof that some of the beekeepers in the
colony are at last waking up to the fact that there is a better system of management
than that which is generally adopted. Considering how well adapted our climate is
to the culture of the honey-bee, it is strange how little has been done towards
improving the rude system generally in vogue, and I can only explain this apparent
apathy by supposing that most beekeepers are not aware of the advantages possessed
by the movable comb hive.
After the paper has been read I shall be pleased to explain any doubtful points, or
answer such questions as may be suggested by my remarks.
How to Begin Beekeeping. —The first thing for a beginner to do is to study some
reliable work on the subject, so as to understand the habits of bees and how to
manage them. If possible visit a successful and intelligent apiarist, and watch him
when at work among his hives. It is useless for any one to start scientific beekeeping


without having some knowledge of the use of a frame hive. 1 have known several
instances where a movable comb hive has been tried and condemned as worthless
beaause the possessor did not know how to use it.
The ordinary beekeeper will find it advantageous to begin with one hive only, and
when he has thoroughly mastered that he can then get as many more as may be required.
The Best Books for Beekeepers. — l am frequently asked, “whichare the best
books’on beekeeping?” and will therefore take this opportunity of giving my opinion on
the subject. After reading nearly all modern works, lam more than ever convinced
that “ Quinby’s New Beekeeping,” by J. C. Root, is the most useful and trustworthy
for the practical beekeeper. By following the clear and simple directions given in
that book, I was able to make movable comb hives and to work them with much
satisfaction. “The Beekeepers’ Guide,” by A. J. Cook, is an excellent work, and
should find favour with all those who wish to study the natural history of the honey
bee. A new edition was published last year, so that it contains all the most recent
discoveries and improvements. Both of the above books are American publications,
those who prefer the English system should get “The Apiary,” by Alfred Neighbour.
Our German friends will no doubt rely upon Dzierzon’s “Rational Beekeeping.”
This work is written by one of the greatest of beemasters, a man who has made some
valuable discoveries. For the student of apiculture there is “Langstroth on the Hive
and Honey Bee,” a book which, although out 'of date, is unquestionably the best
written Bee book in the English language. Every apiarist should read at least one of
the many excellent Bee papers now obtainable so as to keep himself well up in the
subject. The New Zealand and Australian Bee Journal, published at Auckland,
ought to become popular in Australia,
The Movable Comb Hive. —The most important of all aids to successful Bee
culture is the movable comb hive. It was invented by the Rev. T. T. Langstroth, of
America, about the year 1851, and in such a practical form that it at once revolu-
tionized Bee keeping. It speaks volumes for the value of Mr. Langstrbth’s invention
when we consider that some of the most successful specialists of America are now
using his hive, and that even the details remain unchanged. Mr. Langstroth is still
living, but owing to failing health he has been for many years unable to take an
active interest in a pursuit which owes so much of its present importance to his
genius.
Advantages. —ln a movable comb hive the bees build their combs in frames made
of four thin slats of wood nailed or dove-tailed together. Each frame with its comb
can be lifted out of the hive and inspected without difficulty. The condition the bees
are in can be seen at a glance, and when they diminish in numbers the cause can be
readily discovered. Weak colonies can be strengthened by exchanging an empty
comb for one full of brood and honey taken from a strong colony. The number of
drones in the hive can be reduced by allowing only worker comb to remain. Swarms
can be made at pleasure by dividing ; or, if natural swarming is preferred, it is easy
to determine when the first swarm will issue. (Those persons whose business prevents
them from being always near their hives in spring will find this control over swarming
a great convenience.) When the combs are full of honey, the honey can be thrown
out with the extractor, and the combs returned to the hive to be again filled by the
bees. If comb honey is required the surplus may be taken in boxes, and in such
a manner that they can be handled without any danger of breaking the delicate combs.
I think there is nothing which gives the beekeeper more pleasure than removing a
set of boxes well filled with snow-white honeycomb, and therefore box honey is sure
to become popular in South Australia. With practice all these advantages can be
obtained and operations performed without the operator receiving a sting, or causing
injury to a single bee. I would here caution the inexperienced not to expect that the
mere substituting a movable comb-hive for an ordinary box-hive will lead them to
success ;it requires something more than that. The superiority of the movable comb
hive lies in its giving us complete control over the bees, but this is lost if we do not
know how to use it intelligently.


I 5 )
Which Hive to Get. —To decide upon the best hive Is generally perplexing to
beginners. There are a great variety of hives in use by the successful apiarists of the
day, but most of them are made upon the same principle. In selecting a hive it
should be remembered that ours is a hot climate, and therefore the hives which have
proved to be the best in Europe and America might not answer so well here. After
studying descriptions of nearly all the hives of any repute in the world and testing
several in my own apiary, I have decided to adopt the “Quinby” as being the best
suited to my purpose. Perhaps all beekeepers would not succeed so well with this
hive, and therefore I shall call particular attention to the “ Langstroth ” hive, which
has received the hearty approval of most of those who have tried it. In America the
Langstroth hive threatens to become the recognised standard, and in New Zealand it
has proved a great success. That it will also answer in South Australia is, I think,
proved by the results that have already been obtained here. A hive should be as
simple as possible, with no corners or crevices into which a bee cannot go. All the
hives in the same apiary should be exactly alike, and so well made that the parts are
interchangeable. To ensure this, the wood of which they are made requires to be well
seasoned. Hives should be painted to preserve them from the weather and to give
the apiary a cheerful and neat appearance. Light colours are most suitable.
Shade and Ventilation. —In summer the hives should be shaded from the sun.
The manner of doing this will depend upon the arrangement of the apiary. With the
Quinby hive I simply place a large paling roof over each, which also serves to throw
off the rain in winter. Ample ventilation is no doubt of more importance than
shade. The loss of honey through the want of ventilation is much heavier than is
generally supposed.
Standard Frame. —The beekeepers in England have wisely adopted a standard
frame, so that, no matter how many different kinds of hives there are, the frames are
all interchangeable. If the same thing could be done in this colony it would be
satisfactory, but lam afraid it is hardly practicable. However, now is the time to
settle questions of this kind, and thoughtful beekeepers should give this matter of a
standard frame their careful consideration, Shallow frames appear to be better
suited to our hot summers than deep ones, but it is doubtful whether the difference is
sufficient to warrant any especial alteration. With shallow frames the bees build
their combs right down and fasten them to the bottom pieces, thereby making them
much stronger. Shallow frames can be handled much more rapidly without injury to
the bees.
Honey Extractor. —Of all modern inventions in beekeeping the honey extractor
comes next to the movable comb hive in importance. By the use of the extractor the
apiarist can secure nearly double the amount of honey that he could get in combs,
and, moreover, he has entire control over swarming. When uncapping the cells of
the honeycomb before placing it in the extractor the knife requires to be very sharp in
order to make a clean cut. Every beekeeper possessing more than two or three hives
will find it to his advantage to have an extractor.
Comb Foundation. —Comb foundation is an exceedingly valuable invention, and no
beekeeper who uses a frame hive can afford to be without it. It consists of a sheet of
pure beeswax, with the bases and side walls of the cells impressed upon it. There is
sufficient wax to form the complete comb ; all that the bees have to do is to draw out
the cells to the natural depth. By the use of comb foundation we are enabled to
obtain beautiful straight combs in a very short time. Recently I placed two frames of
comb foundation in a Ligurian swarm of bees, and on examining the hive eight days
after found two complete combs filled with eggs and brood. Each of these combs
contained 136 square inches, and as there are 50 cells to the square inch, there would
be about 13,000 cells in the two combs. So that, in eight days, the complete combs
wereJmade, and fully 12,000 eggs were laid by the queen. It is calculated that, in
making one pound of wax, bees consume at least fifteen pounds of honey, so that by
supplying artificial combs there is not only a saving of time but also of honey.


Manipulating Bees.—Beginners should protect themselves until they gain sufficient
experience to render this unnecessary. A veil to cover the face and stout gloves on
the hands is all that is required. The gloves will soon be dispensed with. The
following two rules should be clearly understood when handling bees, namely : —Rule
I. —Bees, when filled with honey, never volunteer an attack, but act solely on the
defensive. Rule 2. —Bees, when frightened, immediately begin to fill themselves
with honey from their combs. Therefore, if we can succeed in frightening them we
can make them quite peaceable. The simplest way to do this is to blow a little
smoke from a bellows-smoker amongst the bees and they will at once be subjected.
In practice I always wait two or three minutes after blowing in the smoke before
opening the hive. The bellows-smoker is very useful in controlling bees.
Difficulty of Getting Supplies.—The difficulty of getting supplies is at present
a great hindrance to the progress of Bee culture in the Colonies, and there are many
who would like to try the improved system if they only knew where to get the
necessary appliances. Ido not know of any manufacturers of hives nearer than
Messrs. Bagnall Brothers & Co., of Turna, Thames, New Zealand. Comb foundation
(made by Mr. Hopkins, of the Matamata Apiary, near Auckland) in boxes containing
5 -lb. and 10-lb. can be obtained from Mr. John Hatch, of Melbourne. Extractors
and smokers are now being manufactured by Messrs. Simpson & Son, of Adelaide.
Adopt Some System of Management.—lt is of the utmost importance to know
when the different trees and plants in the neighbourhood of the apiary are in flower,
so as to be able to form some idea when honey is likely to be gathered. Unless this
is done it is impossible to work in a systematic way. I rely upon the Cape marigold
and the eucalyptus trees, and have settled down to the following system of manage-
ment. The honey from the Cape marigold, gathered in September and October,
enables me to build up all colonies to a proper standard of strength, and also to
increase the number of stocks if necessary. In November and December little or no
honey comes in, and all that the bees then require is to be kept supplied with food.
In January the redgum trees come into flower, and my honey harvest begins and
continues until about the end of March. Should the gumtrees fail, as they have done
this year, I get no surplus honey. In ordinary seasons all that I have to do is to get
my bees strong towards the end of December. Although bees will go three or four
miles for honey, it is not desirable they should go so far. In concluding this part of
my paper I would impress upon Beekeepers the importance of “always keeping every
swarm strong.” It is a golden rule, and should be the motto for every apiary.
The Future of Beekeeping in South Australia.—There ought to be a bright
future for the Beekeeping industry in South Australia. With a favourable climate, abun-
dance of good pasturage, few enemies or diseases, bees ought certainly to thrive well. It
is not likely that the enormous honey yields recorded in America can ever be realized
here, but I am certain that with improved appliances and management a fair average
per hive may confidently be expected. The chief enemy of the Bee in this colony is
the Bee moth. I regret that this pest has become very common this season, and is doing
serious injury to our apiaries. In Queensland the black bees around Brisbane have
almost been exterminated through the moth. With the movable comb hives the
apiarist has nothing to fear from this enemy, but with the common box hives it is
almost impossible to prevent its ravages. With regard to the preparation of honey
for the market, it is to be hoped that such receptacles as empty kerosine tins, old
pickle-bottles, and jam tins will soon be things of the past, and that in their place we
shall see extracted honey in neat glass jars with attractive labels, and comb honey in the
ever-popular little section boxes. The fact that Californian honey commands a much
higher price in Australia than the colonial production is certainly due to the careful
way in which it is prepared, for I am sure we can produce honey equal to any in the
world. We have yet much to learn in adopting the modern system of Beekeeping to
the requirements of our climate, and if successful Beekeepers will only freely inter-
change their ideas and discoveries we shall advance at a much more rapid rate.


As an outdoor employment for women there are few pursuits better suited to them
than Beekeeping. Women are usually more patient than men, and for that reason
they are better adapted to the management of these irascible little insects. By keep-
ing the gentle Italians in frame hives there is little to fear of receiving stings, and if
the hives are designed for giving box honey the work is clean and there is no occasion
to lift any heavy weight. Many women in America have been very successful with
beekeeping, and I do not see why those in South Australia, who have a taste for this
industry, should not also succeed. If they attempt it I am sure they will find that
while obtaining a nice little income from their bees, they are at the same time im-
proving their health, and engaging in an extremely interesting employment.
In conclusion I would call attention to the injury which has been done to the honey
trade in America through the dishonest practices of a few unscrupulous men, and trust
that all who propose to make a business of Bee culture will act in an honourable and
honest manner, so that the name “ South Australian Honey” will be a sufficient
guarantee of its purity.
Mr. Bonney exhibited a large quantity of apparatus used in the improved system of
Beekeeping, including a centrifugal honey-separator, adapted to extracting from any
size of frames. This was manufactured by Messrs. A, M. Simpson & Son, and is a
very perfect machine. He also showed a smoker, an observatory hive, with some
Ligurian bees at work in it, a Quinby hive, and various small things used by modern
Beekeepers. Mr, Robertson (of Anderson & Co.), also showed a small Langstroth
hive (not the “Standard” size), with improved and ingenious frames, a peculiar
knife for uncapping the combs, a swarm arrester, and some comb foundation (both
imported and manufactured in the colony)—an excellent sample.
Mr. Bonney explained the chief features of his hives, showing combs already com-
pleted and others in which only the comb foundation had been fixed, and stated, in
answer to questions, that a full frame of honeycomb could be made in two days upon
such foundation. Bees in this country would withstand any amount of cold, but the heat
had to be guarded against. The advantage of the standing frame over the old style of
hanging frame was that the apiarist could work with one or more frames, and instanced
the observatory hive, consisting of only one frame, which he had kept for more than a
year. With the Quinby hive the beekeeper could get his bees to fill tumblers, section
boxes, or any shaped vessels he choose to put on top. This hive cost, without
section boxes, $5 in America. To shift bees from common boxes into the Quinby
hive the comb should be cut out and put into frames, and then the bees must be put
down in front of the new hive, when they would run up into it. There was some
difficulty in getting young bees to leave a hive ; but a little patience and manoeuvring
would conquer their reluctance. The hive he thought would be used in this colony
was the hanging-frame hive, upon the top of the frames of which, when the honey
was coming in freely, any number of section boxes could be put on, even up to 150 lb.
He could see no reason why, in a busy season, two such lots should not be taken
from a strong hive. It would be possible to “drive” bees from an old hive into a
bar-frame hive, but he thought it would be best to drive the old bees first and place
the box beside the bar-frame hive, when in a short time all the young bees would
follow. In explaining the extractor, he said that it was common for several persons to
join and purchase one between them, but in the large apiaries in America, where
hundreds of hives commonly were owned by one man, and where the extractor would
be needed daily during the honey season, such a plan was not followed, each bee
ranche owning its own extractor. The price of an extractor in this colony like that
shown was about 455. to 50s. Two frames could be manipulated in such a machine,
but they were made in some cases to “sling” the honey from eight frames at once.
A cheaper and smaller extractor might be made if such small frames as those
exhibited by Mr. Weidenhofcr were used.
Mr. J. H. Weidenhofer showed and explained a hive'which he had got made
after the pattern now largely used in Germany, and designed by Herr Dziertzon ; also
some frapnes filled with comb ppd hopey, The piece of foundatiop cotpb WPS placed


in the frame and put into the hive, and within two days the Ligurian bees completed
the frame containing 4,500 cells and filled it with honey. The frames are much
smaller than those in general use, and are placed in three tiers of twelve, one tier
above the other, the back of the hive being closed by three doors of the same height
as each frame. When it is desired to inspect the hive one of the doors is opened,
when a pane of glass is seen set in a frame. If closer inspection is needed, the glass
frame is taken out, and the first frame and comb is exposed. If that frame is removed
the next is exposed, and so on until the twelve are taken out. For removing the
frames a pair of long steel tongs is used. By using this hive the exhibitor claimed
that there is no need for using smoke, and he said that another advantage was that the
whole hive of bees would not come out at once in pursuit of the operator, He had
fifteen of these hives now in operation, and he coloured them differently—first,
because it had a neat effect, and secondly, because it enabled the bees, he thought, to
distinguish their own particular hives. (A VOICE : “ Had you not better number
the hives?”—Laughter.) The Ligurian bees were very intelligent, and he hoped
within a few weeks to teach them to read figures, when the enquirer’s suggestion
might be acted upon. The complete hive, glass, frames, and all could be made
for 30s. It could be managed like any other improved hives, only more easily.
The stocks could be multiplied in the usual way by removing a frame and bees
to a fresh hive and giving them a queen; and he would “ drive ” bees from an
old box hive or other form in the same way as that described by Mr. Bonney.
Portulacca flowers seemed to furnish a deal of pollen for bees, and mignionette was a
very good flower to exist in the neighbourhood of hives. Sunflower was an excellent
one for honey, and lucerne was one of the best plants that could be cultivated for
bees ; but one of the most prolific honey plants was the Eucalyptus calophylla , the
laro-e’ flowers of which at present were giving his bees a great supply. He was
pleased to hear that this was to be the only kind of eucalyptus that was to be planted
in and about the City of Adelaide. A deal of amusement was occasioned by Mr.
Weidenhofer’s enthusiastic advocacy of the perfections of his particular fancy in hives,
but he kept cool and turned the laughter completely upon one or two who wished to
prolong the fun.
The next speaker appeared to take his cue from the last, and began, amidst shouts of
laughter, to claim that his hive was the best, most convenient, and most easily managed
of all; this was the Langstroth, which Mr. Robertson (Anderson & Co,, Lome
Vinegar Works) described as the “practical” man’s hive, whilst Dziertzon’s hive
was the amateur’s, and the Quinby the gentleman s hive. The Langstroth was
very simple. It consisted of an underhive containing hanging frames, in which the
bees formed their combs, and these contained young bees and sufficient honey for
winter. When this is full the top is taken off, and some double-width frames fitted
with section-boxes of any convenient desired form and size are placed on top,
forming a double hive, and in busy times another hive of section-boxes can be placed
on top of this, till four or even five hives stand on the top of each other. He then
dilated upon the value of this system of section-boxes (applicable to all three forms of
hives shown), by which absolutely pure comb and honey were stored up in the boxes
by the bees. No brood or drone comb was ever placed in these upper hives, all the
brood-cells being confined to the middle frames in the lowest hive. The method of
extracting honey pursued by those who used tea-chests and cases could not ensure
clean honey, because the whole of the combs were cut out and exposed to the sun to
drain, and the grubs, dead bees, &c., had afterwards to be strained out.
A great many questions of minor import, and dealing with generalities and detail,
were asked and answered, and after the usual vote of thanks had been passed and
responded to the meeting separated.
A considerable amount of interest was manifested in the proceedings, and many
persons remained after the meeting to more closely inspect the Beekeeping appliances,
or to seek information on points on which they required enlightenment.
W. K. Thomas & Co., Printers, reufell Street, Adelaide.
