

C.£fc-)C.*C>i->f» Py\(S&
ftOA Cj
Modern Notions of Liberty;
A COMPLETE REPORT
OF THE
5 RECENT CONTROVERSY
BETWEEN THE
REV. P. BERMINtiHAM, D.D., ROMAN CATHOLIC PRIEST
(LATE OF ALBURY),
AND THE
REV. B. BUTCHERS, 8.A., WESLEYAN MINISTER,
WODONGA.
PRICE ONE SHILLING AND SIXPENCE.
31ASON, FIRTH & M'CUTCHEON, GENERAL PRINTERS,
51 and 53 Flinders Lane West.




f T 7 VU
Modern Notions of Liberty:
A COMPLETE REPORT
OF THE
RECENT CONTROVERSY
BETWEEN THE
KEY. P. BERMINGHAM, D.D., ROMAN CATHOLIC PRIEST
(LATE OF ALBURY),
AND THE
REV. B. BUTCHERS, 8.A., WESLEYAN MINISTER,
WODONGA.
gl £ 1 h o n xn t :
MASON, FIRTH & M'CUTCHEON, GENERAL PRINTERS,
51 and 53 Flinders Lane West
1874.




TABLE OF CONTENTS.
I. Peeface 5
11. Db. Beemingham’s Lectuee on Modeen Notions of Libebty 7
111. Rev. Mb. Butchebs’ Lectuee on Tiara and Cbown . . 17
IV. Db. Beemingham’s Fiest Lettee in Reply .... 30
Y. Rev. Me. Butchebs’ Lettee to De. Beemingham . . 37
YI. & VII. De. Beemingham’s Two Additional Dialogues ... 49
VIII. Rev. Me. Butchers’ Final. Rejoindee .... 60
IX. Appendix 68




PEEF A C E
In sending forth this pamphlet, a word or two by way of introduction is perhaps
necessary. This is briefly its history. A short time since a lecture was delivered
in Albury by the Eev. Dr. Bermingham (whose reputation as a Roman Catholic
orator and divine had for some time preceded his return to these colonies, after
an absence of many years), on “ Modern Notions of Liberty.” The subject was a
grand and comprehensive one, if only treated in a broad, liberal, and truly
Catholic spirit. Its actual treatment appeared to me to be precisely the reverse.
It appeared to me, as it did to the Eev. A. D, Acocks, Vicar of Albury, that the
Doctor’s “ arguments were fallacious, his conclusions equally far from the mark,
(and) his definition of liberty narrow and one-sided,” Speaking for himself and
his Church, the lecturer said, “We defend vested rights and are therefore the
advocates of liberty—of the liberty of the individual, the family, and the society.
In the full light of the immutable teaching of the Church, me condemn as crimes
against morality any violation of them by either mobs or parliaments, by either
kings or kaisers, by secularists or denominationalists." (The italics are mine.)
Thus, at one fell stroke, the Doctor unchurched all non-Catholics, and arraigned
the British and Colonial Governments as being guilty of “ crimes against
morality.” The nature of the subject, and the reputation of the lecturer, demanded
a reply. That reply will be found in the lecture on “ Tiara and Crown”— with
mhat degree of success it is for the public to decide.
After a considerable time, the Doctor replied in turn, by sending a letter to the
Murray and Hume Times , in which he stated he entered the arena of controversy
reluctantly, and for the last time, and “ declined to discuss the title-deeds” of his
Church with any one whatsoever. This was speedily met with an answering letter
from myself. This letter, apparently, induced the Doctor to re-consider his deci-
sion, as he at once produced two additional dialogues ; in which, however, he care-
fully abstained from making the slightest reference to my letter, but dealt with
certain points in my lecture which previously he had contemptuously declined to
discuss. It is for the reader to determine the cause of this sudden change. By
the rules of respectable journalism, I was clearly entitled to the right of reply ;
this, however, was most unfairly and positively denied me. The controversy
having become too lengthy to justify me in asking its insertion in any other
journal, my only remedy lay in printing for myself, and the result is now in the
reader’s hands.
The whole of the report (with the exception of my final reply, and a paragraph
or two which were omitted to oblige the Murray and Hume Times) has been
printed verbatim from the newspaper reports, and its accuracy may be relied on.
In some cases, when quoting the Doctor’s words, I have taken the liberty of itali-
cizing those words which I deemed emphatic. If in any case I have misunderstood
the Doctor, I hold myself liable to correction. In one instance only have I per-
mitted myself to use unusually strong, though not abusive, language ; in my
opinion, the occasion furnished ample justification, and, after due reflection, I do
not think it right or wise to make any alterations whatever, If the Doctor justifies
ov proves his charges against Wesley, I will myself apologise. It is now for the
public to decide on which side the truth lies, for it is to illustrate and defend the
truth that this pamphlet issues from the press.
B. BUTCHERS, B.A.
Wodonga, 10th August, 1874•




MODERN NOTIONS OF LIBERTY.
The following lecture was delivered at the Exchange Assembly Rooms, Albury,
on 21st May, by the Rev. Dr. Bermingham. The chair was occupied by the Mayor,
who briefly introduced the reverend lecturer :
Mr. Chairman, Ladies and Gentlemen—The position I have the'honour to occupy
to-night is, I may say, to me new indeed ; and, from want of experience, I feel it
somewhat embarrassing. Though it has been my lot, both at home and in foreign
lands, to address large and brilliant audiences, twice only before to-night did I try
to act the part of the lecturer. To the just and true qualities of the lecturer you
will, then, be prepared to find me practically a stranger; and make, I do hope,
generous allowance for my shortcomings. If, therefore, the pleasing tones of the
lecturer be missing to-night; and if you find yourselves worried by the stern
utterances of the preacher, “ oh, blame not me blame Dr. M'Alroy. Place it on
his shoulders that can, as you are aware, bear a something. I gave him timely and
earnest warning to be prepared for a failure—if not for an out-an-out breakdown,
A matchless orator once said of Erin’s sons, “ Their virtues are their own, and their
vices have been forced upon them.” Now without delaying to consider the origin
of my good or bad qualities, I can truly say my present undertaking comes more
of another’s earnest wish than of my own choosing. “ I long,” said Dr. M'Alroy,
“ to see my people happily united, and contributing to each other’s pure and
sinless joys ; and, far removed from dangerous influences, to have them take their
part with the other respectable inhabitants of Albury in promoting not only the
material interests of this fine district, but the social and intellectual improvement
of the community.” Who could hold out, I should like to know, against that
strong, though indirect, appeal 1 Why, his request, speaking as it did largely of
peace and good will amongst you all, acted upon me like a spell, and bade my own
heart join in the poet’s touching prayer—
"God of peace, before Thee
Peaceful here we kneel,
Humbly to implore Thee
For a nation’s weal.
Calm her sons’ dissensions,
Bid their discord cease ;
End their mad contentions,
Hear us, God of peace.
God of right, preserve us
Just; as we are strong,
Let no passions swerve us
To one act of wrong.
Let no thought unholy
Come our cause to blight.
Thus we pray Thee, lowly,
Hear us, God of right.”
And now that I am in the presence of the worthy inhabitants of Albury,
amongst whom I can recognise a few old friends, into whose ears I sometimes
poured, in years gone by, my gushing feelings—my hopes for the future of this
magnificent country, and my longings for the success of its high-minded in-
habitants—l trust to your kind indulgence to bear with me, and sustain me while
laying at your feet a few thoughts on a pregnant theme, of which I can only touch
the outer circle in this lecture. lam sure it is quite unnecessary to remind the
enlightened audience I have the honour to address that though 1 may use words and
phrases ordinarily only current in bitter polemics, I shall, in anything I may say
to-night, only regard revolution and vested rights —only destruction and conservatism
—as viewed in the light of first principles. Oh, not for a little world would I
wilfully and unnecessarily introduce anything out of harmony with the rational


feelings of one in this audience ; indeed, if I know my heart, of anyone in wide
Australia.
The subject I have chosen is one vitally interesting to the individual and the
family, to the State and society. At present it is spoken of at almost every hearth
the world over ; it quickens the sinking heart of the old, and its thrilling action
makes the life-current of the young flow faster and faster ; it has even made
its way into the quiet family circle, and disturbed the even tenor of the
ways of mother and daughter. They now speak from the housetops of
liberty, and of rights unjustly denied them, who hitherto had been content
with the high privilege and clear duty of tempering with gentle love the
bitter cup of adversity, and of toning down, by the effusion of holy and tender
affections, the feelings of impatience and anger, aye, and alas ! not seldom of revenge
and hatred, awakened in man’s heart by the trials, the struggles, and crushing
disappointments of life. The sphere marked out by God for woman, and into
which the Catholic Church raised her after long years of hard struggle with
Paganism, and in which that same church to-day battles with doctrinaires and
atheists to keep her, that sphere of duty no longer satisfies her. Alas! we have
even seen her anxious, like Lucifer, to reign amidst turbulence and social chaos,
instead of mildly ruling the household God willed her to bless and adorn. Yea
more, in the not distant past, Europe trembled at the sight of woman preferring
the hideous orgies of advanced liberalism, of Mazzinianism and communism, with
all their frightful excesses, and raging like demoniacs at the Holy of Holies, and
frenzied with the desire of reddening their hands in the hearts’ blood of aged and
venerable priests. Everywhere, too, men are talking loudly and writing much of
liberty and progress, and denouncing tyranny and —as it pleases some of them to
call a figment of their own disturbed imaginations— reaction. Ask them, however,
what meaning they attach to these words, and how few will you find to agree
in a definition or description of them, while many are sure to confound
license with liberty, and destruction with progress. In fact, you could
scarcely find ten in a hundred of those who are perpetually babbling
about liberty and progress, progress and liberty , who ever troubled them-
selves to find out what is the idea —what is the objective truth, con-
veyed by those two words, when understood in a sense dictated by reason and
sanctioned by morality. How many, even in this hall, ever seriously asked them-
selves, what is liberty ? or—and I now wish to speak with the most profound con-
sideration for every one present—could, on the moment, give a definition of it,
that might not possibly be tortured into a justification of the wildest license
touching their neighbours’ natural and vested rights ? If it be allowed me to
call on the memory of the past for one or two trivial incidents of boyhood’s
days, I think they will not only illustrate the truth of what may seem to
many a bold and questionable supposition, but also indirectly make evident the
difficulties under which many labour to acquire correct notions of the liberty
reason approves and God blesses. One day, in the freshness of life’s young morn-
ing, an uneducated Irish cottier asked me to read him a letter from his son. The
youth had been ten or twelve months in America, and, as a matter of course, not
only deemed himself competent, but actually felt bound to give his poor simple
father a right view of liberty. “ Dear father,” he wrote, “ this is the finest and
freest country in the world ; we don’t even salute the priests here.” “ There are,
I’m afraid,” remarked the simple-minded father, “ sad days awaiting that foolish
child of mine.” Poor man, notwithstanding his simplicity, seeing peeper into the
young man’s heart than others, he, alas, but too truly concluded that, under
that silly phrase, was hidden the germ of a wild rejection of all moral restraint.
That boy was shot while on a fillibustering expedition in America. Again, after
not many days, returning from school, I met some fifty wretched-looking tenant
farmers, their hats in their hands, and their heads bowed down on stricken
breasts, following a colonel over his ungrateful fields. Had those poor down-
trodden serfs been a captive train, gracing the triumph of that soldier—without
a true soldier’s noble thoughts of a true knight’s bearing— he could not have
shown more proud contempt for the hapless sons of toil in word and act, in
look and haughty mein ; nor could they have manifested more abject slavish
feeling. At once I instinctively felt that I was in the presence of slavery
—hideous slavery—slavery under unmitigated feudal oppression. It happened


1 had, that very moment, finished reading one of O’Connell’s magnificent orations,
in which he apostrophised his native mountains, towering in glorious majesty
to heaven, and the broad Atlantic’s wild waves seeming to echo “Liberty,
liberty,” as, rolling far away from Labrador, they broke on his native shores.
A boy’s heart, horrified at the appalling slavery of the Irish tenant farmer,
could not resist the charms of his eloquence. Whatever he said seemed to him
true—whatever he did appeared just and good to his “ hot and restless” mind.
Assured by those I questioned in a spirit of boyish curiosity, that he, whom a
nation revered and loved, not only always met the Irish peasant —from whose
heart he had sworn to pluck the iron of slavery—with kindly greetings, and spoke
to him—as the future heir of long-lost liberty—cheering words, but, in city, village,
and town, did honour to priestly office; who can marvel if my young mind
impatiently asked, “ What is liberty ? Oh, where is she to be found ?” or that my
young heart longed to see her moving like some queenly beneficent being over
“the fair hills of holy Ireland,” and scattering bliss around-: Poor young enthusiast!
I began, like many others, to speak and think of liberty as a child. I knew her
not; her beauty had not yet beamed on my soul; she had not yet appeared to my
understanding wreathed in the brilliant loveliness of heaven’s blessing. Time
rolled on, and at length I received a description of liberty, such as you might
expect from one of “ the spirits of the just made perfect.” It took possession of
my soul, and held it without interruption until in dear old Maynooth I learned to
view things not only synthetically but analytically. “My child,” said a young
holy priest, in reply to my forward questioning, “ perfect liberty is not found here
below ;it is found and serenely enjoyed only in the happy land—in heaven ; and
true liberty is enjoyed here below only in knowing, loving, and serving God.” The
sad, thrilling tones in which he spoke, the love looks to heaven of his simple eye, and
oh, above all, the fervour of rapt devotion with which he seemed to ken the perfect
liberty of the true Hebrew, are to-day “as dear to memory as they were then to the
senses.”
Now-a-days, young men, aye, and old men too, ask the journalist and
the tribune, What is liberty? and are, not seldom, bidden to seek it—
where ? Do guess where ? Why, in negation, and not in the positive; in
destruction, and not in being ; in pulling down everything, and building up
nothing. Day after day, in sheet after sheet, from the staid quiet weekly to the
haughty imperious London daily, the old irrational cry rings out in the ears of the
nations : “ Fling from your necks the Ultramontane yoke. Liberty demands, as
an essential of its existence, the rejection of all ecclesiastical authority ; more
especially in the matter of education, as also the removal of the old social ‘ land-
marks,’ traced by priestly ignorance, intolerance, and superstition.” Beyond all
doubt they cry out —often in a fierce scream—if you love and seek intellectual
freedom ; if you want to be free both soul and body, and to move over your native
hills and valleys with a freeman’s step, you must accept the dicta of say the
Fawcetts, the Huxleys, and the Darwins, and, God bless the mark, of all other
highly cultivated secularists; and you must regard godless colleges and godless
schools as the beacon lights of the Irish race, and of all Catholics, saving them
from the most terrible disasters —subjection to the moral influence of priests,
especially of Irish priests—
“ Am I the slave they say,
Soggarth Aroon ?
Since you did show the way,
Soggarth Aroon ?
Their slave no more to be,
Soggarth Aroon ?
While they would work with me,
Quid Ireland’s slavery,
Soggarth Aroon 1
Loyal, and brave to you,
Soggarth Aroon;
Yet be no slave to you,
Soggarth Aroon!
Nor out of fear to you,
Stand up so near to you ;
Och ! Out of fear to you,
Soggarth Aroon.


No. The grand old Irish spirit filled with the blessings of St. Patrick, who first
broke the Irishman’s chains, making him a true Hebrew, a brother of Christ, and
an heir to a kingly crown, feels and knows well that many of the men who write
and speak in this manner—sometimes refusing in their insolence to speak English,
calling the Catholic Church Eomish—inherit the infamy of three centuries of
persecution —the cruelest and most atrocious God ever allowed savage hate to
inflict, in the name of religion, on a people always ready to forgive the wrongdoer,
and die in defence of justice, truth, and legitimate authority. The feelings
of hatred and contempt for Irish Catholics rioting in such bigot hearts—intense as
they are unreasonable—now that they cannot find issue in blood and confiscations,
assume the form of refusing justice to poor Catholic children, if their parents
presume to demand, in their education, a full knowledge of man’s relation to his
fellow-man and his God—
“Oh ! weep those days, the penal days.
When Ireland hopelessly complained ;
Oh, weep those days, those penal days,
When Godless persecution reigned,
When year by year, for serf and peer,
Fresh cruelties were made by law.
And filled with hate
Our senate sate,
To weld anew each fetter’s flaw.
Oh, weep those days, those penal days.
Their memory still on Ireland weighs ;
They bribed the flock, they bribed the son,
To sell the priest, and rob the sire;
Their dogs were taught alike to run
Upon the scent of wolf and friar,
Among the poor.
Or on the moor.
Where hid the pious and the true.
While traitor, knave,
And recreant slave
Had riches, rank, and retinue.
And, exiled in those days,
Our banners over Europe blaze ;
A stranger held the land and tower
Of many a noble fugitive ;
No popish lord had lordly power,
The peasant scarce had leave to live.
Above his head
A ruined shed.
No tenure but a tyrant’s will,
Forbid to plead.
Forbid to read,
Disarmed, disfranchised, imbecile;
What wonder our step betrays
The freedman born in penal days.
They’re gone, they’re gone, those penal days ;
All creeds are equal in our isle,
Then grant, 0 Lord, Thy plenteous grace,
Our ancient feuds to reconcile.”
To-day four millions and a half of Irish Catholics, dwelling in the land that gave
them birth, hopelessly complain—to a certain extent like the Catholics of New
South Wales —of a natural right denied them by the concentrated legislative
wisdom of the Empire, unless on the impious condition, that the laity part from
the priesthood, and break a union consecrated and sealed by the blood of a million
martyrs, and hallowed by traditions of glory and fame in the school and the field,
“ from Dunkirk to Belgrade.”
If, moreover, a Bismarck, after clutching French provinces, interferes with the
rights given man in the creative act—the rights of religious worship—he is sure to
be lauded by such journals as the Pall Mall Gazette, solely because his legislation
is opposed to the very existence of what is called Ultramontanism, but which I
call the Catholic Church. If, too, a priest, breaking his solemnly-plighted troth to
God, and falling from the old living organism, like a stone from some venerable


building—from which it received, and to which it returned dignity and glory—if
he refuse obedience to his bishop and the Holy See, they are not ashamed to cry
out, “he is asserting just and true liberty.” But, ladies and gentlemen, is not all
this equivalent to placing liberty in obedience to constituted authority, and in
submission to successful might, in destruction of vested rights, and of authority,
hallowed by the glories of centuries ; and venerable and sacred by the prescription
of more than 1800 years. „ , ,
Socialists, moved often by the inspiriting influence of oysters and beer, never
weary of reminding us that ours is an age of peculiar enlightenment, abounding
in advantages denied the generations of the superstitious past. In this blessed
19th century liberty is better understood and more highly valued ; and men, per-
fected by superior intellectual culture, are ready to make greater sacrifices to
obtain or preserve liberty. Beyond all doubt—to use the words of a great American
philosopher—“ The present generation is skilled above all others in using good
words in a bad sense, and bad words in a good sense.” Therefore are we obliged
to ask the leaders of liberalism— of advanced public opinion—what meaning they
attach to the word liberty ; and are often startled at being told—“ Liberty means
freedom from kings, aristocrats, and priestly oppressors, with the full free use of
our rights as men.” A well-educated Englishman, who called himself now a
radical at another time a liberal, gave me an analogous view of liberty, one day
last summer—saying England shall never enjoy real freedom until she has rid
herself of lords, priests, parsons, and public-homes. Passing over this very uncom-
plimentary notion of liberty, I would remark that the other definition or
description denies, at least implicitly, the possibility of liberty even where a do
facto government rules wisely and justly distributes rewards, burdens, and pains.
Moreover, the admission of only man’s rights as man—which my old dark friend,
Jackey King, of Yass, had, in his day, equally with our worthy Mayor, or even
with our gracious Queen—affirms vested or civil rights to be immoral usurpations.
Where natural rights are outraged, there is not, there cannot be, true liberty, i
willingly admit. But the common sense of mankind tells us there are, and must
be, special rights arising out of special social relations; for instance, rights of pro-
perty, of family, and social rank. Admit equality in them, and you at once assert that
anyone in this hall has as good a right to Mr. Fallon’s big store as he has; and what
I should not like to allow, to that buggy and the horses given me the other day.
There would not then be one thing free from the claims of one and all ; and i
might be tempted, owing to a partiality I have for the press, to fix longing eyes on
one of our Albury newspapers. Stern logic bids us on, until we actually reach
horrid confusion, social and political. We cannot stop here. We must justify
the devilry of Utah, or at least, like Hepworth Dixon, say a kind word of a
kingdom that is only a fitting antechamber of hell. Moreover, if a ruler—say if
Queen Victoria—is not the just possessor of rights above and sacred from another s
claim, what becomes of authority or civil sbciety in her vast dominions I in
fact every form of Government would become impossible and inadmissible;
the democratic could not obtain, for how could the people invest a representative
with power ? No one can give more than he possesses, or what he has not. mere
are therefore rights not included in man’s rights as a man, special rights founded
in and springing from special relations of man to man and of families to families.
Liberty then, as we are now viewing it, has been well defined by a great
American philosopher to be—“ The safe enjoyment by every man of all his rights,
natural and civil.” „ . , , , „ ~ ~ •,
Here I wish gratefully to remark that I am indebted for many thoughts and
arguments on this subject to the matchless pages of the grand old philosopher
and scholar, O. A. Brownson. Having viewed every form of error—social
and political—with keenest intellectual power, that heroic Christian and
pure patriot has been up to this very hour—though his once brilliant orbs
shall never more see light until re-illuminated in the New Jerusalem—engaged,
in periods of wonderful lucidity and logical accuracy, in bravely defending
the twin loves of his noble heart—social and political order and religion.
If any man deprive me of my natural rights, unless forfeited by a voluntary act,
he is a robber and a tyrant in heart and deed. By natural rights I mean the rights
derived from the creative act, from the fact that God created man wita an intellect
to know God, and therefore to know truth, both absolute and contingent; and a


free will to follow good or evil, and a heart to love the First Good and First Fair,
and by this means reach his destiny, by returning from the first cause, from the
Creator, to the Sanctifier for ever more. Amongst those rights holding the first
place are rights of conscience—of religion—of our duty to God. Kings or kaisers,
Cassars or dictators—all, all refusing obedience and submission to the author of all
things—are criminals. The greatest genius, the proudest king, the most successful
statesman, or the bravest captain—all are, before God, not one whit more than the
lowliest peasant, save so far as goodness reaches and aims can attain. Those rights
are anterior to the State, and do not, therefore, derive from it. I was a man before
I became a member of society; an individual, with his natural rights, before I
became a citizen. The State cannot absorb the citizen, or annihilate his rights, and
still less can he the rights of man. The State is incompetent in spirituals, and
bound to protect rights of conscience. When, therefore, the British Parliament
gave Catholic emancipation, it merely withdrew a robber’s hand from the rights of
British subjects, and restored ill-gotten goods to their rightful owners. The citizen
has a right to more than religious toleration, for religious toleration—that proud
boast of England—supposes a concession to the man by the State of what it really
cannot give, or to which it may not lay claim. Religious liberty, the natural right
of every man, does not suppose a concession by the State. It is based on a right
independent of and anterior to all governments “of earth, earthy it comes from
heaven. The penal enactments on the statute-books of England were not,
therefore, laws. They were, like the German Falk laws—outrages on re-
ligious liberty, on the natural rights of the individual. They were nothing
more than the criminal commands of the vilest and worst despotism. No
king, no parliament, could impart to them the majesty and power of law. It
matters not, therefore, what parliaments or statesmen may say or dare enact if the
existence of a God and of a moral order be admitted ; the State cannot destroy that
order, or declare right what is fundamentally wrong. Even kings and parliaments
should be ruled by the moral law, and can no more rob or take the individual’s
property, than an individual, without incurring the guilt of injustice. When,
therefore, monasteries, convents, and churches are gutted—whether in England,
Italy, or Germany—by a lewd Henry, a lewder Victor Emmanuel, or the despicable
wee tyrants of Geneva, in order to defend such acts, there is a logical necessity to
deny the existence of God the Creator willing and ordaining an order of relations
between man and man, and between Him and His creatures. Admit God just and
holy, and stern logic declares and proves them robbers and tyrants without con-
science or the fear of God and the love of justice.
Admit vested rights, and you impliedly forbid the tyrant to reign, for a tyrant,
in the ordinary acceptation of the word, is an usurper, reigning without them , and
robbing others of them. Hence your modern revolutionists—for instance, the
French pets lately fondled by Sydney celebrities, are the vilest of vile tyrants ; for
they deny and destroy, without slfhme or remore, vested rights. Beyond all
doubt, therefore, the journalist or other writer, who either lauds or defends the
wrong and outrages of Italian, French, or German revolutionists—be they rebels
either against legitimately constituted civil authority, or—like Cavour, Victor
Emmanuel, and Bismarck—against fundamental God-willed order—even though
only poor nuns or priests, or a meek gentle old man like Pius the Ninth are the
feeble victims —they are criminal approvers of sacrilegious despotism, and uphold,
so far, a, tyranny condemned by reason and God’s law ; a tyranny trampling on
every right which the human heart, unless brutalised by passions, must regard
and cherish. My thoughts on this question are not, I know, the thoughts of
several others; but thousands who reject, hate, and despise them in theory
especially when uttered in behalf of that glorious old ecclesiastical confederation
of which I am the least and most unworthy member —maintain them in practice,
and unflinchingly act upon my principles in their personal relations to the family,
the individual, and the society.
It is, however, this teaching that renders the priesthood of Europe so odious to
your advanced liberals. For this very reason we are again and again told we belong
to the old cruel dark past—that ignorance and superstition render us insensible to
noble impulses and generous thoughts, and incapable of heroic acts ; while
ambition makes us grasping and insatiable despots. Senseless babblers, your cry is
old as evil; you fight with the same weapons and seek the same ignoble ends as did


the generation you belong to, since Abel fell by a brother’s red right hand. Surely,
ladies and gentlemen, the heart of the priest may beat as warmly and loyally as
that of the political theorist, and far more so than those of political charlatans,
elevated to high places by chance or by crime. Nothing pertaining to the rights
of country or religion can lose its winning loveliness or its moving charms from the
touch of priestly orders. We love liberty ; and, in its sacred cause, offer—
heroically offer—to revolutionary schemes the unconquerable passive resistance of
death. We defend vested rights ; and are, therefore, the advocates of liberty—of
the liberty of the individual, the family, and the society. In the full light of the
immutable teaching of the church, we condemn as crimes against moiality any
violation of them by either mobs or parliaments, by either kings or kaisers by
secularists or denominationalists. .
I am not, however, going to maintain that any one religious denomination
ever had or now has a monopoly of men of extreme views. Some of the
greatest and worst radicals have been baptised, and were Catholics, but
Catholics falling below their principles, and violently contradicting them.
But this I do fearlessly assert, every true Catholic must be conservative of
vested rights—must be loyal to just rule —to government, and regaid with
unutterable loathing the orgies of mad revolutionists. Catholicity, however, does
not destroy free will; it only illumines the intellect to see and approve the right,
and assists the will to follow after it. Hence while millions of Catholics choose to
serve God and save their souls, thousands elect to serve Mammon, and make sure
of the good things of this world at any loss, not only to their own souls, but to the
interests of the individual, society, and the state. On this very account I was once
reproachfully asked by a distinguished artist, u How can your church, if she be
pure and holy, have in her bosom such wild, lawless children ? bee what you have
made of Italy, that you had altogether in your hands. The school was under your
control; and you either influenced the Government or took an active part in its
administration.” This objection, I replied, followed out logically, reaches the
novitiate over which Christ was master, and to the very throne of God, asking,
Why was Judas, why is evil on earth?" But really it is no marvel. Con-
cupiscence inclines strongly to the world, and the world’s ways—which are not
God’s; and the very persons who are so persistent in reproaching the Catholic
Church with a monopoly of bad men, if they would only let us know their real senti-
ments, must own its terrible power. To resist it effectually many have not or refuse
to acquire the strong unbending will that is necessary to come off victorious in
the continual fiery struggle. Moreover, principles condemned by the Catholic
Church, obtain largely amongst what are known as educated Catholics,
and never fail to make their destroying way through them, amongst the unedu-
cated. But how could it be otherwise since nearly all intellectual food is more or
less poisoned by the philosophy of Bacon and Descartes. Wherefore, many Catholics
not unwilling to die for their faith become atheists in politics, vote God out of the
sphere of politics, and make kings or parliaments, aye, not unfrequently political
mountebanks , supreme and independent of moral obligations. God within the
sanctuary; but Csesar, and Caesar only, on the throne, is their motto. Moreover,
men abandoning, often without advertence, their own principles, are so greatly-
influenced by what they read, and hear, and see—by, in a word, social forces—that
they imperceptibly drift into habits of thought, of speech, and action, which are
not only out of harmony with their principles, but terribly contradictory to them.
In perusing the writings of journalists, essayists, and political leaders on the
doings of such men as Bismarck, it is not hard to detect the revival of Manicheism,
or the assertion of two distinct independent first principles. Ihe church, repre-
senting as she does the spiritual order, is fiercely denied the right of guidance or
of authority over the secular, which is represented by the State. According to this
theory there are two final ends independent one of the other ; but if there are two
final independent ends, there must be two first causes. Applying their theory, the
Catholic Church, according to radical writers of the advanced school of politics, is
—they of course have no doubt—the evil principle, is Antichrist! and, therefore,
the good principle, which is the State, should rule the church, dictate to the
spiritual, and Ciesar be, as in the days of paganism or devil-worship, pontiff and
king. Gallicanism too, always so dear to statesmen and lawyers, re-appearmg now
in the persons of the few rebel spirits facetiously calling themselves Old Catholics ,


oy presuming to sit in judgment on the supreme spiritual authority, teaches the
subject to judge and condemn the chief magistrate. The fruits of Gallicanism in
the last century were the terrors of 1798, and in our days are the infamies of
Garibaldi and the Communists of Paris. Gallicanism cannot deny its own ; it has
consecrated the principle of revolution, made authority and vested rights void,
and found issue at one time in unmitigated despotism, and at another in
individualism, How like Descartes are our modern radicals. That weak
sophist attempted to construct all things upon nothing, attempting, as he
did, to reach the affirmative by negation or destruction. Doctrinaires and
radicals of our day, whether appearing as secularists, rationalists, or humani-
tarians, whether seeking the origin of lordly man—through seven or eight
unintelligible developments —in a sponge or in a spontaneous generation,
want to destroy all existing institutions and beliefs ; and, in order to effect this,
refuse dogma to the young mind, and moral restraint to the young heart. We
see chaos, said a yoting scholar of Cambridge to me one day in Harrowgate, and
the iouleversement of all things on our path ; but liberated mighty man shall, by
the force of culture and genius, bring out of it a new order of universal equality,
happiness, and peace. Here, in Australia, you have, if I may j udge from a printed
notice sent from some education office, out-Heroded Herod. Here, on this virgin
soil, where, in days departed, I used to look foward with hope and confidence to
the beneficent reign of justice and truth over a young, a vigorous, a generous, and
a Christian people ; here it is forbidden to tell the young heir of grace anything
of the good God, or of redemption, not only in the school, but even on the premises.
Lo and behold, the sublime wisdom, in a legal enactment, of one, cast, by some
freak of hostile fortune, on our shores from that “ black country,” where the intel-
lect of the poor son of toil is often as dark as his body; of a black diamond
“Issuing rays on this benighted colony, treasured up from .”
Devoid of creative power, what more can these, your doctrinaires, give us than
a shallow egotism, after consummating the work of destruction ? Why not
start with something positive—with institutions providentially given to us ? else,
where can pigmy man rest the lever to lift his fellows to peace, happiness, and
glory 1 Beyond all doubt there must be a universal uprising of thoughtful benevolent
men against those heralds and authors of instruction. The thoughtful of our
generation now stand aghast at the results of the teachings of selfish doctrinaires.
They see religion, under their treatment, issuing in a denial of the supernatural,
philosophy in nihilism or egoism, politics in anarchy, and morality in the sanctifi-
cation of lust. It is but as yesterday since a young lady, with bold and dashing
pen, put an end to Satan in the pages of the Fortnightly Review. His Satanic
Majesty gone, “ Anglicanus,” in the Contemporary, questioned the existence of hell.
Indeed our literary wonder-workers can hardly go farther, since they give us for God
man, fallen man, and free us from all moral obligation. This is liberty with a
vengeance, and progress to—as a great writer remarks—“this side of nowhere.”
Looking in sorrow at the threatened ruin of everything good and pure, of every-
thing ennobling and elevating humanity, the Church—representing the spiritual—
refrains not crying out —order, peace, and self-respect are necessarily based on self-
denial, and cannot co-exist with the removal of moral restraint from the restless,
passionate human heart, or with the silence or slavery of the authority, divinely
appointed to inculcate the necessity of self-denial. Without self-denial, or moral
restraint in act, there can be no sanctity; grandeur or nobility of character is but
a name ; heaven is not the “ bourne ” whence no traveller thinks of returning.
Without it no pleasure can give satisfaction to the wildly-beating young heart ;
pleasure of itself can only fill the heart with tyrant longings, eventually shutting
out from our souls God’s light and love, and driving forth hope and charity from
the fleshy temples wherein God willed them to dwell.
“ False the light on glory’s plume.
As fading hues of even,
And love and hope and beauty’s bloom,
Are blossoms gathered from the tomb.
There’s nothing bright but heaven. ”
It is, nevertheless, a false charge that the Church anathematizes all that is sweet
and lovely in nature, or wills the heart to be coldly closed against joy or the im-
pressions of pure love. For the true Catholic aft nature is robed in the Creator’s


beauty ; and he catches the thrilling music of His love from every work of His
hands. The birds with their free wild notes charm him ; and the flowers, arrayed
in glory greater than that of Solomon, should delight him here below, and lift him
to the uncreated beauty awaiting his enraptured gaze and everlasting posssession,
while charity is inparting new sweetness and new charms to his affections. The
love, however, justly deserving his approval, is rational love, and not the love of
senses. High above all the rioting of human passions, pure love—as found, for
instance, in the Sisterhoods of the Presentation and Mercy Orders, and in the
heroic daughters of Vincent and of Paul—seeking union with its object, which is
Christ, and seen in every form of want, or sorrow and disease ; by sacrificing itself,
holds—like some gracious queen—sway over the mortified Christian’s heart, gives
full scope to the noblest aspirations, and, united with God’s holy will, pours itself
out on the despised, the poor and suffering members of Christ. This pure love —
charity divine—is a gift of God, and can be, like faith, lost. Grace is not
only not inadmissible, but can be resisted. God never does violence to free will,
and both as Redeemer and Creator treats man as endowed with it. Man has, then,
the terrible power —no matter his social standing, his education, or the helps of
grace—to turn from the first good or God, and go after the creature, which consti-
tutes the essence of sin. It is true the human will has for its object good, but it
not seldom happens that true good is not its object. Even men are some-
times found to will evil from a satanic hatred of good, thereby sinning,
like Lucifer, from downright malice; they find a sort of good in rebelling against
God’s laws and his institutions. “ Better to reign in hell than serve in heaven”
is, or seems to be, their maxim, “ None,” as Brownson remarks, “ ever yet inter-
preted so truly or forcibly the thoughts of devils as the author of those terrible
words, and he (Milton) had a peculiar knack in doing so, for he was himself a
superb rebel.” Therefore did he make Mammon find good in not obeying God—in
turning away from the First Good and First Fair.
“ . . . . How wearisome
Eternity so spent in worship paid
To whom we hate.
. , . . Preferring
Hard liberty before the easy yoke of servile pomp.”
Satan is the model of men, who refuse, at any cost, to admit a superior—to be
ruled.
“ To bow and sue for grace
With suppliant knee, those we hate,”
is to Satan and his followers the hardest of trials and the worst of evils.
“ . . , . The unconquerable will
And study of revenge, immortal hate,
And courage never to submit or yield,”
characterised many a creature of clay in the past, making the human will
appetitive of evil without changing its nature, which is to be appetitive of good.
I was not, therefore, filled with astonishment, though thrilled with horror, when
some years ago an Irish judge —a man representing the majesty of law—whose
lips should keep justice, judgment and truth, while, with pure unbiassed heart,
he held in unstained hands the scales of sacred justice, lauded the author of The
Doctrine and Discipline of Divorce , and the bold defiant approver of regicide,
from whose sublime epic I have been quoting.
But beyond all doubt, no Catholic—yea, no man of serious well-balanced mind,
of high noble aims and pure sentiments—can accept as leaders, prophets, and
guides, men who call virtue vice; who, while screaming out liberty , liberty, try to
pluck from the human breast a heart ruled and swayed by conscience—by an
intelligent conviction of moral responsibility to God for thoughts, for words, and
for acts ; and who deny to a Catholic, because he is a Catholic, the rights that are
his by God Almighty’s will—unless anxious to cover the world with the ruins of
order, and consequently of society. Certainly, in the glorious past, the sons and
daughters of my own race and creed have admitted and maintained the necessity
of self-denial and self-government—in a word, of religious yoke—for the existence
of internal peace, freedom, and order in the individual’s heart; and adopting Plato’s
teaching, “as society is only the individual on a larger scale,” they have ever held
that the appetites and passions obtaining in society require to be governed, if


man would enjoy social peace and rational liberty. This legacy of sound doctrine
“ we pray, we pray” they may transmit to their children, and make it fruitful in
every land where fortune may cast their lot.
I cannot, ladies and gentleman, close the eyes of hope to the loveliest of visions
that can gladden the heart of priest or patriot in this fair and lovely land.
Methinks I see a young nation, whose brave and heroic sons know—and unswervingly
act on the conviction —that there can be no government without justice, no freedom
without order, and no order without authority—sacred authority. That anarchy
not only destroys order, authority, and freedom, but generates despotism ; while
revolutions usually lead to the wreck of virtue and right, and eventually end in loss
of liberty —in tyranny. Oh, the beauty of the vision is growing on my enraptured
soul. I see them looking to Heaven, and not to hell for liberty ; convinced that
true liberty cometh from above, and not from below, and diffuses her blessings only
where just government obtains ; where an authority, regarding power as a°sacred
trust, to be used for the interests of the whole community, and not of a few pri-
vileged individuals or classes, exacts national obedience from both peer and peasant,
places honour and uprightness on the judgment seat, rewards the good and
ennobles the high-minded, and sternly refuses to give place or power to unprincipled
political charlatans, no matter what is the tact or ability displayed by them during
a successful but infamous career.
At the close of the lecture, a vote of thanks, on the motion of Mr, P. E. Fallon
—who mentioned that the proceeds were to be devoted to a charitable purpose—
was carried to Dr. Bermingham by acclamation.


TIARA AND CROWN.
A CBITIQUE AND EXPOSITION.
A Lecture in reply to Dr, Bermingham's Lecture on “ Modern Notions of
Liberty."
The above was the title of a lecture delivered on the 19th June, at the Mechanics’
Institute, Albury, by the Rev. B. Butchers, 8.A., of Wodonga. At 8 o’clock the
chair was taken by
The Rev. A. D, Acocks, who introduced the lecturer in the following terms :
Ladies and Gentlemen—When I was first asked to take the chair on this occasion,
I declined. First, because I thought it would be injudicious to bring the clerical
element too prominently forward ; and in the second place, as the subject is not
necessarily a religious one, I thought the chair would have been better filled by a
layman. I was induced a short time since to consent to preside, with the hope that
I might prevent this assembly from considering itself, or being considered by others,
apartyone. Thesubjectof the lecture is, as you know, “Modern Notions of Liberty,”
in reply to one on the same subject by Dr. Bermingham. Now, I want every member
of this assembly to remember and admit that Dr. Bermingham had a perfect right to
state, and to state publicly, his opinion on this subject; just as Mr. Butchers has a
perfect right to state his opinions publicly on the same, or any other question. It
is a subject dear to every Englishman, and should be so to every man, whatever his
nationality, creed, or colour 5 and this reminds me of another thing I wish you to
remember. Dr. Bermingham was most careful to avoid all mention of any other
Church, except that to which he belongs. He did not attack the Church of
England, nor the Presbyterians, nor did he touch upon any doctrine or religious
question that would hurt the feelings of any person present. I believe his argu-
ments were fallacious, his conclusions equally far from the mark, his definition of
liberty narrow and one-sided ; and it is to discuss these, and not to indulge in any
religious controversy, that we are here. It was upon this understanding that I con-
sented to occupy my present position, I trust that all present will give the
lecturer as fair and impartial a hearing as was accorded to Dr, Bermingham, and
that you will dismiss from your minds all party and sectarian feelings. I now call
upon the Rev. Mr. Butchers to commence.
Mr. Butchers then spoke as follows :
Mr. Chairman, Ladies and Gentlemen —Before formally entering upon the
subject of this evening’s lecture, I must beg leave to offer one or two preliminary
remarks. For my appearance here to-night, and for the sentiments to which I may
give expression, lam alone to be held responsible. I have no kind Dr. M'Alroy on
whose ample shoulders I may lay the blame, if blame there be. lam not, how-
ever, disposed to apologise for thus intruding myself upon your notice, because I
hold it to be a sacred duty binding upon every public teacher to stand forth man-
fully in defence of Eight and Truth. And I felt that I could not, without acting
a traitor’s part, stand silently by, and suffer to go unchallenged, a lecture which
seriously affected the honour and'impugned the faith of my country. I have been
warned that little good and much harm may be expected to come from such a
controversy, but I have sufficient confidence in the manliness and Christian
liberality of my Roman Catholic friends in Albury to believe that they will bear me
no personal ill-will for endeavouring to point out to them a more excellent way
than their own. In doing this, while I shall scrupulously avoid giving unnecessary
offence, yet I must be permitted to express my meaning in plain Saxon-English.


If there happen to be any Roman Catholics present, they must be prepared for
some hard hitting; but I wish, once for all, to say that I shall make no statement
which I am not fully prepared to justify and defend, and in defining or stating
Roman Catholic doctrines or practices, I shall, when possible, quote in proof
Roman Catholic authorities. And I shall be the more careful on this
point, because no less an authority than Cardinal Wiseman has declared
that he has no hesitation in saying that “never yet has an attempt been
made to expound Catholic doctrines in any other place of worship but our
own, without those doctrines being most strangely misrepresented.” If that be
so, then I intend to be an exception to the rule. I fight for truth, and not fox-
victory. “ I speak as to wise men ; judge ye what I say,” But to my subject. I
confess then that it was with mingled feelings of surprise and curiosity that I
heard the first announcement of the lecture so recently delivered by the eloquent,
learned, and able Dr. Bermingham. I felt delighted at the prospect of listening to
such a lecturer on such a subject. In this case, however, as in most others, the
pleasure of having was not equal to that of anticipating. I expected argument,
but was overwhelmed with declamation ; I heard much of “ stern logic,” but found
more of the flowers of rhetoric ; “ The hands were the hands of Esau, but the face
was the face of Jacob I hungered for the bread of proof, but was starved on the
empty husks of assumption.
My first complaint is that Dr. Bermingham proposed to lecture on one thing,
while he really lectured on another. The very title of the lecture—“ Modern
Notions of Liberty”—clearly implies that there is more than one notion of liberty
abroad in these days among anti-Catholics. The Doctor, however, reso-
lutely fastened his iron grip upon one and one only, and so led his hearers to
believe that this was the only one which anti-Catholics could adopt. In fact, his
lecture was really on Communism or Red Republicanism, and none will be
more ready than myself to endorse every word of his powerful invective against
the atrocious crimes committed under the influence of that notion of liberty.
But was it fair to lead us to suppose that if we rejected the Roman Catholic notion
of liberty we must accept the Red Republican ? Is there no via media, no golden
mean which shall steer between the tyranny of the former and the license of the
latter ? Had we not a right to expect that some distinction would be drawn
between the license claimed by a, French Radical and a British Protestant ? If
we looked for any such distinction, we were doomed to disappointment. Dr.
Bermingham evidently sees no difference between “ French pets” and English
reformers—between a Rochefort and Milton. The former he graces with the
elegant epithet, “ vilest of vile tyrants,” while the latter he dignifies with the lofty
title of “ superb rebel.” I confess that I felt hot with indignation when I heard
England’s purest, noblest bard, and boldest champion of rational liberty, defamed
by such an opprobrious epithet; nor was my indignation lessened when he charged
Milton himself with holding the same rebellious notion of liberty which he
ascribed to Satan, “Better to reign in hell than serve in heaven.” Dr. Bermingham,
in making such a charge, is either entirely ignorant of the whole tenor of Milton’s
life and works, or else has suffered prejudice to blind him. Milton, it is true, was
the uncompromising foe of tyrants and tyranny, whether the tyrant were a King
or a Pope, or the tyranny civil or religious, but an enemy to liberty, never ! Dr,
Bermingham, howevei', in thus confounding notions of liberty which are essentially
distinct, is. after all, but true to the instincts of his order and faithful to the
teachings of his Church. His views flow logically enough from the cruel doctrine
which he and every other priest and Roman Catholic must believe, that “ there is
no salvation outside the pale of the Roman Catholic Church.” There may be
degrees of wickedness in devils, but are they not all devils still. Lest I should be
thought gulity of exaggeration, while under the influence of polemic zeal, I will
read to you the calm and deliberate utterance, not of a Protestant, but of a
Roman Catholic author. “ Out of thine own mouth will I condemn thee.” I
hold in my hand a volume of essays on Religion and Literature, edited by no
less an authority than Archbishop—prospective Cardinal—Manning. I presume
that every Catholic will be satisfied with that name. As I may have to refer
again to these essays, I had better state once for all that they were delivered
before a Roman Catholic Academy in London, which was founded by Cardinal
Wiseman in 1861, and which since his death has been carried on under the able
superintendence of Dr. Manning. On page 142, we find Mr. F. Oakley thus


delivering himself :—“ The position then to be realised is this :we Catholics are,
by the grace of God, children, whether by inheritance or adoption, of the Church
which is the sole and exclusive depository on earth of eternal and immutable
truth; nor alone the passive receptacle of that truth, but its ordained guardian
and active dispenser. We neither share our treasure nor divide our claims with
any other religious body whatever. The most imposing of the pretensions of
other bodies does not even approach the limits, far less invade the province and
threaten the majesty of our prerogative ; the most orthodox of their opinions does
not in one, and that a most important sense, come a whit nearer to our truth
than the wildest and niost fanatical of their doctrinal innovations.” And then
the Essayist, far from feeling a blush of shame at his own arrogance, tells his
audience that he feels “ bound to apologise for the enunciation of truisms so
obvious.” If any liberal Catholic should feel scandalised by the “ enunciation of
truisms so obvious,” let him remember that the Doctor and the Essayist are both
perfectly right according to the teachings of Holy Mother Church: of which more
presently,
A second charge that I have to bring against the Doctor is that while his avowed
object was to produce peace and unity, the direct tendency of his remarks was to
sow dissension and to breed discord. “ Oh, not for a little world,” we hear him
exclaiming at the beginning of his lecture, “ would I wilfully and unnecessarily
introduce anything out of harmony with the rational feelings of one in this
audience; indeed, if I know my heart, of any one in wide Australia.” Noble
sentiment, but then unfortunately it was only a sentiment, for almost immediately
after we have him hurling at our heads the assertion that “ we inherit the infamy
of three centuries of persecution—the cruelest and most atrocious God ever allowed
savage hate to inflict, in the name of religion, upon a people always ready to forgive
the wrong-doer, and die in defence of justice, truth, and legitimate authority.”
Time was when Roman Catholics felt constrained to acknowledge and deplore
those dark deeds of cruelty which, during long ages, were not only perpe-
trated but sanctioned by the infallible authority of the Church; but, in these
days, it has become the fashion among leading Roman Catholics to deny that they
have ever persecuted, and, with many and loud protestations of innocence, to hurl
back the accusation upon the heads of Protestants. Dr. Bermingham has good
authority for his assertion. He has not read Manning and Newman in vain.
Thus, in the Essays, page 45, we have Dr. Manning rejoicing that, “ After three
hundred years of penal laws, to which the fabulous cruelties of the Spanish Inqui-
sition are merciful, the Church in England is once more free ;” while we hear
Dr. Newman asserting that Protestants have “ persecuted whenever, wherever, and
however they could, from Elizabeth down to Victoria, from the domestic circle up
to the Legislature, from black looks to the extremity of the gibbet and the stake.”
( Hare's Contest with Rome , page 266.) We find him endorsing, also, the extra-
ordinary statements of the Catholic Balmez that “ the Popes, armed with a tri-
bunal of intolerance, have scarce shed a drop of blood : Protestants and philoso-
phers have shed it in torrents.” These assertions, and I can produce some more if
required, may well be treated with the contempt they deserve, yet it is only right
that Protestants should know something of the unblushing effrontery of Romish
advocates. It is readily admitted, and admitted with sorrow and shame, that at
times Protestants have persecuted, though not with the persistence or savage
cruelty which have ever characterised Romish persecutions ; but there is this
essential difference, that Protestants have persecuted, contrary to their principles,
Romanists in accordance with them: we confess and deplore our past errors, Rome
denies or justifies her most atrocious crimes. Let but Pope Pius IX., speaking ex
cathedra , tell us that the Church of Rome shall never persecute again, and the
hatchet shall be buried ; but until we have that authoritative denial of the
Church’s right to persecute, we are compelled to believe that -tfhat has been may
be again. As to the Doctor’s charge against us of cherishing “ feelings of hatred
towards Irish Catholics in our bigot hearts,” I can only say that he must have
evolved them as the German did the camel, out of his own consciousness. It
is not we who cherish feelings of hate towards any Catholics, but, alas ! it has
ever been the policy of Rome to produce in Roman Catholics feelings of hate
towards Protestants. Nor do I wonder that such feelings do exist when I reflect
upon the kind of food upon which Rome feasts her children. Let me give you
one or two examples, for I am most anxious to make no assertion without proof.


While in Melbourne I had the curiosity to examine Haydock's Catholic Family
Bible in the Public Library, and to read some of its notes. Now, this Bible bears
date 1853, and was issued with the approbation of the Vicars Apostolic of Scot-
land. Among other notes of a similar kind, I found this on the 11th verse of
Jude’s epistle —“ Heretics follow the way of Cain, by murdering the souls of their
brethren ; the way of Balaam, by putting a scandal before the people of God for
he ir own reward ; and the way of Korah, by their opposition to the Church
government of Divine appointment.” On turning to the 9th chapter of Revela-
tion I found that Luther was the star that fell from heaven, and that the locusts
which came up from the smoke of the bottomless pit were—heretics. This was
a portion of the note—“ The locusts are commonly understood of heretics.
Heretics are compared to locusts, said St. Jerome, because they are a species of
insects extremely hurtful to mankind, as they occasion famine, eat up the
harvest, and even strip the trees and vines. With very great propriety,
then, may the locusts here mentioned be understood of the first reformers,
not only on account of their rapacity, but also of their numbers.” In
the Bth verse of the same chapter, it is said that the “locusts had hair
as the hair of women.” The note on this is almost too scandalous to quote, but
truth compels me to do violence to my own feelings. The note then says—“ This
latter allusion, unhappily for the sectaries, betrays too plainly their sensual
propensity towards that sex, their shameful doctrine on that score, and the scanda-
lous example of their practice.” And what is the proof for this shameful
accusation ? Positively nothing more than that Luther and some others “ married,”
and oh, horror of horrors ! Luther “married a nun.” The commentator winds up
this creditable note with the clinching remark: “ But, as St. Jerome says, it is
rare to find a heretic that loves chastity,” In the preface to this Bible, the editor
states that “ to obviate the misrepresentations of the many heretical works which
disgrace the Scriptures and deluge this unhappy country, has been one main design
of this present work.” I may say that 1 made these extracts among others
with my own hand, and I publicly vouch for their absolute accuracy. My
only comment on these extracts will be to ask Dr. Bermingham how far
such comments can be reconciled with St. Paul’s description of charity in
the 13th chapter of Ist Corinthians—that charity which “thinketh no evil;
rejoiceth not in iniquity, but rejoiceth in the truth ; beareth all things, believeth
all things, hopeth all things, endureth all things.” Or how he can reconcile it with
our blessed Saviour’s exhortation to His disciples, contained in the'oth chapter of
St. Matthew, 43rd and following verses :
“ Ye have heard that it hath been said, Thou shalt love thy neighbour and hate
thine enemy.
“ But I say unto you, Love your enemies, bless them that curse you, do good to
them that hate you, and pray for them that despitefully use you, and persecute
you;
“ That ye may be the children of your Father which is in heaven : for He
xnaketh His sun to rise on the evil and on the good, and sendeth rain on the just
and on the unjust.
“ For if ye love them which love you, what reward have ye ? Do not even the
publicans the same ?
“ And if ye salute your brethren only, what do ye more than others ? Do not
even the publicans so ?
“ Be ye therefore perfect, even as your Father which is in heaven is perfect.”
A word or two as to the Doctor’s logic. This in his hand is a magic wand,
which produces the most wonderful results. “ Stern logic” is his favourite weapon
of offence and defence. With its powerful aid he builds up his own argument,
and demolishes that of his opponents. He reminds me of no one so much as
Hudibras :— *
“ He’d run in debt by disputation,
And pay with ratiocination ;
All this by syllogism true,
In mood and figure he would do.
He would distinguish and divide
A hair ’twixt south and south-west side,
On either which he would dispute,
Confute, change hands, and still confute.’


The Doctor, too, while he has many premises, has but one conclusion. No matter
where he ‘starts from in his argument against modern notions of liberty, he is sure
to land us in “ horrid confusion,” or a denial of God’s very existence. In this he
reminds me of a fellow-student at the Melbourne University, who, no matter what
the mathematical question, always found the answer in the Binomial Theorem.
The Professor assured us one day, with a sarcastic smile, that although this
ingenious youth invariably worked out the Binomial Theorem quite right, yet he
failed to pass. Thus it is with the Doctor’s logic. It is very clever, but it is not
correct. If half of what the Doctor said were true, then the sooner we get back
into the ark of the true Church the better; but it is not true. Let me give you
an illustration or two. He is arguing that man has rights, not simply as man, but
that “ there are and must be special rights arising out of special relations ; for
instance, rights of property, of family, of social rank,” with all of which I
cordially agree. “Admit equality in them," the Doctor goes on, “and you at
once assert that any one in this room has as good a right to Mr. Fallon’s big
store as he has, and, what I should not like to allow, to that buggy and horses
given me the other day,” with which I don’t at all agree.* On the very
contrary, I most confidently assert that it is precisely because we do “ admit
equality in them" that Mr. Fallon has exclusive right to his big store, and the
Doctor to his buggy and pair. Is it not singular that from exactly the same
premises, two logicians will draw exactly opposite conclusions. Yet so it is.
What, then, is the solution ? Simply this, that the Doctor was, as usual, fighting
against socialists and advanced radicals, who deny special rights in property,
affirming that no one man has any better right than another to the
possession of any given piece of property, but that all property should
be resumed by the State, and administered for the common weal. With that
view, Protestants have no sympathy whatever. Our view is that Mr. Fallon
has' a right to his store equal to the fright that the Doctor has to his buggy,
or any other person to his own possessions. The Doctor’s argument is good against
socialism, but is quite irrelevant so far as we are concerned. Let us look at
another specimen of the Doctor’s logic. He is arguing against the Protestant
theory of the reciprocal though independent powers of Church and State, and he
tells us that “ in this theory it is not hard to detect the revival of Manicheism, or
the assertion of two distinct independent first principles. The Church, represent-
ing as she does the spiritual order, is fiercely denied the right of guidance or
authority over the secular, which is represented by the State. According to this
theory there are two final ends, independent one of the other (and now comes
the logic) “ but if there be two final independent ends, there must be two first
causes.” I confess that, without intending any disrespect for the Doctor, I laughed
outright at this conclusion, for by it the Doctor denies to God a power which is
actually exercised by man. His argument amounts to this, that two chairs require
two carpenters to make them. Why this world of ours is chock full of final inde-
pendent ends in the sense in whicn we plead for the reciprocal independence of
Church and State. Nay, more, it will hardly be denied by any rational mind what-
ever that the one First Cause could create two distinct independent worlds, which
should have no relation whatever the one to the other. But we need not go so far.
A pill and a pistol has each a distinct final end—the one to cure, and the other to
kill—and yet it is quite possible for one man to make both. Even, then, granting
the Doctor’s premises, his conclusion is quite irrelevant, and therefore illogical.
It may be worth while here to point out the fallacy which underlies this and
every other Roman Catholic argument against the reciprocal though independent
powers of Church and State. Roman Catholics assume that because the Church
has not a direct influence over the State, that therefore the is “ infidel or
atheistical,” just as they assume that because religion is not taught in the
schools, therefore the schools are “ godless,” which is just equivalent to saying
that when any given individual is transacting church business he is holy, but that
the moment he puts his hand to secular labour he is unholy. This fallacy arises
from the habit of considering the State and Church as real and separate entities,
whereas when we speak of the State ruling, we only mean that the people in the
State are, by their chosen representatives, transacting their secular business ; and
when we speak of the Church ruling, we only mean that the religious portion of
the people in the State are bringing holy influences to bear upon their rulers. But
m each case it is the people, in the one case, performing their secular, and, in the


other, their religious duties. The State, in fact, is one comprehending the secular
and religious element, just as an individual is one though he perform distinct
functions. Hence it is that if the people of a State be moral and religious, they
indirectly exercise a sway over those who transact the secular business of the State
more imperial and influential for good than Rome ever exercised in the palmiest
days of Innocent 111. or Hildebrand. And why so? Simply because if the
people be moral and religious, they will choose moral and religious rulers, and so
the Church will really guide and rule the secular power. The influence which
the Roman Catholic Church would bring to bear upon the secular power is a
mechanical one, working from without, and producing constant discord and
rebellion ; while the influence which the Protestant Churches bring to bear is
chemical, working from within, and so permeating irresistibly, though silently,
all the varied forces, agencies, and rulers of the State. Which theory produces
the happiest and most permanent results, let the condition of Spain and
Italy as contrasted with that of England and America show. In the former
we see the secular power everywhere in revolt against the spiritual, while in the
latter we behold the spiritual really influencing and directing the secular. You will
observe that I have omitted France from this comparison. I did so because I was
in doubt, from Dr. Bermingham’s language, whether France is, or ever has been,
a Roman Catholic country or not. I will quote his words—“ The fruits of Galli-
canism in the last century were the terrors of 1789, and in our days are the
infamies of Garibaldi and the Communists of Paris. Gallicanism cannot deny
its own. It has consecrated the principle of revolution, made authority and
vested rights void, and found issue at one time in unmitigated despotism, and at
another in individualism.” Now the Gallican or French Church is Roman Catholic,
or it is not. That much is plain. But it is not Catholic, for the Catholic
Church cannot err , and surely to “ consecrate revolution” is an error; and
yet it is and must be Catholic, unless an infallible Pope may be fallible,
for Pius IX., when addressing the French on the 18th of June, 1871,
exclaimed —“ Not pray for France ! how could I forget that nation, first-born,
of the Church , and well deserving of the Holy See ? From France have I received
the greatest aid of every kind, both in money and men who have shed their blood
and died in my defence. ” (“ Modern Jove," page 411) Thus, from Dr. Berming-
ham’s own premises—premises, too, which he cannot and dare not deny —that the
Church and Pope are both infallible, it logically follows that the Gallican Church
does and does not belong to the true Church —a conclusion which, I need hardly
say, is both an absurd and impossible one. For that, however, lam not responsible.
The absurdity lies in the assumptions, and not in the conclusion. This is only a
specimen of the contradictions and absurdities involved in the Romish dogmas of
the Visible Unity and Absolute Infallibility of their Church.
There are several other points in the Doctor’s lecture which I would fain criticise,
but I must hasten on to show that separation from the Holy See is not “ equivalent
to placing liberty in disobedience to constituted authority,” even though that
authority be “ hallowed by the glories of centuries, and venerable and sacred by the
prescription of more than 1800 years.” If antiquity be the test of truth, then the Greek
Church has claims quite equal to those of the Roman Church. Throughout his whole
lecture, Dr. Bermingbam assumed for his Church equality with God, whence it
follows, logically enough, that if you disobey the Church you do disobey God. Dr.
Bermingbam, however, made the very common mistake of assuming his major
premise before he proved it. It will be our task, then, now to examine the founda-
tions and superstructure of the Romish Church, when I think that we shall find
that her claims are altogether disproportionate to her authority. Now, the most
important claims or so-called vested rights of this Church are three in number,
viz., the Papal Sovereignty, the Papal Supremacy, and the Papal Infallibility. By
the first, in its widest sense, the Pope, as the Head of the Church, claims an appel-
late jurisdiction over nations in civil matters ; by the second, supreme jurisdiction
over nations, churches, and individuals in matters of conscience; and by
the third, supreme jurisdiction over nations, churches, and individuals in
matters of conscience. When Rome has claims so vast to present, her
foundations must surely be very broad and sure. Is it so ? Let us see.
First, let us take the dogma of Papal Sovereignty. What is the real,
plain meaning of this dogma ? It simply means this, that the Pope claims
an authority in civil matters superior to the authority of kings or parlia-


xnents. In effect the Pope says to kings and emperors—■“ By me kings reign and
princes decree justice.” Past Popes have exercised this temporal sovereignty, and
the present Pope claims it also. For proof of the former, I will quote Dr. Man-
ning, and for proof of the latter, the Pope himself. Dr. Manning, in his funeral
oration over those who had died in defence of the temporal power, thus exhorts
his hearers:—“And be not afraid, brethren, for the Holy See. What has
befallen it, is only its common fare these 1800 years. It has lived in conflict ;
again and again from age to age it has been beset and overwhelmed. The patri-
mony of St. Peter has been trampled down, and held for generations by despots
and usurpers ; and Rome itself has been sieged and sacked, sacked and sieged
again. The Yicar of Jesus Christ has gone forth again and again from his seat
of power to await the subsiding of the waters : and when the flood was overpassed
all things were found as in the beginning. So it ever has been ;so it ever shall
be; for the life of the Church is undying because Divine. The Roman Empire
could not quench it; the nations of the north could not put it out. The Lom-
bards ravaged its inheritance and were destroyed. . . . Henry of Germany
strove with St. Gregory YII. He was excommunicated and fell. Frederick of
Barbarossa laid siege to Rome. Alexander 111. smote him with an interdict, and
he never prospered more. An Emperor of France annexed Rome to his dominions,
and laid hands on the Vicar of Christ, and his downfall is a bye-word in the
history of this century.” Let me now read to you the words of Pope Pius IX.
himself. Addressing the Austrians and Tyrolese on June 18th, 1871 —“At the same
time I put you in mind that your obedience and fidelity must have limits. Be
faithful to the sovereign that God has given you, obey the laws which govern you;
but when it becomes necessary , your obedience and fidelity must stop at the foot of
the altar, and go no further — usque ad aras. For it must not be forgotten that
besides obligations binding you as subjects, you have other duties of
conscience as Christians. Remember that, above lares, constitutions, empires,
is the Divine law, and above the princes of the earth is the Sovereign
Lord of Heaven, God, to whom, first of all, we must be faithful and
obedient. Then unite the two things, and let your supreme law be—the holy law
of God and that of the Church." ( Modern Jove, p. 62.) The plain meaning of
this is, that the voice of the Church is the voice of God. Disobey the Church, and
you become a rebel against God. Dr. Manning conveniently forgets that Henry
VIII. and Queen Elizabeth were also excommunicated, but they did prosper, while
all the anathemas which the present Pope has heaped upon Victor Emmanuel don’t
seem to injure him at all. Perhaps the true explanation of this palpable failure
may be found in Solomon’s proverb; “As the bird by wandering, as the swallow by
flying, so the curse causeless shall not come” (Prov. xxvi. c., 2 v.) If, however,
Pius IX. cannot injure Victor Emmanuel in time, he means to do it in eternity, for
has he not the keys of heaven and hell ? These are his words, translated by Mr,
Arthur from the Pope’s recently collected speeches—“ Now,” the Pope says, “ those
who ought to guard the patrimony of St. Peter, take it away. It is true that I cannot,
like St. Peter, launch the thunders that reduce bodies to ashes, but I can none the less
launch the thunders that reduce souls to ashes; and I have done it by excommunicat-
ing all those who have perpetrated and borne a hand in the sacrilegious spoliation.”
This is the man who, according to Dr. Manning, “is meek above all men upon earth,
and who came among his people as an Angel of Peace.” I suspect Victor
Emmanuel and his co-patriots regard PiuslX. rather as a Destroying Angel. Alas!
we fear that Pius IX. has indeed fallen on evil days, for now interdicts and
excommunications have no effect whatever. Nor indeed is there a really Christian
state on the face of the earth. “The State,” says Mr. Lucas in the Esssays, p.
364, “is either Christian or Infidel. If Christian it must both in the persons of
its members and in itself submit to the society out of duty.” “If the State be
Infidel, as indeed nearly every State is, either it gives nothing, or it gives persecu-
tion, or it gives just so much protection that it hopes to receive some more of the
same sort.” What a dismal prospect does not our world present to a Roman
Catholic ! Dr. Manning’s eye wanders to and fro in the earth, but it cannot rest
upon one green spot where the Papal sovereignty is acknowledged. England,
France, Italy, Spain, Prussia, Austria, all, all have rebelled, and Rome’s mournful
plaint is, “ I have nourished and brought up children, and they have rebelled
against me.” Now, how came this tremendous change upon the earth ? Has the
whole world thrown off its allegiance to God because it refuses to recognise the


temporal power of the Pope ? Is all this the work of devils, as Pius alleges, or is
it not rather the enlightened conscience of man moving under the directing agency
of God, in resisting and throwing off a yoke which was too grievous to be borne ?
Men first doubted, then examined, and finally rejected the justice of this so-called
vested right. When they came to ask the Pope for his Divine warrant, they
were told that there was no direct warrant either in Scripture or Tradition,
but that it was inherent in the Spiritual Power. It is admitted that the power
was not exercised for long centuries, but we are assured by Dr. Manning that
“ though some hundreds of years passed before the Vicar of Christ was clothed
with his Royalties, yet the germ of his temporal prerogatives was inherent in the
spiritual supremacy from the beginning.” ( Sermons —Manning, p. 266.) Father
Burke, the great Dominican orator, is more precise, and tells the exact time
which this “ germ” took in order to expand into its present magnificent size. In
his eloquent oration on the Pope’s Tiara or Threefold Crown, in answer to the
question, How old is this tiara 1 he says, “ I answer that, although the mere
material crown and its form dates only from the year 1340 or ’42, and the Pontifi-
cate of Benedict the Twelfth, the tiara itself —the reality of it—the thing that it
signifies—is as ancient as the Church of God, which was founded by Christ our
Lord.” So, after ail, this mighty claim has to rest upon a theory of development.
Now, was it not a little ungrateful of Dr. Bermingham to anathematise Darwin
so fiercely when Newman and Manning are glad to take a leaf out of Darwin’s
book, and “ develope” the enormous temporal prerogatives of the Pope out of some
minute spiritual germ—a germ as different in quality and magnitude from its
final result as Darwin’s famous ascidian is from the noble biped man. Was it
any wonder, then, that when the claim was found to rest on so uncertain a foun-
dation, the common sense of mankind rebelled against it ? Or, can any human
ingenuity torture such a revolt into a sin against God-willed order 1 Such then is
the claim, and such is its foundation. Are you prepared to accept it ? Are you pre-
pared to see the British Empire once more an appanage of Imperial Rome: and to accept
your policy not from a Parliament of your own choice, but from the Roman Curia 1
Are you prepared to hold fast your dear-bought liberty, or do you desire once more
to see the secular arm of the civil power employed in enforcing the decrees of a
spiritual despotism ? Be careful how you answer. Every Protestant here can
boldly answer No ! but a Roman Catholic dare not so answer, for if he does, that
very moment he ceases to be a Roman Catholic at all. Be not startled —I have the
proof at hand. Hear Dr. Wiseman on this point—“ For the moment any Catholic
doubts, not alone the principle of his faith, but any one of those doctrines that are
thereon based —the moment he allows himself to call in question any of the
dogmas which the Catholic Church teaches as having been handed down within
her—that moment the Church conceives him to have virtually con-
nection with her. For she exacts such implicit obedience that if any member,
however valuable, however he may have devoted his early talents to the illustra-
tion of her doctrines, fall away from his belief in any one point, he is cut off with-
out reserve ; and we have, in our own times, seen striking and awful instances of
this fact,” {Wiseman's Lectures, p. 77.) Let the Roman Catholics of Albuiy who
repudiate the dogma of Papal sovereignty, reflect on their true position in the
light of this doctrine, and they will see that their choice lies between their country
and their Church,
11. The second so-called vested right of the Roman Catholic Church is that of
the Papal supremacy. Lest I should by any mischance be guilty of misrepre-
sentation, I will ask Dr. Wiseman to define this dogma for us. On page 240 of
his lectures on the Church, we read, “ What then do Catholics mean by the
supremacy of the Pope, which for so many years we were required to abjure, if we
would be partakers of our country’s laws ? Why it signifies nothing more than
that the Pope or Bishop of Rome, as the successor of St. Peter, possesses authority
and jurisdiction in things spiritual, over the entire Church, so as to constitute its
visible head, and the vice-gerent of Christ upon earth. The idea of this supremacy
involves two distinct, but closely allied prerogatives ; the first is that the Holy
See is the centre or unity ; the second, that it is the fountain of authority.” But
we can quote higher authority than even Cardinal Wiseman, for in the 10th
article of the Creed of Pope Pius IV. every true Catholic declares, “ I acknowledge
the Holy, Catholic, Apostolic Roman Church for the mother and mistress of all
churches; and I promise true obedience to the Bishop of Rome, successor to St.


Peter, Prince of the Apostles, and Vicar of Jesus Christ.” It is the fashion now,
and the Doctor has followed it, for Roman Catholics to press their claim to the
title “ Catholic” to the exclusion of all other churches whatsoever. Unfortunately,
however, the very name of their Church condemns the arrogant claim. The Doctor
belongs to the Roman Catholic Church. Now, I need hardly tell so able a logician
as the Doctor that Catholic is the genus and Roman the species , nor need I remind
him that the species is never equal to the genus. The Roman Church, by her own
self-chosen title, confesses that she is, after all, but one branch of the universal
Catholic Church. Look, for example, at the title of the Church in the fourth century
as compared with that adopted by the Council of Trent in the sixteenth century.
In the fourth century, every Christian reciting the Nicene Creed declared, “ And I
believe one Catholic Apostolic Church;” but mark the difference in the creed of
Pope Pius IV., date 1564—“ I acknowledge the Holy Catholic Apostolic Roman
Church as the mother and mistress of all churches.” The term Roman was
inserted to distinguish between the Latin and Greek species of the genus Catholic,
since each claim an equal right to that glorious title. Now, however, the Roman
Church is pressing its claim to the exclusion of all other churches, declaring that
“out of her pale no one can be saved.” Now, look this idea of unity fairly in the
face, and see what it means. It means this, and only this, that there is no
salvation outside the pale of the Roman Catholic Church, and so dooms 180,000,000
of Greek and English Christians to the pains of eternal death. Some Roman
Catholics will doubtless be surprised and horrified to learn that this is the doctrine
of their Church, but I defy Dr. Bermingham or Father M‘Alroy to deny it publicly
either here or in the press. Do you ask for proof, then I declare that it is
explicitly so stated in the Canons of the Council of Trent, and so taught by every
faithful priest in the Church of Rome. I hold in my hand a copy of Gobinet's
Youths' Instructor, dated 1872, and published by J. Duffy, where, in article
111., on what we are obliged to ' believe concerning the Church, I read —
“ Fourthly, we are obliged to believe that there is no salvation for
any one out of this one true Church. This is an article of faith which
every true Christian is bound to believe” (p. 439). I am afraid that I shall
weary you with quotations, and yet it is high time that the members of the
different Protestant Churches should know from the lips of Roman Catholics
themselves in what light the One, Holy, Apostolic, Roman Catholic Church regards
them; that when she calls us “brethren” it is only out of “ condescension” to our
“ dwarfish standard of moral and spiritual attainment,” but that in the “ House of
Prayer where Catholics breathe most freely, and things are called by their right
names,” we are called “ heretics and Let us look at ourselves in the
looking-glass which Mr. Oakely has so kindly placed at our disposal. Doubtless
we have some difficulty in recognising our own features, so ugly and distorted
are they made to appear, but it is better for us to learn from infallible authority
our true appearance than continue to cherish any mistaken notions of grace or
beauty. “Here are we,” says Mr. Oakely speaking of himself and his Church, “in
this country the treasurers and. guardians of eternal truth, the inheritors of the
original religion, the members of that Church whose ancestry alone is royal, whose
pedigree is alone untarnished, and whose relations with the world she has
to conquer are alone unfettered by the boundaries of human empire, and
independent of the fluctuations of human caprice—here are we, I say,
through the effects of that misery which is proverbially the parent of unnatural
coalitions, compelled to cast in our lot with those Separatists of yesterday, even in
their largest comprehension and minutest intersection ; with the rejected of the
rejected, the off-shoots of the dissevered branch ; with the fautors, however un-
conscious, of heresy double distilled, and victims of schisms twice divided ; and
compelled to think it gain if we can get into port by the aid of a towage so rude,
or under a convoy so shabby. Certainly it is an abject position for the Queen of
the Nations and the Bride of the Lamb.*’ ( Essays , page 145). Nor let the great
and glorious English Church, which boasts equally with the Roman Catholic that
her priests are in apostolical succession, and that through her channels flow the
sacramental graces, rashly imagine that she is recognised as a sister Church by
this “ Bride of the Lamb.” Not for one moment. Listen to Mr. Oakely’s touch-
ing lament over the abject position of the True Church in that it cannot call
things by “their right names.” “Thus,” he says, “while forced to apply the
venerable name of a Church to that great religious society—the queen of all the


sects, thovgh lot a sect, which in this nation usurps the place, assumes the titles,
affects the privileges, and appropriates the revenues, of the ancient and rightful
Church of England, we are precluded from applying to ourselves any loftier
appellation than than that of the ‘ Catholic body.’ ” ( Essays , p. 146.) Is it any
wonder that when pretensions so ridiculous were seriously advanced, schism after
schism should have rent the Church of Eome, and that first the Greek, then the
Lutheran, then the English, and finally the old Catholic Church should have
asserted their rightful liberty. Can any priest, or bishop, or cardinal, or Pope
persuade us that we are doomed to eternal woe because we refuse to receive the
dogma of the Papal supremacy, which is built ostensibly upon a few obscure
passages of Holy Writ, which so interpreted are contradicted and disproved by
dozens of other passages about whose meaning there can be no doubt; but really
upon a series of forgeries —forgeries which have been acknowledged to be such by
Catholic historians for the last two centuries. For proof of this I refer you to
the seventh chapter of Hollands History of the Middle Ages, where he winds up
his account of these false decretals by the emphatic declaration, “upon these
spurious decretals was built the great fabric of Papal supemacy over the different
national Churches —a fabric which has stood after its foundation crumbled
beneath it; for no one has pretended to deny, for the last two centuries, that the
imposture is too palpable for any but the most ignorant ages to credit,” ( Hallam,
vol. 1. eighth ed., page 524.) Oh ! my Eoman Catholic friends, where are your
natural instincts of pity, where your bowels of mercy ? Am I, and 180,000,000 of
my fellow Christians, shut out of the true Church, cut off from Christ for ever,
because we dare not believe a dogma built on so flimsy and rotten a foundation ?
Oh! believe it not. We are members of the one, holy, Catholic, and Apostolic
Church as well as you, but that Church has its centre of unity and fountain of
authority not on earth, but in heaven, not in a frail and sinful man, but in a risen
and glorified Saviour. Within its ample bosom are nestling trophies of redeeming
grace, gathered out of every church, clime, and nation; for with St. Peter we
believe that “ God is no respecter of persons : but in every nation he that
feareth him, and worketh righteousness, is accepted with him.” (Acts x.,
34-5 v.) Within its spacious courts are crowding those whose robes are
washed and made white in the blood of the Lamb, whether they be Eoman Catholic,
Greek, Armenian, Lutheran, Protestant, or old Catholic. Is not that a glorious
Catholic Church ? Its test of unity, love to Christ; its test of holiness, a regenerated
heart; its test of catholicity, the multitude and variety of its members; and its
test of apostolicity, that it is “built upon the foundation of ” —not Peter, but —
“the apostles and prophets, Jesus Christ himself being the chief corner-stone; in
whom all the building fitly framed together groweth into a holy temple in the
Lord : in whom ye also are builded together for an habitation of God through the
Spirit.” (Eph. ii., 20-22 v.) But the Pope, in virtue of his supremacy, is not
only the centre of ipity, but the fountain of authority. As this point will come up
again under my next head, I will content myself with just quoting Dr. Wiseman’s
description of the powers it involves. He says —“ We likewise hold the Pope to be
the source of all authority, as all the subordinate rulers in the Church are subject
to him, and receive, directly or indirectly, their jurisdiction from and by him.
Thus the executive power is vested in his hands for all spiritual purposes
within her ; to him is given the charge of confirming his brethren in
the faith ; his office it is to watch over the correction of abuses, and the
maintenance of discipline throughout the Church ; in case of error spring-
ing up in any part, he must make the necessary investigation to discover it and
condemn it, and either bring the refractory to submission, or separate them as
withered branches from the vine. In cases of great and influential disorder in
faith or practice, he convenes a general council of the Church, presides over it in
person, or by bis legates, and sanctions, by his approbation, its canons or decrees.”
Such were the enormous powers of the Pope prior to 1870. Most Protestants, and
some Eoman Catholics, will doubtless be surprised to learn that the Pope claims
jurisdiction, not only over his willing, but also his unwilling subjects. His theory
is that every baptized human creature under heaven comes under his authority;
that they are bound by all the precepts of Eome, whether written or traditional,
and that they are obliged to observe them, whether willing or unwilling ; that
further, all baptised children of heretics or Protestants, when they grow to maturity,
are not to be left to their own choice, but are to be compelled to lead a Christian life,


by punishments, besides exclusion from the Eucharist and other sacraments. For
proof of this, I refer you to the 4th, Bth, 9th, and 14th clauses of the Council of
Trent, on Baptism. Such, then, were the enormous powers vested in the Pope,
and there wanted but one power more to make him truly our Lord God the Pope.
This power of infallibility was conferred by the last Yatican Council.
111. Papal Infallibility : Prior to this Council, while the opinion generally pre-
vailed that the Church was infallible, great difference of opinion existed as to
where, or in whom the infallibility lay. Some said it was in the General Council,
some in the Pope ; while a third class, being determined to make assurance doubly
sure, said it lay in Pope and Council when combined. So much for the unity of
the Roman Catholic faith. As we know, the knotty question was definitely settled
at the last Council, which decided that it was the Pope, when speaking ex cathedra
(whatever that may mean) on faith and morals, who alone was infallible. Hence,
let the Pope tell you what are the Canonical Books of the Bible, or what the
interpretation of any particular passage, and you are bound to believe him. Now,
the chief supposed virtue of this infallibility is that it establishes a final and
unerring court of appeal ; but let me ask how anyone of you know this dogma to
be true ? Is it because Dr. Bermingham tells you so ? He is not infallible, is
a bishop, or even a cardinal. The fact is, that even the Dogma of Infallibility
cannot override the rights of conscience, or the exercise of the reasoning powers.
Now, I protest against this dogma, because it is craftily used for the purpose of
cramping and fettering human freedom of conscience. The first, the only duty,
of a good Catholic is to obey, for in‘Cardinal Wiseman’s words, “ No one is, or can
be, a good Catholic, but by his entire submission to his Church,” p. 33, For
Rome, the chief of all the graces is obedience, “ blind obedience.” Let me prove
to you the vast importance she attaches to unquestioning, unreasoning obedience.
I hold in my hand the third volume of a Roman Catholic book on the Practice
of Christian and Religious Perfection. The author is V. F. Alphonsus Rodriguez,
of the Society of Jesus, and the publisher is Richard Coyne, printer and bookseller
to the Royal College of St. Patrick, Maynooth, and publisher to the Roman Catholic
Bishops of Ireland. The date is 1844. Here, then, if anywhere, we shall find the
truth. On page 227, vol. 111., the author defines “perfect obedience.” He says, “ There
are two sorts of obedience in religion. The one is general, common, and imperfect;
the other is perfect, and shows the force and virtue of obedience, and teaches us how
far a true religious may advance in perfection. The imperfect obedience, says
this saint, “has eyes to its own advantage; the perfect is blind, but in this
blindness, wisdom and perfection are clearly perceived. The one discusses every
command ; the other obeys without reasoning upon any point." Again on page
231. Let us have no eyes to observe curiously our superior’s actions ; let us make
no reply to the prescriptions of obedience ; and when we are commanded anything
against our inclinations let us act as if we had no feeling." And then he tells
us how the “ fathers of the desert, those excellent spiritual men, exercised their
scholars in obedience.” Thus St. Anthony made his disciple Paul first sew his
habit, and afterwards rip up the seams ; to make baskets of willows or palms, and
then pull them to pieces. Others made their scholars draw water out of a well,
and. to throw it in. again. And wg road that St. Francis commanded Brother Mace
his companion, to turn round in the highway, till he fell down through
dizziness. He made also those that asked the habit of his order, plant cabbage
and lettuce with their roots upwards, and did all this for no other end, than to try
their obedience, and even to deprive them of their own will ami judgment so far as
that no trace of either should remain." And then the author piously exclaims, I
wish to God these practices were in use at this day more than they are." These
extracts will serve to show what paramount importance Rome attaches to
obedience. The Church speaks, you must hear ; the Pope commands, you must
obey. The Pope must select your library for you, and you will not find Bunyan s
Pilgrim's Progress, or Milton’s Paradise Lost and Regained, or the Protestant
Bible there, for they have long held an honourable place in the Index Expurga-
torms. Now why this jealousy of all Protestant literature, even of a purely
uncontroversial kind ? Why, except that Rome dreads knowledge—dreads light.
I can read Roman Catholic books by the score, why may not a Roman Catholic
read Protestant books ? Ah ! they are poison, rank poison, Then all I have to
say is, I thank God we have so much of it ; and if Catholics but dared read Stilling-
fieet and Chilling worth, and Jeremy Taylor and Barrow, they would soon cut the


painter, and Rome knows it too well. I call upon you to assert your freedom, to
use your God-given powers. You dare not! And is he a free man that says he
dare not, because a priest forbids him ? Is it any wonder that the world is revolt-
ing against such tyranny; that such men as Dbllinger and Reinkens have burst
through the iron band of Infallibility ? Why, a good Roman Catholic dare not
believe my word, nay, the word of any Protestant; and why ? because a priest
forbids him. I protest against such tyranny. I am a man and a Christian,
and I have said nothing to-night that I do not in my heart believe to be
true. I claim, as my vested right, the right to be heard, and the right to be
believed, and I declare the man who denies me the one or the other as a coward and
a tyrant, he he Pope or Priest. “ This,” said that “ superb rebel” Milton, “is true
liberty, when a freeborn man having to advise the public may speak free.” Solo-
mon says, in the 18th chap, of Proverbs, in the 13th verse, “ He that answereth a
matter before he heareth it, it is a folly and a shame unto him.” And yet this is
precisely what is done by the Dogma of Infallibility. It condemns a man by
anticipation—before he has spoken. A man may bring to his task the mightiest
intellectual powers, the keenest insight into truth, the most unswerving integrity
of soul, in fine the most perfect combination and adjustment of mental, moral, and
spiritual powers, and yet this Dogma of Infallibility, like some grim spectre, shall
stalk across his path and hound him down with the cry, “ Believe him not, for I,
Pope Pius IX., am alone the Fountain of Truth and the infallible interpreter of
God’s own word. ” Then I answer, why, 0 most unfaithful steward of the manifold
mysteries of God’s word, why hast thou left thy flock in doubt and uncertainty as
to the meaning even of one portion of the Word of Truth ? Why forbid others
from attempting what thou hast not done ? Why, for example, hast thou not
decided on -the precise meaning of Christ’s words to Peter, the Rock of Rome ?
“ Go behind me, Satan, thou art a scandal unto me ; because thou savourest not
the things that be of God, but those that be of men” (Mat. xvi. 23). What says
the note ? This, “ These words may signify ‘ Begone from me,’ but the holy fathers
expound them otherwise, that is, ‘ Come after me, or follow me.’ ” May signify!
And dost thou attempt, 0 infallible interpreter, to satisfy my doubts with a “ may
signify” when I want to know what it does signify ? Do you not see, my hearers,
the reason for this politic uncertainty ? For the Church to decide'for the natural
meaning of the words were to deal a crushing blow at St. Peter’s supremacy
over the other Apostles, and on that supremacy the Pope’s power is built; while
to decide definitely that “ Get thee behind me” means “ Come and follow me,”"
the were to excite men’s ridicule, and turn God’s word into a very puzzle. And so
infallible Pope and the infallible Church for nineteen centuries have been satisfied
with a “ may signify !” I will tell you another reason why an infallible Pope
and Church leaves the meaning of this plain and simple passage in glorious
uncertainty. Let me ask some Roman Catholic to repeat the second article in
the Creed of Pope Pius IV.:—“ I also admit the Holy Scripture, according to that
sense which our Holy Mother Church has held and does hold, to which it
belongs to judge of the true sense and interpretation of the Scriptures ; nor will
I ever take and interpret them otherwise than according to the unanimous con-
sent of the Fathers.” Mark that last phrase; for since by her own confession
there is no unanimous consent of the Fathers on this knotty point, the infal-
lible Church is by her own rule forbidden from ever deciding on the true mean-
ing of the simple words —“ Get thee behind me, Satan I” This is only a specimen
out of dozens which might be adduced did space and time permit. Let me beseech
you, then, in the language of St. Paul, “Beware lest any man cheat you by philoso-
phy and vain deceit, according to the tradition of men, according to the rudiments
of the world, and not according to Christ” (Col. ii. 8). Go, my friends, straight to the
pure word of God ; there is nothing to forbid you. I challenge all the priests in
New South Wales to produce one single passage from God’s word which forbids any
man, woman, or child, from having free and full access to the Bible. Go home
and read the 118th Psalm—Douay version—and imitate David’s holy example.
He was not a priest, and yet he could say —“ 0 how I have loved thy law, O
Lord ; it is my meditation all the day. Through thy commandment thou hast
made me wiser than all my enemies; for it is ever with me. I have understood
more than all my teachers, because thy testimonies are my meditation. , . _
Thy word is a lamp unto my feet, and a light unto my path.” Ah ! but the mys-
teries ! the mysteries, you cry. My friends, there are mysteries in God’s word ;


but they are mysteries which the Pope is as powerless to fathom as any child ; but
there is no mystery as to the way of salvation. Isaiah declares that the way is so
plain that the warfarying man, though a fool, shall not err therein. The mysteries
you fear are of Rome’s own making, and you will not find them in God’s pure word,
You will find nothing there of confession to an earthly priest, of penance, of ab-
solution, of transubstantiation, of the worship of the Virgin Mary, of the
seven mortal sins, and a multitude of other inventions of men. You will find this
plain and simple statement—“ Believe in the Lord Jesus Christ and thou shalt be
saved” (Acts, xvi., 31 v.). “ The just shall live by faith” (Heb. x. 38 v.). So doing
you shall “ know the truth, and the truth shall make you free” (John, viii. 32 v.).
My task is ended. I have endeavoured to show that we plead not for lawless
license, but for rational liberty ; that we aim not at the destruction of any
real vested rights, but at the conservation of them all; that we plead for national-
isms in politics, and individualism in religion—a Free Church in a Free State
where individual rights, whether civil or religious are respected —and where the
laws are righteously administered and religiously obeyed. It is for you to judge
how far I have succeeded in showing that Ultramontanism is incompatible with this
true Christian liberty—liberty such as the bard sung 1 of in words of power and
beauty—
“ True liberty was Christian sanctified,
Baptised, and found in Christian hearts alone,
First-born of virtue ! daughter of the skies !
Nursling of truth divine! sister of all
The graces, meekness, holiness and love !
Giving to God and man, and all below,
That symptom showed of sensible existence,
Their due unasked; fear to whom fear was due ;
To all respest, benevolence, and love;
Companion of religion ! where she came,
There freedom came ; where dwelt, their freedom dwelt;
Ruled where she ruled, expired where she expired.
This, this is freedom, such as angels use,
And kindred to the liberty of God.
First-born of virtue ! daughter of the skies !
The man, the state in whom she ruled was free ;
All hence were slaves of Satan, Sin, and Death.”


DB. BIRMINGHAM'S FIRST LETTER IN REPLY.
To the Editor of the Murray and Hume Times.
Sir —“ Tiara and Crown ”is the showy title of Mr. Butchers’ reply to my lecture
on “ Modern Notions of Liberty,” in which, as the chairman —Kev. A. D. Acocks—
candidly admits, I “ did not attack the Church of England, nor the Presbyterians,
nor did I touch upon any doctrine orreligious question that would hurt the feelings
of any body present.” The title is obviously not original; “ Pope or President,” an
analogous one, is the title of an American publication—New York, Delisser, 1859.
Carnal Judaism said, not Christ but Caesar. The matter of the lecture in one sense
is as old as gutter controversy, and in another older. It may be found (passim) in
the cartloads of controversial writings with which fanatics and pharisees worry the
inoffensive, and embitter social and political relations. Educated non-Catholics
do not value or urge Mr. Butchers’ objections to my lecture as advanced by him.
Scientifically put they are used and do tell directly with some show of force against
every form of Christianity, throwing man back on the natural alone. Twenty-four
years ago I, for the first time, heard them proposed by my professor with precision,
point, and force, and then they looked formidable indeed, but now they seem trifles
light as air. The lecture is plausible, and not without what a Yankee would call
smartness ; but it is a melancholy instance of the influence of what Mr. Butchers
calls “polemic zeal,” in warping a clever man’s judgment and repressing the gene-
rous sentiments denied by nature to no one. Mr. Butchers not only misapplies
my reasoning, and perverts words to a sense obviously never intended—thus draw-
ing largely on the ignorance and credulity of the non-Catholics of Albury—but
adroitly evades, to a great extent, the whole thesis, in order to treat the “ liberal
Catholics” of Albury to some “ hard hitting,” and hang his controversial rags on a
something. Eeally, unless Mr. Butchers is more weak than wicked, his reply, so
fiercely aggressive, reveals a malicious impulse and an unchristian cunning. He
will persist in regarding my lecture as an attack on Protestants, though neither Mr.
Acocks or any educated high-minded Protestant in Australia saw it in that light.
Why is this ? Simply because he either does not understand it, or is unwilling to
master it as a whole, or view it in its unity. Poor Albury, only able to furnish a
harmless second in the person of Mr. Acocks, is obliged to send over the Borders for a
fiery zealot to do battle under the Potestant banner of the Protestant Association.
The Anglican rector and the protestor against Anglicanism joined hands in a
corporate effort to crush a Catholic priest and annoy a Catholic people by what I
take to be a corporate production. It is written, “And Herod and Pilate were
made friends that same day” (Luke c. 23, v. 12).
My lecture is made up of an introduction, a preparation of my audience for a
definition, a definition, conclusion seemingly flowing from it, and an expression of
my hopes and earnest wishes to maintain, as in the past, friendly relations with
every one in Australia. Following Brownson, I defined liberty to be the safe
enjoyment by every man of all his rights, natural and civil. In other words,
liberty is justice. The definition Mr. Acocks thinks “ narrow and one-sided, the
arguments fallacious, and the conclusions far from the mark.” That is a candid
avowal, a palpable objection, denoting a scholarly habit of thought, and a horror
of the shallow flippancy of the wriggling acrimonious controversialist, brimful of
hatred of Catholicity and foregone conclusions against the Catholic Church. But
assertion, Mr. Acocks, is not proof : even your opinion does not necessarily give us
certainty. Will you then favour us with a broad and many-sided definition, with
arguments and conclusions up to the mark ? I have, however, one complaint
against Mr. Acocks. I arraign him as the silent approver of language calculated
to lead to a breach of the public peace, and kindle to a white heat the angry


passions of one portion of his fellows against another. How could you, Mr. Acocks,
find it in your heart to quietly listen to a fierce warwhoop, so painfully suggestive
of Old Wesley’s shriek when hounding on the “scum of society to exterminate
Catholics.” Lo, and behold the charitable rhetoric of this graceful would-be guide
of the “ Liberal Catholics” of Albury to what he designates “ A more excellent
way.” “ Unblushing effrontery of Romish advocates.” He had promised to speak
“ Saxon English but Bomish is not English ;it is now considered vulgar imperti-
nence, disgusting to a gentleman, and simply nasty in the estimation of the
cultivated scholar. Hearken again : “ Dark deeds of cruelty, not only perpetrated
but sanctioned by the infallible authority of the church;” ‘ ‘ the persistent and
savage cruelty which has characterised Romish persecutions “ Romanists have
persecuted in accordance with their principles “ most atrocious deeds of Rome.”
“ It has ever been the policy of Rome to produce in Roman Catholics feelings of
hate towards Protestants.” Could utterances be more venomous, more malicious, or
more unchristain. Do we not recognise them as the faithful, though harmless, echo
of Wesley’s call in 1778 upon the people of England to annihilate Popery. That old
hypocrite’s truculent shout combined the ferocious bow-wow of the bloodhound with
the keen cowardly yelp of the jackal. Yet Mr. Butchers coolly asks Dr. Berming-
ham to reconcile notes in Haydock’s edition of the Bible with St. Paul’s touching
and beautiful description of charity. Then, raising his voice to a.roar, he cries out,
« Go, my friends, straight to the pure word of God ; there is nothing to forbid you,”
We have gone, Sir, to that record of supernatural love and justice. It is now open
before me, to read, in the sweet sermon oh the Mount, “ Thou hypocrite, pluck out
first the beam out of thy own eye, and then shalt thou see to cast out the mote of thy
brother’s eye.” Again I read : “ Now the end of the commandment is charity
from a pure heart and a good conscience and an unfeigned faith ; from which things
some going astray are turned aside unto vain babbling; desiring to be teachers of
the law, understanding neither the things they say nor whereof they affirm. (Ist
Tim., c. 1, v. 5,6.) “Art thou, Mr. Butchers, a master in Israel and knowest not ?”
St. Paul hath said, “ A man that is a heretic after the first and second admonition,
avoid ; knowing that he that is such a one is subverted and sinneth, being con-
demned by his own judgment (Titus, c. 3, v. 10, 11). Again St. John writes (2nd
Ephes., c. 1, v. 10): “ If any man come to you and bring not this doctrine, receive
him not into the house, nor say to him God speed.” Again (Ap., c. 2., v. 6) : “ But
this thou hast that thou hatest the deeds of the Mcolaitanes which I also hate.”
Strong words indeed, Mr. Butchers, and yet easily reconciled with the precept of
charity, or with God, “ who is charity.” In our charity, we pity and pray for all
who err or do wrong, to receive light, to know the truth, and grace to do well ; but
we hate what God hates—-sin and falsehood. It matters not how hard Mr. Butchers
may hit me or the Catholics of Albury, we cannot without sin exclude him from
the benefit of our prayers and good wishes. Yea, we would kindly remind him,
“ Men who live in glass houses should not throw stones.” Now, once for all, I
must protest against Mr. Butchers’ feigned discovery in my lecture of a continual
reference to Protestants. I never once used the word, not only in that lecture, but
in any one of my writings during the last twenty years. Whenever I do speak
of persons outside the Catholic Church, the stereotyped word is, non-catholic. Some
of my dearest friends are educated, high-minded Protestants, benevolent men,
amongst whom I have freely and happily mingled, in England, Ireland, and
Scotland, sharing their splendid hospitality, and the while calmly exchanging ideas
and opinions. If now, once and for the last time, I seem to enter the controversial
arena, I do so with great reluctance.
Mr. Butchers, suddenly emerging from the woods about Wodonga, has, to adopt
his own phrase, cleverly and cruelly tried “to exhume the hatchetbut I decline
to drag religion in the mire, and to discuss the venerable title deeds of the divinely
constituted Organism of the Catholic Church with any or every wayfarer—no matter
his pretensions to learning or genius—who can only give a furious negation of
everything Catholic, and, instead of the guides, his own pretentious self. My work
is to build up, not pull down —to give my people what is positive—not mere nega-
tion, clothed in burning words—to keep faith, hope, and charity alive in the human
heart, and not to fill it with unbelief, despair, and hatred. Truth is objective—is
being, else we must deny the objectiveness of reason itself. It, and not error or
the mere negation of truth, is the proper object of the intellect, and as such cannot
fail, with the help of God’s grace, to captivate the honest seeker after it. I shall,


therefore, confine myself to removing some of the sad misconceptions likely to
follow from Mr. Butchers’ baseless views and erroneous inferences, and to correctly
stating some of the Catholic doctrines, so fiimsily travestied by him. To do this
effectually, it will be necessary to explain the peculiar position Mr. Butchers
occupies as a theological wrangler. I shall, therefore, for the edification of our
friends, imagine a quiet interview between myself and Mr. Butchers, both laying
aside foregone conclusions and prejudices, sound and fury, and calmly discussing
a few of the sore points in question.
Dr. B.: I hold, and do still maintain, Liberty is justice I condemned only
outrages on justice. Did I then attack Protestantism ? Is it injustice ?
Mr. B.; You did attack it by inference: you wished us to infer there was no via-
media between your notion of liberty, which implies despotism, and that of the
communists, which means license.
Dr. B. : Surely despotism and communism are judged and condemned by my
definition of liberty, for both are outrages upon rights, and are therefore unjust.
This, moreover, I distinctly asserted without a qualifying clause. Did I not there-
fore actually select a via-media ? But I may be misunderstanding you ; say what
mean you by a via-media 1
Mr. B.: I much prefer denying and generalizing to strictly defining ; it limits
intellectual freedom overmuch, and clips the wings of fancy. My lecture is before
you ; I stand or fall by it.
Dr. B. : Liberty is Protestantism, is, then, as it seems to me, the formula
covering the substance of your lecture.
Mr. B.: What else could it be ? Certainly not Romanism.
Dr. B.; But you do not tell me what form of protest.araong the following, is national
[rational?] liberty—Lutherans, Calvinists, Agricolists, Anabaptists, Re-baptisers,
Storkites, Carlostadians—the three last banished by Luther from Wittenberg for
heresy ; Mincer executed for rebellion, 7000 Anabaptists killed—Adamites,
Apostolics, Taciturns, Perfects, Innocents, Libertines, Sabbatarians, Clancularians,
Manifestations, Weepers, Eejoicers, Indifferents, Sanguinarians, Andronicans,
Antitunitarians, Bacularians—a sect who deemed it a crime to have any other
weapon than a staff—Puritans, —a sect of rigid Calvinists, some of whom killed
cats for eating mice on Sundays, but deferred execution till Monday—Quakers,
Rustics, Insurrectionists, Sandemonians, Kiss-of-charity boys, Lovefeasts, Seceders,
Shakers, Socinians, Southcotians, Swedenborgians, Theophilanthropists—headed
by Tom Payne—Universalists or salvation everywhere, Tuinglians, Muggletonians,
New-lights, Seekers, Armenians, Tunkers—who deny eternal punishment—Episco-
palians, Fifth monarchy men, Jumpers, Groaners, Laughers, Latitudinarians,
Methodists, Robinsonians, Brownists, Ranters, Baptists, Pedobaptists, Mormons,
Spiritists, Demonists, with many others, all protesting against you, with one
exception, and of course, therefore, against Liberty on the via-media.
Mr. B.: lam a Methodist preacher, and, whatever may be our faults, past
history proves that we are not wanting in moral courage.
Dr, B.: Please then give us a proof of your moral courage, by reconciling the
following bit of sad history with your notion of rational liberty.' In the May of
1778, the British Parliament repealed certain provisions of the 10th and 11th of
William 3rd, entitled an act to “ prevent the further growth of Popery,” thereby
allowing Catholics to hold purchased property, and bishops and priests to say
mass. The other atrocious penalties for hearing mass, or teaching school, remained
in full force; still, no Catholic could be a postmaster, justice, or attorney, keep arms,
vote at elections, practice law or medicine, sit in parliament, defend a lawsuit, or
be a guardian, and to convert a Protestant to Catholicity was high treason. For
the honour of the Protestants of England, be it proclaimed that inhuman
legislation partially failed in its atrocious working. “ Neither bribes held out to
thfeir cupidity, nor assured impunity,” prevented them from manfully shielding
Catholics from the provisions of a ruthless enactment, which, Mr. Dunning
declared in the British Parliament, “ were calculated to loosen the bonds of society,
to dissolve all obligation, to poison domestic life, and to annihilate every
principle.” Will it be believed, by one body of men, and one old Pharisaical cleric,
by the Protestant Association, and the founder of Methodism —John Wesley, that
paltry relief from glaring injustice was regarded as a huge grievance, “ destined to
operate the destruction of the state and the ruin of the nation.” “ Popery,” said
the Protestant Association, “ is not only high treason against the king and the


state,” your one entity, Mr, Butchers, “ but also high treason against God.” The
dregs of the population, led by Lord G. Gordon—whom a witty pen pourtrayed as
a Lord with his hair cropped, a Bible in his hand, turned elder and high priest at
the age of 23, and fainting for the ark of Israel’’—gutted churches, attempted
to kill Protestant bishops, because they had pity on the Catholics, and kindled,
at one and the same time, 36 fires to burn London. In 1780, your spiritual
father in God, holding the via-media theory of liberty, published his two letters
on the civil principles of the Roman Catholics, in which he maintained “ that
no government but Roman Catholic ought to tolerate men of the Roman
Catholic persuasion,” that they ought not to be tolerated by any government,
Protestant, Mahomedan, or Pagan. The old Pharisee, too, with sanctimonious
whine and eyes upturned to heaven, exhorted Englishmen to act as one man with
Lord G. Gordon, “ to stop the progress of that soul-deceiving and all-destroying
superstition, which threatens to overspread the land,”—(“Attempt to establish the
Reformation in Ireland,” by Thomas Darcy Magee, page 252.)
Mr. B.: Wesley, no matter what you or any Romanist may say, was the marvel
of his age ; he attacked not liberty, but the despotism of enslaving Rome, I feel
that his pure heroic spirit has descended on me, giving “ moral courage” to hit you
and all Romanists hard. But you are now only trying to evade the force of my
crushing reply. You evidently see no distinction between Rochefort and Milton,
Dr. B.: Pray, can you, Mr. Butchers ? Rochefort, ignoring the Divine ordinance
of matrimony, defying public censure and outraging public decency, lived until her
sad death with the victim of his protesting passion. Was this liberty or license ?
It is, beyond all doubt, a practical protest against my notion of liberty. Milton
wrote a treatise on the “ Doctrine and Discipline of Divorce,” and, by his
scandalous proposal of marriage to the fascinating Miss Davis, forcibly, though
not explicitly, said to her, “ My wife refuses to come back to my cold Puritan
home ; I can, therefore, freely marry again. The Romish doctrine ‘ one to one, and
forever,’ is—if I may use the Rev. Mr. Butchers’ words touching the papacy—
‘ostensibly built upon a few obscure passages of Holy Writ.’ Will you, Miss
Davis, marry me, the author of the treatise on the ‘ Doctrine and Discipline of
Divorce ?’ ” This is protesting with a vengeance against the “ Catholic notion” of
liberty. Again, Rochefort went in thoroughly for the destruction of all vested
rights, and for standing with glaring eye and dagger drawn, in a spirit of gratified
pride and passion, over the commingled ruin of throne and altar. Was this liberty
or license ? It was a terrible protest against the “ Catholic notion” of liberty, more
especially during those terrible hours while protesters against my notion of liberty
were making a bonfire of lovely Paris. By the way, dear old Wesley liked a good
fire when he wanted to burn Popery. Milton, for the trifling consideration of one
thousand pounds, defended regicide ; and, clutching what may be termed his blood
money, described England—as Mr. Acocks can assure us—“ groaning under the
prelatic yoke”—that is, under one form of protest. In protesting against the
“ prelatic yoke,” Milton was, you must admit, or be inconsistent, your able pre-
cursor ; and, therefore, the “ advocate of rational liberty.” But what, Mr.
Butchers, about regicide ? Are the people at liberty to judge and kill kings 1
Mr. B.: You are forgetting or ignoring what I said of Milton; Milton was
England’s purest, noblest bard, and the advocate of “ rational liberty,” the foe of
Popes and all other tyrants.
Dr. B.: Tennyson is, now-a-days, I may presume, England’s purest, noblest bard ;
could you regard him as the advocate of rational liberty if—as Macaulay said of
Milton —“he stood up for divorce and regicide,” for the putting away of his wife
and attempting the seduction of an innocent girl, as also for the murder of our
Gracious Queen Victoria, defender of the “ prelatic yoke.” I may remind you, in
passing, the words “ better reign in hell than in heaven”* are neither mine nor
Milton’s ; the extract, by manipulation, becomes your own.
Mr. B.: You confound notions of liberty which are essentially distinct, and no
wonder, since your views flow logically from the cruel doctrine that you and every
Roman Catholic must believe that there is no salvation outside the pale of the
Roman Catholic church, and so doom 180,000,000 of Greek and English Christians
to the pain of eternal death.
* This is the Doctor’s charitable comment on a printer’s error, which is now corrected.


Dr. B.: Why not say to the pains of hell, or have you agreed with Miss F. P,
Cobbe that hell is a myth? You do not state Catholic doctrine correctly, not-
withstanding the help of Catholic writings. You want the key to the understand-
ing of it, because you will not allow you are fallible and feeble, requiring a guide, a
help, and a light to know the truth as it is in Christ, not as it seems to you to be
in the Bible, to know not your own sense of the Bible but God’s meaning thereof,
and to know it with certainty, and not as a matter of opinion. No priest, no layman,
is bound to believe the doctrine laid down by you ; how then can my “views flow
from it?” Being cannot come from non-being as its fruitful source. Every
Catholic is indeed bound to believe that any one guilty of actual sin, and dving
impenitent, is not saved, will go to hell; in other words he damns himself by a'vol-
untary criminal act, Christ, we believe, and know with certainty, established a
visible society of “ the new creature” or regenerated humanity, “ born not of blood,
nor of the will of the flesh, nor of the will of man, but of God (John c. 1, v. 14), and
commanded universal aggregation to it. To voluntarily and deliberately refuse
incorporation with Christ’s mystical body, or to reject or set at nought a living union
with the vine , Christ, is, we hold, a criminal violation of Christ’s command, and
a setting aside of the ordained mode of applying the merits of His precious blood
to the individual soul; and whoever knowingly and willingly presumes to goto heaven
not by the way marked out, by whatever way he himself fancies, incurs the guilt of
mortal sin, and thus dooms himself to hell. The sinner’s doom is then his own work ;
hell, or “ the pains of eternal death,” is his own deliberate choice. God gives man
free will; and he, voluntarily parting from his first cause, forfeits his ultimate end,
which is none other than th e final cause, and damns himself. Salvation is ordinarily
found in the bosom of the Catholic Church ; but this ordinance does not shorten
the arm of God’s power, nor limit his boundless mercy, “ Invincible ignorance,”
said a sharp Irish boy to an aristocratic questioner, “ may excuse you from the
mortal guilt of heresy or schism.” The boy however should have added, “ Ignorance
being negative cannot give a positive claim to the beautiful vision, which, while
it is a grace is al # so a reward of strict merit —a crown of justice, as St. Paul calls it.
Ignorance by itself only exempts from more stripes.”
Mr. B.: But the Roman Catholic Church by her “ self-chosen title”—Roman—
confessed that she is after all but one branch of the Catholic Church. When,
therefore, you hold the Catholic Church to be the ordinary home of grace and
salvation, you only claim a privilege shared in by all other churches. She is but
one of many churches constituting the glorious universal Church.
Dr. B.; Chosen for the instruction and direction of those “ who are carried
about by every wind of doctrine,” to indicate the centre and principle of unity,
without which catholicity is impossible, and chosen as a name of honour and glory,
like the name of Christian, when the perverse and ignorant used it as a term of
reproach. Yes, chosen to qualify the word catholic, as if there could be a dual
catholicity, or catholicity in the supernatural order of grace and salvation could
be multiplied, or as necessary to distinguish the organism, owning it, and alone,
really claiming it, from the sectaries or national churches. No. “ How shall we
know,” said a gifted French philosopher, “the Church of Christ amidst so many
claimants ? By a sign (he replied), to speak of only one, as resplendent as the sun
in the heavens ; the sign of universality, of catholicity, which no false authority
possesses, which no false authority can assume.”
Mr. B.: You should remember that I’m a catholic, but not a Roman Catholic. I
am one of “ the nestling trophies of redeeming graceone of those “ whose robes
are washed in the blood of the Lamb ;” one “ with a regenerated heart“ a
member of that glorious church whose test of universality is the multitude and
variety of its members.”
Dr. B.: Your description is not very like St, Paul’s (Ist Cor., c. 12). Every
member of the Church you fancy is at open war with every other. Union is a
note of Christ’s Church—disunion of the synagogue of Satan. Some years ago, I
was told, an inmate of an Irish Lunatic Asylum called himself the King of Tim-
buctoo. Did any one believe his claim, or call him by that honourable title ? Of
course not. Apply this test, as did St. Augustine in the case of the Donatists.
Would any one, young or old, man or woman in Albury, even of those who sur-
round your pulpit on Sundays, if asked—say by Macaulay’s New Zealander—to
point out the Catholic Church in Albury district, direct him to your conventicle
over the border ? Really to any one in Australia, not even excepting yourself, the


very idea must and would appear ridiculous, and not be entertained by any one
out of bedlam.
Mr. B.: But I have another and more serious charge against you. The direct
tendency of your lecture. However much you disclaim it, it was to sow discord.
Dr. B.: I assure you it was my most distant thought to attack or insult any one
in Australia.
Mr. B.; All very fine, but don’t you know the dark deeds of cruelty perpetrated
and sanctioned by your Infallible Church 1 You, of course, will deny them, but
the denial is only a proof of your unblushing effrontery. Time was when you felt
constrained to acknowledge and deplore them. Take your denial, indeed ! I know
better than that. Yon will, and may, promise good behaviour for the future ; but
until the Pope declares ex cathedra (whatever that means) that you Romanists do
.not intend, when you get the opportunity, to kill, burn, and make slaves of the
members of the Protestant Association, I shall not believe you—not I, indeed.
Dr. B.: Do be quiet and keep down your ire. It dims your brilliant intellect,
and spoils your meek features. Oh, if you could only see how much your appear-
ance alters when that spirit comes upon you, you should cry out for David’s harp-
ing upon his harp to allay him. Catholics, I do admit, were guilty of acts of
cruelty and stern despotism. Ido not deny there have been, and now are, bad
Catholics. Indeed, I described them pretty fully in my lecture, and accounted for
their falling below their principles, and acting against both the spirit and law of
the Catholic Church, whose unworthy criminal children they were. For instance,
to cite only one, Louis XIV., who revoked the edict of Nantes, and persecuted the
Huguenots, and interfered in the Jansenistic disputes, was a very immoral man,
and with Colbert, his minister, held he mas the State, and, in temporals, inde-
pendent of the Church. He would be the only judge of his own official acts, and
scouted the notion of accounting for them to the Church, the representative of the
spiritual order —not the order itself, as your reasoning would seem to affirm. The
law of charity binds all, from the Pope to the peasant ; and as long as we keep it
—in other words, as long as we remain good Catholics —we can do no grievous
wrong to any one. But even if we willed it, where is the power all the world over ?
The most the Church can do, even in her own defence, is to bid the heroic defiance
of deaths to the Wesleys and the Bismarcks—to fanatics and knavish tyrants,
longing and struggling for her annihilation. Non-catholics now, as in the years
past, largely represent in the British Parliament Irish Catholic constituencies.
Catholics fight, and have often fought, the battles of non-catholic governments
and kings, when others exiled, killed, and dethroned them ; and to give one in-
stance of peculiar generosity—when the Catholic people of Belgium, aroused to a
sense of duty to God or their country by the Catholic priesthood, drove beyond
his dykes the persecuting Dutchman, they selected —a Protestant king. Do
you give me one instance of similar generosity on the part of the non-Catholics.
Mr. B.: But do, if you can, reconcile the note in Haydock’s Bible with charity. I
challenge you to do so ! No matter what you say, you must hate Protestants,
“ fattening as you do on that kind of food.”
Dr. B.: I’m not bound to accept the notes in Haydock’s Bible as Catholic truth,
nor are the utterances of Archbishop Manning or Canon Oakley as such to be
regarded as Catholic dogmata, but in so far as they are the actual doctrines of the
divinely appointed and supernaturally aided teacher of the Universal Church.
Even you, if you were a Catholic, should be humble and admit liability to err;
and that your only safety from error lay in the teaching of an infallible authority—
infallible because of the help and guidance of the abiding Spirit of God. But you
really mean to force me into an angry and endless controversy. Here we are dis-
cussing questions in the supernatural order or the revealed order of grace, whereas
in my lecture I appealed to reason only for a notion of liberty. Indeed, I never
once thought of dragging in the dust the credo of the Catholic church for you or
anyone else to dance upon it in the thoughtless spirit of seeming victory.
Mr. B.: ’Tis useless then, I find, to ask you to defend the horrid teachings of your
Church; but remember the honour of Romanists is at stake. I proved in the opinion
of hundreds of Wesleyans—men, you know, of peculiar illumination, and gifted
beyond their fellows with high qualities of mind and heart, if not exactly with
downright genius—that your logic was bad, radically bad.
Dr. B.: You allowed my logic in the only two instances in which you grappled
with it, and, in doing so, admitted my lecture to be “very clever,” and also con-


elusive against the communists. Now, in the first instance, my argument was
directed against socialists—against those who denied vested rights, and admitted
only natural rights. It was, therefore, on your own showing, good; and if
clever, it certainly deserves something better than quibbling on the word
“equality.” Even men writing a scientific treatise, with a view to exhausting
the subject, may afford an ungenerous critic a chance of perverting his language.
I had been speaking of the equality obtaining in natural rights in which Jacky
King, late of Yass, was, I said, the equal of Queen Victoria ; since in them or by
them no one could claim anything special or exclusive. They did not allow
inequality or unequal rights. But admit, I urged, that species of equality in rights
affirmed by the common sense of mankind, in civil rights, and you at once con-
cede Mr. Fallon has not a special right to his store, or a right excluding the
claims of one and all. You reject the very idea of vested rights—which essen-
tially admit and demand inequality. In a word you, Mr. Butchers, speak of an
equality founded on what may be called the quality or power of exclusion—of
an equality based in a denial of the existence of that quality. Natural rights
are the rights of man as man, and therefore admit no equality ; whereas vested
rights are the rights of men as such and such men , and therefore suppose
inequality. My argument holds consequently not only against the levellers of
rights of property, but against levellers of any other vested right. The principle
involved and attacked is the same Bismarck and old Wesley violated, the same
principle as Cromwell and Victor Emmanuel, Eochefort, and Milton did. I was
not, therefore, merely speaking of the rights of possession to any given piece of
property : there are other objects of vested rights besides gold and silver, houses
and lands; for example, a wife, a royal crown, or even the rights of scholar-
ship-say to put B.A. after your name. Your mode of argument is, therefore,
scarcely fair; it is, to use a mild term, more captious than direct and manly,
Mr. B.: But while I attacked your logic “I spared yourself,” though you
actually contradicted “the Infallible Pius 1X.,” implying as you verily did that
the French church is not Roman Catholic. But that it is, is clear from an extract
from Modern Jove, page 41, where I find the Pope actually “praying for the
French nation” as “firstborn of the Church.”
Dr, B. : Who or what is Modern Jove; I rather like him, or it, the flashes are
so very harmless. Esau was first born, Mr. Butchers, but not therefore the actual
child of the inheritance; you cannot therefore necessarily prove from the words
of the Pope as cited by you that he declared France to be Catholic ; of course he
knows she is, and the world knows it too ; it is a patent fact, and didn’t require
elaborate proof—no more than the existence of the noonday sun,
Mr. B.: But I used the argument against you to show to my admiring friends
how loosely you reason, and how radically bad your logic is.
Dr. B.: I spoke of Gallicanism, and not of the Catholic Church in France,
Gallicanism is not—as any little girl in the convent school could tell you—identical
with the Catholic Church in France : it is the obtrusion of the state or temporal
authority on the representative of the spiritual authority ; it is and means direct
opposition and hostility to the Catholic Church, It is Cassarism, or the constituting
of the state not only supreme in its own order, but independent of moral obligation,
and not subordinate to the higher law. It therefore logically follows—not that
the Gallican Church or the Catholic Church in France does not belong to the
Catholic Church ; but that you were lecturing about what you did not understand
•—Oh for “the sarcastic smile of your professor,” and the apt illustration of “the
j ßinomial Theorem .” It also logically follows you know very little of the Catholic
dogma of Papal Infallibility, and still less of the ordained" sphere of its activity.
In a word, if we may judge from your writings, the least intelligent of the smart
children at St. Bridget’s convent, Albury, could, with the help of their catechism,
find matter well deserving of laughter in your critique and exposition, and impart
to you wisdom “never dreamed of in your philosophy,” I shall now conclude this
letter with your own words slightly altered. This is only a specimen of the con-
tradictions and absurdities involved in the Wesleyan doctrine of the absolute
infallibility of every one of its preachers.
P. BEEMINGHAM, D.D.
Wagga Wagga, July, Octave Day of Sts. Peter and Paul, 1874


REV. MR. BUTCHERS’ LETTER TO DR. BER-
MINGHAM.
(Per favour of the Murray and Hume Times.')
SlE—You have at length, though with very evident reluctance, come forth to
vindicate your own reputation and that of your cause. lamat a loss to under-
stand why you should be at all coy or reluctant to enter the lists in defence of
your faith. You would justly feel indignant if I were to throw out any imputa-
tion upon either your courage or ability : why then hesitate ? You charge me
with wanting to “ force” you into an “ angry and endless controversy.” I respect-
fully submit that unless priests differ, as doctors are said to do, no forcing should
be required. Thus I read in the preface to that valuable little book called “ The
Controversial Catechism, or Protestantism refuted and Catholicism established,”
these remarkable words, which I transcribe for your encouragement: “ Discussions
on the various questions of religion have ever been, and still are, matters of
inevitable necessity ; because Christianity and its dogmas have ever been and still
are impugned by those victims of passion, prejudice, and error—the schismatic,
heretic, and infidel. The true minister of Jesus Christ is thus compelled to make
religious controversy an important part of his studies, as it is only by this means
he can, by the help of God’s grace, bring back these unfortunate wanderers to the
fold of Christ. . . . Catholics, as regards their doctrines, court publicity,
because they are fully aware that the more these are tried and examined, the
stronger will be the conviction of their truth in the mind of the sincere inquirer.”
This doctrine must be correct, for it is stamped with the approbation of four Right
Reverend Bishops of the Scottish Roman Catholic Church. You ought, therefore,
to feel delighted at this providential opportunity of courting publicity. Instead
of this, you seem angry at being compelled to reply at all to my lecture, and
intimate that you will do so no more. I must say that I feel sorry for this deter-
mination, as in this letter I shall have to make statements which I think ought, if
possible, to be controverted. Besides, I do not like to write against any man,
knowing that he would not reply again. However, I have one consolation ; I
write not simply for you, but for the general public.
I am sorry that I cannot congratulate you upon either the manner or the matter
of your latest effusion. Its first portion especially chiefly consists of a string of
assertions, charges, and calumnies of which I am sure that every respectable Roman
Catholic must be ashamed. If your only hope of defending yourself lay in abusing
me, and above all the sainted Wesley, whose praise is in all the churches, it had
been better for you to have held your peace. A word of advice, Doctor. When next
you indulge in the luxury of controversy, don’t let your passion overcome your
judgment. You affect to despise my “ baseless views and erroneous inferences,”
and yet you are evidently angry. Let me address to you the words of “ Junius”
to Sir William Temple: “But after all, sir, where is the injury? You assume
that my logic is puerile and tinsel, that it carries not the least weight of conviction,
that my premises are false and my conclusions absurd. If this be a just descrip-
tion of me, how is it possible for such a writer to disturb your peace of mind, or
disturb a character so well established as yours ? Take care, Sir William, how you
indulge your unruly temper, lest the world should suspect that conscience has some
share in your resentment. You have more to fear from the treachery of your own
passions than from any malevolence of mine.”
And now I shall endeavour to remove one or two of your “ sad misconceptions,”
by remarking (1) that the title of my lecture was original. Please not to run away
with the idea that Protestant and plagiarist are synonymous terms. I never saw
the book you refer to, nor any with an analogous title. (2) The lecture was not a
“ corporate” production. It really only took one head to expose your assumptions,
unravel your sophistries, and demolish your arguments. And it was the most
fitting rebuke that Protestantism could administer to your self-complacent pride,
that she should put forth her youngest and rawest man as the champion of her
cause. And if my arguments, which 24 years ago looked “ formidable indeed,”
but now are “ trifles light as air,” so disturbed your equanimity of temper, what
would have happened if the Vicar of Albury had taken you in hand ? If, however,
truth is on your side, what a splendid opportunity is now afforded you of establish-
■ ing your cause on the ruins of mine. Ought you not gladly to embrace it ? (3)


Your witty though wicked reference to Herod and Pilate is quite beside the mark,,
for where there is no quarrel there can be no reconciliation. A niche in West-
minster Abbey has just been offered for a bust of John Wesley. “ See how
these Christians love one another.” (4) You affect to be greatly scandalised by
my use of the word “ Eomish.” It is not “ English,” and is “ vulgar.” In-
deed ? I find it in all the English dictionaries, and it is freely used by the most
respectable English writers, such as Bishop Taylor for example. It simply means
“ pertaining to Rome.” It really looks as if you wished to separate from that holy
city, for you constantly leave out the word “ Roman” before Catholic—an adjec-
tive which you tell us was “ chosen to indicate the centre and principle of unity.”
As Rome has a unity and principle peculiarly her own, and as me claim the title
Catholic as well as you, I shall have to supply the prefix where you most strangely
omit it. Ido this simply for the sake of avoiding confusion of thought, and as a
protest against your exclusive right to the name of Catholics. In this letter I will
.drop the term “ Romish” in deference to your superior delicacy. I must say, how-
ever, that to be so particular about Saxon English comes with a very bad grace
from a priest of that church, which up to the present time conducted the whole of
her service in Latin, and now so conducts a considerable part of it. (5) Your
allusion to a “ breach of the peace” is an anachronism. The laity of ’ your church
are ahead of their priests on that point. They do not believe with Father Sheehy
in the “ pathos of a rifle and the logic of a blow." (See Advocate, June 20.) That
might do for Spain or Italy, but not for Australia—for the 13th century, but not
for the 19 th.
And now for your cowardly and unchristian attack upon the sainted Wesley.
You say that my “ fierce warwhoop” is “ painfully suggestive of old Wesley’s shriek
when hopnding on the scum of society to exterminate (Roman) Catholics.” I call
upon you, sir, to prove your words, or else I charge you with uttering a wilful and
deliberate falsehood. I assert most fearlessly that Wesley never spoke one bitter
or vengeful word against Roman Catholics, much less did he ever “ hound” on any
one to “exterminate” them. I defy you to prove your assertion, which springs
from culpable ignorance or wicked malevolence, by one solitary quotation from
Wesley’s own writings, and they are in fourteen volumes. Apologise or prove, sir,
or else be content to lie for ever under the infamous stigma of cruelly and wantonly
slandering the dead. Say what you please of the living, who can defend them-
selves ; but lay no sacrilegious hands on our sainted dead.
You say again that “ In 1780 your spiritual father in God, holding the via-media
theory of liberty, published his two letters on the civil principles of the Roman
Catholics, in which he maintained that “‘no government but Roman Catholic
ought to tolerate men of the Roman Catholic persuasion.’ ” That they “ ought not
to be tolerated by any government, Protestant, Mahomedan, or Pagan.” How,
Doctor, if you had gone to Wesley’s own works, instead of getting your information,
at second-hand, you would have learnt that Wesley only published one letter on
the above topic ; but that the second letter was actually forged and published as
Wesley’s own by the great Capuchin Friar, Father O’Leary, who entered the lists
against Wesley in defence of the Roman Catholic faith, but who, at the very time
he was doing was actually selling the very cause he was championing for
British geld. This little episode in biography has been unearthed by Froude, in
his History of the English in Ireland (vol. 11., p. 413). Now, Dr. Bermingham,
who was the “old hypocrite the “founder of Methodism,” or the champion of
Romanism ? “ whose memory,” Froude tells us, “ is worshipped by Irish Catholic
politicians with a devotion which approaches idolatry,” but who “ was despatched
as a paid and secret instrument of treachery, in reply to a request for a trained
informer .” (See Appendix.)
Wesley, it is true, in his one letter did write the words you have quoted ; but
he gave solid reasons for his opinion, and attached a very different meaning to
those words than you would ha \eyour readers entertain. He said that he would
not tolerate Roman Catholics because they “ cannot give those whom they account
heretics any sufficient security for their peaceable behaviour. 1. Because it has
been publicly avowed in one of their General Councils (Constance, a.d. 1414)
that faith is not to be kept with heretics. 2. Because they hold the doctrine of
Papal pardons and dispensations, and (3) because they hold the doctrine of priestly
absolution. (Wesley’s Works, volume x., page 17.) Those same reasons,
Doctor, hold good at the present day. Would I then urge the Repeal of the Roman
Emancipation Bill ? Not at all. We are strong now, and can afford to be


generous. Apart from moral considerations, those doctrines are non perfectly
harmless, for though you would you cannot hurt us. As you very truly observe,
“ But even if we milled it, where is the power all the world over?” Gone, Doctor,
and let us hope and pray, gone for ever. “The most the church can do, even in
her own defence, is to bid the heroic defiance of death to the Wesleys and the
Bismarcks—to fanatics and knavish tyrants, longing and struggling for her
annihilation.” No, Doctor, you limit the power of your own church too much,
for even in “ consumption” it can boast of health, and in the grapple of death it
can shout, “ I will never die,” But what did Wesley mean when he used the
words “not tolerate?” did he advocate persecution? Listen, Dr. Bermingham,
and learn a lesson of Christian moderation from the man “ whose truculent shout
combined the ferocious bow-wow of the bloodhound with the keen cowardly yelp
of the jackal.” These are bis words : “But still, be their principles what they
will, I would nut persecute them. So persecution is utterly out of the question.
I know no one who pleads for it. ... I would not hurt a hair of their
heads. Meantime, I would not put it into their power to hurt me or any other
persons whom they believe to be heretics. I steer the middle way. I would
neither kill nor be killed, I would not use the sword .against them, nor put it
into their hands lest they should use it against me ; I wish them well, but I dare
not trust them. But still I say, persecution is out of the question. And I look
upon all vague declamations upon it which have been lately poured out, as mere
nourishes of persons who think they talk prettily, or artful endeavours to puzzle
the cause, and to throw dust into the eyes of honest Englishmen.—(Works,
vol. x., p. 175.) Now, Doctor, do you not feel heartily ashamed of your slanders
against the dead ? If you do not, I feel sure your own people do. So much for
Wesley.
But really your letter is so rambling that I hardly know how best to deal with it
at all. As you seem, however, to be partial to dialogue, and as lamof an accom-
modating disposition, I may as well follow your own excellent example. Let us
then quietly discuss a few of the differences between us. And do you, doctor,
begin, please. (The doctor put into my mouth words I never uttered, and argu-
ments I would scorn to use, without distinguishing in any way my actual utter-
ances from those which his imagination supplied. I will try to be fairer, by mark-
ing the doctor’s words with inverted commas.)
"Dr. B.; I hear that you were somewhat dissatisfied with my lecture the other
night.
M. B.: I was, for I thought that you were not quite so open, candid, and liberal
as one had a right to expect.
Dr. B.: Will you kindly particularise ?
Mr. B.: With pleasure. My first complaint is that you confounded two notions
of Liberty which are essentially distinct, for apparently you could see no difference
between “ French pets” and English Reformers —between a Rochefort and a
Milton.
Dr. B.: “Pray can you, Mr. Butchers?”
Mr. B.: Now, Doctor, don’t be ridiculous. Do be serious for once in your life.
Dr. B.: lam serious, I assure you. Did not Milton and Rochefort both ignore
the “divine ordinance of matrimony,” and did they not both justify regicide?
What difference is there between them ?
Mr. B.; Your logic, dear Doctor, is again at fault, for it by no means follows
that because Milton resembled Rochefort in two particulars, that therefore he
resembled him in every particular, A goose and a man have each two legs and a
backbone, but no one would dream of asking a friend your question, “ Pray can
you distinguish any difference between them ?” What say you to that, Doctor ?
Dr. B.: Well even so nevertheless you cannot deny that Milton was a bad man
in these two particulars’at least. “Milton wrote a treatise on the doctrine and
discipline of divorce, and what, Mr. Butchers, about regicide ? Are the people at
liberty to judge and kill kings ?”
Mr. B.: I would kindly remind you, Doctor, that those that live in glass houses
should not throw stones. If you condemn Milton on these two issues to outer
darkness, you must also consign many of your own brightest luminaries to the
same quarters. Thus Cardinal Bellarmine taught that divorce was lawful for
any one of three causes, viz.—(l.) Fornication, according to Christ’s rule—Matt,
xix., 9v. (2.) For heresy, from Titus hi. 10 v., “ A man that is a heretic after
e 2


Ihe first and second admonition avoid,” a passage which has as much to do with
divorce as Tenterden steeple has with the Goodwin sands. (3.) When one is a
continual offence to another, and a provocation to sin. This is based on Matt,
v., 29 v., “If thy right eye scandalise thee, pluck it out.” {Bell.. cap. 14, tom. 3
p. 1750-55' —quoted in Willett's Synopsis, vol. 6., p. 247.) Is there no difference,
Doctor, between Bellarmine and Rochefort ?
Dr. B.; In that particular there seems to be none, I admit; but I’m not bound
by Bellarmine. The doctrine of cur church is “ one to one, and for ever." She
says, “Accursed is the man that puts a divorce into his or her partner’s hands.”
{Burke Lectures, p. 138.)
Mr. B.; I am sorry that your church speaks thus, for many of your own infallble
Popes have, by granting divorces, come in for the curse. I will give you one
illustration. Julian Yaleazar, the bastard son of the Conde D’Olivarez, before he
was recognised by his noble father, married Isabella D’Azuta. When, however,
the Conde recognised him as his lawful son and heir, the Pope dissolved the mar-
riage, and gave him leave, under the name of Henry Philip de Guzman, to marry
D. Juana de Yelesco, daughter to the Constable of Castile. ( Taylor's Works, vol.
ii., 810 p.) And what says Hallam ? He tells us that “ history is full of dissolu-
tions of marriage, obtained by fickle passion or cold-hearted ambition, to which
the Church has not scrupled to pander on some suggestion of relationship.”
(Vol. ii., M. Ages, p. 7.) Consequently, Doctor, your church and its head, the
Pope, is accursed by her own decree.
Dr. B.: It would really appear so indeed. “ But what about regicide ? Are the
people at liberty to judge and kill kings 7”
Mr. B. : As regards that, your case is worse still, for more than a dozen of your
celebrated doctors have upheld the lawfulness of regicide.
Dr. B.: You really don’t say so ?
Mr. B.: Ido indeed. Take one instance out of many. Thus Suarez says, “An
excommunicated king may with impunity be deposed or hilled by any one." Nor
need there be the slightest scruple of conscience on this point, “ For if the Pope
should err" (you see, Doctor, that in Bellarmine’s days the Dogma of Papal Infalli-
bility had not been defined, and so, poor benighted soul, he, like myself, thought a
Pope could err in a ticklish point of morals ) “by commanding sin or forbidding
virtues, yet the church were bound to believe that the vices were good and the
virtues evil; unless she would sin against her conscience.” They are the very
words of Cardinal Bellarmine, who died in A.D. 1621. — (Bell. D.R. Pont. lib. IV.
c, 5, quoted by Jeremy Taylor, works vol. 11. p. 812). Your church, sir, is good at
pronouncing woes ; but I would invite your attention to a woe pronounced by God
Almighty himself. You will find it in your Douay Bible, in sth c. of Isaiah, at
the 20th verse. It is this—“ Woe unto you that call evil good and good evil: that
put darkness for light and light for darkness: that put bitter for sweet and sweet
for bitter.” Nor can you get rid of this horrible doctrine by throwing Bellarmine
overboard as you have Maiming and the rest, for on the 9th September A.D. 1589
Pope Sixtus Quintus, “in an oration in a conclave of cardinals, did solemnly
commend the monk that killed Henry 111. of France. The oration was printed at
Paris, by them that had rebelled against the Prince, and avouched for authentic
by Boucher Decreil and Anselin ; and though some would fain have thought it
none of his, yet Bellarmine dare not deny it; but makes for it a cruel and crude
apology.” (Bell. In resp. ad apolog. pro juram fidelit.) No Protestants, and few
intelligent Roman Catholics, will be disposed to doubt this fact when I say that
Bishop Jeremy Taylor is my authority for making it (works vol, 11, p. 813). I need
hardly say that the most recent illustration of this pernicious doctrine is the
attempted assassination of Prince Bismarck by a member of the Roman Catholic
society, to whom, no doubt, was promised a Papal Dispensation by his priest, who
has also been arrested* on the charge of complicity. Readers of English history
will remember that Henry Garnet, the general of the Jesuit order in England, was
executed for complicity in the attempt to blow up the King and Parliament in the
notorious Gunpowder Plot. Now, Doctor, it is my turn. Let me ask you, “ What
about regicide ? Are subjects, monks, and popes at liberty to judge and kill
kings ?” Yes or no, doctor ?
‘Since discharged—the suspicion unfounded.


Dr. B.: It would be useless to deny it—at least publicly. I wish now I had let
that “ superb rebel” Milton alone.
Mr. B.: Yes, Doctor, it is not easy to catch those old Puritanstripping; and
more than that, there is, I believe, hardly a single vice or crime the lawfulness of
which has not been taught and justified by the doctors of your holy Church.
“Those that live in glass houses should not throw stones.”
Dr. B.; Well, in any case I “must protest against your feigned discovery in my
lecture of a continual reference to Protestants. I never once used the word, not
only in that lecture, but in any one of my writings these twenty years. Wherever
I do speak of persons outside the (Roman) Catholic Church, the stereotyped word
is non-catholic.”
Mr. B.: And a very nice and comprehensive word it is, Doctor, since it includes
not only Protestants, but nine-tenths of the human race ; but your protest is quite
uncalled for. Will you kindly point out to me the passage in my lecture where I
charge you with continually referring to Protestants, for I cannot find it. On the
contrary, I charge you with ignoring them altogether. You set up an Aunt Sally,
and therf knock it down.
Dr. B.: Have you any other charges to bring against me ?
Mr. B.: Oh yes ! several; and the second is, that, while your avowed object was
to produce peace and unity, the direct tendency of your remarks was to sow
dissension and to breed discord. I think I proved this from your own language,
and further showed, by extracts from Haydock’s Bible, that such has been the
constant policy of Rome. What have you to say to this charge, Doctor ?
Dr. B.: “I assure you it was my most distant thought to attack or insult any
one in Australia.”
Mr. B.: You mistake me, Doctor. I never impugned your intention , but only
complained of the tendency of your remarks. I did make this charge against
Rome, and proved it from those charitable notes. What have you to say to
them ?
Dr. B.: Well, I admit they do look ugly. I cannot deny they are there, and
sanctioned too by the approbation of the highest R. C. dignitaries ; but since
“some of my dearest friends are educated, high-minded, benevolent Protestants,”
I dare not defend them. The fact is, indeed, “Pm not hound to accept the notes
in Haydock’s Bible as Catholic truth ” at all.
Mr. B.: Heyday, Doctor ! What means this ? Is not that a serious admission ?
If you are not bound to accept them, then I suppose no other Catholic is, and
in that case what good are they at all ? I always thought in my innocence that
the notes were there to explain the Scriptures, but it seems that sometimes the
notes, in spite of the approbation of several orthodox vicars apostolic, may be so
glaringly wrong that even a Roman Catholic doctor of divinity is compelled to throw
them overboard in order to save his sinking ship. [ You see, ray Roman Catholic friends,
what an uncertain and erring interpreter of the sacred Scriptures your church is.
The title-page of this Bible tells us that it is embellished “ with useful notes, critical,
historical, controversial, and explanatory, selected from the most eminent
commentators , and the most able and judicious critics, by the Rev. G, L.
Haydock.” And yet Dr. Bermingham, without'the slightest compunction, throws all
these notes overboard as not being binding on any Roman Catholic! Let me ask
you, my friends, this simple question : If you are not bound to accept the notes of
the most eminent commentators and the most judicious critics of your church, do
you think you are bound to believe everything your own priest tells you ? If these
eminent and judicious men may err (and Dr. B. admits that they have erred), may
not your priest err too ? Is it then safe to peril your soul’s salvation on his word
alone, without “ searching the Scriptures” for yourselves “ daily to see whether
these things are so or not.” (Acts xvii., 11 verse—Douay Bible.) The Bereans
were commended by St. Paul himself for testing his doctrines by a personal
reference to the Scriptures, and if that were so in the case of an inspired apostle, it
cannot be wrong for you to test the doctrines of uninspired priests in a similar
way.] Oh I by°the way, Doctor, while on this subject, I may remind you that
you forgot to explain that little difficulty about “ Get thee behind me, Satan,” and
“ may signify !” Would it not have been as well to have cleared that mystery up
while you were writing ?
Dr. B.: Well, the fact is, as I couldn’t explain it, I thought it best just to pass it
over in silence, and so let it drop quietly out of sight.


Mr. B.: Very prudent! very prudent indeed! I very much admire your tact
and discretion, Doctor, You doubtless remember the well-known lines —
“ He that from fighting runs away
May live to fight another day.”
The principle is a sound one, and if you act up to it you can never be wounded—
except in the back.
Dr. B.: Had we not better change the subject, think you ?
Mr. B.: As you please, Doctor.
Dr. B.: What next ?
Mr. B.: Your logic, Doctor, is bad, radically bad.
Dr. B,: “ You allowed my logic in the only two instances in which you grappled
with it,” and in doing so admitted my lecture to be “ very clever,” and also con-
clusive against the communists.
Mr. B.: There are several errors, Doctor, in your last utterance. (1) I did not
“ allow” your logic in either of the two instances. In the first instance, from your
own premises I drew an exactly opposite conclusion, and in the second I showed
that, even admitting your premises, your conclusion was irrelevant, and therefore
illogical. If that is “ allowing” your logic, I don’t know what disallowing it would
be. (2) I did not admit your lecture to be “ very clever,” as you represent.
Romanists are good at quoting half texts, but in this case you have been satisfied
with a third part. My words were, referring to the Binomical Theorem illustra-
tion, which seems to have taken your fancy, “ Thus it is with the Doctor’s logic.
It is very clever, but not correct .” Is that allowing it ? That reminds me, too,
that if I only grappled with two instances of your logic, you have only grappled
with one of mine. That small slip about the two chairs requiring two carpenters to
make them probably escaped your notice. You also apparently forgot to notice my
dissection of the Roman Catholic argument against the reciprocal though independent
powers of Church and State. Perhaps you have reserved that for another letter.
I should like to have your opinions on that important point, because if I am right
what becomes of the temporal power!
Dr. B.: Never mind ! You must at least allow that in the one instance I did
grapple with your logic, I vindicated my own.
Mr. B.: I cannot even do that, Doctor, for you only do so by imputing to me a
belief which I never have held, and do not now hold. Your words to me are, “ You
reject the very idea of vested rights—which essentially admit and demand ine-
quality.” Ido nothing of the kind. I admit freely man’s natural rights as man,
and men’s vested rights as such and such men. So far we agree ; but when you
say that the principle involved and attacked is “ the same Bismarck and old Wes-
ley violated,” your logic is once more at fault. You are guilty this time of a petitio
principi, vulgarly known as begging the question, for you assume that those rights
which Bismarck and Wesley violated (?) were vested rights, which is the very point
requiring to he proved. I admit the right of any man to any power or office when
once he has proved his claim, but not before. I don’t believe, for instance, in the
Pope’s so-called vested right to the temporal power, for the simple reason that I
don’t believe he ever has or ever will prove his right to that power, and there-
fore I don’t consider Victor Emmanuel a rohher or a tyrant for dispossessing the
Pope of what never really belonged to him. In this opinion lam supported by the
powerful authority of Cardinal Wiseman and certain other notables of your own
church. I will quote Wiseman. In his lectures, p. 242, he distinctly asserts that
“ The Papal sovereignty over his own dominions is no essential portion of his
dignity. His supremacy was not less before it was acquired, and should the
unsearchable decrees of Providence, in the lapse of ages, deprive the Holy See of
its temporal sovereignty, as happened to the seventh Pius, through the usurpation
of a conqueror, its dominion over the church, and over the consciences of the faith-
ful, would not thereby be impaired.” It is quite clear that Cardinal Wiseman was
not an Ultramontane. It is equally clear that in spite of your boasted unity your
ablest doctors differ on even fundamental points. Any Catholic can verify my
references. I make no statement without proof.
Dr. B.: Well, if I failed in that instance, you will surely “ allow” that I got out
of the dilemma that the Gallican Church does and does not belong to the Catholic
Church, for “ any little girl in the convent school can tell” you that “ Gallican ism
is not identical with the Catholic Church in France.”


Mr. B.: Have you ever heard of the Gallican liberties, Doctor ?
Dr. B.: No! what are they ? ■
Mr. B.: I refer you to Mr. Hallam, in whose chapters on the history of ecclesi-
astical power during the middle ages you will find much startling information.
He says : “ From the principles established during the schism, and in the Prag-
matic sanction of Bourges, arose the far-famed liberties of the Gallican church
(how is it their fame has not reached you, Doctor?), which honourably distinguish
her from other members of the Roman communion.” These liberties “ depended
upon two maxims ; one, that the Pope does not possess any direct or indirect
temporal authority ; the other, that his spiritual jurisdiction can only be
exercised in conformity with such parts of the canon law as are received by the
kingdom of France. Hence the Gallican Church rejected a great part of-the Sext
and Clementines , and paid little regard to modern papal bulls, which in fact, only
obtained validity by the king’s approbation.”— {M. Ages, vol. 11., p. 54, eighth
ed.) Will you now inform us, Doctor, whether the Gallican Church is Catholic
or not, for it really seems to me that it ought rather to be called Protestant,
since from the eighth century up to the present time it has repeatedly, and as a
Church, protested against the the Pope to appoint its bishops or domineer
over its kings. Gallicanism is not, as you would fain imply, a principle outside
of the true Gallican Church, but it is a principle bound up with the very lams and
practices of that church itself, and therefore if “ Gallicanism has consecrated the
principle of revolution,” as you assert, the Gallican Church is also guilty, and must
therefore long ere this have ceased to be a member of the true Catholic Church
at all. Does not the Gallican Church “embarrass” you, Doctor? But let us
now turn to the less pleasing subject of persecution. What are your views on
that point, Doctor ?
Dr. B.: (Roman) “ Catholics, I do admit, were guilty of acts of cruelty and
stem despotism. I do not deny there have been, and now are, bad (Roman)
Catholics. Indeed I described them pretty fully in my lecture, and accounted
for their falling below their principles, and acting against both the spirit and
law of the (Roman) Catholic Church, whose unworthy children they were. For
instance, to cite only one, Louis XIY., who revoked the edict of Nantes, and per-
secuted the Huguenots, and interfered in the Jansenistic disputes, was a very
immoral man, and with Colbert, his minister, held he mas the State, and in
temporals independent of the church.”
Mr. B.: Stop, Doctor, if you please. There are several of your views on this
point to which I am bound to take exception.
Dr. B.: What now, my good friend ?
Mr. B. : Well, in the first place, you seem to teach that the church has never
persecuted, but only its bad members, as, for instance, the immoral Louis. Do I
understand you aright ?
Dr. B. ; You do ; that is my meaning.
Mr. B.: Very well. My first remark is, that according to the doctrines of your own
church, Louis XIV, was not a member of the Roman Catholic Church at all! I
need hardly tell you that the three essential qualifications for membership in the
Roman Catholic Church are, (1) profession of faith ; (2) use of the same sacra-
ments ; and (3) submission to the Pope. Now since Louis XIV., by your own
admission, held that, with Colbert, he was the state, and in temporals independent
of the Pope, it necessarily follows that he was not a Roman Catholic at all!
Dr. B.; Oh yes 1 he was. He was one of those “ bad Catholics” who “ fall below
the principles of their church.” •“ ,
Mr. B.: You apparently forget Cardinal Wiseman’s statement that the church
such implicit obedience, that if any member, however valuable, however
he may have devoted his early talents to the illustration of her doctrines, fall
away from his belief in any one point, he is cut off without reserve" (Lectures,
p. 77). Now why, Doctor, was not Louis XIV. “cutoff without reserve?” Is
there one law for poor weak Jansenists, and another for the rich and powerful
king ? You say, moreover, that he was a “ very immoral man.”
Dr. B.: That is a notorious fact in history.
Mr. B.; Then why was he not expelled from your Holy Church on that ground ?
I know of no professedly Christian Church but yours, which recognises notoriously
immoral men as its members , bad or good. Besides, I have another difficulty.
Doctor. <


Dr. B.; What is that, my friend ?
Mr. B. : I cannot believe, in spite of history, that Louis XIV. mas an immoral
man, for Father Burke tells me “ that although a Catholic may sin ” and “ be false
in every relation of life,” yet, “ one thing you may be sure of, that he either does
not go to confession at all, or, if he goes to confession and comes to the holy altar,
there is an end to his sin,” and “the whole world around him receives an absolute
guarantee" then “that that man must be all that I have described the Christian
man to be —a man in whom every one, in every relation of life, may trust and
confide. This is the test.” (Burke Lectures, p. 42. J Now, tried by this test,
Louis XIV. was a good Christian, though a bad Catholic, and a very immoral man,
for it was during the latter half of his reign that with Madame de Maintenon “ he
plunged into the mystic devotions of the Jesuits—and the fatal consequence was the
Revocation of the Edict of Nantes, and the persecutions of the Protestants. (De
Vericour, Christ. Civil., p. 353.) So you see, Doctor, we have traced two of your
instances to the Jesuits, who were the devoted creatures of the Pope. It is not
therefore the “bad Catholic” Louis XIV., but the Infallible Pope, who must be
held responsible for the Revocation of the Edict of Nantes and the persecution of
the Protestants.
Dr. B.: But what about “ the Jansenistic disputes ? ”
Mr. B.; Louis XIV., with his dying breath, threw the whole responsibility of
that wicked persecution on the Jesuits, who stood round his bed to administer
the last rites of the Church. “If indeed you have misled and deceived me”—
such was his last address to his confessors — “ you are deeply guilty, for in truth I
acted in good faith. I sincerely sought the peace of the Church'' (Essays in
Ecclesiastical Biography, by the Right Hon. Sir James Stephen, K.C.8., p. 332.)
Dr. B.: But even supposing I have to grant that it was the Jesuits who per-
secuted the Jansenists, still they are not the Pope, nor can the Pope be held
responsible for their persecutions.
Mr. B.: You forget, Doctor, that the final tragedy in the Jansenist persecution
was perpetrated under the authority of a Papal Bull obtained by De Noailles,
and only too cruelly carried into effect in October, 1709, by an armed force under
the Marquis D’Argenson. Not content with venting their malice on the
poor nuns, some of whom were 80 years of age, and all past their
prime, the Jesuits poured out the vials of their cruel wrath on the very
buildings where they (the Jansenists) had dwelt, and the sacred edifice
where they had worshipped, and the tombs in which their dead had been
interred. The monastery and the adjacent church were overthrown from
their foundations. Workmen, prepared for their task by drinking, broke open
the graves in which the nuns and recluses of former times had been interred.
With obscene ribaldry, and outrages too disgusting to be detailed, they piled up a
loathsome heap of corpses and bones, on which the dogs were permitted to feed.
What remained was thrown into a pit, prepared for the purpose, near the neigh-
bouring churchyard of St. Lambert. A wooden cross, erected by the villagers,
marked the spot; and many a pilgrim resorted to it, to pray for the souls of the
departed and for his own. At length no trace remained of the Fortress of
Jansenists to offend the eye of the Jesuits, or to perpetuate the memory of the
illustrious dead, with whom they had so long contended.” (Essays by the Right
Eon. Sir James Stephen , K.C.8., p. 331-2), And these Jansenists were not
Protestant heretics, gentle reader ; they were as faithful Catholics as ever breathed ;
but they had the misfortune to differ from the Jesuits on the doctrine of “ free
grace,” and so for 70 years were persecuted, even to the death, by that powerful
and unscrupulous order. And these poor aged what was their crime ? Be
not startled. They died because they refused to call on the God of Truth to attest
a lie. “ For this, one after another went down, with no priestly absohition, to
graves which no priest would bless ; strong, even amidst the weakness and the
mortal agonies of nature, in the assurance that the path to heaven could not be
found in disobedience to the immutable laws which Heaven itself had established”
(Idem, p. 324). (And this was done, mark you, not, as the Doctor says, by a bad
Catholic, but by an Infallible Pope, and that in A.D. 1709. Let the Doctor
deny that, if he dare.) The fact is, Doctor, that in spite of all your frenzied
efforts, you can no more tear off the responsibility of your persecutions from the
infallible Head of your Church than Hercules could tear off his poisoned shirt..
Your church will go down to the grave “drunken with the blood of the saints
and with the blood of the martyrs of Jesus” (Rev. xvii., 6 v.)


Dr. B.: You slander our Church,sir. The “cruelties” of the Spanish Inquisition
are “fabulous” (Manning) ; and “The Popes have never shed a drop of blood:
Protestants and philosophers have shed it in torrents” (Newman).
Mr. B.: Let us hear what Prescott, the historian, has to say on this point.
“ The chair of St. Peter at this time (viz., Reign of Phillip II.) was occupied by
Pius the Fifth, a pope who had assumed the same name as his predecessor, and
who displayed a spirit of fierce, indeed frantic intolerance, surpassing even that
of Paul the Fourth. . . . At the accession of the new Pope there were three
Italian scholars, inhabitants of Milan, Venice, and Tuscany, eminent for their
piety, who had done great service to the cause of letters in Italy, but who
were suspected of too liberal opinions in matters of faith. Pius the Fifth
demanded that all these scholars should be delivered into his hands. The
three States had the meanness to comply. The unfortunate men were
delivered up to the Holy Office, condemned, and burnt at the stake.
This was one of the first acts of the new Pontificate, It proclaimed to
Christendom that Pius the Fifth was the uncompromising foe of heresy, the
Pope of the Inquisition. Every subsequent act of his reign served to confirm his
claim to this distinction. . . . Pius, as may be imagined, beheld, with deep
anxiety, the spread of the new religion in the low countries. . . . He wrote
to Philip, conjuring him not to falter in the good cause, and to allow no harm to
the Catholic faith, but to march against his rebellious vassals at the head of his
army, and wash out the stain of heresy in the blood of the heretic." {Prescott’s
History of Philip 11., Book ii., p. 271.) And yet, Dr. Bermingham, you, with an
hypocrisy at least equal to that of “old Wesley,” tell me that you “cannot,
without sin, exclude” me “from the benefit of your prayers and good wishes 1”
If for “ prayers” you had substituted “persecutions,” and for good wishes “anathe-
mas,” it would have been nearer the truth. You cannot consistently pray for me or
any other heretic, for you swear in your Episcopal oath of allegiance to the Pope,
“ heretics, schismatics, and rebels to our said Lord and his aforesaid successors, I
will, to my power, persecute and oppose." If lam not mistaken Archbishops
Manning and Goold have both taken that oath. (Perhaps, however, though the
Doctor has so signally failed to clear his Church from the charge of perse-
cution, he will be more successful with regard to that cruel doctrine that there
“is no salvation outside the pale of the Roman Catholic Church”). What are
your views on that point, Doctor ?
Dr. B.: You do not state (Roman) Catholic doctrine correctly, notwithstanding
the aid of (Roman) Catholic writings.
Mr. B.: Will you kindly state it for me then ?
Dr. B.: Certainly. “Salvation is ordinarily found in the (Roman) Catholic
Church; but this ordinance does not shorten the arm of God’s power, nor limit
His boundless mercy.”
Mr. B.: Thank God! it does not, Doctor, for in that case nine-tenths of the
whole human race were irretrievably lost. But what hope, then, have we Protes-
tants of salvation ?
Dr. B.: “Invincible ignorance,” said a sharp Irish boy to an aristocratic ques-
tioner, “ may excuse you from the mortal guilt of heresy or schism.
Mr. B.; Excuse me, Doctor, but to hang the salvation of nine-tenths of the
human race upon the dictum of an Irish boy is most contemptible trifling, and to
place our only hope of salvation in “ invincible ignorance, ’ displays most astound-
ing arrogance. Even then, too, with that certainty which marks your rule of
faith, there is a may be in the matter !
Dr. B.: “No priest, no layman, is bound to believe the doctrine laid down by
you; how then can my views flow from it ?”
Mr. B.: In spite of this bold denial I will now prove that you are bound to
believe and to teach the doctrine laid down in my lecture, viz., “ that there is no
salvation outside the pale of the Roman Catholic Church.” Are you bound to
acknowledge the Creed of Pius IV., Doctor ?
Dr. B.: Yes.
Mr. B.: You may well say yes, Doctor, for your own Dr. Butler in his book of
the Church says that “ anyone who seeks admission into the Church of Rome
publicly repeats and testifies his assent to this creed, without restriction or
qualification." Now, Doctor, will you publicly repeat the twelfth article of that
creed ?


Dr. B.; “I, Dr. Berm in gh am, do at. this present freely profess and truly hold thi?
true Catholic faith, without which no one can he saved ; and I promise most con-
stantly to retain and confess the same, entire and inviolate, with God’s assistance,
to the end of my life, and I will take care, as far as in me lies, that it shall be
held, taught, and 'practised by my subjects, or by those the care of whom shall
appertain to me in my office ; this 1 promise, vow, and swear —so help me God, and
these holy Gospels of God.”
Mr. B,: Have you kept that solemn vow which you took when you became a
priest and a professor 7 Do you not break it by denying my statement of your
doctrine to be correct 7
Dr, B.: You want the key to the understanding of it, because you would not
allow you are fallible and feeble, requiring a guide and a light to know the truth
as it is in Christ.
Mr. B.: I will then now confess my fallibility, and will humbly submit to the
guidance of a saint twice canonised, once by Gregory XVI. and once by Pius VII.,
so late as A.D. 1834. Surely he will understand the meaning of this difficult
doctrine. Let us listen to St. Liguori. He says, “We must also believe that the
Homan Catholic Church is the only true Church. Hence they who are out of our
Church or separated from it, cannot (there is no may there, Doctor) be saved,
except infants who die after baptism How great is the number of
infidels, heretics, and schismatics; the world is full of them, and they are all
damned. Catholics do not amoxont to the tenth part of the human race.” {St.
Liguori on the Commandments, pp. 46, 55, dated 1866, and stamped with Arch-
bishop Murray’s Imprimatur.) So that it really seems, Doctor, that my mistake
lay in understating the actual number condemned to suffer the pains of hell for not
belonging to your Roman Catholic Church, for instead of saying 180,000,000 I
should have said 900,000,000. Is it not so, Doctor !
Dr. B.: It would really seem so.
Mr. B.: I honour you, Doctor, for being heartily ashamed of this article of your
faith, but should honour }mu more if you boldly confessed, as I do, that the Church
which holds and teaches that God-dishonouring doctrine is not and cannot he infal-
lible, nor indeed the True Church at all, as founded by Christ and His Apostles.
And be assured. Doctor, that as, in spite of all your barefaced denials and vain
explanations, the light breaks in upon the minds of your laity on this doctrine,
thousands will disembark from a vessel which confesses that she carries as passen-
gers to heaven but one-tenth part of the whole human race /
Dr. B.: But in what ship then will these separatists embark. I pray you 7 “ You
do not tell me what form of protest among the following is national (rational 7)
liberty:—Lutherans, Calvinists, etc., etc., ad libitum
Mr, B.: You put too much honour upon me, Doctor, for I by no means claim
infallibility. I leave that to Pius IX. My advice, Doctor, is simply this—read
and you will know, and above all exercise your right of private judgment. With
the Bible in your hand, and the love of God in your heart, you will be guided
aright. At present there is abundant internal evidence from your list of “ varia-
tions” that you are ignorant of the very terms you parade with such a show of
learning. Space will only permit me to give you two proofs. You shall have more
if yon ask for them. The Jumpers, then, so far from protesting against me, were
themselves Welsh Methodists, and were called Jumpers on account of their
excitability. I know some priests in your church to whom that term would apply
with equal propriety. Again, the Tunkers did not deny eternal punishment.
Their peculiar tenets (as is shown by their name, which is German) was the
doctrine of baptism by immersion, and they held that each individual of the
human race, by a life of abstinence and mortification, may work out his own
salvation, which is the doctrine of your own church. But, Doctor, was it not a
little unwise to introduce the subject of variations at all 7
Dr, B.: Why so 7 Does not the strength and glory of the Roman Catholic
Church lie in her unity, and your weakness and shame in your variations 7
■“ Union is a note of Christ’s Church —disunion of Satan’s synagogue.”
Mr, B.: The strength does, but not the glory, Doctor. Unity alone is no mark
of holiness, nor disunion always a mark of wickedness. Your knowledge of
Scripture is defective. Read the following passage from your own Douay Bible
(Mark iii., v. 22-26); —“And the scribes who were come down from Jerusalem
said, ‘ He hath Beelzebub, and by the prince of devils he casteth out devil&


And after He (Jesus) called them together, he said to them in parables ; Horn can
Satan cast out Satan ? And if a kingdom be divided against itself, that king-
dom cannot stand. And if a house be divided against itself , that house cannot stand.
And if Satan be risen up against himself, he is divided, and cannot stand, but hath
an end.” So it really seems, Doctor, that unity is one of the marks of Satan and
his kingdom, and not disunion, as you assert in opposition to Christ himself. If,
however, disunion were a mark of Satan’s synagogue, I fear that your Church would
belong to that synagogue as well as ours.
Dr. B.: You insult me, sir. Our Church is one and indivisible. It never has
been and never can be divided against itself. _
Mr. B.: The truth, sir, should insult no one, and I shall give you a very brief
and necessarily imperfect account of the “ variations” of your one and indivisible
Church. These “variations” may be divided into two great classes, viz., general
and special. (1) General: The whole body of Roman Catholic theology has been
a Itered at different periods of her history. The five principal systems were: the
Lombardic, which taught that justification was by grace and works; (2) the
scholastic, which taught that justification was by human works alone (there were
several sects of these, as Thomists, Scotists, Occamists) ; (3) the monastic, which
taught that salvation was to be sought in papal indulgences, in works of superero-
gation, and in will worship ; (4) the mixed, which approached the Protestant
doctrine of justification by faith ; (5) the Jesuitic, which taught that justice before
God consists in an infused habit, but actual justice in the merit of good works.
Where, doctor, will you find greater variations among Protestants than those ? and
yet I dare you to deny, and I defy you to disprove, that those schools have
existed in your one and indivisible Church.
Dr. B.: But what do you mean by “ special” variations ?
Mr. B.: Why that, for example, between the Dominicans and Franciscans, the
former of whom stoutly, and for 300 years, denied the doctrine of the immaculate
conception (which, as you are aware, was decreed in 1854 to be a dogma of the R.
C. Church, which whosoever denies, anathema sit —Let him be accursed), while
the Franciscan as fiercely upheld it. The whole Dominican order, therefore,
stands accursed by the edict of the present Pope! And then there were the
disputes between the Jesuits and the Jansenists on the doctrine of free grace,
which raged for 70 years ; the dispute between the Gallican or French Church
and the Italian as to the supremacy of the Pope. The great Western schism
occurred through this, and the world beheld the edifying spectacle of three great
parties in the one church, each obeying its own Pope, and each anathematising the
others. Roman Catholic authors, Bellarmine among the rest, admit that so great
was the confusion, that it was then, and has been ever since, impossible to find
out which was the real Pope, And this, Doctor, is your boasted unity !
Dr. B.: But surely you have not the infinite presumption to claim the glorious
title of Catholic yourself, Mr. Butchers ?
Mr. B.: That is my just and righteous claim.
Dr. B.: Why a lunatic might as well call himself king of Timbuctoo.
“ Would any one . . if asked to point out the Catholic Church in Albury district,
point him to your conventicle over the border ? Really to any one in Australia,
not even excepting yourself, the very idea must and would appear ridiculous, and
not to be entertained by any one out of bedlam.”
Mr. B,: “ Better is a little to the just than great riches to the wicked” (Ps. 36,
v. 16.) You are justly proud of your magnificent cathedral, and if you have
equal cause for pride in the means by which you have built it I congratulate you ;
but let me remind you, that a Jew might have used your taunt to the disciples of
Jesus who were assembled in that little “upper room” where they awaited the:
descent of the Holy Ghost (Acts i., 13 v.). The rejected Jew could point to hi*
magnificent temple, but the “ true Hebrew” “ abode in the upper room;” or a Pagan
might thus have sneered at the great apostle of the gentiles, as in Rome, with its
magnificent heathen temples, Paul “preached the Lord Jesus Christ with all
confidence and without prohibition” “in his own hired lodgings" (Acts xxviii.,
31 v., Douay Bible). I hope you won’t use that taunt again, Doctor, But tell me
now what defence you have to make to my attack upon the foundations of your
faith ?
Dr. B.; None whatever. “ I decline to drag religion in the mire, and to discuss:
,thfc venerable title deeds of the divinely constituted organism of the (Roman).


Catholic Church with any or every wayfarer, no matter what his pretensions to
learning or genius.”
Mr. B.: But, Doctor, just consider for a moment that some of your own divines
cannot find any title deeds at all to the temporal power. Some say that no grant
was ever made or required ( Wiseman's Lectures, p. 242); others say that the title
deed was conferred by the “ people,” and that the temporal power “is very con-
venient and very useful , and very necessary for the church of God,” and that,
therefore, “ that temporal power will return, as it returned in the times of old,
because it is good for the Church, and the world cannot get on without it” (Father
Burke's Lectures, pp. 193, 207); while others still, resorting to the “ germ” theory,
say that “ the temporal prerogatives were inherent in the spiritual supremacy from
the beginning” (Manning's Sermons, p. 260). Now, Doctor, in the face of these
delightful “ variations,” would it not have been worth while for you to settle
those “ doubts” which must be secretly working in the minds of the “faithful?”
Would it have been beneath your dignity to do what Archbishop Manning is
attempting to do with such herculean efforts ?
Dr. B.: Why do you quote Manning, &c., so repeatedly ? Their “ utterances, as
such," are not to be regarded as Catholic dogmata, but in so far as they are “ the
actual doctrines of the divinely-appointed and supernaturally-aided teacher of the
universal church.”
Mr. B.: You adroitly evade saying whether the utterances of Manning and Canon
Oakley are or are not the actual doctrines of the Pope. Would it not be as well
to write to his Holiness Pope Pius IX. at once, in order to learn from his own lips,
speaking ex cathedra, which of the trio, Wiseman, Burke, or Manning, is right on
the temporal power question ? Two out of the three must be wrong, you know,
and who is to decide which but the infallible Pope, for he alone is, infallible. But
what, Doctor, about those forgeries on which Hallam says “is built the great
fabric of the papal supremacy over the different national churches?” Would it
have been beneath your dignity to have placed a prop against the tottering pillar of
the spiritual supremacy ?
Dr. B.: Well, the fact is—and I tell you in confidence —that the subject of those
forgeries is a very difficult one, owing to the inconvenient candour of some of our
own historians. But there is one consolation, for although I cannot argue the
question with you, I can solemnly warn my people against the sinfulness of doubt-
ing even one of the doctrines of the church, and I can impress upon their docile
minds the virtue of “ blind obedience”—of “ absolute submission.”
Mr. B.: Your candour is charming, Doctor. Would that you would always thus
speak out. But what of the dogma of Infallibility ?
Dr. B.: Why as to that, “ you know very little of the Catholic dogma of Papal
Infallibility, and still less of the ordained sphere of its activity.”
Mr. B,: Let me then sit at your feet, Doctor, while I seek for true information on
this point. And just tell me, please, when, where, and by whom was this dogma
declared ?
Dr. B. - When? In A.D. 1870. Where? In Rome. By whom? By the last
great Vatican (Ecumenical Council. But you must be very ignorant not to know
these things,
Mr. B.: Yes, Doctor, but bear with me if I observe that even granting (which I
do not) that this doctrine of Papal Infallibility was held, though not defined, by the
True Church before 1870, it strikes me as very strange that 1870 years should have
elapsed before the Church publicly recognised the Pope as infallible. Does it not
seem so, Doctor ?
Dr. B.: It does, I confess, seem strange to a person accustomed to reason and to
think ; but I assure you it presents no difficulty whatever to a good Roman Catholic,
whose only duty is to believe.
Mr. B.: I see, Doctor, an “Act of Faith” settles the difficulty right off.
Dr. B.: Precisely.
Mr. B.: Don’t be angry with me, Doctor, but I have another difficulty. It was
the Council which decided by vote that it is the Pope alone who is infallible, when
speaking ex cathedra, in faith and morals. Was it not so ?
Dr. B.: It was.
Mr. B.: Do you not see, therefore, Doctor, that the moment the Council declared
that the Pope alone is infallible, it declared itself to be fallible ; and that, there-
fore, the Pope is declared infallible by a fallible Council. Is it not so ?


Dr. B.; I confess that I do not see my way out of that dilemma. The only
possible way out of the difficulty is to assume that the Council was super naturally
aided until this onerous duty was performed.
Mr. B.: A very ingenious supposition, Doctor, but I fear that even that will not
lessen the difficulty, for I suppose you will admit that if a General Council was
super naturally aided at one great crisis of the Church’s history, it would be at
another ?
Dr. B.: Most assuredly.
Mr. B.: You will also admit that two Councils so aided could not possibly con-
tradict another.
Dr, B.: I must admit that also.
Mr. B.: That puts us in a difficulty ; for the General Council of Constance, A.D.
1414, decided that it had “ received by divine right an authority to which every
rank even the Papal , must submit in matters of faith,” while the Vatican Council
of 1870 decided that the Council must obey the Pope. Now, Doctor, do tell us,
please, which of these super naturally aided Councils was right, for one must be
wrong.
Dr. B.; I cannot tell you, I must confess.
Mr. B.: And yet, Doctor, your church anathematises every soul that does not
firmly believe this mysterious dogma. I fear that there are a good many Roman
Catholics in this district to whom that Papal curse applies. Thank God ! in these
davs Papal curses don’t go for much. Their chief sting lay in the temporal
power, and that is clean gone for ever. May a merciful God forbid its return.
And now, Doctor, as it is getting late, I think we had better adjourn sine die.
Before doing so, let me congratulate you on the improvement shown in your temper
during this dialogue as compared with the gusts of passion which interrupted the
calm of our last conversation. I trust the improvement will be permanent, nay,
even progressive, until at length you may even come to admit that a Wesleyan
Methodist preacher is as sure of heaven as you are. Praying that God may open
your eyes if you are blind to the truth, or change your heart if you are wilfully
Acting it, I am, jours faithfully, „ BUTCHERS, B.A.
From the “ woods of Wodonga,” July 18th, 1874.
[Owing to the extreme length of the foregoing communication, several quota-
tions in° illustration, have, with the writer’s consent, been curtailed, others
omitted. Ed. M. and 11. Times. In three instances the above-named omissions
have been supplied.—B. B,]
DE. BEEMINGHAM’S TWO ADDITIONAL
DIALOGUES,
To the Editor of the Murray and Hume Times.
Sjr—l enclose a report of the second interview between the Rev. Mr. Butchers
and the Rev. Dr. Bermingham, which I hope you will find full and accurate. —A our
obedt. servant, „ T . T , „
P. BERMINGHAM, D.D.
Wagga Wagga, July 18th, 1874. _
Rev. Mr. Butchers: Your parting shot on the breaking up of our former inter-
view might well have been reserved for your own blundering in logic, which made
me “ laugh outright.” Arguing against the Protestant theory of the reciprocal
independent powers of Church and State, you deny to God a power which is
actually exercised by man. Your argument amounted to this;—Two chairs re-
quire two carpenters to make them.
Dr. Bermingham: Either you understood my argument and the philosophical
terms I used, or you failed to catch my meaning and to comprehend the words and
phrases employed. If you accept the latter alternative, you surely did not reply
to me nor refute my thesis ; you were simply answering and refuting Mr. Butchers ;
and consequently your laughter denoted a want of thought, and a strange uncon-
sciousness of your nescience. If you stand up, as I have no doubt you will, for the


former, intending your remarks to logically and categorically apply to the subject-
matter, I have no hesitation in saying your lecture herein borders on something very
like blasphemy, at which you should weep, and not laugh outright. You identify
or confound the first cause with a secondary cause, the Creator with a creature,
God with a carpenter or the imaginary maker of a pill and pistol ; and you fail to
distinguish between the final cause of creation and the carpenter’s purpose in
fashioning a chair, a pill, or a pistol; as also between the final ultimate end of man
—whether regarded as an individual or a member of society—with the immediate
proper end, use, or function of a physical entity. Creation was a free act of God ;
and consequently for some end (propterfinem), This end could not be (ad extra)
without the divine essence, for contingent being supposes creation. It must be and
was (ad intra) within, and therefore must be God, since God is most pure-act or
most simple self-existing being, excluding all composition. The final cause of
creation is therefore God. He is not only the end for which He created, but He
is also the final or ultimate end of the creature according to the creature’s capacity.
By the creative act man proceeds from God as His first cause, and returns to Him
as his final end or cause—his beatitude—without, however, being absorbed by
God. In no sense, therefore, can you, a Christian, believing in God, the first and
final cause of creation as well as the final end of man, say, without blasphemy
“ the world is chock full of final causes.” It would be tantamount to saying it was
chock full of Gods.
Mr. B.: But you omit the qualifying clause, “ in the sense in which we plead for
the reciprocal independent powers of Church and State.’ ’
Dr. B.: Perhaps you were then replying to yourself ; beyond all doubt you were
not answering me. Are you now prepared to fall back on the other alternative,
and plead ignorance of what you were speaking about ? In my lecture, I was
arguing against the theory that “ votes God out of the sphere of politics, and
makes kings and parliaments—aye, not unfrequently political mountebanks—
supreme and independent of moral obligations, cries ‘ Caesar, and only Caesar, on
the throne,’ and even wills the State, or the representative of the temporal order,
to dictate to the spiritual order or its representative, and make Caesar, as in the
days of pagan Rome and devil-worship, pontiff and king—yea, God Almighty.”
Substitute the people for Caesar, and what is the improvement ? You have then
your people king, people pontiff, and your people God, If this be your Protestant
theory of the reciprocal, though independent, powers of Church and State, I was,
no doubt, arguing against it, and the common sense of Christendom cries, “ Down
with itno man not a Manichean can defend it on principle. By holding it, you
are, moreover, false to the principles of Nonconformists. Wesley, that interesting,
“ nestling trophy of redeeming grace,” must disown you ; while Erastus would
clap you on the back. The Kirk of Scotland rejects it, and the Free Kirk abhors
it. Whatever there is of law and authority in the writings of the ablest men of
the Church of England protests against such infamous anti-christian Erastianism.
Have you not heard or read of the grim prisons and blood-stained scaffolds, where
Catholics and Nonconformists met in protest, faithful unto death, against it 1
Mr. B.: But if you are “ endowed with a rational mind” you cannot deny one
first cause could create two distinct worlds independent, and without any relation
whatever the one to the other.
Dr. B.: Without a relation of origin—and, therefore, supposing one to be above
the creature, and consequently good ; or below a creature, and therefore non-
being—certainly not. Independent of ttye first cause—one or other of those two
worlds —with a final cause distinct from the “ one first cause,” assuredly not.
Herein is the essence of Manicheism, which asserts a dual first cause and a dual
final cause of all things. Pure blasphemy in one sense, Mr. Butchers, and in
every other respect nonsense. Will Mr. Butchers now kindly let us know his
theory of the relations of Church and State 1
Mr. B.: Before doing so I must remind you of “ the fallacy underlying every
Roman Catholic argument against my theory you assume, because the Church
has not a direct influence over the State, that, therefore, the State is infidel, just
as Catholics assume the schools are godless, because religion is not taught in them ;
which is equivalent to saying that while any individual is transacting church
business he is holy, but unholy when putting his hand to secular business.
Dr. B.: We assume no such thing; we claim no such influence for the Church
over the State. Nor do we regard schools, where religion is not taught, godless.


Your inference is therefore equivalent only, as far as we are concerned, to nonentity
or nonsense, and consequently to your own assumptions, Man may be a devil or a
saint, whether he is transacting Church business or secular business. While
transacting secular business he is subject to the higher law ; and, as the temporal
or secular does not exist for itself, but for an end—not indeed temporal—for a
spiritual end, he, even thus employed, must observe that law, intending in all his
actions, at least not excluding, his ultimate end, which is union for evermore with
God as his supreme good. St. Paul’s doctrine (Cor. 1 E., c. 10, v. 31), “Do all
things for the glory of God.” Schools, too, are in our opinion godless, when they
positively exclude religion from their course of instruction, on the principle that
education has nothing to do with religion, and lies within the exclusive province of
the State, acting independent of or above the spiritual authority, or the authority
of the Church. Indeed, you have not yet made yourself acquainted with even the
rudiments of Catholic opinion or Catholic dogmatic teaching , between which, as
you should know, there is a vast difference. I now await your theory of the rela-
tion of Church and State.
Mr. B.: The State is one , comprehending the secular and religious elements,
just as an individual is one though he performs distinct functions. When I speak
of the State ruling, I mean the people in the State, by chosen representatives,
transacting secular business; when of the Church ruling I mean the religious por-
tion bringing holy influences to bear upon their rulers. With this definition,
luminous as the sun, concise and clear as an axiom, and, if I may borrow Mr.
Acocks’ apt phraseology, “up to the mark,” I claim as my vested right to be
heard and to be believed, and I protest against the tyranny of a priest forbidding
a Catholic hearing and believing me.
Dr. B.: Believing you does not necessarily follow from hearing you : to hear is
the property of one of the sensed; but to believe is a rational act. I’m hearing
you ; but if I believed you, or what your words seem to imply, it would not be an
act of reason. It would be labouring under—at least, in my case—a Satanic
delusion. Indeed, every Catholic in Albury pities you, knowing, as they do, what
a transparent sham Methodism is, Christ’s Church or kingdom—the divinely-
instituted organism —with its own proper life and functions, and with its powers of
ruling, guiding, and teaching within its own sphere, is, therefore, according to your
luminous theory, a nonentity. The Word made flesh did not found a kingdom or
Church on the rock, with a new order of life, placing man in supernatural relations
with God —an order in which Christ is the alpha and omega. The Church of God
is only an accident or condition of the sovereign entity, the State, which it owes to
the sublime and pregnant fact of having a few pious men—Wesleyans, of course
—“ nestling trophies of redeeming grace, men with regenerated hearts, and washed
in the blood of the Lamb,” influencing the representatives of the people. But my
doubting friends, “ palpate and videte ,” touch and see. For over 18 centuries the
Church of Christ has been as visible as the sun, palpable as the snowy mountains,
knowable as a proposition in Euclid, and intelligible as an axiom, by the light of
faith. Because Christ did come to establish a kingdom, which was to give the law
of the cross to all kingdoms “of earth, earthy,” carnal Judaism crucified him
between two thieves. Was it against a nonentity pagan persecutions raged in
vain, or was it a nonentity that finally planted the cross in the chief cities of the
old and new worlds ? Take the Church of Christ’s visible kingdom from the page
of history, and at once everything glorious and heroic disappears, leaving only a
record of the wars, the robberies, the ferocities, and brutalities, of your one entity .
For three hundred years, the heresies originating in Germany—like all the heresies,
from the first years after the first Pentecost—have supposed the existence of this
supernatural entity, while presuming to strut about in her stolen robes, and to
assume her prerogatives. The common law of Europe admits its existence; the
constitutions of every civilised nation suppose it or affirm it in their acts. Against
it, or in its favour, laws have been promulgated in every age by the one entity, the
State, Why, its foundation and growth to glory and power are facts of history,
clearer than the existence or growth of any empire or nation in the world. Ask
me to deny the existence of the “ Church Catholic,” and you will ask me to declare
myself a lunatic ; ask me to question the origin of Christ’s kingdom as a distinct
entity—a supernatural entity—a visible, palpable kingdom, and you ask me to deny
every page of history, to deny moral certainty, and bid me stare with sightless
orbs on possible space —vacuity. Yet you, Mr. Butchers, “ claim to be heard and
believdd I” Pray give us a proof of what you state.


Mr. B. : I told you there was a fallacy underlying your theory of Church and
State ; my view is the correct one, and should not be questioned.
Dr. B.: But allowing the Church of Christ to be a nonentity , or a quality, like
colour, heat, breadth, and thickness, and that the whole of Christendom is made
up of fools, barring, of course, the happy family of Methodists, and the “ other
nestling tropics of redeeming grace,” will you not admit two orders—the spiritual
and the temporal—or God and the creature ? You cannot deny those two orders
without denying the creative act. Now, God or the spiritual is surely supreme,
and above the temporal or the creature. The two orders are distinct, but not
separate ; for that would involve the annihilation of the temporal—the creature.
The temporal must ever be subordinate to God and His law. And as God is the
final cause of creation, and “ in Him we live, move, and have our being,” His pro-
vidence extending to all our acts, public and private ; all our free acts must be
ordered by His law and for the one end—our beatitude. All secular business has,
therefore, and must have, a relation to the spiritual order, and be under moral
obligations. Buying and selling are secular business ; can I then lie, and cheat,
and refuse to pay debts, without sin ; or am I only amenable to the enactments of
the one entity? If that be Wesleyan doctrine, I shall never, if I can help it, be
found transacting “ secular business” with any one of them.
Mr. B.: But I said the influence which Protestant Churches bring to bear is
chemical, permeating all the various forces and rulers of the State.
Dr. B.: That I willingly admit; for hitherto the action has tended to dissolve
and disintegrate everything, whereas the action of the Catholic Church con-
solidates and forms into a compact mass the elements of society, removing every
disturbing cause, and checking the flow of destroying agencies. Will you kindly
inform me whence is the power or right to rule according to your view of State
sovereignty ?
Mr. B.: The people in the State, acting by, in, and with its representatives, would
seem to be the subject of sovereign power.
Dr. B.: But if the people be the original source of power, how explain St. Paul’s
words, “ For there is no power but from God and those that are ordained of God”
(Eom. c. 13, v. 1.) The people can only be the medial origin. The power or right
to rule comes from God ; and therefore the State or sovereign representative acts
by virtue of a God-given trust, and is in every act responsible to God’s law. It is
Mr. 8., a beautiful and pregnant question, that of the origin of power and the"
nature of government, on which I hope to give a lecture, ere many months, in
Albury, to which you are hereby invited.
PAPAL CLAIMS.
Mr. B.: Well, whatever you may be able to urge in defence of your illogical
lecture, why assume for the Romish Church “ equality with God.”
Dr. B.: Pray don’t look on every Catholic you meet as an inmate of bedlam.
Catholics know the Church is a creature, and, therefore, not equal to God. They
leave blasphemy to frenzied rhetoricians. J
Mr. C.: You said so equivalently, for you infer from an “ assumed major premise”
—and indeed logically, which is not very usual with you—that if you destroy the
Church you destroy God.
Dr. B.: Just the very thing Christ said. “He that heareth you heareth Me, and
he that despiseth Me despiseth Him that sent me” (Luke c. 10, v. 16). Again
“ And if he will not hear the Church let him be to thee as the heathen and the
publican’ (Matt. c. 18, v. 17). Whoever disobeys one, authorised by God to com-
mand, disobeys God, in not willing obedience to whom He hath given authority to
command. The child disobeying his parents disobeys God ; but does this suppose
an equality between God and the child’s parents 1
Mr. B.: At all events you cannot give us a Scriptural or rational basis for the
three enormous claims of the Romish Church—Papal Sovereignty, Papal
Supremacy, and Papal Infallibility. By thefirst dogma you claim Papal Sovereignty.
The Pope says in effect, “By me kings reign and decree justice.”
Dr. B.: The Papal Sovereignty is not a dogma, as any fairly instructed Catholic
child can tell you. Do try and distinguish between dogma and opinion The
Pope does not say, “Byrne kings reign if he were head of the Synagogue of
Satan he might, barring the stupidity and ignorance it would involve. Is it not
really too bad ? You will, I find, persist in taking Catholics for full-grown idiots,
and the non-Catholics of Albury for the most ignorant creatures in Christendom.


Mr. B.: I confidently appeal to Dr. Manning’s funeral oration over those who
died in defence of the temporal power.
Dr. B.: Just so, over those who died in defence of the temporal power, but not
therefore in defence of a claim to appellate jurisdiction, as you call it, over kings
and nations in civil matters. The Pope had been de jure and de facto , as he now
is de jure , sovereign over the patrimony of the Holy See—the States of the Church.
His claim to that sovereignty, founded in every title that could make sacred and
venerable a right to rule, no more interfered with the rights of other sovereigns
than does the sovereignty of Queen Victoria with the rights of the Autocrat of
the Russias.
Mr. B.: Ah, but Pius the Ninth, in his address to the Austrians and Tyrolese,
leaves no doubt about the claim, for he said—“ Your obedience and fidelity must
have limits. Besides obligations binding you as subjects, you have duties of
conscience as Christians.” The meaning of all this is : Disobey the Church and
you disobey God.
Dr. B.; The very teaching of Christ! “ Render to Caesar the things that are
Caesar’s, and to God things that are God’s.” Unless you return to Paganism, making
Caesar God, his powers must be limited; and whenever he exceeds the limits 5 ,
attempting, like the Emperor of Germany, to be pontiff and king, every Catholic,
aye, every man loving liberty and hating oppression, every one loving justice and
loathing wrongdoing—in a word, every man with a man’s heart, too noble to
crouch in slavery or wear a chain, though one of gold, will and must, if true to his
nature, cry out, “ If it be just in the sight of God to hear you rather than God,
judge ye” (Acts, c. 4).
Mr. B.: Dr. Manning, you must admit, has a convenient memory, for he forgets
that Henry VIII. and Elizabeth were excommunicated and yet prospered, as does
Victor Emmanuel.
Dr. B.; Excommunication is the exercise of a spiritual power, with spiritual
penalties attached. Now, how can you undertake to say it has no effect ? Ah, I
seem now to begin to comprehend what “a nestling trophy of redeeming grace”
is. Are you gifted with a knowledge of the unseen ?
Mr. B.: I spoke of temporal prosperity ; if you would only attend to my words
you could understand so much.
Dr. B.: Do you call it temporal prosperity to reign like Nero and live like Helio-
gabalus ; to kill wives and murder guests ; to quarter and disembowel priests and
bishops for saying mass and for obeying God rather than man ? Do you call the
successful gutting of churches, the robbing of poor helpless nuns, and the malap-
propriation of the money of God’s starving and helpless poor, with, moreover, a
life of libidinous debauchery, a sign of temporal prosperity ? If you do, then in
your view is \ictor Emmanuel the most prosperous Prince in Christendom. Herod
did not lose his kingdom after killing the holy innocents and attempting to plant a
dagger i n the infant heart of the World’s Redeemer ; can you conclude therefrom he
was not a criminal, or that a malediction did not reach the monster ? Up to this
very day the Jews hold the money-bags of Europe, influence kings and statesmen,
as also the press of Europe; can you infer, from their possession of riches and
power, that over their bent shoulders is not suspended the appalling invocation
“ His blood be upon us and on our children ?”
Mr. B.: But no one minds the Pope now ; all countries are rebelling against his
arrogant pretensions ; all have thrown off a yoke too grievous to be borne.
Dr, B.: The old, old cry; “We have no king but Caesar “ write not King of
the Jews ‘‘ if Thou be the King of the Jews save Thyself “ wagging their heads
and crying bah ! they said save Thyself.” Then was the hour of darkness ; but oh,
how near the resurrection ; it was the very dawn of the day of glory and triumph
over sin and death. The vicar of Christ is now insulted and mocked, as had been
promised by our Lord ; but still the Papacy has all the vigour of immortal youth,
whilst the hands raised against it are on the eve of dissolution. Why not read
Alison s account of the melting away of the grand army of France; the arms
literally falling from the hands of more than two hundred thousand soldiers amid
the snows of Russia ; though but a few months before, when excommunicated,
Napoleon proudly asked, “ Does the old man think the arms can fall from the
hands of three hundred thousand soldiers?” Read and say whether is suffering
weakness or ruthless Satanic might, during the passing hours of darkness, a proof
of right and justice.


THE SUPREMACY.
Mr B • As I habitually avoid misrepresentation by citing doctrine only from
fife writi I I TJ Dr. WisomanGo
r.pal supremacy signifiesthat.tit> roPg o ° r ? 1! t thingsi P ngs B p, rl tu’.il, over the entire
Church P and was constituted its visible head’and the vice-gerent of Christ on earth.
up “meey L“Xee two distinct but closely f M the Holy
See is the centre of unity ; second, it is the fountain of aut y. b D
Dr B ■ Your doctrinal statement is accurate, but you should rememoer ur,
wSen.au IT J ™ ZaU he iefine it. Only the inWhble reabhmg an homy
defines a dogma. Indeed, Catholics pity any one who fobhshiy (snes « ouit i
man and a Christian ; whatever I say is true beyond a d Jt-is trueas
Mr. B.: But is it any wonder, when pretensions r * dl ° ul ° , English Gre ek
schism after schism should have rent the Church of Uret ’
and Old Catholic Churches should have asserted their J ’ Wh tM {
Or B ■ Ridiculous ! So you call them, but not therefore are tney. wny inis is
thfl'ery question in and certainly the bold
graduate of the famous Melbourne University cannot disturb rational con^ctmE
T-meetto^SlyTtS.''^
r« S’iSr=r^s^ftL,
Mr B : But are they not asserting their rightful liberty i . . , ,
Dr. B.: Are we free to do wrong? In doing wrong XriLieSn
of liberty. Call it rightful liberty after proof, but not after re •
Mr. B.: Do you not know the dogma of Papal supremacy is os y
a few obscure passages of Holy writ ? T x • u ™ iRp not and fact of
Dr. B.: I know no such thing, nor do you. It is builtZee if Scripture in
Christ's appointment, of which we have over-ample evide P . e »
the writings of the Fathers, in the living tradition of thei Church, and f m the
exercise of the prerogative for over eighteen centuries, witho . q idiots and afc
sition save from fanatics or tyrants, pharisees or despots, g . ts | J
sinners. The Church, you should not forget, received, the ™
therefore built up by their help and »ey are not to ohmte. she
was God’s finished work-derngiiedl by Him, and erecte T J ament as written .
founded by Primate Peter be ore on ~f f and what you must prove before
Do you now perceive wherein you and I differ, ana wnar y p
you can “ with reason call ugly names or make well-founded charg •
Mr. B. : You must certainly allow the interpretation given thoseobscuretexts
of Scripture are contradicted by dozens of others about whose mean „
be Dr° i°fl‘'cannot insult my reason by allowing what every Catholic knows
to be false. Obscure the texts may seem to iffhe/are obscure how
standpoint of foregone conclusions and prejudice, but if they ,
STthe elearness of the contradiction, which ago I bS
apprehension of contradictory propositions. More than SU oZ. ma cyV one of
all the texts a Wesleyan could bring up urged against the sup y J
the ablest of living divines, Dr. Crolly, of Maynootbt Colley
vellous power of argument could only give them tbe sl ® n T t hav | tr s, d the
snnhistrv was transparent. More than one hundred times 1 too nave triea rne
sopmstry was uiuispaipui. could muster, and never
logical acuteness of young Levites with all the texts you eumu ,
yet met one so stupid as not to tear the objections to pieces. ~ fnundpd _ on a
Mr. B.: You must not forget the Papal supremacy is leally founded upon a
‘‘ D^B°- IndfedT’When did you discover that? How stupid and ignorant
Catholics are! Think of hundreds of bishops, thousandls on-™*'"t^two
hundred millions and more of Catholics, not knowi g character and
from Wodonga coolly asserts ! Think of millions of men staking characterana
common sense, yea, their eternal fate, on what a “ nestling of the Melbourne


University, by the help of Mr. Hallam, has the hardihood to tell us is founded on
a series of forgeries !* Why, Hallam is no better authority than yourself.
This, the Protestant Dean of Durham, Dr. Waddington, in his ecclesiastical
history, and Dr. Maitland, in an ecclesiastical magazine, have made so clear, that
-even you, Mr. Butchers, could scarcely question it. They have convicted him of a
forged calumny on St. Eloi or Eligius—of treacherously publishing “ the treachery
of Mosheim in his unpardonable mutilation of his authority.” Believe me, the day
is long past since the baseless Elizabethan tradition could delude the most simple
of untutored Catholics. Nevertheless, “ the cry is still they come,” assertions bold
but baseless as a vision—stupid and unmeaning as the snort of the rhinoceros,
Mr. B.; Eeally both Catholics and Protestants are surprised to learn the Pope
claims jurisdiction over every baptised creature.
Dr. B.: Better say has jurisdiction over him or her. The Pope is head of the
Catholic Church, into which baptism, validly administered, introduces any one of
Adam’s children, constituting him a member of Christ’s mystical body, over which
Christ has constituted the lawful successor of St. Peter His own vice-ruler. For-
bear, then, to be surprised, until you have proved the Pope is not supreme visible
ruler of God’s Church, which you have not done, and which you cannot do, since
for over sixteen hundred years his Satanic Majesty has tried in vain to utilise the
most learned of the world to do so.
(To the Editor of the Murray and Hume Times.')
Subjoined is a full and accurate report of the third and last interview between
the Bev. Dr. Bermingham and Rev. Mr. Butchers :
INFALLIBILITY,
Mr. B.: Add to the supremacy the infallibility, and you make “ the Pope truly
our Lord God.”
Dr. B.: Then the collation to a creature of supreme jurisdiction on earth over the
visible kingdom of Christ’s Church, and the preservation of the recipient from
error, within a limited area of instruction, by the aid of God’s abiding Holy Spirit,
is equivalent to the Eternal Generation of the Son or the Eternal Procession of
the Holy Ghost! The creature, remaining a creature, becomes God ! Was wilder
blasphemy ever uttered on earth or below the earth—blasphemy without even the
shabby covering of Satanic sophistry ? And yet the author of it comes unseat, as
a teacher in Israel to show the Catholics of Albury “the more excellent way”
amidst, if me can credit report, the applause of a large audience ! “ Mother reads,”
says an American Methodist preacher, “ and I s’pounds an s’plains.” Well, I must
say, I can scarcely believe such profound ignorance, or such ineffable want of
intelligence, could be found amongst even the Aztecs or Patagonians, much less
amongst the inhabitants of Albury and Wodonga.
Mr. B.: Then I ask the Catholics of Albury how any one knows this dogma to
be true ; is it because Dr. Bermingham tells them ?
Dr. B.: Indeed it is not; nor do they know it to be false because you tell
them so.
Mr. B.: You are not infallible, Dr. Bermingham.
Dr. B.: Nor are you, Mr. Butchers, We differ, however, in this, that you speak
and dictate as if you were, whereas I know we are not infallible, and believing it
act up to this belief. lam merely a messenger from an infallible judge and
an infallible teacher ; and what is required of me is fidelity, not infallibility.
M Now it is required amongst the dispensers that a man be found faithful” (Cor.
Ist Bp., c. 4, v. 2).
Mr. B.: Surely the dogma of Papal Infallibility cannot override the rights of
conscience or the exercise of the reasoning powers. I protest against it because it
is craftily used for the purpose of cramping and fettering human freedom of
conscience.
Dr. B.: What in the world can a man say to that string of assertions without
proof or principle ? It does not override conscience unless the communication of
♦ See pages 63, 64.


truth, objective truth with certainty, does so; it directs and enlightens our
judgments, I have yet to learn light and truth override rights of conscience.
<< Craftilv used.” When and where, and by jvhom ? “ Cramping and fettering.
Are the dictates of conscience free of opinions ? I thought they were certain
judgments about the moral rectitude or the sinfulness of a present action. Can
the certain knowledge of truth make evil good, or change the nature of things.
Prav don’t indulge in arrant nonsense. To embrace falsehood is an abuse of
intellectual freedom, as the doing of evil is an abuse of free will. When we accept
truth and do good, then, and then only, are we really using liberty and exercising
our reasoning powers. 01l x
Mr. B.; But see the blind obedience Eome regards as the chief of all graces. 1
hold in my hand Rodriguez' Christian Perfection.
Dr. B.: Do save yourself the trouble of reading extracts. He is speaking of
volunteered, promised obedience, given by a member of a religious order, who, tor
the love of God, parts with his free will in matters determined by a written rule.
This obedience has no reference to the Catholics of Albury, save those who are
members of the Mercy Order of Nuns. Indeed, you were merely doing the logical
trickster or juggling for the amusement of your simple audience when you quoted
Mr.^B.: I must speak out; and I now declare Eome dreads the light. _
Dr. B.: Why not be afraid of the lightning flash, or the lurid light issuing from
below ? Eeally you are only renewing the old scene in Paradise. Your precursor
the serpent—was more subtle than all the beasts of the earth ; and said to the
woman, “ God doth know that in that day soever you shall eat thereof your eyes
shall be opened, and you shall be as gods knowing good and evil. Why hath
God commanded you that you should not eat of every tree in Paradise? Was
God over-riding rights of conscience and the exereise of the reasoning powers,
while the old cunning serpent, coming from the bush into the garden, was defend-
ing the rights of conscience, and bidding Eve exercise her reasoning powers I _
Mr. B.; I call upon the Catholics of Albury to assert their liberty, and use their
God-given powers. . , , . ~ ,
Dr. B.; They have done so already in embracing truth, and rejecting sham
and counterfeit. They can look back over an ancestral line of glory and heroism,
every point of which is luminous by the light of truth, and famous by the wounds
of confessors, the blood of martyrs, and the angelic purity of virgins. Do you
want them to break with everything grand and glorious in the traditions and
history not only of their own race, but of the wide world, for the darkness and
ignominy of one of the most contemptible of sects? Do you want them to
adopt the Book of Discipline or Constitution old ranting Wesley gave his children,
instead of the Constitution the Word made Flesh gave them ? Do you want
them to exchange their beautiful temples for what a wag one day called the
“ Lord’s barns to exclude sweet harmony from devotions, and every instrument
of music, save the nose, from churches ; to extinguish the little lamp that, like
the Star of the East, shows the hidden God’s resting place to those wise enough
to see and believe ? , ~ , ,
Mr. B.: But I claim to be heard and believed, and the man who denies me one
or the other, I declare to be a coward and a tyrant, be he Pope or priest.
Dr. B.: But in the words of St. Paul (Eom. c. 10, v. 15), ‘'How shall you preach
unless you be sent?” Pray, who sent you, or do you run of yourself like the
false prophets of old ? , A . , x j v *l.
Mr. B.: I’m a Methodist preacher, legitimately ticketed by the Wesleyan
Dr. B.; But who sent or constituted the connection? Is authority naturally
inherent in it, or does it derive from a special mission, or come with the halo
of Apostolic authority ?
Mr. B,; The question, as you put it, is not worth consideration. I may bring
to this task the mightiest intellectual powers; the keenest insight into truth ;
the most unswerving integrity of soul; in fine, the most perfect combination and
adjustment of mental, moral, and spiritual powers. Why then dare this dogma
of Infallibility, like some grim spectre, stalk across my path and hound me down
with a cry, Believe him not, for 1, Pius IX., am alone the fountain of truth.
Dr. B.; Your learning, your earnestness, and your uprightness of purpose, aye,
even your genius, if you will have it so, we stop not to question. We have, how-


ever, examined your credentials, and find them wanting the guinea stamp. Instead
of the seal of the Fisherman they bear that of the dear old harmless Wesley.
“A stranger; therefore Catholics follow you not, but fly from you because they
know not the voice of strangers (John c. 10, v. 5). We hear the voice of the
shepherd, who entered by the door—by lawful mission from divinely-appointed
authority—and follow him, because we know his voice.” All others, as many as
have come, Christ tells us, “ are thieves and robbers, coming to steal, and kill, and
destroy” (John c. 10). How can you blame Catholics if they “ beware of false
prophets, who come to them in sheep’s clothing, but inwardly they are ravening
wolves” (Matt. c. 7, v. 15). Our Redeemer knew human nature well, and, there-
fore, did he say—the tears that had fallen for impenitent Jerusalem being scarcely
dried up—“ If any one say to you, Lo, here is the Christ or there, do not believe
him ! for there shall rise false Christs and false prophets” (Matt. c. 21, v. 23, 24).
Come forth, Mr. Butchers, from the corner wherein human freedom is really
■“ cramped and fettered” by tyrant individual opinion; and enter the home of
objective truth, where is believed God speaking to his people through his accredited
teachers. In the Church, which St. Paul calls “ the pillar and ground of truth,”
you will find intellectual and moral freedom, and above all freedom of conscience
in knowing what is lawful, and being helped and urged to do it. There you will
find—within the boundaries of England—two hundred and more priests celebrat-
ing mass, who were once the pride and glory of the English establishment as they
are to-day of old Oxford and her sister Cambridge.
Mr. B.: But I have said nothing that Ido not believe to be true.
Dr. B.: Willingly granted ; but we want certainty, not opinion.
Mr. B.: I want you and all Catholics to hear me, and be sure they will “ cut the
painter,” and leave enslaving Rome to follow the Melbourne graduate and the
Methodist preacher from Wodonga.
Dr. B. : Suppose we do “ cut the painter,” will you specify what you are pre-
pared to give us instead. We pray for you and your deluded followers “to com-
prehend the light shining in darkness.” To what do you wish to convert us ? Is
it to Protestantism in the sense it is accepted by all, including the Methodists ?
But in that sense it is merely the negation of Catholicity : we would then be
giving up the religion we have, to go without any ; in a word, to live without
God in this world, and die as the dog dieth. You must therefore give us some-
thing better than that. What next do you offer 1 Is it reason ? That we have
already, not less than you ; and this is not saying very much. Reason leads us
to obey the Church commissioned by God to declare wisdom and dispense the
mysteries of the Cross. By a free act of our reason we continue to submit to her ;
and to renounce her would for us involve the abject renunciation of our reason.
Is it not reasonable to believe God on His word, and to submit to Him 1 But
in obeying the Church my reason tells me I do rightly, since my reason,
with the aid of grace, which God denies to no one, is convinced that The
Indwelling Holy Ghost uses the Church as His organ of speech to us. What then
remaineth ?
Mr. B.: Everything. The Bible —God’s glorious word, the charter of our liberty,
the source of light and love to the whole world, which Papists refuse and reject,
because Rome, “ dreading the light,” forbids them to read the Bible. Oh, the
tyranny of enslaving Rome !
Dr. B.; Why we had the Bible nearly seventeen hundred years before Wesley
was born. From us both he and you got it : on the authority of the Catholic
Church or Catholic tradition you take its canonicity and its inspiration. It is false,
as even you know, that we are not allowed to read the Scriptures: we are forbidden
to read corrupt versions: we are forbidden the abuse of them or the idolatry
of them.
Mr. B.: But we will allow you to interpret them for yourselves.
Dr. B.: Yes, provided we do not interpret them differently from the Methodist
connection. Why not allow us to interpret them as Catholics, and leave us alone ?
What is wanted is assistance to arrive at their true meaning ; can you give us
that 1 Certainly not. Therefore we are as well off as you can make us. What or
where, then, is your more excellent way ?
Mr. B.: The doctrine of justification by faith alone. With hearts yearning for
your salvation we implore you to go straight to the Bible and read thus, “ Believe
in the Lord Jesus Christ, and you shall be saved. The just shall live by faith.”


Dr. B.; Really everything affirmative in your doctrine we have already ; we
know and believe faith to be the foundation of every virtue, but we do not hold
faith without charity will save us, since it is dead, as St, James tells us, and death
can’t give life. The wee particle alone is Luther’s ; and, since it is purely negative,
we have all you can offer us. You merely want to take from us what we have.
Downright robbery, is it not ? The life you offer us is indeed easy ; it is without
fear or favour ; there is no need to fast or do acts of mortification. Faith, and it
alone, in the atoning sacrifice, will do the rest while we are living, as also in death.
Your doctrine, could you only make us sure of it, would save us a great deal of
trouble, and be a consolation to us, if we went in for good living and downright
sinning—say for robbing, lying, cheating, and the sins of the flesh. Now I begin
to realise the meaning of what a kind-hearted English merchant said one day to
me “ I should like very much if I could legitimately live a Wesleyan and die a
Catholic.” But can there be such a thing as justification without justice, or the
works of justice ? The very works from which you exempt us may be necessary
unto real justification —not your justification, with the leprous state of sin yet
remaining. What we want is to be saved from our sins, and live in actual union
by grace with God. This your justification does not offer us : it is only imputed.
But really, Mr. Butchers, what can you offer us on this or anything else, but your
belief, either in the shape of a negation or an affirmation of truth ? Why, then,
exchange with you? Pray, are you infallible?
Mr. B.; “ I’m a man and a Christian, and I have said nothing in my lecture that
I do not believe to be true.”
Dr. B.: But you can’t claim infallibility.
Mr, B.: Certainly not, but lo and behold the Bible.
Dr. B.; Here the same question crops up. Are you infallible in your under-
standing of what the Bible teaches ?
Mr, B.: Certainly not ; I must be consistent if I can.
Dr. B.; Then, at very best, your belief may turn out to be false, while, at worst,
ours is only fallible. What superiority, therefore, have you ? My yes is as good
as your yes, and my no as your no. Really, your arrogant tone is out of place p
your asking us to “ cut the painter” and “ use our God-given freedom” does not
come well from you, until you can give us something better than negation, which
is sometimes not the fruit of knowledge and intelligence, but of ignorance and
stupidity. Our system at worst is as good as yours at its best. First, then, go and
get non-Catholics to agree as to what is Christianity ; then make out your com-
mission and show it, as coming from Almighty Gad in due form, to preach and
teach, and we shall hear you ; but don’t blame us if, until then, we are mindful
of the Lord’s words by Jeremy—■‘■“l have not sent these prophets, and yet they
run. They are prophets of the delusions of their own hearts.”
Mr. B.: I ask the Catholics of Albury to “ choose between their country and
'their Church—between their dear-bought liberty and the decrees of spiritual
despotism—of the so-called supreme infallible Pope.” lam a man and a Christian,,
one of the nestling trophies of redeeming grace, with a right to be heard and
believed, as I have had occasion to so often tell you.
Dr. B.: It is really carrying the joke too far for a Methodist to be talking of
freedom in any sense of the word. The Methodist discipline, if you adopt old
Wesley’s constitution, is most stringent. Moreover, a real Methodist is a
descendant of the Montanists, finding religion in feeling and the operation of the
' spirit, with which reason has nothing to do; but without reason and free will
where is liberty ? Ask an old Methodist woman why she believes, and she will
answer, “ Because I know.” “ But how do you know ?” “Oh ! I feel it,” she will
reply, putting her hand where her heart ought to be.
Mr. B.: What have you to say of the crushing despotism of the Papal peroga-
tives ?
Dr. B.: They interfere not with the freedom of the State or of the citizen ; they
leave the State supreme, without a superior in its own order , and guard from
tyranny the citizen by forbidding the State either to do or make be done anything
forbidden by God’s law. The Papacy thus becomes, as she always has been, the
guardian of the weak and poor man’s rights, anathematising the despotism of the
one entity over its subject, when either asking or forcing him to do or believe or
"think or obey contrary to God’s law, which is necessarily the Supreme authority
for men and nations, for rulers and subjects. But why talk of us as being slaves-


because we recognise the Papal prerogatives ? Are you at liberty to do or believe
anything contrary to the teaching of the Bible ? If not, why blame us for not
believing or doing anything contrary to the decisions of the Holy Father ? The
only difference between us is, your authority—as supreme as ours—is placed in
what God said by men long ago, whereas ours is in what God continues to say
through the voice of the living Pontiff. If ours is human, so is yours; the Apostles
and Prophets were men, like the Pope, and if the human element in our teacher
makes his authority purely human, the same must be said of the Apostles and
Evangelists; you assert Apostolic authority that was, while we hold to one that
was and is. In a word, the Papacy is a despotism if not founded by Christ; but if the
Pope be of Christ’s choice and appointment, he governs by divine authority. Charge
him—as divinely appointed—with despotism, and the charge passes to our Lord.
Mr. B.: That it is the Divine appointment I deny. The Pope is not supremo
and infallible if Peter was not ; but Peter was not, for Christ said to him, “ Get
thee behind me, Satan.” This text is a specimen out of a dozen which might be
adduced. The Pope never interpreted it, because if he gave it a true meaning he
would pull down the primacy of Peter, and consequently his own.
Dr. B.: At length I see a prospect of bringing this interview to a close. Your
fierce harangue and your denunciations are based on one text after all. Take it
away and nothing remains but fury and foam—but yourself worked up to a state of
fine frenzy, and boldly denying and recklessly affirming without principle or proof.
Oh for one with a scholarly mind, who could and would calmly look at the Church
Catholic, and earnestly discuss her claims and her powers. Now to the text. When
our Lord said, “ Thou art Peter, and on this rock I will build my Church, ” you hold
he didn’t mean what he said, because afterwards he rebuked Peter, saying “ Get be-
hind me, Satan.” But did Christ know at the time of making the promise he would
say “ Get behind me ? ” Can any one then in his senses conclude, from a rebuke —the
necessity of which in the future he was at the time of promising aware—either that
the promise was not made or was to go without effect? What proves too much
proves nothing. Now if his rebuke was a bar to the Primacy it was equally so to
the Apostleship, but even you must admit Peter was an Apostle. Did not Peter
deny Christ with cursing and swearing ; surely this made him as unworthy of the
Apostleship as of the Primacy, and of both as much or more so than did the rebuke
you allude you. Yet he was an Apostle, was he not? You forget it was Peter con-
verted or the future Peter, who was to confirm his brethren, and actually enter on
the promise. Could he not repent, or do you think he was selected because he was
by nature perfect ? His Apostleship as also his Primacy rested in grace and the
work of the Holy Ghost, and not in human virtue. Certainly, despite natural de-
fects, our Lord was able to fit him for any office. Was he not? If so, pray how can
you say he did not, because he received a rebuke from Christ. Pray don’t be so
hard of heart; learn that justice and mercy kiss each other here below, and know
that our Lord could rebuke in love and chastise without anger. He was not a Me-
thodist in feeling, thought, or in judgment. He allowed place for repentance, and
crushed not the broken reed. Had you been with the Pharisees the day poor Mag-
dalen washed our Lord’s feet with her “tears,” and wiped them with her hair, ten
to one, scandalised with her forwardness, you would have sent for a policeman
to take her to the—what shall I call it—house of correction. Neither you nor I,
dear Mr. Butchers, can smile as we were wont to smile in the sweet innocence of
life’s young morning; but our tears of sorrow are acceptable to Him, who spurned
not weeping Mary, but, pouring into the chalice of her contrite heart the riches of
His grace, made her a consoling example for you and me, assuring us, if we bedew
the feet of our Redeemer with our tears, he will beautify our souls with His love,
and bid us renew our youth under the healing touch of His grace. Christ rebuked
Peter, but not angrily. Our Lord had been speaking of his intended journey to
Jerusalem, where he was to suffer and be put to death. The loving Peter cried out,
“Lord, be it far from thee, this shall not be unto theecried out, no doubt, in love
for his master. Why then take our Lord’s words in a harsh sense? We may thus
interpret them; In wishing these things to happen not to me, thou savourest not the
things that be of God, and art in opposition to me. They must happen : Come after
me and suffer after my example. No matter, however. Really, may not Christ have
chosen Peter, because of his very imperfections, for the Primacy, in order to found
him in humility, and show the world that the Church stands not, like human inati-
■ tutions, on the wisdom and genius of her children, but in God’s grace ?


I have done, Mr. Editor, after a painful and humiliating run through Mr.
Butchers’ fierce denunciations and bold assertions, without point or purpose,
save to insult and worry Catholics, and teach Dr. Bermingham “to confine
himself to his pulpit.” Though not very much afraid of polemics, and pretty
well prepared, after years of study, to grapple with the ordinary adversaries of
the Old Church, I had much rather hold on to the even tenor of the olden way,
teaching objective truth and not opinion, and inculcating charity to all without
exception, with a friendly hand to every upright citizen, and a willing help to
every community in promoting social peace and the public good. Hundreds have
kindly assured me, that, neither in the matter of my lecture nor in the mode of
presenting my views, did I give reason for rational offence. This assurance en-
courages me to hope, ere long to again meet my Albury friends, “to lay at their
feet a few thoughts on a very important subject.” In you, Mr. Editor, I’m proud
to recognise a scholar, who, without accepting my views, was generous enough
not to see evil in everything a priest may say on a public question ; one who is
not insensible to gratitude, when a fellow-colonist, without promise of reward or
hope of even general approbation, comes forward, at the request of friends, to
contribute for one hour to the amusement or improvement of his well-meaning
and intelligent fellow-colonists.
P. BERMINGHAM.
REV. ME. BUTCHERS’ FINAL REJOINDER,
Mr. B.: I see, Doctor, that*l was right in supposing that you had reserved that
little difficulty about the two chairs for a second letter.
Dr, B.: Yes,you “forced” me into print once more, though, I assure you, it is
much against my will.
Mr. B.: I can easily believe it, Doctor; but what have you to say to my
argument 1
Dx\ B.: “You identify or confound the first cause with a secondary cause, the
Creator with the creature, God with a carpenter, or the imaginary maker of a pill
or a pistol.”
Mr. B.: I did nothing of the kind. I simply said that by your argument you
denied to God a power which is exercised by man, thus in fact making God weaker
than man.
Dr. B.: But your argument is blasphemous. It is “ tantamount to saying that the
world is chock full of Gods.”
Mr. B.: And so in one sense it is, Doctor, as you might easily have learnt had
you been more familiar with the Scriptures. Turn to your own Douay Bible, and
in the 81st Psalm you will read, “ God hath stood in the midst of gods, and being
in the midst of them he judgeth gods and again, “ I have said you are gods, and
all of you the sons of the Most High.” The fact is, that you either are, or affect
to be, ignorant of the nature of our argument from analogy. It by no means
follows that because I compared a carpenter to God in one respect, that therefore
I identified or confounded the one with the other. The confusion is entirely of your
own making. It is the old fallacy of Rochefort and Milton over again.
Dr. B.: “ But you were ignojrant of what you were speaking about, for in my
lecture I was arguing against the theory that votes God out of the sphere of
solities, and makes kings and parliaments supreme and independent of moral
obligations,” &c.
Mr. B.: Then, Doctor, you may spare your breath, for I know of no Protestant
who holds that theory. But, nevertheless, do not run away with the idea that,
because a King or a Parliament is not submissive to the Pope, it is therefore
“ independent of moral obligations.” It is a great fact, Doctor, that men may
actually love and serve God though they do not care one jot or one tittle for
the Pope. I assure you that it is a tremendous mistake to suppose that all
morality centres in the Pope or is summed up in your Church.
Dr. B.: “ But surely it is blasphemy or nonsense to suppose that the first
great cause could create two distinct worlds without any relation of origin, or
one of them being independent of the first cause.”
M. B.: The difficulty is again of your own making. You create two
suppositions of which I never even dreamt. By my very hypothesis they had of


necessity a common origin, and, therefore, the same final cause; but they need
not be related in any other way the one to the other, which was sufficient for my
argument. But tell me now what are your views on “infidel states,” and “ godless
schools.” It seems I misunderstood Roman Catholic opinion on that point.
Dr. B.: You did. “ Man, while transacting secular business, is subject to the
higher law,” in accordance with St. Paul’s teaching that we should “do all
things to the glory of God.”
Mr. B.: We Protestants hold precisely the same doctrine, and preach it every
Sunday in our churches ; but the misery of it is, that so far as obedience is
concerned you have substituted the Pope for God, and would make all men
bow their necks to his yoke, and their backs to his burden, though his yoke is
not easy nor his burden light, as Christ’s is. But what of godless schools 1
Dr. B.: “ Schools, too, are in our opinion godless when they positively exclude
religion from their course of instruction, on the principle that education has
nothing to do with religion, and lies within the exclusive province of the State,
acting independent of or above the spiritual authority, or the authority of the
Church.”
Mr. B.: I quite agree with you that such schools would be decidedly godless,
but I must confess that I don’t know where to look for any such. They are
certainly not to be found in Australia. I doubt if there is a State-school such
as you describe in the whole world. But what, Doctor, did you make of my
theory of the relation of Church and State ?
Dr. B.: Why, according to your theory, “ the Church of God is only an accident
or condition of the sovereign entity —the State.”
Mr. B.: The words “ sovereign entity" are yours, Doctor, not mine. I never once
used them. But apart from that, your assertion is not correct, for it is actually
your theory, and not ours, which makes the “ Church an accident of the State.”
Your Church cannot even do its duty without the aid of the civil power. Thus
Prescott tells us that, after the process setting forth the grounds on which those
heretics doomed to be burnt were condemned, “ the Grand Inquisitor consigned
them into the hands of the corregidor of the city, beseeching him to deal with the
prisoners in all kindness and mercy ; a honeyed, but most hypocritical phrase, since
no choice was left to the civil magistrate but to execute the terrible sentence of
the law against heretics, the preparations for which had been made a week before”
(Philip JL, B. 11., p. 176).
Dr. B.: But Prescott, like “ Hallam, is no better authority than you are.”
Mr. B.: Let us, then, listen to Cardinal Bellarmine. Perhaps he will convince
you. He tells us “that it does not belong to monks or other ecclesiastics to
commit murder , neither do the Popes use to proceed in that way. But their
manner is, first, fatherly to correct princes ; then, by ecclesiastical censures, to
deprive them of the communion ; then to absolve their subjects from their oath of
allegiance, and to deprive them of their kingly dignity. And what then ? The
execution belongs to others" (Cent. Bard., c. vii., quoted by Bishop Taylor, Works,
Yol. 11., p. 812). So you see, Doctor, that if the “others,” viz., the civil magis-
trates, refuse to “ execute” your sentences, your Church is utterly powerless. We,
on the other hand, believe that our only duty is to persuade men, by preaching the
“Word,” and we can do that, not only without the aid, but even in spite of the
civil power ; but you want to force men into your fold nolentes volentes, and for
that you are absolutely dependent on the civil power, which, so far from helping
you, is everywhere rebelling against you. As Father Burke very truly says, “ The
temporal power is very convenient, and very useful, and very necessary, for the
Church of God.”
Dr. B.: “But the spiritual and temporal powers, though distinct, are not
separate, for the temporal must be subject to God and His law.”
Mr. B.: I cordially agree with you, but with this proviso, that you do not substi-
tute for “ God and His law,” the “ Pope and His law,” as is your usual custom.
Dr, B.: All secular business has therefore, and must have, a relation to the
spiritual order, and be under moral obligations.
Mr. B.: Most assuredly. A Wesleyan preacher could not have put it better. I
fear, however, that by “ moral obligations” you mean the obligation to obey the
Pope and your Roman Catholic Church, in which case I must certainly disagree
with you. But do you admit my statement, that the influence of Protestantism is
chemical ?


Dr. B.: “ That I willingly admit, for hitherto the action has been to disintegrate
and destroy everything.”
Mr. B.: Chemical action is not necessarily destructive, for do you not remember
that Christ himself said, “ The kingdom of heaven is like unto leaven, which a
woman took and hid in three measures of meal, until the whole was leavened ”
(Matt, xiii, v. 83). Now, the action of leaven is purely chemical. You should
remember, Doctor, that there is a chemistry of life as well as of death—a chemistry
of the fruitful earth as well as of the corrosive sublimate. And now, Doctor,
for those “venerable title deeds of the divinely constituted organism,” which
at first you “ declined to discuss,” but which, apparently, you now feel compelled
to defend. What of the dogma of the Papal Sovereignty ?
Dr. B.: It is not a dogma at all, but simply means the right of the Pope to reign
over St. Peter’s patrimony—the States of the Church in Italy.
Mr. B.: I was very well aware of the distinction between the doctrine of the
Papal Sovereignty and the dogma of the temporal power, and therefore in my
lecture I used the words “ Papal Sovereignty” in their widest sensk, in order to
include both ideas. Don’t quibble about words. Mind the thing itself. You admit
that the Pope claims the temporal authority ?
Dr. B.: Ido most freely.
Mr, B.: How, then, do you account for its failure in the case of Henry YIII.,
Queen Elizabeth, and Victor Emmanuel ?
Dr. B.; “ Excommunication is the exercise of a spiritual power, with spiritual
penalties attached. Now, how can you undertake to say it has no effect ?”
Mr. B.: I have now to charge you, Doctor, with a deliberate attempt to deceive
or mislead the public. Spiritual penalties indeed! They are spiritual now, but it
is only because you have not the power to make them temporal; and if I cannot
prove they have failed, I defy you to prove they have succeeded. Do you think
that because the Pope consigns Victor Emmanuel to hell, therefore he goes there ?
But, apart from that, you surely must draw largely upon the credulity and igno-
rance of your readers if you wish them to believe that the penalties of excommuni-
cation are purely spiritual. What says Mr. Hallam ? Speaking of the Church, he
says, “No stretch of her tyranny was perhaps so outrageous as this. During an
interdict the churches were closed , the hells silent, the dead unburied, no rites but
those of baptism and extreme unction performed” (M.A., vol. 1., p. 529). Were
those spiritual penalties? I publicly challenge you to deny that these effects did
follow the greater excommunication. I know you cannot, and you dare not. And
yet, in the face of this, you tell us that excommunication is the exercise of a
spiritual power, with spiritual penalties attached ! Tell the truth, Doctor, and con-
fess with Bellarmine that “the Church does not always exercise this right, either
because it has not sufficient power, or does not think it expedient.” Tell the truth,
and say at once that you would lay England and all the Australias under an
interdict to-morrow, if you thought it would do your Roman Catholic Church an
atom of good. Remember that God “ hates sin and falsehood,” and that in His
sight equivocation is falsehood. What must your own people think to see you
trying to explain away the most notorious doctrines of their Church ? Say at once
that temporal effects of the direst kind have followed the exercise of this spiritual
power, and would again if you had your wish, and then you would speak the
truth.
Dr. B.; Ah, yes ! “ The vicar of Christ is now insulted and mocked, as had been
promised by our Lord ; but still the Papacy has all the vigour of immortal youth,
whilst the hands raised up against it are on the eve of dissolution. ”
Mr, B.: It is well for your peace of mind that you can believe it; but really, as I
look at the condition of the Papacy in its strongholds—ltaly, France, Spain, and
Germany—l must be excused for saying that, judging from the facts, it seems to
me to be rather getting into the “ sere and yellow leaf” of old age. Think of the
schisms which have rent your one Church, Doctor.
Dr. B.: Their existence does not prove the doctrines denied to be false, or the
mandate disobeyed, not founded on just and legitimate authority ; nor does it take
from them their essential wickedness.
Mr. B.: When one sees both sailors and passengers disembarking from a vessel
in the open sea, and crowding into the life-boat, it is a pretty sure sign that there
■is* a leak somewhere. Now, half yom passengers and crew left in the eighth
century, thousands more at the Reformation; and just the other day, the old


Catholics, under the leadership of Reinkens, Bollinger, and others, disembarked
in hot haste, lest the ship should sink with the weight of the new dogma of Papal
Infallibility. So numerous, in fact, have been these desertions that your Church
now is actually in the minority, instead of being, as formerly, in the majority;
and, owing to the more rapid increase of population in Protestant, as compared
with Roman Catholic countries, your minority is every year becoming more and
more evident. Thus, while during the present century the population of France
has increased by only 25 per cent., that of England has increased by 100 per cent.l
In the words of a recent writer, “ the results are immense; so immense that if the
movements of populations go on to the close of this century in the same ratio as
they have from its commencement, the result will be that the Protestant and the
Reformed population of the world alone, without the Greek or Eastern Churches,
will far and away outnumber the whole Roman Catholic population of the world.’*
And this is only to be expected, since the Papal Supremacy is really founded not on
truth, but on a “ series of forgeries.”
Dr. B.: “ Indeed ? When did you discover that ? How stupid and ignorant
(Roman) Catholics are! Think of hundreds of bishops, thousands of priests, with
two hundred millions and more of Catholics, not knowing what a Wesleyan
preacher from Wodonga coolly asserts !”
Mr. B.: You forget that for more than 1600 years your priests, bishops, cardinals,
and popes believed that the earth mas stationary, and that in a.d. 1633 Pope
Urban VIII. declared that Galileo’s doctrine, that the earth moved , was
“ erroneous, and contrary to the holy Scriptures proceeding from the mouth of
God,” Galileo was handed over to the holy, universal, Roman Inquisition, and
submitted to the rigorous examination—that is, tortured until he recanted this
“ pernicious doctrine,” murmuring, however, as he rose from his knees, “ Still it
moves.” My authority for this is the famous Roman Catholic writer, E. Quinet,
p. 63 of his Lectures on the Roman Church and Modern Society. You see,
Doctor, numbers are no test of truth.
Dr. B.: But Hallam is no better authority than you are.
Mr. B.: Your cause must be desperate indeed, when, in order to defend it, you
are forced to speak thus of an historian, whose “ knowledge,” according to Lord
Macaulay, was “ extensive, various, and profound,” and who, according to the
same authority, “ sums up with a calm, steady impartiality, turning neither to-
the right nor to the left, glossing over nothing, exaggerating nothing, while the
advocates on both sides are alternately biting their lips to hear their conflicting
misstatements and sophisms exposed,” (Essays, vol. 1., p. 52, p. ed.)
Dr. B.: But “the Protestant dean, Dean Waddington, in his ecclesiastical
history, and Dr. Maitland in an ecclesiastical magazine, have convicted him of a
forged calumny on St. Eloi or Eligius, of treacherously publishing ‘ ‘ the treachery
of Mosheim in his unpardonable mutilation of his authority .”
Mr. B.: I have carefully examined Waddington's Church History, and the only
two passages which treat of St. Eligius are found, the one at page 153, and the
other at page 289, and in neither of them is there a solitary reference to Hallam
in any shape or form; nay, not even is his name once mentioned throughout the whole
history. And since you quote Dean Waddington, we may as well hear what he
has to say on the subject of these forgeries. Here is his testimony, and you are
very welcome to it: —“ In the meantime,” he says, “ while the Episcopal order
was thus generally strengthened and aggrandised, the particular interests of the
Bishop of Rome were especially promoted. Adrian 1., a man of great talents and
much influence with the French king, occupied the Papal chair at this crisis ; and
while he profited, as he was justified in doing, by the voluntary and legitimate
donations of that monarch, he also adopted (as some historians think) a less
ingenuous method of exalting his own see. So much, at least, is certain, that
two instruments, now denominated the “ False Decretals” and the “ Donation of
Constantine”—the two most celebrated monuments of human imposture and credulity
—were put forth about the conclusion of the Bth century, and immediately and
universally received as genuine. Probably they were the [composition of some
monk or scribe of that age. Their direct object was the unlimited advancement
of the Roman see ; and for that purpose the Decretals furnished the spiritual, the
Donation the temporal, authority—the former professing to be a compilation of
the epistles and decrees of primitive Popes and early Emperors, derived from
•the first ages, the ghostly omnipotence of Rome ; while the latter proclaimed no


less than that Constantine, on removing the seat of Government to the East,
had consigned the Western Empire to the temporal as well as the spiritual govern-
ment of the Bishop of Rome — unbounded dominion over churches and nations and
kings was delegated to the successor of St. Peter and the vicar of Christ. It was
asserted that the original deed of the Emperor had been recently discovered ; the
monstrous forgery went forth, and spread itself through the world without con-
futation, seemingly without suspicion ; and it continued , for above six hundred
years, to form the most prominent and not the least solid, among the bulwarks of
papacy" ( Waddington's History of the Church, p. 223). Have you had enough of
Waddington, Doctor ?
Dr. B.: I think so; let us pass on. I will be more careful next time, I assure
you.
Mr. B.: I have no doubt you will. But I have not done with this subject yet.
Hallam’s authority for the forged Decretals of Isidore was your own Roman
Catholic historian, Fleury, and here is what he says about them :
“false decretals.
“He was succeeded in the office of Archchaplain by Ingolrain, or Enguerran, Bishop
of Metz, to whom is attributed a collection of Canons, which are likewise said to be com-
posed by Pope Adrian, and given by him to Enguerran on the 13th of the calends of
October, in the ninth indiction; that is on the nineteenth of September, in the year 705,
when his cause was examined. But other copies show that it was Enguerran who pre-
sented them to the Pope, which is more likely to be true, considering the difference
between this collection and the code of Canons which Pope Adrian gave to King Charles
about 10 years before. The chief difference consists in the extracts from the false
decretals of Isidore, with which the collection of Enguerran is filled ; and this is the first
time that we find these decretals made use of.
“ The collection wherein they are found bears the name Isidore Mercator, who seems
to have been a Spaniard. He says in the preface that he was obliged to compose this
work by fourscore Bishops and other servants of God ; and after the Apostolic Canons,
some decretal letters of Popes are inserted therein. That is of Clement, Anacletus,
Evaristes, and others, as far as St. Silvester ; but he does not say where he found them.
They were unknown to Dionysius Exiguus, who 200 years before had collected the
decretals of the Popes, only from the time Siricius. Besides there are manifest marks
of falsehood in them. They are all in the same style, which is much more like that of
the eighth century than of the three first —long and full of common places ; and it has
been discovered, upon a careful examination, that they are filled with diverse passages
out of the work of St. Leo, St. Gregory, and other authors who lived after the times of
those Popes whose names they bear.
“ Their dates are almost all false.
“ The subject of these letters, moreover, discovers them to be spurious. They speak
of Archbishops, Primates, and Patriarchs, as if those titles had been received in the
infancy of the Church. They forbid the holding of any Council, even a Provincial Synod,
without the permission of the Pope, and represent appeals to Rome as a usual practice ;
and frequently complain that the temporal estates of the Church were usurped. Therein
this is laid down as a maxim, that Bishops who have been guilty of any sin, after they
have done penance, may perform their functions in like manner as before, contrary to
what 1 have related in divers places. In fine, the principal subject of these decretals
concerns the accusations of Bishops, and there is hardly one of them which doth not speak
of this matter, and prescribe rules which render it very difficult. And indeed Isidore suffi-
ciently discovers, in his preface, that he had this matter very much at heart. He main-
tains that there were above twenty Canons of the Council of Nice, and speaks of the
sixth Council, conceived in the year 680, which shows that this could not be Isidore, of
Seville, as some have supposed. Besides the decretals of the Popes, the collection of
Isidore contains the Canons of the Councils of the East, in a version more ancient than
that of Dionysius, Exiguus, and many Canons of the Councils of Gaul and Spain.
“ In the meantime his artifice, notwithstanding it was so palpable, imposed upo’i all
the Latin Church. His false decretals were looked on as authentic for the space of 800 years,
and it was with much difficulty that they were given up in the last century.
“It is true that at present there are hardly any, though meanly instructed in these
matters, who do not ack owledge these decretals to he false.”
“ Fleury's Ecclesiastical History. Bk. XLIV., p. 195, vol. V. Printed in London for
W. Irvings, MDCCXXXIL, from the copy now in the Clerical Library, Phillip-street,
Sydney.”
“ Copied verbatim this 27th day of July, 1874, by me—L. Barry, LL.D.”
Well, Doctor, what have you to reply to this ? Can it be possible that Dr. Ber-


mingham is “ meanly instructed in these matters,” or will he dare to assert that
Fleury is no better authority than Hallam or myself ?
Dr. B,: I certainly did say that there were “ hundreds of bishops, thousands of
priests, with two hundred millions and more of Catholics,” who did not know of
these forgeries ; but I would not have said so, if I had known you could have
got that extract from Fleury.
Mr. B.: I don’t want to press you too hard. But now with regard to Dr.
Maitland, I have a few things to say. In the first place, seeing how
careful I myself was in giving you every facility for verifying my references,
I had a right to expect similar care on your part. Might you not, for
instance, have told me what magazine it was, and what the date, and
what the page, in which this serious charge against Hallam was made.
As it happens, however, I can supply your omission. The magazine was the
British , and the essay you, refer to was one of a series on the Dark Ages, pub-
lished in that magazine between the months of March, 1835, and February, 1838.
The essays were afterwards collected into a volume, which now lies before me.
And, in the second place, I have to observe, that if you got your statement as to
Hallam’s treatment of St. Eligius at second hand, of 'what is your authority
guilty ? While, if you got it first hand, of what are you yourself guilty ? . I
have read Dr. Maitland’s essay on St, Eligius carefully through, and Mr. Hallam’s
name is not even once mentioned in the whole essay ; nor can I find a solitary
reference to any thing which Mr. Hallam has ever written.*
But what of making Pius IX. our Lord God the Pope, Doctor ?
Dr. B.: In saying that by attributing infallibility to the Pope we make him our
Lord God the Pope, you are guilty of blasphemy, without even the covering of
Satanic sophistry.
Mr. B.: Not so, Doctor. It is we who protest against the Pope’s blasphemy in
arrogating to himself or receiving from the Church titles and attributes which
belong only to God, “ so that he as God sitteth in the temple of God, showing him-
self that he is God” (2 Thes. ii. c., 4 v.) If, therefore, there is blasphemy any-
where, it lies with you, and not me. Besides, does not this dogma override the
rights of conscience ?
Dr. B.: I have yet to learn that light and truth override rights of conscience.
Mr. B.; So have I, but darkness and error do, and we believe that your dogma
of infallibility is one of the most dreadful errors ever palmed off upon a too
credulous world, I protest against it because it has been craftily used for the pur-
pose of cramping and fettering human freedom of conscience.
Dr. B.: When, where, and by whom 1
Mr. B,: From the eighth century up to the present time. Wherever you have had
the power. By you and your fellow-priests all the world over. Does not Eodriguez
teach that it is the Mind obedience which is the perfect obedience.
Dr. B.: “He is speaking of volunteered, promised obedience given by a member of
a religious order, who, for the love of God, parts with his free will in matters
determined by a written rule. This obedience has no reference to the Catholics of
Albury, save those mho are members of the Mercy Order of Nuns,
Mr. B.: It is well then that the Roman Catholics of Albury should know that
their Sisters of Mercy (of whom I speak respectfully, but whom I most sincerely
pity) have “parted with their free will,” and that now, according to St. Ignatius,
they must be in their blind obedience just like a “ dead corpse,” which “ sees not,
answers not, complains not, nor has any perceptionor, like a “ staff ” which goes
“ wherever you carry it, where you lay it down there it stays, nor has it any other
motion but what it receives from the hand that holds it.” (Rod. vol. 111., p. 231.)
Is not that overriding the inalienable rights of conscience ? Has any human being
whatsoever the right so to part with his or her own free will as to become simply
as a corpse or a staff in the hand of another ? Is not this craftily using the dogma
of Infallibility for the purpose of fettering and cramping human freedom of con-
science?
Dr. B.: “ But that has no reference to the (Roman) Catholics of Albury.
* Maitland and Waddington are in my possession, and may be examined by the curious or
sceptical.


Mr, B.; It is painful to have to repeat the same thing so often; but as your
memory is apparently so defective I must repeat Cardinal Wiseman’s statement,
that none can enter your Church “ if they enter not by that one gate of absolute,
unconditional submission to the teaching of the Church” {Lectures, p. 23). There
is nothing in Rodriguez stronger than that. Christ said, «I am the door ;byMe if
any man enter in he shall be saved, and shall go in and out and find pasture” (John
x. 9). You shut that door up, and substitute another, viz., blind obedience to the
Church.
Dr. B.; “But suppose we do assert our liberty, and cut the painter, will you
specify what you are prepared to give us instead ?”
Mr. B.: Most willingly. The first thing we will give you is an open Bible, not
by way of permission, but as your inalienable right ; not clogged with conditions
which render the gift useless, but to be in reality “ a light to your path, and a
lamp unto your feet” (Psalms cxviii. 105 v., D.Y.). We will further give you the
right to obtain the pardon of all your sins direct from Jesus Christ himself, and
that without money or without price. We will also release the souls of all your
friends from the torturing fires of purgatory ; and we will also clear out of your
way a heap of fables, superstitions, and impostures, which prevent the people from
drawing near unto God himself with filial confidence and joy. These are a few of
the blessings we have to offer you in exchange for your present system of faith,
and we promise all this, not on our own authority, but on the authority of God’s
own word. We say to you, as Moses said to Hobab, “ Come thou with us, and we
will do thee good.” ,
Dr. B.: “ Why, we had the Bible nearly 1700 years before Wesley was born.”
Mr. J 3.: Yes, Doctor, and kept it very safely under lock and key , jealously sealed
up in a dead language.
r- * s se > as y° u know, that we are not allowed to read the Scriptures.
We are forbidden to read corrupt versions ; we are forbidden the abuse of them
or the idolatry of them.”
Mr. B.: Yes, Doctor, your people may read the Bible after they have got written
pe? mission from their priest. Just try to imagine a Protestant layman going to his
clergyman with a “ Please, Sir, may I read God’s Word ?” And yet that is the
humiliating position in which, without exception, you place your laity. In order
that there may be no mistake about this point, I will quote the fourth rule of the
Index of the Council of Trent, and which I copied from Haydock’s Bible with my
own hand. Here it is “ Inasmuch as it is manifest from experience, that if the
Holy Bible, translated into the vulgar tongue, be indiscriminately allowed to
every one, the temerity of men will cause more harm than good to arise from it •
it is on this point referred to the judgments of the Bishops or Inquisitors, who
ma T> b y tb e advice of a priest or confessor, permit the reading of the Bible
translated into the vulgar tongue by Catholic authors, to those persons whose faith
and piety they apprehend will be augmented, and not injured, by it; and this
permission they must have in writing. But if any shall have the presumption to read
or possess it without any such written permission, he shall not receive absolution
until he have first delivered up such Bible to the Ordinary. Let the Roman
Catholics of Albury ponder that rule well, and let them ask their priest for his
Divine warrant for withholding or granting permission to any one to have and to
read God’s own Word, And then, when the permission is granted, you do not
allow your people the right to interpret it except in accordance with the teach-
ing of the Church, a condition that makes it a useless gift.
Dr. B.: Why don’t you “ leave us alone ? What is wanted is assistance to arrive
at their true meaning. Can you give us that ?”
Mr. B,: Most certainly. I can tell you to a dead certainty what is the exact
meaning of “ Get thee behind Me, Satan,” the interpretation of which has puzzled
your infallible Church for nearly nineteen centuries !
Dr. B.: Come, then, tell us plainly what is your most excellent way. Do you not
teach that people are justified by faith alone?
Mr. B.: The word “ alone" is yours, Doctor, not mine. I teach what St Paul
taught—“ The just shall live by faith.”
Dr. B.: “ But can there be such a thing as justification without justice or works
of justice?”
Mr. B.: Yes, Doctor, as your own Douay Bible would have taught you if you
had read and believed it. Look in the third chapter of Galatians, and at the sixth


"verse you will read—“ As it is written, Abraham believed God, and it was reputed
to Him for justice. Know ye, therefore, that they which are of faith are the
children of Abraham. And the Scriptures, foreseeing that God justifieth the
Gentiles through faith, told unto Abraham before, In thee shall all seeds be
blessed.” And again in the third chapter of Titus, at the fifth verse, you will read
—“ Not by the works of justice which we have done, but according to His mercy He
saved us, by the laver of regeneration, and renovation of the Holy Ghost, whom
He has poured upon us abundantly through Jesus Christ our Saviour ; that, being
Justified by His grace, we may be heirs, according to hope, of life everlasting.” (I
trust that Roman Catholics will, if they have a Bible, verify these references, and
seriously ponder their plain and self-evident meaning.)
Dr. B.: “ The life you offer us is indeed easy. We can go in for good living and
downright sinning, say for robbing, lying, cheating, and the sins of the flesh.”
Mr. B.: You either know nothing of Wesleyan doctrine, or you are wilfully mis-
representing it. Take Wesley’s own words, where, in his sermon on the law esta-
blished through faith, speaking of justification he says, “ This is the corner-stone
of the whole Christian building. We are justified without the works of the law, as
any previous condition of justification ; but they are an immediate fruit of that
faith whereby we are justified. So that if good works do wot follow our faith, even
all inward and outward holiness, it is plain our faith is nothing worth; we are
yet in our sins. Therefore that we are justified by faith, even by faith without
works, is no ground for making void the law through faith, or for imagining that
faith is a dispensation from any kind or degree of holiness" (W orks, vol. V., p. 454).
And now, having refuted one more of the Doctor’s misstatements, I must, for a
time, bid him farewell. I think that, without egotism, I may fairly presume
upon having shown the Doctor to be but a sorry and erring guide ; and I trust that
I have also said enough to awaken interest and stimulate inquiry on many most
important questions. My object in carrying on this controversy was not to snatch
a victory or arouse sectarian feelings, but to kindle in all a deeper desire to know
truth, that the truth may make them free. I have purposely refrained from
touching upon many points alluded to in the Doctor’s last two dialogues, not from
any wish to shirk a difficulty, but because the issues raised demand a more detailed
treatment than my present space would allow.
In addition to that, the reader will find several important points discussed m
my first letter to the Doctor—a letter which the Doctor has carefully abstained
from answering, although he had ample opportunity for so doing. On other
points again I may have something to say at no very distant date. Leaving this
whole matter now in the hands of God, and to the judgment of impartial men
I am, &C., T>TTrrnTTl7r)C! T 3 A
B. BUTCHERS, B.A.
Wodonga, July 29, 1874.
P.S.—This reply, in open violation of the rules of journalism was refused ad-
mittance into the columns of the Murray and Hume Times. Whether this
action will be endorsed by liberal Roman Catholics is more than doubtful ;
but most certainly the Roman Catholic cause will not be advanced by such
methods. This, at least, is a very practical commentary on some modern notions
of liberty. I will briefly state the facts. The Doctor’s lecture was inserted ; mine
was not inserted, but unfavourably reviewed. At length the Doctor replied, and
I replied again. Two more lengthy communications from the Doctor were then
inserted, and the columns closed to me. Comment is needless. B. B.


APPENDIX A.
Extracts from Fronde's “ History of the English in Ireland," Volume 11.,
page ,413.
Mr, Froude, speaking of the state of Dublin in 1784, tells us that since “ useful
and confidential agents,” whose silence and fidelity could be relied on, * who
would write the daily history of a man’s motions,’ without betraying himself,
were not to be found in Dublin, the Irish Secretary applied to the English
Cabinet to furnish him from their own staff of informers. Two valuable persons
answering to Mr. Orde’s description were sent, and the name of one of them will
be an unpleasant surprise to those already interested in the history of the time.
They were both Irishmen. One was a skilled detective named Parker . . the
other was no less a person than the celebrated Father O’Leary, whose memory is
worshipped by Irish Catholic politicians with a devotion which approaches
idolatry. O’Leary, as he was known to the world, was the most fascinating
preacher, the most distinguished controversialist of- his time, a priest who had
caught the language of toleration; who had mastered all the chords of liberal
philosophy, and played on them like a master ; whose mission had been to plead
against prejudice, to represent his country as the bleeding lamb, maligned, tra-
duced, oppressed, but ever praying for her enemies; as eager only to persuade Eng-
land to offer its hand to the Catholic Church, and receive, in return, the affectionate
homage of undying gratitude. O’Leary had won his way to the heartof Burke by his
plausible eloquence. Pitt seemed to smile on him :it is easy now to conjecture why.
When he appeared in the Convention at the Rotunda, the whole assembly rose to
receive him. Had such a man been sent over on an open errand of conciliation,
his antecedents would have made the choice intelligible. But he was despatched
as a paid and secret instrument of treachery, in reply to a request for a trained
informer. What the Government really thought of Father O’Leary may be
gathered from Orde’s language, when told to expect him. ‘He could get to the
bottom of all secrets in which Catholics were concerned,’ and Catholics were
known to be the chief ‘ promoters ’of the agitation in Dublin. But he was to be
dealt with cautiously, for he was a priest. ‘ They are all of them,’ Orde said,
‘ designing knaves ; the only good to be derived from them is perhaps to deceive
them into the idea that they are believed.’*
“ Parker and O’Leary reached Dublin at the end of September, and were both
at once set to work.
“ ‘ Your experts have arrived here,’ wrote the secretary, reporting their appear-
ance. ‘At this moment we are about to make trial of O’Leary’s sermons and
Parker’s rhapsodies, and they may be both, in their different callings, of
very great use. The former, if we can depend upon him, has it in his
power to discover to us the real designs of the Catholics, from which quarter,
after all, the real mischief is to spring. The other can scrape an acquaintance
with the great leaders of sedition, particularly Napper Tandy, and perhaps dive
to the bottom of his secrets.” f
*Mr. Orde to Mr. Evan Nepean, 17th October, S.P.O.
fMr. Orde to Mr. Evan Nepean, 23rd September, 1784. Private S.P.O.
Mason, Firth & M'Cutcheon, Printers, Melbourne.




