

Modern
Cambodia
Edited by the Press Office of the Royal Palace.


Modern Cambodia


Modern
Cambodia
Edited by the Press Office of the Royal Palace.


HIS AMJESTY NORODOM SIHNOUK
KING OF CAMBOLIA


I
HISTORICAL OUTLINE
Period from 1863 to 1949.
Cambodia is a kingdom of ancient civilisation which reached the
height of its power in the 12 th century, a period during which its
rule spread beyond its present frontiers, over Cochinchina, the
greater part of Annam, Laos and Siam and even a part of the Malayan
peninsula as far as Burma.
Placed under French protectorate in 1863, Cambodia progressively
became from 1863 to 1945 a modern State according to European forms
and methods.
Almost immediately after resuming its relations with France, stopped
by the Japanese attack on March 9th, 1945, it obtained its own practice of
interior sovereignty by the signing on January 7th 1946 of the « modus
vivendi », the clauses of which were true to the spirit that inspired the
declaration published in March 1945, by the interim government of the
French Republic, following the meeting of the Conference of Brazzaville.


Endowed by its King in May 1947, with a democratic Constitution,
Cambodia has at last obtained the statute of an independent State, asso-
ciated with France and a member of the French Union, by the Franco-Cam-
bodian treaty signed on November Bth 1949.
Modus Vivendi of January 7th, 1946.
This temporary act was destined to enable to go through, under the
best conditions possible, the period of reestablishment, in every branch, of
the order troubled by the World war and the Japaneses occupation, while
leaving to Cambodia the possibility, with the help of French Counsellors,
of establishing and organising its new national department, as well as refor-
ming the basis of its traditional institutions ; thus preparing its accession
to Independance.
The jurisdictions of the High Commissioner of the French Republic
in Cambodia were reduced to that of representative of France and of the
Indochinese Federation on one hand, and to that of Counsellor of His
Majesty the King on the other hand.
In his former duties, he was called upon to maintain public order in
accordance with the Royal Government, but he kept his former established
authority only towards the French, the Foreigners, and the Indochinese of
the other parts of the Federation.
In the latter duties, he was notably qualified to give his consent to the
legislative and regular laws and acts reserved for the King’s signature.
Thus the King and the Royal Government were given real supremacy,
with the only reserve of soliciting the advice or consent of the French Coun-
sellors, placed under the authority of the High-Commissioner of the French
Republic in the service of the Ministers and Cambodian High Officials.
The authority is exercised under the same conditions on a provincial
or municipal (Phnom-Penh) scale. In regard to Cambodian nationals this
authority belongs to Cambodian Governors, assisted by French Counsellors.
From July 26th 1945, these Governors were even to receive a delegation of the
Federal Government of Indochina to govern the non-citizens under the same
conditions and with the same authority as the old French Residents, and to
have the right to hold the office of registrars of births, deaths and marriages
for the non-citizens, with the exception of the French and European foreigners.
6


Lastly, the offices known as « local » passed under the authority of the
Royal Government, whereas the old Federal offices represented in Cambodia
remained under the direction of the representative of France.
There was thus a transfer of cognisance concerning Cambodian Police,
Elementary and Secondary Education, Health, Religious knowledge, Public
Works Departement, the Board of Survey, Agriculture, Woods and Rivers,
Fine Arts, Annexe of Cattle-breeding and Manufactures. A similar transfer
concerning the Excise Office was to take place from January Ist, 1948.
Also a few complementary agreements were signed in the course of the
year 1946, for the application of the clauses of the « Modus Vivendi », more
particularly : a financial agreement safeguarding for the Royal Government
the management and the free arrangements of the budgets of the Kingdom,
and allowing it to establish new taxes and duties for the benefit of these
budgets ; a military agreement defining the elements of the military organi-
sation of Cambodia in the Staff of the Indochinese Federation and the
French Union, as well as the respective powers of the Cambodian Royal
Army and the forces of the French Union remaining on the territory of the
Kingdom.
Thus the French authorities retained only a few powers strictly limited,
on one hand, in matters of public order and regarding the non-Cambodians ;
on the other hand, powers resulting from the old federal organisation of
Indochina.
His Majesty the King of Cambodia and the Royal Government were in
possession of real interior sovereignty tempered only by the presence of
French Counsellors near the principal detainers of authority. Further more,
Cambodia could ever since then have its own administrave organisation, its
national Offices, its Finances, its National Army and Police. The signature
of this <( Modus Vivendi » thus allowed the procedure without counter of
the effective transfer of very important powers, from France to Cambodia.
The Constitution of May 6th, 1947.
From the realisation of this transfer, His Majesty the King of Cam-
bodia undertook himself the transformation of the institutions of the State.
Holding all the powers, and exercising directly most of them, more parti-
7


cularly, the legislative power, He wished to replace the traditional absolute
Royalty by a Constitutional and Parlementary Royalty.
It is to this end that, since May 31st 1946, an electoral law has been
promulgated to allow the election, by universal and direct vote, of a Consul-
tative Assembly charged to give its opinion on a scheme of Constitution
presented to it. The elections took place, without any incidents, in Septem-
ber 1946 and on May 6th 1947 the Constitution of Cambodia was pro-
mulgated.
This Constitution was greatly inspired by the elaborated scheme of the
provisional Government of the French Republic, exactly as it was deferred
at the Popular Referendum in May 1946. With a thoroughly democratic
spirit it contains the following principal stipulations.
The essential public liberties are acknowleged to all the Cambodians,
and the law, the expression of the national will, guarantees to all the pratice
of constitutional liberties and rights.
All the powers emanate from the King, but are carried out, in His name
by the National Assembly, the Ministers, or the Courts of Justice of diffe-
rent degrees or juridictions concerning either the legislative, executive or
judicial powers.
The deputies of the National Assembly are elected by universal and
direct vote, and are the representatives of the whole Cambodian Nation.
They enjoy parlementary immunity during the whole period of their elec-
toral mandate.
Another Assembly, the Council of the Kingdom, consists of members
designed and elected by limited suffrage. It plays only a consultative part
in matters of legislation.
The Ministers are responsible to the National Assembly and can be
prosecuted by it, in the High Court of Justice, for crimes, offenses or glaring
mistakes, in the practice of their functions.
A superior Council of Magistracy insure the discipline and indepen-
dence of the Magistrates.
Lastly, no revision is possible to modify the stipulations concerning the
monarchical form of the State, the representative character of the form of
Government and the elements of liberty and equality guaranteed by this
Constitution, nor to limit the Rights reserved by the latter to the Royalty. The
8


other constitutional stipulations can be revised, following the identical
proceedings as those prescribed by the ordinary laws.
This Constitution, as soon as applied, brought about in January and
February 1948 the formation of the new Assemblies established by the
Sovereign as well as the working of the Parlementary form of Government
in Cambodia.
Political parties were then constituted, and one of them, the democratic
party obtained a great majority in the National Assembly (55 seats out of
75) where it functioned untill 1948, at which time a split detached 12 of
its members.
This ascendancy of one party, coupled to the fact that the duties
imposed by the new form of Government on the representatives of the
Nation had been often imperfectly understood by them, was the source of
difficulties met by the executive power in the accomplishment of its work,
rendered particularly difficult by the circumstances and by a certain unrest
throughout the country, caused by some elements, the majority of which were
under foreign influences.
Many threats of a change of ministry broke out and obliged the Sove-
reign to pronounce the dissolution of the National Assembly in September
1949. On this occasion, it seemed that the Constitution itself merited amen-
dment, in order to realise a better equilibrium of the legislative and exe-
cutive powers, more particularly by giving the Council of the Kingdom a
larger part in the practice of the former powers.
It is with the intention to study the eventual revision of the Consti-
tution, in the meaning here-above mentioned that a Commission has just been
formed to begin its work in January 1950, the revision itself, if necessary
should be worked out in accordance with the Constitutional rules.
Whatever might be its results, the intangible element recalled above
will remain in force, and Cambodia will remain endowed, by the will of its
Sovereign, by a liberal and democratic Constitution, placing the State under
a form of government exactly comparable to that of the most evolved states
among these, that under the banner of the United Nations have decided to
participate in the defence of public liberties.
9


Franco-Cambodian Treaty of
November 8 th, 1949.
Signed in Paris between the High representatives of France and Cam-
bodia this important act has consecrated the independence of Cambodia and
its adhesion to the French Union as a State associated to France, each of
the contracting parties accepting there from, the obligations prescribed,
to the title of French Union, by the Constitution of the IVth Republic.
The Royal Government of Cambodia is qualified ever since then to
practice in their fullness the attributions and prerogatives that proceed
from interior Sovereignty.
Cambodia accepts the monetary and customs union with the other asso-
ciated States of Indochina. It acknowleges to France certain particular rights
or certain facilities in matters of public or private education, grants to the
subjects of the French Union, the benefit of the national form of government
regarding their properties, rights, interests and undertakings, its natives
receiving by reciprocity the benefit of a same treatment in the territories
of the French Union.
Cambodia has thorough and entire jurisdiction for all the civil, com-
mercial and penal instances, in the whole territory of its Kingdom, under
reserve of stipulations or agreements concerning the working and the com-
petency of mixed jurisdiction in regard to instances arising about people
of the French Union ; other than Cambodians and certain foreigners profiting
by a jurisdictional privilege.
It is qualified to have its own National Army, receiving the help of
the Forces of the French Union for the defence of its own frontiers, and
cooperating with the latter in the defence of the frontiers of the French Union
against all exterior enemies.
In diplomatic matters, the Royal Government will elect delegates to
the High Council of the French Union. It can be represented abroad by
diplomatic authorities, and negociate and decide upon international agree-
ments concerning its particular interests, under reserve of acting in connec-
tion or on agreement with the Government of the French Republic, under
conditions plainly determined.


A Protocol and different annex Stipulations, signed at the same time
as the treaty provide for a few precisions in diplomatic matter, and about the
employment, by each contracting State, of subjects of the other State, as well
as about judicial, cultural, military, economic and financial questions.
Lastly, several particular agreements for the purpose of facilitating
the application of this Treaty and of its annexes, and to permit the realisa-
tion, at the shortest notice, of the transfer of the necessary competences,
have just been discussed while these transfers only interested France and
Cambodia, or shall shortly be elaborated during one of the inter-States
Conferences, in order to transfer, or to uphold, if needed, under reserve of
modification, the powers previously practiced by the High Commissioner’s
Office of France in Indochina, of mixed organisation being prescribed to
study, coordinate, or to make regulations for Offices of Common-interest,
more particularly, transmission Office, Immigration Control, Exterior Trade
and Customs, Treasury and the Plan of Equipment.
Approved by the French Constitutional Requests, the Franco-Cambo-
dian Treaty and its annexes are from now on applied and will be in full vigor
in a very short time.
They insure to Cambodia the complete practice of its interior Sove-
reignty, and only limit its exterior sovereignty in the measure of the dispo-
sitions true to the spirit of the French Union, or agreements concluded
or to be settled soon with France and the other associated States of
Indochina, according to the constant common interests in all these States.
Cambodia must therefore be estimated as really having henceforth the
effective status of an independent State, since inconsiderable limits to its
sovereignty exist only in quality of international acts settled by it.
11




SCHOOL-GIRLS MARCHING PART H.M THE KING
THE ROYAL GUARD
CONSTITUTION DAY


H.M.NORODOM SHIANOUK RIDING ((ZODIAQUE))
GREY INDOCHINESE-ARABIAN-ENTIRE


II
THE KING
According to the tradition and for want of an heir chosen by the
preceding King, the Constitution has prescribed the nomination of
the Sovereign by a Crown Council composed of the highest political
and religious personalities of Cambodia, the Throne, however, being com-
pulsorily the inheritance of King Ang Duong’s male issues.
The King is the supreme Head of the State and His person is sacred
and inviolable. All the powers emanate from Him, but are practiced in
His name by the organisms prescribed by the Constitution. He summons
the National Assembly and can dissolve it under certain circumstances,
promulgates the laws, chooses the President of the Council of Ministers and
appoints him as well as the Ministers proposed by this President. He creates
and confers civil and military ranks, names the magistrates on proposal of
the superior Council of Magistracy and has the right of pardoning and
commutation of sentence.
Lastly, He is the supreme Head of the Armed forces of the Kingdom,
and He signs or rectifies the Treaties according to the vote of the National
Assembly.


Each of His acts, with the exception of those regarding the interior
order concerning the Royal Palace, must however have the countersignature
of the President of the Council of Ministers and that of one or several
Ministers.
His Majesty Norodom Sihanouk, now 28 years old, acceded to the
Throne in 1941. By His mother, He is the Grandson of the preceding King,
His Majesty Sisowath Monivong, by His father, He is the great-grandson of
King Norodom and thus belongs, by His descent, to the issue of King Ang
Duong of whom Norodom was the eldest son.
Designated to the Throne of Cambodia while He was brilliantly pursuing
His classical education in the <( Lycee Chasseloup-Laubat » in Saigon, His
Majesty Norodom Sihanouk initiated himself, during four years under the
protectorate of France, to His duties as a Sovereign before being able to
practice them in their fullness. In December 1945, He brought about the
joining of His country to the French Union, and in April 1946 He went
to Paris for the first time in order to study, with the Head of the provisional
Government of the Republic, the new basis of relations between France and
Cambodia.
A modern-minded Sovereign, and apt to democratic ideas, His Majesty
Norodom Sihanouk, since the signature of the (( Modus Vivendi » on January
7th 1946 was desirous of raising the Constitution by which He would grant
to His subjects the essential public liberties and resign all personal power
in order to devote Himself entirely to His duty as Head of a State working
under a form of parliamentary government.
The first independant Sovereign of Cambodia, by the signing of the
Franco-Cambodian treaty on November Bth 1949, His Majesty Norodom
Sihanouk, as proved by all His Acts, is thoroughly decided to persne his
duty which He has assumed and to make Cambodia a Modern State anxious
to contribute, according to His abilities, to the work of peace, liberty and
prosperity undertaken by the United Nations.
Lastly, it must be added that His Majesty Norodom Sihanouk, supreme
Head of the Cambodian Armed Forces, former pupil of the Saumur School
of Cavalry and Armour in France —having gone through a course of instruc-
tion in this school as student-officer in 1946 and as Lieutenant instructor
in 1948 —, is at the same time entitled to the honorary rank of Brigadier-
General of the French Army, and to the rank of reserve Captain of the
Cavalry and Armour of the same army.
14


H.M. THE KING
RIDING
((RÊVEUR))
GREY AUSTRA-
LIAN, GELDER
IN THE PARK OF THE ROYAL PALACE
THERE ARE TWO RIDING-GROUNDS,
((SAUMUR ARE TWO RIDING-GUARD)),
SHOWN OPPOSITE


H.M. THE KING OFFERING
GIFTS TO VENERABLES IN THE
THRONE-HALL
H.M. THE KING GREETING
BONZES DURING A TOUR IN
THE COUNTRY


III
THE PARLEMENTARY
ASSEMBLY
The National Assembly.
This Assembly plays a prevailing role in Cambodia due to the fact
that it has the prerogative of the practice of the legislative power.
The deputy members of this Assembly are elected by the universal
and direct suffrage, in each province on the basis of one deputy for every ten
thousand registered and of one extra deputy in proportion superior to half
this number. Only men who have attained twenty years are called to vote.
For these elections, every province of the Kingdom is divided into electoral
circumscriptions, every one having right to a deputy. The electors vote for
ihe candidate of their choice, who is declared elected if he gets the relative
majority, the ballot having only one turn.
Further more, every candidate is admitted to encounter the votes only
in one circumscription.
The electoral mandate of deputies is for four years and every one
only comes into office after validation of his election by the Assembly.
Only the National Assembly votes the laws and it cannot delegate this
right. The bills or proposals of laws are however submitted to the Council


of the Kingdom for advice, but any amendment or even any rejections on
behalf of this Council only causes the presentation of a second reading
before the National Assembly, who decides, in a last resort to the public
ballot and to the base majority of its members, if there has been a rejection.
Besides this essential part regarding legislative matters, the National
Assembly practices the political control of the activity of the Government.
The latter cannot come into office, without having obtained the inves-
titure of the Assembly, and has to give resignation if confidence has been
refused to it in consequence of an interpellation or of a deposit of a call to
censor.
The Council of the Kingdom.
This Council consists of twenty-four members, two of whom are nomi-
nated by the King from the members of his family and the twenty-two others
elected by limited suffrage. Two of the latter are elected by the National
Assembly apart from its members, eight are elected by a limited and indi-
rect suffrage to represent the City of Phnom-Penh and the seven Regions
(the groups of provinces) of Cambodia, lastly, eight others represent the
different professions and are elected to their mandates by direct suffrage
or by correspondance, just as four members represent the government
officials.
The mandate of the Counsellors of the Kingdom, is for 4 years, and
they enjoy parlementary immunity under the same conditions as the deputies.
As mentioned above, the Council of the Kingdom has only a consulta-
tive role in legislative matters, the initiative of the laws, however, belonging
to it, as well as to the King, to the Council of Ministers, and to the National
Assembly.
The Government is not responsible to it.
The working of the parlementary form
of government since 1948.
Although the new form of government has marked a deep change in
the traditional institutions of Cambodia, the elections took place calmly and
the two Chambers composing the Parlement have worked under fairly satis-
16


THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY


factory conditions. The Council of the Kingdom composed in majority of
competent personalities more particularly has rendered great services in
the elaboration or the adjusting of laws and has proved that it should
be able to play a more important part, for the good progress of public
affairs.
In consequence certain conflicts of interior order almost unavoidable
while the whole ancient organisation of the Kingdom marching towards
Independence had to be revised and when the establishment of new relations
with France were bringing up delicate problems, His Majesty, however, by
request of the Royal Government and according to the rules fixed by the
Constitution, had to resolve to proceed in September 1949 to the dissolution
of the National Assembly whose action risked delaying the work of redres-
sing, undertaken in Cambodia. This Royal decision has been approved by
the whole population, who will soon have the opportunity of electing its
new representatives.
It also appeared that the mechanism of the new form of government
merited improvements in certain of its mechanisms.
A survey of the revision of the Constitution of 1947 has thus been
examined and it is estimated that the parlementary form of government will
soon be called to work again under absolutely normal conditions and more
perfectly adapted to the spirit of the people and to the highest interests
of the country.
The Representation of Cambodia in the
institutions of the French Union.
Cambodia has five delegates at the Assembly of the French Union,
among whom is Her Royal Highness, Princess Ping-Peang Yukanthor who
holds the office of Vice-President.
The Kingdom will also be represented at the High Council of the
French Union as soon as will be settled this organism of connexion and
of co-ordination between all the members of this Union.
17




IV
THE GOVERNMENT
The executive power is held by the Royal Government, under nearly
the same conditions as those existing in most democratic States. The
President of the Council of Ministers designated by the King and
the associates chosen by Him to form the Ministry are only nominated and
come into office after having obtained the confidence of the National
Assembly.
The Ministers can be chosen indistinctly in or out of the Parlement.
They are collectivily responsible to this Assembly of the general politics
of the Ministry, and every one of them is individually responsible for his
acts to the President of the Council, but must account to the Assembly for
the administration of his Department when asked to do so.
The Ministers have access to the two Chambers and their Commissions,
by which they must be heard when asked by them.
They are responsible, by penal law, for the crimes and offenses com-
mitted during the practice of their functions. In this case, and in that of
heavy faults committed under the same conditions, they can be arraigned
by the High Court of Justice and by the National Assembly, after a vote
acquired at a secret ballot and to the base majority of its members. This


High Court of Justice is composed of five members, of whom two are High
Magistrates, one elected by the National Assembly, and two elected by the
Council of the Kingdom. These elections take place at the beginning of
every legislature and last as long as the latter.
The Royal Government is at present composed as follows :
President of the Council, Minister of the Interior and of Information :
His Royal Highness the Prince Sisowath Monipong.
Minister of Economic Affairs and of the Plan : His Excellency Ray
Lomuth.
Minister of National Defence : His Excellency Son Vceunsal.
Minister of Finance : His Excellency Au Chheun.
Minister of Justice : His Excellency Chan Nak.
Minister of Public Works and Communications : His Excellency Tim
Kenn.
Minister of National Education and Youth : His Excellency Pitou de
Monteiro.
Minister of Public Health and Social Action : His Excellency Neal
Phleng.
Minister of Religion and Fine Arts : His Excellency Meas Hell.
Minister for Forcing Affairs : His Excellency Son Sann.
Minister of Industry and Trade : His Excellency Chea Chinkoc.
20


H.R.H. PRINCE SISOWATH MONIPONG,
PRESIDENT OF THE COUNCIL SURROUNDED BY
THE MINISTERS
DIPLOMATIC RECEPTION IN THE
THRONE-HALL


THE ESCORTHING SQUAD OF
H.M. TEH KING
H.R.H. PRINCE SISOWATH MONIRETH, SRIGADIER
GENERAL OF THE ROYAL ARMY OF CAMBODIA


V
THE ARMY AND THE POLICE
The Royal Army of Cambodia.
From the stipulations of the Franeo-Cambodian Treaty of November
Bth 1949, the High Cambodian Command possesses a ful territorial
sovereignty, the Army of the French Union being called to stay in
bases or garrisons strictly limited, and not having to participate during
peace-time in the upholding of the interior order of the country excepting
on the demand of the Royal Government.
The Royal Army of Cambodia is in a state of formation and deve-
loppement. It consists of two principal elements, the National Guard and
the Mobile Reserve rvhose total effective force is temporarily fixed at 5.000
men, and it comprises moreover a few common elements namely : a Staff of
the National Defence, a Private Staff of His Majesty, a Company from Head
quarters, a Training Center and a Military Police.
The managing of the Royal Army of Cambodia is at the present time
temporarily given to the General of the French Army, commanding the
Forces of Cambodia, with the exception of the elements stationed in the
self-governed sector of Siemreap and Kompong-Thom which depend directly


on His Majesty the King. The connexion necessary for a perfect unity of
action is being insured by constant relations between the Private Staff of His
Majesty and the Staff of the General Commanding the Forces in Cambodia.
The Brigades of the National Guard, numbering 15 that is one per
province as well as the Brigade of the Lakes, are placed under the orders
of the Governors who act under the authority of the Minister of the National
Defence. They insure the general security in every province, and each
one has at the disposal of the Governor concerned, a mobile element which
besides its missions of information and against acts of piracy functions in
case of needs in connection with the troops of the Army of the French
Union and of the Mobile Reserve.
Two Brigades nevertheless are excluded from this organisation, the
Central Brigade of Phnom-Penh whose sector of activities extends to the
province of Kandal and which depends directly on the Minister of the
National Defence, excepting a mobile element at the disposal of the Governor
of Kandal, and the Brigade of the Lakes which depends on the same autho-
rity and whose sector extends to the whole of the Great Lakes and their
banks.
The Mobile Reserve, on the other hand comprises three Battalions of
Cambodian Light Infantry which operate each in one of the sectors of Takeo,
Siemreap, and Kampot, under the same conditions as the troops of the Army
of the French Union.
The Staff of the National Defence helps the Minister in the organisa-
tion, the setting-up, the equipment, the upholding of discipline and the
general administration of the Royal Army of Cambodia, the instructions and
the tactic orders depending however of the Private Staff of His Majesty.
This insures the connection between his Majesty the King and on one
side, the Minister of the National Defence for everything concerning the
organisation and the command of the Royal Army and, on the other side,
the General Commanding the Forces of Cambodia concerning the operations
of the self-governed sector. Besides, he helps His Majesty with the ordering
of this sector.
The Company of the Head-Quarters has mostly an administrative role.
The military training centre, on its side, insures the common instructions
of all the units of the Royal Army.


Lastly, the Cambodian Military Police is made up of a sole Brigade
under the orders of an officer. Stationed in Phnom-Penh and dispatching
in principle, a Provost in every province, it has attributions regarding
discipline and judicial matters.
Military instruction.
It is insured by the Training Center, above designed, by a French Mis-
sion of Military Instruction, and by a formation School of Cambodian
Officers.
Since the Royal Army has been recently formed, it has been necessary
to ask for the help of the French staff for the benefit of its instruction and
to complete its formation. Consequently, the Military Instruction is prati-
cally directed by tire French Mission aforementioned and most of the unities
and formations allow a mixed formation of French and Cambodians.
The Cambodian School for Officers originated on January Ist, 1946,
and was organised by His Royal Highness Prince Sisowath Monireth, the
King’s Uncle, now Head of His Majesty’s private staff. Founded in Phnom-
Penh it has already trained fifty Officers and two promotions are in course
of training.
His Royal Highness Prince Monireth, a former pupil of St Cyr and a
former Officer of the Foreign Legion, exerted himself to establish the tradi-
tions of this school in the likeness of the French special Military Schools
while keeping them true to their national character. The results obtained
prove that he has fully succeeded.
Indeed, among the Officers of the first three promotions, two, have
fallen on the field of honour, another has received the Legion of Honour
and 17 the French War Cross, while 15 others were awarded high National
Distinctions (Military Medal and Cross of the National Defence of the
Royal Order). Fifteen young Cambodian Officers have on the other hand,
gone to France to improve their knowledge in different military schools.
23


The National Police.
The upholding of order is, jointly with the army, insured in Cambodia
by a National Police placed under the orders of a High Officer who depends
on the authority of the Minister of the Interior.
This National Police Service includes a central organism in Phnom-
Penh, provincial stations and some posts of frontier-police.
The Central Organism disposes of the following principal sections :
Special Police (of political character).
Police of administration, Mobile Judicial Police, Judicial and admi-
nistrative Police, Police of Asiatic Immigration.
Police of Economics, and Station of the Post of Phnom-Penh.
The provincial Stations have about the same attributions as the Central
Organism, of which they follow the directives.
The provincial under-sectors of judicial identity and of asiatic immigra-
tion are, however, placed under the authority of the Governors.
The effective forces now pass 500 units of which about 2/3 serve for
the Centralisation of Phnom-Penh. The recruiting of the extra clerks is from
now on and already considered, while the effort of the Office tends conti-
nually to form a Staff of specialised Directors having a strong professional
education.
That is how young Inspectors have been sent to the Paris School of
Scientific Police from where two graduated Inspectors have already come
and where another Inspector is on the point of terminating his studies.
Lastly, a provincial Police placed under the authority of the Governors
includes chiefly in each Khet (province) two sections :
the first entrusted with insuring the public security.
the second entrusted with the Police of the City in the most impor-
tant centers.
The effective force of this provincial Police consists of nearly 4.000
non-commissioned officers and agents.
24


VI
THE JUDICAL AND
ADMINISTRATIVE
ORGANISATION
Administrative Organisation.
Apart from the Capital (Phnom-Penh) which has a particular statute,
Cambodia is divided into fourteen provinces which are :
Kandal, Prey-Veng, Svairieng, Kratie, Stung-Treng, Kompong-
Cham, Kompong-Thom, Siemreap, Battambang, Pursat, Kompong-Chhnang,
Kompong-Speu, Kampot and Takeo.
At the head of every Province (Khet) is placed a Governor who, repre-
senting the Government, has a Police under his orders and controls the
working of the differents Offices.
Each province is itself divided into districts (Srok) comprising a cer-
tain number of villages (Khum). A Chauvaysrok governs each Srok under
the authority of the Chauvaykhet, and a Mekhum elected by the members
of a Council who are themselve elected by the inhabitants of the village


is placed at the head of this collectivity. A few important centers : Kompong-
Cham, Battambang, etc... are besides set np either as Municipalities disposing
of their own budget and in which the Mekhum is helped by a municipal
Commission, or as Urban Centres also disposing of their own budget.
As for the city of Phnom-Penh divided into districts, it is governed by
a Governor with the help of a town-Commission, consisting of French and
Cambodian members and whose advice must compulsorily be taken in a
certain number of cases, more particularly on the occasion of the preparation
of the municipal budget and of its administrative account.
Every Minister, on the other hand, practices his authority over a certain
number of Offices, every one directed by a High Officer and whose helps
depend already only on the Royal Government : National Police, Excise
Office, Agriculture, Veterinary Service, Woods and Rivers, Fishing, the
Board of Surveys, Public Works, Elementary and Secondary Education,
Health, Information... etc...
A few other Offices Treasury, Customs, General Post-Office
are still working under the authority of the High Commissioner of France
in Indochina, but a Conference, in which France and the associated States
of Indochina will be represented, will soon determine under what new condi-
tions these Services will be organised, as well as the competence and the
extent of the powers given to mixed organisms intrusted to co-ordinate the
activity of these Services all through Indochina within the framework of
the Treaties concluded by France and these States and allowing for the neces-
sities resulting from the monetary union and from the customs union accepted
by Laos, Vietnam and Cambodia.
Cambodia administers sovereignly its finances. It disposes of all the
receipts collected on its territory, with the exception of those that will be
affected to the working of the organisms common to the associated States
of Indochina. It fixes the amount of the existing duties and taxes and can
create new ones.
The whole of these receipts and expenses are put down at the national
budget, excepting those of a particular character, which are put down on the
provincial and municipal budgets as well as on the budgets of the Khum
made into urban Centers.


THE BOARD OF SURVEYS
IN PHNOM-PENH
GOVERNMENT HOUSE OF THE
PROVINCE OF KRATIE


TEH TREASURY BUILDING
THE COURT-HOUSE


Judicial Organisation.
At the basis of this organisation, there exists in every province, besides
a few Justices of Peace, a district Superior Court called Sala Dambaung,
the competency of which exercices itself in civil and commercial matters and
in penal matters for the judgement of Offenses and the punishment of Crimes.
The jurisdictions of second degree are concentrated in Phnom-Penh,
where a Court for Criminals also works and a Tribunal of administrative
affairs in litigation.
Cambodia has its Penal and Civil Laws and a Commercial Code is being
prepared. The judicial organisation on the whole draws its inspiration from
France, with its Attorneys, its Lawyers, its Clerks of the Court, and its
Prosecutors.
The competency of the Courts and national jurisdictions extends only
for the time being, to Cambodian subjects Agreements to be passed
with France and the other Associated States of Indochina, and eventually
with the States the nationals of which benefit of a judicial privilege in
pursuance of previous treaties, will determine, in the future, which will be
the exact competency of these Courts and national Jurisdictions on one hand,
and on the other hand, that of Jurisdictions of mixed composition prescribed
by the Franco-Cambodian Treaty and which must work, without affecting
the sovereignty recognised to Cambodia, in jurisdictional matters on the
whole territory of the Kingdom.
27




VII
SOCIAL ORGANISATION
Education.
Public elementary and secondary education is entirely insured by
the Government of Cambodia. It is accessible to tall and scholar-
ships are widely granted, to allow deserving youths belonging to
poor families to pursue their studies.
Elementary education is practically distributed in all villages along
with the traditional religious knowledge in the Renovated Pagoda Schools
under the direction of priests formed according to pedagogical modern
methods in Schools of special Application.
This education works under the control of the Minister of National
Education who is responsible for the payment of books and school statio-
nery as well as a moderate indemnity to the teaching priests. The other
expenses, more particularly those relative to the disposition of the premises
and generally to the school furniture, being on charge of the pagodas them-
selves. Some Inspectors of this renovated traditional education insure
this control.


These Pagoda schools, scattered all over the territory of the Kingdom
now number more than 1400 allowing more than 1700 classes and frequented
by nearly 65.000 pupils of which the percentage of absentees has only been
10 % during the last school year.
The Cambodian children thus have the possibility, without leaving
their families and while learning agricultural works which will generally
be theirs, to learn how to read, write and count, and to acquire elementary
notions of history and geography as well as moral and religion.
The classical elementary education is, on the other hand, distributed
in many public schools existing in the principal centers. The number of
these schools is actually 384 for the elementary cycle and 88 for the com-
plementary cycle. They have been frequented during the last school-year
by nearly 53.000 boys and more than 12.000 girls. In these schools a large
part is given to lessons in the French language, to enable children, if they
wish, to go in for secondary studies, which are made in this language.
The secondary national Education is distributed by a Lyceum and
a High School for Girls in Phnom-Penh, a secondary school in Battambang,
and another one in Kompong-Cham. Besides a Teacher’s training School
insures in Phnom-Penh the training of teachers.
More than 1.500 pupils frequent these establishments, of whom more
than 300 are in the Teacher’s training School.
Higher Education, on the other hand, could not yet be organised in
Cambodia where there only exists one establishment of that kind. This one,
the National Judicial and Economical Institute founded in 1948, number 68
first year pupils and 28 second-year pupils these latter being divided into
two sections, administrative and judicial. Besides, about fifty free pupils
attend the lectures of this Institute the studies of which are sanctioned by a
certificate allowing more particularly, after a year of course in the Cam-
bodian School of Administration, the access to the staff of the Administra-
tion and of the Justice of the Kingdom.
In practice, the cambodian students desiring to follow the courses of
higher education, put down their names either in the Indochinese University
in Hanoi or Saigon, or, almost all of them, in the Faculties in France. A very
serious effort has been accomplished, during these last few years, by the
Royal Government in order to facilitate these higher studies.


THE BUDDHIST INSTITUTE
ENTRANCE OF LYCÉE SISOWATH
AND OF INSTITUT NATIONAL DES
HAUTES ETUDES JURIDQUES


ACTIVITY OF THE MEDICAL ASSISTANCE
(ANTICHOLERAIC VACCINATION IN THE COUNTRY)
A NURSE IN A DISPENSARY
IN PHNOM-PENH


To that effect, a Cambodian Students Office has been created and freely
grants scholarships to the students. These, apart from four pupils at
the Higher School of Public Works in Saigon, actually reach the number
of 94 foundation scholars scattered in Faculties and Higher schools in
France. One of them is a pupil at the Ecole Poly technique, 8 are inscribed
at the Faculty of Law, 5 at the Faculty of Medecine, 3 at the Faculty of
Science, 7 at the National Veterinary School, 12 at the Special School of
Public Works etc...
Besides, the Cambodian Government desirous of extending this move-
ment of cambodian students towards France is now occupied with the buil-
ding of a House of Cambodia with about 150 rooms, situated in the heart
of the University City.
On its side technical teaching is not neglected and a Technical College
gathers more than 200 pupils who learn how to work iron or wood or to
acquire notions of mechanics, electricity... etc... at the same time as they im-
prove t'heir general knowledge. Schools for tailors and for shoemakers also
exist in Phnom-Penh while a School-Workshop works in Kompong-Cham,
with sections of adjustment forge, copper-smith’s and carpentry.
Besides, in the interior of most of the principal Services, courses of
professional formation enable the young men to improve their knowledge,
in order to form on the spot a part of the technicians needed by these
Services.
Lastly, the religious knowledge, properly speaking, is given by Schools
of Pali, distributed in the provinces and a Higher School of Pali in
Phnom-Penh. The latter works under the direction of the Buddhist Insti-
tute, a National Institute which, in connection with the Ecole Framjaise
d’Extreme-Orient, centralises all the documents and studies relative to the
buddhist religion in an important Library opened to all research workers and
insures more particularly the publication and diffusion of the volumes of
Tripitaka (Triple basket).
Medical Assistance,
Apart from the hospitals existing in Phnom-Penh and in the principal
centres, the Service of Public Health has endeavoured to multiply the num-
ber of medical formations in order to satisfy to the maximum the needs of
31


the country folk. That is how every province disposes, without counting the
dispensaires and maternities, of a certain number of sanitary posts held by
men-nurses with a view of giving general care to the sick.
During the year 1949, more than 1 million consultations have thus been
given to about 400.000 consultants. In the sanitary formations, 23.000 inha-
bitants have been to the hospital, the number of the days of treatment ap-
proaching 400.000. Nearly 3.000 child-births have taken place in the mater-
nities, and nearly the same number have been operated by a corps of mid-
wives, trained by the Service of Health and scattered in the whole country.
Thanks to the efforts of the medical assistance, the mortality during
the year 1949 has been reduced to a number inferior to 20.000 deaths,
while more than 40.000 births have been registred, for a population of about
4 million inhabitants.
Social Action.
Besides education and medical assistance, social action manifested itself
in other domains in order to improve the workers’ conditions of life. A
labour inspection service which has adopted the legislation actually in force
in France, takes an interest in the fate of all paid workers.
The Board of Surveys, on the other hand, next to its administrative
and fiscal role, endeavours to stabilize the situation of farmers and to help
them in all the acts relative to the conservation of their rights of real estate,
thus playing an extremely important social part.
Besides its fiscal role by which it insures a fair distribution of land-taxes,
this Service replies to a double aim, judicial and administrative.
On the judicial plan, the works of immatriculation of the lands enable
the establishment of plans by lots and of surveying of original registers, as
well as of registers of land which insure the publicity of the real rights of
the real estate
On the administrative plan, the activity of this Service allows the census
of public and private properties in view of their conservation, the census of
the zones of large scale culture which constitue a part of the agricultural
wealth of the Kingdom, and the giving of certificates of the land immatri-
culation serving as bonds of property .
32


The corresponding works have been urged on with the greatest energy
and according to modern technique during these last two decades, the
operations on the land having been realised after missions of aerial photo-
graphy and the working of negatives in laboratories perfectly equipped.
These operations have been persued in all the principal agricultural
regions of Cambodia, where the lands are, either, regularly matriculated
or simply declared. The residts are centralised and held up to date in the
following establishments.
A municipal office of land Survey in Phnom-Penh.
Surveying Divisions in each of the 14 provinces of the Kingdom.
A Municipal Service of the board of Surveys, for the town of
Phnom-Penh.
And Offices of Land in 82 of the 86 Srok of Cambodia.
The Land Offices have an extremely important part in the country life,
serving as intermedium between the population and the Surveying Divisions
in all business referring to the property of land, and filling, in some sort,
notarary functions in the service of farmers who can accomplish all the legal
formalities in view of the validity of real estate contracts which have to pass.
These Offices have even taken under their responsahility the registration of
the acts of real estate, and they will soon insure the surveying Conservation
now centralised in the Offices of every chief-town of Province. The small
land-owner is thus put into possession of his rights, thanks to the establis-
hment of surveying matrix, the delivery of certificates of immatriculation
and the making out of plans by lots. He has all security for the preservation
of these rights, thanks to the real and personnal publicity of the land proper-
ties, and he realises great economy in the management of his landed-pro-
perty, thanks to the services rendered him by the Land Offices.
The following figures give an idea of the importance of the operations
of the Service of the Board of Surveys. On December 31st 1949 more than
1.100.000 lots have been surveyed, and more than 2.200.000 have been
declared. Besides, during the last five years, the Land office have drawn
up nearly 220.000 acts of real estate, directed nearly 26.000 inquiries,
conducted more than 22,000 meetings grouping more than 630,000 auditors,


in the rural societies, and given more than 70.000 land consultations to the
inhabitants, while nearly 380.000 lots were the object of mutation in the
Offices.
The Service of the Board of Survey the organisation of which according
to eminent visitors, could be given as a model to most western countries,
thus plays a social part of the very first order in an essentially agricultural
Kingdom.
Lastly, help to the farmers is insured in another way, not less effica-
cious, by a Mutual Agricultural Credit which has been working more than
20 years and which tries to enable the rural population to escape from the
gripe of money lenders.
This institution which acts in constant connection with the Service of
the Board of Surveys, depends, moreover on an organism having greater
aims, the Office of Popular Credit, which finances, by the grant of openings
of credit, Provincial Safes of Mutual Agricultural Credit, and Agriculture
and Crafts Cooperatives.
The Provincial Safes of Mutual Agricultural Credit group, in the limits
of the province, members who, by suscribing parts of a moderate amount
may obtain advances of funds at the rate of 1 % a month, on pledge of their
grounds, without any giving up of this pledge.
The loans granted can be for a short period, for buying grains, t 0015...
for a medium term, for acquisition of agricultural stock, cattle, fitting up
grounds... or for a long term when it concerns collectivities and for the
financing of great works, for instance irrigation.
Since their creation, these Provincial Safes, which have been opened
in nine provinces, have grouped nearly 50.000 adherents, have had the bene-
fit of the opening of credits surpassing 12 million piastres, and have gran-
ted mostly individual agricultural loans for a short term, by which nearly
15.000 of their members have benefited. Besides, these Safes receive from
individuals and from collectivities, deposits of funds bearing interest, and
thus play the role of ordinary banks to the rural population.
This organisation, which necessitate the presence of a numerous staff
for seasonal calculations generally dealing with small sums has undergone
certain difficulties in the fight against ancestral customs unfortunate dup
rooted. Experience has shown that its success depended upon the decentralisa


tion of its organism, and the creation of seconday Agencies, the activity of
which will be limited, for every one of them, to the territory of one Srok,
is in course of study with the adjunction of shops where the members will be
able to buy (at cost-price increased by a small commission) objects of
current use.
Agricultural Cooperatives have been created on the other hand in
Kandal to regulate the rate of palm-sugar, and in Kompong-Cham to deve-
lop the culture of tobacco and to improve the conditioning of maize. Ano-
ther Cooperative will soon be re-opened in Battambang, in Mongkolborey,
with the installation of a rice-mill-cooperative which may produce 1.250 tons
of white rice a year. The Cooperative of Kompong-Cham is in full activity
and groups nearly 8.500 members to whom it has during the last campaign
bought more than 40 tons of tobacco sheets and distributed nearly 550.000
Hungarian tobacco plants.
Lastly the Office of Popular Credit has largely contributed, by its finan-
cial aid to the setting up of two other important Cooperatives, the Coopera-
tive of Fresh-Water Fishing of Cambodia and the Forest Cooperative of
South Indochina.




VIII
ECONOMIC RESOURCES
CAMBODIA is an essentially agricultural country which gets nearly the
whole of its resources from the products of its soil and of its
waters. Industry is still, relatively undeveloped and only con-
cerns the transformation of these products in view of interior use and
exportation.
Rice Cultivation.
The cultivation of paddy occupies by far the first rank. During the
last agricultural campaign, the cultivated surfaces in rice plantations reached
1.100.000 hectares, with a production of nearly 1.300.000 tons of which
300.000 were ready for exportation.
The development and improvement of conditions of rice cultivation
are pursued with the technical help of the Rice Office. To this purpose
Cambodia applies itself :
to the realization of hydraulic works.
to .a selection of varieties of slow growth and of good size, for
exportations.


to the generalisation of the use of manure.
to the development of mechanical cultivation.
and lastly to the creation of growers’ association, for the rational
working of lands laid out.
The aim pursued is to obtain more cheaply a product of quality while
improving the material conditions of the peasants’ life, as technical measures,
if used alone, cannot give any results if the economical and social trend
is not favourable. That is why the Government pursues, on this last plan, a
program of roads-works, well-digging and organising of rural sanitary ser-
vices.... etc...
From an industrial point of view, efforts are being made for the building
of new rice godowns and of rice mills, in order to manufacture the paddy
crops on the very spot. A scheme for the creation of rice-mills, working
under the form of cooperatives is in course of study for the most important
centres of paddy production.
Other Cultivations.
Before ther war, Cambodia produced on an everage about 350.000
tons of red maize, almost entirely exported to France. This market having
momentarily disappeared for a few years, the production has fallen and
barely reaches 60.000 to 80.000 tons.
Food-producing cultivations are important. Besides those destined for
local uses, they include an interesting crop of soja and green beans for
exportation. Fruit cultivations are numerous and various ; fruits coming
from the provinces of Battambang and Kampot are particularly valued. The
cultivation of sugar-cane is still sporadical, but the production of palm-sugar
is very important and is greatly over 30.000 tons a year of which half is
exported to South Vietnam in the form of treacle or sugar loaves.
Oleaginous cultivations are in full development. Cambodia produces
yearly some 3.000 tons of earth-nuts in shells, of which a great part is trans-
formed on the spot into oil and which about 1/3 is exported. Castor-oil
plants are cultivated according to needs. Those having increased during
the last war, the production then reached 6.000 tons a year. Lastly, numerous


((EXPLOTATION RIXICOLE MÉCANISÉE
DE BATTAMBANG))
(MECANIZED RICE-GROWING
AT BATTAMBANG)
MODERN REAPING
MODREN PLOUGHING


ELEPHANT AT WORK
TEH WOODS AND RIVERS SERVICE
IN PHNOM-PENH


by products such as : oil extracted from hevea grains, from kapok, or cotton,
are exported to South Vietnam to be used as raw materials in the making
of soap.
Concerning the textiles : cotton, kapok or jute, the production is chiefly
reserved to family needs ; clothing, packing, cordage... the rami fibres
obtained by local processus of wolling are very resistant and are used for the
making of fishing tools. The only important exportation concerns the kapok,
the production reached, 4.000 tons of picked fibres a year, of which 3/4
are exported.
The cultivation of coffee is still but a home-growth. That of the cacao-
tree has just been introduced to Cambodia, with very promising results.
Tobacco, however, has been largely cultivated for a long time, with a produc-
tion greatly exceeding 5.000 tons a year. Important plantation of hevea
(rubber) exist, chiefly in the provinces of Kompong-Cham and Kratie. The
surface actually topped exceeds 20.000 hectares and the production figures
about 20.000 tons. There are finally very numerous secondary productions
lacquer, cinnamon, vomica nut, pharmaceutic products... etc... It is right,
among these, to mention pepper, about 1.000 tons of which are exported
every year, and quinquina which has been used for very promising tests
during the last few years.
Forest productions.
The forests of Cambodia cover about 3/4 of the surface of the country.
A great part of the riches which proceed from them is still unexploited
especially in the far-distant and most mountainous regions. The production
which supplies all the needs of the Kingdom and the exportation even now,
reaches very interesting figures which are susceptible to a notable increase.
The Woods and Rivers Service endeavours to increase the best kinds and to
create many ways of penetration into the interior of the forest domains.
During the year 1949, the following numbers have been reached :
Timber more than 160.000 cubic metres produced and more than 50.000
exported.
39


Woodfire almost 450.000 stores produced and more than 45.000 exported.
Charcoal more than 115.000 tons produced and almost 10.000 exported.
Woodoil more than 350.000 cans produced and nearly 90.000 exported.
Cattle-breeding.
Cattle-breeding constitutes one of the principal wealths of Cambodia.
The number of oxen is about 1 million heads, and that of buffaloes exceeds
450.000 heads. Besides, some 800.000 pigs and from 3 to 4 million fowls.
The local consumption, which tends to increase is thus largely satisfied, and
there remains an important excess for exportation to South Vietnam, with
oxen and buffaloes being exported to the Philippines. This exportation is now
of about 45.000 oxen, 10.000 buffaloes, 60.000 pigs, and 800.000 heads
of poultry.
The exporation of hides summarily treated on the spot, also reaches
interesting figures, about 75.000 ox-hides and 15.000 buffalo-hides a year.
Some 30.000 pieces of leather are also used for local consumption or in the
proportion of about a third exported to South Vietnam.
Fishing product.
Besides the maritime fishing grounds of the Gulf of Siam, Cambodia
with its rivers and streams and its icthyological reserve of the Tonle Sap
disposes of a considerable wealth. The fishing organisation is placed under
the direction of a Fishing Service, in connection with the Oceanic Institute
of Indochina and is composed of two categories of exploitation, with a free
zone and a zone reserved for leasing given out by the adjudging of fis-
hing lots.
The total production is about 100.000 tons a year of fresh fish.
After satisfying the needs of the country, it permits an important expor-
tation which has, in 1949, gone beyond 10.000 tons of fresh fish and nearly
7.000 tons of dried or smoked fish, without mentioning the by-products such
as fish-oil and (( nuoc-mam ».


THE MARKET IN PHNOM-PENH
THE CROSSING OF SINDHI BULLS AND
LOCAL COWS GIVES EXCELLENT RESULTS


LAUNCH PLYING BETWEEN
PHNOM-PENH AND CHOLON
TAN PA SHIP BUILDING YARDS
LAUNCH-BUILDING
IN PHNOM-PENH


Concerning more particularly the dried and smoked fish, exported
before the war to South Vietnam, Singapore, Batavia and Hong-Kong, a
Cooperative has been created to centralise the production and to realise the
direct sale to foreign countries, as well as to improve the procedure of the
making and conditioning @f exported fish. This Cooperative grants, moreo-
ver, loans to its members at the beginning of the annual periods of great
fishing. It is now in process of reorganisation.
Industry and Trade.
Geological investigations have not yet been very much carried on
in Cambodia, and have only given rise to exploitations concerning more
particularly a few layers of jet, phosphate, iron-ore.
The province of Kompong-Thom however seems to present interesting
mining possibilities, and studies have revealed traces of copper, manganese
and gold. We meet, on the other hand, in the province of Stung-Treng,
grounds containing corundum and zircons, the exploitation of which is
pursued according to local procedure.
Industry on a large scale is practically non-existant in Cambodia, where
there is only a small agricultural manufacture of transformation : distille-
ries, india-rubber manufactures, oil-mills, rice-mills.
We find, besides, numerous handcraft establishments such as saw-
mills, tile-kilns, brick-kilns etc... mentioning very active crafts such as
weaving, rope-making, basket-making, pottery, goldsmith’s art, jewelery,
cut out skins etc... for local needs.
Trade is facilitated by a group of excellent means of communications.
The road-system reaches 3.000 km long, without mentioning numerous roads
passable during the dry season, and the fluvial navigation opens a great
number of waterways allowing transport by junks and launches in all seasons.
The port of Plinom-Penh suitably equipped is accessible to boats of medium
tonnage, as well as few other fluvial ports of which the most important is
that of Tonle Bet, which supplies the great agglomeration of Kompong-
Cham. Lastly, the port of Ream, in the Gulf of Siam, would only need a


little repairing of equipment presenting no difficulties in order to be acces-
sible to cargos ships of any tonnage by any weather.
The export trade has been in 1949 for a value of nearly 900 million
piastres, the most important posts being those relative to paddy, and rice,
india-rubber, palm-sugar, pepper, oxen, green-beans, maize, pigs, wood
and tobacco.
The imports for the same year only represent a value of about
300 million piastres and concern chiefly tissues, cotton threads, salt, ciga-
rettes, refined sugar, gasoline, moto-cars, machines and metals.
Lastly, it must be added that a railway of more than 400 km long,
exists between Phnom-Penh, Battambang and Poipet, at the Thailand fron-
tier where the junction with the railways of the latter country is made.


FISHERMEN’S VILLAGE ON
THE TO NEE SAP
CONTRAST: THE OX-CAR OF
THE TIME OF ANGKOR PASSING
BY AN AMERICAN CAR


THE INTERIOR YARD OF
ALBERT-SARRAUT MUSEUM
CRAFTSMEN IN SIEMREAP
FASHIONING LEATHER
PICTURES FOR SHADOW-
PANTOMINE


IX
THE TOURISTIC RICHES
AND URBANISM
Cambodia with its rice fields, its plantations, its great rivers and is
its great Lakes, its woods and its mountains, its historical monu-
ments and its pagodas, constitutes an attractive and varied country,
where the intellectual, the merchant or the industrial, the hunter or the simple
tourist are sure of receiving the best hospitality from a peaceful and smiling
people and to find, while moving from place to place satisfactions of all
kinds.
The visitors will naturally he allured by the splendid vestiges of the
civilisation of Angkor, the principal monuments of which are situated in the
province of Siemreap. Restored under the direction of the Ecole Frangaise
d’Extreme-Orient, Angkor Wat, Angkor Thom, the Bayon, Banteai-Srey and
many other temples easy to visit, offer to the tourist, in an exuberant nature,
unforgettable sights of art and by their sculptures and their basso-relievo
the possibility of getting acquainted with the ordinary life and beliefs of
the inhabitants of the ancient Cambodian Kingdom. Besides this stay in the
province of Siemreap which must be made by travellers passing through


Cambodia, one will meet in the rest of the country, in the provinces of
Battambang, of Kompong-Thom, of Takeo... as in the ancient capital of
Oudong in the province of Kandal, admirable vestiges of a civilisation impre-
gnated with hindouism. This traveller will be able, in Phnom-Penh itself on
visiting the Albert Sarraut Museum to admire the treasures of art which are
gathered there. A School of Arts annexed to the Museum will show him
that the Cambodian craftsmen remain worthy of their ancestors, and he will
be able to admire and buy some « sampots » finely woven, often worked with
gold or silver, or goldsmith’s works in which traditional art is luckily
matched with modernism of good taste.
Neither will he miss a visit to the Royal Palace, its Throne-Hall, its
Silver Pagoda and its Museum, and he should seek the occasion of seeing
the Royal Troop of Cambodian Dancers who in their clothes sumptuously
embroidered interpret, in the most traditional style, episodes of the legendary
lives of the ancient divinities of buddhism or brahmanism.
Besides these artistic satisfactions, the tourist will be able to practise big
game hunting, elephants, tigers and panthers, wild oxen, stags... etc... and
rest at the mountain resort of Bokor with its admirable view on the Gulf of
Siam, or at the sea-side resort of Kep, with its greensward, its coco-nut trees
and its green islands, or at Ream in a delicious natural site-setting.
If he wishes to mingle with the lives of the inhabitants, he will have
all facility to do so by frequenting the numerous pagodas of the Kingdom,
which are the real centre of rural life and where the population often
meet for the traditional feasts impressed with unquestionable local colours.
Lastly, if he is more enamoured with modernism he will be sensitive
to the particular aspect of the principal agglomerations of the Kingdom
which have developed in functions of urban plans well understood ; be it
in Phnom-Penh admirably situated at the junction of the (( Quatre Bras »
(Four Arms) of the Mekong, the Tonle-Sap, and the Bassac, at Kompong-
Cham, at Siemreap or at Kampot. He will find, next to large shadowed ave-
nues and modern residential districts, cambodian, Chinese, Vietnamese or
malayian agglomerations, with their own particularities but united into
groups which respect the essential laws of urbanism and of hygiene without
spoiling the picturesque.


LAMBERT STADIUM
IN PHNOM-PENH
THE RAILWAY STATION


ONE OF THE BUILDINGS
ON THE BOULEVARD
DOUDART-DE-LAGRÉE
THE MONIVONG BRIDGE
OVER THE BASSAC


THE ROYAL PALACE WHEN ILLUMINATED
(THE THRONE-HALL)


A ROYAL DANCER IN THE
ANGKOR VAT TEMPLE
LOVE SCENE BY TWO
ROYAL BALLET DANCERS


X
CONCLUSION
I ' ROM the quick survey made out in the proceeding pages, the general
I situation of Cambodia presents itself under a favourable light and
this State, if order be quickly reestablished on its frontiers, can
contribute to insuring in South East Asia the stability of democratic
institutions.
Politically and administratively, Cambodia under the high authority of
a Monarch who has freely transfered to the Nation, most of His powers,
has, from now on, with its Parlementary Assemblies, its Ministers, its Gover-
nors and its National Services, its Army and its Police, an organisation
entirely in place and of which only the staffs have to be developed while
endeavouring to improve the professional knowledge of those already formed.
This task will be well executed in the shortest delays with the help, insured
to Cambodia, of French technicians.
Socially, the Kingdom has its own Services and Institutions, which also
need only developing and perfecting. Social peace, always more easily
insured in a mostly agricultural centre has not stopped reigning in Cambodia
where exist neither unemployment nor pauperism, and where mutual assis-
tance has constantly been practiced under the influence of Buddhism.


Lastly, economically the situation is satisfying and the volume of expor-
tations which may be largely increased, is sufficient to allow the indispen-
sable importations and the progressive acquisition of the industrial equip-
ment necessary to the country.
The Kingdom, thus seems to have triumphed over the principal post-
war difficulties, notably over those which might have been caused by its
passing without any transition, from a regime of Absolute Monarchy to that
of a Parlementary Royalty. The principles of liberty and equality inscribed
in its Constitution give satisfaction to the instinctive tendencies of its popu-
lation, and a return to any dictatorial form of Government could only he
imposed by force and would meet a deep hostility in the popular masses,
to them.
The new independence of the Kingdom, also holds in the hearts of the
people sincerely attached to the spirit which animates the United Nations,
and who have from now on, a sufficient idea of all that binds them to these
Nations, and particularly to France. They conceive that the Association of
their country with this Power on a footing of equality must insure their
security and their prosperity.
Cambodia, a country essentially peaceful and of ancient civilisation
where the national feeling is accompanied by no hatred of foreigners thus
has a feeling of being worthy of being admitted into the circle of the United
Nations, with which it sincerely wishes to work, according to its means, to
the upholding of order, in the Far East and to the development of cultural
and commercial bonds betwen these Nations.


BASSO-RELIEVO AT ANGKOR VAT




Imprimerie d’Outre-Mer
3, rue Rudyard-Kipling Saigon.
