

Modern Style
Piano Playing
NOW MADE EASY BY
HEDLEY SMITH
Well-known Adelaide and Interstate Broadcasting Pianist
Private:
'Phone: U 4631
Studios:
'Phone: C. 1088
Particulars:
HEDLEY SMITH SCHOOL FOR PIANO
198 Gawler Place, Adelaide


HEDLEY SMITH.
(Photo by courtesy of Allans Ltd.)
INTRODUCTION.
Popular music published to-day is issued in its simplest form.
The melody is given together with a straight-forward or simple
accompaniment. The professional pianist uses this part as a basis
to his or her own interpretation.
How many of my students have heard a number played by a
music shop assistant, bought the music, and on reaching home
found, to their disappointment, that the number when played as
written sounded totally different? You might ask, "Why is the
number not printed in built-up form?” The answer is very simple.
About 85 per cent, of net sales are by medium of the beginner,
who knows nothing about "building-up.” The arranger, that is,
the person who sets the music to this simple form, has an unenviable
task. His arrangement must include the necessary notes in his accom-
paniment for the professional to he able to pick his chord, at the
same time it must sound reasonably tuneful when played as written
by the beginner.
Modern style piano playing is not difficult if the pupil is willing
to practice conscientiously.
In past days, a pianist who could play a few little classical
numbers or vamp a popular melody was always in demand, but not
so to-day, with the advent of talkies, wireless, and other modem
scientific inventions, the public have become educated. Their demand
nowadays is fore something more accurate, more novel, and above
all, something that they can appreciate.


CLASS TUITION.
These classes have proved very successful—you might ask? How does
one learn by class method. It is just as easy for a teacher to talk to a
number as it is to explain a matter to an individual student. You learn
by your class-mates’ mistakes. In giving a private lesson a subject is often
dealt with, and although the pupil appears
to have understood everything thoroughly,
it is still not too clear.
In cases like this the class tuition
stands alone, as the question is being
repeated from time to time. While one
student is having a lesson the previous
ones are having theirs repeated.
We have three studios; one is set apart
for beginners, the second for advanced
pupils, while any one requiring a little
practice on what they have just been
taught may use the third as a practice
room.
Class tuition has many advantages:—
It provides a night’s enjoyment, as
well as being an education.
Class tuition is inexpensive.
You learn by your friend’s mistakes.
Your friend learns by your mistakes.
Each class represents 2i hours’ dura-
tion.
The classes are run on modern methods.
Each pupil has an individual lesson.
Mr. W. LUND,
noted dance pianist
and instructor of
the H.S.S.P.
The Hedley Smith School for Piano is the first to successfully teach
by this method in South Australia.
The Hedley Smith School for Piano, up-to-date has eleven pupils now
playing in Adelaide and suburban dance balls.
Recommendations count more than advertising—our pupils are your
guide.
For 10/6 one has five nights* of interesting pleasure, at the same time
finding out if he or she is adapted to modern music. Here is your oppor-
tunity, grasp it, commence at once!
CLASS TUITION—IO/6 Term (Term, 5 Weeks).
7.43—10.13 p.m.
Phone: C 1088.
Our Pupils are Our Advertisement
The Hedley Smith Method Takes the "Irk" out of "irksome"


SECTION OF No. 1 STUDIO.
(Photo by Jack Beare, Croydon.)
PRIVATE TUITION.
Although everything is done to make everybody as much at home
ns possible, during class lessons, some students are apt to be very bashful
and lack the confidence to learn while others are within hearing. To these
we would recommend private tuition.
PERSONAL INSTRUCTION.
£2/2/- Per Term.
Terms consists of ten weeks; lessons three-quarters hour (3 hour) duration
(approx.)
Owing to pressure of nightly engagements, personal tuition is not
available after 7 p.m. However, I have two competent instructors on my
staff, who teach at my studios nightlv. Fees for this
of ten weeks, lessons three-quarters hour (approx.).
Owing to inconvenience and loss of time no lessons will be made up
except in cases of sickness.
Our Methods Are Founded on Interstate Experience


HINTS FOR THE PROSPECTIVE PUPIL.
The Hedley Smith method makes practice a pleasure.
The Hedley Smith method saves hours of study.
The Hedley Smith method is cheapest in the end.
It is costly to experiment—make Adelaide’s recognised teacher your
teacher.
All pupils of the Hedley Smith School for Piano recommend our
methods.
WHY?
BECAUSE—
We teach in the shortest possible time.
Our fees are reasonable.
All lessons arc made a pleasure.
Our pupils are not handicapped with too many boring scales and
exercises.
We teach harmony, breaks, syncopation, how to build up popular
songs in a way that keeps one interested from the very word "Go.”
REMEMBER—
The Hedley Smith School for Piano is your guide to better music
whether for pleasure or as a profession.
: o ;
Our Methods Are Founded on Interstate Experience
Don't Be a Spectator, Be a Performer
With Practice You Will Surprise Yourself in a Few Short Months


SYD REID’S RISE TO FAME.


POSTAL TUITION.
Hedley Smith School for Modern Style Piano Playing.
198 Gawler Place,
Adelaide.
For quite some considerable time I have felt that there was need of a
postal course for the teaching of modern style piano playing. Apart from
enquiries received at my studios, the success I am having with individual
students is very gratifying, and has made me feel more than ever that my
friends in the country should have the same opportunity of improving their
knowledge of the piano and how to play it.
My course, which has just been published, comprises six (6) separate
lessons in concise book form, and can be obtained direct from me or through
the agents, Messrs. Cawthorne’s Ltd., 17a Rundle Street, or Gladiola Co.,
69 Rundle Street, Adelaide, who have given me every assistance to make this
publication possible. The whole six lessons will be posted on receipt of the
remittance fee of £l/1/-.
The fee of £l/1/- (payable in advance) includes all postages and
reimbursements of any postages which you may incur by writing me during
the term. At present I have under me 67 people of varying ages, who are
showing great improvement, and, what is more than anything to me, are
satisfied that my method is correct.
The system is foolproof, and if you are prepared to adapt yourself
and spend time in practice—well, there is only one answer, YOU WILL
SUCCEED.
Now, if you are interested sufficiently, write me at the above studio
address or through Messrs. Cawthornc’s Ltd. or Gladiola Co., filling in the
attached questionnaire, and I will give you my best and prompt attention.
In harmony,
I remain,
Yours faithfully,
HEDLEY SMITH.


HEDLEY SMITH.
Dear Sir,
1 have perused your circular, and am certainly interested in
your method of modern style piano playing. I am enclosing
herewith remittance covering the amount of £l/1/-, and desire you
to forward your (first lesson, remainer to follow weekly) (complete
course) as soon as possible. To enable you to have full formation,
I have answered the following questions as you desire.
Yours faithfully,
Full Name
Address
1. Mr., Miss, or Mrs
2. Age (answer optional).
3. How long have you been playing piano?
4. Do you play any other instrument?
5. What is your chief difficulty when playing popular style
music? ......
6. Can you stretch an octave comfortably?
7. Do you know the value of the different notes in music?


YOUR HANDS.
Do not feel that you are handicapped if you happen to have snu.il
hands. My hands are smaller than the average, and 1 have a number of
successful students who can barely manage an octave. Many think that it
is essential to have long fingers—this is not so. Some of the world’s finest
pianists possess short and stubby fingers.
THE TWINS.
(Photo by Jack Beare, Croydon.)
JAZZ VERSUS CLASSICS.
How often has one heard it said that modern syncopated playing
tends to spoil one’s classical ability. These statements are definitely wrong,
and are no doubt made in ignorance by the majority (and in numerous cases
by teachers with the inability to play anything except classical music).
On the contrary, it has been proved time and time again that modern
syncopated playing tends to improve one’s classical ability, giving a better
sense of rhythm, better attack, improved sight-reading, firmer playing, and
above all, a general knowledge of harmony and chord construction.
PRACTICE.
It is not necessary to practice for hours at a time. Three-quarter hour
of solid, intelligent study a day is far better than months of old-fashioned
finger exercises. Make your practice as interesting as possible, and above
all, only practice when in the mood for it. Do this and you will succeed.
Remember, your teacher will do his share, but it’s up to you to do the rest.


DON’T HESITATE!
You have probably stood aside and watched the pianist—the centre
of attraction at the party, putting everybody in high spirits with his snappy
syncopation, at the same time taking an obvious delight in it himself. BUT
have you stopped to realise that after a short course with the Hedley Smith
School for Piano, you could be in the same position yourself. Make up
your mind—here is your opportunity, don’t hesitate but write, or phone
Central 1088 NOW, for appointment.
CORNER SECTION OF No. 3 STUDIO.
IS MODERN STYLE PIANO PLAYING DIFFICULT?
The Answer—NO!
You have no doubt heard it said that piano playing is a gift, only to be
successfully mastered by a fortunate few. The failure of many enthusiastic
students is due to faulty tuition. This has brought complete discourage-
ment, with the result that the pupil has given it up in despair, with the idea
firmly in his or her mind that he or she unfortunately has not the "gift.”
There is nothing difficult in piano playing, so long as one has complete
confidence in the teacher and vice-versa—practice does the rest.


JAZZ PLUS MODERN REFINEMENT.
Extract from Mr. Smith’s article in October, 1935, “S.A. Dance News.”
To a large percentage of the public, the word jazz conveys one meaning—cheap
music. To another portion it represents a terrible din resembling a kitchen calamity.
For the remainder who are, metaphorically speaking, “sitting on the fence,” we will
analyse the meaning of jazz.
First of all, let me hasten to tell you that the word jazz is fast dying out, and is
being superseded by the word modern style. However in this article we are dealing
with the so-called jazz, so we will leave the word to take care of itself.
Certainly jazz of fifteen years ago was very crude, but everything must have a
beginning. Many were the laughs when a veteran automobile race was held from Adelaide
to Glenelg some few months back. Compare the car of yesterday to that of to-day,
and in the same sense compare the early jazz to that of modern times —few people look
on jazz music in this light.
I could name quite a number of people who do not know the difference between a
jazz and a classical number. For example, a certain friend of mine was asked to
listen very intently to two of England’s leading dance musicians in the form of a two-
piano recording. He was told that the result was a Beethoven Sonata, and, after hearing
it, many were his praises for the so-called better class music. Some half hour or so
later, by a coincidence, the same record was featured over one of Adelaide’s radio
stations, and announced as Harry Roy’s Tiger Ragamuffins playing "Dinah.” Believe
it or not, the wireless was switched off in disgust! I wonder how many of my readers,
who profess to loathe jazz, could be caught in the same manner?
When jazz first came into the limelight it was a meaningless jumble, a conglomeration
of all that was noisy-—from wows-wows to cat-calls, from tin cans to cow-bells. Each
and every musician’s job was to make more noise than his mate, and in this respect
the drummer was usually the prominent member of the band.
It wasn’t until George Gershwin (of "Rhapsody in Blue” fame) met the great
Paul Whiteman that dance music started to improve. Melodies were arranged from a
systematic chord foundation. Whiteman’s band was the first to feature these arrange-
ments (better known as orchestrations). This new style of music was something
different; it was more tuneful. The drummer dropped back from head noise-maker to
a unit of the rhythm section. (To those who do not know what this is, the rhythm sec-
tion of a dance band consists of the piano, guitar or banjo, bass, and drums. These are the
instruments which form that rhythmical swing heard underneath the melody of a dance
number when being played.)
Before long, Paul Whiteman was the hero of the dancing public; hence his name
"King of Jazz.” Whiteman received all the credit, but it was real ly Gershwin who
deserved the bouquets.
Since then dance music has never looked back, and to-day we have bands of all
kinds varying from 4-25 players, and even more. Who has not heard of Jack Hylton,
Debroy Somers (the medley king), Jack Payne, Ray Noble, and last, but not least,
our own Jim Davidson? These are only a few of the world’s finest bands, and there
are literally dozens of equally famous bands that can be heard on records and over the
radio every day in the week. So, in concluding this short article, I will ask those
whol up to the present time have had no time for “MODERN MUSIC,” to ask them-
selves the question, “Is it the music, or the word JAZZ, that I dislike?” When they
have answered this question, a good idea would be to buy a few records, preferably
by some of the above-named bands, go home, light the fire, pull out the old gramophone,
put on the records, and listen carefully.


MOTHERS! YOUR CHILDREN—
The old custom of parents scolding their children for playing the
so-called jazz, has vanished. To-day jazz has turned to modern rhythm.
Don’t hesitate to send your child to us, he or she will appreciate your kind-
ness in later years.
A pupil turned out by the Hedley Smith School for Piano means a
pianist of outstanding, all-round ability. Older students with no previous
knowledge of music may commence immediately on Modern Style, but
children definitely start on orthodox methods—we have proved this to be
more successful. If, after a short period, the parents decide to have their
child learn popular music, he or she by then has had a good grounding and
is ready to go ahead on modem methods.
No. 2 STUDIO LOOKING FROM No. 1.
(Photo by Jack Beare, Croydon.)
INSTRUMENTAL TUITION.
VIOLIN, SAXOPHONE, XYLOPHONE, DRUMS, MANDOLIN,
BANJO, Etc.
We are only too pleased to be of service in recommending available
teachers of the above instruments.
The Hedley Smith Method to the Semi-Professional Earns More Than It
Costs


We thank you for the interest you have taken in reading this
booklet. Should you decide to go further into the matter, or
require any further information, telephone Central 1088, or
write to above address, and your enquiries will receive prompt
attention.
Thanking you again,
Yours in harmony,
HEDLEY SMITH.


THANK YOU FOR YOUR
INTEREST
Stevenson Print, 33 Franklin Street, Adelaide. Phone €.5443.
