

' ' r ‘ •’ •' ’
licx i -
CONGREGATIONAL UNION AND MISSION
OF VICTORIA.
MODERNISM AND CHRISTIANITY
CHANGED AND UNCHANGING
USING THE
ADDRESS FROM THE CHAIR AT THE ANNUAL MEETING
OF THE CONGREGATIONAL UNION AND MISSION OF
VICTORIA.
Delivered in the Collins-street Independent Church on Tuesday
Evening, 12 th October, 1909,
LLEWELYN D. BEVAN, LL.B., D.D.
Melbourne :
WALKER, MAY AND CO., PRINTERS, MACKILLOP-STREEET
(OFF LITTLE COLLINS-STREET).
1909.


q \' >
t *
i3?£
.
i -Vv <4
£v S ’ *
. ' -ZSitisar- '** y
■ %vr •' *
-<_-, - - a. a'-< "
. gS* -X*‘ :


CONGREGATIONAL UNION AND MISSION
OF VICTORIA.
MODERNISM AND CHRISTIANITY
CHANGED AND UNCHANGING
BEING THE
ADDRESS FROM THE CHAIR AT THE ANNUAL MEETING
OF THE CONGREGATIONAL UNION AND MISSION OF
VICTORIA,
Delivered in the Coll ins-street Independent Church on Tuesday
Evening, 12 th October, 1909,
LLEWELYN D. BEVAN, LL.B., D.D.
Melbourne :
WALKER, MAY AND CO., PRINTERS, MACKILLOP-STREEET
(off little collins-street).


♦s


Modernism and Christianity
Changed and Unchanging.
CHAIRMAN’S ADDRESS,
Congregational Union of Victoria, 1909,
LLEWELYN D. BEVAN, LL.E., D.D
HONOURED Fathers and Brethren, —The distin-
guished trust which you have placed in me in call-
ing me for the third time to occupy the chair of your
assembly must be my apology for a few words of a personal
character by way of an opening to my address. Twenty-
three years have passed away since you welcomed me to
your ministry, and to association with you in the common
service of our churches. I take this opportunity of ex-
pressing my thanks for the brotherly fellowship which I
have enjoyed and the pleasure which I have found in such
part as I have been able to take in the work of our Union,
and wherein there has always been the ready aid of a
kindly and loyal comradeship.
It is impossible to think of these past years without
noting the changes that have come over us. How many
are the vacant places from which loved and honoured
forms have vanished, whom we can only recall in tender
memories of character and worth never to be forgotten!
Some in our assembly are still with us and faith-
ful as ever. I have no desire to draw even the faintest
cloud of melancholy over our fellowship, but the years of
my life amongst you have seen every pulpit but that of
this church rendered vacant, and I am left the only acting
pastor in all our churches still in the position of twenty-
three years ago. But the succession of devoted service
has been unbroken, and I think we may say without the
slightest disloyalty to the ministry of the past that to-day


we can be thankful that the Head of the Church has
graciously filled every post with as devoted and powerful
a service as that of the olden time. Many of our brethren,
both ministerial and lay, are with us no longer. Of the
laymen we have still some who we rejoice to know are
carrying on their voluntary work in our churches and in
our Union with unwearied devotion. How large a place
has been recently rendered empty you will all feel with
me as we recall the departure of our honoured brother
Eickard. We miss him everywhere.
But I am sure that you all rejoice with me that in our
ministerial ranks we have some of our honoured fathers
still amongst us —-two I may specially refer to, in the
persons of my predecessor in the chair of the Union, and
the Principal of our College—on whom the gathering
years do not seem to lay any signs of weakness. We
thank God for the service which they have rendered, and
pray that they may he long spared still to serve our
churches with the wisdom which years give, though they
may abate something of vigour and strength.
But we are not here for reminiscence, however pleasant
it may be when lighted up with the sentiments of per-
sonal affection. The passing years not only change the
individuals and personalities of human life, but they bring
the vicissitudes of new conditions even to our greatest
institutions. And we find that so ancient and stable
an institution as the Christian Church, with its venerable
doctrines and its rites so long observed, changes with the
changing times. And it is to some considerations of the
relations of Christianity itself to the ever-varying influ-
ences of the flying years that I have chosen as the subject
of m3 7 address from the chair
MODERNISM AND CHRISTIANITY.
One of the most striking features of the age through
which we have passed is the changed relation of Chris-
tianity in its organised and dogmatic forms to the prevail-
ing conditions of secular thought and social progress. The
movements of the human mind which were inaugurated
and sustained by the Eeformation have at no period
asserted themselves so powerfully as during the last half-
century. The advance of positive science and the exten-
sion of investigation into the phenomena of nature have
been pursued with an intellectual vigour that has almost
become a rapture, while 'the extraordinary power which
man has gained over the external world has served most
brilliantly to illustrate his knowledge, and very widely


to extend its practical effects. The leaders of material
science have been by no means content with their purely
scientific investigations. It has been an easy step from
the experiments of the laboratory and the observation of
nature to the speculations of the philosopher. Physics
has always supplied abundant texts for metaphysics.
Thus modern science has very largely infringed upon the
sphere of philosophy, and, having arrived so far in her
wanderings, it has not been difficult to pass into the adjoin-
ing territory of religion.
THE SCIENTIST HAS BECOME THE THEOLOGIAN.
This relation of science to philosophy and theology has
undoubtedly existed in all ages; but the intensity of the
modern world has made the contact between these regions
of human thought far more definite and vigorous than in
any previous time. Up to the Reformation the predomin-
ance of religion as possessing a voice of final authority was
generally acknowledged, and philosophy was willing to
corroborate by speculative reason what faith had already
accorded either to the deposit of tradition or to the affirma-
tions of revelation. Physical science was held to be a kind
of poor relation in the family of human knowledge.
Regarded somewhat dubiously, as being too willing to
consort with what both philosophy and religion contemned,
it was occasionally permitted to occupy a place where it
could fill a useful part in some of life’s practical duties,
or, as a medicine, attempt to heal the physical ills of life.
All this has been changed during the later years. Partly
under the influence of sceptical rationalism, and partly by
the growth of the physical sciences, the thought of the
18th century moved beyond the range of Reformation
scholasticism, while the 19th century leaped by prodigious
bounds forward in the development of mechanical art, in
its extraordinary inventions and scientific applications.
THE AGE OF ECONOMIC ADVANCE.
The result has been the enormous increase of human
wealth in the production of manufactures and the
economic organisation of the last century. The steam
engine, the locomotive, the electric telegraph, the various
forms of photographic invention, the applications of all
kinds of mechanical devices in art and practical life, are
only a few of the achievements of the chemist and the
physicist in the material world. The commonplaces of
our city life would have been recorded among the miracles
of past ages, and man, who has dominated the earth and


is well nigh complete conqueror of the ocean, seems only
to be waiting in daily expectation of adding to his vast
dominion the empire of the air.
THE HYPOTHESIS OF EVOLUTION.
But these merely material achievements would have
but slightly affected the mental and spiritual world had
not the middle of last century seen the announcement of
a natural law, the sweep of whose influence has extended
far beyond the physical world and invaded the regions both
of the mind and of the spirit. It is only just over half a
century since two great natural philosophers, working
upon lines of investigation not altogether unknown to
former ages, formulated a law known as the law
of development or evolution, which has completely con-
quered every side of investigation and thought. That law
has been specially associated with the name of Darwin,
the jubilee of the publication of whose epoch-making essay
we have lately celebrated. The progress of this theory
has been almost unique in the history of thought, both for
the rapidity of its acceptance and the extensive influence
which it has exerted over every field of research and
speculation. The uncertain conjectures of ancient phil-
osophy and the experimental efforts of modern science
seemed to be gathered into a concentrated force by the
illustrations of evolution afforded in the Darwinian investi-
gations, which immediately penetrated all forms of
thought, subjecting them to its direction and conquering
all sides of mental activity. The evolutionary hypothesis
in many quarters is accepted as a certain law. It has
been almost raised to the dignity of a god, and to it now
all the movements of life and energy are unhesitatingly
referred without a moment’s doubt or questioning. Re-
ligious thought, which for a while opposed the new theory,
soon yielded to its influence, and to-day we find the theolo-
gian and preacher referring to development and its
expression in the formulas of evolution as glibly and as
freely as the most pronounced physicist, or even the most
antagonistic sceptic.
HISTORIC AND LITERARY CRITICISM.
Together with this great expansion of scientific know-
ledge and the development of evolutionary philosophy,
there has been a striking advance in literary and historic
criticism. The era of the Reformation synchronised with the
rapid extension of literature through the invention of the
art of printing and its accompanying handmaid, the
manufacture of paper. This was also heralded by the


renaissance, which included not merely the quickening
of the human mind, but also the revival of classical learn-
ing by which the attention of scholars was turned again
to the works of Latin and Greek writers. The criticism
of the classics acted and reacted upon that examination
of the text of the sacred Scriptures to which the reformers
were naturally driven by the demands of their religious
polemic with the Catholic Church. The accuracy of the
sacred text had to be determined, when appeal was made
from the authority of the Church to that of the Bible. It
was an easy step from this to the inquiry into the historical
validity of the sacred writings, their character, their form,
and the numberless other critical questions which their
study involved. This movement, at least in our English-
speaking communities, came to a head in the last half-
century, and was thus contemporary with the era of the
prevalence of the doctrine of evolution, and in many
quarters created a wide-spread alarm which has not even
yet altogether subsided.
SOCIAL AND POLITICAL CHANGES.
A. third movement greatly affecting religious thought has
taken place in the sphere of practical life, where perhaps
the influences of the .Reformation have been more power-
fully felt even than in the region of the intellectual activi-
ties. This is the social and political change which has
proved so active in modern civilisation, partly the effect
of the economic movement and partly owing to the revo-
lutionary spirit which, manifesting itself especially in the
18th century, was really the result of’ the Reformation
teaching of the 16th and 17th. In the freeing of man from
the tyranny of the Church, and the recall of human atten-
tion to the value of the soul and its immediate relation
to God, modern individualism was born, and the rights
of men were recognised. Thus men not only broke the
power of the priest, but also snapped the iron rod of the
monarch and the lord. Notwithstanding the recovery
which monarchic forms of government have apparently
enjoyed in later years, it is certain that it is only in the
forms of rule that the supremacy of the one or the few
has been manifested. The spirit of the modern State
completely recognises individual freedom and right, while
we now see the growth of the new force of socialism, which
is only the more powerful re-assertion of the claims of
the individual recognised as existing in every member of
society, and calling therefore for the action of society as
a whole, only that thereby the individuals who constitute
it might the better gain what is their due without any of


them securing exceptional privileges or unequal advantage.
Whatever shape this movement may take, we find it uni-
versal. The subject peoples of India are beginning to stir
with the claims of right, as against the rule of Britain.
The Eastern peoples are awakening from the sleep of cen-
turies, and even the Chinese are discussing constitutional
government. Russia is the arena of conflict between the
bureaucracy and the nihilist. All Western civilisation is
alert with the struggle. The new race of overlords whom
economics has produced are perpetually engaged in trying
to justify their existence by enormous largesses of charity,
or in combining their forces against the attacks of the mul-
titudes whose strength they have exploited in the amassing
of their wealth. Even where the fight is less bitter, the
doctrine that the State exists for those who constitute it
is bearing its fruit. “ Equal opportunity," “ popular-
education, ” "the solution of the problem of unemploy-
ment," the “ claims of labour," “ cessation of property
in land," and all the other phrases of the modern Babel
of conflicting opinions, are heard everywhere. While little
apparently is effected, the movement distinctly continues,
and we seem certainly to be on the eve of a wide-spread
extension of socialistic principles and practices.
SCIENCE, 'CRITICISM, SOCIALISM, THE MODERN TRINITY.
What are the prevailing objects of our modern thought?
We may briefly characterise them as Science, Criticism,
Socialism. They are the objective extensions of our
subjective relations to nature, history, humanity. They
furnish the contents of the latest interpretations of the
universe and man. Always existent, they have received
much larger attention in the democratic conditions of our
times. The megaphone of the newspaper exaggerates
the volume of their sound. Once the whisper of the few,
they are now the roar of the multitude. They fill the
world with their sonorous reverberations; they deafen the
ears of quiet folk, and sometimes drown with their noise
the voices of the wise.
HOW IS CHRISTIANITY RELATED TO THESE?
We propose to ask the question —What is the relation
of Christianity to this modern condition of thought and
action? We might formulate the question as that of
Christianity and modernity, using the latter term in a
wider sense than that in which it has been used by a
high ecclesiastical authority, and the former term in a
somewhat restricted sense, for it must not be forgotten
that in some aspects the word Christianity may be re-


garcled as covering tiiose very world forces to which we
have referred, and it may be regarded as the spirit of the
modern civilisation which has generated their movements.
The spirit of inquiry, the spirit of research, especially the
spirit of social movement, are all either the offspring of
the religion of Jesus or have been adopted into its family;
and there is a very real resemblance between the children
and the parent. But we may also use the term Chris-
tianity in a much more limited sense. We may regard
it as expressed in the various forms of church life which,
with all their divergencies, and even antagonisms, have a
common character—distinctive and one. Or it may be
that form of ordered and authoritative thought which all
the churches more or less express in dogmatic formulae,
and where there is a large body of almost identical opinion
—the Catholic creed of universal Christendom. But we
shall not on this occasion deal with Christianity only in
its formulated doctrine or as the expression of church life
and order, for there is still another sense in which we
may use the term, and it is in that sense chiefly that we
employ it in the present address. When we speak of
Christianity we mean the special relation of our Lord to
the individual life, and as it is expressed in the character
of the Christian man. From our point of view as preachers
of the Gospel, and those who have distinctly allied them-
selves by profession and active participation in Christian
service, this aspect of our religion has its peculiar and
supreme value. We do not underrate the theology of the
Church; we do not forget the important place occupied
by ecclesiastical institutions and the various forms of
church life. But it is possible to conceive of these as
non-existent, or grown effete and relegated to oblivion;
and yet the real value of Christian faith and the Divine
life in man derived from Christ might continue—nay, as
some of us believe, would be far more powerful and more
operative than they are under present conditions. There
are many who hold that Christian dogma has often stifled
and hindered Christianity; and whereas undoubtedly much
advantage has accrued to the race from churches and the
influence of their corporate institutions, it must be sadly
confessed that ecclesiastical history is a melancholy study,
and mankind has had occasion to gravely doubt the value
of the results of a very large part of the influence and
effect of the definitely organised church life of the
Christian centuries.
ESSENTIAL CHRISTIANITY.
We shall then in the first place briefly define what we


regard as the essential of Christianity, and that inner spiiat
of the system which remains under all changes of thought
and vicissitude of circumstances. The central fact of
Christianity, I presume, will be universally acknowledged
to be the person and work of Jesus Christ. There is of
course a theology which lies back of the Divine Personality
of Jesus which is common to all religion in its purest and
most embracing form. But the special characteristic
of Christianity is the relation which Jesus bears to man-
kind. He is the Supreme Teacher, the all-commanding
Sovereign, the Universal Saviour. His historic life forms
the foundation of our faith, but its real essence, its abid-
ing power, is the present influence of the Living Lord.
Now, in regard to this, nothing has occurred in the new
forms of human thought and activity which can modify
this direct relation of Christ to mankind. Even if we
were to apply the evolutionary doctrine to the explanation
of Jesus and His relations to man, this would not destroy
their actuality. This would remain as clear and definite
as it is at present. To defend them is to appeal to ex-
perience—an appeal which ever becomes more powerful
as the history advances. Every life redeemed, every
heart strengthened, every sorrow soothed, every tempta-
tion overcome, becomes a fresh proof of the "reality of
Jesus Christ and His power over the race. The Christian
propaganda, the triumph of Christian missions (not the
teaching of dogma, not the spreading of ecclesiastical
dominion) have been the distinguishing marks of the last
century. These are among the most powerful testimonies
to the truth of Jesus and His Gospel; and these have .been
concurrent with the new science and its ambitious
philosophy.
Christ’s person and work independent of criticism.
This independence of the central truth of Christ’s per-
sonality may be seen not only in relation to scientific
philosophy, but also in regard to the critical and historical
changes which have come over the scholarship of our
times. We must not forget that the theory of verbal
inspiration and the absolute inerrancy of Scripture have
not always been held by the Church, and were only pushed
to their most rigorous extremes by some of the Protestant
churches in the later Deformation period. While all ages
of the Church have accepted some kind of doctrine of
inspiration, the extreme form of that doctrine has always
been modified by some qualifying theory. Thus, for
example, the principle of the double meaning of the Scrip-
ture was adopted by many of the Fathers, while in the


development of ecclesiastical authority the Catholic
Church could always set the tradition as guarded by the
Church and its claim to be the sole interpreter of the
Scriptures over against the tyranny of the mere word. The
place of these modifying forces in relation to the letter of
the Scripture has been taken by the critical influences
which have very largely affected our views as to the
authority of the Scriptures, and in many cases their inter-
pretation. Notwithstanding these changes, modern criti-
cism has not lessened the value of the personality of our
Lord. We should rather say that it had heightened it.
Theological statements and authoritative dogmas may
have lost some of their influence, but it carinot be said
that Jesus Christ has retreated to a greater distance from
the eyes of mankind, or has been robbed of His power by
critical research and conclusion. The life and history
and personality of our Lord have become more distinct
as the result even of the most severe criticism, and especi-
ally when the varying conclusions of critical investigation
are fairly weighed and compared. Historical criticism
has presented a series of ever-changing positions, with the
result that while a theory, after holding its own for a
while, has become discredited and thrown aside, it has
at the same time served to elucidate and bring to greater
distinctness some sides of the evangelistic history which
may have been ignored, or to which a proper value had not
been given. We know no more striking example than is
furnished by the famous tendency theory, which
was identified for so long a time with the Tubingen school.
How greatly this served to determine the direct relation
of our Lord to varied sides of life and temperaments in
the primitive Church ! What light is shed upon some of
the dark places of the history of the first Christian ages !
And yet this critical theory, upon which very largely this
service was based, is now disregarded as an explanation
of the mode in which the writings of the New Testament
were produced. We know Christ and His followers far
better than we did by reason of the theory. The theory
may be discarded, but the results remain for ever in our
clearer apprehension of our Lord and His apostles. It has
been said, and there is much truth in the saying, that
“ Christ has been re-discovered by modern criticism.”
Church tradition and ritual, and the decisions of specu-
lative theology, had sublimed the real Christ into an
attenuated and lifeless theory. Jesus was a definition,
not a man; a dogma, not a Saviour; a ritual spectacle, not
a living force. The Church, and perhaps still more the
world outside the Church, has seen again what Galilee


saw and heard. We have listened again to the words that
stirred the hearts of men in ancient synagogues, and
moved the multitudes upon the hillside or in the Temple
court. The Son of God has become once again incarnate
in the Son of Man; and we seem with the apostles to
have heard, and to have seen w T ith our ej'es, to have
looked upon and with our hands to have handled the
Word of Life.
RELATION OF CHRIST AND HIS WORK TO SOCIALISM.
These considerations bring us naturally to ask what
effect modern democratic, and especially socialistic,
tendencies have had upon the conception of Christ’s
person and His relation to mankind. It is very interesting
to note from this point of view the change which has come
over the advocates of the modern movements of life in
respect to religion, and especially the religion of the
Personal Christ. The revolutionary movements of the
18th century were very largely supported by men who
were more or less anti-Christian. The deism of England,
and the rationalism of Germany, and the infidelity of
France were arrayed upon the side of the Revolution
in its more or less destructive forms. The conservative
defence of existing institutions was chiefly supported by
those who belonged to the different churches, and especi-
ally by the official class. Even the patriotic movements
of America were largely directed by men who either dis-
tinctly or indirectly were regarded as so-called free-
thinkers. Even after the more violent forms of Revolu-
tion had passed away, and the old institutions and condi-
tions had been partly restored, or changes in the direc-
tion of freedom and reform had taken on a more orderly
character, there was for many decades an underlying sus-
picion of the more pronounced reformers. The very
words which indicated progress gained a kind of connota-
tion which was partly irreligious and certainly anti-Chris-
tian. Such terms as “ freetliinkers ” and “ freethought ”
were captured by the anti-Christian party. Many even
in the Free Churches who joined the ranks of reform were
looked upon with suspicion by their fellow-members and
the more conservative of their ministry. But this has entirely
changed in our time. A party, certainly not numerous,
but of far-reaching influence, was formed chiefly among
English churchmen, who called themselves Christian
Socialists. Some of the most pronounced gatherings of
revolutionaries, strong in their opposition to organised
Christianity, and absolutely rejecting some of the first
principles of religious thought, have welcomed the name


of Christ with cheers of recognition, while many of the
leaders of the most revolutionary principles of social life
have been most pronounced in their adherence to the
Christian faith, not a few of them being members and
ministers of evangelical churches. Modern socialism is
filled, both in theory and practice, with the forces that
are drawn from Christ and His work. Some of the lead-
ing churches of Christendom have seemed to observers
to have laid aside methods of former evangelistic character
and taken up the questions of social reform. Even the
most ancient and conservative churches, in the utterances
of some of their representatives, have declared themselves
not unfavourable to the democratic movements of this
age. The ancient gibes against the Christians, that they
were wholly absorbed in trying to save their souls, and
forgetting the evils of the present in dreams of another
world, have become stale and futile. The modern Church
resents the charge that she is on the side of the selfish
and the conservative, and seems very often to be in
danger of forgetting the spiritual and the unseen in her
practical activities and her busy secularism. Nowhere is
the victory of the Personal Christ more marked than in
the way in which men are turning to Him as the model
and inspiration for the aims and energies of the socialistic
movements.
THE GROWING POWER OF CHRIST’S REDEMPTIVE ENERGY.
When we turn to that side of Christianity which deals
with the work of Christ in the moral regeneration of the
world, which we may describe in evangelistic phrase as
our Lord’s redemptive and saving work, we shall find that
the active forces of our modern life are only tending to
bring that energy of Christianity into greater and
more extended application. It may perhaps be urged that
the elaborately discussed theories of the principles of
salvation which moved along the line marked by the great
teachers, Paul, Augustine, Anselm, and were so profoundly
developed by the reformers and the evangelicals under
the guidance of Calvin, Owen, and the theologians of the
Reformed Churches, and were made popular by the dif-
ferent schools of the Puritans, the Methodists, and the
Revivalists, have lost in our time some of their power and
constancy of presentation and influence. This, however,
we think, is a superficial view of the case. We are not
sure that there is so profound and intense a sense of sin
manifested in the teaching and the experience of modern
religious life. Certainly the old phraseology is no longer
as common and as pronounced, and yet it must not be


forgotten that in essence many of the aims of modern
religious activity are precisely the same as those of past
times. The form has changed, but the spirit remains un-
altered. Undoubtedly we do not hear so much of that
graphic description of future judgment and the awful
results of sin in its eternal issues of punishment and
destruction which were formerly the lurid notes of religious
teaching and the so-called preaching of the Gospel. It
must not be forgotten, however, that with this modifica-
tion of the objective and future results of human sin there
has been a corresponding increase of attention to the sub-
jective and the immediate effects of sin in man’s inner
nature and the outer life of the present world. Revival-
ism, as a definite form of the Church’s activity, has never
been so persistently and widely conducted as during the
last half-century. The wonderful achievements of
Methodism in the 18th century, so far as public attention
and excitement are concerned, have been far outstripped
in the labours of the travelling evangelist of modern times.
The crowds whom Whitefield gathered were not so great
as those who have followed scores of modern evangelists,
while the permanent results of these labours have been
no less than were those of the most distinguished
preachers of the past. It must also not be forgotten that
these modern workers have carried on their labours at a
time when all the churches have been themselves engaged
in a far-reaching religious service, covering every side of
human life in a vital and ceaseless activity. The 18th
century saw a revival of religion when the churches were
few and well nigh dead. The Wesleys and Whitefield
sowed the seed upon the soil which, so far as religion was
concerned, might be said to be virgin. The modern evan-
gelist has worked on a region already almost entirely
occupied.
GENERAL INSTITUTIONS OF CHRISTIAN CHARACTER AND
SPIRIT.
Then, again, we thankfully note that the modern world
is everywhere covered with Christian agencies which,
though silent perhaps as to future salvation and the de-
liverance of men from Divine judgment, are seeking
instant reform and the rescue of human souls from the
evils, the present evils, of vice and sin. When we re-
member the numberless movements for reform, for edu-
cation, for the rescue of children, the vicious and the
criminal classes, all of which are forms of Christian evan-
gelism, and with hardly any exceptions are dictated and
sustained by Christian inspiration, even if we grant that


the conviction of sin is not so much expressed as in former
periods of the Church, it seems clear that the work of
Christ as the Saviour of the World from sin is more dis-
tinctly recognised and more widely promulgated than
ever.
WORLD-WIDE MISSIONS.
Our contention that modern conditions have not
weakened the power of the Christian forces centred around
our Lord’s personal work is strikingly illustrated by the
enormous development of Christian missions throughout
the world. The Church in all ages has examples of the
endeavour to fulfil the commanl of Christ to “go into
all the world and preach the Gospel to every creature. ’ ’ But,
compared to the modern propaganda, the world missions of
the past, even in their most striking instances, are insig-
nificant. The multiplication of workers and the success
of missions find their most triumphant illustration in the
last century. The century of scientific progress and demo-
cratic extension has also been the century of missionary
endeavour and success. It is remarkable that the ages
of theological activity and symbolical definition and
ecclesiastical authority felt little impulse for the salvation
of the world. If modern thought and activity have been
undermining Christian faith, why is it that the Church
has so awakened to the sense of the claim of her Lord, and
to the vitality of His Gospel? It is true we do not hear
so much of the “ perishing heathen ” and the “ lost
world,’’ but at the same time there never was such a
stir, never such a sense of responsibility for the rescue of
that “ lost world ’’ and the bringing of those “perishing
heathen ’’ to the knowledge of the Saviour. In former
times an orthodox theologian, who, if he had survived till
now, would doubtless inveigh with holy horror against
some of the opinions of the present Church, could rebuke
a young enthusiast who desired to carry the Gospel to the
heathen. “If,’’ said he, “God willed to save the
heathen, He did not require the help of the would-be
missionary to carry out the purposes of His will.’’ But
to-day the hearts of thousands are throbbing with the
passion to evangelise the world, even though they have
drunk deep from the fountain of modern thought and
modern inspiration. For my part, I think that the real
power of Christ and His cross are with the modern heretic,
if heretic he be, and not with the hidebound orthodox,
whose own soul might be safe, but who knew nothing of
the yearning of the heart of the Lord that all men should
be saved.


IS THE INNER AND ULTIMATE THOUGHT OF THE AGE LESS
CHRISTIAN?
Turning from the practical activities of the Church, it
may be well for a moment to ask whether the influence of
modern thought has not tended to weaken the central
truths and forces of Christianity in their real hold upon
the ultimate thought and conviction of Christendom. The
merely external life and widespread activity of the
preachers of religion are by no means absolute indications
of the permanence and real force of the Gospel. It is a
superficial conclusion when men judge of the strength
and inherent vitality of any human interest by its external
conditions. We must inquire into the state of those
intimate principles upon which it rests. It has been well
said that the dream of the poet of yesterday becomes the
thought of the philosopher of to-day, and the practical
object of the politician and the man of the world to-mor-
row. It is, therefore, important to inquire whether the
undoubted changes in human thinking which the last
century has experienced have really affected the essentials
of Christianity to such a degree as to lessen their power
and threaten their continued acceptance by the thoughtful
and intelligent man. The earlier enthusiasm of the
scientific and materialistic schools led to the most por-
tentous claims on the part of natural science, and perhaps
an apparent outgrowth of the human mind from the prin-
ciples of Christianity which had won for themselves an
imperial place in the thinking of the world. We remember
how men trembled for the Ark of God when they heard
the triumphant cry of the scientific philosopher. He had
found the secret of the universe by his microscope and
■test-tube. The “ promise and potency of matter ” con-
tained not only the new promised land, but the new heaven
and the new earth. The supernatural was banished, and
as for a miracle, the mere use of the word set you down
as a kind of ignoramus, or at least a preacher of ex-
ploded myths and ignorant of the new truth. But this
gush of philosophic novelty has passed away. We are
not sure that “ lonely matter ” has either promise or
potency. The riddle of the universe is still unread, at
least by the materialistic monist or by his idealistic twin-
brother, who does little more than change the names of
things. It is noteworthy, too, that some of the most
distinguished expounders of science have become conspicu-
ous advocates of Christian faith, in some cases out-Heroding
the very Hercds of orthodoxy, and harking back to what
old-fashioned faith and science called superstition. We
do not think that either the speculative metaphysics of


science or the sober conclusions of the critic find their
least cordial welcome in the thought and practical em-
ployment of those who are the most loyal upholders of
the claims of Christ and the most devoted exponents of
His atonement.
THE MIND ADVANCES THROUGH CRISES APPARENTLY
REVOLUTIONARY.
The history of the human mind is that of progress,
marked at certain stages by crises which seem almost revo-
lutionary. Ever since the truth of the Gospel has been
declared to the world, it has experienced these critical
conditions, and has ever emerged from the strife and per-
haps apparent overthrow only with its message more
clear and the claim of its great subject more distinctly
affirmed and acknowledged. Many things that are mov-
able may have passed away in the shaking, but those
things which cannot be shaken remain. The truth re-
cast and restored, like some ancient edifice, the scaffolding
for the reparation of which has been taken away, appears
in all divine proportion with a clearness and beauty which
no other age has ever known.
BUT SOME CHANGE INEVITABLE.
While we thus unhesitatingly affirm the undying claims
of what is essential in Christianity, it would be idle for
us not to recognise that many things once regarded as of
supreme importance have been greatly affected by the
changes of the last century. And it is of the highest im-
portance that these should be noted, both for the sake of
securing honesty of thought to the Church and for the
modification of our practical methods to meet the claims
of our social life and the needs of the world. Whatever
may have been the policy of the Church in the past, and
the advantages which may have been secured by methods
of compromise and discrimination, the present temper of
the world is ill-suited to anything but the most absolute
and clear understanding of our position and definition of
the truth. We do not mean by this that we are called
upon to present our belief in accurately defined formulae,
especially in regard to subjects which can only be matters
of opinion and where man moves with uncertain footsteps
in dimly apprehended ways. This wxmld be to fall into
what we regard as the errors of our fathers, who were so
certain about what they did not know that they did not
hesitate to pursue with fire and sword those who differed
from them. Neither do we regard it as either unwise or
injudicious to be reticent about many questions in respect


to which the temper of others may be such as to make
any dealings with the subjects likely to do more harm
than good. The error of the over-confident confessionist
may be repeated by the unguarded affirmations of the un-
instructed sceptic. Still there lies a vast region between
these extremes, and this is the region in which after all
the real practical efficiency of the Christian preacher and
teacher is found. Work in this territory may be suf-
ficiently iconoclastic; and, necessary as it is, the pulling
down of idols, whether in the church or in the forum,
must, run the risk of controversy and opposition. Vener-
able institutions may have to be demolished, and forms
of thought and word that have seemed almost sacred by
their long-continued use may have to be laid aside as not
enduring the test which Divine Providence sends in the
recurring crises of advancing thought.
MODIFICATION OF FUNDAMENTAL PRINCIPLES OF RELIGIOUS
THOUGHT.
We have said that there are certain wide-reaching prin-
ciples of religious thought common to all faiths. In re-
gard to these the new forms of modern thought undoubt-
edly demand modification, and perhaps amplification of
many ideas that have held long and powerful control in
the thought and practice of the Church. Some of these
changed conditions have received an especial attention,
perhaps we ought to say an unfortunate notoriety, by
recent controversies iu connection with what has been
popularly termed the New Theology. Like all contro-
versies, an element of personality has vitiated and dis-
figured the discussion, confining the attention to a narrow
field, and very often with unworthy issues. We shall
endeavour to consider the question in its broadest aspects
and as far as possible away from the spirit of mere con-
troversy.
THE IMMANENCE OF GOD.
It is quite certain that the conception among religious
thinkers, and indeed that of mankind in general, of the
relation of God to men is very different from that of former
ages. We would not say that modern ideas concerning
God are entirely novel. In all ages the conception of
God's relation to man prevalent in our time may be found
both in the teaching of churchmen and the speculation of the
wise. But in the authoritative definitions of the Church,
and in general opinion, God was regarded as remote from
His universe. Whether God was conceived of in His creative
or His providential dealings with the world, the concep-


tion of separateness was much more prevalent than it is
to-day. Creation was the act of a Being, almighty and all-
wise, but in making the worlds He gave to them an order
which, like a machine, held within itself the methods and
forces which should secure their working. Faults and
failings occurred in the moral world in the great fact of
sin, and upon these God descended with interferences and
readjustments and restorations, all of which were still
separate from Himself, so that the Supreme Being, after
acts, whether of creation or redemption, was regarded as
retiring into the seclusion of His infinite holiness from
which He still superintended the organisation which He
had made, but to a great extent left it to the direction of
these creative and redemptive powers, which were a kind
of intermediary between Himself and His world.
EIGHTEENTH CENTURY DEISM.
The 18th century probably gives us the most defined
example of this character of ancient thought. It was the
age when deism was pronounced, and the deism found
in infidelity and in very much of the scientific philosophy
of that age, was responded to even by the teaching of the
Church, in a spirit which rendered the theology of those
times almost as deistic as unbelief itself. Now it is un-
doubted that a change, and a very marked change, has
come over human thought. The far-reaching doctrine of
science as to the correlation of physical forces, and the
tendency to reduce these natural forces to one all-prevail-
ing, all-pervading force, combined with the philosophical
reference of the objective energy to a subjective will of
which we have in our own consciousness the most direct
and highest knowledge, has resulted in an effect upon
human thinking which has given to the conception of God
a far more present and immediate relation to the universe.
In some directions probably this conception of the imman-
ence of deity has become not very far removed from pan-
theism ; but it must not be forgotten that pantheism is
the extreme of the reaction against a mechanical deism,
and that as w y e proceed to define the various points that
arise in the reactionary process, we are compelled to
qualify and to guard our statements, as indeed has been
found necessary in all theological definition in the pro-
cesses of human speculation, when thought, especially
upon the infinite, is driven to its logical conclusion. What-
ever maj 7 be the results reached in the various schools of
speculation in reference to the relation of the Supreme
Being to the universe, it is quite certain that there has been
a great modification in the general spirit of theological


reasoning, and all in the direction of adding to the concep-
tion of the ail-creating and all-governing God that of the a>K
pervasive and all-informing Spirit.
THE INFLUENCE OF MODERN PHILOSOPHIC SPECULATION. *
To this result not only has scientific investigation contri-
buted, but the influence of widely prevailing philosophic
systems has also greatly aided. The philosophic thinking
of the last century has been largely affected by Hegelian-
ism, and it is noteworthy that almost contemporary with
the triumph of evolutionary doctrine in the hands of Dar-
winians, and which seemed at the time to be a victory for
materialism, there has been a most remarkable revival
of idealistic metaphysics. This, combined with the power-
ful advocacy of monism by several vigorous thinkers, has
led to the triumph of a spiritual rather than to that of a
material view of being and thought. The fact is, modern
philosophy, however it may have declined to accept the
principles of the common-sense schools, has been driven
to the final appeal of consciousness, and this must always
tend towards conclusions of a spiritual kind. It is impos-
sible for man to express the conditions of consciousness in
mere terms of the material world. Philosophy refuses to
acknowledge the validity of the statement that mind is
a function of brain, and if the physiologist insists upon
the reference of thought to the simple action of even the
highly organised matter which we call brain or nerve,
then if we are to express this result in terms of monism,
it must be the monism of idealism, and not that of
materialism. Such a result, moreover, necessarily makes
for objective spiritualism, which compels us to reduce the
to an expression altogether theistic. In the
language of a modern writer, the results of the thought of
the last century have been to make theism itself more
theistic.
LESSENED ASSURANCE OF EVOLUTIONARY HYPOTHESES.
It must not be forgotten, moreover, that the remark-
able and swiftly-won victory of the theory of evolution,
notwithstanding the determination of the strenuous con-
troversy which Darwinism provoked, and the defeat of
those who attacked it from the theological side, like all
rapid triumphs, has not as time advances proved so per-
manent a conquest as was at first supposed. It is indeed
true that what may be regarded as the religious side of
criticism did not secure any very conspicuous advantages.
The theologian and the philosopher who ventured into
scientific territory were not too well equipped for the


strenuous conflict. The hosts of the scientists, of whom
in England Mr. Huxley was perhaps the most prominent,
if not the most distinguished, leader, seemed to gain an
undoubted victory. As time advanced the attack on
Darwinism lias chiefly arisen within the scientific ranks
themselves; and, however complete may have been the
acceptance of the doctrines of descent, some of the other
sides of the Darwinian theory—as, for example, natural
selection and sex selection—have been strongly discredited.
The great question, which is after all at the very founda-
tion of the speculation, the origin of variation, has still
remained entirely a matter of debate. Many theories
have been set forth which are wholly speculative, and it
would have been perhaps wise in both combatants had
they exhibited a little more of the virtues of patient wait-
ing.
THE UNDYING INTEREST OF RELIGIOUS PROBLEMS.
Another remarkable feature of the movement of modern
thought is to be found in the fact that some of the most
distinguished expositors of science have themselves turned
with a devotion greater than that which they exhibited
even in their scientific work to problems of most distinctly
religious Christian significance. I need only remind you
of those highly interesting excursions made by Mr. Huxley
himself into the critical study of the New Testament, and
Wall ace’s almost impassioned adherence to spiritualistic
doctrines and their bearing upon man’s relation to the unseen
and eternal world: and when we are also almost constantly
invited by some of the most prominent of our scientific
leaders to consider their inquiries into theological ques-
tions, we cannot but conclude that so far from critical
movements of scientific thought being hostile to a purely
theological interest, they rather stimulate and give em-
phasis to that which we regard as of supreme importance
to mankind. Many lament the apparent religious indif-
ferentism of our time. Examining the facts, however,
that lie beneath the surface of things, and penetrating to
the quiet recesses of the lives of some of the noblest and
most influential men of our time, we find that the con-
trary is the case, and that in no age as in our own has
religion shown its vitality and extended its ever-deepening
hold upon the human heart.
CHANGES IN VIEWS ON SOTERIOLOGY.
It must certainly be acknowledged that a marked change
has come over the soteriological doctrines of Christianity
during the last century. Here perhaps our churches and


those more particularly allied to us in the freedom of our
forms of worship and in our relation to the Puritanic section
of the Reformation have felt that change more than the
older branches of the church. The doctrine of the
atonement, which occupies in the Christologic faith of the
Church a place of supreme importance, has been in all
ages and in all churches a subject of ceaseless discussion;
and it must not be forgotten that, while in every age the
atonement has been asserted, yet the form of its exposi-
tion has greatly varied, the doctrine itself not necessarily
therefore losing its importance. Speaking broadly, we
may say that the view of the sacrifice of Christ as a
ransom paid to Satan, regarded as the captor of humanity
by sin, held a prominent place in the teaching of many
of the Fathers. The scholastic period of the Church was
largely influenced by the teaching of Anselm, who, in his
famous tract in answer to the question of the reason of the
incarnation, replied that it furnished the person who alone
was able to pay the debt incurred to God by human sin.
The most influential teaching of the Reformation was that
which has been associated with the name of Calvin, where
the essence of the atonement is found in the vicarious
endurance by our Lord of the penalty which falls upon the
sinner, and by reason of which endurance there is a satis-
faction and re-establishment of Divine justice, which
makes it possible for the Divine grace to operate in the
forgiveness of sin and the redemption of the sinner. That
this doctrine in various forms has largely dominated the
evangelical churches needs scarcely to be remarked; but
during the last half-century these views have undoubtedly
been greatly modified, and what has been called the moral
aspect of the atonement has more or less taken the place
of the patristic and scholastic theories. Many religious
teachers have declared that no theory can cover the re-
demptive facts, or on the other hand that all theories are
only efforts of the intellect to express in logical terms the
experiences of the moral and spiritual nature. The pro-
tests of the various schools, on behalf of their peculiar
orthodoxies, have become more or less feeble; and while
it can hardly be said that any theological conception of the
atonement can claim to be exclusively orthodox, and its
lessened authority therefore so far represents a decaying
and obsolescent thought, the tendency of the times has
been to regard the redemptive work of Christ as a far-
reaching and an ever-operative force in the moral sphere,
tending ever to the restoration of man to a right relation
with God. The conception of this energy of .redemption
has been undoubtedly made more easy from its analogy to


the scientific forces with which modern human thought
has become familiar.
THE DIMINISHED IMPORTANCE OF HISTORIC REDEMPTIVE FACTS
ONLY SEEMING, NOT ACTUAL.
The relative importance of certain historic facts in the
Christian revelation, such as the crucifixion and the resur-
rection, under these conditions may seem to have become
diminished, but this is only because the conception of the
redemptive power of Christ’s work and its influence has
been enlarged in regard to the sphere of its operation, and
a greater stress has been laid upon the immediate and direct
energy of the ever-living Personal Christ. Rightly con-
sidered, the change which has come over modern theology
has not arisen from the lessening regard to the objective
facts of redemption or to a diminution of regard for certain
sides of the Divine attribute, especially those that lie in
the order of God’s sovereignty, but from an appreciation
of what in former ages has been disregarded in both these
spheres of thought—namely, the subjective influence of
the Glorified Christ and those attributes of the Divine
Being which belong to His paternal relations to man and
to the order of His grace and pity.
THE VEHICLES AND INSTRUMENTS OF DIVINE GRACE.
These considerations naturally lead us to the considera-
tion of another series of modifications of Christianity, the
effects of which have been very striking during recent
times. We have referred to the objective facts of re-
demption, concerning which orthodoxy has declared,
especially in Protestant thought, that they were finished
and completed acts on the part of God in Christ. The
question then naturally arose, how were these finished
works to be applied as forces of redemption to man’s con-
dition? And the answer has been, by the instru-
mentality of the Divine Spirit working through the Church.
During the ages in wdiich ecclesiasticism was fully de-
veloped and regarded as the supreme and only instrumen-
tality of God, this application of salvation to human needs
was entirely in the hands of the Church and its officials.
It was they who interpreted, as well as guarded, the
Divine Word. They proclaimed the Gospel, and,
although faith and repentance w T ere demanded from men,
these conditions only became of power as they were recog-
nised by the Church, and salvation was bestowed through
the sacraments, which were both vehicles and seals of
the grace of God. Protestantism, notwithstanding the
revolt of the Reformation, never entirely shook itself free


from these ecclesiastical forces. Even the churches
which were furthest removed from Rome still retained
very much of the claim to authority, and, to put the matter
in its broadest terms, salvation outside of the church was
regarded with serious doubt and questioning. In one
of the Protestant churches this authority and power of
the Church has experienced a remarkable revival, and
what has been called the Oxford movement in the
English Church and its allied communities —a strange and
somewhat grotesque retrogression to mediaeval conditions
—has been of considerable power and extent. This re-
crudescence of sacerdotalism and sacramentarianism in
English-speaking communities is weird and almost incom-
prehensible, but the fact of it is undoubted. Notwithstand-
ing that it is wholly alien to the essence of Christianity
and to the spirit of the age, it is yet world-wide in its
manifestations, and presents itself as perhaps the most
evident, if not the most vital force, in the Anglican com-
munities. Some of the incidents of this movement have
manifested themselves in pale and often ludicrous
attempts at imitation in the Free Churches; but, in our
opinion, these are only eddies and backwashes in a great
movement which is tending to a reconstruction of all
churches and the restoration of the true and original place
of the Church as the instrument of the kingdom of God.
A NEW CONCEPTION OF THE CHURCH.
We have referred to the present and universal working
of the redemptive power of the Christ as a force cease-
lessly operative and all-pervasive. The Church is not the
administrator of this power, but it is its ceaseless witness.
It is to present the continued testimony of its own life as
the most distinct and completely obedient illustration of
the results of the redemptive force. Where it operates in
the wider spheres of education, society, and politics, the
Church is to be its counsellor, its nurturer, its comrade.
The Church is not the “ garden walled around,” the sole
appropriator of the blessings of this Gospel of a Living
Lord; but wherever the fruits of righteousness, of justice
in human welfare are to be seen —the growth of the seed
which the Living Lord is planting everywhere—there the
Church must be found as a willing ministrant ready to
sow in any soil, to tend its growth in every form, and to
help to the gathering of its life-giving bearing. The fact
is, modern times are only beginning to appreciate
the true character of the Church, which even in its first
age, and under the apostles themselves, began to fall away
from Christ’s conception of the kingdom. This is the real


explanation of that decay of the power of the Church
which everywhere is being mourned. The perception of
the universal working of the saving grace of Jesus Christ
is turning men from the Church so long regarded as the
sole custodian and example of the life of Jesus realised
in the life of men. And the sooner that we, as church-
men, recognise this modification which modern thought is
producing, the sooner shall we both conserve our churches
and take our proper place in the advancement of the
kingdom. We are not quite sure that the real Christian
forces are not to be found in our time outside the formal
organisations of ecclesiasticism. We are, in fact, in the
midst of a New Reformation, far greater and wider in
its range than that which the voice of Luther roused
and the logic ,of Calvin formulated. This is the modernity
which the Pope has banned; this is the secularism before
which our churches tremble and dwindle.
THE RELATION OF CHRISTIANITY TO THE PRACTICAL MOVE-
MENTS OF THE AGE.
We are thus brought face to face with two practical
movements which cry with clamant insistence for the
attention and the activity of the Christian Church. Two
forces have emerged out of the swiftly-moving -activity
of the last century. Though distinct in the forms of their
manifestation, they are really in essence one. In political
life we call it democracy; in the general intercourse of
men it is socialism. In the relations of the peoples of the
world it is internationalism. In respect of the race it is
world evangelisation. Everywhere mankind is emerging
into its true sphere of simple humanism. Equal rights,
equal opportunities are everywhere demanded. The
Western world has long declared for equality, never yet
realised, fraudulently denied by class conditions, and
covered and buried by the militarism which threatens to
destroy our civilisation. The Eastern world has awakened
from its long sleep, and is stretching out its hand for the
justice and freedom which our civilisation has so long pre-
tended to enjoy. Upon the dim shadows of the so-called
barbaric and inferior races the light of a new day is break-
ing. To him who considers wisely, all this is but the
working of the forces of the Living Christ, and we ask
therefore, What is the relation of the Christian Church
to these world-wide conditions? Questions of denomina-
tional union, reconstruction of theological dogma, and the
like seem to us to be puerile, trivial, and reactionary. If
the churches want union, here is a field in the modern
world which demands so much attention and so much


energy that old controversies and separations must be
forgotten in the effort to meet the imperative claims.
What matters it whether an antique order, Episcopal,
Presbyterian, or Congregational, is to be recognized or
defined? We have no time for discussion; there is work
to be done. If men feel themselves called to this or the
other form of ecclesiastical movement, with its special
titles or rites or dress, in the name of Liberty let each
man go his way. But let all men go out into the field
that is so white for harvest. Let us all stand shoulder
to shoulder in the conflict to which we are called. The
rights of democracy must be supplemented by duties that
are as universal as rights. Christ calls all men to minister.
If the Church has vision of this ministry, then let it fulfil
its ministry and teach the men who clamour for their
rights by precept and example to fulfil their duties.
CHRISTIANITY AND SOCIALISM.
Socialism is the service which society must render to
each and all. Surely this is Christianity translated into
the language of common life. The child has to be rescued,
the lapsed has to be recovered, the criminal has not only
to be restrained but to be changed into a good citizen.
Higher ideals than wealth and pleasure have to be set
before the eyes of men. Who can do it better than the
Church of God? It has some realisation of the force of
Christ, and He is the highest example, and He is the
mightiest agent of the true social idea. In the great inter-
national questions which press upon us, can the Christian
Church be indifferent or inert? Christianity is not
national, but human. Are we going to repeat the gigantic
error of the Reformers, who, breaking from the corrup-
tions of the mediaeval Church, left behind many of its
errors, but sacrificed to dynastic and national interests
that conception of the oecumenical Church which Rome so
magnificently elaborated? Why can we not join hands
with the Chiistian forces of every nation, and stay those
jealousies of trade and commerce which bear their fruit
in the preparations for war and the occasional outbursts
of savage strife. Here surely is a region of Christian
service by which our churches can lay aside their self-
centring ambitions, and move out together into the estab-
lishment of the world-wide kingdom of God.
WORLD CHRISTIANISATTON.
In no sphere of service has the modern world so affected
the Church as in the magnificent opportunity which the
age has afforded for the carrying of the, power of Christ


to all mankind. We must not forget that the operation
of an all-pervasive force is determined by conditions
which make it operative at some particular point of space
and time. What is true in the physical world is equally
true in the world of morals and of the spiritual. It can-
not be doubted that Christ is regenerating the universal
conscience of mankind. Through civilisation and culture,
dominated and inspired by His grace, the world is being
permeated. The universal intercourse of mankind is
a condition through which the often undefined and un-
recognised redemptive force is working. Slavery, for ex-
ample, is one of the sinful conditions of our humanity
which Christianity is destroying, and the relations of a
people delivered from that curse must affect races where
slavery still abounds. But this indirect influence is slow
and oftentimes entirely neutralised by conditions alto-
gether immoral and unspiritual. Now, it is the duty of
the Christian Church to supply those more definitely
marked Christian conditions which serve as a leaven by
which the whole being leavened far more readily responds
to those impulses of civilisation which, like man’s uni-
versal liberty, spring from Christ’s teaching and life.
WORLD OPPORTUNITY.
In no time in the history of the world has there been
such an opportunity for evangelisation. Partly the result
of the Christian propaganda, all countries have been
opened to the reception of the Gospel. Through the in-
fluence of modern conditions, the accessibility of the entire
world has been rendered far greater. Thus the physical
and social conditions of our age, themselves indirectly
springing from Christianity—the heart of modern civilisa-
tion —have reacted upon the work of Christian missions,
and made them far more possible than in any previous
time. Hence the century of the victories of material
science and a philosophy in agreement with it, has been
also the century of the development of missionary labour
unparalleled even in the apostolic age itself. Science may
have sought to weaken the intellectual validity of ancient
miracles; it has certainly lent the aid of its own miracu-
lous achievements to the propagation and enforcement of
the religion of Jesus.
SOME NECESSARY CHANGES IN EXTERNAL FORMS OF
THOUGHT.
We have thus briefly and by way of general allusion
considered the various ways in which the thought of the
past age may be held to have affected Christian faith.


We have examined it in its intellectual and moral rela-
tions. We have regarded it as it affects both the individual
and the institutions of the Church. In respect of what we
may call the essentials of faith, we have seen that the ten-
dency of the age has only been to a clearer apprehension
of Jesus Christ, and to a larger and more widely spread
application of His work. Extending our view over the
territory of religious thought, we discern the new stand-
point from which religious facts and ideas must be re-
garded, and we freely recognise the necessity of such a
re-definition of the thinking of the time as is evidenced
by movements more or less active in all parts of the
Church. We are convinced that it is necessary to re-
define especially the relation of God to the universe, to
change the conception of miracles, and probably greatly
to enlarge the conception of our Lord’s atoning work,
freeing it from the logic of the scholastic, and setting it
more in a line with modern world forces.
ECCLESIASTICAL AND SOCIAL RECONSTRUCTION.
It is perhaps when we turn to ecclesiasticism and the
social organisation of Christianity that the most powerful
effects of the age are to be observed. On the ecclesias-
tical side Christianity has been largely an institution of
negations. Sacerdotalism is prohibitive. Even the ethical
foundations of conduct and character are prohibitions
centred in the “ Thou shalt not ” of the sacerdotal law.
And the Church has been largely dominated by this
negative spirit. The natural voice of such a temper is
“anathema,” “restrictive rules,” “will worship,” and
everything which has made all forms of churches more
or less unhuman, hard, and unsympathetic. How dif-
ferent from this was the voice of Jesus Christ! For the
anathema of the ancient economy and the modern eccle-
siasticism, he gave the blessedness of a sweet and right-
eous and loving life. Nothing shows the character of the
teaching of our Lord more than His positive formulation
of the golden rule, which, though existing in the far-off
ethics of the Oriental sage, is there negative in its state-
ment, and therefore without any powerful inspiration.
Modern conditions, however, have opened the way for the
positive rules and impulses of Jesus Christ rather than
the negative resolutions and exclusive forms of churchly
ways. To this new spirit the Church must conform
itself, or perish. The new wine of the kingdom of God
has not yet found proper vessels .in which it should be
borne, and the old ones are cracked and breaking. We
have said that there is a second Reformation abroad; we


are not sure that we might not say there is a second and
altogether new establishment of Christianity taking place.
It is the religion of all-pervasive Divine love and human
service. It will not build gigantic structures of splendid
architecture and gorgeous rite in the midst of the Squalid
houses of the people, whose poverty has been accentu-
ated by the exactions of the church-builders. The new
religion will not segregate ecclesiastical functionaries and
religious communities of men and women; but it will
Christianise all human life and carry its divine humanity
into the hearts and lives of all the people. Modern
Christianity will not erect ever higher fences on the
frontiers of nations, and join a revived barbarism in
intensifying the separations between the races of mankind.
It will rather extend the brotherhood of man and establish
the unity of the race, not in a hidden descent from an
original unity, but by making men one by their common
love of God, their common faith in Jesus Christ, and in
a fellowship which ever transcends nationality and race,
and knows no limit but the limit of the universal family of
mankind.
JOYOUS EXPECTATION OF THE FUTURE.
It is then with these views that we turn our face
towards the light of the coming day. This is our “ east-
ward position.’ This shall be our undying hope and en-
deavour. We have no place for rest and despair. We
leave pessimism to the philosopher and the ecclesiastic.
We are optimists, because we believe in Jesus Christ.
Without rest and without haste ” we would march
forward towards that bright future which beckons us. Thus
do we interpret the words of the prophet and the promises
of our Lord. We urge you, brethren, to live and labour
in this large life of faith and love. We are quite aware
that the outlook of our churches may not be very inspirit-
ing, and many conditions produced even during our lives
are full of peril and ominous. But we know that there
are forces abroad more mighty than the evils. Gilead
has still its balm for the ills of humanity. One only can
heal. One only can give to man the new strength whereby
he shall be able to follow the Leader of our souls. Ever
keep your eyes on Him. Listen to His hearkening voice.
Follow Him, and follow Him very closely, and it shall be
yours to behold His triumph in your own age, and to share
in the final victory of God and man.
Walker, May and Co., Printer?, Mackillop-street, Melbourne.








.
-
;■
rT " . ■ r^iSr c _
L* f •
-Jsr .«*• , •,.■ «.>—i-,
' -x ' ' . -• ■- .■ '-
' * : ■■■■ '■■■ .
Zsk- . . —* ‘ «>t 1 . ' - I> _,' _ ■ ~s ' £>' ‘ _ --- *• ( v > "j ' . •< " ’ ->*. --
. " .•- •.--$&- ■■:; .v -sifek'
• -. “•»-'■£*■.,-•■■ - ■' * •' ■“ . ’ . •-> ■ ■ -Z'fCft J- - 7’~'- JL i /■' * r; »----%rw _ *rf


MSi
fe ilSSfe
.4
