

MODERN INFANT FEEDING
WITH UNSWEETENED
EVAPORATED MILK
• PUBLISHED FOR PHYSICIANS


CONTENTS
Chapter: Page:
I ACCEPTANCE OF UNSWEETENED EVAPORATED MILK FOR
INFANT FEEDING 3
II COMPOSITION AND NUTRITIONAL VALUES OF
EVAPORATED MILK 4
111 ADVANTAGES OF UNSWEETENED EVAPORATED MILK FOR
INFANT FEEDING 9
Concentrated Nutritional Values 9
Uniformity 9
Safety 9
Ease of Digestion 10
Hypo-Allergenic Properties 11
IV CONSTRUCTION OF EVAPORATED MILK FORMULAE FOR
NORMAL INFANTS 13
Amount of Evaporated Milk 14
Amount of Water 14
Amount of Carbohydrate 14
Caloric Requirements 14
Feeding Intervals 14
Formula Construction 15
Adjustment of Formula 15
Formula Guide 16
Preparation of Feedings 17
Reconstitution of Carnation Milk 17
V EVAPORATED MILK IN SPECIAL FEEDING CASES 19
The Premature Infant 19
Malnutrition & Marasmus 19
Pylorospasm 20
Acute Infections 20
Diarrhoea 21
Vomiting 21
Colic 22
Milk Allergy 22
Acid Milk Formulae 22
VI A WORD ABOUT CARNATION EVAPORATED MILK 24


FOREWORD
THE PURPOSE of this booklet is to present a concise summary of
generally accepted practices in the use of Unsweetened Evaporated Milk
for infant feeding. It is not intended as a strict guide to infant feeding,
for it is now generally recognised that the nutritional requirements of
infants vary so greatly that in each case the treatment must be individual.
In view of the wide acceptance of Unsweetened Evaporated Milk as
an excellent milk for the construction of infant feeding formulae, it is felt
that this summary of present-day knowledge concerning its use will serve
a useful purpose.
If the discussion of Unsweetened Evaporated Milk and its advantages
for infant feeding contained in this booklet, prove of interest and value
to the busy doctor and nurse, its function will have been fulfilled. It is to
these groups, the medical and nursing professions, that this booklet is
respectfully dedicated.
Carnation Company Pty. Ltd.,
252 Swanston Street,
Melbourne, C.l.


CHAPTER I
The Acceptance of Unsweetened Evaporated Milk
for Infant Feeding
THE phenomenal growth in the acceptance of Evaporated Milk as a
food for infants dates back only to the late 1920’s when the first
clinical reports of Brennemann, Marriott, Kerley and others were
published.
Since that time a steady flow of research has confirmed the earlier find-
ings that Evaporated Milk is a superior form of milk for infant-feeding.
Babies who receive Evaporated Milk feedings have been shown to compare
favourably with breast-fed infants in their nutritional state and general
development. There is ample evidence in the literature to prove that
Evaporated Milk is easily digested, well tolerated, safe, and of extremely
uniform composition and quality.
In the latest edition of their textbook, Paterson and Forest Smith (1) ,
when speaking of Evaporated Milks, say: “These are on the whole more
useful in infant feeding than the sweetened brands. With suitable dilution
and the addition of sugar a humanised mixture can be made which is
extremely satisfactory in feeding premature, underweight or normal
infants. The unsweetened milks are extremely digestible”. Jewesbury (2)
says the milk “is very easily digested, hence it may be given to babies
with weak digestions, particularly with regards to proteins”.
More recent research in Great Britain has confirmed the experience of
earlier investigators that Unsweetened Evaporated Milk is most suitable
for infant feeding. O’Brien and Smellie (3) , and Sturrock (4) report excellent
results when using the milk for normal babies, whilst Ellis (5) and Ford (6)
speak highly of its merits for premature babies.
Thus through consistent medical recognition Unsweetened Evaporated
Milk has become, in many parts of the world, the most widely used milk
for infant feeding.
(D Paterson, D., and Smith, J. Forest: Modern Methods of Feeding in Infancy and
Childhood, 9th Ed., 1947.
(2) Jewesbury, R. C.: Mothercraft Ante-Natal and Post-Natal, 1937.
(3) O’Brien, M. C, and Smellie, J. M.; Birm. Med. Review No. 5 (1950).
(4) Sturrock, Marian E.: Med. Off., No. 2290 (14.6.1952).
(5) Ellis, R. W. B.: Amh. Dis. Child., 14:80 (1939).
( g ) Ford, Findlay J.: Lancet, 1:987 (1949).
3


Constituents
Human Milk*
(per cent.)
Cow’s Milk*
(percent.)
Evaporated Milk
(Diluted 1 : U)
(per cent.)
Fat
3.5
3.5
3.55**
Protein
1.5
3.5
3.51
Carbohydrate
7.0
5.0
4.62
Minerals
0.2
0.8
0.76
Total Solids
12.2
12.8
12.44
Cals, per fl. oz.
20
20
21
CHAPTER II
Composition and Nutritional Values
of Evaporated Milk
NORMAL cow’s milk contains the principal food components needed
to maintain the vital life processes. Apart from the essential energy-
bearing, tissue-building constituents which it supplies, there are
present many of the accessory food factors necessary for efficient meta-
bolism. Basically, the protein, carbohydrate and fat of cow’s milk provide
for satisfactory physiological maintenance and nutritional balance.
Evaporated Milk is cow’s milk in concentrated form. It differs from
whole cow’s milk chemically only insofar as it is concentrated to slightly
more than double strength in all of the solid ingredients. Table 1 shows
the average composition of human milk, cow’s milk and Evaporated Milk
reconstituted 1 part of milk to 1| parts of water.
TABLE 1
* “A Guide to the Care of the Young Child”, Dept, of Health, Victoria, 1951.
**“The Law requires that all evaporated milks have a butterfat content of 8.0%,
which, when diluted 1 to U, gives this butterfat content of 3.55%.
Proteins
The proteins of milk consist of casein, lactalbumen, lactoglobulin and
split fractions. Their assimilation is known to be 97 to 98 per cent,
complete, compared with 92 per cent, for most other proteins. Further-
more milk contains all the amino acids indispensable in human nutrition,
as listed in Table 2.


Amino Acids Essential to
Human Nutrition
1.
Lysine
5. Isoleucine
2.
T ryptophane
6. Threonine
3.
Phenylalanine
7. Methionine
4.
Leucine
8. Valine
TABLE 2
Carbohydrate
Lactose is the form of carbohydrate found in milk. It is helpful in
establishing a mildly acid reaction in the intestinal tract, and it is thought,
too, to aid calcium assimilation due to the fact that lactose is not hydrolysed
as rapidly as other carbohydrates.
Butterfat
Butterfat is a mixture of triglycerides of various fatty acids. The
characteristic flavour of butterfat is due to the presence of low molecular
weight fatty acids. Certain of the unsaturated fatty acids are known to
be essential for animal nutrition, and are present in cow’s milk in adequate
amounts.
Vitamins
Milk is an excellent source of vitamins A and B 2 and a fair source of
vitamin Bi. The niacin content of the Vitamin B complex is low, while the
vitamin C content is not dependable. Several investigators, among them
Rosenow (7) , Osborn and Mendel (B) , Steenbock et alii (9) , Butcher, Francis
and Combs (10) , agree that Evaporated Milk compares favourably to raw
milk in amounts of vitamin A, Bi and 82. Experiment has shown that the
heat to which Evaporated Milk is subjected during processing has no
material effect on the vitamins which milk can be depended upon to supply.
The addition of vitamin Ds to Evaporated Milk, increasing the potency
to a level of 500 International Units per reconstituted quart (18 fl. ozs.
milk to 22 fl. ozs. water), makes it an excellent and automatic source of
the vitamin.
Vitamin Ds (irradiated 7-dehydrocholesterol) is produced by the irradia-
tion of certain sterols of animal origin known as provitamins. This form
of vitamin D is identical to that produced by the action of sunlight upon
the body, and by the direct irradiation of the milk. Its presence in
Evaporated Milk at the indicated level is checked regularly by bio-assays,
and there is no evidence of loss of potency during storage.
According to Reed and his co-workers (11) there is a sufficiently wide
difference between the therapeutic dose and the toxic dose to permit the
5
INFANT FEEDING WITH EVAPORATED MILK


Vitamins in Evaporated Milk
(Per Reconstituted Quart 1 ; 14)
Vitamin A (I.U’s)
2244
Thiamin (mg.)
0.28
Riboflavine (mg.)
2.22
Niacin (mg.)
1.22
Vitamin D (I.U’s)
500
Important Minerals in Evaporated Milk
(Per Reconstituted Quart 1 : If)
Calcium 1.55
gm.
Phosphorus 1.09
gm.
Iron 0.96
mgm,
physician, if he deems it necessary, to use an additional vitamin D supple-
ment without fear of overdosage.
The vitamins of Vitamin D Evaporated Milk are listed below in
Table 3.
TABLE 3
Minerals
Milk is one of the most important sources of calcium and phosphorus
in readily assimilable form. For this reason it may be considered to be the
most convenient and dependable food source of calcium.
Potassium, sodium, magnesium, zinc, and chlorine are likewise contained
in milk in such amounts that adequate quantities are provided for in a milk
diet.
Iron, copper, manganese, and iodine are found in milk, but at levels
too low to satisfy human requirements, and must be supplied, therefore,
by other foods. Table 4 shows the more important of the minerals
present in Evaporated Milk.
TABLE 4
Physical Properties of Evaporated Milk*
In order to appreciate the physical changes which take place in
Evaporated Milk during processing, it is necessary to understand the steps
in the processing of this form of milk.
*The description given applies to Carnation Evaporated Milk produced at Merrigum,
Victoria.
6
INFANT FEEDING WITH EVAPORATED MILK


Only milk of good quality is acceptable for processing. After milking,
the milk is cooled immediately and held at a low temperature until arrival
at the evaporating plant. Here it is tested for acidity, bacteria count,
palatability, butterfat content and total solids. If the milk passes these tests
satisfactorily, it is heated immediately to a temperature of around 212°F.
to check bacterial growth. It then passes to the evaporator where 60 per
cent, of the natural water is removed. Since evaporation takes place
under vacuum, a temperature of only 135 °F. is required.
After evaporation the milk passes to the homogeniser where the fat
globules are broken down into tiny particles and dispersed uniformly
throughout the milk, preventing the fat rising to the top in the form of a
creamy layer. The milk then goes to the standardising tank where it is
tested and standardised to government requirements for butterfat and total
solids. The vitamin Da is added at this stage and mixed thoroughly by
means of agitators.
Finally the milk passes to the filling machine where it is forced into
tin-coated steel cans, which are automatically soldered, giving sealed, air-
tight containers. The can and its contents are then sterilised at a
temperature of 240°F.
As a result of this procedure, Unsweetened Evaporated Milk possesses
a number of attributes which make it especially advantageous as a food
for infants. Some of the attributes are described below.
Concentration
The concentration of all the milk nutrients into less than half their
original volume makes Evaporated Milk particularly valuable when it is
necessary to reduce the liquid intake yet retain all the milk nutrients.
Uniformity
Evaporated Milk is uniform in composition the year round. Because
of the mixed herd supply of milk used in the manufacture of Evaporated
Milk a more uniform composition is insured than could be expected from
a single herd.
Nevertheless all milk —even mixed milk from many herds—is subject
to variations in composition due to climatic, seasonal and herd differences.
To compensate for these, the milk is made to a standard fixed by the
government which provides that it shall contain not less than 28 per cent,
total milk solids of which not less than 8 per cent, shall be butterfat.
7
INFANT FEEDING WITH EVAPORATED MILK


Sterility
Milk as it comes from the cow is practically free from bacteria if the
conditions of milking are sanitary and the cow is in good condition. Milk,
however, is a culture medium which can sustain the growth and develop-
ment of a large number of bacteria. Milk-borne epidemics are not
uncommon occurrences even today when much has been done to provide
a safe milk supply. Disease bacteria have been isolated from milk, many
of them having their origin in human carriers.
When Evaporated Milk is sterilised in the hermetically sealed container,
it is heated to a temperature of about 240°F. This kills all bacteria which
survived the pasteurisation process, including all spore-forming bacteria.
Thus Evaporated Milk made from clean, whole milk, processed in clean
equipment and given such a sterilising treatment, will keep indefinitely
in the sealed container.
Soft Curd
The triple heat treatment given to the milk in the forewarming,
evaporating, and sterilising processes, causes physical changes in the
proteins. There is an increase in particle size, some bound water is
expelled, and there is a reduction of colloidal surface electric charges.
These changes result in an altered behaviour towards coagulating enzymes
—a fine, soft, granular curd is formed, instead of the firm tough curd of
untreated milk. Furthermore, curd tension is markedly lower. There is a
reduction of free calcium ions, which in turn reduces the intensity of the
calcium-casein coagulating mechanism.
Although there is no conclusive evidence that butterfat is more easily
digested when homogenised, there are some evidences of greater tolerance
for the butterfat of cow’s milk if it is thoroughly emulsified or homo-
genised. There is evidence, also, that homogenisation reduces somewhat
the curd tension of milk.
Less Allergy
As a result of the heat treatment during processing the proteins of milk
are modified in such a manner that evaporated milk has less allergenic
properties than untreated milk.
O Rosenow: Bact. Med. Surg. A., 184:455-458 (1921).
W Osborn & Mendel: Bob Chem., 41:549-565 (1920).
O) Steenbock, H. et al.: Biol. Chem., 47: 89-10° (1921).
(10) Dutcher, Francis & Combs: J. Dairy Sci., 9:378-387 (1926).
(H) Reed, C. 1., Struck, H. C, and Stech, I. E.: “Vit. D”, Uni. of Chicago Press,
(1939).
8
INFANT FEEDING WITH EVAPORATED MILK


CHAPTER III
The Advantages of Evaporated Milk for
Infant Feeding
EVAPORATED milk possesses a number of advantages for infant
feeding due primarily to the modification it undergoes during
processing, as described in the previous chapter. The attributes
which make it especially suitable as a food for infants are discussed below.
Concentrated Nutritional Values
As a result of the evaporation process, Evaporated Milk retains the
essential values of whole pasteurised milk in less than half the volume.
Thus it is possible to give more concentrated feedings than are possible
with bottled milk, while at the same time any desired dilution may be
obtained by the addition of water.
Uniformity
Because of the mixed herd supply of milk used in the manufacture
of Evaporated Milk, plus the standardisation of butterfat and total solids,
the composition of Evaporated Milk is remarkably uniform regardless of
seasonal or geographical location. The uniform composition of Evaporated
Milk is a distinct advantage over bottled milks, which vary in composition
with different herds, different geographical locations and different seasons
of the year. This is a most important consideration in infant feeding.
Safety
Evaporated Milk is a safe milk because it is sterile. The three heat
treatments applied during processing, particularly the final heating at a
temperature of approximately 240°F. after the milk is hermetically sealed
in the can, produce a milk that is free from all micro-organisms. [There
has never been a proven case of food poisoning from Evaporated Milk.]
Deming and Davis (l2) examined samples of Evaporated Milk purchased
on the market and found them free from pathogenic bacteria. Davison (l3)
states: “The evaporation process removes the risk of Brucella infection
(undulant or Malta fever), diphtheria, foot and mouth disease, scarlet
fever, septic or streptococcic sore throat, tuberculosis, typhoid and para-
typhoid A and B fever, and other diseases which can be spread from a
dairy”.


Ease of Digestion
The heat treatment during the processing of Evaporated Milk results in
a soft, fine curd in the infant’s stomach rather than the hard, tough curd
of unprocessed milk. The soft curds of evaporated milk leave the stomach
more readily than the curds of bottled milk and are more completely
digested in the gastro-intestinal tract. It is a well-known fact that the
normal stools of a child fed on Evaporated Milk resemble closely the
stools of breast-fed infants in frequency and consistency, while the stools
of fresh cow's milk-fed infants tend to be harder and less frequent.
EVAPORATED AND BOTTLED MILK CURDS
Left—Suspension of finely divided milk curds.
Right—Large, tough bottled milk curds.
Although there is no conclusive evidence that homogenised butterfat
is more digestible than unhomogenised, there is some evidence of a greater
tolerance for the butterfat of cow’s milk if it is thoroughly emulsified or
homogenised. The fat particles are reduced to a very small size, thus
exposing a greater surface area to the action of fat-splitting enzymes. The
improved digestibility of Evaporated Milk has been demonstrated clinically
by such workers as Dennett and Craig (l4) , Williams and Kastler (15) , and
many others.
10
INFANT FEEDING WITH EVAPORATED MILK


Hypo-Allergenic Properties
The allergenic properties of cow’s milk are overcome to a considerable
extent by the processing of Evaporated Milk. The heat treatment appar-
ently coagulates soluble whey proteins which are generally the allergens of
milk, rendering them insoluble until they are acted upon by enzymes in the
normal digestion process. Cutler (16) has shown that sensitised animals have
less reaction to heated whey proteins than to those unheated. This
explains Ratner’s (17) observation that infants who are allergic to bottled
milk can tolerate Evaporated Milk without untoward results.
EFFECT OF HOMOGENISATION
Finely divided fat particles (right) resulting from homogenisation
of milk compared with normal fat globules (left).
To summarise: The advantages of Vitamin D Evaporated Milk for
infant feeding brought about through the processing of this milk are:
1. It is uniform in composition as a result of standardisation.
2. It retains the essential values of whole milk in less than one-half
the volume.
3. It is more readily digested due to the soft, flocculent curd, and the
reduction in curd tension, and to homogenisation.
4. It is less allergenic because the protein is altered by the heat
treatment.
5. It is absolutely safe because it is sterilised.
11
INFANT FEEDING WITH EVAPORATED MILK


6. It is a dependable, automatic source of vitamin D, providing 500 I.U’s
per quart when 18 fluid ounces of milk are diluted with 22 ounces
of water, which is of course in the dilution ratio of 1 : 1£ needed to
give reconstituted whole cow’s milk.
(13) Davison, W. C.: Am. J. Dis. Child, 49-72 (1935).
(14) Dennett, R. H, and Craig, J. D.; Med. J. and Rec, 136:133 (1932).
(15) Williams, C. T, and Kastler, A. O.: J. Red, 4:454 (1934).
(16) Cutler, O. I.: J.A.M.A, 92:964 (1929).
(17) Ratner, B, and Gruehl, H. L.; Am. J. Dis. Child, 49: 287 (1935).
12
INFANT FEEDING WITH EVAPORATED MILK


CHAPTER IV
Construction of Evaporated Milk Formulae
for Normal Infants
THE fact that formula construction with Evaporated Milk is today
such a relatively simple procedure, constitutes another reason for its
popularity in infant feeding.
There are certain basic rules which govern the amount of food and
the proportion of food substances considered necessary for normal growth
and development. These rules are by no means complicated, but it is
important to remember that no infant can or should be fed by strict rule.
There are wide variations in the requirements of individual infants, and
the formula may have to be modified markedly before the infant responds
as he should.
In the control and adjustment of a formula to a particular infant, the
physician can be guided by three fundamental questions: —
1. Is there normal weight gain, growth and development?
2. Is hunger satisfied?
3. Is it a “good” baby?
If these three questions can be answered in the affirmative, the formula
prescribed is probably adequate.
Evaporated Milk may be adapted to any whole milk formula to which
the physician is accustomed. It should be remembered that 13 fluid ounces
of Evaporated Milk to 17 fluid ounces of water gives a mixture of whole
cow’s milk standard. (Butterfat content 3.5%.)
An Evaporated Milk formula has distinct advantages over a bottled
milk one, since the former is tolerated better owing to its finer curd, lower
curd tension and finely divided fat globules. Furthermore, it can be given
in greater concentration than is possible with bottled milk, although it is
generally used at the same caloric levels, except in special cases where
greater food intake is indicated. It is also much more convenient to
prepare, since Evaporated Milk does not require boiling or cooking.


Amount of Evaporated Milk
At least f ounce of undiluted Evaporated Milk per pound of expected
bodyweight should be given per day. The more usual practice now,
however, is to allow 1 ounce of Evaporated Milk per pound bodyweight
per day.
This amount will furnish the required protein, fat, carbohydrate,
calcium, and phosphorus for each pound of bodyweight, found sufficient
for the bottle-fed infant.
Amount of Water
The fluid requirement of the average infant is 2|-3 ounces per pound of
expected bodyweight. This amount increases as the infant becomes older
and more concentrated feeds of Evaporated Milk are given. In hot
weather, however, and in cases of fever, more fluid may be given, and
boiled water can then be given between feedings.
Amount of Carbohydrate
Of the daily total, not more than 90 to 120 calories should normally
be provided in the form of added carbohydrate, unless the infant is consti-
pated. The carbohydrate may be cane or beet sugar, lactose or one of the
maltose-dextrin mixtures, according to the physician’s preference. It will
be found that for babies up to 8 lb. in weight f ounce of cane sugar (or
the equivalent in another carbohydrate) in a day’s feedings is quite
sufficient, whilst babies above that weight rarely need more than 1 ounce.
Some paediatricians, among them McMahon (18) , McCulloch (19) ,
Adams (20) , and Harris (21) , have reported excellent results in feeding more
concentrated formulae without any added carbohydrate.
Caloric Requirements
It is now generally accepted that the normal infant requires a daily
intake of around 45 to 50 calories per pound of expected bodyweight.
Carnation Evaporated Milk provides 48 calories per fluid ounce, and cane
sugar 120 calories per ounce.
Feeding Intervals
During the first weeks of life the normal infant is usually given six
feedings a day at 3-hourly intervals. At the end of the first month this
may be changed to five feedings at 4-hourly intervals.
14
INFANT FEEDING WITH EVAPORATED MILK


Formula Construction
Using the forementioned rules it is quite simple to calculate a basic
formula for the normal baby. For satisfactory tolerance the formula
should not differ greatly from the basic requirements, although it may
have to be adjusted to the needs and response of the particular infant.
The following specimen formula is given as an example:
Normal infant. —Expected bodyweight: 10 lbs.
Formula;
Carnation Milk (1 oz. x 10) . . . . = 10 fl. ozs. (480 cals.)
Water (2 oz. x 10) = 20 fl. ozs.
Sugar (Cane) = oz. (60 cals.)
30 fl. ozs. (540 cals.)
This formula will allow five feedings of 6 ounces. It provides 24
grammes of protein daily (Carnation Milk 2.42 grammes per fluid ounce).
Adjustment of Formula
Some babies will progress normally with what are considered the
basic food requirements. Many will require more, and must be given a
quantity of food with which they will gain weight normally and are
content. Hence, persistent effort to feed an infant according to theoretical
figures and calculated requirements per pound of bodyweight may lead to
trouble. It is important to remember that formulae must be given to suit
the actual individual, not the average one, and that the best criterion by
which to judge the composition of the formula is the baby himself and
his growth.
Occasionally a baby may have a low tolerance for carbohydrates. This
may be remedied by removal of any amount of the added carbohydrate
deemed advisable, making up the caloric loss by a slight increase in the
Evaporated Milk.
Evaporated Milk is a desirable food when the infant’s capacity seems
small. Both Sheldon (22) and Schlesinger (23) state that Evaporated Milk
is suitable when small concentrated feeds are necessary.
15
INFANT FEEDING WITH EVAPORATED MILK


Age
Months
Weight
Lbs.
Carn-
ation
Milk
Fluid
Oz.
Water
Boiled
Fluid
Oz.
CARBOHYDRATES
(Use one only)
No. of
Feedings
per Day
Each
Feeding
Fluid
Oz.
|
Cane
Sugar|
Milk
Sugar
Dextrins
Maltose
Mixture
Total
Calories
Level Tablespoons
£ *
6-7
4
15
2
3
4
6
3
312
4"1
7-8
5
15
2
3
4
6
3
360
1-2
10
8
17
2
3
4
5
5
504
2-3
12
94
20
2
3
4
5
5i
576
3-4
13-14
10
'20
2
3
4
5
6
600
4-6
15-16
11-13 :
22
2
3
4
5
6f7
744
**
6-8
17
!3 |
22
0-2 |
o
i
o
4
8
744
**
8-12
18-22
13
17
0 :
0
o
3
1 cup
624
FORMULA GUIDE FOR AVERAGE BABIES
The amounts indicated are suggested quantities only and should be
increased or decreased to suit the individual infant.
* Suitable for Complementary or Supplementary feedings. 2 to 2\ oz. may be
sufficient for Complementary feeding.
**Formulae for upper age group are constructed on basis that other foods are being
prescribed. The Carnation can contains 13 fl. oz. (14 k oz. by weight). Total
calories given do not include solid foods. 13 fl. oz.
CARNATION MILK + 17 fl. oz. Boiled WATER = 30 oz. WHOLE MILK.
Carnation Milk is fortified with Vitamin D to a potency of 29 international units per
undiluted fluid ounce or 500 units per reconstituted quart (1 part Carnation : H parts
Water). This milk when ingested in the customary amounts fed to infants will
provide sufficient Vitamin D to prevent rickets and promote optimal growth and tooth
development.
16
INFANT FEEDING WITH EVAPORATED MILK


Preparation of Feedings
After the mother has been given the Evaporated Milk formula she is
to use, the physician or infant welfare sister may consider it advisable
to instruct her in the method of preparing the feedings. Whenever pos-
sible, the mother should be advised to make up a sufficient amount of
formula at one time to feed the baby for a 24-hour period. The following
simple procedure is suggested: All equipment must be sterilised by
boiling. Measure the required amount of boiled water into a measuring
jug. Do not use boiling water. Add the suggested amount of sugar (using
a standard tablespoon or teaspoon) to the water and stir until dissolved.
Scrub the top of the evaporated milk can and scald with boiling water.
Open the can by punching two holes at indicated spots and measure
required amount of evaporated milk into sugar-water solution. Stir well
to mix.
Pour formula into bottles and adjust nipples and covers (do not touch
tip of nipple). Cover the bottles and place in refrigerator or cool, clean
area until feeding time. Warm the formula before using.
Reconstitution of Carnation Milk
The dilution required to give whole cow’s milk (butterfat content
of 3.5%) is 1 part of Carnation Evaporated Milk to parts of
water. Thus, when the contents of the 13 fluid ounce (i.e., ozs.
by wt.) can of Carnation Milk is diluted with 17 ounces of boiled water,
30 ounces of sterile whole milk are available. This may then be used for
infant feeding formulations in place of fresh milk. No boiling is required
since the milk is sterile and the proteins have been greatly modified, thus
facilitating digestion and absorption by the infant. The protein content
per undiluted fluid ounce of Carnation Milk is 2.4 grammes.
For the baby’s first two months of feeding or where complementary/
supplementary feedings are required, or for travelling mothers the
smaller size can may be more convenient.
The contents of the 6 oz. weight can fl. ozs.) made up to 12 fl.
ozs. with boiled water gives the equivalent of whole milk. The dilution
factor is the same as for the 14£ oz. weight can, i.e., 1 part of Carnation
Evaporated Milk to parts of water.
17
INFANT FEEDING WITH EVAPORATED MILK


Added Vitamins
Carnation Milk is fortified with vitamin Da (irradiated 7 dehydro-
cholesterol) to a potency of not less than 29 International Units per
undiluted fluid ounce, or 500 units per reconstituted quart (18 fluid
ounces of milk diluted with 22 fluid ounces of boiled water). This milk,
when ingested in the customary amounts fed to infants, will provide
sufficient vitamin D to prevent rickets and promote optimal growth and
tooth development. All artificially fed babies must be given added vitamins.
It is advisable to prescribe one of the compound vitamin products available.
Vitamin C is essential for the artificially fed baby and is needed soon
after birth. Orange juice, an excellent source of vitamin C, is given
almost routinely to infants.
However, some young babies have difficulty in digesting orange juice
in the quantities they need. Some physicians start their infants on a
concentrated vitamin C preparation prescribing orange juice when the
baby is four to five months old.
(18) McMahon, H. O.: Wis. Med. J., 38-874 (1939).
(19) McCulloch, H.: Am. J. Dis. Child., 67:52 (1944).
(20) Adams, Forrest H.: J. Fed., 33:23 (1948).
(2D Harris, L. E.: Am. J. Dis. Child., 82: 677 (1951).
(22) Sheldon, W.: Diseases of Infancy and Childhood, 1946.
(23) Schlesinger, B.: Nursing and Diseases of Sick Children (4th Ed.). Edited by
Alan Moncrieff.
18
INFANT FEEDING WITH EVAPORATED MILK


CHAPTER V
Evaporated Milk in Special Feeding Cases
The Premature Infant
THE food requirements of the premature infant, with respect to
calories, minerals and proteins, are relatively high in proportion to
bodyweight. At the same time the digestive tract is sensitive and
feeble in function; consequently the volume of food that may be taken
at a given time is small. The food must be easily digested and yet be high
in calories and adequate in protein and calcium content.
Human milk meets the requirements of easy digestibility, but is relatively
low in protein and calcium, and may not supply a sufficient number of
calories in the quantity that can be given. The addition of Evaporated
Milk to human milk in the proportion of one-fourth to one-third of the
volume increases the caloric value and the protein and calcium content,
and adds some vitamin D, all without appreciably affecting digestibility.
When human milk is not available, good results may be obtained with
Evaporated Milk formulae. Moncrieff (24) states that if breast milk is not
obtainable perhaps the most practicable alternative is Unsweetened Evapor-
ated Milk. Ford (6) is of the opinion that an Evaporated Milk mixture is
as suitable as unmodified breast milk for the feeding of prematures. He
reports an excellent experience using a mixture supplying 20 calories per
fluid ounce. This mixture was given in the proportion of 2\ fluid ounces
per pound of bodyweight a day, in three-hourly feeds, without additional
fluid by mouth or otherwise. Ellis (2s) confirms the suitability of the
mixture, and adds that it may be fortified with casein hydrolysate. He
states that the sweetened varieties of condensed milks are unsuitable for
prolonged use in the feeding of premature infants.
Malnutrition and Marasmus
The food requirements of underweight infants are high in proportion
to their bodyweight. Since the digestive capacity is usually low, it is
necessary to supply an easily digested food of relatively high caloric value.
Evaporated Milk formulae are admirably suited to this type of case, and
are frequently used in dilutions of 1 part of Evaporated Milk to to 2
parts of water, with about 10 per cent, added carbohydrate. The number


of feedings per day is usually six to eight, the volume per feeding being
determined by the infant’s appetite, gastric capacity and reaction to the
food.
Acid milk formulae have been used with considerable success for
marasmic infants. (See: Acid Milk Formulae, page 22.)
Pylorospasm
Pylorospasm during infancy, in varying degrees of severity, is much
more common than is generally believed. Many of the disturbances once
ascribed to food intolerance and, for want of a better term, to “colic” are
now known to be due to pylorospasms. Pylorospasm is thought to result
from a hypertonicity or hyperactivity of the pyloric sphincter, particularly
in hypertonic infants, which causes a delayed gastric emptying, over-filling
of the stomach and vomiting, sometimes projectile in character. The infant
so affected is fretful and cries a great deal. Pie may have abdominal
distension and is usually constipated. Such an infant does not gain
properly; in fact, he may even lose weight.
Evaporated Milk fulfils a useful function in the treatment for pyloro-
spasm, since it permits feeding of a concentrated formula in small amounts.
In addition, Evaporated Milk forms small granular curds in the stomach
which pass more readily into the upper intestine.
Mild forms of pylorospasm usually respond to small frequent feedings
of a concentrated Evaporated Milk formula. More severe forms respond
better when the formula is thickened by the addition of a farinaceous food.
Atropine, in doses of 1/1000 grain, or grain of phenobarbital, in a
teaspoon of warm water, fifteen minutes before feeding, is frequently of
value in controlling the vomiting.
Acute Infections
During acute infections, such as upper respiratory infections, some
infants will not take the normal amounts of their feedings, but will tolerate
smaller amounts of the same formula very well. If vomiting is present,
the addition of a larger proportion of water to the formula will frequently
overcome this difficulty. At the same time it increases the fluid intake,
which is desirable in the presence of most infections.
20
INFANT FEEDING WITH EVAPORATED MILK


As convalescence proceeds, the baby’s appetite may increase greatly and
the food must be increased proportionately until it compensates for the
setback due to the infection. At this time the relatively greater concentra-
tion of feedings made possible by the use of Evaporated Milk is a distinct
advantage.
Diarrhoea
When diarrhoea occurs, the formula should be examined. If the concen-
tration is too high, the quantity of milk should be reduced. Frequently
elimination of the carbohydrate will clear up the difficulty. In cases of
severe diarrhoea, it may be necessary to stop all food temporarily—not
longer, usually, than 24 hours. It is essential that the fluid intake be main-
tained. When feedings are resumed, Evaporated Milk formulae may be
used to advantage. The first feeding should consist of 1 part of Evaporated
Milk to parts of water without added carbohydrate. The volume
should be small at the start, usually not more than one to one and a half
ounces. The amount is gradually increased, and then small amounts of
carbohydrate are added until the needed food intake is again established.
Vomiting
Some of the more common causes of vomiting are distension of the
stomach due to swallowed air, giving too large quantities of food, feeding
at too short intervals, infections, allergy, pylorospasm, and pyloric stenosis.
There are certain general principles which are applicable to the feeding
of infants who vomit from causes other than acute infections. Small
volumes of more concentrated food are better retained than larger volumes
of diluted food. The intervals between feeding should be fairly long,
usually four hours, and the food should be one that is most easily digested
and non-irritating.
A formula consisting of one part of Evaporated Milk to one and a
quarter parts of water, with 5 per cent, of added carbohydrate, may be
used with good results. It is easily digested and supplies a sufficient
caloric intake (29 calories per ounce of formula) for a temporary period.
Formulae thickened with a farinaceous food are less easily vomited than
ordinary formulae, and are particularly useful in cases of vomiting due to
pylorospasm, pyloric stenosis, or so-called idiopathic, habitual vomiting.
21
INFANT FEEDING WITH EVAPORATED MILK


Colic
Colic has been ascribed to many causes such as intestinal fermentation,
allergy, difficulty in digesting the tough curd of ordinary milk, overfeeding
and underfeeding. The cause of colic should be determined, if possible.
Frequently it is due to excessive air-swallowing, a common occurrence in
babies who are underfed or whose feeding is improperly regulated. Air-
swallowing can be prevented by proper regulation of the feeding schedule,
but if it does occur the “wind” should be removed by holding the infant
in an upright position after each feed. In the presence of excessive
intestinal fermentation the added carbohydrate should be reduced or
eliminated temporarily from the formula.
Milk Allergy
Food allergy may manifest itself in infants by a variety of symptoms,
including eczema, colic, abdominal pain, vomiting or asthma. Frequently
the allergen is the protein of cow’s milk. In the majority of cases milk
allergy is due to the sensitivity of soluble whey proteins lactalbumen
and lactoglobulin.
The heat treatment during the processing of Evaporated Milk is
believed to coagulate the soluble whey proteins, thus “desensitising”
Evaporated Milk so far as these factors are concerned. This may explain
why Evaporated Milk is well tolerated in many cases of milk allergy when
untreated milk cannot be used.
Acid Milk Formulae
The value of acid milk mixtures, particularly in special feeding cases
such as marasmus and malnutrition, has been recognized since the earlier
reports of Marriott (26) (27) , and Hess (2B) . Many paediatricians feel that
these mixtures offer no particular advantages for normal infants, and
that their value is limited to special feeding cases. In acid milk formulae
the curd is pre-formed and flocculent, and does not clot in the stomach,
though it may be pointed out that the curd formed in the stomach with
unacidified Evaporated Milk is also soft and flocculent. The alkalinity
of cow’s milk is greater than that of human milk, and sometimes inhibits
the action of peptic enzymes; therefore, the use of an acid formula
overcomes this difficulty.
Marriott’s (29) lactic acid formula consists of 10 ounces Evaporated
Milk, 15 ounces water, 1 ounce carbohydrate, and 80 drops of lactic acid.
Williams and Kastler (ls) found that the infants tolerated Marriott’s
formula better when it was diluted one-third by volume with sterile water.
22
INFANT FEEDING WITH EVAPORATED MILK


Formulae made with lactic acid are very unpalatable, and often cause
vomiting. In the opinion of Nicholson (30) a much more satisfactory mixture
can be made by acidifying Evaporated Milk with fresh lemon juice, which
not only does the work well, but also provides an easy method of giving
the antiscorbutic. One teaspoon of strained lemon juice should be used
for each 3 ounces of Evaporated Milk in the formula.
(24) Moncrieff, A. A.; Infant Feeding, 1946.
(25) Ellis, R. W. B.: Practitioner, 164:979 (1950).
(26) Marriott, McK.: J.A.M.A., 81:2007 (1923).
(27) Marriott, McK.; J.A.M.A, 89:862 (1927).
(28) Hess, A. F., and Matzner, M. J.: J.A.M.A,, 82:1604 (1924).
(29) Marriott, McK., and Schcenthal, L.: Arch. Fed., 46:135 (1929).
(30) Nicholson, P.: J. Med. Soc. New Jersey, 28:212 (1931).
23
INFANT FEEDING WITH EVAPORATED MILK


CHAPTER VI
A Word About Carnation Evaporated Milk
INNUMERABLE clinical studies have shown that Evaporated Milk
is pre-eminent for the feeding of normal, premature and sick infants.
The qualities of the milk have been discussed in the preceding pages.
Whilst it is true that the composition of all Evaporated Milk is
essentially the same, as fixed by Government standards, there are other
important factors which make Carnation Milk outstanding in quality and
an infant food which may be prescribed with every confidence. Some
of these factors are:—
1. Proper care in selection and improvement of raw milk sources.
The dairymen selected as suppliers to the Carnation Plant are given
the benefit of breeding, feeding and production experiments, as
a means of improving their herds.
2. Trained supervision in the best methods of handling the raw milk
from farm to evaporating plant. Fieldmen, trained in dairy science,
regularly inspect each Carnation dairyman’s farm, examining the
sanitary conditions and equipment, thus ensuring proper handling
and cooling facilities.
3. Rigid scientific control and supervision of all steps in the processing
of the milk. At the evaporating plant the raw milk must pass rigid
tests for cleanliness, acidity, temperature, butterfat and total solids
content. The milk is processed in modern, sanitary equipment,
according to the latest refinements in dairy technology.
4. Adequate laboratory control of the finished product. A control
laboratory at the Carnation Plant safeguards the quality of the milk
through the various stages of processing. Tests are double-checked
frequently by a central laboratory to aid in maintaining the uniform
high quality of all Carnation Milk.
5. The integrity of the Evaporated Milk producer. The constant
care exercised by the Company over many years in safeguarding
Carnation quality has been amply rewarded. Today Carnation
Evaporated Milk is the largest selling brand in the world and
enjoys the confidence of those associated with infant feeding
everywhere.


