

MODERN
DEVELOPMENTS
IN THE
AUSTRALIAN
WOOLLEN
INDUSTRY


MODERN DEVELOPMENTS
IN THE AUSTRALIAN
WOOLLEN INDUSTRY
THE ASSOCIATED ENTERPRISES
OF
YARRA FALLS SPINNING CO. PTY. LTD.
AND
AUSTRALIAN KNITTING MILLS LIMITED
MELBOURNE, VICTORIA.
AUSTRALIA.


Australasia (including from New Zealand
Approx. Weight.
Lhs.
about 200,000,000 lbs.) ..
.. 852,000,000
South America
.. 487,000,000
North America
.. 328,500,000
United Kingdom
99,000,000
Russia in Europe
.. 150,000,000
France
.. 50,000,000
Germany
37,000,000
Italy
35,000,000
All other European countries
.. 236,500,000
Asia
.. 326,500,000
Africa ..
.. 220,000,000
World’s Total
.. 2,821,500,000
IA has been truly named "The
/\ |ua Land of the Golden Fleece.” The credit
for this name belongs to those pioneers
W i|y who m the early days of the civilisation of
/rv ./V this great Commonwealth expended so
much time, patience, and money m
promoting the establishment of our wondrous wool-
growing industry. Some Australians believe that their
country produces the bulk of the wool supply of the
world. That this is not so is shown by the following table
of the wool production of 1920, as estimated for each
wool-growing country by the National Association of
Wool Manufacturers of the United States of America :
From the above it will be seen that wool grown in
Europe alone is over 600 million pounds weight, and the
South American and African totals are increasing each
year. Australia, however, to-day produces the bulk of
the fine merino wool of the world. The proportion
of this particular quality now grown in Australia, as
against the crossbred or coarse wool, is estimated as
follows : Merino, 66 per cent. ; crossbred, 34 per cent.
This estimate excludes New Zealand, where the
proportion is : Merino, 2 per cent. ; crossbred, 98 per cent.
Parra : jfalls JSptmthtg (Ho.


in 1920 there were thirty-five wool textile mills
registered in the Commonwealth of Australia; since
that date up to the end of 1922 approximately twenty-five
more companies were registered. Prior to the war the
majority of these companies were engaged upon the
manufacture of blankets, flannels, rugs, woollen tweeds,
and woollen fabrics and mixtures. Very few of them
were, however, making the pure wool fine worsteds, nor
did any company set out to manufacture worsted and
cashmere yarns for the requirements of the weaving and
knitting industries, except where they themselves were
engaged upon or interested m companies carrying on this
class of work. Since the war there has been a decided
increase m the number of companies formed for the
manufacture of wool m its various stages in Australia.
We have been told that with the supply of the raw
material at our doors we have a big natural protection
against foreign competition. If the position is analysed in
all its bearings, it will be found that production costs m
Australia to-day are considerably higher than any other
country m the world, with the exception probably of the
United States of America. Wool cannot be bought any
cheaper by the Australian manufacturer, and, after
allowing for the necessarily higher expenditure of
organisation, the extra cost of converting greasy wool into
wool tops m Australia more than counterbalances the cost
of freight from Australia to any foreign port. The bulk
of the machinery required for manufacturing has to be
imported, and this adds considerably to the prime cost of
same. Experienced men have to be engaged to supervise
the erection and running of plants. The cost of buildings,
fuel, oil, power, light, and last, but not least, wages are all
much m excess of what other countries are now paying,
and can safely be estimated as 50 per cent. more. The
contention, therefore, that a natural protection exists
cannot be maintained unless all these costs are placed on
the same level as those of other countries.
I|arra Jfalls (Em
Pg-P*-


The task set before Australians to-day is to show the
outside world that they can compete against all these
disadvantages and produce goods that will first of all
satisfy the wants of the inhabitants of their own country.
The importations of woollen goods and tissues into
Australia to-day are enormous. The population of this
country is bound to increase, owing to the desire of the
inhabitants of the battle-scarred countries of Europe to
seek a land of peace, and also on account of the stringent
conditions now being placed upon Immigration by the
United States of America. The Internal development of
the country is proceeding apace, and the great irrigation
works, which will be made available through the locking
of the Murray River, should considerably increase the
number of settlers who will be secure from the
possibilities of drought, the nightmare of every landowner.
There is no reason, therefore, against our own country
increasing its population enormously within the next
decade ; but work must be found for many people, as we
cannot all be growers of wheat, wool, and other agricultural
commodities. This fact, and the conditions which arose
in Australia during the world war, should be sufficient to
convince any person that every possible inducement
should be given to those who are prepared to risk their
capital m, and devote their time and energies to, the
building up of the wool-manufacturing industry in this
Commonwealth.
On the following pages are shown some details of the
organisations known as Yarra Falls Spinning Co. Pty.
Ltd. and Australian Knitting Mills Ltd. The former
Company has two distinct mills: one for the manufacture
of wool tops and yarn, and the other for weaving high-grade
worsted cloths. These two mills are described and
illustrated m separate sections m the following pages.
Australian Knitting Mills Ltd. is an associated enterprise,
and the wool yarns which are used m the manufacture
of its products are all supplied by Yarra Falls Spinning
Co. Pty. Ltd,


Yarra Falls Spinning Company Pty. Ltd.
Melbourne Directors :
William Lawrence Baillieu, Chairman.
Ernest Marsh Pearce, Vice-Chairman.
Frederick Farquhar Robinson. James Edward Thyne. Fred Hill.
Arthur Hordern.
London Directors :
Sir Henry Whitehead. William Sydney Robinson.
Technical Adviser : Managing Director :
Sir Henry Whitehead. Frederick Farquhar Robinson.
Secretary : Works Manager :
Arthur Waddington Briggs. Harry France.
Bankers ;
Bank of Australasia, Melbourne.
Union Bank of Australia Limited, Melbourne and London.
Solicitors ;
Sir Arthur Robinson & Company, Collins Street, Melbourne.
Registered Office :
Johnston Street, Abbotsford, Victoria, Australia.
Telegraphic Address ; “Yarrafalls,” Melbourne. Telephone J 3116.
London Office;
27 Old Broad Street, London, E.C., 2.
Combing and Spinning Mills ; Johnston Street, Abbotsford, Victoria.
Weaving and Finishing Mills : Trenerry Crescent, Abbotsford, Vic.
Representing in Australia
Sir Titus Salt, Bart., Sons & Co. Ltd., Saltaire, Yorkshire, England,
for Fancy Worsted Coatings.
Sir Henry Whitehead, Young Street Mills, Bradford, England, for all
classes of Spun Yarns.


The principal products of the Company’s mills are :
Wool Tops—Merino and Crossbred, Oil or Dry
Noble combed.
Yarns —Worsted and Cashmere for Weaving and
Knitting.
Worsted Cloth —Fine Botany Worsted Coatings,
Dress Goods, Mixtures, and Fancies.
The Company now comprises the following interests :
Sir Henry Whitehead ] All of Sir Titus Salt, Bart.,
Ernest Henry Gates Sons & Co. Ltd., Saltaire,
Arthur James Hill J Yorkshire, England.
P. H. PEARCE & Son, Melbourne, Victoria.
Australian Knitting Mills Ltd., Richmond, Vic.
The first chairman of the Company was the late
Philip Henry Pearce. Mr. Pearce took a very great
interest m the creation of the Company, and his loss is
deeply regretted.
To establish the industry on a large scale has been the
aim and object of the formation of the Company. The
proprietors recognised that only by installing the very best
and most modern types of machinery could they hope to
be able to compete against the imported article. The
results achieved are illustrated in the following pages.
Uarra 4FaUs (Ea.


The primary objects of the Company are the combing
and spinning of wool into yarn required for all classes of
hosiery and worsted cloth manufacture. The sum of
nearly £500,000 has already been expended by the
Company on this branch in buildings and necessary
machinery alone. Operations were started, in the wool
combing department, early in 1919, and the first yarn was
produced towards the end of that year.
The carding and combing plant comprises the very
latest types of machines required for this work, and at
present is capable of producing over 2,500,000 lbs. weight
of Wool 1 ops per annum. This represents about 15,000
bales of greasy wool per year. This greasy wool has
first to be sorted to type, and then each type has to be
thoroughly blended m order to obtain a uniform product.
1 he Sorted Wool is scoured and dried, and then passes
through a series of machines with the object of firstly,
making the fibres parallel, and secondly, removing any
burrs, seeds, and short staples. The first machine is the
Carding Engine, which extracts the bulk of burrs and
Se u* l *1“ turns out what is called a Sliver of wool, in
wmch the fibres are parallel. After passing through some
subsidiary machines, the Sliver is placed in a Noble
Comb, which extracts the Noils, i.e., short staples ; the
wool then passes through finishing machines, and the
prodiict is then what is known as a Wool Top. In the
combing and finishing machines an extremely important
factor is the accurate setting of the combing pins. A large
portion of the Company’s production of Wool Tops is
now exported to Japan, but it is anticipated that eventually
the whole quantity will be spun into yarn at the Company’s
mills.
In the yarn departments there are two distinct systems
for converting Wool Tops into Yarn, viz., frame spinning
for weaving and worsted knitting yarns, and mule
T g , £? as^mere y arns - Where colours are required
the Wool Tops are dyed before passing through the
drawing machinery.
Ifarra JJalls Jiptmthty (Urn
Pu-Tt&-


For Frame-spun Yarn the first process is the Open
and Cone Drawing. This machinery gradually draws
out the fibres, reducing the diameter of the Sliver, and
at the same time imparting a slight twist. The last
machine, which is called the Cone Rover, produces
what is technically known as Roving. This Roving is
then placed m either a Cap, Flyer, or Rmg-spmning
Frame ; these are the different types of spinning frames
necessary for the production of various types of yarn in a
sfingle count. This single yarn is then twisted on a
Twisting Frame into two, three, or four fold yarn as
required, and finally is wound on to cardboard cones or
tubes for the knitting or weaving mills. For the weaving
mill the yarn is wound by means of a Warping Machine
on to large beams, which hold sufficient yarn for the warp
threads of from 400 to 500 yards of cloth.
For Cashmere Yarn the French Drawing system is
used. This system reduces the diameter of the Sliver,
but the fibres are held together by a rubbing motion,
instead of twisting, as in the other system. The Roving
from this set of machines is then spun on a Mule Spinning
Frame, which produces the single cashmere yarn used
at the knitting mills. When two or more fold yarn is
required, twisting and winding operations are necessary.
By means of the Flumidlfying Plant moisture is
sprayed into the air throughout the combing and spinning
mill, m order to secure suitable atmospheric conditions.
The total weekly production from the spinning
department is now approximately 25,000 lbs. weight of
Yarn. Further orders for machinery have been placed,
and before the end of this year the output of yarn should
be considerably increased. All the machinery necessary
for spinning has been chosen by Sir Flenry Whitehead,
of Saltaire, one of the leading British spinners of to-day.
There are now about 600 employees, the principal workers
living near the mills in houses owned by the Company, for
which a low rental is charged.


Combing and
Spinning Mill.
Sorting Wool
Yarra Falls Spinning Co,
Pty. Ltd.


Blending Wool.
Baling
Sorted Wool.


Sorted Wool
Store.
Scouring
the Wool
"WiL jC<l *


Scoured Wool
ready for Carding.
Worsted
Carding Engines
(showing Autoralic Feeders).
Yarra Falls Spinning Co,
Pty. Ltd.


Another view of
the Worsted
Carding Engines.
Noble
Combing Machines.
I|ar«i .lialls i!n.
s jTas %
Ip*i* I 1 *™-


Finishing
Wool Tops.
Pinsetting
Department.


Packing Wool Tops
for Export.
Cartage of
Wool Tops for
Export.


Dyeing and
Backwashing
Wool Tops.
Open and Care
Drawing.
Ifiills Jljaiimiiitji Cli-
ps- P tt -


Reducing Frames
(Open and Cone
Drawing).
Cone Rovers.


Cap, Flyer, and
Ring Spinning
Farmes
Ring Twislers.
Yarra Falls Spinning Co,
Pty. Ltd.


Winding.
warping.


French
Drawing.
F rench
Drawing.
Yarra Falls Spinning Co,
Pty. Ltd.


Male
Spinning.
Mule
Spinning.


Yarn Storage
and Packing.
Humidifying
Plant.
Yarra Falls Spinning Co,
Pty. Ltd.


The spinning of the yarn is the first essential process
towards the manufacture of cloth, and in order to find
an outlet for some of its production of yarn the
Company decided to install a weaving plant.
The plans and specifications for the buildings were
drawn out and completed under the direct supervision of
the Saltaire partners of the Company, who also purchased
all the necessary plant and machinery, which is of the
very latest and best type used m the world to-day.
Construction was started about August, 1921, and the
first looms were m commission by May, 1922. The
buildings have been so laid out that both sections,
weaving and finishing, can be more than doubled m their
present capacity. The plant to-day is capable of turning
out over 18,000 yards of cloth weekly. Only fine worsted
cloths of the best type are now being made, more especially
for the Dress Goods and Coating trade, and the cloth
has met with a very favourable reception from the leading
wholesale buyers m Australia.
Over £lOO,OOO has been spent on this section to date
in land, buildings, and machinery. The following pages
illustrate the various departments :
"Harm Jfalls spinning (Hen
■pltg,


Drawing and
Twisting-in
Warps.
Wearing.
IdlJlL &lO*


Grey Cloth as
received from
Looms
Mending
Room.
Ifarra lliilb Co,
|itij. ICtt.


Crabbing
Machine.
Cloth-scouring
Machines.


Piece Dyeing
Machines.
Tentering
Machine.


Cutting Machines.
Wet and Dry
Blowing
Machines
Yarra Falls Spinning Co,
Pty. Ltd.


Cloth-finishing
Room
Rigging and
Cutting Machine.
Yarra Falls Spinning Co,
Pty. Ltd.


Finished Cloth.
Steam Boilers
far Dyeing and
Finishing.
I:liirrn Ifalls ,Sfiiiiwt«3 Cp,


Authorised Capital
.. £450,000
10,000 Preference shares of £ 1 each
£10,000
440,000 Ordinary shares of £1 each
440,000
Total .. £450,000
Subscribed Capital on
10,000 Preference shares of £1 each
350,000 Ordinary Shares of £ I each
1st January, 1923.
£10,000
350,000
Total
£360,000
Australian Knitting Mills Limited
Board of Directors :
Frederick Farquhar Robinson, Chairman.
James Edward Thyne. Norman Robinson. Herbert Abrahams.
Maurice Howard Bailheu. Gerald Henry Robinson.
General Manager : Secretary ;
James Edward Thyne. Sinclair Thyne.
Bankers ;
Union Bank of Australia Limited, Melbourne.
Solicitors :
Sir Arthur Robinson & Company, Collins Street, Melbourne.
Auditor :
E. H. Shackell, F.C.P.A., Collins Street, Melbourne.
Registered Office :
Stewart Street, Richmond, Victoria, Australia.
London Office :
27 Old Broad Street, London, EG., 2.
Cable Address : “Hosiery,” Melbourne. Telephone J 4117.
(Australian TiJills
JChwteh.


Associated with Yarra Falls Spinning Company
Proprietary Limited is Australian Knitting Mills Limited,
of Richmond, Victoria. Twenty years ago this Company—
then only a small proprietary firm —carried on business as
manufacturers of knitted goods, all made from imported
yarns ; about fifty hands were employed. Its progress has
been consistent and steady, and m 1910 it was formed into
a limited company, so that new capital could be found to
enlarge and develop its business. To-day it owns and
occupies extensive freehold premises at Richmond,
adjoining the Railway Station, practically m the centre of
one of the most popular working districts of Victoria.
New buildings are now being erected for the
accommodation of what is termed the Worsted Knitting
Department. When finished, these mills will rank
amongst the most modern and up-to-date structures of
their kind ; strict attention has been devoted to obtaining
the best possible working conditions for the employees.
This Company is noted throughout Australia as the
sole manufacturers of the famous “Golden Fleece ’ and
“Kookaburra” brands of underwear. The output to-day
from both sections is over 2,000 dozen garments per week,


and this Includes all classes of Fine Cashmere Underwear
for men, women, and children, also Sports Coats, Jerseys,
Knitted Suits, Bathing Costumes, etc. Approximately
500 hands are now employed at these mills, and this
number will be considerably increased when the installation
is completed of further plant and machinery, which is now
being added, all of the very latest type.
To the Directors of this Company the formation of
Yarra Falls Spinning Co. Pty. Ltd. is largely due, and at
present more than half of the paid-up capital is invested
with that Company. As far back as 1912 they endeavoured
to secure the interest and co-operation of some of the
leading British spinners in the establishment of mills for
the manufacture of Spun Yarn. It was not until after
the war eventuated, and yarn supplies of all kinds reached
enormous prices, that they were able to obtain the
practical and technical assistance from Great Britain to
help in this direction. Now the Australian public are
assured of constant supplies, and will always be able to
obtain their requirements of knitted woollen goods at
reasonable prices. The association, therefore, of this
Company with Yarra Falls Spinning Co. Pty. Ltd. has
been a distinct advantage to Australia, as the whole of the
worsted and cashmere yarn required can now be obtained
from that Company spun from Australian wool.
The manufacture of the knitted garment throughout
its various stages from the yarn to the finished article is a
process of considerable interest. Some idea of the
numerous processes, and the machinery used in connection
therewith, can be formed after viewing the accompanying
photographs. The care and attention by the Company in
each process of the manufacture and finish of every
garment largely accounts for the popularity accorded to
their products by the buying public of Australia.
The welfare and comfort of employees are carefully
studied, and movements that tend in this direction always
receive practical support from the Company.
TC trait pb,


New Building for
Worsted Knitting
Winding Yam for
"Golden Fleece"
Underwear.


Knitting
“Golden Fleece”
Underwear.
Scouring the
Web for
"Golden Fleece"
Underwear


Drying Wed for
"Golden Fleec"
Underwear
Finishing Room,
“Golden Fleece"
Underwear,


Pressing and
Packing
"Golden Fleece"
Underwear.
Worsted Knitting
for Sports Coats,
Jerseys, etc.


Worsted
Finishing Room.
Pcking Coloured
Worsted Goods.


Packing White
Worsted Goods.
Yarn Store.
Wholly set up and printed in Australia by D. W. Paterson Co. Pty. Ltd.
495 Collins Street, Melbourne.
Yarra Falls Spinning Co,
Pty. Ltd.
