

PWIO'J
MONEY versus WEALTH
—OR THE—
ORIGIN OF INTEREST
CLEARLY EXPLAINED BY A PUPIL OF
HENRY GEORGE & JOHN RUSKIN.
RESPECTFULLY DEDICATED BY THE AUTHOR TO
SIR HENRY PARKES
AND ALL LAVV-OBSERVING LABOUR-UNIONISTS OF AUSTRALIA.
PRICE
SIXPENCE.
cSsbiuju :
H. T. DUNN AND CO., POINTERS, QUEEN’S CIIAMISEX;.S, QUEEN’« PEACE.




MONEY versus WEALTH
—OR THE—
ORIGIN" OF INTEREST
CLEARLY EXPLAINED BY A PUPIL OF
HENRY GEORGE & JOHN RUSK IN.
RESPECTFULLY DEDICATED BY THE AUTHOR TO
SIR HENRY PARKES
AND ALL LAW-OBSERVING LABOUR-UNIONISTS OF AUSTRALIA.
H. T. DUNN AND CO., PRINTERS, QUEEN’S CHAMBERS, QUEEN’S PLACE.


“ Lo ! Wc bring into bondage our sons and our daughters to
be servants, and some of our daughters are brought into bondage
already : neither is it in our jwwer to redeem them ; for other
men have our lands and vineyards .”
And 1 was very angry when I heard their cry and these
words.
Then I consulted with myself, and I rebuked the nobles and
the rulers and said unto them, “ Ye exact usury every one of his
brother ,” and I set a great assembly against them.
Nehemiah v., vv, 5-7.
N.Jj.—For Ezekiel’s opinion on English “economics,” the reader
will please consult the note at the end of this pamphlet.


so ru <
PREFACE.
The writer of this pamphlet is au Australian working man and a
graduate of the University of London. He claims to have com-
pletely harmonised the teachings of the two economists of the
nineteenth century —the doctrines of the authors of “ Munera
Pulveris ” and “ Progress and Poverty.”
Rent has been long denounced, and its nature and origin are
familiar to every student of economics. Interest is here unveiled
and all the imprecations of modern Socialists, and all the
anathemas of ancient Socialists (such as Ezekiel) are fully justified
by the result of logical analysis.
The writer concludes with a challenge.


“ A very long discussion is one of the most effectual veils of
Fallacy. Sophistry, like poison, is at once detected and nauseated
when presented to us in a concentrated form ; but a Fallacy,
which when stated barely in a few sentences would not deceive a
child, may deceive half the world if diluted in a quarto volume.”
Whately.


MONEY oersus WEALTH
ROBABLY more than ninety-nine people out of a hundred,
if asked, what is the question of the hour, would reply—
“ Capital versus Labour.” But they would be, one and all, in
error; but only in error as regards their mode of expression.
There can be no contention between a spade and a man. And if
you should stand corrected and say the great topic which is
demanding the close attention of all thinking men the world
over, and even, during strike time, compels the thoughtless by
appeal to that organ which does duty with him for a brain (I
mean his stomach) to ask what it is all about; if you were to
correct yourself and say, the Capitalist versus the Labourer, you
would be again wrong though less absurdly wide of the mark.
To avoid all appearance of hair-splitting and of cultivating
paradoxes, I will say at once that what the hundred out of a
hundred do mean, is the moneyed man versus the un-moneyed
man ; in other words the Rich versus the Poor.
The question will be greatly simplified if we can get a right
understanding of Money. Hard as it is to get Money in the
everyday struggle for that article, and harder as it is to keep it
when coals are going up, it is considered harder still to understand
what Money is.
Let not the reader here turn away with a shrug of the
shoulders and sneer, “ Political Economy again,” or what is the
same thing, “ dry hash.”
Political Economy, there is no question, is in bad odour with
the reading public, but amongst that small section who think as
well as read, there are many earnest men girding up the loins of
their mind and making a solemn vow in the sanctuary of their
own mind to wrest from its owner the Sphynx-riddle of the
future —or to perish in the attempt. The intellectual atmos-
phere of the world is visibly palpitating with the electric currents
of thought, and between the poles of the circuit, becoming white
hot , is the Labour question.


The writer of this article is firmly persuaded that the
revolution by which will lie brought in—the Millenium of Labour
—will be peaceful ; the pen is to-day mightier than the sword.
Apologising for this well-worn aphorism which smacks of the
seventh-rate debating society, I will now proceed to examine the
term Money. Edward Bellamy, whose name excites responsive
chords of sympathy in the hearts of those who are not altogether
occupied in making to themselves friends of the Mammon of
unrighteousness, with a view either to this world or the next, —
the author of “ Looking Backward,” has recently added a post-
script to his world-renowned I took. In it he writes—“ As an
iceberg floating Southward from the frozen North, is gradually
undermined by warmer seas, and, become at last unstable, churns
the sea to yeast for miles around by the mighty rockings that
portend its overturn, so the barbaric industrial and social system,
which has come down to us from savage antiquity, undermined by
the modern humane spirit, riddled by the criticism of economic
science, is shaking the world with convulsions that presage its
collapse.”
The italics in the above quotation are mine. It is the
intention of the present writer to put a humble nail into the coflin
of this so-called science. No coffin is required for true Science.
True Science, or to be brief, Science, deals with universal and
eternal laws, and like its subject matter is immortal.
To say that economic science is “riddled” is to understate the
facts. It is thrown down and ground into powder. But these
tilings are only subjective and of two minds, the same thing may
be at once prostrate to the one and erect before the other.
I don’t wish to haggle about trifles or, to use the economic
term, to “ higgle,” but I do most strongly protest against the
improper and illegitimate and totally unwarrantable use of the
adjective “ political.”
Political Economy is Government in the widest sense. This
“science” then should content itself with some less comprehensive
name. Economies of Industry or Industrial Economy, let us call
it. That a “science” which proceeds upon the cool hypothesis that
all the wealth produced should be given up by the workers to the
Idlers except as much as will keep the worker going,—that such a
“science” should call itself Political Economy or the Art of
Government (!) will be considered in years to come the drollest
of drolleries. But it is a very painful joke for all that. This Art
of Anarchy or No-Government may be very humorous if you
receive dividends and have leisure to trace the vein of wit. But
on the other side there are curses deep and not low,


Call it then Industrial Economy (though both words be
outraged) and let us come to Money. I think that the first light
that ever dawned upon my groping mind as I panted and puffed
and became entangled and fell in the thicket of the Dismal
Science, shone upon it from page 157 of “Progress and Poverty”
where I first learnt that the terms Rent, Interest and Wages are
mutually exclusive terms. That is to say, if the Land-Owner, out
of a hundred cabbages, takes seventy and the Capitalist twenty,
there can only be ten left for the Labourer or Wage-Worker.
Now I do not just here intend to press this point, but I think
it is gravely open to doubt whether the other three terms : Land
Owner, Capitalist and Labourer : are mutually exclusive. If they
are not mutually exclusive then the bottom falls clean out of
every treatise on Industrial economy extant including “ Progress
and Poverty” !
I have my doubts about that Capitalist but shall not stay to
take his temperature until I have examined the terms, Money and
Capital.
All writers upon the subject under consideration appear to
have neglected two essential points. They have no Unit of Spare
and no Unit of Time ! No wonder “ the dismal science ” is a
dismal morass of error.
I wish to call the attention of the thoughtful readers of this
pamphlet to the fact that there is a way by which every disputed
question in economics can be infallibly tested and truth sifted
from error. It is the abstract study of the question by taking
fixed units of space and time.
Now by a unit of space I mean, of course, a given populated
area : say the world, or Australia, or this colony, or Sydney, or
any section of Sydney large enough to be fairly representative
and to embody the existing conditions of industry. The gross
absurdity into which a thinker so well-reputed as Mr. Gladstone
can fall from lack of a mental unit, is forcibly illustrated in a
remark made by him against the Single Tax Scheme.
Mr. Gladstone said that he would be sorry to see the State
take the place of a private landlord and evict tenants ! May 1
ask how a State could evict citizens, except by banishing, hanging
or drowning them. Will industrial economics as a “ Science, ’
fail with the Federation of the World, that distant dream of
poets ? How will the Federated World evict except by execution ?
A palpable blunder this ! And surely it is not in accordance
with the rules of ratiocination to transfer a set of causes from
one set of conditions to another in this holus-bolus way. Suppose


the private individual, the landlord, creates all the trouble (which
is beyond the limit of doubt), will evictions be necessary under
Land Nationalisation 1 The logical fallacy, which lies at„the base
of all extant economic treatises, lies there because the writers of
these treatises have let their eyes rove here and thei’e all over the
world, and have not observed that they themselves stand not on
solid, ground.
This fallacy becomes manifest when Money and the Unit
of Time are considered. Economics is said to be the Science of
Wealth-production, but it will become abundantly manifest that
its subject matter is not Wealth but Money, and when we intro-
duce our Unit of Time the plainest unlettered reader will see at
once that the shadow has been followed and the substance
forgotten. Definitions are always tedious but they need not
detain us long. A man produces wealth who does good work.
The wharf-labourer who humps a bale is doing just as good work
as the University Professor who delivers a lecture upon the
classics. The wharf-labourer can get along without the Professor,
but the Professor would have to come reluctantly down from the
heights of learning and roll casks and things himself if the trolly-
man did not do this necessary and therefore invaluable work for
him. Wealth, therefore, is good work embodied in some object
material, mental or moral. When the desert blossoms as the rose
the resulting state is embodied (or materialized) human-energy-
beneficially-exerted. Generally, when a piece of arid ground is
converted into a cabbage-garden you will find that a Chinaman
has done the good work. I have no objection to Chinamen pro-
vided they will remain in China.
Material Wealth easily and naturally falls into two divisons.
(1 want the reader to forget all the economics he has had the
misfortune to learn, and to dismiss from the subject all men
except the wealth-producer or honest wage-worker.) These two
sorts of wealth are enjoyable wealth and serviceable wealth. The
enjoyable wealth is our living , our daily happiness and hourly
comfort, our food and clothing, books and tobacco. The second
class, the serviceable portion, comprises spades and warehouses,
wharfs, machinery; anything in fact which we do not directly
enjoy, but create as a means for living happily. All these things
are the simplest, without exception, that ever engaged the
reader’s attention. Economics rightly understood is not a dismal
science at all ; it is a glorious Art, it is the Art of living happily
in large numbers.


English economics lias, however, been hopelessly mystified by
the introduction of certain quite temporary English political
conditions, as though anything obviously temporary could be
grafted into a science! When an English economist, say John
Stewart Mill, says that land, labour and capital are the three
factors of wealth-production, and then gravely introduces to me
three gentlemen to correspond, I say No, land is not a gentleman,
Labour is, and capital—is it a man too ?
As I have during the last few months flung myself upon this
mystic science and made it yield to me its ultimate secret I have
been astounded beyond the powers of utterance to be told in a
scientific manual that land is a man and capital another man.
I am certain they are not. I put it candidly to the reader
whether it is not manifest that English economics is a gruesome
mixture of abstract principles and temporary political conditions.
Can such a “science” be Science? As well might you introduce
into Newton’s Theory of Gravitation the fact that the discoverer
was once summoned before Jeffreys.
Wealth then is our living and Capital is the means whereby
we live. Capital is a part of wealth and all is produced by
Labour. But what is Money ?
Money is a documentary title to Wealth including of course
that part of Wealth which we have been describing as set apart
for the further production of Wealth.
Ruskin defines “currency” as the sum of the documents
acknowledging debt which are transferable in the country (page
76 Munera Pulveris). If this definition is intended to include
private cheques and private bank-notes I must demur upon the
ground that their transferability is very limited indeed compared
with that of coin of the realm. I will accept this definition
if the word “in ” be taken as meaning “ throughout.”
Money, then, I briefly define as a State-issued document
constituting a claim to Wealth or as Ruskin elsewhere puts it
constituting a demand for labour. Now this is a definition. The
ordinary statement that money is a medium of exchange and a
standard of value is not a definition. It is a description and a
very worthless description. It may be shown and in a little book
printed for private circulation, not yet put into the market, I
have shown that trade or exchange does not and cannot go on
through money and I can show and am prepared to show that if
we refused to receive private cheques and private bank-notes


(which are not legal tender : which, that is, we are not compelled
to take) business would stand still to-morrow. To say that money
is a standard of value is absolutely the most worthless statement
ever made. A sovereign is absolutely of the same value as a
Government bank-note (wherever such are issued) and the gold
in it may be regarded as altogether wasted seeing that a piece of
tin or paper or galvanized-iron Government-stamped is the exact
equivalent in every respect. If gold be a useful commodity (and
use is the only standard of value) then all the gold which is in
circulation is good stuff’ wasted. .Let the Reader clearly under-
stand then that paper-money is every whit as good as metal
money ; in other words that paper documents (or parchment if he
likes) are every whit as good as metal documents provided that
they have the same stamp—the Government mark. Every such
document carries the credit of the Government embodied in it
and this is the essence of money.
Before I go on to consider the Unit of Time taken in con-
nection with Money or the Documentary claim upon Wealth (or
briefly, the Wealth-document or Wealth-Token) T should like to
make clear the objection to regarding a private cheque as money
apart from the fact that its “circulation” is through limited areas.
To regard a private token as Money merely because it is a docu-
ment of some kind would require us to call a written injunction
from a slave-owner to stop the victuals of a refractory slave as
money because it deals with the slave’s wages. A slave has wages
undoubtedly though he does not receive them in money but in
kind. His clothing, food, shelter, etc., are his wages: they
are the “circulating capital ”of the slave-owner. If he were a
“ free ” European he would be paid not in kind but in tokens, and
upon going into the market he might And that his tokens actually
would not buy the “ living ”of a slave. Men are at this hour dis-
covered (in Australia) “ upon the verge of starvation.” See the
daily papers. The most exquisite piece of logic occurs in the
Scientific Manual of Fawcett where he is discussing the
“ Economics of Slavery !” He denies that a slave receives wages,
and adds apologetically : “A slave is fed but so are the horses.”
Well, I should say that the horse received wages if he were a man.
Let me parallel this. My son is not a wage-worker (being only
three years old); he therefore receives no wages. But he is fed ;
therefore he is a horse.
Remembering then that Money is a document representing
wealth the reader will see at once that it is a violation of natural
law or, which is the same thing, of the Laws of Thought through
which medium laws of nature can alone reach us— it is a violation


of the laws of thought, I Isay, to predicate of the document what
you cannot predicate of the thing represented. Some one (say,
some member of the Sydney Economic Association who has never
observed the grotesqueness of Fawcett’s logic about slaves and
horses) will perhaps say : The title-deeds of an estate can be
carried in one’s pocket, the estate cannot. I will, however, answer
this objection when it is raised. If the question were put to me
in public I think I should “go for” the interrogator with a table
or the nearest reporter.
Now for our unit of time and I invite the attention—l invite
very respectfully but at the same time very imperatively the
attention of all intelligent Citizens of Australia to th“ fallacy
which underlies all industrial economies yet published. I now
leave abstract economy with its Labourer, capital and land and
turn to the English treatises of economy to find the Labourer (I
don’t see how we could get on without this man) the Capitalist
and the Landlord. Let us take any unit of space you like, say
a cabbage garden yielding a hundred cabbages in a given time.
Let us suppose that the Landlord takes as Rent fifty cabbages in
the given time, the Capitalist (who owns the spade with which the
Labourer works) thirty in the given time, and the Labourer the
remaining twenty.
Before going further into this investigation I must say that
I take great exception to these twenty cabbages being called
“ circulating capital.” For this reason, that it destroys the
individuality of the labourer and regards him purely and simply
as a slave. He has no right to the land, except by permission
of the landowner. I admit that. He has no right to the spade,
except by the permission of the spade-owner. I admit that. But
he pays fifty cabbages for the use of the one, thirty for the use of
the other, and yet the remainder is called circulating capital!
Good heavens ! Has the English labourer, the wage-worker,
nothing that he can call his own 1 It would appear not. This
spade-owner plays the most prominent part of all in every-day
life. He is always doing something magnanimous, “ employing
labour,” or otherwise charitably comporting himself. But I will
return to him anon. Notice, just here, how quietly the man who
takes the most retires into seclusion leaving the spade-owner or
capitalist to fight the labourer. I really cannot understand how
it is that the capitalist gets all the kicks in every-day struggles,
and the landlord all the half-pence. Henry George has a terrible
“ down ”on this landlord, but none on the capitalist. This is
strange.


Now for the point. Yon cannot predicate of the document
what is not predicahle of the thing denoted. This is exactly
parallel to the error of arguing about words and neglecting the
ideas underlying the words. It is the same error. It Is chop
logic. “The slaves are fed, but so are the horses.”
We have now a test by which we can infallibly detect any
error in the use of the term “ money.”
The fifty cabbages are the Rent for the given time. The
Land Owner takes these fifty cabbages and through trade gets
them exchanged for what he wants. Very well. Those fifty
cabbages must be consumed in the next unit of time or they will
be wasted. If the land-owner cannot consume them (“consume”
feed, clothe, warm and lodge himself by exchange) in the given
unit of time by the assistance of his friends and family there will
be a balance of rent at the time when the next rent falls due.
Now a balance of rent is a contradiction in terms. There is so
much wealth produced on this unit of space in the unit of time
by the labour of these thi’ee men and a spade. For a landlord to
take as remuneration for the use of the ground more than he and
his can consume in the given time (that is in the next following
unit) is an impossibility unless the vegetables lie about and decay.
Are you following me, you gentlemen of the Australian Economic
Association ? Rent in kind for the given time is some portion
large or small of the aggregate of labour-products resulting from
the labour of the given time. Now the Law of Rent is simply
this that the Landlord lets his land at the highest “price” he can
get; “price” being labour-products or commodities as measured in
terms of Money. The Rent rises by competition and here is the
absurdity of the situation : there is no intelligent calculation ever
made or ever hinted at between the consuming power of the land-
lord and his family and friends in the given time! But if we are
intelligent beings and I hope I am not assuming what ought to
be proved—L repeat that if we are intelligent beings there must he
an intelligent computation made by the landlord of the amount of
the wealth he can consume in the given time. The reader can
now see for himself that English economists have mistaken the
shadow for the substance, the document for the thing denoted,
Money for Wealth ! If a landowner’s rents amount to <£3oo per
annum he must spend it all in the given time for there is no such
thing as a balance of Rent in kind. If there be a documentary
balance where there can be no real balance the document lies. If
then he spends £250 and the Banker “carries forward” £SO and
if (be careful, here) —and if this balance at the Banker’s have any


efficacy or meaning or “value,” it must mean (aie you listening
Dr. Garran, M.L.C., R. R. Wise, Esq., you gentlemen of the
Economic Association and the Single Tax League?)— it must mean
that the Labourer’s future labour is mortgaged or commercially
enslaved.
Reader, this is the origin of Interest !! !
I have one surprise more. The reader may think that I
have forgotten the capitalist or spade-owner and the thirty
cabbages. Interest is said to be, in strict terminology, wealth
paid for the use of capital, for the use of spades, wharfs, &c.
Alas ! Reader, this capitalist is an impostor. He comes in upon
the very threshold of the “ science of wealth-production ” with
wealth already produced and ready for beneficent distribution.
He is therefore crossed out, “ wiped out ” in one act by the rules
of logic. This man vanishes and the labourer’s share still being
twenty cabbages, the landlord’s is eighty, and they must all be
consumed in the given time. Am I followed ?
Reader, you are now in possession, as clearly as my pen can
put you in possession, of the true nature of interest. Let men
inquire no more. Here is interest.
All economic science is upside down. All English industrial
operations are worked upon and originate in these bogus
balances !
All the “savings” in the world, all the bank balances of all
the millionaires in existence are worth, exactly worth in intrinsic
value, a dishonored cheque for the total amount.
No one knows how many in a given city, say Sydney, are
daily engaged in manipulating, adding and substracting this
bogus money.
The only way in which an intelligent community can save is
by the intelligent oversight and renewal of their capital, that is,
wharfs, warehouses, tools, machinery.
The question of Money versus Capital is now elucidated.
Let me end this article with a little practical joke. I propose
to buy out the Landloids. Let us pay them in their own coin.
Come forward Landlords, no matter how many. You own all
Sydney and suburbs except the mainroads, and the wonder is you
haven’t got them too. Calculate the area of Sydney and sur-
rounding district as far as Parramatta. “So many acres.” Acres !
Talk not to me of acres, f want the area in square inches. I
will deal right royally with you. I will not “higgle” with you
about a “price.” I will offer you a million sterling for every
square inch and the sum shall stand to your account in the
Nation’s ledger.


Reader, the Landlords would have a comfortable and rosy
time for a week or two and then, the incubus being removed,
Trade, which is an abortive form of Co-operation, would rapidly
develop and the Landlords would wake up in less than u mouth
to find themselves not penniless but market-less. Trade would
vanish and prices and markets. The monied men would have no
leverage to turn their money into wealth or living. They would
go to the Government and say ; “We cannot live on Money, Money
will not make the mare to go ! The whole world is busy. There
is a universal hum of happiness. There is not a burglar, or a
“ blackleg,” or a discontented man in the country. The atmos-
phere simmers with delight. We are the most wretched of men.
Our money will buy nothing There is nothing for sale.” And
the Minister for Works would reply to the leader of the deputation:
“ Friend, Ido thee no wrong; did’st thou not agree with me for
a penny (a pretty big penny too)? Take that thine is and go
thy way.”
And the deputation of moneyed men would go out and join
the Nation Co-operative Society.
Such is the question of Money versus Wealth or any part of
Wealth.
I now close with a challenge. I have written a little book
in which I have arrived at the same results in another way. I
could not have written this article, if I had not written that
book.
I challenge any economic thinker in Sydney or Australia to
a public or semi-public debate in which I will uphold the following
propositions against all comers :
1. All Wealth is produced by the Labourer.
2. Money does not and cannot circulate in a community.
3, Trade, that is, production and distribution in any form short
of full co-operation of all able-bodied citizens, is diametrically
opposed to Intelligence and Individual Freedom.
4. The Single Tax will lead directly to Socialism.
CINDERELLA.


nsroTE.
The passages from Ezekiel (chapters 18 and 22) are too “ realistic”
to be stated on week days. The “ capitalist ” reader, is strongly
urged to borrow a Bible and consult the prophet. Suffice it, here,
to say that this seditious fellow with whom the “ rights of
‘ property ’ ” would appear to weigh less (!) than the claims of
Virtue and Honour, of Life and Happiness, brands lending-upon-
increase as among nameless “ abominations .”
Can it be, by any possibility, more than a mere coincidence,
that the Capital City of the country whose “ economic ” law is a
maximum Bent, and money lent (upon securities) at a maximum
Interest, is known to-day in household talk as the Modern
Babylon ?
Can there possibly be any causal connection between this
“ law of economics” and the fact that under its action “sweating”
is produced in a new country in fifty years. Contagion will not
account for the phenomenon because Hobson’s Bay is thirteen
thousand miles from “ Babylon.”
And in about a hundred years you shall have “ immoral
private bars,” where women earn their living (much the greater
portion of the “profits” made in this “ business” going to the
innocent and retiring landlord. See Daily Telegraph's recent
articles) ; and you shall have at the same time able-bodied young
men willing to work breaking windows to get into prison to avoid
dying (or, as it is generally put, “to make a living”) —and you
shall have the vastest Industrial Civil War ever enacted.
Will anyone be bold enough to say that Mammon, Belial and
Moloch do not form a co-operative society.


'TArp
&1&U0
fUIOI
A/ ooM




