

®lf si®
B "ST P. G-RAHff.
"Around his Tomb—let Art and Genius Weep."
WHEN Men, who stand pre-eminent on Earth,
(For Talent, Virtue, or Illustrious Birth)
Receive a hasty Summons to the Grave,.
Which yawns alike for Monarch, or for Slave,
Ere yet the deepening Shades of Age fortell,
The near approach of Death—with Funeral Knell,
All but the base—must feel a " Deep Regret"
And " Glorious Sympathy, with Suns that Set."
Had Peel—in Council, like Great Chatham,—-died,
When full of years,—yet still his Country's Pride,
(Rousing his Slumbering energies, to Save
An Empire from Disruption's Angry Wave)
Or Fallen —like Picton, on some Far-famed Field,
'Midst Britain's Heroes—never known to yield,
That Universal Grief—which now extends
From Pole to Pole— (where Britain's Empire ends,)
Might find relief—though viewing from afar,
The bright effulgence of a Falling Star.
When the World scans —with retrospective gaze,
The flight of Meteors, that have ceased to Blaze,
If much of Good—o'er Evil—still prevails
In large proportion—Charity ne'er fails,
To cast into the Shade—-some Acts which may
Scarce bear the Light of Truth's all-searching Ray.—
Hoping that future evidence may yet
Clear up some Doubts —which we would fain forget.;
For Truth stands forth—when prejudice has fled—
To shield the Ashes of the Mighty Dead.
Ail must admire Consistency —allied
To strong Conviction—not that based on Pride,
For he—who would in Error—still persist,
(Although— upon emerging from the Mist,
He clearly saw—he hod been led astray)
Must meanly dread—what the Vain World might say
Of Broken Pledges—evidently wrong
Not in their breach—but when maintained too long.
Admitting then, that Peel, at first did stray
From Toleration's and Reform's clear sway,—
We find excuse in Oxford's opiate Streams
Which flow from Bigotry's " Time Honor'd " Dreams—
So—when Transplanted to those Orange Bowers
Which bloom'd in Ireland—round Her Castle Towers
His mind was warp'd by Party's false alarms.
With hints that Wrongs were best redress'd by Arms.
And placed by Affluence—in Protection's van,
He stood —a Barrier to the Rights of Man.
Yet Reason's voice did not appeal in vain
Her Empire—in his Bosom—to regain,
(Though fierce the Conflict, which is waged—with Pride,
If Friends turn'd Foes—Men's altered views deride),
When Martyr'd Canning left a vacant Seat,
From which, Ambition could not well retreat,
The tatter'd Banner of the Tory Band—
Was seen transferr'd to a far feebler hand,
And Orange quickly changing into Green,
Emancipation—on His Shield was seen
Paled with Reform—(the Boroughmonger's bane) —
Which stopp'd the Fountains of Unhallow'd Gain.
Peel's " Bullion Standard " rose midst Storms of Hate,
Whilst Flimsy Arguments caused Fierce Debate,
Though strange it seem'd, that doubts could e'er arise,
With this plain fact—display'd before men's eyes—
That Guineas sold (if not reduced in weight)
For One-Half more—( or nearly at that rate) —
Than Pound Notes—which some Alchymy had raised
To Twenty Shillings—by the Mint assay'd.
The Sanguinary Code of England's Laws,
Met with Retrenchment midst the World's Applause.
While Corn Restrictions vanish'd at His call—
Deem'd by Old Friends " tK unkindest cut of all."
Loud was the wail, from Tamworth to Whitehall
Which swell'd in Concert, at Affection's call.
The gentle Partner of his bright career
Stands Mute with Anguish— but ne'er'sheds a Tear
Whilst Sons and Daughters in deep silence Weep, '
At the approach of Death's impending Sleep.
Next may be seen—in Sacerdotal Robes,
A Father of the Church—who while he probes,
With Heavenly Balm soothes anxious thoughts which
must
Attend the Exit— even of the Just,
Although in Saving Grace they firmly Trust.
But we turn back, and briefly would portray,
This World s First City —in its deep dismay.
The Queen's Enquiry, and the Prince's Call,
Awake the echoes oflhe Entrance Hall,
From Morn to Eve, —whilst gathering crowds await
The issues of a dark impending Fate,
At the first opening of the Porter's Gate.
The Daily Press—a Bulletin conveys,
On which Impatient Thousands long to gaze;
Swift noiseless Wheels pass o'er the litter'd street,
Whilst fresh enquriers through the Day oft meet/
Finding at length—that they have come too late
To seek for Tidings of his Earthly State.
The Iron Duke—Chief Pillar of the State,
Urges postponement of the Peers' Debate; '
While all—with wonder—for the first time'view,
O'erwhelmed with Grief—the Prince of Waterloo,
Who, —amidst faltering interruptions,—claims
A Tribute due to Venerated Names;
Recounting how—He often—side by side
Struggled—with Peel—against an Ebbing Tide,
Undaunted by the sneering Cheers which fall
From Men, who ridicule the whispered call
Of Conscience, —vainly striving to reclaim
Zealots—pre-destined to a Spurious Fame.
Stanley—Game Scion of the Derby Brood,
Deeply laments—that he, of late, had stood
Opposed to One—whose Comrade he had been
In many a Trying—Fierce-debated Scene,
Till Rights invaded ! called on Him to stay
The uplifted Axe, which levelled Corn Law Sway.
The Noble Premier—in " The Commons," found
Strong Sympathy—in all who stood around,
When tracing a bright outline of Peel's Life,
He scorned the Triumph of a Rival Strife,
Which Envy—filling paltry minds—displays
In Smothered Hatred —blighting with Faint Praise.
But four long months have been engulf'd in Time,
Since many an Elegy—in Plaintive Rhyme
Has flowed from Pens, more able to dilate
And vindicate the stern Decrees of Fate;
So we shall draw our Tribute to a close,
By quoting Lines which every School-boy knows.
" No longer seek—his Merits to disclose,
Or draw his Frailties—from their dread abode;
There —they alike—in trembling Hope repose,
The Bosom of his Father, —and his God."
Newstead, Sydney,
