

t
on
*
7
I^nT
’off,
/o yc>
wJiOyCKw-'




O | . v »
V


0


.


sip** ' ■
: >!. W ' , \ "} , WlMI i
-■**, A,
Or 4 "
Pink Crocus Bulb Creatures waltzed out of the earth
as proudly as could hr.


WRITTEN AND ILLUSTRATED BY
HELEN NOAKES
AUSTRALASIAN PUBLISHING CO. PTY. LTD.
SYDNEY


REGISTERED AT THE GENERAL POST
OFFICE, SYDNEY, FOR TRANSMISSION
THROUGH THE POST AS A BOOK
First Australian Edition, 1942
Wholly set up and printed in Australia by
William Brooks & Co., Limited, 99 Pitt Street, Sydney,
for AUSTRALASIAN PUBLISHING CO. PTY. LTD., Sydney


To the Memory of my Mother
F. M. Noakes.


\


Dear Children
The Sugar Cane Fields belonging to the coastal belts of Northern
Queensland and New South Wales are not as well known as they ought to be
to boys and girls in other parts of this big land of ours.
This is a great pity, because these particular boys and girls simply do not
realise how much fun and beauty and adventure they are missing by not
knowing about the jolly Fairy people who live there.
Now, almost all my life long, I have lived in a beautiful Sugar Cane
district, not far from the sea, where the friendly Cloud People come down now
and then, and sit on the rims of the hills, and talk to the ploughed Helds
who yawn so lazily in the sunshine, as the Blue Top Weed Babies are sung
to sleep at naptime by Bumble Bee, and where the lines of young Sugar Cane
seem to be thrusting their little green leaf swords at the sky like green soldiers
standing to attention as though to say:
“Who goes there? !!!! I!!! •' ”
If you were to climb with me a special hill I know very well, and were to bring
your very best ears with you, you would hear the singing of choirs of birds and
the voice of the Busybody Wind Lady gossiping to Hoop Pine Tree, and the
gay Grasshopper Creatures searching the highways of the long grasses for
adventure.
Looking down with me from the hilltop you would see the Sugar Cane
Fields stretching like a bright patchwork quilt far below; there would be Helds
of all the shades of green imaginable, criss-crossed by ploughed ones of pink,
and grey, and red, and rusty brown, all seeming to be playing hide and seek
with little laughing roads and lantana thickets and patches of nobbley tree-tops.
On a Summer day the big mountains guarding the hills are very blue,
and if your nose is sharp and good, you can sniff the breathings of the gum


trees and the wattle blossoms and all the sweet wild weeds. If your ears arc
wise and keen you will know that the cattle bells are full of new magic tunes
especially towards the Springtime of the year.
There is no doubt about it, the Fields are fun to know about, especially
the little Fairy People, who are mostly hiding away in the tallest Cane jungles
where they are very hard to find.
I am going to invite you to meet some of them through this little story
I have to tell you. If you like them, well, I must simply tell you of some
more, as I think you will agree Sugar Cane Fairy People are different to other
People in the world.
First of all I want you to meet Gyp, the little sun-brown girl who lives
in a farm-house built high on wooden stilts on a hill-top among the Cane Fields
themselves. I do hope you will like Gyp, because I like her very much indeed.
Also I hope you will like her friends—Mr. Working Boot, the Moon Man,
Bad Barn Rat, the Wind Lady, Sugar Cane Sprite, and all the others . . .
Do let me know if you do, will you?
H. N.


Gyp Learns of the Moon Magic
Children, can you keep a secret?
Listen then:
When the first full moon of a new year rises over the
Sugar Cane Fields there is Magic afoot until midnight,
so that any dumb creature who is wise enough to know
about this, is given the power to come to life, to bow
to the Moon Man three times and say . . .
“Mr. Moon Man in the sky
Grant one wish before you die,
Grant me Magric wide and deeo
While the world is fast asleep/’
It is most particular that you whisper your special wish
quite loudly and, if the Man in the Moon approves of


it, he will nod, smile and cross his Invisible Fingers so
that his Magic will last until midnight.
Now Gyp, the little sun-brown girl, who lives in the
stilted farmhouse on the hill would never have known
about the special Magic belonging to the Moon Man if
the Wind Lady, who is the greatest gossip in the world,
had not told her. It happened one day towards the end
of the Midsummer School holidays when Gyp was
carrying her father his billycan of hot tea, for his
afternoon “smoko” up to the fields where he ploughed
with the tall grey horses; as she walked along she met
the Wind dusting the Blue Top Weeds gently with her
broom, but when she saw Gyp she called her over and
whispered her secret in her ear.
“Don’t tell another Human Soul,” warned the Wind after
she had told her, “For if you do, the Magic will all leak
out and the Moon Man will never forgive me.”
Having said this she sped off across the fields before you
could say “Come back” three times, leaving Gyp all
wriggley with excitement at the news and wondering if
Wind would remember to ask Moon Man if she too, could
wish the following night as Wind had promised to ask.
Wind has so very many moods you know, that she is
dreadfully forgetful and sometimes cannot be trusted to
keep her word at all, which is rather a pity.
Gyp did not see Wind to speak to again, until dusk of the
following day when she was sent up to the field to collect


a Working Boot her father had left behind him by
mistake. It was the left hand mate of his favorite pair
and she was just nearing the spot where it was supposed
to be when Wind, who is always doing the most unex-
pected things came skimming hurriedly over a patch of
wild cotton bushes, so that the Cotton People who were
quite taken by surprise and were trying to put their
babies asleep, set up an angry complaining among
themselves.


“Listen,” called Wind, “I was driving the Cloud Lambs
to the North to deliver them to Mr. Storm as usual, when
I remembered I had not asked the Moon Man if you
might be allowed to wish tonight, so I rushed over the
other side of the sky to find him just getting out of bed
between his dark sheets, taking off his dark nightcap. He
was very cross I can tell you to see me just then, for he
has the toothache again; but I put in a good word for
you and he says all in a hurry—'Does the Earth Child
keep a secret well?’ and I said, ‘O yes, Moon Man.’
“ ‘Just this once then,’ says he. ‘But terrible things will
happen unless she promises not to break her word.’ ”
“I promise,” said Gyp as quickly as she could, for there
wasn’t a moment to be lost as already the bald shining
head of the Moon was beginning to show over the slope.
As for her wish, she did not have to think very hard to
know it was to explore the hill Quarry by moonlight to
find out who the Echoes were and where they lived, but
especially to free the two little Captive Echoes who called
sadly all day across the valley from the deep dark
dungeons where the Wind had once told her the Hard
Rock People had imprisoned them long ago. Gyp was
always very sad when she thought of the poor little
Captive Echoes who were shut away from the sunlight,
and always she had made up her mind to free them if
she ever could meet the right people to help her find them
with Magic.


v«
A
\, .


So now Gyp quickly bowed three times, and whispered
her wish loudly behind her hand hoping the Hard Rock
People would not hear about it.
Just then the Moon Man, very red from climbing the hill
on the other side, sat down to rest on the tree tops, wiped
his brow with an invisible hand, and said in a worried
voice:
Oh dear, I used up so much Magic in getting over my
toothache that I am afraid I shall run out of it before
midnight, if I am not careful; I only hope everybody
won’t be wanting Magic tonight or I certainly shall.”
Then he sighed deeply, and, happening to look down, saw
Gyp, and, liking the look of her, he remembered his
promise, and crossed his Invisible Fingers, and nodded.
Gyp held her breath with excitement very hard, for just
then the most UNEXPECTED happened, and her eyes
grew very round indeed, for there came a GREAT BUMP
beside her . . .


.. Q«.—
A Great Personality
Mr. Boot
This is what Gyp’s eyes, very round with surprise,
saw:
The Old Working Boot she had come to collect for her
father, seemed to have come to life, for it was he who had
come “thump” out of a line of sugar cane where he had
lain hidden. As she stared with her wondering eyes she
saw him take a little hop and land fair and square on toe
and heel while he commenced to grow bigger and bigger
until at last he seemed larger and more important than
Gyp herself.
Now, if you and I had seen Mr. Boot at that moment I
am quite sure, that like Gyp we would have felt he was
a GREAT PERSONALITY, although he was full of
creases, and had no polish left to dazzle the eyes at all.
But he was a most determined looking Person and anyone
could see there was an Air of real adventure about him.


“Hullo,” said Boot, in a deep, dry, leathery voice.
“Hullo yourself,” said Gyp, recovering from her surprise.
“Where do you go?” Boot asked her.
So Gyp told him.
“That ought to be quite an adventure,” said Boot. “Now
I am travelling under my own power tonight, for, as you
can see, the Man in the Moon has given me some of his
Magic ... I am seeking vengeance myself, and the
punishment of Great Barn Rat, the bully who torments
me when I have no power to fight him. Only yesterday
as I snoozed on the headland after your father had placed
me there in the shade, he crept up and nipped one of my
laces hard, and the night before, he chewed my toe; for
so long has he tormented me that I can bear it no longer;
so, tonight I told the Man in the Moon all about it and
asked him not to grant Barn Rat any Magic, so that I
shall have greater powers than he, which will enable me
to track him down and punish him.
“But listen: Why not hop into my Boot Carriage and
come with me; I promise to go with you in return to
find out all about the Echoes in the big quarry and help
free the little Captive Echoes. But listen again: I heard
the Busybody Crickets gossiping to the Wind last night,
and they said that Rat had boasted he would be attending
the field concert tonight, even though he wasn’t invited.
Let us go there, and if we find him I shall then put an
end to his nonsense.”


, sH*
—*- | I\% t / S t vX/
%
T/ie Lantana Bramble People were on the lookout.




It all seemed a very good idea to Gyp, so she climbed into
Boot’s inside and grasped his laces like the reins of a
horse. Then with a leathery leap they went hopping up
the farm headland more quickly than the Grasshopper
Creatures ever travelled, for it seemed Boot did not want
to waste another moment. As for the Wind Lady who
had been listening all the time as she soothed the tempers
of the Wild Cotton People, she looked very worried indeed
for the Wind Lady secretly liked Barn Rat and being a
born mischief-maker with a finger in everybody’s pie, she
wanted to warn him of Boot’s Vengeance and decided to
try to do this whatever happened. So off she went in a
different direction to be in sight of the Field People’s
Concert and to see what she could do to help him there,
all, of course, unknown to Boot and Gyp


They find Mr. Rat
In no time Boot and Gyp reached the site of the Field
People’s Concert and pulled up from hopping.
Leaning through the pale moonlight Gyp could dis-
tinguish some gay young field mice, all flirting very
badly, some Brown Cane Beetles doing the lances, some
Crickets with their fiddles, a Pheasant or two showing
off their long train tails, some Mournful Quail, some Cane
Grubs shaking their heads over the weather, and many
lively Sugar Cane Sprites playing hide and seek with the
Field Spiders, whose half-finished webs were really a great
credit to their families.
As she watched, Pink Crocus Bulb Creatures, opened their
front doors and waltzed out of the earth on their hundreds
of bootless, hairy legs as proudly as can be. Gyp had not


f s >
seen them come up for an airing before, and as they
danced with their long pink flower plume head-dresses
swaying from side to side and their earth creased faces
wreathed with smiles they looked so funny that she
laughed aloud to herself. Just then she spied Mr. Cane
Toad who is not usually a very sociable fellow, come
hopping along with his little family all going flop, flop,
flop, beside him ... but more important still, she spied a
long sleek inquisitive looking Rat put his head stealthily
around a stalk of cane looking so guilty, that it was as
plain as the moonlight to Gyp, that he had not been
invited at all. Just then Rat’s roving eye fell on Mr. Boot,
who gave a fierce start of triumph; if ever a Boot with
Magic in it fairly creaked with anger, Boot did at that
moment.
Goodness me, it was a sudden shock even to Gyp, who
should have felt prepared. Gyp felt her heart beating
however, very fast indeed, as a little heart always does
when something dreadful is going to happen . . .
So she waited, wondering, what it was going to be.


Mr. Boot pursues Barn Rat and Barn
Rat is punished.
CjYP sat there grasping Mr. Boot’s laces very tightly
and listening to him getting more and more angry, and
glaring balefully at his enemy in silence, until at last
Barn Rat, poking his sharp nose around furtively, sud-
denly turned quite white by the light of the moon as his
courage gave out. There was a quick scuttle as he took
to his heels, and all you could see of him was his long
tail disappearing from view.
“Hold tight,” called Boot, as he leapt in pursuit low along
the ground with quick determined hops, his Magic eye
glued fiercely on Rat’s disappearing tail. Now, the Wind
who had been lying low in hiding all this time, and listen-
ing, suddenly came out into the open and blew Barn Rat
up the sloping field with her broom, but, try as she might,
she could not stop Boot following because of Moon Man’s
Magic power. In no time Rat had reached the shelter of


the stable, where the horses were talking to each other
over the doings of the day, as they crunched chop chop
and corn. Quick as you can say “lightning,” Mr. Rat
raced in the Barn door, breathing very hard and fright-
ened, and closing the squeaking door with his paws,
locked it and put his weight against it, just as Boot and
Gyp came tearing up in hot pursuit. Mr. Boot looked
very grim indeed as he said to Gyp, “Quickly, jump out
of my carriage, as I must travel alone with my Magic
while I punish my enemy.”
Gyp jumped quickly out and snuggled into a far corner
near old Lofty’s feed box.
“What is going on here?” said Old Lofty, looking down at
her from his great height. But before Gyp could even
answer him, her friend Boot, looking very strong and
determined and masterful had taken a deep breath,
hopped two paces back, made a lunge at the door with
his great toe, and burst it open as easily as you can say
“splinters.” At that moment there came a mad scuttle
from inside, followed by a loud horrified squeak from Rat,
who raced for shelter along the highest beam, all the long
hairs on his wriggling tail, standing up with fright. Mr.
Boot, his jaw set in true fighting attitude, followed and
stood beneath. Suddenly, without warning, he arose in
the air, and, as Rat turned in a great panic to round the
corner of another beam, Boot shot out his Magic toe
and kicked him in the pants high up towards the ceiling.
Mr. Rat, I believe, looking like a parachutist who could


not open his parachute, sailed wriggling and whimpering
through the splintered wood of the broken door, through
the horse stalls, and out into the moonlight, landing
“bump” against a mango tree where a Mopoke Bird,
whom he feared very much, put out a claw to grab him.
However, Rat managed to escape her sharp claw, and,
squealing loudly, he sailed helplessly off into the sky, kept


there very much against his will by the Magic of Mr. Boot,
his enemy.
The Wind watched him go as she hid in a tree nearby, for
she did not dare show herself to Mr. Boot.
Meanwhile the draught horses were full of excited ques-
tions in the stalls as they watched the goings on. “Well
I never,” said Big Dora, “What a good punishment that
is for an impertinent Barn Rat,” and she gave a deep
approving neigh as she gobbled up the last of her yellow
corn.
“Rat is our enemy too,” said Old Major nodding to Mr.
Boot, “How long will he have to stay up there in the sky?
“I never boast,” said Boot modestly, “But he ought to
stay up there until my Magic gives out,” and he looked
up and laughed with great satisfaction at the sight of his
bitter enemy dangling helplessly by both legs in the skv
all upside down as he turned a Magic somersault. “Come
along,” called Boot to Gyp, “Now we can go to set the
little Captive Echoes free in the quarry.”
Gyp climbed in, and in no time they were ready to set out
on their quest to free the little Captive Echoes and went
hopping happily away forgetting all about Wind who
still lay hidden in the boughs of her hiding tree. It was
a great pity they did forget about her, because as she lay
in hiding she made up her changeable mind to free bold
Barn Rat from the sky and when she had thought out
the only way to do it, she left the shelter of her tree,
chuckling to herself with mischief.


ypmd helps Barn Rat to escape from the
Sky
Now children, after Wind had come out of her hiding
tree with her heart set on mischief making, she flew
straight up to look for her friend Barn Rat in the sky.
As she went she remembered that Gyp and Boot had
gone in search of the Captive Echo Sprites, and she
plotted more wickedly than ever to herself . . .
“Rat,” “Rat,” she called, as she searched for him in the
sky.
“Help,” “Help,” answered Rat from a great way off, turn-
ing a dizzy somersault as the Magic from Boot’s kicking
toe, tormented him. He had thought for a moment it was


Mother Mopoke following with soft wings spread to catch
him and eat him all up.
“Listen,” called Wind, “I have thought of a plan to help
you; I shall go boldly to the Moon Man himself and tell
him a clever story that will put him in a good temper,
and, when he is in a good mood, he may be persuaded to
free you from the sky.” She went rushing off full of her
own importance. She found Moon Man in a good temper
again, for his toothache was quite gone, and he peeped
cheerfully over a cloud top, round and red, and happ>.
So Wind put herself to tell him the very best funny story
she knew until tears of merriment scampered down his
fat cheeks and he quite lost his breath from laughing.
Then, when he was in his most agreeable mind, she said
to him very coaxingly, “O Moon Man, now that Boot
punished Rat to his heart’s content, let him be freed of
his Magic so that Barn Rat can be freed from the sky.
Otherwise Mother Mopoke will kill him and eat him, as
she tears him limb from limb, to feed her babies.”
“What is this I hear?” said Moon Man doubtfully, not
knowing whether to feel offended or not, “Are you sure
Boot wants Rat really to fall from the sky before his
time?”
“He told me so himself,” said Wind untruthfully, but she
looked the other way as she said it.
“I cannot understand Boot at all then,” said Moon Man
a little crossly. “First of all he wants my Magic, and then


-2=^1


he does not want it, I do wish he would make up his mind
better. Are you sure he asked you to do this?
“Yes, yes, yes,” said Wind.
So Moon Man regretfully crossed his Invisible Fingers to
let out Boot’s Magic power, and Wind raced back and
helped Rat come down from the sky and to land safely
in a patch of pink Summer grass on Mother Earth just in
a spot where the Great Creek guards the Great Hill.
Now, Rat was dizzy from turning somersaults in the sky,
and the wind fanned him gently by blowing on him, and
as she fanned him she wickedly told him where his enemy
Boot, had gone after he had punished Rat himself. Now
that he was again safely on the earth, Rat felt quite brave
and crafty again, and suddenly, as he remembered his
punishment, he became so full of vengeance that his
whiskers twitched from side to side wildly, and all the
hairs on his long tail shivered with fright. “We must
warn The Hard Faced Rock People that Boot goes even
now to free the Echo Sprites,” he said, “Who will go”?
Despite his anger, Rat was very weary, from turning
somersaults in the sky you see ... and all he really wanted
to do was to go fast asleep.
“Leave it to me,” said Wind, smiling in conceit over her
own cleverness. Away she swooped, never stopping, until
she had crossed the tree tops over the gully, and found the
Big Quarry where the Hard Faced Rock People lived.
“Listen,” shouted Wind hurriedly, “Put special padlocks


on your dungeon doors, for strong thieves come to steal
the Captive Echoes,” and she sat down on the branch of
a Tree and told them all about her fears. O dear, those
Rock People were furiously upset, and they raced around
in circles looking for even one padlock, everywhere, but
nowhere could they find one at all, so they raced down
in a great state and bribed the Lantana Bramble People
who held the road at the top of the hill to try to hold
back all new comers that night to the hill. “Get out your
bramble ropes,” said they. So after a great deal of
arguing, the Lantana People agreed to do what they
asked and the Rock People scampered back all falling
over each other’s big feet as they hurried to reach their
own territory.
The Wind, she clapped her hand full of glee at this point,
and rushed back to tell Rat all about it.


Boot loses his Magic and meets again his
Enemy.
Meanwhile, we had left Boot and Gyp after the
punishment of Rat, going off happily together, bound
for the Hill Quarry, to free the Captive Echoes and quite
unaware of Wind’s deceit.
As they went hopping happily up the last paddock before
the valley a Slab Fence shouted a wooden greeting, and
a Plough snoozing by himself in a neighboring field
opened one eye, looked startled, and demanded in
surprise.
“Goodnight friends, where do you go”?
“To free the Captive Echo Sprites from their deep, dark,


dungeon/' called Gyp, who was in a great hurry to arrive
there.
“It's no good my coming then," said Plough in a
disappointed voice, “I’m afraid my days of Adventure
are over; Pm too old and rusty," and with that, he sighed
and settled back to sleep.
So Gyp and Boot went on until they came to a solitary
Cane Truck left by the mill loco, stranded on a side rail
from -last “crushing" season and very bored with life.
“Who goes there?" shouted Cane Truck, rattling his
chains eagerly.
“Two travellers, passing to free the Captive Echoes in
the Quarry," called both Boot and Gyp, as they passed.
“Mightn't I come too?" said Cane Truck anxiously, “I
promise not to take too much roadway or to jostle too
much; the Moon had blessed me tonight with Magic so
that I can run without rails. Let me come even a little
way with you, for I do want Adventure."
“If you want Adventure then, come along," called Boot.
“But don’t jostle."
So the three passed on together until they came to the
bottom of the gully where a fast flowing creek cut off the
road to the Hill. Now, at the bottom, near the bank of
the stream, they met more pilgrims waiting to cross, for
the tree bridge had broken in the middle. Among the
crowd was a tired young Bandicoot with a knapsack, a
Mother Wallaby with Young in her pouch, and a dare
devil Guana with a Gumboil. Now, all these pilgrims


■■■ \ a f "I, •'j
/ I
•' X *1 , I ;
■ , H lif fi
V t: v'
■■&?** Wt, g Mali *?
-*—?r
-. —— — •* -4,,. ;4* ■***» § #
4 /,-pefy Sugar Cane Sprite pushed out his head.




were bound for the Quarry, for different reasons, and as
they stood there making a great noise about the fallen
bridge, a faint shout arose behind them, and another
party of pilgrims arrived, comprising a dozen Sugar Ants
all marching gravely in single file like Indians, one behind
the other, a Carpet Snake still yawning from his midday
nap, a Big Wood Lizard, and a Barnyard Hen in a brand
new red comb hat. There was a great to do, I can tell
you, as they all chattered together loudly, asking each
other the very wisest thing to do in an emergency like
this, but none agreed with the other, and all were inclined
to argue, until their voices became shrieks, and as Cane
Truck began to jostle everyone's toes, he too became
more and more excited and rattled his chains.
Boot and Gyp who were in a really important hurry to
get up to free the Captive Echoes, privately decided to
leave Cane Truck behind, as he was enjoying himself so
much with the crowd at the water. So, they went off by
themselves until Boot found a jolly place to cross. So, he
called “hold tight" to Gyp, and was just taking his best
hop across the water when his Magic gave out, for, of
course, this was the exact moment when up in the sky
Moon Man crossed his Invisible Fingers after Wind had
pleaded for Rat to be released from the sky. O dear, as
his Power gave out, Boot fell “plonk" in the water bring-
ing poor Gyp with him and there he lay on his side quite
helpless, until Gyp helped him to shore, where they both
sat down very sadly wondering what had happened.


Moon Man gives Mr. Boot back his
Magic, and he meets his Enemy Rat
again.
A.FTER Gyp had helped Boot to dry land again, a
remarkable thing began to happen, for Boot began
straight away to shrink and shrink until he was as small
as he had been before Moon Man’s Magic had made him
grow. Worse still, he had grown “tongue tied” with
shock and had no voice left at all to express his feelings
at such a time.
Now, it happened that a field of Sugar Cane grew nearby,
and just as Gyp was going to give up all hope, a lively
Sugar Cane Sprite pushed out his head from behind a
stool of sheltering Cane, with his long pipe in his hand,
and called, “What has happened, and why are you so
sad?”


So Gyp told him what had happened, and he nodded very
wisely several times with his eyes very bright and
friendly like a bird. “It is the strangest thing I have heard
for a long time,” said Sugar Cane Sprite, But lam sure
there must be some mistake. Shall I fly up to ask the
Moon Man for you? Perhaps his Magic has given out
before its time.”
“O please go as quickly as you can,” said Gyp. So, away
he went and was back in a twinkling, for Sugar Cane
Sprites travel very, very, quickly. Sure enough he brought
with him the strange story of the Wind Lady’s deceit.
“Please go up at once again, and tell him that Wind was
only mischief making,” pleaded Gyp, “Tell him that poor
Boot has lost his voice and wants his Magic back very
badly indeed.”
So the obliging little Sprite
flew up into the sky a
second time, and in a
twinkling returned smiling
from one side of his merry
face to the other.
“The Moon Man is so
sorry,” he explained, “But
he quite understands, and if
you will look up into the
sky you will see that he is
crossing his fingers again.


Sure enough, there he was nodding over a cloud at them.
So in no time the Magic returned inside Mr. Boot, and
he began to grow and grow, until he seemed to Gyp to
be even larger than before, for the Magic seemed much
stronger this time. So happy was Boot as his voice came
back, that he cheered loudly in his leathery voice, and
danced on his great toe and took a leap right over a giant
tree top, and then kicked a huge rock into the creek
without any effort at all. Then he thanked Sugar Cane
Sprite who disappeared into his Cane Jungle in a
twinkling.
Then Gyp climbed into his Boot
Carriage and they leaped over
the creek and went on hopping
until they came to a patch of
Summer Grass, with somebody
lying among it, snoring loudly.
So they pulled up to see who it
was, and who should they find
there, but Barn Rat fast asleep,
just where Wind had left him
when she had gone to find the
Rock People after she had helped
him down from the sky.
Now Boot was so angry that
Gyp knew there was going to
be trouble again, so she woke
Barn Rat and he sat up and


rubbed his eyes; when he saw Boot he smirked all over
his face and said, “Pm not at all afraid of you, and
someday I shall make you pay for insulting me.” Even
to Gyp it was plain to see he had not learned his lesson
at all and was still a Bad Barn Rat at heart and a very
defiant one too. “You’re only a Boot after all,” added
Bad Barn Rat with a nasty sneer.
Now, Boot was fiercely angry but he said nothing at all,
but he quietly danced three steps sideways, and three
steps back, until he felt full of Magic, and then he kicked
Bad Barn Rat in the seat of the pants for the second
time, over the tall tree tops, up past the hill and through
the clouds so very far up in the sky, that it was surprising
he was not seized on by The Black Storm People and so
would never have been seen again at all, even by the Wind.
This did not happen, however, for he squealed so loudly
that even Mother Mopoke, was ashamed to chase him,
and he just went on turning somersaults in the sky all
over again, until the top of his head seemed to be nowhere
at all, and his long tail lost all its pride.


Boot and Gyp are taken prisoners by the
Lantana Bramble People.
Boot had kicked Bad Barn Rat for the second
and last time into the sky, he forgot his anger and
laughed a happy, leathery, laugh of satisfaction for a job
well done. Then he and Gyp, went racing merrily up and
over the tree tops until they reached the Hill road. The
Bramble People, who were on the lookout for them with
their sharp eyes in the moonlight, raised their Bramble
Swords and called all together, “Stop, who goes there?”
and even before Boot had time to call upon his Magic


power, he and Gyp were rushed upon with Bramble ropes
and bound very hard indeed. Now, Boot knew if he could
only get his great Magic toe away from the tangled ropes,
he could kick free without any trouble to speak of, but
this toe was already sat upon by at least twenty little
fierce Bramble men, so the Magic could not work at all
well
Just then who should come flying along but the Wind
Lady, who had searched high and low for Barn Rat, and
had found him for the second and last time, turning
somersaults in the sky, quite beyond helping indeed.
Now, Wind is a very fickle person, and sometimes has as
many as a dozen moods in one day, and spends most of
her time getting into trouble for prying into other


people’s business, and then getting out of trouble again
the best way she can, to save her own face.
When Wind saw Gyp and Boot, bound fast by ropes of
the Lantana Thicket People, she decided to turn right
around and help them get free to find the little Captive
Echo Sprites. So Wind made up a special coaxing story
especially to tell the Lantana Thicket People, for she is
especially clever at making up stories to suit every
occasion. However, her story was so very clever that the
Bramble People were deceived, and so after a good deal
of sharp prickly scolding, they loosened the Lantana
ropes and allowed Gyp and Boot to pass on to the Quarry.
But Boot was very hurt and disgusted with Wind and
refused to speak to her, even when she offered to help
them. So Gyp and he, went hopping off without even a
word of thanks. Now, the Wind Lady followed and
whispered in Gyp’s ear, “Please forgive me, for the Little
Music Maker of the Hill has the key to the dungeon
where the Echo Sprites are imprisoned, and if you will
forgive me and let me guide you, I shall show you where
he lives in his weeny cave behind the Wattle Thickets.”
So Gyp whispered to Boot, and Boot pricked up his
leather ears and said scornfully, “No, no, no” so loudly
that Wind was frightened and went and hid herself in a
sheltering tree all alone. As she hid there, she bowed her
head with sorry shame, for she suddenly remembered
that owing to her deceit, the Rock People too, would be
watching out to hurl boulders at Gyp and Boot as they


1 • v
passed, all unsuspecting of their betrayal. What could
she do to help them in their peril, she wondered? She
decided to take heart and follow on her Wind Wings, so
she left her hiding tree full of curiosity as to what would
happen next.


1 A v ■■
Boot and Gyp file into the Sky to escape
the Rock People.
BoOT and Gyp, after leaving Wind, went on alone until
they came within view of the Quarry. As they did so,
the Hill turned a little in his sleep and yawned so that a
little crater was formed, and only the Magic in Boot’s
big toe, saved them from toppling right in and becoming
Earth prisoners.
Even the trees almost lost their balance, for it appeared
they had quite forgotten this happened once a year, and
so were not prepared for emergencies. There were no
accidents as might have been expected, however, in such


an awkward moment, which was just as well, as the Hill
People’s first aid set was out of order at this moment.
Such a whispering took place though, as the Possums
and Native Bears said “O dear” to one another.
Gyp and Boot went hopping on, and as it happened, the
Rock People were heavily guarding the other side of the
hill at that moment so they reached the back door of the
Quarry quite safely. As plain as the moonlight, they
could hear the free Echo Sprites playing hide and seek
among the rocks, and the little imprisoned Sprites calling
sadly from their hidden dungeon cave.
“Let us see the sun again,” “Let us ride on arrows of light,
O Hard Rock People.”
And as the little sad Captive Sprites called, they repeated
this all over again without stopping, and it was the
saddest little call you could ever imagine, so that tears
came to Gyp’s eyes and she said to Boot quickly. “There
is no time to be lost; we must find the Little Music Maker
of the Hill as soon as we can.”
But, although they searched, and searched, and searched,
around the door of the Quarry and up through the wattle
trees and under the great boulders nearby, no where
could they find the weeny cave of the Little Music Maker
of the Hill. After a while Gyp began to wish Boot had
not been so unforgiving, for after all Wind had offered
to give them the very best directions, and it did seem a
pity to have missed the opportunity.
Just then Boot was seized with a bright idea. Let sgo


boldly and knock on the doors of the Rock People,” he
For perhaps they will not guess that we have
come to find the Little Music Maker of the Hill, only
because we want his key, and perhaps they will be
friendly enough.”
It was a great pity Boot did not know of the Wind Lady’s
deceit before he knocked so loudly; but he did not know,
so that was all about it.
It so happened, that a Rock Mother had left her baby
sleeping in his shadow cradle nearby, and as Boot knocked
loudly on the door, it woke up in a great fright and gave
such a loud cry, that the mother came running back from


the other side of the hill, all in a hurry to see what ailed
her little one. When she saw Boot and Gyp in front of
her door, she raced back and told the other Rock People
and they all came running belter skelter, shouting and
hurling stone weapons, as they came scrambling in the
moonlight.
Just then the Wind darted out of a wattle tree, where she
had been hiding and screamed to Boot and Gyp, in high
excitement.
“Quickly, leap up into the sky where they cannot follow;
it is your only chance, for even Moon Magic cannot guard
you from their great stones.”
Boot realised she was right, and that there was nothing
else to do, so he took three paces back and then shot over
the tree tops into the sky, with Gyp holding as fast as
she could to his lace reins.


Rat, Boot, Wmd and Gyp, make up their
quarrel in the Sky, and find the Music
Maker's Cave together.
It happened, that, as Boot and Gyp, followed by Wind,
shot up into the sky and sheltered behind a cloud, they
bumped into Barn Rat who was turning his sixty-seventh
somersault that night, and who looked so wretched that
his whiskers drooped sadly and his tail had quite lost its
proud feelings and he hadn’t a smirk left in him anywhere.


As they all stared at one another in the sky, too surprised
for anything, the Wind Lady decided she would try to
make peace between everyone, so she said coaxingly,
“O, Mr. Boot, if you will be friends again and will let me
lead you to the weeny cave where the Music Maker lives,
I will help you free the Captive Echoes, for I know a
secret place to land on Mother Earth where the Rock
People will never find you. But first, please release Barn
Rat of your tormenting Magic, and let him too, come
down to the friendly Earth, for he has promised never to
bully anyone ever again.”
“Indeed, I am willing to promise for ever,” said poor Rat,
for he had learned his lesson even before turning the
sixty-seventh somersault in the sky, and even Boot could
see this was true. So, it came about that they all made
up their quarrel in the sky, and the Wind, true to her
word, led them back over the tree tops until they reached
the secret patch of Mother Earth among a Wattle Thicket.


When they had reached this, she led them on tippy toe
until she came to a weeny cave and peeped in to see if the
Little Music Maker were in. It was only a moment before
she came flying out full of excitement, and hid herself
beside them in the Wattle forest.
“Listen,” she whispered, “In a minute he will come out
to look at the weather, for tomorrow is his special wash-
ing day when he washes his only hermit shirt, and he
will make sure that the sun will shine before he goes to
bed. You must seize him before he can see you, for it will
be your only chance of asking him all about the Echoes.”
So Boot, Gyp, Barn Rat, and Wind, waited holding their
breath, and by and by a shuffling noise of little bare feet
came softly out of the cave, and out came a little bow
legged man with a practising pipe in his hand and dressed
only in a long hermit shirt of thick woven leaves sewn
with cobwebs. Now, his eyes were so used to the darkness
of his weeny cave that he was almost blind in the light,
and he wore special leaf glasses low on his nose, over
which his long bald head, and his long suspicious face,
peered short-sightedly. It was very plain to see that he
liked to vanish if he were aware strangers even looked
hard at him, and Gyp wondered what to do, for, mindful
of the Wind’s advice she knew she must not let him
vanish. So, before he could even see them she seized him
by the tail of his long shirt, and said:
“Please Little Music Maker, we have come to release the
Captive Echo Sprites. Please give us the key of the Cave,


and tell us the story of the Echoes, for we have come a
long way to find you.”
O dear, how that little fellow carried on, and, being
furiously angry, almost got away as the leaf and spider
web shirt stretched and stretched, and stretched. How-
ever, Mr. Boot who still had so much Magic left, that he
didn’t quite know what to do about it, put his remarkable
toe under the hermit’s feet and tripped him. Then Rat,
determined not to let him get away, sat on him. It was


just as well he did, for the Music Maker was as slippery
as an eel, and it was quite a time before his anger cooled
enough to make him inclined to want to tell them any-
thing. So while Wind fanned his anger gently away with
a gum leaf spray he promised to tell the story of the
Echoes, so listen very carefully children . . .


The Little Music Maher of the Hill tells
the Story of the Echoes.
J.HIS is the tale told to Boot, Gyp, Barn Rat, and Wind,
by the Little Music Maker of the Hill who lives in a
weeny cave hidden in a Wattle Forest on the great Hill
near the Stone Quarry, and whom the Hard Rock People
had forced to keep the key of the dungeon of the Captive
Echo Sprites.
“Long ago,” he began, “when the Hill was quite young,
and its rock ribbed sides, and its caves were the hunting
grounds and the homes of the Aboriginal Man who built
his camp fire by rubbing two stones together, two little
piccaninnies were left behind when the camp was deserted
for the Winter months, and the tribe moved on to spear
Fish and feast on oyster creatures in the land of The


Little Rivers. These little ones had no mother and no
father, and there were none to love them or care that they
were lost, save the creatures of the wilderness. The birds
of the sky sang to them and sheltered them, and showed
them where the wild, juicy fig berries, grew. Even the
Hill Sprites watched over them lovingly; but, the day
came when the little ones grew lonely and called in vain
for other little brown piccaninny playmates; although
their calls rang sweetly down into the scrub-covered
valleys only the Lyre Bird answered and the Parrot and
the Great Black Crow.
“It happened, that when they heard the little ones calling,
the Hill Sprites were grieved and wondered what they
could do to make them happy again. However, at last
they decided to give to them forever, as playmates, the
eight dimpled Echo Sprites who never grow old, but who
love to mimic every call they hear, and every note of
music I play in my cave. Echo Sprites have no homes,
but ride to and fro across the valley on arrows of light,
and sleep in the tree tops or the Bramble Thickets, or
just anywhere at all when they happen to be sleepy, which
is not very often. The little piccaninnies found the little
Echo Sprites great playmates, and were happy for many
days sending their pretty voices pealing across the
Valleys, and watching the Echo Sprites darting off riding
their arrows of light to capture the voice notes, and bring
them back to throw their calls against the old Quarry
Walls. At last, a day came when the Spirit of all mothers


"f- V \ W M * * 'W.'
Nj s r*' 'V? i 1
%>. v v v* nm I
tAl»'' l l. 1 'W W/m v> "
r ',k‘ f % »(/■ - - 1 ) : U,4 > '
X \VUS» "1 < ■ v i«’ y . W & V bn \i C" 1 i
1 1 t* V
The Wild Cotton People set up an angry complaining.




called to the lost piccaninnies from the shadowy land of
Spirits, calling, ‘Come my little ones.’ When the sweet
call came to them from out of the shadows, the weary
piccaninnies could no longer eat the wild fig berries, nor
drink the dew in the vine cups, and they no longer
laughed in play with the dimply Echo Sprites. So, one
day, just as the trees were turning to dark lace against a
sunset sky, the little ones followed to the Land of Happy
Spirits where everyone is so happy helping everyone else
to be happy, that there is no time to be lonely at all.
“Now, the Rock People, whom no human has ever seen
but who are the color of the quartz rocks in the Quarry,
and are hard tempered, and bent and wrinkled like
Gnomes, had set themselves for spite, to capture the little
dimply Echo Sprites as they watched them speeding
happily across the valley, riding on arrows of light, and,
so, after the piccaninnies had left the Echo Sprites to
look after themselves the Rock People waited in hiding,
and captured two little Baby Echo Sprites, and locked
them away from the light in a deep, dark dungeon, and
then came to me and threw the key into my Music
Making Cave, and said with horrible voices
“ ‘Keep this key for ever and if you ever lose it, we will rain
rocks at you until your cave is hidden from the air, the sun
and the starry sky, and you become an Earth Prisoner
and can make no more Music at all.’ As I was afraid of
the cruel Rock People, and did not want to be a prisoner
and lose my power to make Music, I have kept the key.


I I


As for the Rock People, they are tormented every day by
the free Echo Sprites who have promised each other to
haunt the doors of the dungeon, where the Baby Echo
Sprites are captive, and to play hide and seek with the
shadows there, so that the Rock Babies will be wakened
from their sleep and cry loudly. Each day, the Free Echo
Sprites come calling and knocking at the thickets outside
my weeny cave, pleading with me to give them the key to
unlock the deep dungeon and free the Captive Echoes,
but, even though I hear them weeping there, I dare not
give them the key because I fear the anger of the Rock
People. So, each day they come, I have to hide the key
in a new place so that they will not find it, but each day
I dry their tears and get out my practising pipe, and make
them forget their grief with the wonderful tunes I play.
When they are happy again I teach them new Echo tunes
to call across the valleys as they ride to and fro on their
arrows of light. But, O dear me! Now today I have used
up my last hiding place for the key of the dungeon, and
what am I to do about it I do not know.”
Here, the Little Music Maker of the Hill, finished his
story, and shook his bald head sadly, for, although the
Wind Lady had fanned all his anger away yet she could
not fan away his fear and worry about the key of the
dungeon, which belonged to the cruel Rock People. The
Wind Lady, however, had an idea, and she said
coaxingly:
“Bring out your key from its last hiding place and come


with us this very moment, to unlock the dungeon, for
Mr. Boot has Magic to protect us, and I have the greatest
power in the world for blowing anyone out of danger,
and I give you my promise that you shall not be made a
prisoner in your own cave, for each day I shall come and
blow away the rocks the cruel Rock People rain upon you
as fast as they throw them, so that they will grow weary
and go away and leave you in peace.”
“Are you very sure of what you say?” asked the little
Music Maker of the Hill. “I do so want to free the Captive
Echoes, and I do know a door
hidden at the back of the cave
which the Rock People have
forgotten, and never visit. But
first be very sure that you will
cool the tempers of the Rock
People each day as well as
blow their stones away, for I
do not want to lose my power
for Music-making.”
“I promise,” said the Wind
Lady.
“Then,” said the Little Music
Maker of the Hill, “Come
with me.”


The Little Music Maker of the Hill
helps Gyp and her friends free the
Captive Echoes.
The Little Music Maker of the Hill took from its last
hiding place, the key of the deep, dark dungeon, and left
his weeny Cave with Gyp, Boot, Barn Rat and Wind,
following one behind the other, creepity creep, in the
moonlight, with their funny shadows behind them. So
they went through the Wattle Forest and up on to the
private territory where the Rock People were still some-
where looking up searching for them in the sky. Luckily,


they passed unnoticed, although once they heard the
voices of the Rock People, shouting fiercely a long way
off as they ran helter skelter tumbling over their big feet.
At last the Little Music Maker led the way to a Lantana
Thicket which guarded the entrance of a low locked door;
there were no Lantana People guarding it, as the Rock
People had called them away to help them guard the
Quarry door, so there were no fierce soldiers at the thicket
to call boldly, “Who goes there?” or to hear the Little
Music Maker carefully place the hard feeling key in the
rusty lock. O dear, how everyone outside held their
breaths as there came a grating sound and the door
swung open widely and happily and stretched its joints
and said “Thank you.”
The Baby Echo Sprites were at the very far end of the
dungeon with their little noses pressed against the door
calling sadly in their little Echo voices, “O let us see the
sun again,” “Let us ride on arrows of light again, O Hard
Rock People.” But, when the moonlight began to steal
in from the far away open door at the other end, they
turned and rubbed their sad little eyes, and came drag-
ging their stone hobble chains, and holding out their
little hands to catch the moonbeams, on the dungeon
walls. My goodness me, they were so happy to be rescued
that they sang in the moonlight so loudly that the Rock
People pricked up their hard long ears and called to one
another and came running across to see what it was all
about. Boot, Gyp, Barn Rat, Wind, the Little Music


Maker, and the Baby Echo Sprites darted off quickly into
the Wattle Forest, and had just reached the Music Maker’s
weeny cave, when the Man in the Moon crossed his
Invisible Fingers very regretfully for his Magic had at
last given out. So, the Music Maker, taking the Wind
Fady’s promises with him, ran into his weeny cave to
find his practising pipe and shut himself safely away from
the anger of the Rock People and the happy little Baby
Echoes flew up to a hiding branch in the tree tops and
poor Wind had to blow Boot, Gyp and Barn Rat as fast


as she could to the bottom of the hill with the Rock
People coming helter skelter with their sharp stones
behind them. You have no idea what a terrible race it
was to get away from the angry Rock People, but thanks
to Wind’s blowing they were not caught. And Barn Rat,
he ran to his stable home, a wonderfully improved Rat
who had learned his lesson well. Poor Mr. Boot had by
this time, shrunk right down to his normal size and had
no voice left to speak of but he looked a very happy Boot
indeed, and it was as plain as anything that all the wild
adventures he had had that night, had not ruined his sole.
Gyp carried him quickly home in the creepy shadows of
the fields where the Sugar Cane Sprites were blowing
sweetly on their long leaf pipes among their hiding
jungles. The Wind Lady came with her up the farm road.
Goodnight,” said the Wind in a loud whisper as they
reached the stilted house on the slope, “Goodnight,”


\&y-
whispered back Gyp, as she tiptoed in to place Boot gently
down to snooze beside his mate on the floor. “Goodnight,
whispered Mr. Boot with a happy sigh as the last of his
Moon Magic went from his inside.


118 1
NATIONAL LIBRARY OF AUSTRALIA


#


