

Moral Courage.
He Prayeth Best . . .
. . . Who Liveth Best.
in.
The Problem.
Hartley Williams
Price
One Shilling.
1896.
MELVILLE, MULLEN & SLADE,
262 & 264 Collins Street, Melbourne,
and all Booksellers.




I have recently delivered at the request of the
Australian Natives Association, tzvo addresses ,
“ Moral Courage ” and “ //<? prayeth best who liveth
best." I have , since their delivery, received many
communications from residents in Victoria and in
the other Australian Colonies , inquiring where these
addresses can be obtained. I was obliged to reply
that the latter had not even been reduced to manu-
script. Following on this reply , I received numerous
requests to write and publish that address , which I
now comply with by publishing both addi'esses under
one cover. I have added a few observations on what
I may fairly call “ the problemfor the purpose ,
chiefly of showing that I have not (as has been
assumed) overlooked it and that I appreciate both its
importance and its difficulties.
HARTLEY WILLIAMS.
Melbourne, March , iBq6.




MORAL COURAGE.
OUR AGE in man or woman is an attribute which ought never to
fail to enlist and command the approbation, admiration and
applause of the world at large. Impulsive and reckless acts and
deeds of daring, of bravery in the battle-field or at sea, make the
heart beat faster, and create within each and every one of us a
sympathetic glow that no one of you in this room can, at some period
or other of your lives, have failed to experience. In a smaller degree,
but for the same reason, the acts and deeds of a brave dog in defence
of or to save a master or a child, of a wild beast bravely defending its
life against overwhelming assailants, produce a somewhat similar effect.
But this branch of courage, though naturally enlisting our sympathy
and commanding our admiration, is not in my opinion by any means
the highest, or even a high branch of courage. It may, for the most
part and speaking generally, be classed as animal courage. Some
people call it, and it is popularly known by the name of, physical
courage, but it is, I think, more fitly designated by the former term.
For the purpose of this lecture, I venture to place all acts of daring,
for the execution of which the actor has not called into play considera-
tion, forethought and judgment, under the head of animal courage.
To some extent this may be what Aristotle describes as the courage of
inexperience. On the other hand when a man embarks in a perilous
undertaking, after knowledge of the perils in front of him, and
appreciating those perils determines to confront them and to go through
with his undertaking, that man in my opinion possesses the highest
form of courage, not animal courage, but true courage, moral courage.
Of course I am here speaking, and this I wish you to bear in mind, of
voluntary agents, not of those who are under discipline. The man who
rushes into danger on impulse, or without weighing and appreciating
the perils and risks before him, possesses no higher degree of courage
than that of the wild beast, who, when enraged, rushes on his enemies.
All acts of reckless courage, unreasoning acts of bravery, impulsive


deeds of daring, may therefore be classed under that branch of courage
which I have designated as animal courage ; and though, as I have
said, this class of courage invariably excites admiration and applause,
and is highly attractive to the unreflective portion of mankind, it is
after all a spurious kind of courage, and not to be placed for one
moment in the same category, as that branch of courage which I have
described as true courage, moral courage. These few observations
have, I hope, given you some notion of what I mean by moral courage
in action, but there may also be a high degree of moral courage dis-
played in a certain kind of inaction. For instance, when under
temptation or strong inducement a person abstains from doing oi
uttering what he believes to be a wrong unjust or ungenerous act or
speech. At such a moment the act of abstention may be ridiculed and
jeered at as pusillanimous, priggish or Quixotic ; or your refusal to
co-operate in what you believe to be unjust or ungenerous may estrange
from you those whom you believed to be your friends and comrades;
or it may bring loss upon you, monetary, or that of promotion and
advancement; or it may deprive you of some much desired pleasure or
enjoyment. If notwithstanding all these, appreciating the strength
of the inducement or temptation, and the unpleasant nature of the
consequences which may follow, you remain true to your better self
and to what you believe to be right, you exhibit and are posssssed of
a degree of moral courage equal to that of the man who displays it in
that more conspicuous active way to which I have alluded. Now it is
on moral courage that I am here to address you this evening, but as, if
my definition be right, there are many aspects of it, I can only, in
the time at my disposal, discuss those aspects which appear to me to be
the most important, and which are, I regret to say, far short of being
developed to the extent to which I desire to see them developed in this
our native land. In Australia we have an abundance of animal
courage, and we have also, I am glad to say, a fair and average share of
true courage, moral courage, in many of its aspects. Our short histoiy
contains abundant instances of men and women who have embarked
on enterprises and undertakings fraught with danger and engirt with
peril, with full knowledge and with just appreciation of the hardships
and risks in front of them. Knowing and appreciating these, they
have not, as the timid would do, shrunk back, but have bravely and


resolutely pushed forward to their object. There is, however, a species
of true courage, in which I have with pain and regret observed, that
we, Australians, are lamentably deficient, and it is with the hope of
doing my little to assist in the cure of this short-coming in my fellow
countrymen that I have chosen my present subject.
I hope, imperfectly and lamely as I may express myself, in some
degree to secure your co operation in helping me to incite the young
men and women of Australia to remove this blot, and to make it, in
process of time, characteristic of our nation that we do not fear, nay,
do not hesitate to think for ourselves, to form after thought and
deliberation our own judgments, to speak what we honestly believe to
be the truth, to express and act up to our own honest convictions, to
refrain and abstain from doing acts which we believe to be wrong, and
from uttering that which may be unjust, ungenerous or unkind,
regardless of consequences and independently of the approbation or
disapprobation of others. Two lines of a great poet here occur to me
as of assistance in pointing my meaning—
“ And because right is right to follow right
Were wisdom in the scorn of consequence.”
Do not let us allow ourselves indolently to nurse a falsehood, or to
abstain from searching out the truth for ourselves merely because the
process may involve an expenditure of time, labour and thought; and
do not let us when we have found the truth, or what we honestly and
conscientiously believe to be the truth, refrain from giving it utterance
and effect, merely because the doing so may call down upon us either
harsh criticism or ridicule, or be regarded as singular, peculiar, eccentric
or Quixotic. It is the selfish, the mean, the calculating, the timid and
the cowardly who so refrain, and who so order and measure their
actions, their utterances, and their manner of life as to please that
“ sordid impersonal goddess who rules Society.” Beware even, though
one is often sorely tempted to do so, of attempting to compromise with
what we believe to be the truth, or to be right or to be wrong. We
often hear compromise spoken of as “ the virtue of compromise,” but
believe me, when I tell you, that to compromise with what you
believe to be the truth or to be right, is a vice and the act of a
coward. There has recently passed from amongst us a man, who, in all
the respects I have mentioned, was the embodiment of true courage,


moral courage. He may often have been wrong, he may have made
many mistakes, so has every one of us, not even excepting those
oracles of small coteries, clubs, leagues and Societies who deem them-
selves all but infallible. The man I refer to is one whose memory the
people of Australia will, I hope, cherish and love, respect and venerate
for all time. That which after thought and deliberation he believed to
be right, he uttered and did, regardless of consequences, indifferent to
the jeers and scorn, revilings and misrepresentations of those of his
own class, to the approbation or disapprobation of the world at large.
It mattered nothing to him what friends he estranged, or what enemies
he made, regardless of consequences, loss of position, of friends and
comrades, he fearlessly uttered that which he believed to be the truth,
he as fearlessly acted up to and endeavoured to carry out what he
believed to be right. You must all know to whom I refer—George
Higinbotham. Let the young men and women of Australia never
forget him, or his brave unselfish stainless life. Let it be their heart s
desire in nobility, honesty and integrity of purpose, in patient industry,
in fearless and resolute speech and action, in the scorn of consquence,
to come within measurable distance of that illustrious example.
To revert to less attractive matter, it is obvious that a man may have
the ability to evolve a noble, wise, and benefical project, and yet may
not have the courage to carry it into execution, to realize it. Timidity
may keep him back, and will in all probability furnish him with excuses
for not making the trial. A courageous man on the other hand, having
arrived at a determination, will calmly look all the difficulties that stand
in his way in the face, the censure, ridicule, and opprobrium that may
be heaped upon him when he begins to reduce his scheme to action, and
yet will “ dare to do all that may become a man.” Such a man is pre-
pared to meet all the consequences of his acts when they are accomplished.
The interests that have stirred him into action, he refuses to sacrifice for
ease and security. He probably knows that he must expect to meet the
strong dissapprobation of friends, and the malignant misrepresentation
of enemies, that he may cause sorrow to his relatives, that his comrades
may meet him with coldness, ungraciously, or even with reproaches.
Notwithstanding his appreciation of all these consequences he continues
on his course and resolutely refuses to sacrifice the object he has set
himself to pursue. Contempt and ridicule is another trial which he


may reasonably anticipate. Taunts, jeers, and scorn he may have to
sustain for a long period of his life, but these also he is prepared to
patiently endure. The man who shrinks from the task he proposes to
himself to undertake, from the fear that the world may laugh at
him, ridicule deride and misrepresent him, has not true courage. His
project may have been well thought out, may, if carried out, prove
useful, humane, and beneficial, but he has not the courage to bring
it to fruition. Consequently the good that might result from his
project is lost to humanity until the truly courageous man comes
forward to finish the work which the timidity of another has strangled.
A fine illustration of the courage that rises superior to the opinion of
the multitude, and to tempests of scorn, derision, and hostility may be
found in Milton’s description of Abdiel. You may remember the
occasion. When Lucifer gathers together his forces, the third part of
Heaven’s host, and makes them a harangue which is received with
approbation and applause, the Seraph Abdiel alone opposes his aims and
resolutions and those of his mighty host. He alone raises his voice in
remonstrance and opposition, knowing that he stands alone, that his
words will be received with scorn and derision, and that his opposition
will excite the furious anger of the multitude around him.
“ So spake the fervent Angel : but his zeal
None seconded, as out of season judged
Or singular and rash.
So spake the Seraph Abdiel, faithful found
Among the faithless, faithful only he :
Among innumerable false, unmoved,
Unshaken, unseduced, unterrified,
His loyalty he kept, his love, his zeal,
Nor number, nor example, with him wrought
To swerve from truth, or change his constant mind
Though single. From amidst them forth he passed
Long way through hostile scorn, which he sustained
Superior, nor of violence feared aught.”
Many a man who is a good and honest patriot at heart, fearful of
hostile criticism, of misrepresentation, of jeers and of abuse, of the loss
of friends, or of injury to his worldly position, refrains from giving
expression to the thoughts which burn within him. As a true patriot
he may judge a contemplated act or measure of his party, or of those in
power, to be unjust, or oppressive, and yet he shrinks from advocating
that which he believes to be right, and from raising his voice in protest


against that which he believes to be wrong, because he feels that if he
does so, he may and probably will be denounced as unpatriotic and as
disloyal to the nation to which he belongs. As an illustration of what
I here refer to, let me shortly place before you the position that Mr.
Gladstone took up in reference to that thorny and acrimonious measure,
Home Rule for Ireland. lam not now concerned with the rights or
wrongs of that question, whether that measure be just or unjust, politic
or impolitic, nor with the question whether Mr. Gladstone has often
during his life, or seldom, or never, been deficient in the great attribute
of moral courage—but this I do unhesitatingly assert, and I believe
that in course of time History will say the same, that in fathering,
advocating, and with all his energy and strength pursuing the measure
of Home Rule for Ireland, Mr. Gladstone displayed the very highest
degree of moral courage,
When he decided to take this measure up and devote to it all his
moral influence, and all the strength and energy which increasing years
had left to him, he well knew and thoroughly appreciated all that this
determination meant. He knew that it would involve an alienation,
indeed a separation for the remainder of his political life from many of
his oldest and dearest political and private friends : he knew that his
motives, utterances, and actions would be miscontrued and mis-
represented ; that he would be publicly branded as disloyal to his Queen
and as a traitor to his country- He fully appreciated the strength, the
ability, and the cohesion of the hostile forces opposed to him, and the
probability of numerous desertions from his own—yet notwithstanding
this distressing and disheartening outlook, because in his own heart and
conscience he believed that this measure was right and just, and that it
would be the means of binding the people of England and Ireland
together in a firmer and more lasting union, he put his hand to the
plough, and under conditions, which we might reasonably have antici-
pated, would have disheartened, if not have overwhelmed even so
exceptional a man, henever for one moment turned aside from the pursuit
of the object he had set before his mind, until the course of nature and
the demands of nature compelled him to do so.
Similarly a man may be a good citizen, and yet be a pronounced a
Communist or Anarchist, because believing the cause to be just, he takes
an active part with the weak against the strong, with the inferior against


the superior ; a hair brained enthusiast, because he raises his voice on
behalf of those who are being oppressed or ground down ; grand-motherly
because he takes action to elevate those below him, and to help and
protect those who are unable to help or protect themselves. Hostile
and selfish criticism and misrepresentation of this kind, often degenera-
ting into vituperation and abuse, is powerless to induce the humane and
truly courageous man to desist from his task, and to sacrifice the
interests that he has at heart for selfish ease and ignoble security.
At the commencement of this lecture I mentioned, if you recollect,
that a high degree of moral courage may often be displayed in inaction,
in, when under temptation or strong inducement, abstaining from
conduct, or act, or speech, which may be wrong, selfish, unjust or
ungenerous, even though the effect of such abstention may be to
deprive you of some long-looked-for pleasure or enjoyment, or to
estrange comrades and friends, or to expose you to sneers, jeers and
derision. A touching instance of moral courage in abstention is that
of Enoch Arden. No doubt many of you remember the tale of his
love, his sufferings, his patient endurance, and his heroism. He, a
sailor lad, and Phillip Ray, a miller’s son, loved the prettiest and
sweetest girl of an English port. She marries Enoch, and he makes
for her a pretty comfortable nest, where for many years they lived most
happily and lovingly together, and where children are borne to them.
Then Enoch meets with an accident, bad times come, and adversity
stares him in the face. Enoch is forced to sell his trading boat, and
when he recovers from his injuries, he goes to sea as boatswain of a
merchant ship. His parting from his loving and much loved wife and
children is full of pathos, and enlists our tenderest sympathy. Eventu-
ally the ship is wrecked, and all are lost
“ But Enoch and two others. Half the night
Buoyed upon floating tackle and broken spars
These drifted, stranding on an isle at morn
Rich, but the loneliest in a lonely sea.”
There his two companions shortly die, and Enoch lived alone waiting
for a sail.
“No sail from day to day, but every day
The sunrise broken into scarlet shafts
The blaze upon the waters to the east:
The blaze upon his Island overhead :


The blaze upon the waters to the west:
Then the great stars that globed themselves in heaven
The hollower bellowing ocean, and again
The scarlet shafts of sunrise— hut no sail.”
“ There often as he watched, or seemed to watch,
So still, the gold lizard on him paused ;
A phantom, made of many phantoms, moved
Before him, haunting him, or he himself
Moved haunting people, things and places, known
Far in a darker isle beyond the line :
The babes, their babble, Annie, the small house,
The climbing street, the mill, the leafy lanes,
The horse he drove, the boat he sold, the chill
November dawns and dewy-glooming downs,
The gentle shower, the smell of dying leaves,
And the low moan of leaden coloured seas.”
There in solitude, in this “beauteous hateful Isle,” Enoch waiting and
watching for a sail spent year after year, and
“ His hopes to see his own
And pace the sacred old familiar fields
Not yet had perished, when his lonely doom ”
came suddenly to an end. He is rescued by a passing ship, whose
officers and men pitying the lonely man, raise amongst themselves a
fund of support for him, and land him in that harbour “ whence he
sailed before.” There and then, Enoch speaking no word to any one,
his heart foreshadowing calamity, seeks his home, and he reaches the
home
“ where Annie lived and loved him
And his babes in those far off seven years were born.”
But finding it untenanted, he thinking “ dead, or dead to me ” turns
back to the port, seeking a tavern which of old he knew, and there he
rests silent many days. From the garrulous landlady (one Miriam
Lane) who does not recognise him, he hears the story of his wife, his
children and his home ; of the poverty which befell them after his
departure, his baby’s death : how Phillip put the others to school, of
his long wooing of Annie, of her slow and reluctant consent and of her
marriage with Phillip ; of the birth of Phillip’s child, and of how
“ Enoch, poor man, was cast away and lost ”
Then “ Enoch yearned to see her face again;
If I might look on her sweet face again
And know that she is happy.”


So on a dull November night he goes to Phillip’s house, steals into the
little garden, and through the window this is what he saw.
“ On the right hand of the genial hearth he saw
Philip, the slighted suitor of old times,
Stout, rosy, with his babe across his knees:
And o’er her second father stoopt a girl,
A later but a loftier Annie Lee,
Fair haired and tall, and from her lifted hand
Dangled a length of ribbon and a ring
To tempt the babe, who reared his creasy arms,
Caught at and ever missed it, and they laughed ;
And on the left hand of the hearth he saw
The mother glancing oft toward her babe,
But turning now and then to speak with him,
Her son, who stood beside her tall and strong,
And saying that which pleased him, for he smiled.”
“ Now when the dead man come to life beheld
His wife, his wife no more, and saw the babe,
Hers, yet not his, upon the father’s knee,
And all the warmth, the peace, the happiness,
And his own children tall and beautiful,
And him, that other, reigning in his place
Lord of his rights, and of his children’s love—
“ Then he, though Miriam Lane had told him all,
Because things seen are mightier than things heard,
Staggered, and shook, and feared,
To send abroad a shrill and terrible cry,
Which in one moment, like the blast of doom,
Would shatter all the happiness of the hearth.”
“ He therefore turning softly like a thief,
Lest the harsh shingle should grate underfoot,
And feeling all along the garden wall
Lest he should swoon and tumble and be found,
Crept to the gate, and opened it, and closed
It lightly as a sick man’s chamber door
Behind him, and came out upon the waste.
And there he would have knelt, but that his knees
Were feeble, so that falling prone he dug
His fingers into the wet earth and prayed.”
“ Too hard to bear ! Why did they take me thence ?
Oh God Almighty, blessed Saviour, Thou,
That did’st uphold me in my lonely isle
Uphold me, Father, in my loneliness
A little longer ! Aid me, give me strength
Not to tell her, never to let her know,


Help me not to break in upon her peace.
My children too ! Must I not speak to these ;
They know me not. I should betray myself.
Never : no father’s kiss for me—the girl
So like her Mother, and the boy, my son.”
Then he rises and paces
“ Back toward his solitary home again,
Beating it in upon his weary brain,
As though it were the burthen of a song,
Not to tell her, never to let her know.”
There in that tavern, he sickens and dies, broken by grief and solitude,
holding his purpose till he dies, with his last breath blessing and
praying for her who was his wife, and blessing and praying for his
children. “So past the strong heroic soul away.”
Under the description “ sordid impersonal Goddess ” I have in the
course of this lecture mentioned to you a lady whose influence is not
beneficial, but detrimental to the development and exercise of moral
courage. She has thousands of worshippers, none of whom love her,
all of whom fear her, many of whom hate her. Her name is “ Mrs.
Grundy.” In effect her sway is pernicious and immoral. To please her
men and women pretend to be what they are not, utter what they do
not believe, and do what they do not enjoy. Under her malign and
demoralising influence men and women become hypocrites and cowards,
and as a reward for their submission to her, this contemptible old
lady gives them plenary indulgence to commit in private as many
irregularities as they please, informing them, however, that the crime
unpardonable is detection. Let a Grundian sentiment be uttered, it
is received with a chorus of assent and approval from those who at
heart either absolutely dissent, or who have in regard to it no mind.
Let an opinion which is displeasing to this sordid and worldly old lady
be expressed, and it is received in silence, with loquacious dissent, or
inane ridicule. Departure from truth, failure of moral courage,
shams'’and frivolities of all kinds in speech and action, opposition
to and denunication of what is right, humane, honest and just, are
encouraged and applauded by her, in proportion as each of these vices
may serve her purpose or minister to the easy running of the wheels of
what is called “ Society.” A highly talented and gifted lady who
writes under the nom de plume of “ Ouida ” has recently in a book
entitled “ Views and Opinions” attacked and shown up in vivid colours


the sins, shams, hypocrisies, hollowness and extravagances of Society.
She certainly is not a devotee of Mrs. Grundy, and were one quite sure
that she moves in those circles which she exposes and castigates, her
outspokenness might justly be regarded as characteristic of the
possession of a very high degree of moral courage. Writing of the
want of refinement in Society, she attributes it in a great degree to
the vulgarity of many of those, who are designated by Mrs. Grundy
as “ smart,” an epithet which by the way “ Ouida ” informs us has
been borrowed by those, who aspire to the designation, from the
vocabulary of kitchen-maids. Writing of the low standard of honour
and principle which pervades Society she says, “ the naughty clever
people know how to keep their sins unseen—the candid warm-hearted
people always sin the sole sin, which really injures anybody—they get
found out.” Referring to the scramble, that is continually going on
amongst those who constitute Society, not to be left behind, to keep in
the swim, she writes as follows : —“ We desire a crowd on our
stairs, and a crush in our rooms, as evidence of our popularity
and our distinction. We are so tormented by the desire to
pack 48 hours into 24 that we gobble our time up breathlessly
without tasting its flavour, as a greedy Schoolboy gobbles
up stolen pears without peeling them. Of the true delights of
conversation, leisure, thought, art and solitude, Society en masse has
hardly more idea than a flock of geese has of Greek. The great
malady of the age is the absolute inability to support solitude or to
endure silence. There is nothing more costly than this hatred of one’s
own company, than this lack of resources and occupations independent
of other persons. What ruins many households is the expense of
continual visiting and inviting. Everybody detests entertaining, but
as they all know that they must receive to be received, people ruin
themselves in entertainment. It is not the home which ruins people,
it is the incessant breathless round of intermingled sport and pleasure,
danced on the thin ice of debt, and kept up frequently for mere
appearance sake , without any genuine enjoyment , only from a kind of
false shame, and an inability to endure life out of a crowd. Society
has no pleasure which is graceful or elevating except music, but
music listened to in a crowd loses half its influence. An incessant
and maladif restlessness has become the chief characteristic of Society


now-a-days. It is accounted a calamity beyond endurance to be six
months at a time in one place. Every event in persons’ lives is a cause
or an excuse for indulgence in peregrination.” The writer then proceeds
to attack the fashion which obtains in Society of making presents to
betrothed people, which she calls “abominable blackmail,” also the
fashion of piling masses of decaying wreaths and floral crosses upon a
coffin, which she calls “ senseless barbarism,” and continues thus : “Of
all spectacles which Society flocks to see, it may certainly be said that
the funeral and the wedding are the most intolerably coarse and
clumsy. There is indeed a curious and comical likeness between these
two. Both take place in a crowd : both are the cause for extortion
and expenditure : both are attended unwillingly and saluted with
false formulae of compliment. Both are “ seen out ” and “ got
through ” with sighs of relief from the spectators : and both are cele-
brated with the sacrifice of many myriads of flowers crucified in
artificial shapes in their honour. Princes and trades-people have in
each case decreed that this shall be so, and Society has not will or
wisdom enough to resist the decree. There cannot be a more Philistian
jumble of greed, show, indecency and extravagance than are com-
pressed into the marriage festivities of our great cities.”
These extracts will have given you some notion of the writers’ out-
spokenness, of her moral courage in exposing evils and abuses which she
honestly believes to exist, and of her fearlessness of and contempt for
Mrs. Grundy. Should you desire to know more of “ Ouida ’ in these
respects I must leave you to read for yourselves this her latest and best
work. We may not be and I hope that we are not, admirers of many
of “Ouida’s” works and there may be many of her opinions, as expressed
in this, her latest work, to which we feel ourselves unable to give
unqualified assent, but if we are honest and candid, we must, I think,
admit that there is a great deal of solid, wholesome truth in many of the
views and opinions which she expresses, and in many of the judgments
which she passes.
How, then, are these evils to be repressed, these abuses to be checked ?
The answer seems to me to be, by the exercise of moral courage. If
half-a-dozen of those who are in the front of Society were to raise their
voices with no uncertain sound in protest against the continuance of the
evils and abuses, the shams, hypocrisies, frivolities, and extravagances


which “ Ouida ” so mercilessly and fearlessly exposes, and by the actions
and conduct of their daily lives were unmistakably to demonstrate to
Society their inflexible determination to use life in a healthy, virtuous,
temperate, and useful manner, and to encourage others to do the same,
I have little doubt but that little by little the court of Mrs. Grundy
would become broken up, and that within a reasonable time it would
come to be regarded as a sin and as a crime to abuse the great and
precious gift of life, and that in the place of artificial, unhealthy and
pernicious desires and pursuits, we may hope to see rising from their
ashes, the natural and healthy longing and desire to use life well, to
use it wisely, to live it from day to day in a manner that may prove
wholesome and beneficial not only to ourselves but also to mankind at
large.
In conclusion ; if after mature reflection and consideration you
believe a certain action to be right, or the expression of a certain
opinion to be demanded of you as an honest truth-speaking man, give
each effect, do the one and utter the other—but in so acting, in so
speaking be not personal, wantonly aggressive, offensive, or inconsiderate.
Act and speak courageously but calmly, courteously and patiently.
Subject to this do not stop to consider how this act or that opinion
will be viewed or received, whether it will be received with approbation
or with disapprobation-; whether it will be politic to so act, or whether
this or that opinion will be palatable to those around you. “ Perish
policy and cunning,” “ Fear God and do the right.”
Remember, lay to heart, and in your daily life never cease to act upon
that pearl among precepts which Polonius enjoins on Laertes,
“ To thine ownself be true :
And it must follow, as the night the day,
Thou can’st not then be false to any man.”




“HE PRAYETH BEST WHO LIVETH BEST”
T HAVE taken as the subject of my address to you this evening the
line of a well-known poet transformed by the alteration of a letter.
In making this minute alteration I do not seek, even were I capable of
so doing, to improve on Coleridge. I adopt his sentiment without
reservation, as you will, I hope, see before I conclude this address, and
in “ liveth best ” I include “ loveth best.” “ Liveth best ” appears to
me to be by far the more comprehensive term, for to “ live best ” a
man or woman must not only “ love best,” but must perfect as far as
possible various other elevating moral attributes.
Now, in addressing you on this serious and, I hope, interesting and
instructive subject, it shall be my earnest endeavour not to say one
word which can reasonably offend or hurt the feelings of a single man
or woman in this hall. I hope to be able to speak seriously, earnestly,
reverently and temperately. I wish to commend what I say to your
sound reason and your sober judgment ; if you will listen to me with
attention, use your reason, and exercise, after reflection and reason,
judgment, I shall be more than satisfied. If, after an honest use of
these most precious faculties, you should find yourselves unable to
agree either with the whole or with any part of what I say, I can have
no right to feel aggrieved. It is I repeat to your reason and to your
unprejudiced judgment after reason and reflection that I address
myself on a subject, which all will admit is of the highest importance
to our happiness here, and which the majority of mankind will admit is
of still greater importance to our happiness hereafter. Now what do
I mean by the statement that “he prayeth best who liveth best?”
Shortly put I mean this, that he, who lives the best life, is the most
religious man. This definition compels me to point out to you
that Religion and Theology, Religion and Orthodoxy, are by no means
identical. In my opinion a man may be thoroughly religious, and yet
absolutely indifferent to Theology, absolutely unorthodox ; he may lead


the very best life, and yet care nothing for the science of religion,
which is Theology, he may lead the very best life, and yet decline to
trouble himself as to the truth or validity of the various doctrines and
dogmas, rites and ceremonies, of the various Churches. He feels, and
his reason and his conscience both tell him, that, if he leads
the best life, the life that conduces most to his own happiness,
and to that of those around him here, and that should, according to
right reason, ensure his happiness hereafter, it is of little or of no
importance whether he believes or does not believe in justification by
works, or by faith, original sin, infant or adult baptism, predestination,
election, or the Athanasian Creed. We have been told that God is
a Spirit, and that they who worship Him must worship Him in spirit
and in truth. Jesus in the most emphatic way, when he was asked
which is the first and great commandment replied, “ Thou shalt
love the Lord thy God with all thy heart and with all thy soul and
with all thy mind, this is the first and great commandment; and
the second is like unto it thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself ;
on these two commandments hang all the law and the prophets.”
St. James says “Pure religion and undefiled before God and the
Father is this, to visit the fatherless and widows in their affliction and
to keep oneself unspotted from the world,” and Micah says “ What doth
the Lord require of thee, but to do justly and to love mercy and to
walk humbly with thy God.” Thus you will observe that if we
penetrate behind the mists, clouds and trappings, which in this
nineteenth century veil and obscure the essentials of true religion, we
shall find that the truly religious man is the man who loves the Great
Spirit, the Great Spirit of Love and Mercy and Purity, with all his
heart and soul, who loves his neighbour as himself, who living a pure
life keeps himself unspotted from the world, who is merciful, humble
and charitable. He who loves his neighbour as himself, loves the Great
Spirit. “ The second is like unto it thou shalt love thy neighbour as
thyself.”
“ Oh Brother man fold to thy heart thy brother ; ”
“ Where pity dwells the peace of God is there,”
“ To worship rightly is to love each other,”
“ Each smile a hymn, each kindly word a prayer,”
This therefore is no new religion that I am introducing to you ; it is
on the other hand a very old, very beautiful, very simple and pure


religion that I am endeavouring to lead your minds back to. Its
simplicity, beauty and purity have become lamentably disfigured and
mutilated, if not destroyed, by the mysteries created by Theology, by
the dogmas and doctrines invented by man since the death of Jesus.
What are the most beautiful features of that old religion 1 its sim-
plicity, its purity, its humanity. When, after penetrating behind the
veil, we rediscover it with these, and only these, characteristics, and
place it side by side with what is called Orthodoxy or Theology, our
reason and our judgment impel us to the conclusion that the mysteries,
dogmas and doctrines, rites and ceremonies, of the Churches are not
merely useless fringe and trappings, but far worse, that for the purposes
of the Churches, they have been invented, kept alive, added to and
emphasised as being essential to true religion. Again you will observe
that lam not commending to you morality without religion. No one
who believes, as I do, in the existence and presence of the Great
Spirit of Love, Mercy and Purity, and in a future spiritual state, can
insist upon morality as being the one thing needful. Understand that
I am far from disguising from myself, or from you, the existence of
the fact, that there have been and are men and women who, not
believing or disbelieving in a God and a future state, have led and are
leading good, noble, pure and unselfish lives. I refer to those who are
known as Agnostics and Materialists. It is a matter of deep regret
to me to hear truly good men and women belonging to the one or the
other of these two classes of thought, branded and sneered at as vain,
foolish and conceited persons. In reverence, in charity, in love for
their fellow-man, in the nobility and purity of their lives, and in their
altruism, many of them are indeed burning and shining lights to a
large majority of those, who comfort themselves with the reflection
that they are not as these Publicans. I say many, advisedly; for no
one can have a stronger feeling of repulsion, than that which I possess,
to the coarse, irreverent, blatant, noisy Agnostic or Materialist. I
could mention many illustrious names as illustrations of the truth and
accuracy of my protest on behalf of charity and justice, but let it suffice to
mention three, those of Huxley, John Stuart Mill, and Herbert Spencer.
Who can truthfully say that the aim and object of those men’s lives
has been, without hope of reward either in this life, or in a hereafter,
other than that of doing the best they could for their fellow-men, and


by the devotion of their efforts and their lives to leave the world at
their deaths better than when they entered it. If there be standards
of morality, as there are, surely the morality of such men as these,
absolutely unselfish as it must be, deserves to be described as morality
of the highest possible standard. Their good deeds, their daily conduct,
their noble, useful, unselfish lives, unconscious as they may be of the
fact, constitute a continual acceptable prayer to the Great Spirit,
equally unconsciously to themselves, display their love to him and
exhibit to a conspicuous degree the fulfilment of the second great
commandment of Jesus, “ The second is like unto it, thou shalt love
thy neighbour as thyself.”
Matthew Arnold in “ Culture and Anarchy ” makes the observation
that “ a human nature perfect on the moral side is the dominant idea
of religion,” and to the reasoning and unprejudiced mind the truth of
this observation commends itself; but there is a very large majority of
earnest men and women who would fail in the courage, resolution, and
perseverance, necessary for the purpose of leading a perfect moral life,
unless they felt and believed that they could and would derive help,
assistance and support from an external power, from spiritual influences.
This brings me to the subject of prayer.
Recalling to your mind once more that “ God is a Spirit and that
they who worship Him must worship Him in spirit and in Truth,” I
believe that if we pray from our hearts earnestly and sincerely for
Spiritual help and for Spiritual gifts, if we make these the burden of
our prayers, if we in that spirit ask the Great Divine Spirit for
spiritual light, strength, guidance and consolation, meaning and
determined to act up to and to be faithful to our highest and most
worthy thoughts and conceptions of God, and of what his worship and
his service demand, we shall derive that spiritual help, light, strength,
guidance, and consolation for which we pray. But let me here in this
connection impress upon you that these aspirations will be ineffective,
unless they are accompanied by continuous effort and action. These
spiritual aspirations must not be mere passing emotions. Their
influences should be seen in our daily actions, in our daily common life.
If our daily common life be so conducted, as to be in harmony with
the holy, pure and loving Spirit of God, such a life will not only be
acceptable to Him, but, I believe, it will be the highest and best


worship which man or woman can render to Him, In other words “he
prayeth best who liveth best.” Many of us who possess, and are
conscious of, spiritual aspirations when engaged in prayer, feel a certain
amount of spiritual elevation, feel that we earnestly desire to lead
purer, more unselfish, more loving and more useful lives ; but too often,
this is but a transitory emotion. Unless these spiritual promptings
and impulses be strengthened and followed by resolution, perseverance,
and by more frequent, leading to continuous and habitual, expression
in our daily lives, unless these aspirations and impulses produce and
are followed by worthy actions, unless we firmly and continuously
adhere to what we know to be right, and to what we believe to be
acceptable to the Great Spirit, our prayer for Spiritual gifts will be of
little avail. On the other hand, if we make this honest determined
effort, and, undaunted by failure now and again, persist in it, we shall,
I do firmly believe, derive that aid, that support, that guidance which
I have mentioned ; the effort will cease to be an effort, and will
become the peace-giving continuous habitual expression of our daily
lives. I attach no importance to the form, by which, this desire of
the soul to be in closer communion with the Divine Spirit, is expressed.
The secret unknown prayer or aspiration of any one of you, whether
sitting in your office, or in your place of business, in your walks
abroad, in your home, is in my opinion as acceptable to God, and as of
much avail, as if breathed or uttered in a place of worship. But though
I believe in, and fully recognise the efficacy and validity of, prayer to
the extent, and for the purposes which I have specified, I do not
believe in the efficacy of prayer for material changes, or for material
gifts. The laws of nature are fixed and invariable. They are
assumed to be of Divine appointment, and to be in harmony with the
Divine will. It is, to say the least, in the highest degree improbable,
that the Divine Author of these laws would alter or regulate
them for the benefit of a portion of mankind here or there, or
in accordance with the judgment of this or that body of men.
But further, there is no proof whatever that prayers either for
material changes, or for material gifts, have ever been answered,
have ever been effectual. There may be hundreds, perhaps even
thousands of instances, in which persons imagine that prayers of
this description have been answered ; as, for instance, when occasionally


rain has followed within a short time after prayers for rain; when
occasionally a sick person recovers from a dangerous illness after
prayers for that person’s lecovery ; when an officer in the Army or
Navy comes safely through a series of battles after prayers for his
preservation. Such instances as these, and others of the same kind,
seem, but only seem, to be an answer to prayer. Admitting that such
instances are numerous, instances to the contrary are simply multitudi-
nous. How many scores of times have prayers for rain, or for the cessation
of rain, been in vain ? Do prayers in Queensland for the cessation of
rain, or for milder down-pourings of it, in anyway alter or mitigate the
deluges that work such havoc and destruction both of life and property
in that great colony ? Think of the scores of thousands of officers and
men in the armies of the Christian nations of Europe, who, even
during the present century, have been destroyed in battle, or by the
pestilences and hardships that are the accompaniments of war. Was
the preservation of none of these the subject of unceasing earnest
prayer 1 ? How many thousands of wives, husbands and children have
been carried off by disease and sickness, ending in death, for whose
recovery loved and loving ones have never ceased to plead with God.
When cholera, small-pox, or other pestilences invade and work havoc
in our crowded cities, how many thousands of God-respecting families
seek refuge and safety in flight, instead of remaining in their homes
under the protection of the Great Father! When two Christian
nations are engaged in war with one another, both offer up fervent
prayer to God for victory in battle, each considers itself under His
special protection. The one wins a victory, and a day of thangsgiving
is set apart. Shortly, the other triumphs, and a “Te Deum laudamus ”
is celebrated. Out of innumerable instances of the inefficacy of prayer
in connection with our material concerns, let me direct your attention
to a few. When General Gordon was shut up in Khartoum, all
England was praying for his safety and protection. As message after
message brought tidings of his continued security, many a pen
described, and many a tongue proclaimed, how God was watching over
and preserving his pure, unselfish, devoted life. Almost immediately
afterwards came the tidings of his assassination. When, only a very
short time ago, a number of English missionaries in China, good men
and women, warned of the dangers that surrounded them, were urged


to fly, what was their reply ? That they felt perfectly safe in God’s
hands ; that they knew that He, to whom they were praying for pro-
tection, would never allow their enemies to prevail against them.
Hardly had the reply been given before they were cruelly and brutally
massacred. When, a few years ago, during a tremendous volcanic
convulsion in New Zealand, in which the famous pink and white ter-
races were destroyed, lakes filled up, and the configuration of mountains
altered, a body of Christian Maories fled for refuge to a cave, and with
their bibles and prayer-books in their hands, pleaded with God to
shelter and protect them. While so engaged, they were boiled alive in
lava. Even the consecrated house of prayer is not protected. Churches
of all denominations have been from time to time destroyed by light-
ning, by fire, by flood. The same reason, that urges devout men and
women to flee from a plague-stricken city, inculcates upon worshippers
the advisability and necessity of protecting God’s-House with a light-
ning conductor. Viewed as a matter of evidence, the weight of evidence
against the efficacy of prayer for material gifts, material changes, mate-
rial advantages, seems to be overwhelming. Thousands of little
children, in the great and crowded cities of the world, perish in every
year of cold and starvation. Thousands of good, unselfish, patient,
loving and grief-stricken mothers offer up the prayers and supplications
of an agonised heart for a little fuel, a little food—but in vain—there
is no help —no hope ! The poor unhappy mother, unaided, helpless,
hopeless, witnesses the sufferings, then the death of her little ones.
But before leaving this subject, let me ask you to further
consider, as a question of quality , which class of prayer deserves
to be placed on the higher standard—prayer for material gifts,
material advantages, or prayer for spiritual gifts ? Surely, no right,
fair-minded man or woman can for an instant hesitate to affirm,
that in this connection the superiority of prayer for spiritual gifts
is undeniable. Again, if we believe in a future life, as a matter
of value, which kind of prayer is of the greater value? Surely,
prayer for such gifts as will best fit us for the transition into a purely
spiritual state —
“ There is no death : what seems so is transition ;
This life of mortal breath
Is but the suburb of the life Elysian,
Whose portal we call death.”


The great opposing force to the development and perfecting of the
spiritual side of our nature is that which emanates from the animal
side. Of the strength and persistency of this force, I apprehend that
we are all painfully conscious. The struggle, of necessity, therefore,
should and must be to develop and perfect the spiritual part of our
nature, so as to make it prevail over the animal. This should be our
effort, if we desire to fit ourselves for communion with the Great Spirit
and for a future spiritual existence. As I have said before, if we make
this effort honestly, determinedly, and continuously, and pray to the
Great Spirit to assist and uphold us by those pure and holy influences
which proceed from Him, not only will the effort gradually become less
and less severe, but it will in time resolve itself into that peace-giving,
habitual expression of our daily lives to which I have in a previous
portion of this address referred.
You may ask me what are these spiritual gifts for which we ought
to pray, for the attainment of which we should make this effort, which
enter into the composition of that which I call “ the best life.” I
will endeavour, to the best of my ability and understanding, to answer
this natural and reasonable inquiry. Without assuming to exhaust the
list, I think that the man who possesses the fullest measure of Purity,
Love, Charity and Modesty, and of all that is comprised within and
under these four great attributes, is the most religious man : leads the
best life, and prayeth best.
To lead a pure life, to live a life unspotted from the world, a man
must not only live chastely, but he must also live temperately. He
must keep under control, and subdue, the passions and desires of the
animal side of his nature, more particularly those of sexual gratifica-
tion and of the appetite. Further, not only should the pure life be
chaste and temperate, but it should also be honest, untainted by deceit
or hypocrisy, stamped with truth, and clothed with integrity. All this
and more than this is included in the leading of a pure life. To lead a
loving and a charitable life, a man must not only love his wife and
children, remembering that—
“ To make a happy fireside clime
For weans and wife
Is the true pathos and sublime
Of human life,” —
and bestow alms on the poor, but he must practise altruism


in its widest and fullest sense. The conquest of self, the constant
sacrifice of our own desires and interests for those of others, sympathy
with the pursuits, pleasures, troubles, and sorrows of those with whom
we may be brought in contact, consideration for their feelings and
happiness,—gentleness and love to and forbearance and patience with
all, kindly allowance for our neighbour’s shortcomings, an honest desire
to speak kindly and to think well of others, to speak unkindly of none,
generous thoughts, words and actions, all these are characteristics of
the man or woman who possesses a full measure of the gracious
attributes of Love and Charity. And yet it is strange how frequently
we find that those, who take upon themselves the title of ministers of
Love and Charity, are conspicuous for harsh narrow unjust thoughts
and views of others, for want of consideration for the feelings of
others, for an absence of generous sympathy, and in lieu of
the humility, which they preach and affect, exhibit unmistakeable
evidence of intellectual and spiritual pride, pouring out vials of
wrath, abuse, derision and contempt upon those who, though they may
be unable to pronounce their own particular shibboleth, may yet be
leading a life of equal purity, and be exhibiting in their daily common
lives the possession of a fuller measure of that all-embracing Love and
Charity, which I have endeavoured to describe. To be Modest, involves
the possession amongst other qualities of a full measure of reverence
and humility. The modest man reverences and respects all that is
noble, pure, good, and that is truly great. Though he may be gifted
with knowledge, superior to that possessed by the large majority of
mankind, he never ceases to be conscious of his own ignorance, of how
much he has yet to learn, of the necessity of searching for truth and
light. He bows his head before the unknown, and in the presence of
the mysteries of the Universe. Striving and searching reverently for
the truth, he unostentatiously calmly and courageously endeavours to
dissipate the clouds, to lift the veil. He is humble and lowly in his
estimation of himself, unconscious of, and bearing no trace of, intel-
lectual, moral, or spiritual pride. His reverence is sincere and deeply
felt, his humility is real and unaffected. In conclusion, let me again
make that appeal to you, with which I commenced this address ; by
your reason, by your powers of reflection and by sound and calm
judgment decide, whether or no, the man, who leads the best life, the


most spiritual life, who concurrently with the subjugation of the animal
side of his nature, has brought into the highest state of perfection the
spiritual, is not the most religious man, though he be unorthodox,
though he refuses to believe in this or that theological doctrine or
dogma : Whether such a man does not pray best, though he may be
unable to pronounce the shibboleth of this or that sect, or declines to
give his adherence to this or that confession of faith.
Remember the two great commandments : the first, Love the Great
Spirit of Love, Purity and Truth with all your heart, and the second,
which is like unto it, Love thy neighbour as thyself. Pure religion
and undefiled before God and the Father is this, to visit the fatherless
and widows in their affliction, and to keep oneself unspotted from the
world. Do justly, love mercy and walk humbly with thy God.
“ Follow with reverent steps the great example ”
“ Of Him, Whose holy work was doing good.”
“ So shall the wide earth seem our Father’s temple,”
“ Each loving life a psalm of gratitude.”
Strive and persevere in your efforts to lead this best life, and with
determined effort and perseverance, aided by earnest prayer for spiritual
gifts and to be enabled to lead a spiritual life, the struggle will cease,
and in its place you will find peace, contentment, comfort, happiness.
Let me before I resume my seat recall to your memory those well-known
lines contained in Pope’s Universal Prayer, pregnant as they are with
earnest supplication for spiritual direction, for spiritual guidance, and
with the spirit of true humility and reverence,
“ If I am right, thy grace impart ”
“ Still in the right to stay. ; ”
“ If I am wrong, oh teach my heart ”
“ To find the better way.”


“THE PROBLEM.”
TT LEYEN years ago I published a little work called “ Religion
without Superstition.” The object I had in view was to prove that
the only belief that we can rationally affirm, is that of a belief in a
Supreme Being. I therefore naturally concluded my work with that
which is in it entitled “ Part Y. A pure faith-God.” This little book
attained a degree of popularity which surprised me, running as it did
through three editions within a very short space of time. I have since
been frequently solicited to republish it, but for private reasons I have
hitherto abstained from doing so. Strange to say, the last part, part
Y., that dealing with “ A pure faith-God ” provoked the wrath of the
then Anglican Bishop of Melbourne, now Bishop of Manchester, Dr.
Moorhouse. In the third edition, I replied at length both to his
sermons, and to his newspaper contributions, upon the subject of my
views as expressed both in the fifth part and in the other parts of my
book. In one of his sermons he used the following words, “ The
inspiration of that pamphlet is a shallow optimism that shuts its eyes
to pain in nature and sin in man. It thinks it enough to point to the
bird singing in the hedge and the cloud stained by the sunset. But
what if we point to the hawk striking down that bird and the forked
lightning leaping from the bosom of that cloud and striking down the
good man passing beneath it 1 What if, with the poet laureate, we
point to all nature “red in beak and claw,” if we urge, with John
Stuart Mill, that Nature is guilty of all the crimes for which men are
punished ; if with some of the deepest philosophers of our own time,
men like Schopenhauer and Leopardi, we produce the facts of nature
and of human life which led them to cry in anguish of heart that this
is the worst possible of all conceivable worlds 1 What is our shallow
optimist’s answer to all this ? ”
Now this flow of eloquence was produced, not by the destructive
portion of my little work, or as the Bishop preferred to call it,


pamphlet, but by the constructive portion, that affirming the existence
of a Supreme beneficent Being, of an all-loving God. Again, quite
recently, since the delivery of the address “He prayeth best who
liveth best,” the head of another religious denomination, the Presby-
terian, attacked me on the same point, for the same reasons and upon
the same grounds, also citing against my conception of a Beneficent
and Loving God those famous lines of Tennyson which the then head
of the Anglican Denomination had used for the same purpose eleven
years ago.
Now, arguments, observations and criticisms like these coming from
Materialists or Agnostics would not surprise me, as I have for many
years been conversant with them as coming from that quarter. But it
did and does astound me to hear arguments of this description proceed-
ing from the mouths of those who, I have always thought, conceived
the Supreme to be absolutely beneficent, all-loving. Why are they
enraged with me because I write and speak of a loving and beneficent
God ? What do they mean ? What is the conclusion at which they
desire their hearers to arrive or to which they seek to drive me ? Do
they mean that the Supreme is not absolutely beneficent, or that if
beneficent, he is not Omnipotent ? Do they mean that he is a God of
only limited power and consequently of limited love. This must be
what they mean, otherwise their arguments —drawn from the destroying
agencies of nature, such as hurricanes, tidal waves, earthquakes and
inundations, from the havoc wrought by pestilence and famine, from
the existence of crime, disease and misery in the world—mean nothing.
Then if this be, as it must be, what they mean ; I repeat it is passing
strange to witness the heads of large religious denominations using
arguments and reasoning of this description for the purpose of
demolishing a lay-man, who is endeavouring to affirm a conception of
the Supreme as absolutely beneficent and all-loving, and who, because
he enunciates and holds such a conception, becomes to their minds
nothing better than “ a shallow optimist.” To state the problem and
the argument more clearly, I will, even at the risk of being considered
prolix, repeat it It is this: if God be omnipotent, He cannot be
absolutely beneficent, because were He omnipotent, He would never
have created such a world as this with its then existent potentialities
of destructive agencies of every description, of crime, vice, misery and


disease. The argument is not so much that, being omnipotent and also
beneficent, He would not have allowed such a state of things to
continue, but that he would from the beginning have created a per-
fectly happy world, a world perfect in every respect. Being omni-
potent He could have done so, being absolutely beneficent He should
and would have done so. In other words, that, being omniscient, He
must have foreseen the wretched, cruel, deplorable condition of things
in this world ; foreseeing it all, He, being omnipotent, could and ought
to have prevented it, to have rendered it impossible, unless He be a
cruel and indifferent ruler, a Being not beneficent, not all-loving.
Therefore He is either omnipotent and not a God of Love, not beneficent,
or His power is limited and similarly His beneficence.
Having now shown what the problem and the argument is, what
are we to think of this further astonishing fact, that no reasonable, nor
anything approaching to a sound, solution of this problem has yet been
given by either the Bishop of Manchester, or by that head of the
Presbyterian denomination whom I have mentioned. The Bishop,
indeed, says that you will find the solution and the answer in the Old
Book (meaning the Bible). I confess my absolute inability to under-
stand his meaning. What conceivable answer does the Old Book give
to the argument, against the conception of The Supreme as Omnipotent
and absolutely Beneficent, drawn from the destroying agencies existent
in the world which He is said to have created ? At its birth there
existed in it, as He must have known, the potentialities of all those
cruel and destructive forces, to which I ha\e alluded, including that of
“ the forked lightning leaping from the bosom of the cloud and striking
down the good man passing beneath it,” so eloquently and so graphi-
cally described by the Bishop. What answer does it give to the
argument drawn from the terrible destruction of life by earthquakes,
tidal waves, water famines, rice famines, volcanic eruptions, explosions
of fire-damp 1 It certainly is the duty of the Bishop and of his
confrere of the Presbyterian denomination who have, for their own
purposes, produced this spectre, to lay it, to give us a sound, rational,
intelligent and intelligible solution of this terrible and all important
problem. They have neither of them yet fulfilled that duty, and I
venture to think that they never will. Atheists, Materialists and
Agnostics say that there is no solution of it other than this, either that


there is no God at all, or that, if there be a God, he is either not
omnipotent, that is a God of limited power, or, if omnipotent, that he
is indifferent, cruel, not beneficent. I recognise and have for years
recognised the appalling difficulties of the problem, and the terrible
force of the argument. Eleven years ago I went out of my way in my
reply to the Bishop to do that which was and is his duty, his
obligation. I endeavoured to give an outline of that which then
seemed to me to be the best answer to the difficulties so very strangely
and unaccountably presented, but left unanswered, by Dr. Moorhouse.
That outline will be found in pages xliii. to xlvii. inclusive of my reply
to Dr. Moorhouse, contained in the third edition of “ Religion without
Superstition.” I will not repeat it here, partly for the sake of brevity,
principally, because the same answer, substantially, is much more
ably, more fully, and much more clearly given in a most delightful,
interesting and instructive work recently published by Professor
Drummond “The Ascent of Man.” But those, who have heard or
read my address “He prayeth best who liveth best,” will not fail
to bear in mind, that my conception of “The Supreme ” is not that of
a God governing the world by acts of variable will, but that of a God
governing the world by invariable laws, for as Mill says the former
conception “ is radically inconsistent with the most general truths that
have been made known to us by scientific investigation,” the latter “ is
consistent and is based upon the truths that science has demonstrated.”
Further it will be remembered that I regard God’s Kingdom as a
Spiritual Kingdom, of and in which He is the Great Spirit, and that
from Him all spiritual influences proceed. “ God is a Spirit, and they
who worship Him must worship Him in Spirit .” In that address also,
when enunciating my views upon the subject of prayer, mindful of the
conception that “ The Supreme ” governs the world by invariable laws,
I stated that in my judgment prayers for material changes, material
gifts, material advantages, are and would be of no avail, but that
prayers, breathed in the true spirit of prayer, for spiritual gifts,
guidance, comfort, and support, followed or accompanied by earnest
persistent effort, would be not only acceptable to the Great Spirit,
but would be answered. One of God’s invariable laws is that of
“ Evolution,” by means of which, though not an optimist, I, as a
Meliorist, believe we have progressed from bad to good, from good to


better, and, I believe and trust, will continue to progress from better to
best. Simultaneously proceeds, and has proceeded, from the beginning,
the evolution of nature, and, from and with the birth of life, the
evolution of physical form and being, of morals and of mind. Trusting
to this great law, aiding its progress by our best and most intelligent
and earnest efforts, it remains for us, while making the best of our
material state, and of the physical, social and other conditions in which
we live and move, to do all that right reason, conscience and true
religion teach and urge us to do, for the high purpose of fitting our-
selves for closer spiritual communion with the Great Spirit, for
becoming worthy inhabitants of his Spiritual Kingdom.
J. C. Stephen's, Printer, 146 Elizabeth Street, Melbourne






