

f I SI
% c fe
teLiOiOUfi ftXHS
ft OX q
PRINTED BY REQUEST.
Peics 3d.
MORALITY AND RELIGION.
An Essay read before the Sunday Free Discussion Society, on the sth
November, 1871 , in the Masonic Sail, Lonsdale-street, Melbourne.
Mat. vi. 24i. Ye cannot serve God and Mammon.
I LIKE this text. There is about it an aspect of “no compromise,’'
which at once engages the sympathy and commands the assent of
lovers of straightforwardness and plain dealing. For compromise is
the bane of the present age, and the main cause of the prevailing
want of integrity. By comparison it is positively refreshing to read
of the times when men—thinking it right to mutilate themselves and
burn their neighbours alive for the kingdom of heaven's sake—did
so and blessed God for every opportunity of maiming and sacrifi-
cing for his glory, his asserted children made by him in his image.
If their belief was savage —it was certainly sincere—for their con-
duct was consistent with it. Contrast Galvin sacrificing poor Serve -
tus on a slow fire of green faggots—with the Rev, Thomas Binney
writing a book on, “ How to make the best of both worlds !” How
to serve God and mammon too ! Imagine Jesus —in lawn sleeves
and a carriage and pair—preaching the community of goods, and woe
to the rich.
The fact is that the progress of knowledge and the struggle for
civilized existence now compel men to be so practical—that they
have little time to be pious ; and the upholders of religion find that
comfort and common-sense are gradually becoming so much, more
popular than asceticism and faith, that they are compelled to yield
point after point; and their tactics are now reduced to attempts to
compromise matters between obsolete doctrines—and the certain
revelations of science. They are at their wit’s end to serve both
God and mammon !
My object is to show that Jesns was right ; —that religion—or
the love and service of God—is incompatible with the love and per-


vice of mammon-—or of the world; —with morality ; —That morality
and religion are thus in inverse proportion to one another ;
that a moral man cannot be religious ; and that a religious man
must be so far immoral.
/ Religion may be defined as a sanction—or something which
binds—-to a certain line of conduct which is called godliness. Such
conduct has special relation to a supposed God and future life of
rewards and punishments ; and erects them as objects of exclusive
regard and attention. If the principle of religion be consistently
pursued, the worldly interest of one’s self and one’s neighbour must
be subordinated and even sacrificed without hesitation to God’s
glory and our own heavenly inter/ i. Morality m : , ■ manners
of men in relation to each o ’ —to Bo Get -; and the word
morality has come to mean —good social conductimmorality—
bad social conduct. The principle of morality requires that the
paramount object of men should be to promote their own interest
and that of Society at large, in the world in which they find them-
selves; it pronounces asceticism and intolerance to be equally
crimes; affirms the identity of ultimate interest of each and all;
and asserts that while vice causes its own ; ample punishment—vir-
tue is its own best reward. But the absolute antagonism between
our moral and our religious duties and interests is not more
broadly laid down and forcibly insisted on thus by me—than it was
by Jesus in my text (whatever Mr. Binney may say.) Ye cannot
serve God and mammon I
Religion requires allegiance to God alone, and—so far—contempt
for the ties of humanity and defiance of social authority. Witness
the judicial murders of Socrates and Jesus—the wholesale massacre
of St. Bartholomew—and the assassination of Henry the Great of
France by Ravaillac. Witness also the holy zeal with which
Philip 11. of Spain, devoted half his life to devastating the fairest
portion of Europe, and pitilessly sacrificing to God by sword and
fire and stake —thousands upon thousands of his innocent subjects,
whom he believed that he was divinely commissioned to convert—or
destroy. Yet Philip was naturally a humane man. At his first battle
be vowed he would never witness 'another, and he never did. Reli-


gion made him hate for God’s sake, and act the part of a devil as a
sacred duty.
Morality on the contrary inculcates conformity to social ordinances,
and universal forbearance and tolerance. As Lord Bacon says—
ce Atheism leaves a man to sense, to philosophy, to natural piety, to
“ laws, to reputation ; all which may be guides to outward moral
“ virtue, though religion were not; but superstition dismounts all
these and erecteth an absolute monarchy in in the minds of men;
therefore] Atheism [never did perturb states; for it makes
Ci men wary of themselves as looking no further; and we see the
“ times inclined to Atheism, as the the timeof Augustus Cassar, wore
11 quiet times; but superstition hath been the confusion of many
£< states, and bringeth in a new first motive cause that ravisheth all
‘‘ the spheres of Government.” Bacon uses the word superstition.
But as Hobbes has well said, —Superstition—is any religion but
ours; —Beligion—is our own superstition. Bacon shows plainly
that religion is—while Atheism is not—mimical to morality. It is
however my present purpose to recommend—not Atheism, but—
morality, simply.
Beligion teaches that virtue consists in self-mortification and in
foregoing worldly advantage for the sake of the glory of God and
future heavenly bliss. It is herein, radically inconsistent, for if it
were really true that self-mortification is virtue, man ought to study
and to act so as ultimately to reach hell, and he would thus be
most virtuous when most vicious ! All disinterestedness is thus
proved to involve a positive contradiction of the premisses. And
those premisses are based upon as great fallacies—from which all
religions start. All hold not only the doctrine of sin—but also that
God created sinners; which necessarily involves God’s entire res-
ponsibility for ail sin,—on the very same principles by which it is
imputed—iilogically—to man. Ail religions also assume that it is
possible to act in either of two opposite ways in the same circum-
stances; in other words—that the same causes may produce
different effects. Whereas every act of man—being but a link in
the infinite chain of causes and effects—could not possibly be diffe-
rent without a break in the chain. These absurdities are inherent.


in every religion, and form the basis and apology for ail intolerance
and persecution ; than which nothing can be more immoral.
The first of these fallacies—namely—that virtue consists in self-
mortification, or say merely in the foregoing of advantage, proceeds
upon another false assumption—that the interest of an individual is
or may be opposed to that of others. If this were true, morality
would be a problem-—hopeless and impossible of solution. But the
simple fact that the manners of men have improved , is a guarantee
that a sufficient reason for the improvement exists. That the in-
tercourse of men is advantageous to the mass, is learned by experi-
ence of their necessary and complete interdependence, and of the
benefit that each evidently derives from the multiplication and
closeness of his relations with others. If their interests were really
antagonistic, the multiplicity and completeness of these relations
would lessen instead of increase—individual advantage. The im-
provement made therefore—demonstrates that the real interests of each
and all are necessarily identical. And it should not be necessary to
prove this by an elaborate argument, for it is practically
admitted to be proved—as a general principle—hy experience;
and it is only contested in special and apparently anomalous
instances, in which observation does not penetrate beyond
superficial appearances. But. —the great need of scientific
education and habits of consistent reasoning among all
classes, is shown in nothing- so much, as in the general want of con-
fidence in general principles. If a general principle is of ‘any real
value at all, it admits of no exception whatever; and apparent
exceptions merely indicate that further investigation is required.
To give confidence in general principles is the main thing for which
a scientific education is of value. And general principles are of
greatest value, inasmuch as nothing else can give stability to mora-
lity, Nothing else can give an adequate guarantee in exceptional
circumstances, that the true interest of every one must lie in being
virtuous. It is only in such exceptional circumstances that men err
and come to grief,—simply because they have no confidence in their
own principles, and have no time or inclination then to reason back
to them.. That two and two make four, is not to me more certain.


than that the true interest of every one lies necessarily in being moral
virtuous, under any circumstances.
Religions as a rule teach that repentance, or perhaps restitution
may annul crime and avert evil consequences. Nothing can be
more false—absurd —and pernicious. Experience teaches in the
interest of morality that evil results of bad acts can by no possi-
bility be evaded; —and thus—instead of provoking repetition by
impunity,—proves—that every error causes its own inevitable retri-
bution. But priests fatten by imposing—with this glaring fallacy—
upon weak minds. Hence—conscience money;—the miserable
subterfuge by which fools try to justify to themselves their past and
future crimes,—and blindly do more thus to destroy their own
judgment of wise and foolish —of right and wrong, than even the
inventor of the immoral doctrine himself. That doctrine offers a
direct premium to crime, and it is difficult to over-estimate how
much it causes.
Religion essentially teaches the efficacy of prayer,—which thos
who are moral but irreligious enough to reason—are compelled to
discard. Cromwell’s injunction to his soldiers expresses the contra
diction involved as clearly as my text condemns it. u Trust in
“ providence-— but keep your ponder diy !” Religion in the first
clause—morality in the second. Serve God—but—in any case-
serve mammon ! The fact that religionists (including priests) work
to attain their objects, is proof that practically they disbelieve what
they preach. I do not say but that theoretically they may believe
it. The advantage they derive from teaching it, is quite sufficient
to give a practical color to their theoretical belief. The glaring in-
consistency— if not impiety-—of doing one's self what one has
prayed God to do, is not only proof that the belief is merely theo-
retical, but indicates the truth ; —that the Deity invoked is really—
our own egotism simply, projected and personified by an exalted and
diseased imagination.
What is the prayer of morality ? Work !
The doctrine of a superintending providence is fundamental in reli-
gion. In ordinary circumstances, what is this—but a stupid apology
for apathy, or an attempt to evade responsibility for failure ?


But what becomes of it in face of the Earthquake of Lisbon ?
with its half million victims ? The decrepit and the infant—the
strong man and the delicate woman—-the atheist and the priest—•
the innocent and the guilty,—all whelmed in one common destruc-
tion ! Where was justice ? or discrimination ? or tender mercy ?
What was the lesson to be learned ? Even the chattering priest is
silent and abashed. What if we are thus to learn that the fool—
is he~who hath said in his conceit, These is a God!
Another phase of this same fallacy I must not neglect.
Imagine, for the nonce, all human institutions for the maintenance
of morality at once and completely abolished—our laws, courts,
magistrates, police, gaols, and penal establishments suddenly anni-
hilated. What would result ? would all the elaborate machinery
and most strenuous efforts of our religious establishments prove of
the slightest efficacy in restraining the mmorally disposed from in-
dulging their propensities at the expense of their neighbours ?
Would our property or our lives be safe for a single day ? No—
not for an hour. Now let me put the converse proposition.
Suppose on the contrary, our human moral Government intact,
but our religious institutions suddenly and entirely obliterated
that every priest, bible, church, and religious idea were to vanish
from the earth. Would our social moral machinery for the repres-
sion of crime be in the least degree less efficacious than before in
protecting our lives and property ? Not a bit. The fiction being
exploded, the truth would be more efficient.'—ln fact the existence
and maintenance of social checks upon immorality, prove the gene-
ral practical disbelief in the efficacy of any others—even though
divine. A constable is felt to be far more potent than a theoretical
God, and a Lockup—immeasurably more useful than an imaginary
bell.
When a George Stephenson by patient labor— on every Sabbath
—invents railwayswhen a Priestley discovers gas and the
constituents of the air we breathe; —when any man devotes his
time and energy to add to the worldly comfort and happiness of
bis fellows, —he serves mammon, and is rightly charged with


doing- so by pious people. If anyone devotes his attention to
such objects, he contravenes the religious obligation to hate the
world, and to set his affections on things above. For he cannot
serve God and Mammon. Had Galileo, Harvey, Jenner, and
Watt been engrossed with their heavenly interests only, we might
now have been ignorant of the movements of the solar system, of
the circulation of the blood, of vaccination, and of steam power.
But how did religion affect them ? It made them suffer cruelly
for the good they effected. What could more distress a man with
such a keen appreciation of the value of truth as had Galileo,
than to be compelled to testify publicly and solemnly to a delibe-
rate falsehood ? Harvey and Jenner were denounced as atheists,
and lost their practice. I have no time, however, to shew how
all the great mammon servers, who have blessed humanity, have
been rewarded with pious curses, stripes, and flames—in the
interest of religion—by God servers. By their fruits ye shall
know them. That my view that such conduct is in strict accor-
dance with the fundamental principles of religion, is curiously-
corroborated by nearly every ancient religious text book. The
bible begins by relating how the being that it states procured for
man his best and most valuable knowledge—that of good and
evil, —was cursed by God for doing so. And in another mytho-
logy, Prometheus, for giving- the knowledge of fire and of various
arts to man, was punished by Zeus or God, by being chained fast,
with an eagle constantly tearing at his liver. These pregnant
fables prove the early instinctive recognition of the essential
antagonism between God service and Mammon service, —between
religion and morality. The same antipathy is exhibited to-day
in the. consistent opposition of religion to science, and the pious
hatred shown by the servants of God to those of humanity. No
wonder. It is the struggle for life.
I propose now to anticipate a few objections to my theory, and
in doing so to continue my own argument.
First it may he said' that what I attack, is not religion, but the
abuse of it. I reply “By their fruits ye shall know them.” If
my opponents do not approve of the lengths to, which Philip II.„


John Galvin, and the founders of the Spanish Inquisition carried
their principles, let them beware themselves of halting between
two opinions, and endeavoring- to serve both God and Mammon-
The fact is, as I before said, that no principle can be trustworthy
or true, unless it will bear pushing to its ultimate consequences.
Like Philip 11., and Calvin, the founders of the Spanish Inquisi-
tion are known to have been men of “ undeviating and incorrup-
tible integrity •” —they were naturally moral.—-Yet we find that
their merciless cruelty in carrying out their religious principles—
spared neither age, sex, nor innocence; and that therefore for
their crimes—their immorality—scarcely a parallel can be found
in history. On the other hand we find men who have worked
all their lives for the good of humanity, were either of no religion,
or of the most various religions; in the latter case the good they
did was exactly proportioned to the extent to which God service
was subordinated by them to mammon service. There could not
be a greater mistake than to suppose that religious persons are
naturally more cruel or immoral than others, or that they are less
kindly or virtuously inclined than the victims they sacrifice. As
I have said, Philip was exceptionally humane, Calvin an upright
conscientious man, and the Spanish Inquisitors were unimpeach-
ably moral. Yet these mea stand out in history as monsters of
cruelty, in matters in which religion swayed their conduct. Did
not Calvin labor as disinterestedly as Servetus himself, for what
he thought the best interest of man,—nay of Servetus himself ?
If he acted immorally to Servetus, it was because he desired to
act piously towards God, and made that his principal object.
It may be said, also, that religions teach morality; and it is a
fact that every religion has incorporated in its trenchings various
moral rules. But why ? not because those rules were a part of
■—essential to —or identified with—the religion, but simoly
because, without the plausible pretension of teaching morality of
some kind, no men on earth would receive any religion. Not
only so, but the morality taught is mostly in general terms, and
frequently directly contradicted by their religious principles. If
they say, Do good to all men, and love the brotherhood , —-they


say also that you must hate the world, your nearest kin, and your
own life also, or you cannot be a genuine disciple. Such con-
flicting alternatives arise constantly in social life, and were,
doubtless, the reason of the adoption of the hermit’s life, as the
only chance for virtue. But is uselessness no crime?
Perhaps my opponents will point to the laws, among others, of
Moses. In the first place, it is certain that as societies existed
long before Moses, so the immorality of murder, theft, and lying-
must have been recognised, and prohibited. . Moses repeated what
he was taught, as we do to-day. But I will not thus pass the
decalogue. The first four laws* are religious ; not moral—but
rather immoral. For they place supernatural duty above natural
duty. The fifth, Honor thy 1 father and mother, &c,, —is simply
vicious. For it asserts that we should honor certain persons—
not because —or in so far as—honorable, but because they stand
in a certain relation to ourselves! Nothing could be more
destructive of a proper sense of right and wrong’. It is just what
old savages -would inculcate to maintain their own authority in
their tribe. The 6th, 7th, Bth, and 9th, (Thou shalt not kill,—
nor commit adultery,—nor steal, —nor bear false witness ;) were
- —as I said before —not part of Moses’s religion, but adopted into
it to give it respectability and credit. But the 9th is very im-
perfect, and does not inculcate truthful spealdng under any
circumstances. The 10th, Thou shalt not covet, —is evidently
supplementary, and intended to compensate —which it cannot- —
for the defects of the 7th and Bth against stealing and committing
adultery. But the Bible relates that immediately after the
promulgation of these laws, the Jews w r ere specially commanded
by God, through the same Moses, to violate all those of a moral
tendency—point blank and wholesale. And they were all broken,
again with impunity by their vile king David, the man after God’s
own heart; to say nothing of less prominent instances. Nay, God
himself is said to have repeatedly violated the 9tb, against false
# Thou shalt have one God—-Make no images—Swear not—Keep
Sabbath, and why.


witness, both directly, and by speaking falsely through prop ets-
(See Genesis ii, 17, I Kings xxii, 28, Ezekiel xiv, 9.) So much
for the Old Testament. In the New Testament he is asserted to
have broken the 7th with Joseph’s wife. (Matt, i, 18, 20.) And
is it to be wondered at that the servants of God are bloodthirsty—
break their own laws and solemn engagements, and are unjust
and cruel, —when they believe that their master has notoriously
done the same ? He never fulfilled his promises to Abraham, nor
to any other man. First he agreed—by a spontaneous offer, after
knowingly making man so that he must sin, —to accept the blood of
innocent annimals as a solace to his wounded vanity, (for “ vanity”
is commonsense for “ glory.”) He broke that agreement, and after-
wards required and accepted human blood. (2 Samuel xxi. 9-14.)
Insatiable still, he repudiates that self-dictated engagement, and
nothing will satisfy his morbid taste but the blood of his own per-
fectly virtuous son! He seems to have hated virtue even more than man.
Even this last covenant he is asserted to have repudiated, and
co have discovered that the atonement for sin—proposed by him-
self as sufficient, is really valueless. In spite of all these solemn
covenants —capriciously altered and broken from time to time,—
he still requires that man shall after all himself expiate in hell —-
the imaginary sins for which repeated expiations had been
exacted and accepted.
Jesus himself sums up the whole law by saying, “ Thou shalt
“ serve the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul,
and with all thy mind, and with all thy strength, This is the
“ Ist commandment.” (The God that I have just described I)
“ And the second is like , namely this, Thou shalt love thy
(i neighbour as thyself. There is none other commandment
“ greater than these.” Mark xii., 30--1, Why he calls the
second like the first it is difficult to see. It is more like FalstafTs
half-penny worth of bread to the intolerable deal of sack. But as
Jesus says in Luke xiv., 26, that we must hate—beside our father,
mother, wife, children, brothers and sisters, —our own life also,
the love for our neighbour must be less than none at all! (Luke
xiv., 26.)


I have written this paper because I think a spade should be
called a spade, and that truth demands that if we have given up
the essentials of religion, we should not retain the name. If we
recognise the absurdity of its main doctrines of prayer and a
providence, and that good or evil conduct causes' —in this world—
its own ample reward or punishment ; —we are not entitled to say
that we have only improved or developed our religion, when we
have really cast it aside, and obtained something infinitely better.
It we have eaten the fruit of the tree of knowledge of good and
evil, we should not be ashamed to admit being naked. If Adam
and Eve were ashamed, they were obviously in error. For they
were no more naked than they were before, and the responsibility
for their nakedness (by the story) was not theirs but their creator’s,
who, if any one, should have been ashamed. We are unworthy
of the privileges we have gained, if we are ashamed or afraid to
acknowledge them.
I know that many think the religious faculty in man, is too
important and useful to be discarded. Not so. In the first place,
its absence in many intellectual men proves that it is not a neces-
sary or original one, and that it is but a fictitious compound of
imagination and emotion. These , if diverted from religious fic-
tions, may be made useful to morality. But their mis-direction
by religion in such cases as that of Ravaillac, must be
admitted by nearly all; and I have shewn that the like
mis-direction of them by religion is more or less univer-
sal. And the same elements can easily he shewn to constitute
the spring of action in every case of crime, theft, murder, &c.
When they are duly subjected to the direction of an exercised
reason, better results may be expected, but not before. To claim
to be religious, when in fact we are not, is to be ashamed—and
unworthy too—of being clothed and in our right mind ;to assert
that we are naked when better clad than ever; to dishonor a
good cause, and to claim consideration under false pretences.
But we cannot consistently so serve God and mammon.
Finally I would point out|that as there are no men whom it does
not take all their time and all they know to be properly moral—or


to do all the good they can to themselves and to their neighbours ;
so for them to devote any attention to the concerns of another
hypothetical life which religion concerns, is to neglect their duty as
well as their interest. And here I shall again quote Jesus. “ Take
therefore no thought for the morrow, for the morrow shall take
thought for the things of itself. Sufficient unto the day is the evil
thereof,” (Mat. vi. 84.) and I think still more the work thereof. This
precept of Jesus, we all feel to be nonsense if applied literally to to-
morrow,—to a year,—or to less than our probable life. It cannot
refer to the past, and the only reasonable interpretation, or rather
the only interpretation which can make it reasonable, is to take it
as applying to the distant hypothetical to-morrow which religion in-
vents. Let us then devote our exclusive attention to promoting
morality here, and fear not that that will ever prevent our
being amply religious hereafter, if the appropriate season should
ever arrive.
But verily, verily, I say unto you, except our righteousness
(morality) excel the righteousness of the religious scribes and
pharisees,—we are not fit for the kingdom of earth.
3 1508 00074147 5
I
Robert Bell, Printer, 97 Little Collins Street Bast,
