

MORESBY’S
FEW
BY
LESLIE JILLETT
THE STORY


MORESBY'S FEW
BY LESLIE JILLETT




MORESBY’S FEW
A
1


The North Western Courier, Publishers, Narrabri, N.S.W.


MORESBY'S FEW
BEING AN ACCOUNT OF
THE ACTIVITIES OF No. 32
SQUADRON IN NEW GUINEA
IN 1942
BY
LESLIE JILLETT
DECORATIONS BY
HAROLD FREEDMAN
1945
3


TO
GRANT
( R.N.Z.A.F.)
OF LIKE SPIRIT


FOREWORD
(By Wing-Commander D. W. Kingwell, who was
commanding officer of No. 32 Squadron from its formation
on February 21, 1942, until February 4, 1943.)
/| LTHOUGH the British Empire had been at war
with the Axis Powers for over two years, it was
not until Japan attacked the United States at Pearl
Harbour on the morning of December 7, 1941, that
Australia realised that war was something real and not
just news in the daily papers.
As the Japanese tentacles crept southward from
Japan, and island after island, place after place, fell into
their possession, the people of Australia began to get
really worried.
No. 24 Squadron was operating from Rabaul in New
Britain, and the whole world knows of its magnificent r
fight against overwhelming odds just prior to Rabaul
being occupied by the Japanese. A few Lockheed Hudsons
and their crews flew out of that northern slaughter-house,
and to these young stalwarts were sent two more flights of
Hudsons—one from No. 23 Squadron and one from No. 6
Squadron.
This collection of aircraft and crews was called No. 24
Squadron (Moresby), and it was under the able command
of Wing-Commander John Lerew, D.F.C. This was at the
end of January, 1942, and this , new 24 Squadron
operated from Port Moresby against the Japanese, who
by then had occupied practically the whole of New
Britain.
These lads were seldom out of the air, and, no matter
what the job was like, it was carried out with all the
punch and energy that was humanly possible to put into
it.
These were the air crews and these were the ground
crews who formed the backbone of No. 32 Squadron
because on Saturday, February 21, 1942, No. 24 Squadron


( Moresby ) was disbanded, and No. 32 General
Reconnaissance Squadron was born.
It was indeed an honour to form 32 Squadron on
active service with such a fine body of men who,
throughout the following seven months, were forced to
live a very trying life. But, thanks to their patriotism,
guts and sense of humour, they never let the Squadron
down once.
These were the men who saved PORT MORESBY
and AUSTRALIA.
A [?]


CONTENTS
Chapter Page
Foreword by Wing-Commander Kingwell 5
1 This is the Story ... 9
2 Backbone of the Squadron 15
3 Hectic Days at Moresby 18
4 Horn Island Memories 29
5 500-Mile Flight in a Crippled Hudson 36
6 “Pedro,” the Perfect Pilot 41
7 Wing Commander Lerew’s Ordeal 46
8 Escape from Salamaua 51
9 Black Night off Gasmata 55
10 They got their Pictures 57
11 A Pilot who Ahiyfcys did a Good Job 60
12 The C.O. was Allergic to Zeros! 63
13 Long, Long Trail to Moresby 67
14 First Sighting of Coral Sea Fleet 70
15 Murphy’s Luck was Out 73
16 Death of Mavis 77
17 Lucky Discovery of Vital Airfield 80
18 Attacks on Submarines 85
19 Sergeant’s Outstanding Pluck 87
20 Two “Star” Stories 89
21 Attacks on Japanese at Buna 91
22 Operations from Milne Bay 93
23 Anniversary -- and Retrospect 98
Roll of Honour 105
7


8


CHAPTER I.
This is the Story ...
THIS is the story of No. 32 (General Reconnaissance)
Squadron, Royal Australian Air Force, from its
formation at Seven Mile Aerodrome, Port Moresby,
on February 21, 1942, until its departure south nearly
seven months later.
But in a sense it is something more and something
less than the story of a squadron.
Something more because it is necessary and seemly
that exploits preceding the actual formation of No. 32'
Squadron should be told to facilitate a proper apprecia-
tion of the situation in New Guinea and Papua, following
Japan’s entry into the war on December 7, 1941.
Something more, too, because the story of the men
of this squadron is typical of the fighting spirit of all the
men of the Royal Australian Air Force in those desperate
days early in 1942 when the fate of Australia itself was
in jeopardy.
A mighty change has come over the New Guinea
scene since then. For that reason there is a danger that
the heroic part played by these men —Australia’s “few”
to whom 7,000,000 owe so much—may be forgotten as the
irresistible Allied forces, co-ordinating land, sea, and air
efforts, push the Japanese out of New Guinea.
B
9


Let us never forget the timely aid the United States
gave us in men and machines to help to bring about this
change. But let us never forget either the valour of the
men of the R.A.A.F. who stayed in the New Giunea skies
to hold the Japanese in check before that American aid
reached us.
In those desperate days the number of serviceable
aircraft that stood between the Japanese forces and the
Australian mainland could be counted on the fingers of
two hands —and sometimes on the fingers of one.
On the fingers of one hand! That is literally true.
Rabaul was occupied on January 23, 1942. Moresby had
its first raid early on the morning of February 3. More
raids on Moresby foUowed. Night raids were followed by
day raids. In one of these on February 28, Zeros shot up
and sank three Catalina flying-boats off Port Moresby,
and one reliable authority who was there then told me
that this left available for the defence of Moresby three
serviceable aircraft —two Catalinas and one Hudson.
And this position did not greatly improve until the
arrival in Moresby on March 21—three weeks later—of
No. 75 Squadron with its Kittyhawks—the “To-morrow-
hawks,” as Moresby, long awaiting their arrival, had called
them. It is, perhaps, scarcely to be wondered at that the
leading formation of these Kittyhawks, when approaching
the Seven Mile Aerodrome, was fired on from the ground.
It seemed incredible that our own fighters had arrived at
last. One bullet missed Squadron-Leader Peter Jeffrey by
half an inch and several of the aircraft were damaged.
But the Kittyhawks were on the job, and later that very
day two of them shot down a Japanese aircraft, which
fell into the sea.
Moresby began to breathe again. Fortresses and
Marauders, manned by Americans, also appeared in the
New Guinea skies. The situation was not yet saved, but
the darkest phase had passed.
One wonders whether even now most Australians
realise how gravely menaced their homeland was
in the early months of 1942 when a few
Wirraways, a few Hudsons, and a few Catalinas thinly
guarded the northern outposts. When Japan entered the
war Australia’s air strength in New Guinea comprised two
squadrons with two Empire flying-boats and six or seven


Catalinas each. At once another squadron, equipped with
Wirraways and Hudsons, was moved into Rabaul. But
within seven weeks Babaul had fallen, and those same
Empire flying-boats had to he used to aid the evacuation.
It seemed certain that Moresby, too, must fall. That
Moresby did not fall before American aircraft began to
reinforce our hard-pressed Air Force in March, 1942, was
Australia’s good fortune. History may yet record that
Japan, in not striking at Moresby and, through Moresby,
at Australia itself in January or February, 1942, fumbled
just as fatally as did Hitler in June, 1940, when he turned
south to Paris and “postponed” his invasion of Britain.
So, then, this is something more than the story of a
squadron. And, in a more literal sense, it is something
less because it is impossible at this distance from the
events to get first-hand accounts of all the stirring sorties
in this squadron’s proud record. Alas! some of those
who should tell those stories are dead. The squadron of
the Moresby days no longer exists. A year or so later
all the members had been posted elsewhere, and the
squadron itself had changed to other aircraft.
It has not been possible to consult all those, still
active, whose stories are told in this history. That is one
teal difficulty met in compiling in retrospect the history
of a sqnadron which was too busy when operating in
New Guinea to give heed to the keeping of more than
the barest of records. For that reason less than justice
may be done to the deeds of some. The deeds of others
may have escaped notice altogether. But every reasonable
precaution has been taken to check and cross-check the
facts and to strike a just balance.
Continuity is difficult to achieve in writing the story
of a squadron like No. 32. For instance, the squadron as
a whole seldom underwent a common experience, apart
from air raids. And air raids, at the receiving end, do
not make a squadron history. The crews who go out at
any tick of the clock, night or day, to bomb Japanese-
held aerodromes, to photograph Japanese strips and
ships, to attack mast high Japanese warships and trans-
ports, to shoot Japanese aircraft out of the sky—they are
the history-makers. And their experiences are essentially
individual, even among members of the same crew.
An Army may campaign along the glory road from


El Alamein to Bizerta. It may strike through Sicily at
Italy and crowd along all the roads that lead to Rome
und beyond. Its campaign is one continuing story of
swelling triumph, offsetting earlier reverses. A fighter
squadron in the long days before the invasion of Europe
may have swept across the English Channel to France and
the Low Countries so regularly that it built a composite
record of unified achievement.
But a general reconnaissance squadron in New
■Guinea and Papua early in 1942 had no corporate exist-
ence in the broad historic sense. Its history must
necessarily be a series of incidents, of almost personal
triumphs and disasters, with no common theme except
the determination of its members.
Since it has seemed impossible in these circumstances
to set down the history of No. 32 Squadron so that the
general reader can “see it steady and see it whole,” an
alternative method of presentation has been devised.
This, broadly, has been to tell the general story of the
squadron’s life, first at Moresby and later at Horne Island
(Torres Strait), on which it was based from April to
September, 1942, and then to describe separately some
•of the exceptional performances of crews, as far as
convenient in chronological order. It is important
to remember, however, that, although the head-
quarters was moved from Moresby, aircraft of the
squadron continued to range just as freely as hitherto
over the mountains and the waters of the New Guinea
scene. As these pages reveal, Hudsons of No. 32 Squadron
were linked with all phases of the 1942 campaign—the
Japanese landings at Lae and Salamaua, the Battle of the
Coral Sea, the Japanese attacks on Buna, Gona, and Milne
Bay—until their replacement by Hudsons of No. 6
Squadron in September, and the posting of No. 32
Squadron south for other duties.
To-day Moresby, hectic front-line birth-place of No.
32 Squadron in February, 1942, is just a back-water in the
New Guinea campaign. The war has given it a legacy
of airstrips and roads that will be most useful in the days
of peace. But its days of war-time glory are over. The
•enemy raids petered out. Then our own Allied aircraft
filled the skies. From Moresby many historic missions
began-—the flying of our air-borne troops into the back of


Buna and later into the back of Lae. As recently as
Christmas, 1943, one could gaze casually upward to glimpse
the Liberators and Mitchells setting out to pound Arawe
and Gloucester. But, as the enemy was pushed further
back, so did the need to build larger bases beyond
Moresby develop.
Over those 13,000-feet Owen Stanleys, across whose
forbidding ridges No. 32 Squadron Hudsons used to fly
in fair weather and foul in early 1942, the übiquitous
C47s now carry freight to our bases farther forward. This
freight may be a load of belly-tanks, or some urgently-
needed radio equipment, or rolls of wire cables, or mail,
or an equally übiquitous jeep.
At the old Seven Mile Aerodrome itself one files into
an American Red Cross building to be handed a cup of
coffee, a dough-nut, or a fresh-cut sandwich by an
attractive lass with a soft southern accent. A Skymaster
is just in from Australia, and down its bright blue gang-
way are stepping a party of W.A.A.C.s. Australian and
American nurses have long been in Moresby, of course,
and the A.M.W.A.S. arrived later. But, shades of Sloppy
Joe’s cafe of 1942, the place is becoming completely
civilised again!
The real war is much farther along the track now.
This is being written two years after the repulse of the
Japanese at Milne May, a turning-point in the New Guinea
campaign. Since then many R.A.A.F. squadrons have
played spectacular parts there—men flying Kittyhawks,
Beaufighters, Bostons, Vultee Vengeances, Wirraways,
Boomerangs, Spitfires, Beauforts, on a variety of missions.
One or two of the old No. 32 Squadron men, including
the first commanding officer, Group-Captain Deryck
Kingwell, are up in the north again. They’ve reaped a
fine reward. They’re flying Liberators.
And yet one fancies that when the men of old 32
Squadron put their feet up on the mantlepiece and puff
their reminiscent pipes when this war is over they will
think most nostaligically of those Hudson days at
Moresby.
The men who flew the Hudson of No. 32 Squadron and
—let us not forget them—the men who “kept ’em flying,”
first from Seven Mile and later from Horn Island, did a
job that was seldom spot-lighted. This unofficial history


lifts the curtain. Names are linked with exploits, for tales
of anonymous performers somehow lack the spark of life.
Cold print frightens the average R.A.A.F. fellow more
than a Zero on his tail. So it has not been easy to coax
these stories from those men who alone have the facts
straight because they were in the “shows” concerned.
Appeals—even threats—have been made, insisting on no
"“first person” narrative . But there are occasions when a
story can be told effectively only in that way. So some-
times in these pages the “I’s” have it.


CHAPTER TWO
Backbone of the Squadron
THREE o’clock in the morning of July 4, 1942. The
Hudson had just taxied into the refuelling bay at
Seven Mile aerodrome, Port Moresby, and the
landing lights had been extinguished. That Hudson and
three others had been out over Salamaua. One Hudson
was fated not to return. But for this aircraft, first over
the target, it had been a successful mission.
Bombs had been dropped plumb on the landing strip
from 2,000 ft. and no ack-ack had been encountered. The
isthmus on which the township is built looked a tempting
target so the pilot had done a left-hand turn and had dived
on it with both front guns going. This time he had
provoked the Japs into replying, but he had kept his own
Guns going until at 800 feet he had pulled out of his
strafing dive and sped, unscathed, for Moresby.
So all four members of the crew were feeling fairly
satisfied with a good night’s work as they jumped out of
their aircraft at Seven Mile and felt for their cigarettes-


The aircraft was to be refuelled and flown on to Horn
Island.
But presently the beat of aircraft, flying very high,
was heard. “Listen,” warned one of the W.O.A.G.s.
“Oh, that’ll be a 826 climbing for altitude,” said the
pilot cheerfully.
The crew were about to light their cigarettes when
the W.O.A.G. spoke up again. “I reckon that chap is fair
dinkum,” he said. “I’m going.”
The W.O.A.G. made a dash for a trench about 100
yards away, but, in the words of another member of the
party, “he was quickly passed by all the other three.”
The runners had covered about 50 yards when they
heard the swish of bombs and all fell flat on the ground.
A stick of bombs fell about 200 yards to the right. No
sooner had those bombs stopped falling when the party
rose as one man and completed their dash to the trench,
which was reached just as another stick of bombs fell
about 200 yards to the left.
“Well,” said the pilot, as cigarettes were being lighted
at last, “it all goes to make an exciting evening.”
A trivial enough incident this, compared with some
of the events in the air war in New Guinea before and
since, but it does illustrate the incidental risks to be run,
both in the air and on the ground, and it does hit off
excellently the spirit in which those risks were run. It
hits off excellently, too, the sangfroid of the man who
commanded No. 32 Squadron for a year from its front-
line inception—Wing-Commander Deryck W. Kingwell, of
Brisbane, the pilot in this story.
“He hasn’t a nerve in his body,” someone has said
about him. But, better still, he enjoyed the reputation
of never sending anyone on a mission on which he was not
prepared himself to go. All his air crews knew that, for
his deeds had proved it, and his fearless leadership was
a source, of constant inspiration.
Wing-Commander Kingwell, however, will be the
first to concede (as he has, indeed, done in a foreword to
this book) that he was fortunate in the men who were
on the job when he arrived in Moresby in February, 1942,
and in others who joined the squadron, then and later,
from the south.
Those “originals” included crews who arrived in
BACKBONE OF THE SQUADRON


Rabaul just as Japan entered the war on December 7,
1941—men of No. 24 Squadron who had been the first to
carry the war to the enemy over the wide south-west
Pacific seas, reconnoitring the Japanese naval stronghold
at Truk and raiding Kapingamarangi or Greenwich Island,
320 miles from Rabaul; men who had flown in those
Wirraways of deathless memory, which had gone up in a
foredoomed effort to dispute the mastery of the skies with
the Zeros when Japan later moved south to take Rabaul;
ground crew who had worked feverishly to outwit the
enemy, patching wings of bombed Hudsons with sheet iron
and resorting to similar expedients to enable as many
aircraft as possible to be flown out to fight another day.
A month elapsed between the withdrawal from
Rahaul and the formation of No. 32 Squadron at Moresby.
In that period Hudsons operating from Seven Mile,
Moresby, continued to pound the enemy in his new-won
bases and to spy out his activities in the face of the
fiercest opposition. Indeed, in that period three Hudson
pilots were awarded the Distinguished Flying Cross. One
of them was Wing-Commander John Lerew, who had had
charge of the composite Hudson and Wirraway Squadron
at Rabaul; another was F/Lt. W. A. Pedrina, who later
performed notable service with No. 32 Squadron; and
another was F/Lt. D. W. I. Campbell. A member of F/Lt.
Campbell’s crew, Flight-Sergeant Gordon (“Jock”)
Thomson, was awarded the D.F.M. for his splendid
initiative and courage on the same mission.
All these exploits occurred so close to the formation
of No. 32 Squadron that it is fitting that they should be
described in this history.
But first let us look at the squadron in its Moresby
setting a squadron whose birth was to be followed only
three days later by a memorable baptism of bombs.
c
17


CHAPTER THREE
Hectic Days at Moresby
LIFE was hectic at Port Moresby in the early days of
No. 32 Squadron. Back in Australia many were
asking whether it would be possible to hold Moresby.
Babaul had been occupied by the Japanese on January 23,
and invasion of New Guinea proper seemed to be the next
logical step. Moresby was being raided frequently, and
our resources for retaliation were pitifully meagre—a few
Hudsons and a few Catalinas. Indeed, as stated early in
this book, it was competently estimated that, after Zeros
shot up and sank three Catalinas off Moresby on February
28, 1942 serviceable aircraft available for the aerial
defence of Moresby totalled three—two Catalinas and a
Hudson. Maybe it was as well for Australia’s peace of
mind that that fact was not known.
No. 32 Squadron was formed at Seven Mile aero-
drome on February 21, 1942, from personnel from Nos. 6,
23, and 24 Squadrons, who had been posted north to No.
24 Squadron, and from others posted direct to the new
squadron. The first problem was to accommodate the
squadron in safer quarters than the group of buildings
alongside the Seven Mile strip. Wing-Commander Lerew,


C.O. of No. 24 Squadron, had been impressed with the
necessity for encamping the personnel farther from the
strip, and had selected a site at John’s Gully. This site
was on a hillside, which commanded a good view of the
aerodrome, but which lent itself to excellent camouflage
among the trees.
This move was wise, for three days after the formation
of No. 32 Squadron 16 Japanese aircraft made a severe
raid on the original camp, which was still being used, and
many of the buildings were demolished. One airman was
killed, and many personnel lost their equipment and
personal belongings.
Soon after his arrival Wing-Commander Kingwell
called the squadron’s first parade. Parades were not to
prove frequent occurrences in the months that the
squadron spent on active service as members worked in
widely dispersed areas and at greatly varying hours.
The following account of the parade was furnished
by L.A.C. E. J. Simpson, operations room clerk and one of
the best-known identities in the squadron: “The parade
was held between the buildings at the original camp.
There was no division into flights, but three rather
straggling ranks lined up on the uneven, muddy ground.
Most of us who had recently arrived from the south could
not help contrasting this parade with the spit and polish
affairs to which we had been accustomed there. Some
wore shirts, some did not. The same applied to stock-
ings. If anyone had clean boots it was because he was
standing in a pool of water. But, in spite of the squadron’s
somewhat disreputable appearance, one got the impression
that these men would perform their jobs speedily and
efficiently.
“The wing-commander briefly addressed his new unit,
telling the men as much as could be disclosed of future
plans and answering a few questions. Then he dismissed
them to their normal work.
“Many took advantage of any spare time to add
several inches to the depth of their slit trenches. Later,
when Japanese bombing attacks became more frequent,
these trenches were invaluable, and one soon acquired the
habit of locating the nearest trench before starting work
at a strange place.
“In those days ours was the only land-based squadron


between the Japs at Rabaul and the mainland of Australia.
It seemed certain that one day the Japs would attempt
to land at Moresby. None of us was quite clear what
would be our role in the event of a large-scale invasion.
Would we be evacuated, as No. 24 Squadron was from
Rabaul? Would we join the Army in trying to stop the
invader? Or would we hike to the hills and try to take up
some position inland? These questions were often
discussed in blacked-out tents at night. No one seemed to
know the answers, but all felt that doubtless we would
be directed in the event of such an occurrence. In the
meantime everyone kept an emergncy bag with a few
rations and personal belongings and a full water-bottle—
just in case.”
Ten bombing raids were made on Seven Mile in the
first month of the squadron’s life. The first, on February
24, was the most severe. This was the first daylight raid
made by the Japanese on the Moresby area and was
carried out by 16 twin-engined bombers.
First warning was given when the aircraft split into
two formations, nine flying one way and seven another.
They flew right over the huts but did not drop any
bombs. Had bombs been dropped on that first run the
death-roll would have been heavy, as everyone was at
lunch, but the slight respite enabled most of the personnel
to reach trenches.
The first stick of bombs struck the mess hall, which a
minute or so before had been filled with men. There was
no fighter interception so the Japs were able to take their
time, getting the wind just right before dropping their
bombs. Altogether it was estimated 74 bombs were
dropped. Many other buildings were demolished and
transport in the vicinity suffered severely. One Hudson
aircraft was destroyed by fire.
A.C.I H. C. Bower was killed instantly by a piece of
shrapnel before he could reach a slit trench, and
Squadron-Leader R. U. Hoddinott (Works and Buildings)
was seriously wounded in the chest. These casualties
occurred in the first run, and, although it was obvious
that the aircraft were preparing to make a second run,
the medical officer, F/Lt. Adrian McGlynn, left his trench,
rushed to S/L. Hoddinott, and carried him to a motor
truck which had escaped the bombing. But the truck


refused to start and the M.O. carried the wounded man to
a car, which fortunately started. Just as the second load
of bombs began to fall the car sped down the road and
reached the hospital safely. S./L. Hoddinott was flown
south, and made such a good recovery that he was able to
return to Moresby some months later.
This raid hastened the evacuation of the old camp.
Only operations room, orderly room, and switch staffs
stayed there for a few days more. They moved to a safer
place on the morning of February 28. That was extremely
fortunate because* at 1.30 p.m. 25 Japanese aircraft came
over again and, in the terse words of an observer, “belted
hell out of the old place again.” Practically every build-
ing left habitable by the first raid “copped it,” but there
were no casualties. The lesson of the first raid had been
well and speedily learned.
Bombers, sometimes accompanied by fighters,
continued to raid Seven Mile. Most of the attacks were
at high level, but the Japanese, meeting no opposition,
became cheeky, and on March 13 five Zeros made a low-
level attack with machine-gun and cannon fire. But no
personnel were injured and there were some satisfying
moments. One was when the ground defences shot down
a Zero on March 23. Another was when a Japanese
bomber, which came over on March 31, disintegrated and
crashed.
John’s Gully continued to be free from attack, and in
the whole of die squadron’s stay at Moresby the nev
camp area was immune. It was not until one night in June,
after No. 32 Squadron had moved its base to Horn
Island, that two stray bombs fell in the camp area.
Everyone at John’s Gully lived in tents. The only build-
ing in the area was a farm-house, which was used as an
officers’ mess, canteen, casualty room, and concert room.
There was no high living at Seven Mile. Principal
food was meat and vegetables from tins. The butter was
tinned and the milk was powdered. Bread was hard to
get for some weeks, and was rationed at one piece a man
a meal. But Army biscuits were plentiful and there was
jam. This diet caused severe enteritis, and the two
nursing orderlies. Corporal Tummerup and L.A.C.
Wackett, had a busy time, especially in one period when
the squadron had no medical officer.


The wet season had just ended and the aerodrome area
was often a sea of sticky black mud, ankle-deep. These
conditions were particularly trying for the servicing
party, which had arrived at Moresby on January 24,
bringing sufficient gear to service four aircraft for 28 days.
But those 28 days lengthened into several months and
constant improvisation was necessary.
Later, when heavy United States bombers came into
Seven Mile, these trials and tribulations increased. Flying
Fortresses would land to refuel and would sink into the
mud. Bren carriers and bull-dozers would be requisitioned
to pull them out. Sometimes it was necessary to pack up
bogged aircraft with sand-bags, sleepers, and oil drums,
while metal was packed under the wheels.
The transport was also poor. One man averred it
comprised “all the rubbish from second-hand yards with
trucks without brakes and with no top gear as specialties.”
These bad conditions persisted throughout March and
April. All the time the amount of servicing increased
through the arrival of United States aircraft. One March
day a Flying Fortress, with only three motors functioning,
arrived during an alert. Consequently there was no one
on the runway to direct the pilot, who taxied his aircraft
into a dispersal bay, which he thought would be nicely
out of the way.
But the port wheel sank into a filled-in bomb hole
and all available personnel, aided by Bren carriers,
worked like Trojans to free the aircraft. This was
achieved at long last. Everything movable was then taken
out of the aircraft and the captain decided to try to lift
it “off the deck” with three engines only. He took only
one member of the crew in order to save weight. The
aircraft was taxi-ing down to the runway to take off when
the same wheel dropped into another bomb hole. That
meant more digging, more cursing. Hydraulic jacks were
brought into use, empty drums and sand-bags were used
to pack up the mainplane, a bull-dozer was hooked on,
and 50 men got under the mainplane and heaved while the
bull-dozer pulled. Once more the Fortress was freed.
And, after using the full length of the runway, it just
managed to become air-borne on three motors.
Such instances could be multiplied many times.
They serve to illustrate the difficulties of the ground


crews. But they toiled and sweated cheerfully, and they
deserved all the appreciation they got, “Keep ’em flying”
was a motto they lived up to always.
With the arrival of P4os toward the end of March
there was a notable heightening of cheerfulness at Seven
Mile. But, after frequent Zero visitors, the ground
defenders at Moresby failed to recognise the first four
P4os to arrive there as friendly aircraft, and two of them
were temporarily made unserviceable through being shot
at. One bullet went through the head-rest of a P4O
piloted by Squadron-Leader Peter Jeffery. But the two
undamaged P4os (piloted by Flying-Officers W. L.
Wackett and B. M. Cox) went up again the same day and
shot down a Jap reconnaisance plane into the sea. Later
the same day 14 more P4os, led by Squadron-Leader John
Jackson, arrived at Moresby from Australia. The very next
morning the P4os strafed enemy aircraft and installations
at Lae. The story of No. 75 Squadron is outside the scope
of this history, but one hopes its stirring deeds at Moresby,
and later at Milne Bay, will be officially recorded one day.
Servicing of United States aircraft kept the ground crew
of No. 32 Squadron very busy toward the end of its stay
in Moresby. These aircraft were principally Flying For-
tresses, Mitchells, and Airacobras. On Easter Sunday,
1942, for example, 31 United States aircraft arrived
between 4 p.m. and 5.30 p.m. and were all refuelled and
serviced for dawn take-offs.
Feeding and bedding visiting airmen were, in them-
selves, formidable tasks. With little or no warning that
company was expected, Pilot-Officers Petrie and Thrumm
and their men would feed up to 125 extra personnel, either
by transporting them to the camp or by carting food to the
runway and distributing it there, often in the dark. Flying-
Officer Heaton and his equipment personnel also did a
splendid job, handing out bedding and mosquito netting
to visitors at night and trying to collect and account for
the material in the approved manner in the darkness next
morning. Losses were surprisingly low, although frequently
personnel were sleeping under trees and the job of
collecting was, therefore, made more difficult than ever.
It was hard, slogging work for all sections at Seven
Mile, but there were lighter moments, mostly arising from
reaction to raids. Newcomers, of course, were closely


watched by the more or less hardened “originals” and
any signs of nervousness were noted to embellish a later
story.
One story is told of two officers, fresh from the south,
who had arrived at the adjutant’s tent to report. While
the parties were getting formally acquainted the tele-
phone rang. Operations room was reporting that enemy
aircraft were expected in 15 minutes; it was agreed not
to sound the alarm until 10 minutes later.
Tenor of this conversation was overheard by the
newcomers, who looked a little startled but tried not to
show undue apprehension. A few minutes later one of
the new officers strolled away, explaining that he must
unpack, but he was seen to stop in the entrance to a
trench, cut in the side of a hill about 50 yards away. He
stood there with his back to the adjutant’s tent.
The second officer remained chatting with the
adjutant for a few minutes but kept a very wary eye sky-
ward. Suddenly the hooter sounded and this officer,
without asking to be excused, ran like a stag for the
trench where his colleague was standing. He travelled so
swiftly—according to the adjutant—that he took his
companion by surprise, and, in his dive for the trench,
struck the unsuspecting officer in the middle of the hack,
felling him like an ox. The officer so rudely treated had
to have medical attention for abrasions to both arms,
which were heavily bandaged. He swore for some days
that he had been hit by bomb blast.
Another cherished story in the squadron concerns a
member of the messing staff, who believed in prompt
response when the hooter blew. On this occasion, when
the squadron was at its first camp site at Moresby, the
alert was given at 3.30 a.m.
An alleged eye-witness gives this account of the next
few moments: “Bluey (that’s not his real nickname) made
his usual good start. He had his shoes, shorts, and cape
on as he entered the straight for the trench. A certain
sergeant stumbled out of the scrub, and somehow got his
respirator tangled with Bluey’s cape. ‘Wait a minute until
I unhook this,’ said the sergeant. ‘B you,’ said Bluey.
‘You jump on my back and come with me.’ He did.”
Well, that is one story told against the messing staff.
But, on the serious side, all members of the squadron


acknowledge that the messing staff did a splendid job
under great difficulties, both at Seven Mile and at Horn
Island. Five of them—Sgt. E. Hills, Cpl. A. Edminston,
L.A.C. P. Smith, L.A.C. C. Jarvis, and L.A.C. J. Sanders,
who were original members—were still with the
squadron a year after it had returned to Australia, but
doubtless Postings has moved them on again by now.
No one will begrudge a special word of praise to
L.A.C. Pat Smith, who gave cheerful service at all hours
in all circumstances. He had a faculty for getting a meal
ready as soon as he heard the sound of incoming aircraft.
This book is not the first history of the squadron.
The first was told in a very creditable parody on “Bless ’em
All,” which was always a popular community item at sing-
songs in the north. In that parody, incidentally suitable
mention is made toward the end of the work of Pat Smith.
HERE IS THE PARODY;
THEY say there’s a steamboat just leaving Townsville,
Bound for Port Moresby ? s shore.
With Thirty-two Squadron, a bright lot of chaps.
Sent over there to clean up the Japs.
And we're saying good-bye to them all.
Our brothers and sisters and gals;
We’ll cause a commotion this side of the ocean.
For Thirty-two Squadron are we.
Squadron’s pride, squadron’s pride.
Three cheers for the Yanks at our side.
We are a squadron whose aim is, you see.
To chase out the Japs and keep Aussie free.
And we’re doing the job in fine style.
As victories higher we pile.
We’ll be back to Australia And not as a failure.
For Thirty-two Squadron are we.
One bright day, one bright day.
We were having our lunch as they say.
When bombers came over, it was such a sight.
And most of the boys got a hell of a fright.
So away to their trenches ■ they flew
While the bombs of the Japs fell so true.
At the end of the show we said: “Where shall we go?”
And the C.O. said: “Listen, my crew.


“Far away, far away.
We shall move on the very next day.
Away to the hills where the Japs will not know.
We shall wait for the fighters to give them a go.
We shall sleep four or six in a tent.
But we won’t have to pay any rent.
The mossies may bite but it’s not like the fright
That the hoys put up with to-day.”
Ground staff true, ground staff true.
They’re giving the best they can do.
They’re a crowd who are half of our might
And like air crew are ready for fight.
When our bombers come hack knocked about
They’re ready to re-rig them out.
They wait on the planes; they’re the boys with the brains;
They’re the tops, they’re the best, there’s no doubt.
Flying high, flying high.
To rule over Port Moresby’s sky.
The bombers, the fighters, the boys in the kites.
Increasing in numbers and ready for fights.
And the boys from their trenches can crawl.
The M. 0., the Adjie and all.
The war will be over and we’ll be in clover.
It’s Thirty-two Squadron once more.
Our pilots, who don’t give a damn for the Japs,
Up near Port Moresby’s shore . . .
Kingwell, the C. 0., who knows how to fly.
Likes dodging Zeros about in the sky.
For he’s leaving good-bye to them all
As he pastes them with tracer and ball.
He’ll be coming to smack you; you’ll know when he cracks
you.
So come on, you Japs, blast you all.
Our Doctor McGlynn, now a good scout is he.
Up near Port Moresby’s shore.
Hops out of the trenches when anyone’s down.
Hops in the car and drives straight into town.
For he’s doing his duty and all
As he answers the medico’s call.
He’ll get his promotion this side of the ocean
So cheer him, my lads, cheer him all.


Old Nippon he don’t worry us, not a bit.
Up near Port Moresby’s shore.
Dropping his bombs from up in the sky.
Dropping his bombs right near where we lie.
For we’re watching the cows as they fall;
We hear the damned “swish-swish” and all.
Now we’ve got our own fighters we say: “Blast the
blighters;”
We’re waving good-bye to them all.
The Zeros they don’t worry us, not a bit.
Up near Port Moresby’s shore.
Our Hudsons are flying by day and by night
To recco, to bomb or engage in a fight;
Now we’re saying good-bye to them all
As to Richmond they limp on recall.
After repatch and repair they are back in the air
So cheer up, my lads, toast ’em all.
The siren it don’t worry us, no, not htdf.
Up near Port Moresby’s shore.
When we hear it blowing high up on the hill
Do we go on working or even stand still?
No! We’re bounding away up the hill
Like footballers after the ball.
In a couple of seasons we’re bound to break evens;
We’ll clean up the Stawell and all.
Our cooking is really a treat nowadays
Up near Port Moresby’s shore.
“Smithy” makes chickens appear in the pie
When rabbits, we know, are the sole things to die;
And he’s stewing them up in a pot.
Mixing them all with a tot.
He’ll make chipped pertaters with young green termaters.
So good luck, Pat; thanks a lot.
Oh; we are the boys of the fighting brigade.
Thirty-two Squadron are we.
This parody, it will be noted, ends in the kitchen and
gives the opportunity to include this tribute by a pilot
to the Seven Mile institution known as “Sloppy Joe’s”.
This pilot writes:—
“After this show is over I’m going to call on the
official historian and make sure that he includes a


description of ‘Sloppy Joe’s’ in his history of the New
Guinea campaign. This is the least I can do for Sloppy’s.
To the lads at the Seven Mile aerodrome shortly after 32
Squadron was formed Sloppy Joe’s was the local Australia
or Menzies. Of course, the menu was not as comprehensive
. . . Morrow’s fruit cake, supplied by the Australian Com-
forts Fund, or maybe a roll or two from the bakery, and
perhaps some sandwiches (if there was any butter) . . .
which makes about as much sense as the corporal cook
who told us that if he had any eggs he’d give us eggs and
bacon—if there was any bacon!
"‘But there was always Joe’s coffee. The real McCoy,
straight from the States and piping hot, day or night.
You’d drink gallons of the stuff. As fast as you sank it,
out it would ooze from your pores.
“Among its patrons Joe’s boasted fliers of fame and
glory, not forgetting the unsung heroes of that time. The
indomitable Bill Pedrina, D.F.C., who was flight-com-
mander during our stay in Moresby, swore by Joe’s, and
would declare in that slow drawl of his that he was going
to start a fish and chips shop after the war as there was
money in ‘eats’. However, this must have been Pedro’s
secondary amhition; his primary notion was dance bands.
‘Why,’ he would say, ‘some of these American blokes make
100 quid a week, just waving a stick about.’ Fate decreed
that neither of Pedro’s ambitions should come true.
“When the sun crept over the Moresby mountains you
would see eager youngsters, tipping their mugs at Joe’s
and then rushing off to their kites to do a strike or patrol.
At night, when the blaze of tropical stars pierced the day’s
steamy haze, you would find tired, unshaven faces, but
still the eager chatter and rough joking round Joe’s
counter.
“Weary ground staff, up all night doing miracles of
servicing in the dust and heat, would find a minute to
spare for a mug of Joe’s brew.
“And it was just an inconspicuous grass and sago-
leaf hut, built by the natives. Inside it had a long wooden
counter and a wooden floor. I heard, just before we left
Moresby, that Joe’s was being fitted out with a water-
supply and sink. Such luxury!”


CHAPTER FOUR
Horn Island Memories
FROM April until August, 1942, No. 32 Squadron was
based on Horn Island, near neighbour in Torres
Strait of the much better known Thursday Island.
But the squadron continued to operate as actively as ever
in the New Guinea area, and toward the end of its stay
in the north was prominently identified with operations
at Milne Bay before and during the period of the
unsuccessful attempt by the Japanese to capture that
strategic position in the south-east corner of Papua.
The change to Horn Island gave better facilities for
servicing and dispersing aircraft. Moresby was really a
“hot spot” because of the frequent Japanese raids, and
aircraft on the ground were frequently destroyed or
damaged. In any case while the squadron was based on
Moresby it had frequently been necessary for its aircraft
to use Horn Island.
Most of the Hudsons had left Seven Mile for Horn
Island by the first week in April, but other personnel
stayed at Seven Mile until April 24. It was a particularly
arduous three weeks because, in addition to servicing the
usual run of American aircraft and attending to the


creature comforts of their crews, servicing had to be
carried out on numerous A24s (dive-bombers). This, in
the main, consisted of robbing damaged A24s to patch up
others not so badly damaged.
Then there was the task of packing up the squadron
for the move to Horn Island. The adjutant, Flight-
Lieutenant Harold Young, who later became C.O. of the
operational base at_Hom Island, must often have wond-
ered whether it would ever be possible to quit Moresby,
and one can imagine the sigh of relief he breathed when
he found himself at last on board a flying-boat on April
24, bound for the squadron’s new island home. The
Wanaka left Moresby the same day with the main body
of troops, who were disembarked at Thursday Island two
days later and ferried across to Horn.
Horn Island was still in the primitive stage when the
squadron arrived there, and there was a lot of work ahead
in preparing the new camp quarters. This problem was
aggravated by an epidemic of dengue and a recurrence of
malaria cases. F/Lt. McGlynn, who had done a fine job
as M.O. at Moresby, although ill himself with malaria,
was succeeded by F/Lt. Bond as temporary M.O. Soon
afterwards, F/Lt. R. Gill, who had returned recently from
Malaya, was posted as M.O. to the squadron.
One of the first tasks F/Lt. Gill set himself was the
building of a hospital. The site chosen was several miles
away from the main camp on the highest point on the
island with a fine view of the sea. The nucleus of the
hospital was an old gold-miner’s hut —for there is a gold
mine at Horn—which the medical section staff painted
and kalsomined. Shelves were fixed for stocks, a stove
was cleaned and made serviceable, electric light was
installed and, in short, from most unpromising material
an eight-bed hospital was created.
As at Seven Mile when the squadron first arrived
there, Horn Island’s existing meagre accommodation
comprised a mess hut right on the edge of the aerodrome.
There was a large barracks building alongside for air crew.
Moresby experience had taught the lesson that the
place to enjoy a peaceful sleep was certainly not in
buildings near the runway, so once more the squadron had
to get more acceptable accommodation in dispersed areas.


The shrub and tree covered contours of Horn
Island, fortunately, lent themselves readily to concealment
of camp quarters. In due course buildings to house head-
quarters, operations, intelligence, cipher, and signals staffs
were built. Officers’, sergeants’ and airmen’s messes were
also built, and later similar accommodation was provided
for visiting air crews and the operational base. But
everyone slept in tents, dispersed along neighbouring
gullies.
Water was one of the principal worries at Horn.
Open-air showers were built at several points, but hathing
hours had to be rigidly policed, and frequently at the
appointed times there would be no water or just the
merest trickle. But everyone had canvas water-bags, which
fitted on stands, and the main ablutions were performed
in these outside the tent entrances. Mosquitoes were also
aggravating at times—and particularly at shaving times
when the victim’s preoccupation with his whiskers gave
the pests their best opportunity for attack.
This question of whiskers was solemnly dealt with in
Unit Routine Orders before the squadron left Moresby.
The order read; “Officers of No. 32 Squadron will not
shave the upper lip or trim the resultant growth.”
Newcomers were apt to treat this injunction as a joke,
but they soon found out their mistake. A reprimand and
“drinks for the mess” was the inevitable penalty. Some
splendid moustaches reminiscent of the Boer War period
were produced, and none was more spectacular than that
of the C. 0., Wing-Commander Kingwell, himself.
It is reported that a “rookie”, just arrived at Horn,
went to the wrong shower. He was soaping himself up
when he noticed the man alongside him and remarked:
“Gee, that’s a beaut mo. How long did it take you to
grow it, mate?” When “mate” put on his shirt and
revealed his rank, the new arrival made a discreet retreat
in search of the airmen’s showers.
One advantage of the moustache ruling was that it
revealed at a glance who were possible members of the
squadron. True, it did not eliminate personnel of the
0.8., but at least a clean shave denoted: “Not a member
of this squadron.” The beautiful auburn moustaches of
F/Lt. Young, contrasted with the equally elegant black


pair of the C. 0., were so much admired that F/Lt. Young
forbore to remove them when he himself vacated the
adjutant’s office to become C.O. of the 0.8. A jungle
knife, which F./Lt. Young wore jauntily and habitually on
his right hip, marked him out beyond confusion even in
that assembly of handle-barred Horn Islanders.
There was a humorous sequel to this edict on whisk-
ers when the squadron went south later in the year. Wing-
Commander Kingwell, whose wife and young son joined
him then, had a house just outside the station, and there
one night he gave a party. Proceedings were going
pleasantly, it is reported, when Mrs. Kingwell remarked:
‘Now, about those moustaches!’ With suitable ceremonial,
in which blue ribbon played a part, the C.O. and his
hirsute guests were obliged to part with their moustaches.
The guard at the main gate pardonably failed to recog-
nise his C.O. next morning.
Well, that ended the ban on bare faces. The C.O.
grew himself a much less flamboyant set, and it was “go
as you please” for everyone. But it must be conceded—■
hotly as the rule was contested at the time —that it gave
the officers of the squadron, many of them only just
verging on their majority, a senior, stern, and distinctive
appearance.
Raids were much less frequent over Horn Island than
over Moresby, but there was one severe raid in July. On
April 30, only four days after the main body of the
squadron had arrived from Moresby, eight Japanese
bombers dropped about 40 bombs in the vicinity of the
runway, and three Zeros, which accompanied the bombers,
later strafed the runway. Main damage was to three
Wirraways.
A similar raid was made on May 11. Four Zeros
strafed the runway and nine bombers dropped 45 bombs
in the dispersal bays area. Only damage was to one
refuelling unit and to two of the Wirraways which had
been struck on the previous raid.
The severe raid—a daylight attack like the others—
was made on July 7. Sixteen heavy bombers dropped
between 180 and 200 fragmentation bombs in a devastat-
ing run through a section of the area. The armament
section, the combustible stores hut, the visiting crews’


sleeping hut, the meteorological hut, and the duty pilot’s
room were wrecked, and a portable refuelling unit, a
tractor, a utility truck, and two petrol water-testers were
destroyed. In addition, several tents were burnt, and the
occupants lost all their personal effects. The “daisy-
cutters” carved a clean swath through part of the bush,
levelling trees and shattering rocks. Fortunately, there
were plenty of trenches in the camp area and the only
casualty of any consequence was one man who suffered
shrapnel wounds in one leg.
There were two night raids, each by a solitary flying-
hoat, while the squadron was at Horn. These occurred
during the full-moon period and were made on July 29
and August 1. The first raider dropped five bombs
among dispersed aircraft. One was damaged by blast and
three others by bomh fragments, but all were serviceable
again in a few days. The second raid may have had some
nuisance value by keeping personnel in their trenches for
an hour or so while the übiquitous Horn Island mosquitoes
did their worst, but the bombs fell in the sea. These
raids coincided with those on Townsville, where also
negligible damage was done by aircraft of the same type,
commonly known as Mavis, a four-engined job of enviable
range.
Americans who manned the ack-ack at Horn—this was
not available for “receiving” the earlier Japanese visitors
—were thrown into close contact with the squadron.
Americans and Australians co-operated well; one of the
minor aspects of this was the production daily of a
single-page news sheet. Wireless reception of news was
poor, so that, in the hackneyed phrase, the modest “Horn
Island News” filled a long-felt need. The Americans
possessed the only roneo machine on the island, so the
production of the sheet was on the basis of No. 32
Squadron providing the news and the Americans providing
the plant.
Incidentally, an offshoot of this news sheet was
produced when the squadron was voyaging south several
months later, and L.A.C. Simpson, who made the news
sheet his hobby, invented for the delectation of the
squadron a character on whom Mr. Disney might profit-
ably base an animated cartoon. No Pop-eye “fan” in the


big city looked more eagerly for the daily ditherings of
his favourite than No. 32 Squadron, homeward bound,
looked for the latest non-sensical adventure of “L.A.C.
Troppo.”
One of the steady jobs for flying personnel from
Horn Island was a daily patrol of the Gulf of Carpen-
taria, eight hours flying over water which became
colloquially known as “the milk run.” But aircraft were
continually going to Moresby and operating from there
over the old familiar terrain, to which Milne Bay was
added later.
All in all —and mosquitoes excepted—Horn Island was
a pleasant home for the squadron. The butter might be
tainted, the beer might run out in spite of rigid rationing,
and the menu might have its limitations. But the climate
was good and there was a free launch to free pictures at
Thursday Island two or three nights a week for those who
did not mind a long journey after the day’s work.
And even the food could be decked out on occasion.
For instance, as a special effort to celebrate the C.O.’s
26th. birthday, the cook (whose efforts at Seven Mile have
already been extolled) called diplomatically on all
officers who were known to have been recent recipients
of parcels from home and scrounged asparagus for an
entree. This was Horn Island’s only four-course meal:—
Mullagatawny soup (vegetables out of tins and curry ;
asparagus on toast; grilled steak (from York Peninsula) ;
and fruit salad (from various tins) with whipped cream
—whipped from tinned milk.
A feature of social life at Horn was the Sunday
evening concert in the airmen’s mess. The Americans on
the island co-operated in making these shows most suc-
cessful. Corporal D. Wackett and L.A.C. G. T. Byrnes
were the moving spirits on the R.A.A.F. side, and the con-
certs were always bright and breezy. Winter in the north
was like summer in the south, so that the open work
character of the concert hall was well suited to the climate.
Songs, sketches, instrumental numbers, and community
singing—many of the items with topical allusions to Horn
Island personalities—whiled away a pleasant two hours.
I shall always treasure one memory from the first
concert which I attended at Horn. Two swarthy, black


moustached gentlemen were giving melodious tongue in a
duet. One, whom I later knew as “Hank” Hancock, a
redoubtable songster, was well enough cast as “Bollocky
Bill, a Sailor.” But I still think that the other, the popular,
always smiling Hughie Hawthorne, was —despite a decep-
tive falsetto—somewhat out of character as “The Fair
Young Maiden.”
Highlight of the evening at every concert was the
news announcements serious and frivolous from
“Station NBG”. Always the concerts ended with the
singing of “The Star-Spangled Banner” and “God Save
the King.”
One of the last concerts was given at the American
camp, and it was particularly successful, for the per-
formers had put a lot of work into the preparation of the
programme. A further impetus was given by the
announcement, made at the outset, that news had just
been received of the Allied attack on Guadalcanal and
Tulagi. It was this action, grimly fought over the succeed-
ing months, that turned the tide finally against the
Japanese in the south-east Solomons.
There were many genuine regrets when, various furphies
having developed finally into positive news, the squadron
learned that it was to he replaced in the north. Most of
the flying personnel went south in their aircraft toward
the end of August, 1942. The remainder had several
pleasant days at Thursday Island, awaiting their steamer,
before they, too, headed south on September 3—third
anniversary of the outbreak of war.
This, then, was the corporate life of the squadron
in the north. Let us now turn back to record some of the
outstanding exploits of the Hudson crews over New Guinea
and New Britain. The three stories that immediately follow
describe the deeds that won the first D.F.C.s and the first
D.C.M. in that theatre. These crews did not belong to
No. 32 squadron, which was not formed until later in that
month of February, 1942, but several members of those
crews (including one of the D.F.C. winners, Flight-Lieuten-
ant Pedrina) and the D.F.M. winner (Sergeant “Jock”
Thomson) were posted as original members of No. 32. In
any event, the Hudson story from December, 1941, onward
is indivisible, and for that reason it is considered proper
to include those three stories within this history.
35


CHAPTER FIVE
500 Mile Flight in Crippled
Hudson
NO more dramatic story has come out of the air war
in New Guinea than the operation over Rabaul on
February 6, 1942, for which Flight-Lieutenant
David Campbell won the D.F.C., and Sergeant Gordon
(“Jock”) Thomson, only unwounded member of the
crew, who played a conspicuous part in bringing a badly-
stricken Hudson back to base at Moresby, won the D.F.M.
Flight-Lieutenant Campbell (who was station naviga-
tion officer at Port Moresby), with Pilot-Officer J. E.
(“Harry”) Lauder as second pilot, and Sergeants
Thomson and Geoff O’Hea as W.O.A.G.s, left Moresby
at 6.30 a.m. to make a photographic reconnaissance of
Rabaul, which had been captured by the Japanese two
weeks earlier. When they arrived over Rabaul at 10.15
a.m. there was a fair bit of cloud cover and the aircraft
went in at 10,000 feet.
A simple but graphic account of the events that
followed was given later by Thomson—a young Scot, born


in England, who came to Australia only in 1938. Thom-
son, soon after this Rabaul exploit, became a member of
No. 32 Squadron, but the other members of the crew,
because of their wounds, were sent south for treatment.
“We did two or three circuits over Rabaul with
Pilot-Officer Lauder operating the camera,” said Thomson.
“O’Hea was on the rear turret and I was down in the
nose with a sketch map, marking in the shipping. After
we had been over the target about five minutes a Zero
was sighted taking off. This was reported to Flight-
Lieutenant Campbell, who said that there would be time
for another circuit before the Zero got up to us.
“We were just coming out of that circuit and were
heading for cloud when the Zero hit us. He came in
from behind the port tailplane and gave us a three-
second burst in which he wounded Sergeant O’Hea in the
right leg, Flight-Lieutenant Campbell in the left wrist,
and Pilot-Officer Lauder in the fingers, shoulders and
knee. At the same time two aluminium sea-markers ex-
ploded and filled the kite with fine grey powder, which
got into the eyes of the crew.
“I think Flight-Lieutenant Campbell wanted us to
bale out. But we were a long way from home, and it was
decided to stay with the kite while it kept flying. We
were then in cloud and the Zero had broken off its attack.
By this time, too, we were beginning to get over the shock.
Flight-Lieutenant Campbell straightened up the kite,
trimming it to make up for the holes in the ailerons and
rudder.
“I was the only unwounded member of the crew, and I
could see that my job was to try to stop the other three
men from bleeding, particularly Flight-Lieutenant Camp-
bell. I used my oxygen tube as a tourniquet on his wrist
and my singlet as a bandage. O’Hea said he was all right
and refused to let me touch him.
“Pilot-Officer Lauder had one finger torn off and
another hanging by a shred. His shoulder and leg were
also bleeding badly. I used the leads on my head-phones
as a tourniquet for his shoulder and tore up my shirt for
bandages. His leg was spouting blood and for a while I
could do nothing about it. Then I suddenly remembered
that the wireless-operator’s seat is made for a seat-type


parachute. Without a cushion in the seat a person could
sit there and his legs would go ‘dead’ through sitting in
the well. So I got Pilot-Officer Lauder into the seat. My
treatment didn’t stop the bleeding altogether, but it
brought the flow of blood to a trickle.
“Next, under Flight-Lieutenant Campbell’s direction,
I put in the gyro pilot. I set it to climb as we had to go
over the 13,000 feet Owen Stanleys and we had no
instruments left. All had been shot away by the Zero.
When the aircraft had reached its maximum height we
set ‘George’ to level flying and hoped we were high
enough to clear the mountains.
“I had taken the oxygen tube off Flight-Lieutenant
Campbell’s wrist by that time and given it to Pilot-Officer
Lauder for its proper use as we were flying at about
20,000 feet. I also fixed the pilot’s oxygen tube for him.
There were no more so O’Hea and I made do without.
“We were losing petrol fast because both port wing
tanks had been holed, and we were rather worried in case
we could not quite make Moresby. However, we got over
Moresby with our last tank flickering on empty, and put
the nose down so that we could land as quickly as possible.
We didn’t do a circuit but made a straight approach into
the strip with Flight-Lieutenant Campbell handling the
stick and myself handling the throttle controls.
“When we were about 500 feet off the ground the
petrol ran out. I quickly grabbed the fuel pump and
pumped like hell. The starboard engine stopped but the
port engine caught with the last few dregs of petrol and
dragged us on to the runway,
“On the approach we had put down the wheels and
flaps. But as the petrol ran out I whipped up the flaps
and never had time to go back to them. We were told
later that, if the petrol had not run out and the flap
control had been left down, only one flap would have
come down and we would have gone in. As it happened
Flight-Lieutenant Campbell made a beautiful landing
without flaps, but, as soon as we touched down, we found
that the starboard tyre had burst, with the result that
the aircraft wanted to ground loop. I grabbed a brake
and brought the aircraft to a sudden stop.”
Although weakened by loss of blood and the ordeal


•of bringing the crippled aircraft 500 miles back to base,
Flight-Lieutenant Campbell—in the words of the official
citation—“gave a clear, full and concise report, which
tallied with the excellent photographs which were later
developed.”
So ended a thrilling mission, in which the best
traditions of the service were fully upheld. Someone
counted the holes in the Hudson later. There were 256
of them. But that Hudson (Al 6-130) was repaired and
was still in service with No. 32 Squadron in the south a
year later.
How it was temporarily repaired at Moresby before
being flown south is another story that deserves to be
told, because it admirably illustrates the resource and
devotion to duty of the ground staff in spite of lack of
appliances.
“The job was to jack up the machine,” said a
member of the servicing party. “All we had was a two-
ton hydraulic jack. After packing timber under the
jack and pushing it into the mud for 18 inches, we
eventually managed to take the weight of the machine
and then dig a hole in the mud and take off the starboard
wheel. A timber shore had to be cut to act as a main-
plane jack. This was accomplished by using an axe —
truly bush methods.
“When the machine was wheeled on to solid ground
the patching began in earnest. The ragged holes were
trimmed and 130 fabric and dope patches were applied.
It was certainly the paper-hanger’s day out. Some holes
in the main tanks were plugged with wood and tank-
sealing compound, and fabric and dope patches were put
'Over the lot.
“To get the inspection covers off we filed down our
bayonets to fit the philip screws, and excellent screw-
drivers they made, too. After a day and a half’s work the
aircraft was ready to be flown south. Flight-Lieutenant
Hampshire (‘Long John’) took off with the flaps tied up
and petrol streaming from the holes we had been unable
to patch because we hadn’t any metal or screws or rivets
to do anything like a job. But she flew. That was Febru-
ary, 1942, and she was still with No. 32 Squadron a year
later.”


The squadron had another remarkable aircraft —
Al 6-136 —but its life was much shorter. It was known as
“The Gutless Wonder,” and was pressed into service on
several of the squadron’s early raids.
“We used to cram 1,600 pounds of bombs on it,” said
an air-gunner who had raided Salamaua in this aircraft.
“But at nearly full throttle we could get only about 500
feet a minute out of it, and it used to take about an hour
to climb over the Owen Stanleys. The fuel pressure used
to drop off as we got high, and each of us used to take a
turn at the hand pump to keep the ‘Gutless Wonder’ up.”
Perhaps it was as well that this aircraft had a short
life. It was ground strafed by Zeros at Horn Island and
blew up with its bombs.
* * * *
There is a sad postscript to add to this chapter.
“Jock” Thomson and another well-known member of the
old 32 Squadron, Don Bassett, lost their lives when a
Hudson crashed into the sea in a storm off Cairns on
March 5, 1945. There were 11 victims, including Major-
General G. A. Vasey, one of the Australian Army’s most
brilliant officers.
Of the character of “Jock” Thomson the story of his
courage and resource in the Hudson crippled over Rahaul
speaks for itself. Of Don Bassett it can be said that he
combined efficiency as a pilot with a modest, quietly-
spoken personality which gave him a wide popularity.
Both lads earned their commissions the hard way, and
were flying-officers at the end.


CHAPTER SIX
Pedro, The Perfect Pilot
NO Hudson pilot was better known in the north
than F/Lt. William Allen Pedrina, popularly
called “Pedro” and often described as “the perfect
pilot.” His D.F.C. was awarded for exploits on February
11 and 19—a few days before the official formation of No.
32 Squadron, of which he became an original member.
For several months subsequently he flew in the New
Guinea area. Then he was given a spell back in Australia
but was recalled to New Guinea and there he met his
death in December, 1942, through enemy action.
Pedrina, who joined the R.A.A.F. in January, 1938,
did reconnaissances over enemy territory from the
beginning of the war with Japan, and he showed great
skill and daring in getting vital information about Japan-
ese dispositions and shipping movements.
Five Hudsons, including Pedrina’s, left Moresby on
February 10 to attack Japanese shipping and landing
forces at Gasmata on the south coast of New Britain. Bad
weather caused the formation to split up, but four aircraft
reached the target and delivered high-level attacks on
F
41


shipping. There were two transports and three destroyers
in Gasmata Harbour, but no hits on them were observed.
So it was decided to repeat the raid next day. Three
Hudsons went out, the crews being:—Wing-Commander
Lerew, Flying-Officer Watt, Sgt. McDonald, and Sgt.
Henry; Flight-Lieutenant Pedrina, Pilot-Officer Hookings,
Sgt. Theis, and Sgt. Morrison; and Flying-Officer Gibson,
Pilot-Officer Thorn, Sgt. Quaile, and Sgt. Coutie.
Their instructions were simple—to make a mast-head
attack on the Japanese ships at Gasmata—and these
orders were carried out to the letter. In spite of heavy
ack-ack fire the attack was pressed right home. Then
five or six enemy fighters attacked the Hudsons. The air-
craft piloted by Wing-Commander Lerew was seen to
catch on fire and go down sharply. The pilot ordered his
crew to bale out, but evidently they crashed with the
aircraft. Wing-Commander Lerew parachuted, “landing'’
in a tree, and after many hardships returned to Moresby
nine days later, as related later in these pages.
Flying-Officer Gibson’s aircraft was last seen flying
level at about 2,000 feet and heading inland. The
presumption is that it was badly damaged and eventually
crashed, for nothing more was heard of the crew.
So it was that Flight-Lieutenant Pedrina’s aircraft
was the only one of the three to return from this “suicide
mission.” He brought back with him his usual detailed
account of the operation. Only two days later he was
over Gasmata again to make a photographic reconnais-
sance. He took the opportunity also to bomb the aero-
drome, and, although attacked by fighters, he came back
with his photographs.
On February 19 Pedrina was ordered to make a
photographic reconnaissance over Rabaul. Other members
of the crew were P/O. Hockings, Sgt. Mariner, and Sgt.
Morrison. It was known that the Japanese were massing
great strength at Rabaul, and it was important that up-to-
date intelligence should be acquired.
There was very little cloud over Rabaul and the
Hudson was soon spotted. A Zero attacked and a lively
encounter followed in which the Hudson was riddled with
bullets. Sergeant Mariner, the belly-gunner, was killed,
the flap controls were put out of action, and the star


board tyre buret. Nevertheless Pedrina stuck doggedly at
the controls and brought his damaged aircraft back 500
miles for a safe landing at Moresby. His photographs
showed that there were 13 ships in Rabaul Harbour.
For his “courage and devotion to duty in the face of
heavy odds and his determination to complete his allotted
duty, despite enemy opposition,” Pedrina was awarded the
D.F.C. The official citation made special mention of his
mission over Gasmata on February 11 and his mission
over Rabaul on February 19.
Pedrina did not rest on his laurels. On February 27
Pedrina, now a member of the new No. 32 Squadron,
left Moresby to drop supplies at Cape Bougainville. One
box, about five feet by four feet by two feet, full of sup-
plies, could not conveniently be accommodated, but
Pedrina was resourceful. The bomb doors were opened,
the box was pushed up, and, by keeping the doors in
closed position, the box, in the words of one member of
the crew, “sort of held there.”
It was another adventurous trip with a little humour
spicing the adventure. Cape Bougainville was reached
about dusk and the aircraft dived down to drop its sup-
plies. The bulky box had a parachute with a rip-cord
and floated down without trouble, but ack-ack started to
come up aU round the aircraft.
Sergeant J. Dowling, one of the W.O.A.G.s, shouted out
to Sergeant D. Forbes, the other W.0.A.G., who was in
the turret: “Did you see that?”
Forbes, one of the quietest and coolest members of
the squadron, replied: “Yes; I thought they were signal-
ling to us.”
“Who?” asked Dowling.
“Those three destroyers down there,” quietly replied
Forbes. “They’re anchored down there. I thought they
were ours.”
In the words of Dowling: “Pedro gave it the gun and
up we went out of harm’s way.”
On March 5 Pedrina was out again on his favourite
mission—getting photographs of Rabaul and Gasmata.
Pedrina seemed to be a magnet for Zeros. When near
Arawe on his way to Rabaul three Zeros were seen, but
the clouds were kind on this occasion and the Hudson


eluded the Japs. Near Rabaul five more Zeros were seen,
but again sanctuary was found in cloud. The Hudson
went over Rabaul at 6,000 feet while P/O. Hookings
operated the camera and Sergeant Dowling was busy in
the nose, sketching the harbour and marking the positions
of 30 ships. These included four large cruisers or battle-
ships, lying parallel to each other right across the middle
of the harbour. In the distance the Hudson crew saw two
Zeros taking off from the strip at Lakunai, but the Zeros
had no opportunity to intercept because the Hudson was
soon back in cloud and homeward hound with another
excellent collection of photographs.
Pedrina carried out many more missions, hut those
described indicate the calibre of the man. It has been
said that no other pilot “wore out” so many crews.
Pedrina never felt the need for rest. He applied himself
with single-minded devotion to his task. It was with keen
regret that the members of the squadron, then back in
Australia, heard in December, 1942, that Pedrina had been
killed near Buna.
“Pedro,” who had been instructing in the south for
some time, was recalled with other old Hudson pilots for
the special work of supply-dropping in the Buna area
toward the end of 1942. It was strenuous and delicate
work. The crews worked from Moresby, flying over those
familiar, forbidding Owen Stanleys to throw out food and
ammunition to the Allied troops fighting the fanatical
Japanese in the Buna-Gona area.
Three trips had already been made by Pedrina and
his crew on the fateful December 14. Because of the
clouds that shrouded the gap in the mountains further
trips had been called off for the day. But it was found
that some urgently-wanted tommy-gun ammunition
was awaiting despatch, so “Pedro” and two other pilots
loaded up their aircraft and, flying just under the cloud
base, arrived over Soputa, where the dropping was to be
done. The load usually amounted to about 3,000 to
3,500 lbs and three circuits were normally made, two
members of the crew tipping out about 1,000 lbs each
time.
Pedrina had drawn the attention of his crew to ack-
ack coming from a Japanese ship that had been bombed


and grounded off Sananander Point a few days before.
Pedrina’s aircraft, with its door open to facilitate the
dropping, had gone in low twice to enable the cases of
ammunition to be thrown out. The aircraft was going in a
third time, with two members of the crew standing by to
throw out the balance of the load, when the Hudson was
struck, apparently on the nose. Pedrina was heard to say
over the inter-com. that he had been hit. The Hudson
climbed steeply, then stalled and crashed. It ploughed
through the jungle, broke into two sections (apparently
because of the open door) and burst into flames. Sgt.
Leon Callaghan, a New Zealander, who was in the turret,
was the only survivor of the crew of four, and he was so
seriously injured that he had to spend nine months in
hospital.
So a lucky shot from a wrecked Japanese ship killed
the perfect pilot.


CHAPTER SEVEN
Wing-Commander Lerew’s
Ordeal
ONE of the first D.F.C.s awarded to Hudson pilots
early in 1942 (the first three awarded in the Aus-
tralian theatre of war) was won by Wing-Com-
mander John Lerew, who had been commanding officer
of No. 24 Squadron at Rabaul and later at Moresby. He
joined the R.A.A.F. in 1932 and has been concisely
described as “a C.O. if there ever was one.” An old boy
of Scotch College, Melbourne, he has a notable record as
a versatile sportsman, being accomplished in football,
tennis, boxing, swimming, and skating. He also finished
third in an Australian motoring Grand Prix.
He has a record, too, as a grim humorist. A variant
on the famous Churchillian phrase about “the few” is
attributed to him, to the effect that never in the field of
human conflict had so many waited so long for so little
or was it that never had so few been mucked about so
long by so many? At any rate, the jibe reflected his
dissatisfaction with the state of affairs in the north in the
early days of the Pacific war.


More famous is the signal he sent from Rabaul on
January 21, 1942, on the eve of its fall. One can imagine
that eyes popped and heads were scratched at R.A.A.F.
headquarters when this signal decoded into a Latin tag: —
Morituri te salutamus.
That is to say: “We who are about to die salute you."
Happily, Lerew and most of his men escaped to fight
conspicuously on many another day. It was just three
weeks later, indeed, that he figured in an amazing exploit
that earned the D.F.C. Award of this decoration followed
the daring attack on Japanese shipping at Gasmata on
February 11, 1942 in which (as described in the previous
chapter) Flight-Lieutenant Pedrina also won his D.F.C.
Lerew brought down one enemy fighter and damaged
another before his own aircraft was sent blazing down.
He instructed his crew to bale out and himself parachuted
into the jungle of New Britain. Unfortunately, nothing
more was heard of the three other members of the crew.
The second pilot, Flying-Officer “Billy” Watt, was a
particularly promising lad for whom a brilliant operational
career had been predicted.
The story of Wing-Commander Lerew’s nightmare
experience before he reached Moresby by a circuitous
route nine days after he leapt from his doomed aircraft
is told in extracts from his diary. The writer has not met
Wing-Commander Lerew and the following extracts from
his diary are quoted with acknowledgment to a bulletin
issued by the R.A.A.F. Directorate of Public Relations
soon after Wing-Commander Lerew’s return:—
Wednesday, about 3 p.m.. —At bottom of dive got big
bump as though all bombs had gone off together. Took
violent avoiding action and attempted to see results.
Gunner rushed forward and said: “We’re on fire.” Fire
quickly got worse. Cabin filled with smoke and flames
obscured wings so I yelled: “Go for your lives.” Begin-
ning to get toasted. Thought “No chance; better jump
without ’chute.” Attempted to open escape hatch. Unable
to locate crew in smoke. Put on ’chute and tried to climb
out window. Got stuck and stood on “stick.” Aircraft
dived steeply so climbed in again and pulled nose up.
Could not see for smoke, but at last managed to get
through pilot’s window and jumped sideways, shielding my


head from the tailplane. Tumbled over and over but
couldn’t reach rip-cord as ’chute was right out in front
of me and it was reversed so that the toggle was on the
left hand side. Eventually found rip-cord and stopped
with a bump. Caught sight of a Hudson pursued by three
fighters. Trees rushed up at me. My Mae West was chok-
ing me and my head was forced back so I couldn’t see the
ground. Landed in trees. Realised I was choking but was
unable to undo jacket. Nearly exhausted when I managed
to struggle up to a higher bough and ease pressure. Heard
twigs breaking beneath me and almost resigned to being
taken by Japs. Turned out to be wild pig. Found rip-
cord still firmly grasped in right hand. Lumps on my
head too, so I couldn’t have missed the tailplane.
Determined to make big effort to avoid capture. Climbed
gingerly down 100 feet tree to ground. Lost lots of skin
and landed in dense, dark jungle. Heard twigs breaking.
Hid behind tree. Another pig.
Wednesday, 4 p.m. —Walked on north-west course
until I became thoroughly confused. Sat down and waited
for stars; then set off through dense jungle. Checking
again, found I had turned north-east. Sat down. Very
thirsty. Only two matches in box and striker not much
good. Mosquitoes nearly drove me mad, and wild pigs
getting on my nerves. By licking leaves kept myself going
till I found puddle. Drank cold water which made me
feel sick. Found track leading west, but struck mosquito-
infested swamp. Drank more water; then climbed up
bank and lay down. Awake all night killing mosquitoes.
Began to feel weak and sick.
Thursday.—Started again at dawn and walked for
hours. Followed dry creek toward coast, but time after
time got cut off by impenetrable sword grass. Climbed back
up steep mountains and cliffs. Only water cupped in
leaves and pockets of fallen trees. Forced to go north-
west for hours, climbing over fallen trees, up steep banks,
very high hills, and steep gorges. Made about six
attempts to reach sea but always blocked. Sun got too
high to judge direction, so sat down and rested. Feeling
weak from emptiness. Thought about the danger of
scratches turning into tropical ulcers, of malaria. I had
to stop every half-hour in a lather of sweat. Always thirsty.


Made determined effort to follow small creek of stagnant
waterholes to sea, irrespective of direction. Heard sea a
long way off. An hour later am not sure whether it is the
sea I hear or wind in the trees. Am thinking of crew
and hope, if they were killed, it was instantly. Reach sea
at last. Took off clothes and lay in water. Perfect.
Carried clothes and walked naked along beach. Came to
wide river. Reached native village. They gave me
bananas, papaws and water. Got very feverish and sick in
the stomach. Natives frightened to help me.
Thursday, 6 p.m. —Set off again. Reached another
village, very tired and sick. Gut three tabs of quinine and
set off again. Climb up and down steep track. No water.
I get hotter and hotter. Every time I stop I he down
before I fall down. Feeling very dizzy. Stagger on. I suck
a few leaves. Am all aches and can only just stop
vomiting. Push on for hours.
Thursday, 10 p.m. —Find small puddle and stagger
down and drink. Find it full of pig marks but can hardly
prevent lying down beside it and staying there. Twice I
decide I must lie down and go no farther. But struggle
on. Reach beach and find Japs are in possession. Hurry
back into jungle until I can go no farther. Lie down and
shiver until morning.
Friday.—Reach white man’s hut but no white man in
it. Pillow tom up and bed upturned. Hundred yards on
find white man in cave. So I meet Bill . Bill
looked after me all day. Fed me on coffee and marvellous
soup. We celebrate Friday the 13th., and wish the Japs
an unlucky day. We discuss prospects and he says he is
going to stay —maybe able to help other airmen. We
meet Harold and discuss getting out. A Hudson
comes over and drops flares. Try to signal with flash
which is hardly any good. Jap. destroyers have landed
troops in these parts and we are all a bit
jumpy. We set out in Harold’s pinnace. Keep sharp
lookout for Jap ships which, Harold says, have been
operating here since before Christmas.
Monday.—Meet another white man who gives us a
bottle of beer —his last—and a sumptuous meal and a
bath. Life seems grand again. Weather continues unfav-
c
49


ourable and I feel like giving it a go in dinghy with oil
drum flotation lashed on.
Tuesday.— Walk a mile to visit another white man.
He is alone. We talk to him about his schooner and
spend some time camouflaging it.
Wednesday.—lt is now just a week since life seemed
so desperate swinging in that tree in my ’chute. We have
worked all day loading the schooner. Near dusk we begin
to move. The wind is blowing hard and the crossing
threatens to be hazardous.
Thursday.—The crossing is hazardous. Seas break
over us and it is difficult to hang on. There is a lot of
water in the black hole of Calcutta we call our engine-
room. I am black with oil. The pumps won’t work and
we begin to bale. Water seems to be gaining. Weather
seems to get worse.
Friday.—Dawn and there is no sight of land.
Friday, 1 p.m. —Sight land. A pinnace rushes toward
us. They might be Japs. But, no. Whacko, I can see
Aussie hats. They point Tommyguns at us. We look so
much like bushrangers they won’t believe us. No wonder,
I’ve got eight days’ beard. Then we speak and they’re
satisfied. Their first words are: “What about a long,
cold one?” Oh. boy, what about one?
Wing-Commander Lerew had reached Finschhafen
(destined in 1943-44 to be a very important Allied base).
From there he was taken by launch to Salamaua (soon
to fall into Japanese hands), where he was picked up by
a Hudson and brought back to Moresby on February 20,
nine days after he had set out on his adventurous flight to
Gasmata.
It was on the following day that No. 32 Squadron was
officially formed from one Hudson flight from each of Nos.
6, 23, and 24 Squadrons, which had been operating as a
special detachment of No. 24 Squadron and was known
as No. 24 Squadron (Moresby), and Squadron-Leader
Kingwell was posted from No. 23 Squadron, Archerfield,
to be its first C.O.


CHAPTER EIGHT
Escape From Salamaua
ONE of the squadron’s most experienced pilots in the
north was Flying-Officer A. Stuart Hermes, of Fiji
and Manly (N.S.W.), who is “Stu” to his friends
and was by common consent one of the squadron’s
“characters.” He had a fine record for punctuality and
careful preparation for a job. In his own word, everything
must be “tickety-boo.” If he had a foible it was a super-
stitious affection for an aircraft numbered 169, which, he
would point out, was 13 times 13.
Hermes was in Rabaul from the beginning of the war
against Japan, and he took part in the earliest reconnais-
sance from there, including a flight to Kapingamarangi or
Greenwich Island. He was with No. 32 throughout its
operations in the north. Therefore, he had a wide and
varied experience on which to draw when asked to
nominate his most exciting mission. It did not take him
long to reply that his grimmest moments were spent round
Salamaua on March 7-8, 1942, at the time of the Japanese
landing.
Three Hudsons, piloted respectively by Squadron-
Leader Sharp, Flight-Lieutenant Milne, and Flying-Officer
Hermes, left Moresby on March 7 and flew over the
mountains to Salamaua to .refuel. Photographs taken
earlier by F./Lt. Milne had revealed a convoy, apparently
due soon to depart from Rabaul. It was decided that
Sharp and Milne should search the area between New
Guinea and New Britain for the convoy, and that Hermes
should go to Rabaul for more pictures.
Keeping in cloud until he was over Rabaul, Hermes
then dived down to 1,000 feet, took his photographs and
hopped back into a big cloud with two Zeros on his tail.
He kept in cloud until he was over Gasmata, and then
dived down to 3,000 feet to photograph Japanese activities
there. Once more his visit was resented. Two Yal dive-
bombers were air-borne, but once more Hermes eluded
his pursuers by running for cloud cover.
51


Hermes set course for Moresby, but half way over the
sea between Gasmata and the mainland the Moresby radio
was heard to give an air-raid alarm. It then went off the
air. Hermes “stooged round” for half an hour ami then
tried to call up Moresby. Getting no answer, he presumed
the raid was still in progress and decided to head for
Salamaua.
The Hudson was flying at about 16,000 feet when
suddenly, through a hole in the cloud, the crew sighted
the Japanese convoy. The aircraft came lower for a closer
inspection of the convoy, which was then stationary.
Hermes called up Salamaua for a D./F. bearing, flew that
bearing until he made a landfall, and then back-plotted to
check the D.R. position of the convoy.
What followed is best told in Flying-Officer Hermes’
own words. “We went in to land underneath the cloud,
which was down to about 200 feet,” he said. “We were
right on the edge of the ’drome with wheels and flaps
down when we saw that the ’drome had been obstructed
by the Army. We shot up again, wandered round among
the 4,000-feet mountains, did a stall turn at one stage in
the clouds—or something very similar because the gyros
toppled—went out to sea to calm down, and then came
in on a D./F. bearing under the clouds to land at
Salamaua, the Army having removed the obstructions in
the meantime.
“We learned that Sharp and Milne had seen nothing
on their recco and had gone back to Moresby. We sent
in our recco report and awaited orders, which arrived
about 8 p.m.—to take off immediately for Horn Island.
Visibility was 200 yards, clouds were 10/lOths at 200 to
300 feet, and rain was teeming down so we asked
permission to remain a couple of hours to see if the
weather improved. There was no improvement by 10 p.m.
and we were granted permission to wait. We decided it
would not be safe to take off until morning. We had
arranged to take out Captain Alan Cameron and 12 A.I.F.
men.
“At midnight the weather eased up, and about
1.30 a.m. we decided to leave. The tanks were drained
and the aircraft run up, but, because of the risk of bad
conditions at night, we decided to take out only six A.I.F.


men. These were sick men, suffering from malaria,
tropical ulcers, and the like, and none of them had ever
been up in the air before.
“Warrant-Officer Les Burke, of the R.A.A.F. met.
service, with the aid of the men of the New Guinea Vol-
unteer Rifles, laid a flare path, and we were standing by
the aircraft at the top of the path when we saw a motor
car tearing madly towards us. It was Captain Cameron,
who told us the Japs had landed on the beach half a mile
away.
“One mad rush and we were off. The headlights were
burning, as I had intended to keep them on until I was
sure we were not running into Burning Point. I flew out
over the bay and could see the Jap transports in the blaze
of my headlights. I quickly switched off the lights and
started climbing in an easterly direction away from the
boats. The clouds began at 200 feet and went up to
17,000 feet. The temperature was below zero and a
beautiful electrical storm was raging. The six A.I.F. blokes
were in the back of the aircraft, huddled together for
warmth. We could see them in the electric flashes.
Were they enjoying their first flight? I have never seen
such a miserable crowd before!
“We flew to Horn and had a little more excitement
before we landed. A Fortress was flying round there, and,
as we had never seen one before, we came to the bright
conclusion that the Japs had beaten us to Horn. We were
about to set off for Coen when we got the green light to
come in.”
Squadron-Leader Sharp and Flight-Lieutenant Milne
went out from Moresby again on March 8 to investigate
the convoy sighted by Hermes near Salamaua. “We found
the whole convoy—about 15 ships,” said Milne. “It wag.
raining like hell. We flew low over a Jap cruiser which
flashed us the letter of the day. It didn’t even shoot. The
convoy was anchored off Salamaua and we saw the landing
proceeding.”
A day or so later Milne went out again from Moresby
to have a crack at the convoy. On that occasion he sent
a message which, because of its laconic air of mild inquiry,
became famous in the mess. The exact text is somewhat
disputed, but, according to Hermes, the signal read:


“There seem to be a lot of aircraft about here. Whose
are they?”
Milne concedes that, after he had sighted three lot#
of Zero-like aircraft —nine in all—his curiosity was
sufficiently aroused for him to ask Moresby to whom they
belonged, but he got a non-committal reply. In fact, they
turned out to be the first United States dive-bombers to
appear on the New Guinea scene. The aircraft were
sighted in the Markham Valley, just behind Lae, and they
came from a carrier, the presence of which in those waters
was “hush-hush” at the time.
These dive-bombers paid splendid dividends in the
Battle of the Huon Gulf. More than 20 Japanese ships
were sunk or damaged, and shore installations were also
successfully attacked. It is estimated that the disruption
thus caused to Japanese plans delayed for two months any
enemy advance to the south. It is thought that the
Japanese did not know that the aircraft were carrier-
borne; for that reason the communique referred to them
as island-based.
Milne showed pardonable ignorance in asking:
“Whose aircraft are they?” The answer to his question
was one of the best-kept secrets in the north. One
wonders whether the course of the New Guinea campaign
might not have been appreciably shortened if it had been
found feasible to continue to use carrier-borne aircraft
similar to those which so unexpectedly greeted Milne near
Lae on March 19, 1942.


CHAPTER NINE
Black Night off Gasmata
TWO splendid crews were lost when five Hudsons
were sent to attack Gasmata aerodrome and ship-
ping on the night of March 3, 1942. Their fate was
never solved, but the crews who returned reported that
they had had to fly through the worst electrical storm in
their experience.
The crews who went out on the mission were cap-
tained by F./Lt. Erwin, F./Lt. Milne, F./O. Nicolay, F./O.
Hermes and F./Lt. Goode. The aircraft piloted by Goode
was unable to reach the objective because of the severe
weather and returned first; F./Lt. Milne bombed the target
to splendid effect, getting one direct hit on buildings and
two direct hits across the runway; and F./O. Hermes,
last man home by a wide margin, also found the target.
Personnel of the two missing crews were:—F./Lt. P.
J. Erwin (captain), P./O. E. L. McLauchlan (second
pilot), Sgt. J. W. Simpson (W.0.A.G.), and Sgt. I. M.
Barwick (W.0.A.G.)
F./O. A. R. Nicolay (captain), Sgt. M. R. Korbosky
(second pilot), Sgt. W. I. Cass (W.0.A.G.), and Sgt. W.
H. Coppin (W.0.A.G.)
“It was the worst electrical storm I have ever
encountered,” said F./Lt. Milne. “We couldn’t top the
storm at 20,000 feet, and we had to go round by Lae to
get back to Moresby.”
F./O. Hermes was out so long on the job that it
was feared that he also had met disaster. He had battled
his way through to Gasmata, but saw no sign of any of the
other aircraft on the mission. Conditions were relatively
clear round Gasmata, and Hermes was amazed to find the
place enveloped in a bunch of low cloud which he con-
cluded was a smoke screen. He went down to 1,000 feet,
and flew round for 3| hours, being determined, if possible,
to carry out his instructions to “press home the attack.”
He had four bombs, and he dropped one every now and
then.


He admits he “ran things rather fine” in staying
round Casmata so long. In fact, he landed at Moresby
with only 15 gallons of petrol. He returned to a gloomy
mess, which was mourning the loss of three air crews.
Unhappily, two crews were lost, and the return of
Hermes and his boys was the brightest feature of a hectic
night.
Unwittingly, Hermes gave the squadron another
anxious period the next night. The Japanese resented his
long stay over Gasmata, which they must have interpreted
as part of the war of nerves. Hermes had gone on to Horn
Island, and so missed a return visit which a Japanese air-
craft paid to Moresby. The Jap. used Hermes’ tactics.
He circled the place for hours and dropped a single bomb
every half-hour or so.
Hermes, it may be added, was destined to have long
operational experience over a wide area against the
Japanese. In 1944 he was a squadron-leader in command
of a photographic reconnaissance unit, equipped with first-
rate aircraft, and in that capacity he roamed adventur-
ously at large from North-Western Australia toward the
Philippines. A ground job in Fiji is going to seem tame
to this 35-year-old “veteran” after the war.


CHAPTER TEN
They Got Their Pictures
PHOTOGRAPHIC reconnaissance may sound a tame
assignment to the uninitiated, but when the place
was Rabaul and the time February-March, 1942, a
“photo recco” could often appear to be a job with no
future in it. Indeed, many of the high-lighted occasions
in the squadron’s record were directly associated with the
determination of its pilots to get those vital pictures of
enemy shipping and aerodrome activities and bring them
back . . . Zeros notwithstanding.
These missions were both dangerous and strenuous--
dangerous because of the risks to he run over the target,
and strenuous because of the long hours of flying involved.
Experiences of Flight-Lieutenant J. B. (“Long John”)
Hampshire and his crew early in March, 1942, typically
illustrate both these aspects.
Hampshire was ordered out from Moresby at dawn
on March 8 to make reconnaissances over Rabaul,
Casmata, and Arawe. He found a lot of cloud, with a few
breaks, over Rabaul. He decided to go in at 8,000 feet,
peel off through one of the breaks, do a quick run across
H
57


the target, and get as many photographs as he could.
Just as he peeled off Hampshire looked up and saw
four Zeros peeling off after him. He hopped into cloud
and flew on to Gasmata. There another Zero attacked,
but the Hudson managed to do one run over the target
for photographs before shaking off the Zero and heading
for Arawe. The Hudson was about five minutes off Arawe
when it was attacked again, probably by the same Zero
it had encountered at Gasmata. However, the Hudson
made a run over Arawe while Sergeant Mervyn Price was
busily engaged in “mixing it” with the Zero. The Zero put
a couple of bursts into the Hudson, which, however,
eluded the Jap. once more and reached Moresby with its
hard-won pictures eight hours after take-off.
Two hours later the crew were in the air again, bound
for a shipping raid on Salamaua. “A lot of stuff was
thrown at us but nothing hit us,” said one member of the
crew. “We were back at Seven Mile by 8 p.m., and were
congratulating ourselves on the completion of a fair day’s
work. We reckoned we could sleep all next day without
any difficulty. But we got orders to do the Rabaul-
Gasmata-Arawe recco again next day, and we had another
lively trip.
“We went first to Gasmata but found nothing there,
so on we went to Rabaul. We intended to go in high.
We were over the area at 15,000 feet and went down
through cloud. We got a bit of a shock to find, on coming
out, that there was volcano smoke above us. We were
down to 1,500 feet, which was not too healthy in that
climate. However, we flew round the harbour and
Jap. cruisers had a go at us, but did us no harm. Then
we went over Lakunai aerodrome, where we saw 18 twin-
engined bombers lined up, wing tip to wing tip.
“Just as we were over the aerodrome the fun started..
A Zero came at us head on, and scored about 20 hits
through our bomb doors and tail. Luckily no one was hit
and we got our pictures. Just after that we decided it was
high time to turn for home.
“Sergeant Price was in the turret, and presently he
yelled out that he had seen another Zero about 1,000 feet
above us. Flight-Lieutenant Hampshire took prompt,
evasive action. He went very low —about 500 feet —and


flew at that height for about five minutes up a valley.
The Zero was flying exactly the same course above us, but
evidently he could not see us. But suddenly he did see
us and started to come down. Price yelled out to the pilot
again, and the pilot flew right down into the narrow,
winding valley, leading right back up the mountains. He
must have got the aircraft down to 50 feet.
“The only way for the Zero to have a go at us was
to come in straight behind. Price opened up at about 600
yards, finished his burst, and waited. A cloud of blue
smoke came out of the Zero, and for a moment we
thought he had been hit, but we quickly realised he was
really having a belt at us. He wouldn’t come in any
closer than 500 yards. He would have his crack at us
from that range and then drop back for a while.
“This must have gone on for 15 or 20 minutes. Near
the end of the brawl we were coming toward a big cloud
hank so the Zero started to come in to about 300 yards
for a final crack. Price was the only gunner with the Jap
in view. He held his fire, waiting for a decent shot. Then
he pressed the button. But the only result was a click as
the breech-block went back. He looked down. The link
had come out of one belt and all the rounds were on the
floor. The breech-Cover of the other gun had come open,
and all the rounds from that gun were also on the floor.
“It was a nasty moment. The Zero drew closer. Then
suddenly he just hanked away and went toward Rabaul.
We could only conclude he had run out of ammunition.
And I suppose he thought we had, too.
“When we got back to Seven Mile we found there
were 40 holes in the aircraft. But we were all intact and
we had got some good pictures. Those pictures were
wanted urgently in Townsville and we flew them down
next morning. After that we did manage to catch up on
our sleep.”


CHAPTER ELEVEN
A Pilot Who Always Did
A Good Job
NO pilot had a better record with the squadron than
Flight-Lieutenant Lloyd Milne. It is generally
agreed among flying personnel that “he has what it
takes.” He made innumerable bombing attacks and photo-
graphic reccos over enemy-held bases, and was ever ready
to accept risks to get results.
Rabaul, stacked with Japanese shipping ever since its
capture, was a place to be closely watched because of the
vital bearing of shipping movements there on Japanese
strategy in a wide area. Milne was often over Rabaul and
Gasmata in February, 1942, and the intelligence he
brought back was most valuable.
On one mission on February 14 he flew at 15,000
feet and, on approaching the target area, he found there
was no cloud cover. However, there was a mass of ship-
ping in the harbour and he decided to go in. On his first
run over he saw fighters taking off from Vunakanau, but
he managed to make two more runs before putting down
the nose of the aircraft and racing away. Those photo-
graphs revealed the presence in Simpson Harbour of one
aircraft-carrier, three cruisers, two destroyers, and 11
transports, nine seaplanes on the water and three sea-
planes on the slipways.
Four days later Milne made another daylight recco
of Rabaul. He was photographing Vunakanau aerodrome
just as three fighters were taking off to intercept him.
However, Milne had come a long way for his photographs
and still had to “cover the waterfront.” He looked toward
the harbour and saw there was cloud apparently almost
down to the deck. He put the nose down and hopped in


for his photographs at 4,000 feet. By that time the
fighters had begun to close in, but by jumping in and out of
the clouds Milne finished his run at 1,500 feet over Rabaul
itself. He made another run after that, and then headed
for home, via Gasmata. These photographs revealed that
the Japanese warships had left since Milne’s previous
visit, but there were still in the harbour six transports and
nine seaplanes.
Madang and Kavieng were other places visited by
Milne in his far-ranging photographic missions. But he
could unload bombs as well as photograph targets. In fact
his reputation was neatly summed up by a fellow-pilot in
describing one raid: “Milne did his usual good job. He
and Pedrina were most reliable in reaching their target
and bombing it.”
On February 28, for instance, when five Hudsons
raided Gasmata by night, Milne made two runs over the
target and two of his bombs fell plumb on the runway,
the wrecking of which was a priority job. F./Lt. Hamp-
shire also scored two hits on the runway. The attack was
pressed home in spite of ack-ack fire from the west end of
the runway, but happily all five aircraft returned safely.
Three nights later Milne was again over Gasmata
by night, when two of our aircraft were lost, as recorded
elsewhere, and again Milne got direct hits on the aero-
drome buildings and the runway.
Air crew had to be prepared to fly exhausting hours
in those “mad March days” of 1942, when aircraft were
few and urgent missions were many. On March 10, for
instance, Milne’s crew flew for 13 hours 10 minutes. They
left Horn Island for Moresby at 12.30 a.m., bombed up, set
out for Lae, which they bombed, made a recco over
Gasmata, and returned to Moresby by midday. Late that
afternoon they left for Townsville, which was reached at
7.45 p.m. Indubitably a fair day’s work!
Toward the end of the squadron’s stay in the north
Milne did numerous Solomon Islands patrols from Milne
Bay (not named after him!), where two Kittyhawk
squadrons were stationed. Hudsons were sent there on
August 5 to keep a check on Japanese shipping movements
between Rabaul and Guadalcanal, and were destined to
stay there many months, although No. 32 Squadron was
A PILOT WHO ALWAYS DID A GOOD JOB


withdrawn late in August and Hudson aircraft from No. 6
Squadron replaced them.
An incident typical of Milne’s nonchalance occurred
when he flew to Bena Bena, 100 miles back of Lae, to
bring out two sick men. Milne was accompanied by Flight-
Lieutenant “Jerry” Pentland, veteran “character” of New
Guinea aviation. The aerodrome at Bena Bena is 5,600
feet above sea level, and there is a drop each side and at
the end of the runway, which is only 800 yards long. Pigs
had rooted holes in the runway, which was soft at one
end. Milne decided to have a test “flip” to determine
the possibilities of this bush aerodrome for taking off with
a load.
“After witnessing our take-off Jerry decided he would
stay and so give us a bit of a margin with the load,” said
Milne.
One of the sick men was a miner, who had been in
the district for 20 years; the other patient belonged to
the Rabaul garrison. As it happened, the Hudson made a
successful take-off, although it is rumoured that it dropped
rather sharply after it more or less fell off the end of the
runway.


CHAPTER TWELVE
The C.O. was Allergic to Zeros
TWO exciting encounters with Zeros made March,.
1942, a memorable month for Wing-Commander
Kingwell, who quickly established a reputation for
leadership as commanding officer of No. 32 Squadron in
its operations from Seven Mile aerodrome, Moresby.
On March 8 Wing-Commander Kingwell, who had
taken command of the squadron only a fortnight earlier,
carried out his first daylight bombing mission with
conspicuous success. The target was Salamaua, which the
Japanese were then in process of occupying by landings
from transports. Wing-Commander KingwelTs aircraft
scored a direct hit on an 8,000-ton enemy transport, which
caught fire, listed, and eventually sank.
One does not know whether Wing-Commander King-
well is superstitious—many airmen are not, in spite of
popular conceptions to the contrary —but his next
adventure, in which he played hide-and-seek in cloud
with five Zeros over Moresby, occurred on Friday, March
13. However, he escaped those Zeros and before the
month was out took toll of two other Zeros, so it would


seem that he has no particular need to “beware the
Ides of March” or to attach any but the happiest signifi-
cance to the conjunction of Friday and the 13th.
Wing-Commander Kingwell, who had Pilot-Officer
Ferguson as navigator, and Sergeants Townsend and Bond
as wireless operators-air gunners, was returning to
Moresby from a dawn attack on the aerodrome at Gasmata
on the south coast of New Britain. He was making his
approach to the Seven Mile aerodrome about 9 a.m. when
he saw several fighters flying very low over the runway.
His Hudson was flying at 1,500 feet, and was just below
a small patch of cloud which was hanging between the
town of Port Moresby and the Seven Mile strip.
Allied fighters were an unknown luxury in that area
at that stage of the South Pacific war, so Wing-Commander
Kingwell had no difficulty in assuming that these fighters
were Japanese. He thought it possible that the fighters
had not seen the Hudson, and, as he and his crew were
feeling somewhat tired after their Gasmata mission, it
was thought that discretion would be the better part of
valour on this occasion. So Wing-Commander Kingwell
swung round into the cloud and called to Ferguson to
give him a course to Horn Isand.
The Hudson seemed to be no sooner in the cloud
than it was out on the other side. Before Ferguson had
given the C.O. the new course, five Zeros came round that
cloud about 1,000 feet above the Hudson and peeled off to
attack.
Horn Island was promptly forgotten by the Hudson
crew, and it did not take long to get the aircraft back into
the cloud, which was about two miles long, half a mile
wide, and 600 feet thick. After some rapid thinking it was
decided that, as the Hudson had nearly two hours’ petrol
left, it could stay in the vicinity of Moresby longer than
the Zeros, even if they were operating from their recently-
acquired nearest base at Salamaua.
Then began three-quarters of a hour of hide-and-
seek—one Hudson v. five Zeros v. one somewhat
inadequate cloud. Each time the Hudson poked its frame
outside the cloud at least one Zero attacked. The Hudson
gunners retaliated. But after half an hour the Hudson
had used all its ammunition and the crew were becoming


“fed-up” so the W./T. operator called up Moresby and
asked to be notified when all was clear. Twelve minutes
later Moresby gave the signal and the Hudson, without a
mark, landed on the Seven Mile strip.
It was only then that Wing-Commander Kingwell and
his men learned that they had provided diversion for a
large audience. Nearly all Moresby had gathered to watch
the “fun.” The spectators reckoned the funniest part of
all was when the Hudson was still busily dodging the
Zeros five minutes after they had gone.
A more satisfying experience with Zeros was had by
Wing-Commander Kingwell on March 31. On that
occasion his navigator was Flying-Officer Green; his W.O.
A.Gs were again Sergeants Townsend and Bond. This
crew took off from Seven Mile at 6.45 a.m. in one of the
original Mark I. Hudsons to make a photographic recon-
naissance of Lae and Salamaua. Although this aircraft
was not fully serviceable it was used because it was the
only one available at that time.
Lae was photographed from 15,000 feet just before
8 a.m. As the Hudson headed for Salamaua three Zeros
were seen taking off from Lae, and the Hudson had just
finished its photographic run over Salamaua when the
rear-gunner reported that the Zeros were closing in fast
about 1,000 feet below.
The nearest cloud was about 30 miles away down in
the bottom of a deep valley behind Salamaua. To have
run straight for the cloud would have been suicidal, so
the Hudson crew prepared for action and soon a running
dog-fight was in progress. The Zeros came in from varying
directions, and the Hudson was put through all sorts of
aerobatics in an attempt to give as much protection as
possible.
After about eight minutes the Hudson drew first blood.
Sergeant Bond reported from the rear turret that he had
shot one of the Zeros down in flames. Shortly afterwards
another Zero flew close in across Wing-Commander
Kingwell’s front gun sights.
“I saw him coming,” said Wing-Commander King-
well, “and was turning with him as I pressed the trigger,.
He flew through my tracer and ball, swerved suddenly
and, with smoke issuing from the engine, began to lose


height rapidly. This aircraft was not seen to crash, but
it did not return to the fight.”
By this time Flying-Officer Green, who had used up
all the ammunition from his beam gun, had come
forward with blood pouring from wounds in his left arm
and thigh. As the other Zero was still pressing home its
attack Green sat in the wireless-operators seat and tried
to stem the flow of blood as best he could while his com-
rades carried on the fight, and the sanctuary of that distant
cloud was sought.
The Hudson was beginning to look like a sieve, but
there was more excitement in store. The Zero attacked
from behind the starboard engine and two bullets pierced
the front wind screen, filling the cockpit with fine
powdered dust. Through some mischance Wing-Com-
mander Kingwell had no goggles and both his eyes were
filled with this fine glass, which blinded him temporarily.
Eventually he cleared his right eye and saw that the
cloud was almost immediately below at about 10,000 feet.
“Pushing everything forward, we screamed down,” he
said. “The indicated air speed was about 340 knots, and
the aircraft felt as if it would disintegrate at any minute.
We flattened out just before we entered the cloud and
prayed that there were ho hills inside it. On coming out
about a minute later we were greatly relieved not to see
the Zero waiting for us. We all think that he assumed
we had crashed.”
The time was now about 8.25 a. m. and all the
members of the crew assembled forward to check up.
Flying-Officer Green was found to be seriously wounded
(he was sent south for treatment soon after the aircraft
reached Moresby) ; Sergeant Townsend extricated a .3
bullet from under his right little toe; and Wing-Com-
mander Kingwell had his left eye full of glass. Sergeant
Bond was unscathed.
With petrol pouring from all but one tank the
Hudson landed at Seven Mile at 9 a.m. All three tyres
had been punctured and there were 139 holes in the air-
craft. Fortunately, the pilot realised immediately on
touching down that the aircraft had tyre trouble, and full
brake prevented any further damage being done to the
Hudson, which was patched up and flown south two days
later.


CHAPTER THIRTEEN
Long, Long Trail to Moresby
WHETHER Sgt. Jack Prider ever officially belonged
to No. 32 Squadron is a moot point, but his New
Guinea adventures, including a 250-mile walk,
were closely associated with the early days of the squadron
and one of its pilots, Flying-Officer Robert Green.
Flying-Officer Green, with Sgt. William Richards as
second pilot, and Sgts. Prider and Ross McCallum as W.O.
A.G.s, left Seven Mile aerodrome on the afternoon of
January 24, 1942, to make a reconnaissance over Simpson
Harbour, Rabaul, to determine the strength of the Japan-
ese naval forces which had arrived there, following the
capture of Rabaul the previous day. The Hudson made a
successful reconnaissance at dusk, but met heavy ack-ack
and searchlight opposition, from which it emerged with
a few shrapnel holes.
A landfall at Salamaua, still in our hands then, was
planned, but shortage of petrol caused a decision to
“ditch” the aircraft 90 miles short of Salamaua. The
Hudson was put down on the water at 10.50 p.m.—it had
been in the air almost nine hours—and all the occupants
were able to get into the dinghy before the aircraft sank.
Sgts. Prider and Richards suffered head injuries, but the
crew made the shore, which fortunately was only about
300 yards away.
Next day Green and Prider set out to seek help.
They fell in with some natives who told them there was
a mission station “close up”. They were then led to the
Duvira Mission, a walk of 20 miles, which the two
airmen thought a rather liberal interpretation of “close
up.” The missioner made them comfortable, and the
natives went back for the other two airmen, who arrived
at the mission next day.
After 2\ days’ rest the four airmen, accompanied


by natives, left for loma station. This involved a canoe
trip of 70 miles up the Mambare River, which took
2j days. At loma the party were taken in hand by the
assistant resident magistrate, Mr. John B. McKenna. Two
days later a Fox Moth arrived and took Richards and
McCallum back to Moresby.
Green and Prider stayed on at loma as the aircraft
was expected to return almost immediately, but it was
unable to make the trip until nearly three weeks later.
Unluckily the aircraft, which was piloted by Flight-
Lieutenant Hemsworth, crashed in taking off from the
rough 476-yard strip. Hemsworth, Green, and a planter
from Wau left next morning for Kokoda, 80 miles away,
but Prider, who had fever, had to stay behind at loma.
They arranged to send an aircraft hack to Kokoda to pick
up Prider.
Hemsworth and Green reached Kokoda after 4 J days
and in due course were flown back to Moresby. Ten days
later Prider and a Wau dentist, guided by natives, set out
for Kokoda, but after they had covered 75 miles they
learned that the aircraft that was to have picked them up
had been destroyed by bombs and that there was no
prospect of another becoming available.
Prider’s party then decided that their best course
would be to walk back to Buna—about 80 miles away —
and try to pick up a boat to take them to Moresby. At
Sangara plantation they fell in with nine Americans,
whose Flying Fortress had crashed into Musa swamp, and
the two parties joined forces.
It was learned that the Japanese had bombed and
strafed the Government station at Buna, so the party
decided to make for Oro Bay, farther down the coast.
This involved another walk of 90 miles, but the party’s
luck was in. A trading schooner, the Elevala, was at Oro-
Bay, and, with calls at Tufi, Degura, and Milne Bay, it
took the airmen to Samarai. There the party waited for
three days, hoping to be picked up by aircraft. But
eventually it was another schooner, the Matoma, run by
the military forces, which brought the party to Moresby,
where Prider arrived on March 31, more than nine weeks
after his departure in the Hudson for Rahaul.
Curiously, Prider returned on the very day that his


captain, Flying-Officer Green, was seriously wounded in
an encounter with three Zeros. As described earlier.
Green was flying as second pilot to Wing-Commander
Kingwell on a photographic mission over Lae. The
Hudson was engaged by the three Zeros, one of which was
shot down while another was seen falling and smoking.
Green was hit in the thigh by an armour-piercing bullet,
and suffered shrapnel wounds in one leg.
Prider, whose long exertions on the trial while racked
with fever had left their mark on him, left Moresby for
the south almost immediately. Green also was sent south,
and did not fly again with No. 32 Squadron.
More than a year later Prider was posted to a New
South Wales station where No. 32 Squadron was based,
although he was not posted to the squadron itself. So
once more he was fated to be associated with members of ■
the squadron—many of them colleagues of the early
Moresby days before No. 32 was formed—and yet not to-
be a member of it.


CHAPTER FOURTEEN
First Sighting of Coral Sea Fleet
FIRST sighting of the Japanese warships, which were
later defeated in what became known as the Battle
of the Coral Sea, was made by a Hudson aircraft of
No. 32 Squadron in dramatic circumstances on the after*
noon of May 6, 1942.
At this time the war outlook in the north was bleak,
indeed. Never before had the threat to Australia been so
grave. The victory in the Coral Sea turned the tide—-
not permanently it is true, but never subsequently did the
Japanese menace seem so dire, even when the land thrust
along the Kokoda trail toward Moresby appeared in danger
of succeeding.
No. 32 Squadron was then based on Horn Island, and
actually only one Hudson aircraft, Al 6-160, was then at
Moresby. It was in this aircraft that Pilot-Officer Peter
Pennycuick and his crew were flying on May 6. They
had left Moresby about 10.30 a.m. on the standard
“patrol east New Guinea.” Pilot-Officer Pennycuick was
flying at 1,000 feet about 10 miles west of Missima Island
about 2 p.m. when his attention was suddenly attracted
to the phenomenon of two islands with wakes behind
them.
Immediately he climbed to 2,000 feet and made a
closer investigation. He discovered more “islands”—one
aircraft-carrier, one large transport, one cruiser, and two
destroyers!
Friend or foe? That question hung in doubt for a
few seconds. One member of the crew thought one of the
warships was trying to signal the aircraft. He called for
the glasses to see whether he could read the flashes. He
could not —for an excellent reason. Guns were making
those flashes. The cruiser, which was escorting the


carrier, had turned broadside on and opened fire with her
biggest guns, probably 5 inch.
Off flew the Hudson to see whether other Japanese
forces were lurking in the vicinity. The aircraft turned
south to get behind Missima Island and come in from the
east. North of Missima Island it found four destroyers and
three merchant vessels. The Hudson flew right over one
destroyer, which did not fire on it, but the rear-gunner of
the Hudson, Sergeant Stephenson, accurately expressed
the sentiments of his colleagues in firing a burst at the
destroyer.
An alarm report of the sighting was sent back to
base. It was learned later that a Catalina had also sighted
Japanese warships in the area, and the signals from both
aircraft reached Moresby almost simultaneously. Unluck-
ily, the Catalina was shot down by the Japanese.
The Hudson also sighted further Japanese vessels—
a mixed bag of about 16 destroyers and transports. It
certainly appeared that the Japanese were about to
intensify their threat to New Guinea and, unless the way
were quickly barred, to the mainland of Australia itself
Meanwhile at Moresby were 12 other members of No.
32 Squadron, including Flight-Lieutenant Oscar Diethelm
and his crew. There was no action they could take on
Pilot-Officer Pennycuick’s sighting report, for Pennycuick
was flying the sole Hudson available. But, on Pennycuick’s
return, it was arranged that Diethelm and his crew should
take out the same aircraft in an endeavour to get further
information about the Japanese warships.
Diethelm left Moresby soon after midnight and
arrived over Missima in very bright moonlight. Because
of the state of cloud and the bright moon above, it was
impossible to distinguish between islands, possible war-
ships, and cloud shadow. But a fire was seen burning on
Missima and the aircraft flew low to investigate it. No
activity was discernible. But later, when the aircraft was
taken south for overhaul, machine-gun bullets were found
in it. Pennycuick had “collected” only one bullet-hole
on a flap in his earlier flight in the aircraft. The rest
were Diethelm’s “souvenirs,” but his crew confess that
they did not know that they had been fired on until the
routine inspection before the aircraft left for Australia
revealed the evidence.


A foot-note to an adventurous mission is supplied by
Pilot-Officer Keith Fitzroy-Kelly, observer with Flight-
Lieutenant Diethelm.
“Because of the presence of Japanese aircraft-
carriers in these waters we decided to set a course south
for 50 miles, fly west, and come into Moresby directly
from the south,” said Kelly. “We were about three hours
overdue and Moresby was becoming anxious about us. So,
when a bearing was received on an aircraft coming in
from the south, it was thought at Moresby that we were
enemy, and Airacobras were sent out to protect us from
ourselves!
“To our horror, just as we were making a perfect
landfall over the beacon in Basilisk Passage, four single-
engined aircraft dived out of the clouds on us. When a
single-engined aircraft comes straight at you, you don’t
stop to think of its shape and other nice points of
distinction. Oscar pushed his throttles right through the
gate and went straight up as soon as he saw them, and the
rest of us jumped to the guns, thinking they might be
Zeros. Luckily we all recognised each other before any
shots were exchanged.”


CHAPTER FIFTEEN
Murphy’s Luck Was Out
OFTEN during a pilot’s tour of duty there comes a
time when everything seems to go dead wrong.
This time came to Flight-Lieutenant J. F. Murphy
when he was ordered to fly from Townsville to drop sup-
plies to a naval officer on an island.
“Murph.” incidentally, is one of the veterans of the
Pacific war. He was in the first operations from Rabaul
after Japan came into the war, and was one of the Hudson
pilots who had flown up to Kapingamarangi or Greenwich
Island, spying out the strength of the Japanese naval and
air forces, before the attack on New Britain was launched.
A permanent Air Force man, he brought to No. 32
Squadron on its formation a wealth of experience and
local knowledge, and for a long period subsequently he
was a Flight-Commander. When the squadron went south
and again became acquainted with some of the amenities
of civilisation it was discovered that “Murph” was its most
expert billiardist.
With the cue he never had such a run of bad luck as
began for him on May 16, 1942, when he left Townsville
for the north to take those supplies to the naval officer.
J
73


When half way to Moresby Murphy received a recall signal.
He returned to Townsville only to find that another air-
craft had been given by mistake the same call-sign as his,
and it was the other aircraft which was intended for
recall.
One day behind scratch, Murphy left Townsville
again for Moresby next day and arrived there without
incident. He toqk off at 4.30 a.m. the following day for
the island, but had reached only sufficient height to clear
the New Guinea ranges when the port fuel pump failed,
so he had to return to Moresby. A new pump was fitted
and next morning, two days behind scratch, Murphy took
off again.
This time luck held good for a while. Dawn broke
as Murphy passed over New Britain. Now, if there is
anything that a pilot really enjoys when flying over
enemy territory in the New Guinea area, it is a pleasant
stretch of cloud. This day there was not one fleecy bit
to break the monotony of a clear blue sky. But the
island was reached safely.
The stores were carried in the bomb bay in bags with
red and white streamers attached so that the bags could
be seen clearly as they were falling. The streamers of one
bag caught in the bomb carriers and could not be unloosed,
so this bag had to be brought back, hanging about three
feet below the belly of the aircraft.
When Murphy reached the north coast of New Guinea
on the way home he found that clouds were banked in
over the ranges to about 30,000 feet. The only way home
was through them.
About midway over the cloud-stacked ranges
Murphy’s troubles really began. The carburettors began
to ice up and, although carburettor heat was switched on,
the engines refused to give sufficient power to maintain
height. Losing height over New Guinea in cloud is no
fun. The aircraft eventually came into the clear at 5,000
feet with mountains jutting into the clouds everywhere,
it seemed, except just below the aircraft and immediately
in front. At this stage, while change was being made
from high to low blower, one throttle cable jumped a
pulley and the power could not be reduced on that engine.
A single-engined approach had to be made on


Moresby. This was accomplished after the aircraft had
narrowly missed an Army truck, which was claiming
priority on the runway.
Murphy thought his troubles were over, but he was
only just alighting from his aircraft when he was involved
in more excitement. The squadron “run-about” dashed
up, bringing warning of an imminent raid. Murphy and
his crew clambered in and were driven swiftly away. In
turning a sharp corner on the road to the camp a mix-up
occurred with another Army truck, but, apart from a few
scratches, no one appeared to be hurt.
On the following morning Murphy took off for
Townsville. His knee, which had been slightly cut in the
road collision the previous afternoon, was stiff but he did
not worry about it. Half way to Townsville one motor
began to give trouble. Murphy headed for the nearest
aerodrome, Cooktown, and once more made a single-
engined landing.
But, on trying to alight from the aircraft, Murphy
found that he could not move his injured leg. He had
to be carried out, and the next day he was flown to
Townsville, where he spent a fortnight in hospital with
an infected knee and blood poisoning.
If Murphy’s luck was “out” on that occasion, however,
it was certainly “in” on a later occasion when he made a
hair-raising take-off from a bush aerodrome in one flight
associated with the opening phase of the Buna campaign
in July, 1942.
Murphy’s job was to fly in an Australian colonel
and two other Army personnel to Kokoda with an escort
of four Airacobras. It was hard to find the strip through
cloud, but the Hudson made a good landing. The Aira-
cobras stayed aloft, for the Hudson’s instructions were to
return to Moresby at once.
Taking off was a more difficult problem than landing.
The strip was only 600 yards long, it was covered in knee-
high grass, and there was a 12,000-feet mountain on one
side. The Hudson was the largest aircraft ever to have
landed on this strip, and Murphy had a laudable ambition
to claim also the record of being the pilot of the largest
aircraft ever to have taken off from Kokoda.
To get the advantage of the last yard of runway the


aircraft was taken to the very limit of the strip for an
uphill take-off. But there it became bogged, so all hands —
Army personnel, native police, and others—were sum-
moned to pull out the Hudson. This mishap resulted in
150 precious yards of the 600 being lost.
All the crew piled up to the nose to tip the scales in
favour of a take-off. The Hudson had gone about three-
quarters of the available length of the strip and was doing
about 50 knots with the use of about 20 per cent, of flap
when it started to bounce. By skilful use of the stick
Murphy accentuated the bounce and the Hudson staggered
off the strip at about 60 knots. So close was the margin
that the undercart was pulled up just in time to enable
the aircraft to clear by about five feet a house near the
end of the runway.
“If we had dropped 10 revs, on one engine I don’t
think we would have made it,” said one member of the
crew. “Even then we had to go round in a series of tight
circles to get out of the mountains.”
Murphy’s good luck? Well, yes . . . but also
Murphy’s good management.


CHAPTER SIXTEEN
Death of Mavis
TO shoot down a Kawanishi four-engined flying-
boat on their first patrol from Moresby on June 11,
1942, was the exciting experience of Pilot-Officer Lex
Halliday and his crew—Pilot-Officer Alan Gawler
(observer), Pilot-Officer Ron Castles (W.0.A.G.), and
Sergeant Lance Badman (W.0.A.G.). This flying-boat —
the same type that raided Townsville late in July, 1942
is familiarly known as Mavis.
The official communique on June 13 stated: “An
Allied reconnaissance unit encountered a four-engined
flying-boat and shot it down in flames.” But some of the
drama behind that prosaic announcement can be
captured by Halliday’s story of the fight, success in which
is a tribute to the fine team spirit for which this crew,
on and off duty, was conspicuous.
“We had arrived at Moresby for the first time on the
previous night and were off on patrol at dawn,” said
Halliday. “The chaps we had been sent to relieve had
been there a month without meeting a single Jap up top.
At about 11 a.m. Gawler spotted a plane through a break


in the clouds and rain. He handed me up the glasses,
and at that distance we decided it was a flying-boat, prob-
ably a Cat., on patrol. Anyhow, I gave the kite a few
herbs and got comfortably close to the cloud base above
us just in case. By now the flying boat had altered course
to intercept us and I could see that it had four engines.
Must be a Jap, so into the welcome cumulus we climbed.
“Over the I.C. I told Badman to give the Jap a burst
from the turret. This he did at extreme range, but even
then the sight of tracer bullets caused the Jap to swerve.
The rest of the crew were clamouring for me to have a
crack at him. I did some high-presssure thinking.
Being on reconnaissance we should avoid contact. We
were a land-based craft over the sea, miles from the
nearest land. The Jap had the bigger guns.
“But it was hard to resist the temptation. ‘Right!’ 1
shouted and, turning sharply in the cloud, I dived out
where I thought the Jap would be. We saw him about
1,000 feet below us and a mile or so in front. I put my
nose down and screamed after him. I got my front gun
sights on to him, aimed at the port side, held the button
down, and kicked rudder until the shots crossed his
middle. Then I pulled away over him in a steep, climbing
turn. Badman in the turret got in a good burst and we
were in the cloud again.
“Badman yelled over the 1.C.: ‘Think I got him that
time; he’s turning to starboard.’ I yelled back that I was
going in for the same attack and ‘look out for his cannon.’
But at our next attack the Jap. did not fire his cannon.
After our first attack I did not see the tell-tale orange-
flashes again. We must have silenced his gunners. I
repeated our tactics several times, turning the nose steeply
so that Badman in the turret and Gawler at the side guns
could get in longer bursts. I held the buttons of my front
guns down so long that it was a wonder they did not
seize up. The barrels were sizzling hot, but the guns
went right on firing.
“All this time Badman was giving me a running
commentary over the I.C. . . . ‘He’s on our port. . . .
Now he’s under us, turning to starboard. . . . Whoopee.
. . . Got him fair in the guts that time. . . . He’s on
fire. . . . He’s losing height. . . . We’ve got him . . .
we’ve got him.’


“The Jap evidently intended to touch down on the-
drink. He was swinging in a wide arc to get into wind
and was losing height rapidly. Flames were pouring from
his side blisters and we had probably smacked his engines,
too.
“I yelled to the others that I was closing in for the
kill. One of my front guns had jammed at last but that
did not matter, for now Castles got his chance with the
belly gun. Almost at point-blank range he poured enough
lead into that Jap. to sink a ship.
“I caught a glimpse of the Jap as we turned away.
Castles had shot off a float, and bits of wing were flying
everywhere. By now the Jap was very close to the drink—
in fact, right then he smacked and bounced—smacked once
more (we were within range again now and were pouring
more lead into him) —smacked a third time, and up came
his nose. He hung on to his props a split second and
then crashed, nose first, a splintering mass of broken
wreckage, amid a turmoil of spray and spume.
“We completed the patrol, and reckoned we would
have enough juice left if there was a raid in progress
when we returned to Moresby. We had to climb high to
cross the mountains, and I switched to my last tank of
juice. The motors cut dead. I pushed and pulled all the
gadgets I could lay hands on. No go. I checked up the
juice left in the other tanks. The total was 10 gallons.
We would have to make it on that. We made a long, glid-
ing approach and a landing reminiscent of the old Moths.
We touched down two minutes before the motors cut dead
again. Tojo had pranged the fuel pipe leading to my
reserve tanks!”


CHAPTER SEVENTEEN
Lucky Discovery of Vital Airfield
AN emergency landing by an aircraft of No. 32
Squadron on the north-east coast of Papua on June
19, 1942, was strangely linked with the recapture
of Buna from the Japanese several months later. The
reason was that this emergency landing field was soon
afterwards developed, and to it were flown Australian and
United States troops and much equipment, which played
an important part in the drive on Buna from the south-
east.
The forced landing was made near Wanigela Mission
by a Hudson piloted by Pilot-Officer Halliday, who only
eight days previously had been involved in the shooting
down of the Japanese flying-boat south of New Britain. As
on that occasion he was accompanied by Pilot-Officer
Gawler (observer), Pilot-Officer Castles and Sergeant
Badman (W.0.A.G.5.)
“We were caught in a terrific tropical storm in the
afternoon on our way back from patrol,” said Pilot-Officer
Halliday. “We couldn’t break through the storm, even at
20,000 feet. The aircraft iced up, it was bitterly cold, and
we were being thrown about like a leaf by up-currents.
We tried to make base, but we had flown a long way round
in an attempt to avoid the storm and we found at the
end of an hour that we were running short of fuel. The
only way out was to search for an emergency landing
ground while our fuel lasted.
“Luck was with us, for I saw a small break in the
clouds, through which I spiralled down in a steep gliding
turn. At 2,000 feet, expecting to see the ocean any minute,
we were horrified to discover hills all around us. But, on
descending another 1,000 feet, I glimpsed the edge of a
small bay just a mile or so ahead. Rain and squalls had
cut down visibility to a few miles so it was necessary to


skim along the coast several hundred feet high, searching
for a clearing or field. Alan Gawler spotted an excellent
clearing (only a few miles from huts and other buildings,
which indicated the presence of a missionary), and I
touched down in six-feet grass, fluking a perfect landing
without a scratch to the aircraft.”
It can readily be imagined that the surprise landing of
“a ship that flies” caused a tremendous impression among
the crowd of chattering natives who hastened to the
scene. A Church of England missionary, the Rev. Dennis
Taylor, also appeared while the crew were trying to
contact their base by radio. There were hearty hand-
shakes and introductions all round, and the unexpected
visitors were soon being led through treacherous swamps,
thick jungle growths, and palm tree groves to the mission-
ary’s house on the edge of the native village which the
crew had seen from the air. The missionary’s wife—a
young Queenslander with a six-months infant in her
arms —had a meal waiting for Halliday and his crew, who
found the hospitality of this lonely outpost in cheerful
contrast with their bleak prospects earlier in the after-
noon.
Mr. and Mrs. Taylor lived in a large, rambling home,
raised on rime-feet stilts off a cement floor. Dining-room
and vestibule, store-room, study, and bathroom were
below; above were four large bedrooms. Traders and
officials from the Australian-New Guinea Administration
Unit and other Anglican missionaries called there front
time to time; hence the reason for so many beds. Mosquito
nets, towels, pyjamas, and a complete change of shirts and
shorts were provided for the crew, and native girls washed
and ironed the visitors’ own clothes next day. The crew
agreed that forced landings had their pleasant aspect.
Early next day the crew advised base that a runway
could be made ready in four days, and a request was
made for another aircraft to be sent with fuel. The
natives willingly bent to the task of clearing a strip. They
held the aircraft and the crew in the greatest awe. Most
of them understood a little English, and it was possible to
explain to them by word and gesture bow the various
gadgets worked. Once a group of natives was standing
in front of an idle engine (the other engine was running
K
81


to generate power for the radio and thus save the
battery) when Pilot-Officer Halliday switched on the
landing light under the wing. The light shone a powerful
beam right on their faces, and two-score brown bodies
vanished like lightning into the tall grass. Soon they
crept back dubiously and viewed the monstrosity with
loud cries and much gesticulating and clucking of the
throat.
A Very pistol was fired to test their reaction. The
noise the natives made when the ball of red fire left the
pistol is reported to have been sufficient to awaken the
dead. And there was much more clucking of the throat.
In return for the revelation of all these wonders the
natives staged a war dance in full regalia. They were
ever anxious to be of service. At one stage the crew had
to cross a stream. A word from the missionary and the
visitors were being carried across by the husky youths of
the village.
At the end of four days the natives had cleared an
excellent strip, and Flight-Lieutenant Lloyd Milne had
flown over from Moresby with fuel, so regretfully Pilot-
Officer Halliday and his crew had to say good-bye to
Wanigela Mission, the hospitable Mr. and Mrs. Taylor, and
the friendly natives.
That might well have been the end of this story but
for the fact that the landing ground so luckily ‘ found by
Halliday became of great value in the assault on Buna.
This interesting sequel is best told in extracts from a
letter which Mr. Taylor wrote to a member of the crew
many months later.
“The day you left,” he wrote, “they began to lengthen
the runway to about 1,000 yards, and they made another
one, 1,500 yards long, at right angles to it. During the next
six weeks fighters from Milne Bay landed at Wanigela,
and fuel was brought up by boat. I later saw a map taken
from a Jap dive-bomber. Wanigela was marked in red. We
heard various tales of Japs, coming down the coast, but
we had a good system of look-outs and did not worry
much. Then on August 24 a party of Japs landed on Cape
Nelson in seven landing barges. They moved on to Good-
enough Island the same night, but we did not know that
until later, so we had everything ready for instant
departure.


“On August 26 Sergeant T. Riley, of the United
States Air Force, turned up after 19 days in the bush—
-10 of them without food. He was from a 826 which had
got lost over the range at night. The crew of seven and
one newspaper correspondent, Haugland, parachuted, and
six were eventually found. Haugland was found by
Anglican Mission friends of ours, Messrs. Salymann and
Newman, after he had been 31 days without food.
“Mr. and Mrs. Newman, of the Eroro Mission Station,
Oro Bay, had walked down to Wanigela to stay with us.
On August 27 Milne Bay was invaded. I realised that it
was time for the ladies to be going places. I was to take
the ladies to Abau (on the south coast of Papua east of
Moresby), and thence to Moresby. Newman and Saly-
mann were to accompany us for four days and then make
a hide-out. We took 50 of the local boys to carry stores
for the hide-out. After leaving Newman and Salymann the
rest of us went on with 14 carriers and reached Abau in
10 days. John, our infant, was carried in a box hung on
strings from a pole. He had a grand trip. We started on
the trip two days after the news came through of the
Japanese attack on Milne Bay. We were 14 days without
news and so were not at all certain who would be at Abau
to receive us. It was a great relief when we arrived there
to hear how things had gone in our favour.
“From Abau we got a launch into Moresby and the
women went south. I went hack to Abau, intending to
make my way hack to Wanigela, but there I met Newman
and Salymann, who had brought the newspaper corres-
pondent, Haugland, out. We were held up for three
weeks at Abau because the Army had taken all the native
carriers. However, we eventually recrossed the range and
got back to Wanigela. In the meantime the mission house
had become American Headquarters. We were given a
great welcome and for three weeks I was the guest of the
Americans in my own house. The Americans then moved
up for the attack on Buna.
“Wanigela had certainly changed. In one day in
September. 84 planes landed on Lex Halliday’s strip.
When I left on December 8 it was reported that 800 planes
had landed there without a single mishap. Numerous
planes, including a Hudson, made forced landings after


having been shot up, but not shot down, over Buna. One
Hudson landed in the dark without the aid of lights. A
Boston and a 825 did it on one engine. A Flying
Fortress tried it but cleared off.
“A five-ton wharf, 210 yards long, was built, and
there are now roads and jeeps all over the place. The
first Australian Battalion and the first American Regiment
ever to be air-home landed at Wanigela. Until I left the
strip had not been used as a fighter base, but it was used
to land the initial army and stores for the advance on
Buna from this direction. For two months it was a hive
of industry, but never once did the Japs send a plane
within 50 miles of it.”


CHAPTER EIGHTEEN
Attacks on Submarines
DESTRUCTION of two submarines was credited to
No. 32 Squadron aircraft as the results of attacks
made in patrols from Townsville in May, 1942.
These patrols often extended hundreds of miles to sea and
lasted up to 10 hours. They were instituted by a detach-
ment of Hudsons because of the belief that Japanese naval
forces, particularly aircraft-carriers, would attempt to push
south if the Battle of the Coral Sea had been a Japanese
success.
First submarine was sighted by a Hudson, of which
Sergeant Bob Airey was first pilot and Sergeant Jack
Williams second pilot. This is the story, with a sting in
the tail, as told by Sergeant Williams, the squadron’s lead-
ing master of satire: “We were in a position 300 miles
from where we should have been, due to an error in our
orders. Having no bombs, we were unable to attack, and,
being so far out of position, we waited until our return
before we reported the sighting. Our report was received
with some scepticism. However, after being stirred out of
bed several times that night for further questioning, we


finally convinced our doubtful audience that what we had
seen was either a submarine or a large whale with a
conning-tower on it!”
Next day, when Flight-Lieutenant John Hampshire
was out on patrol from Townsville, he also sighted a sub-
marine—possibly the same one that Sergeant Airey had
seen. Hampshire’s aircraft was the first one on these
patrols to carry bombs and he found a quick target for
them. Diving down from 12,000 feet, he apparently caught
the submarine off guard, for it made no effort to
submerge, and the two 100-pound anti-submarine bombs
dropped each struck the base of the conning-tower. The
submarine disappeared, but presently an oil patch, about
100 yards long, was seen.
A third submarine sighting was made the next day
by a Hudson, captained by Pilot-Officer H. Teede, who had
Sergeant D. Bassett as second pilot. At first it was
thought that the submarine was American because of the
type of head-gear worn by men on deck. But the sub-
marine did not answer the aircraft’s challenge, so Teede
dived to the attack. When the aircraft was almost at the
bottom of its dive doubts about the identity of the sub-
marine were dispelled by the sight of a Japanese flag at
the stern. Unfortunately, the bombs undershot the mark,
hut there was secondary satisfaction in the alarmed
behaviour of the personnel on deck, who hastily bundled
down the conning-tower after the attack just before the
submarine crash-dived.
Forty miles south of this sighting and about 400 miles
from the coast on the same day Sergeant Airev and crew
also saw a submarine. They had two 100-pound bombs on
this occasion, and these were released just as the submarine
was submerging. The air-gunner in the turret (Sergeant
Juett) noted what seemed to be an explosion of froth and
bubble in a large patch of oil. It was not a bomb burst
as the explosion was seen on a second run over the scene.
Tt was thought that the submarine had either “blown” its
air tanks or that an explosion in the vessel had occurred.
The submarines attacked by Hampshire and Airey
were officially regarded as having been destroyed.


CHAPTER NINETEEN
Sergeant’s Outstanding Pluck
EXCEPTIONAL courage and determination iit
rescuing his companions after a Hudson had struck
the sea in Hinchinbrook Channel on the evening of
May 5,1942, were shown by Sgt. Geoff Fletcher, air-gunner.
In this accident the other air-gunner, Sgt. Graham James,
was killed.
The aircraft, which was captained by Sgt. Samuel
with Sgt. East as second pilot, was returning from a sea-
ward patrol off Townsville when it struck very bad
weather. The aircraft was off course, and James was in
the nose, working the radio compass, when it hit the sea.
Sgt. Fletcher dashed to the rear of the aircraft and
released the rubber dinghy, but apparently it burst, for
it was later found sunken and deflated.
The depth of water where the aircraft struck was
about seven feet, which was reduced to about four feet
when the tide went down. When Sgt. Fletcher could not
find the dinghy floating outside the stranded aircraft he
attempted to swim toward the shore, which he thought
he could see dimly about half a mile away. But, ou
reaching there, he found that what he had thought to be
the shore line was a mangrove swamp.
Returning to the aircraft, Fletcher helped Samuel to
reach the mangroves. East began to make his way
through the water to the same place and was also helped
by Fletcher. Once more Fletcher returned to the aircraft
for James. He had to dive under water in the nose to
extricate James, whom he brought back to the mangroves.
Then for half an hour Fletcher carried out artificial
respiration in a vain effort to revive James, who was one of
his best friends. However, it was proved later that James
was already dead, his neck having been broken in the
crash.


East was in bad shape and was shivering with cold,
so once again Fletcher went back to the Hudson and
returned with a parachute. The tide began to rise, so the
party moved back farther among the mangroves- where
Fletcher made a hammock from the parachute, put East
in it, and wrapped him up as best he could for warmth.
Part of the parachute was also used for bandages.
During the night the whistle of a train was heard and
a light, possibly belonging to a launch, was seen. Thus,
miserable though their plight was, the marooned men felt
that they were near civilisation. This prompted Fletcher
to attempt to reach the mainland. But, after a nightmarish
experience, dragging himself through mangroves and
tearing himself on the roots, he found himself practically
hack at his starting place.
Nevertheless, when daylight came Fletcher attempted
again to reach land. He reached a point where he saw a
launch across a channel. He signalled it and then began
to swim toward it, but the occupants of the launch shouted
to him to go back. The reason was that the vicinity was
infested with sharks and crocodiles.
The launch picked up Fletcher and then the others,
who were taken to Cardwell, where James was buried.
Incidents such as this show that the Japanese did not
constitute the sole hazards in the north, and that New
Guinea itself did not monopolise the occasions on which
air crew showed resolution, and devotion to duty and
one’s mates.


CHAPTER TWENTY
Two "Star” Stories
HOW Pilot-Officer Harold Teede, one of the most
reliable and imperturbable of pilots, became lost
in a flight from Horn Island to Horn Island used to
be one of the “star” stories in the mess. He was fortunate
in having as his sole and unexpected passenger Sgt. D. L.
(Max) Bradley, who was fixing the wireless gear in the
aircraft 'at the time.
An alert was given late in the afternoon of July,
3, 1942, while the Hudson was on the ground at Horn
Island, and Teede, anxious to preserve the aircraft, took
off in it hurriedly while Bradley was more or less still on
the job.
Actually the all clear was given soon after Teede took
off, but, as his wireless was still unserviceable, he was
unable to find that out. However, after about an hour
Bradley had the wireless functioning again and Teede
learned that it was safe to return. But by then darkness
had fallen and bad weather had set in, and Teede could
not locate Horn. Eventually he asked for a bearing, and
Bradley got a position by cross-bearings from Moresby and
1
89


Townsville. The aircraft then came in on D./F., landing;
at 10 p.m. after being aloft for five hours.
Teede found a job waiting for him as soon as lie-
landed. Four Hudsons were wanted for a night attack
on Salamaua, and Teede was one of the captains. The-
others were Wing-Commander Kingwell (whose return,
from the raid in exciting circumstances was described
at the beginning of this book), Flight-Lieutenant F. R.
McDonnell (who, with his crew, was lost in this July 4-
operation), and Pilot-Officer J. Napier.
So Teede did seven more hours’ flying, beginning the-
second flight only an hour after he had returned from
the first. And that second flight produced another story.,
a favourite also in the mess, which is told against (but,
with the kind permission of) Sgt. Ted Liefman, one of the
W.O.A.G.s.
According to Sgt. Don Bassett, second pilot; “We were-
just getting over the Owen Stanleys on our return from the
raid when Sgt. Liefman reported that we were being
followed. He had seen a light, and there had been a lot
of talk about that time of Japanese nightfighters
with searchlights. So, thinking we had a Zero on our tail,
we took appropriate action. Effective evasive tactics were
adopted by the captain, and the W.O.A.G.S. took up action
stations. Sgt. Liefman, behind a barricade of parachutes,
trained his side gun on the suspected Zero, and we dropped
quickly from 12,000 feet to 1,000 feet. But after a lot of"
sweating we realised that what Sgt. Liefman had seen was-
Venus!”
Harold Teede—a ‘two-ringer” these days—has been
flying with a communication unit since he left No. 32"
squadron in 1943. In that capacity he has flown many
important Service leaders to various parts of the South
Pacific war theatre. In February, 1945, he had the signal
honour of being chosen as the captain of the aircraft in
which the Duke of Gloucester travelled to North Queens-
land, as one of his first acts as Governor-General, to«
inspect A.I.F. units in training there.


CHAPTER TWENTY-ONE
Attacks on Japanese at Buna
FIRST sighting of troops being landed at Buna from a
Japanese convoy on July 21, 1942, was made by
Flight-Lieutenant L. W. (“Gogs”) Manning, of No. 32
■Squadron. Other aircraft from the squadron, operating
from Moresby, played a conspicuous part on subsequent
•days in attacking the Japanese at Buna and Gona. This
move by the Japanese initiated the grim campaign, in
which the Japanese pushed over the Kokoda trail and
threatened Moresby until pushed back over the Owen
Stanley Range again by the A.I.F. and finally expelled
from the Buna-Gona area by Australian and American
troops.
One squadron aircraft, piloted by Pilot-Officer W. F.
■Cowan, failed to return from its mission of shadowing the
Japanese convoy after it had discharged troops off Buna.
Cowan sent back a signal, stating that he had contacted
two Japanese cruisers, apparently heading for Rabaul.
These cruisers had escorted Japanese transports to Buna.
It was thought that the shadowing Hudson was shot down
by one of the cruisers.
An exciting incident marked a raid made on Gona on
July 25 by a Hudson piloted by Sgt. N. B. Clarke with Sgt.
B. P. Butler as second pilot. The aircraft left Moresby
about midnight with four bombs and six flares on the
Bomb racks. The raid was devised mainly for its nuisance
value, the idea being to stay over the target for an hour
and a half and drop a bomb and a flare alternately.
Two bombs and three flares had been dropped, the
second bomb scoring a lucky hit on an ammunition dump
when the Hudson was chased by an unidentified aircraft.
91


“We decided to jettison the remaining bombs and
flares,” said Butler, “but we forgot that the flares were
fused on the bomb racks. You can imagine the result.
The countryside was lit up for about 80 square miles—or
so we reckoned. Personally, I had a horrible feeling of
being like a fly under a microscope with about 10 pro-
fessors examining me. However, we got into cloud and flew
off.”
The wiliness of the Japanese was illustrated by an
experience of Sergeant Juett, wireless-operator in Sgt.
Airey’s crew, who were over Buna the morning after the
Japanese landing.
“We were sent out from Moresby at 4.30 a.m. to get
a weather report on Buna so that the 825 s could go out
and bomb the Japs if conditions were right,” said Juett.
“As it was still very dark when we arrived over Buna it was
impossible to get much weather information so we decided’
to stay round until daylight. We had four 250-pound
bombs. At daylight we flew along at 3,000 feet from
Sananander Point to Gona but could see nothing to bomb.
A bit further on, however, we saw landing barges on the
beach. At this stage ack-ack opened up on us. We made-
two runs on the barges and let fly with the bombs. They
missed the barges but hit a point where, we were told’
later, the ack-ack battery was situated.
“We then flew off toward Collingwood Bay. About
a quarter of an hour later we were called up on the W./T.
by someone using Moresby’s call-sign and were asked for
our true track. Shortly afterwards we received another-
message, instructing us to go to a rendezvous. The pro-
cedure was perfect in each case, but we were suspicious
about receiving such signals and did not reply. Our
suspicions were confirmed when we returned to base and
found that Moresby had not sent those signals, which must
have come from the Japs. It was also ascertained that
Moresby had not given a receipt for the weather infor-
mation sent out by the aircraft just before the inquiry
for the aircraft’s true track. The Japanese must have given
that receipt, too.”


CHAPTER TWENTY-TWO
Operations from Milne Bay
IN the last month of the squadron’s stay in the north,
a detachment of Hudsons was sent to operate from
Milne Bay, which the Japanese later tried to capture.
Highlight of the detachment’s work there was a daring
mast-high attack on a Japanese convoy which was bring-
ing troops to this strategic corner.
Another Hudson squadron, No. 6, replaced the No. 32
Squadron aircraft toward the end of August, 1942, so that
the Milne Bay operations here recorded by no means
represent the total air activities carried out there during
the grim period in which the Japanese, having landed
troops there, tried hard to turn out our forces.
The setting of the Milne Bay strip is entirely different
from that of Horn Island. Horn is rocky and dusty, and
its trees are stunted. But Milne Bay has luxuriant
tropical vegetation and there are papaws, coconuts, and
pineapples to help out the bully beef and other tinned
rations. Water is plentiful, and the sleeping quarters are
not tents, but native huts with thatched roofs.


The strip is about three miles from the sea. There
are 2,000-feet mountains on the north side, and 3,000-feet
mountains on the south side, and the weather is capricious
—a great contrast with Horn, where the weather is usually
clear and not subject to sudden changes. Thus aircraft
approaching Milne Bay usually come in round the south
point unless the weather is very clear, when they may use
a gap in the mountains.
A glance at the map will show the advantage of Milne
Bay as a hopping-off ground for reconnaissance flights
over the north-west Solomons and intervening waters,
where there was considerable Japanese air and shipping
activity.
Personnel of No. 32 Squadron crews at Milne Bay
in August, 1942, was constantly varying, but captains who
spent some time there included Flight-Lieutenant Milne,
Flying-Officer Willman, Pilot-Officers Pennycuick, Robert-
son, Shore, Law, and Teede, and Sergeants Stutt and
Airey. There were also two Australian Kittyhawk squad-
rons there at that time. Zeros came over frequently in the
day-time, and the Kittyhawks shot several down into the
sea or into the hills.
Hudson crews on reconnaissance often sighted enemy
destroyers moving between Rahaul and the Solomons bases
—Buka, Buin, and Faisi. On one occasion Sgt. Stutt
sighted two Japanese submarines and got near misses on
both.
Indications of an attempted invasion by the Japanese
were plain by August 25. On that day Flying-Officer
Willman took off from Milne Bay to locate Japanese
invasion barges, which were reported to be coming down
the coast near Goodenough Island, and to ascertain
whether conditions were suitable for a strike by the
Kittyhawks. He was also instructed to keep a watch for
Japanese warships. Willman sighted the barges near
Goodenough and reported to base by W./T. before con-
tinuing his patrol in search of warships. Kittyhawks later
"cleaned up” the barges. Willman did not find the war-
ships, which, subsequent events showed, were ahead of the
area searched.
Later that day it was reported that a Japanese
convoy, comprising two cruisers, two destroyers, three


transports, and three other vessels about the size of mine-
sweepers, was coming south towards Milne Bay. One
Hudson went out to attack the convoy, but no hits were
scored.
Another Hudson was sent out at 5 p.m. The crew
comprised Pilot-Officer Martin Law (captain), Pilot-
Officer Clarrie Taaffe (observer), Pilot-Officer Rod Car-
vosso, and Sgt. Frank Carr (W.O.A.G.s). It was still day-
light when they picked up the convoy off the south-east
corner of Normanby Island as it was beginning to turn
toward Milne Bay. The Hudson was supported by three
Kittyhawks, each of which carried a 250-pound bomb.
The Japanese had no air cover.
Law decided to make a low-level attack on a trans-
port. His Hudson dropped its four 250-pound bombs mast
high, at the same time strafing the transport with turret
and belly guns. There was a low cloud base and the Hud-
son shot up into the clouds after the run. It carried also
six 100-pound bombs so Law decided to make another
attack. He made a shallow dive, pulling out at 300 feet,
but his bombs fell about 20 feet short.
The second attack was made almost at dusk. Milne
Bay advised that the weather was unfavourable for a night
landing so Law flew on to Moresby, where he arrived at
9 o’clock with only about 20 minutes’ supply of petrol left.
An inspection revealed that the two main tanks and the
auxiliaries had been holed.
Hudsons piloted by Pilot-Officers Shore and Robertson
also attacked the Japanese convoy. But the enemy got
through and landed at Milne Bay next rrorning. The
Japanese brought tanks to support their side of the
argument. Fortunately, A.I.F. reinforcements had
reached Milne Bay about 10 days earlier. A period of
bloody fighting ensued, and, although it took weeks to
drive out the Japanese, exterminated they finally wer'
and another turning point in the campaign was rounded.
No. 32 Squadron was in process of being withdrawn
to Australia at the time of the Milne Bay fighting, and a
detachment from No. 6 Squadron was moving in. For that
reason No. 32 was only partly identified with the
campaign.
Only casualty suffered by the squadron rt Milne Bay


occurred in an accident on the ground. The victim was
Sgt. P. J. Ellis, a litter, who was fatally injured. Pilot-
Officer Robertson, Sgt. Stutt, and Sgt. Ellis were in the
cockpit of a Hudson, which was parked at the side of the
strip. It was to be taken on a test flight, following repairs.
A Kittyhawk was taking off when a tyre burst and the
Kittyhawk swerved off the strip.
The three men in the Hudson, sensing a collision,
ran down the cabin to the door. The Kittyhawk was
about two feet off the ground when it struck the Hudson
near the main tanks. The Hudson was virtually chopped
in two. Stutt had just opened the door when the collision
occurred and escaped with a few scratches. Ellis, who
was just behind him, was injured so seriously that he died
a few hours later. Robertson tripped and fell on the floor
of the aircraft by the belly gun. The trip probably saved
his life, for he, too, escaped with a few scratches. The
Kittyhawk, like the Hudson, was a “wipe-off,” but the pilot
was unhurt.
No. 32 Squadron’s “exceßent work in the Moresby
area from August 1, 1942, to September 5, 1942,” (which
covered the period when Milne Bay was primarily in the
news), earned a letter of commendation from Major-
General George C. Kenney, Commander of Allied Air
Forces in the South-west Pacific area, and a eulogistic
covering letter from the Air Officer Commanding North-
eastern area, R.A.A.F., Air Commodore A. H. Cobby.
These appear on the opposite page.


HEADQUARTERS
ALLIED AIR FORCES
SOUTHWEST PACIFIC AREA
OFFICE OF THE COMMANDING GENERAL
MELBOURNE SCI
201.22
SUBJECT: Letter of Commendation.
TO : Commanding Officer, No. 32 Squadron, Royal
Australian Air Force.
1. I wish to take this opportunity to commend No.
32 Squadron, Royal Australian Air Force, for its excellent work
in the Port Moresby Area from August 1, 1942 to September 5,
1942.
2. Your organisation has made an enviable record
during this period by completing 155 reconnaissance sorties
for a total of 1037 flying hours. The fact that the Squadron
carried out missions every day during this entire period shows
that it had the will and determination to overcome all obstacles.
Your attack missions resulted ip heavy damage to an enemy
cruiser, barges, transport and stores. Particular alertness was
shown when one of the crews dropped bombs on an enemy
submarine.
3. The courage and determination with which these
numerous operations were carried out during this period were
a contributing factor to the successes of our combined Allied
Forces.
GEORGE C. KENNEY,
Major General,
Commander
FROM : Headquarters North Eastern Area.
TO : Commanding Officer, No. 32 Squadron.
DATE : 9th November, 1942.
REF : 908/11/PI
LETTER OF COMMENDATION
1. In passing the attached letter of commendation to the
personnel of your Squadron on the excellent work they have
performed, I would like to let you know that their operational
flying rates as high as any previously performed in any Air
Force.
2. Whilst it would not be expected of an Australian
Squadron to be of any other standard, it must be gratifying to
know that your work is regarded so highly.
A. H. COBBY,
Air Commodore,
AIR OFFICER COMMANDING NORTH EASTERN AREA
Milne Bay completed the operational story of No. 32
Squadron in the north.
M
97


CHAPTER TWENTY-THREE
Anniversary—And Retrospect
THE No. 32 Squadron of Moresby days no longer exists.
Its personnel is entirely new; it flies a different type
of aircraft. But until early in 1943 many of the
•original members were still with the squadron, which for
a long period after its return from the north in September,
1942, was based on Camden, New South Wales. It was
decided, therefore, to mark the first anniversary of the
formation of the squadron, which fell on February 21,
with a special parade and a dining-in night. The C. 0.,
Wing-Commander D. W. Kingwell, was posted early in
February, and Squadron-Leader J. G. Lush, who had been
with the famous No. 10 Squadron in Britain, and had
recently joined No. 32, became temporary C.O.
Wing-Commander Kingwell was able to return to the
squadron for the celebrations and at the special parade
gave an inspiring address, in which he surveyed the record
of the squadron. Fittingly he concluded by reading the
names of squadron members who had paid the supreme
sacrifice. This Roll of Honour appears at the end of this
hook.


At the dining-in night speeches were given by Wing-
Commander Kingwell, and hy the two flight commanders,
Flight-Lieutenant J. F. Murphy (A Flight) and
Flight-Lieutenant Lloyd Milne (B Flight). Events in the
squadron’s stirring record were recalled, and special
tributes were paid to the memories of those men who had
gone down fighting in those desperate days, swiftly follow-
ing the squadron’s formation in the front line at Moresby.
Soon after this celebration the “posting season” set in
in real earnest. Both flight commanders received their
marching orders, and within a month or so, singly or by
crews, other flying personnel departed. To-day they are
scattered over the face of Australia and New Guinea. In
some cases crews are still together, but in most cases the
old combinations have been broken up. This is sad but
inevitable. Some of the older pilots, somewhat to their
disgust, were given a “temporary rest” (so they hoped)
by being posted to ground jobs. Some observers were
posted to get experience in other types of aircraft, and
some air-gunners and other observers went on special
courses.
That was more than two years ago—and some of the
old 32 Squadron lads have made their last flights in the
line of duty since then. One thinks regretfully, for
instance, of genial “Mick” Hamilton, who sacrificed his
flight-lieutenancy as an equipment officer to re-climb the
promotion ladder as a G.D. fellow. Curiously he flew with
Lloyd Milne, another former equipment officer. “Mick,”
one of the squadron’s ace navigators, was posted to Cats,
in 1943, and it was in a Cat. he perished on the final
stage of a flight back to Australia from America. Another
member of Milne’s crew, the very likeable, devil-may-care
“Terry” Ahern, also “bought it” after he had left the old
squadron. “Terry” and “Dutch” Holland probably
constituted the squadron’s most colourful W.O.A.G. com-
bination. Another W.O.A.G. of the old days, “Don” Forbes,
has also passed on. “Don” was most conscientiously
observant when on patrol and would sit silently in the
turret for hours, intent on his job. Then, perhaps, lie
would quietly break the silence to direct attention to some
unfamiliar object or some variation from normal.
Reference has been made in an earlier chapter to the


loss in the one tragic accident off Cairns in March, 1945,
of “Don” Bassett (pilot) and “Jock” Thomson, D.F.M.,
(W.0.A.G.), both of whom were deservedly popular
members of the old squadron.
In the hearts of fellows such as these, and those
■others who were lost in the earlier days, was kindled that
true spirit of adventure which, in the words of a familiar
prayer, made them “scorn the way of safety . . . and put
everything to the hazard till they passed over.”
» * * *
Even as this book was in the printers’ hands the
Australian press reported a speech by the Chief of the Air
Staff, Air Vice-Marshal George Jones, which underlined
the difficulties under which the R.A.A.F. has long laboured
in the South-West Pacific because of the shortage of
suitable aircraft. The speech was made to the Federal
conference of the Air Force Association in Adelaide on
March 10, 1945—three years after many of the events
related in these pages —and its significance to this writer
is that it was the most outspoken public statement he
had read up to that time from an official source on a
tragedy of frustration that has been well enough known
privately almost ever since Japan entered the war.
One understands well enough that such a frank
admission could not reasonably have been made much
earlier. There was no sense in advertising a weakness
while the danger was so dire. It will be for the official
historians to reveal the precise state of aerial unreadiness
in which Australia then stood. One has heard that when
Japanese warships and transports were heading toward
Rabaul for the occupation in January, 1942, the remnants
of our R.A.A.F. forces there received a signal, instructing
'‘all available aircraft” to attack this formidable aggrega-
tion of hostile shipping. In literal obedience one Hudson
was sent out. It has been stated earlier in these pages, on
reliable authority, that at the end of February, 1942,
there were available for the defence of Moresby only
three serviceable aircraft —two Gatalinas and one Hudson.
Even in May, 1942, the Hudson which first sighted the
Japanese warships, later defeated in the Battle of the
Coral Sea, was the sole Hudson available in that area at
that time for vital reconnaissance work, and further obser


vations could be made only by sending out another crew
in the same aircraft.
These instances are not cited to “point the bone” but
to emphasise the debt Australia owes to the men who did
so much with such scanty material in days so full of peril
to this country.
For that same reason let us quote the plain words of
the C.A.S., in which he declared that the R.A.A.F. had
been crippled from the beginning of the war by a short-
age of suitable aircraft:
“Right up to the present stage, when Japanese
air power is declining, it has been quite impossible to
get the aircraft we want. It has been one long struggle
to get aircraft. We could not get Rritish aircraft
because Rritain was fighting for her life and could not
supply her own needs, so we had to go to America.
Then, after overcoming very great difficulties, we got
some Kittyhawks just in time for the Battle of Milne
Bay (in August, 1942). Even now we can get only
those aircraft other countries have left over. American
policy is for Americans to fly American aircraft
wherever possible, and only the balance of aircraft
manufactured in America is available to other
nations. American commanders have been against
giving the R.A.A.F. aircraft because they said we did
not have the necessary ground staff. But we have had
a struggle to get ground staff because we have been
told we have no aircraft for them to service. Finally,
Australia got three squadrons of Spitfires, two
squadrons of Beaufighters, and later on some
American Bostons and Mitchells. It was only 18
months ago that the R.A.A.F. got its first long-range
striking aircraft—the Liberators.”
But in the early days of No. 32 Squadron there was
no circumscribing American policy. The R.A.A.F.
Hudsons, Wirraways and Catalinas —so few, so painfully
few —had necessarily to fly alone. If that point is
laboured in these pages it is intentional.
* * * *
Throughout this record personnel have been referred
to by the rank which they then held. The pilot-officers


of those days are flying-officers and flight-lieutenants in
this year of grace 1945. There are even a few squadron-
leaders extant. Many of the non-commissioned officers
have since got their commissions. Passage of a year or
two can give a squadron a very senior aspect, and so it
was with No. 32 before it was virtually disbanded. Senior
—but not too serious when the circumstances permitted
relaxation.
There was an amusing pair of drawings in a recent
“Punch.” A typical sergeant-major roared at his awkward
squad (top picture) : “As you were!” And, in the bottom
picture, his command was literally realised. His five
recruits, preserving their same stance, were revealed as a
jockey, a butcher, an actor, a coster, and a bricklayer.
Similar pre-war diversity of interests, although in a
rather different plane, is shown by an examination of the
records of the men who flew in the Hudsons of No. 32
Squadron over Rabaul, Kavieng, Gasmata, Lae, Salamaua,
and a dozen other “hot spots”. The commanding officer
and the flight commanders were permanent Air Force
men, but almost all the others were of the Citizens’ Air
Force.
Peace-time callings represented included several farm-
ers and graziers, two or three bank clerks, several school
teachers (who usually make excellent navigators), an
engineer, an advertising manager, an agricultural machin-
ery salesman, an insurance canvasser, several accountants,
several others with radio interests (almost automatically
these become wireless operator-air gunners), others who
were still at university and had not begun a civil career at
the time of enlistment, and one sole representative of the
corset-manufacturing industry.
On a point of geography the writer begs to explain
that he knows roughly the difference between New Guinea
and Papua but for convenience has usually referred to the
general area only as New Guinea.
It is inevitable that this record should give most
prominence to the pilots. But, although it has not been
possible to mention the navigators and the W.O.A.G.s in
proportion to their merit, it is earnestly hoped that no
slight will be inferred. Anyone who has lived among
these fellows—and none more than non-flying personnel —


will count the experience a privilege, and will pay whole-
hearted tribute to the splendid crew spirit which animated
them always.
No squadron in the north had a finer record. In
critical days they stayed in the sky.
All honour then, in these later years of resounding
victories, to Moresby’s few who “held the pass” with
classical, if casual, courage in early 1942 when Australia
stood alone.




Number
Rank
Name
Mustering
Remarks
37472
A.C.l
BOWER, H. C.
Flight Mechanic
) Killed during enemy Air
j Raid on 24/2/’42.
406013
406721
406432
406773
P./O.
SGT.
SGT.
SGT.
NICOLAY, A. R.
KORBOSKY, M. R.
CASS, W. I.
COPPIN, W. H.
G.D. (Capt.)
Airman Pilot
W.O.A.G.
W.O.A.G.
) Missing from Operations over
j GASMATA on 3/3/'42.
1863
405644
400570
5810
F./LT.
P./O.
SGT
SGT.
ERWIN, P. J.
McLAUCHLAN, E. L.
SIMPSON, J. W.
BARWICK, I. M.
G.D. (Capt.)
2nd. Pilot
W.O.A.G.
W.O.A.G.
( Missing from Operations
f over GASMATA on 3/3/42..
406732
P./O.
RICHMOND, R. E.
G.D. (2nd Pilot)
Seriously wounded during
I Operations over LAE on
J 22/3/’42.
403281
SGT.
RICHARDS, R. C.
W.O.A.G.
1 Dangerously wounded during
Operations over LAE on
1 22/3/’42.
661
F./O.
GREEN, R. M.
G.D. (2nd Pilot)
. Seriously wounded during
Operations over SALAMAUA
' on 31/3/’42.
Roll of Honour — No. 32 Squadron
(THE FIRST YEAR)
N
105


Number
Rank
Name
Mustering
Remarks
405121
401646
412091
411100
P./O.
P./O.
SGT.
SGT.
CLARKE, J. C.
HARTLEY, L. J.
LYMATH, J. P.
MORRISON, E. C.
G.D. (Capt.)
2nd. Pilot
W.O.A.G.
W.O.A.G.
)
i
Killed in aircraft accident
PORT MORESBY on
28/4/’42.
405301
SGT.
EAST, J. W.
Airman Pilot
)
t
Seriously injured in aircraft
accident off HINCHIN-
BROOK ISLAND on 5/5/’42.
416260
SGT.
JAMES, G. S.
W.O.A.G.
1
/
Killed in aircraft accident
off HINOHINBROOK IS-
LAND on 5/5/’42.
692
407841
21351
P./O.
P./O.
SGT.
SGT.
ADAMS, A, E.
POWER, J.
BRIGHT, B. R.
CHANDLER, B. N.
G. D. (Capt.)
Observer
W.O.A.G.
W.O.A.G.
}
5
Killed when aircraft crashed
in sea off BEVERLAC
ISLAND on 23/5/’42.
416142
401689
407716
406656
SGT.
SGT
SGT.
P./O.
COOPER, M. W.
GILLAM, L. T.
HERMAN, J. A.
JEWELL, J. L. M.
Airman Pilot (Capt)
Airman Pilot
W.O.A.G.
W.O.A.G.
)
J
Killed in aircraft accident
during formation flying over
GIRU on 24/5/42.
545
404986
405647
407360
P./LT.
P./O.
P./O.
SGT.
MCDONNELL, P. R.
FAIRFAX, R. L.
PETRIE, A. M.
ELLIS, M. C.
G.D. (Capt.)
Observer
W.O.A.G.
W.O.A.G.
)
s
Missing from Operations over
SALAMAUA on 4/7/42.


Number
Rank
Name
Mustering
Remarks
467
F./LT.
TRIGG, R. T.
G.D. (Capt.)
.
403752
SGT.
LOVE JOY, D. J.
Airman Pilot
j
406859
SGT.
MCLAREN, G. A. L.
W.O.A.G.
I
415231
SGT.
RIDGE, G. W. G.
W.O.A.G.
1
Crew and Passengers killed
30650
SGT.
BRADLEY, D. L.
W.O.A.G.
\
in aircraft accident in the
22537
L.A.C.
KIMMINS, E. G. A.
Coppersmith
y
vicinity of BYRON BAY on
24493
L.A.C.
EVANS, W. E.
Messman
1
6/7/’42.
24672
L.A.C.
WOODS, F. A. C.
Messman
i
24775
L.A.C.
JOHNSTONE, H. W.
Cook
i
25767
L.A.C.
MEREFIELD, E. G.
Aircrafthand
/
407614
P./O.
COWAN, W. F.
G.D. (Capt.)
411183
SGT.
POLACK, R. B.
Airman Pilot
}
Hissing from Operations over
408206
P./O.
TAYLOR, D. R.
W.O.A.G.
\
BUNA BAY on 22/7/42.
416396
SGT.
SHEARD, L. E.
W.O.A.G.
Killed in aircraft accident
15680
SGT.
ELLIS, P. J.
Fitter HE
)
at MILNE BAY on 16/8/’42.
406712
SGT.
CLARK, N. B.
Airman Pilot (Capt)
Killed in aircraft accident
401037
F/SGT.
HUBBARD, B. J.
Observer
i
in the vicinity of DAFTO,
408580
SGT.
IREDELL, J. H.
W.O.A.G.
{
N.S.W., when returning from
412187
SGT.
RICH, G. A.
W.O.A.G.
Operations on 4/11/42.
402996
F/SGT.
SCOTT, S. K.
Airman Pilot (Capt)
Killed in aircraft accident
407122
F/SGT.
JOHNS, H. B.
Observer
during training flight on
402928
SGT.
PEARSON, B. C. J.
W.O.A.G.
26/1/43, at Victoria Park,
403920
SGT.
VOYZEY, G. D.
W.O.A.G.
PICTON, N.S.W.
412545
SGT.
LAWSON, T. G.
W.O.A.G.
\
SUMMARY: Killed 34; Missing
16; Wounded
4; Total 54




Leslie Jillett
The author, Leslie Jillett, is a
journalist who has worked for 20
years or so on New Zealand and
Australian newspapers. He was
chief sub-editor of the Courier-
Mail, Brisbane, when he joined
the R.A.A.F. early in 1942. After
appropriate induction by D.l’ s
and other experts of the School of
Administration he was commis-
sioned and was inflicted on No. 32
squadron as an intelligence officer.
He remained over a year with that
squadron—an oversight on the part
of Postings he does not yet under-
stand. His mechanical knowledge
is nil and he has the utmost diffi-
culty in distinguishing one type of
aircraft from another. But, after
sharing the experiences of two
squadrons in the field, he is sure of
one thing—that Australia has ev-
ery reason for pride in the splen-
did young men who flew and serv-
iced the aircraft that kept the Jap-
anese at bay in 1942 and who in
later days have bashed him back
■along the road to Tokio.
MORESBY’S FEW
AUSTRALIA’S unpreparedness in
the air when the Japanese struck
south so swiftly in December, 1941
—January 1942 is revealed starkly
in this book. It must be a shock to
the notorious Australian complac-
ency to be told that at one period,
more than a month after Rabaul
had fallen, Australia’s front-line
air defence comprised only three
serviceable aircraft.
BUT this book has not been writ-
ten to shock. Its simple purpose is
to teR the story of the valour of
“the few” who stayed in the New
Guinea skies in those desperate
days of early 1942 when nothing
seemed more certain than that the
Japanese would invade Australia
itself.
IT is mainly the story of one
squadron—No. 32. The names of
the men who flew the Hudsons of
No. 32 are not widely known. The
spotlight seldom falls on bomber
crews. But Australia is debtor to
them all. Debtor, too, to the men
who serviced those old Mark Ones,
fuelled them, patched them up
with sheet iron, dragged them out
of the tropic ooze. Some men like
Pedrina, D.F.C., have since “gone
in”, as the R.A.A.F. phrase so
tersely puts it. Others, happily, are
stiß flying—some, much to their
amazement, in four-engined bomb-
ers. There has been a mighty
change in the New Guinea scene
since the days of which this book
tells. American aid played a vital
part in that transformation. But
these men of the R.A.A.F. Hudsons
‘held the pass’ with classic, if
casual, courage before the satiri-
cally-termed “To-morrow-hawks”
and Flying Fortresses and Maraud-
ers appeared up north. This book
strives to pay tribute to those
magnificent youngsters.
