

MORE AOBOUT
WOMANHOOD SUFFRAGE,
A PAPER READ BY
AT THE ANNUAL CONFERENCE OF THE
Victorian Alliance, on 25th August, 1891.
Published by the VICTORIAN ALLIANCE, ’
Temperance and General Life Buildings, Swanston Street,
Melbourne.
Sold also by the WOMAN’S CHRISTIAN TEMPERANCE UNION,
28 Russell Street, Melbourne.
PRICE, 2s. per 100.
Dunn & Wilkinson , Printers, 61 Queen Street, Melbourne.


WOMANHOOD SUFFRAGE;
THE principle upon which we claim that the
franchise should be granted to women is, that
every intelligent adult should have the right
of representation in the Parliament of the couutry in
which he resides, and thereby a direct influence in
making the laws by which he is governed. This is the
idea which forms the basis of all our democratic insti-
tutions, and which has been adopted as the governing
force here so far as one-half of the population is con-
cerned. There are many countries where this idea of
government is not yet developed, and I do not argue
that the adoption of it by uncivilised or semi-civilised
races would be beneficial, but I say that in these colo-
nies where you have manhood suffrage, we women
ought not to have to plead for it, but that our oppo-
nents should show valid reasons why it has not been
granted to us. We do not ask for it except upon the
same terms, and for the same reasons that it has been
granted to men. It is about 30 years I believe, since
this principle came into operation here, thereby
acknowledging that the men of this country are fit to
govern themselves, and you look upon it now as a
natural right. What was one of its immediate results ?
Perhaps 1 may be permitted to speak, as having spent
nearly all my life in this colony, and after first purify-
ing the elections by the system of voting by ballot,
there arose an agitation to extend educational advan-
tages to every child in the country. Ignorance was
not to be excused, no, not even tolerated. Men saw
the danger of the ballot being in the hands of illiterate
persons, and thus at last our present Education Act
became law, and you compel those who are to use the
franchise to acquire at least the simplest elements of
knowledge. I wish you to notice that free education
followed upon the giving of the franchise to every man,
so that now the women of this colony are in a better
position to use the franchise wisely than men were.
Now, having adopted this principle as regards men,
why deny it to women ? Is it because we are not capable


of snfficienteducation?! doaotfind that in examinations
either of teachers or scholars, a lower standard is
W 6d fr °™ women than from men, or that girls are
placed on a different footing from boys—they learn in
the same classes, and pass the same examinations, and
though I have known many teachers, I have not heard
complaints of any difficulty in teaching girls. I
however, that girls are required to sew and knit, with
“T‘ e 7> I presume, to their being better qualified to
tho In thei r homes, so that you recognise
the fact that a woman has to perform special duties.
But you do not give the boys any education in politics!
well remember a series of simple lessons on political
economy in a lesson book which was used in the
school I attended at Fitzroy—such subjects as work
and wages, rich and poor, &o„ &0., were treated in
a simple forcible style that I have never forgotten,
and I have often thought it would be a great ad van!
tage to have such lessons introduced in the course of
reading in our schools. It would be a great benefit to
the senior scholars to have some instruction in the
prmoiptes of social and political economy. It cannot
be, then, that we are not capable of studying these
tinnXlt neith ? r . does the la w require a speeialBeduoa-
think thni^h^ lVm^-i- t^e t t * lou gh I venture to
think that the quality of our representatives would be
formp,) ed ' f re® f lect ? rs generally were better in-
formed on political and social matters. What is the
f® a ?. on ’, t . hen > why women are denied the suffrage »
Is It that we have not time to think of politics * It
does not follow that because our home S P are to the
majority of ns the places where our work lies and
most of our time is spent (and we are glad that it is so),
that we are not interested in the politics of
our country Men have their businesses, pro
fessional duties, &c„ but that does not bin-
der them finding time to have opinions on
political matters, attend political meetings, and go
to the polling booth. We are compelled to think
heavvltlp 0 " 4 • SUOh thiDgS "hen, consequence of,
heavy duties prices are raised, or when the trade is


suffering from the effects of a land boom, or when a
strike occurs and our coal supply is out off. We
regard all matters which touch either the moral or
material prosperity of our country as well worth our
study, and we have our opinions about these things.
We cannot see why our views should not find expres-
sion at the ballot-box equally with those of men. Will
anyone say that we would be worse wives and
mothers thereby ? Would woman be less a helpmeet
for man by being interested in all that concerns him ?
Surely not. But you say that your political meetings
are not fit places for women. Well, if you cannot
admit us to your political meetings, we will have our
own, and ask candidates to address us there. But is it
not a disgrace if such is the fact ? If political meet-
ings are demoralising, something must be radically
wrong, and if this principle works evil to our hus-
bands, brothers and sons, let us abandon it at once,
and give up democracy as a failure, for nothing can be
good for a nation which lowers its moral character.
We cannot understard, however, why such should be
the case, but quite the reverse. To be a good states-
man—to guide the affairs of the country so as to
promote its best interests—to take a part in all that
concerns its welfare, and to use all our influence
for the making and administering of just and righteous
laws, what nobler ambition would there be for every
one who loves his country ? What is it then that
excludes us from representation ? I find that you
deny the suffrage to criminals who, by their actions,
have rendered themselves dangerous to the State, and
are, therefore, imprisoned in your gaols; but I find
there a much less proportion of women than men. It
cannot be then our worse moral character. Then you
exclude those who have not the reasoning faculty.
Are we lunatics or idiots? You also deny the right to
those of immature years, excluding ali under 21 years
of age. I certainly think that the average young
woman of 21 is quite as competent to vote wisely as
her brother of that age. Are we to be always reekonedj
as minors ? We think the reason must be that you have!


forgotten us, or that you did not understand our
needs. Let this be the case no longer. Our claim is
that members of Parliament shall represent the views
not only of the men of their constituency, but also of
its women. Perhaps you say that we are indirectly
represented by our influence over our husbands,
Would this sort of representation satisfy those who use
this argument ? I think not. And what of the many
thousands of women who have no husbands, and many
Others whose husbands are very unfit to represent
them ? Consider the thousands of women who support
themselves by their own labor outside of their homes.
And if you say that to the majority home is the sphere
of our energies, I contend that the woman who guides
her home rightly is not only earning her living, but
serving the State to the very best advantage in the
rearing and training of her children. Should she not
be represented ? Our womanhood limits us in regard
to the ways in which we can serve our generation, and
we do not resent this limitation. We do not want .to
rule or usurp any place to which man has a natural
right, or for which he is better fitted. Women who
are rated for property vote in municipal elections, but
in Victoria we never see women adorning the local
councils. Perhaps certain Councils would be better
behaved if they had some lady members. What would
be the effects of such a measure ? I maintain that
to woman herself—to the home—to men (not forget-
ting candidates for Parliament), and to the laws under
which we live, the results of granting the franchise to
women would be good. Ido not want to repeat what
I wrote in a former paper, and so will not trouble you
with details on all these points, but I ask you to look
at the way in which women are taking advantage of
the educational facilities now granted them by their
admission to our Universities. Let us have equal poli-
tical rights, and I do not fear the consequences.
Woman’s influence would be on the side of peace and
purity, just laws, and the protection of v the home.
Yes, it is that the homes of our country may be purer
and happier than they are that we ask for the franchise.


We, who have children growing up in our homes, are
deeply interested in the government of our country,
and we mothers think that we ought to have some
voice as to the education of our children. As to that
great curse of our country—drunkenness—how long
would our present licensing laws remain in force if we
had the ballot? Ah ! too many women know to their
cost that the law does not protect their homes, when it
allows temptations to drunkenness to be placed so
thickly in our streets, and when their husbands come
home reeling with drink, and when the wages they
should feed and clothe the little ones are in the pub-
lican’s till. The question of compensation would be
settled, I fancy, somewhat differently than as it
remains at present, and to women it would probably
appear that the persons most needing compensation
were the sufferers from the traffic, not those who make
money by the degradation of their fellow creatures.
And what of our young men and women who have to
leave the parental roof ? It is all very well to say
make home attractive and your children will stay
there. Those who have beautiful homes, far away
from public-houses, can shield their sons and daughters
as the poorer classes cannot. Neither can our children
be always under the shelter of home. And what
horrible traps are laid for them—temptations to vice
flaunt themselves in our streets. Can they not be
purified ? There is a saying (too often quoted) to the
effect that men cannot be made sober by Acts of Par-
liament, but it seems to us that it is only as regards
drunkenness that such nonsense is talked. What is
government for, but to protect the interests of the
people—their health, their wealth and morals ? The
State punishes theft and does not license thieving dens
or schools for theft. It punishes drunkenness, but
actually licenses the manufacture and sale of
that which produces so much misery and causes
the loss of thousands of lives yearly. Let it close
these drunkard factories, and dissolve its existing part-
nership in this business. And as to laws which concern
the protection of life and property, judging by the


sentences awarded to offences against the person, it is
a much greater offence in the eyes of the law to steal
a coat than to beat or abuse a woman even to the risk
of her life. It seems to us that too much of your
legislation has been on the principle that might is
right. You regard the ballot as the great of
protecting yourselves from oppression and injustice.
Are you afraid to put the same power into our weaker
hands ? But is tliere danger to be apprehended by
granting such a measure ? With every liberty there
is not only responsibility, but necessarily a certain
amount of risk. If you teach a child to read, you
give him the power to read bad books as well as good.
Bad women would exercise an evil influence, no doubt,
but there is a much smaller proportion of bad women
than men. You give the franchise to a criminal, if not
actually in gaol, (on the supposition, I presume, that
he is reformed,) and if you are willing to take the risk
with men, why not take a smaller risk with women ?
Some, again, see danger to the peace of the home in
possible disputes on political matters, while others say
it would be no use giving women a vote, they would
simply do as they were told. In the latter case no
harm would be done—the vote would simply be
doubled ; while as to the former, I imagine that those
who dread this do not know how to govern their
households. If a home is rightly managed, there may
be discussion, but not quarrelling, and discussion will
do no harm, but good. In asking this we are not ask-
ing the State to make a dangerous experiment.
Where a partial franchise has been given, as in the
Isle of Man, and in Kansas territory, women have
proved themselves intelligent voters, and their influ-
ence in politics has been beneficial, while in the State
of Wyoming, where women enjoy equal political rights,
the testimony as to its benefits is decisive, and comes
from governors, judges, superintendents of school
boards, and many prominent citizens. Better legis-
lators, better laws, and quietness and order at the
polling booths, have been the result of more than
twenty-one years 1 trial of


quote great names, but a measure which has had the
support of men like Abraham Lincoln, Henry Ward
Beecher, Joseph Cook, and Charles Kingsley, and
women such as Frances Willard, Mary Livermore, and
Frances Power Cobbe, and many others whose intel-
lectual attainments, high-toned character, and self-
denying lives command our respect, cannot be con-
signed to ridicule. You do appreciate the help of
woman in many ways that take her out of her home.
To relieve distress, to visit the poor, to nurse the sick
—these are duties which specially belong to women,
and we find that women of every creed, who have the
opportunity, are spending their time and energies in
these works of benevolence, and just because they are
doing so they are finding out the need for woman’s in-
fluence in politics. Woman’s sympathies are being
broadened by co-operation with those of her own sex,
and also with men, for wise and good ends, and that
they are being prepared for wisely using the power
which enfranchisement will give. Woman’s vote will
be on the side of that righteousness which exalteth a
nation, and will make for peace. Women have to bear
the heavier burden of all the social ills which afflict
our race. Let her come to the help of the State in
finding a remedy for them. We think you need us.
Much has been done in the way of reforms already,
but very much more remains to be done. Although
we do not want legislation too much in advance of
public sentiment, we think that legislation should lead
the way, and not lag behind when reform is needed.
We are not clamorous, but do not think that because
we work on quietly, and patiently wait for the time
when you will open your polling booths to us, that we
are careless about it. The women of this country are
uniting to help your societies, and the churches also,
in fighting the battle against evil. Give us the weapon
you find so needful. Call woman to your aid in the
battle for truth and righteousness, and let her take her
rightful place in the State as well as in the home.
