





MORMONISM:
THE DOCTRINES OF THE SELF-STYLED
LATTER-DAY SAINTS
COMPARED
WITH ITSELF AND THE BIBLE,
FOUND WANTING,
BY JOHN DAVIS.
Where truth divine its sacred light displays,
Foul falsehood shrinks beneath its fervid rays.
And where Truth’s advocate her weapon plies
Imposture shudders—sickens—droops—and dies.
Sstiiug ;
PUBLISHED BY JOHN L, SHERIFF, BOOKSELLER AND STATIONER,
135, GEORGE STREET.


PRINTED AT THE EMPIRE GENERAL STEAM PRINTING OFFICE,
HUNTER STREET, SYDNEY.


01 55 ,/f fm r
INTEODUCTION.
I have read in manuscript the following pages 5 which
are now given to the public in print, and, at the request of
the author, I venture thus publicly to express my opinion
of the little work.
Mr. Davis has, I think, executed his task in a very
satisfactory manner. He has grasped the subject with
which he professes to deal; and, besides furnishing a vast
amount of authentic information on the topics treated of,
he has in a terse and concise style conclusively refuted
the gross absurdities and glaring contradictions of Mor-
monism from the Word of God and their own writings,
and exposed the immoral tendency both of their principles
and practices.
It is a remarkable and a melancholy fact, fully attested
in the history of past ages, and not less undeniably estab-
lished by actual observation in the present day, that there
is nothing too monstrous or too ridiculous in religious belief
to be propounded to multitudes, and embraced, and held
with a tenacity and firmness of purpose that might do
honour to the clearest, the most important, and incon-
testible truths.
Nay, perhaps it is not an exaggeration to say that, just
in proportion as religious error outrages both Scripture,
and reason, and common sense, in the same proportion is


its power to fascinate and enslave. There seems to be a
magic influence about it that weakens and darkens, and
casts a spell over the judgment, and clothes in a robe of
beauty that deformity that is visible to every eye but that
of the spell-bound devotee. There are many who can see
no attractiveness in the sublime doctrines of the lively
oracles of God, and have no relish at all for its “ words
of truth and soberness,” whose imaginations are fired
even with the maniacal ravings of weak-minded but wily
impostors. An orthodox creed, when only theoretically
held, is almost sure, in certain minds, to give way before
the rush of that superstitious fervour which is awakened
by alleged dreams and visions, and direct revelations, and
immediate intercourse with Heaven. Recorded miracles
are too tame for many minds. They would like to realise
and see reproduced before them those stirring and won-
drous scenes in which the mighty power of God was so
singularly displayed in the olden time. Seas divided —
rivers stayed in their course—the sun and the moon stand-
ing still —the lame healed—the blind restored to sight—
and the dead in their winding sheets coming forth from
their graves.
There is in many minds a morbid craving for novelty in
religious belief, and this craving is stimulated and gratified
by the bold and confident claims of impostors to inspira-
tion and miraculous powers. And whenever the great
landmarks of Bible truth have been disregarded and passed
over under the influence of these morbid cravings, and the
impulsive feelings which they generate, it is impossible to
foresee in what a labyrinth of errors, both doctrinal and
practical, those excited speculatists may involve them-
selves.


There is, moreover, in the state of mind now indicated,
and the mental processes that lead to it, no small degree
of pride and ambitious aspiration. The dupes of reli-
gious impostors, only too willing to be deceived, are ele-
vated with the thought that the glory and honour are in
some degree reflected upon themselves, which belong to
these wonderful men who are entrusted with the secrets of
heaven, and who are commissioned to exercise that au-
thority and wield the mighty power of God upon earth.
It matters not that there is not a particle of reliable evi-
dence that these impudent claims and blasphemous
pretensions are well founded, the judgment of the dupes
has been already surrendered, and while they are taught
to regard it as something like impiety to question or scru-
tinize such claims, the share which they fancy they have
in the honour of those by whom these claims are made
overbears and lulls into slumber any awakening effort of
judgment and common sense, and deepens and perpetuates
the delusion.
To be a member of a religious society, of whose doctrines
and practice the revealed word of God is the only standard
—to have religious instructors, who neither possess nor
claim to possess any superhuman powers, whose appeals
are only to the law and the testimony, illustrated by su-
perior knowledge and more familiar acquaintance with the
written Word, and personal experience of its truth and
power—this is too humble and commonplace for many
minds—there is nothing exciting or distinguished about it.
But there is something grand and most solacing to self-
importance in being associated with a society whose in-
structors have, according to their impious pretension, seen


God, like Moses, face to face, and talked familiarly with
Him—who stand now on the same level With the Pro-
phets and the Apostles of old, invested with the same
miraculous powers—unfolding as fully, and with the same
divine authority, the purposes and the counsels of Jehovah.
The pride that ruined man at first-—the pride that
prompted him to be equal to his Maker, and to believe the
devil rather than God, has in all ages laid his fallen pos-
terity open to the snare of the Devil and to the seductive
influence of lying wonders —to the “ cunning craftiness” of
the emissaries of Satan, and to the power of all the “dese-
crableness of unrighteousness.”
Mormonism—so named from the “Book of Mormon,” a
pretended new revelation, found in the earth on a hill-side
in Kentucky, in the United States of America, by a man
named Smith, of very questionable reputation, who al-
leged that in a vision he had been charged to seek it, and
directed where to find it —the new revelation being in-
scribed on plates or tablets of gold. Mormonism is the
most extravagant and barefaced imposture that, in these
modern times, has been been submitted to, and attempted
to be imposed on the world. Its origin and all its adjuncts
form such a clumsy invention that, even taking into account
those principles and tendencies of fallen human nature
above alluded to, it is still amazing that such an amount
of folly and credulity should exist as even to give it the
narrowest standing ground upon the earth. But lam not
called upon here to discuss the tenets, or the principles, or
the practices of the sect.
This, in my judgment, Mr. Davis has done to some pur-
pose in the following pages. The artillery of the Sacred


Scriptures is brought to bear with effect on this modern
“ Tower of Babel,” while the inconsistencies and the in-
congruities contained in the writings of their so-called
Apostles and High Priests, are brought out into bold relief,
and there is no escape left from the withering exposure.
I am inclined to believe that the paroxysms of this
Mormon Mania have greatly subsided in Sydney, and no
single man has done more, and I believe not so much, to
produce this result as the Author of these pages.
Many will remember that, when some few years ago,
this impudent imposture forced on the public notice in this
city, its impious pretensions in placards, and pamphlets,
and open air meetings, Mr. Davis encountered them in all
directions and at every turn, and his exertions did, by the
blessing of God, very effectually check the spread of the
delusion.
Some may say, we see nothing of Mormonism, and hear
nothing of Mormonism, and why should this book be pub-
lished now ?
The Mormons have grown wiser in their generation.
They work more secretly in the diffusion of their tenets,
and perhaps not less, but more effectually, if the state-
ment be true which I have just heard, that a few weeks
ago, a ship left our harbour with about 200 souls on board,
disciples of the Mormon faith, destined for the “ Salt Lake ;’ 5
one of these hopeful inhabitants of the New Jerusalem
taking with him three wives , and several others two.
Though the snake may be scotched, it is not killed, and
every able and well meant effort to deliver our fellow
men from the snare of an erroneous belief, or to prevent
them falling into it, deserves encouragement. An unpre-


tending title work like this will find its way into quarters
where more elaborate and voluminous productions would
not come. A mere bough from a tree sweetened the bitter
waters of Marah —a stone from a sling thrown by a strip-
ling, laid low the champion of the uncircumcised Philistines
who had defied the armies of the living God.
I regard this little treatise as extremely creditable to
Mr. Davis, as a working man—a self-taught man, and,
according to the ordinary acceptation of the term, an un-
educated man. lam confident that this circumstance, far
from detracting from the merit of the little book, will
enhance its merit in the estimation of those who may
really be termed educated. They are best able to judge
of and appreciate the power of thinking, and the capabi-
lity of writing which it displays ; and I am no less confi.
dent, that it will commend itself to the judgment and
sound sense of our intelligent artizans. It is a credit to
their order—it reflects honour on the class to which they
belong.
It is a valuable contribution to the elucidation and main-
tenance of divine truth as revealed in the Scriptures, in
its bearing on one of the endless forms of error that have
sprung up in our own day—a form of error which, in
spite of its glaring absurdities and immoral tendencies, has
been able to acquire an amount of support and a number
of adherents all but incredible.
ALEX. SALMON.
Fort-street, Sydney,
15 th July, 1857.


PEEFACE.
Dear Reader,
The following pages are the result of a patient and
lengthened investigation of the claims of Mormonism.
How far I have succeeded in demonstrating, from their
own authorised publications, its self contradictory charac-
ter, you must be the judge. I wish it to be distinctly
impressed upon your mind, that what I have written has
been written in the spirit of love to those who are deluded
by this most infamous attempt to cajole the unthinking and
unwary. Had I designed to write a laboured essay, I
might have extended this volume to four times its size.
My object was to lay before the public a “ bird’s eye
view” of the system, with heads of arguments thereon,
that those who come in contact with its advocates may be
able to think it out for themselves. If the Mormon
Elders can shew that I have in any way misquoted their
writings they are at liberty to expose the same in the
columns of the Australian Banner, which will be open to
them for that purpose.
It will be seen, that in the extracts I have made, many
subjects arise which I could not enter upon without greatly
increasing the size of this work.
The cause of the newspaper correspondence is briefly
this. After reading several works which I had purchased
from C. W. Wandell, the then leader of the sect in Sydney,


I asked him if he “ was open to discuss the principles he
promulgated both by his preaching and the publications he
circulated?” He replied, “Yes, at a proper time and
place.” This was on the Hyde Park, on January 23,
1853. During the following week, I sent him a statement
of the principal propositions I required him to discuss. A
week or so afterwards, I had a conversation with Mr.
John Jones, which led to the advertisement which stands
at the head of the correspondence.
As I desire to avoid any approach to egotism, I would
gladly have suppressed that portion which may be consi-
dered personal, but the connection would not allow it.
I now send it forth to be tossed upon the uncertain
waves of public opinion. If but one soul is plucked from
that hideous system of concentrated Anti-Christianism, into
the enjoyment of a blessed resurrection, I shall feel an
ample reward for any trouble I may have taken.
Header! —“ Prepare to meet thy God.” “ God was in
Christ reconciling the world unto himself; we therefore,
pray you, in Christ’s stead, be ye reconciled unto God.”—
2 Cor. v. chap.
I remain,
Yours in the bonds of Christ,
J. D.
July , 1857,


MOEMONISM, ETC.
[ADVERTISEMENT.]
To The Editor of the Empire.
SlR—The Editors of the Herald having refused to
insert the following, would you be kind enough to give it a
place in your valuable paper, and oblige yours, &c,.
John Jones.
To the Editors of the Herald.
Gentlemen —As Mr. John Davis, of Canterbury, from
his advertisement in the Herald of yesterday, appears to
like to see his name in the papers, please to insert the fol-
lowing, and oblige yours, &c.,
John Jones.
Sydney, 27th January, 1853.
Me. W. C. Wandell.
Sie —As you have agreed to discuss the principles you
hold and promulgate in the printed publications of your
Society, I send you the following propositions, which will
form the ground of our discussion, and from which I do
not'intend to depart:—
1. You'will demonstrate, that our Bible of the Old and
New Testament is “so generally corrupt” as to be an
“ unfit” guide in faith and morals.—l will undertake to
prove the opposite.


2. You will undertake to reconcile the glaring contra-
dictions which are in the standard writings of the Society
to which you belong.—l will undertake to shew them to
he irreconcilable.
In discussing the first proposition it will (in order for
the public to have some standard of judgment in the mat-
ter) be necessary for you to produce the newly-revealed
Bible which you profess to have received from Joseph
Smith.
The friends who hand you this will receive your reply.
I am, Sir, yours &c.,
John Davis.
The following is the reply to the foregoing, which his
“ friends” were to call and receive on the Monday follow-
ing the above date, hut did not until a week afterwards,
at which time it had been removed :
Me. John Davis.
Sie—Your letter of January 27th, to “ Me. W. C.
Wandell,” has been, by Elder C. W. Wandell, President
of the Australasian Mission of the Church of Jesus Christ
of Latter-day Saints, presented to the congregation of
said Church in this city, who appointed the undersigned a
Committee to consider it and write you an answer.
We therefore write in reply, that we approve of the
answer made you by Elder Wandell, on the Hyde Park,
on Sunday, the 23rd instant, in reply to your question at
that time, namely—“ If our principles are open to discus-
sion ?” His reply was, “ They are at a proper time and
place.”


We are, therefore, ready to treat with your friends as
to “time” and “place;” and we have appointed Elder
John Jones to be your opponent.
The sentence which you have miscalled (1) a proposi-
tion, we disallow ; and have never maintained that “ The
Bible is so generally corrupt as to be an ‘ unfit’ guide in
faith and morals.” But, if you referred to the Apostle
Orson Pratt’s proposition, as contained in his “ Divine
Authenticity of the Book of Mormon,” page 33, which
reads thus: —“ The Bible and tradition, without further
revelation, an insufficient guide we say, that we agree
with him most heartily, and Eider Jones will defend the
proposition against all your attacks.
Elder Jones will also defend the standard writings of
our Church, namely—The Bible, Book of Mormon, Doc-
trine and Covenants, Voice of Warning, and other writ-
ings of the Twelve Apostles (2) of said Church, against
your charge of “ glaring contradictions provided that
you furnish him with a list of the said supposed contradic-
tions, with a reference to each where it can be found, at
least one day previous to the discussion.
With regard to his producing the inspired translation of
the Bible at the discussion, he will agree to do so, either
in part or in whole, provided that you produce the
original tablets and manuscripts with which it can be
compared.
There is one condition which it will be proper to men-
tion here, namely —that, as Elder Jones will represent
the Church of the Saints, it will be required of you to
represent some acknowledged body of religious people
also.


All other conditions to he settled at the earliest conve-
nience of your friends.
We are, Sir, yours, &c.,
John Batin, A
John Jones, n. Committee.
Wm. Robb, i
And now, Messrs. Editors, since Mr. John Davis has
withdrawn himself from the proposed debate, he will, no
doubt, lecture when, where, and against whatever he
pleases.
I am, Sir, yours, &c.,
JOHN JONES.
February 12.
The following appeared in The Empire of February 17,
1853 :
MORMONISM, OR INFIDELITY UNMASKED.
In Saturday’s issue of The Empire there is an adver-
tisement, signed “John Jones,” purporting to be an
answer to an advertisement of mine which appeared in
Friday’s issue of the Herald, headed “Mormonism, or In-
fidelity unmasked,” as also a communication of mine to C.
W, Wandell, containing two propositions as the ground of
the proposed discussion between him and me.
Had the reply been truthful, I would not have thus
publicly noticed it, as I am determined not to engage in
newspaper squibbing.
In the third paragraph they deny holding the doctrine I
charge them with. They write, “ The sentence which
you have miscalled a proposition we disallow, and have


never maintained that the Bible is so generally corrupt as
to be an unfit guide in faith and morals.” They thus
publicly assert that they “ have never maintained” the
general corruption and unfitness of the Bible as a guide.
Is this truth, or is it evasion ? We shall see. Apostle
Orson Pratt (as he is called), whose work John Jones un-
dertakes to defend, in the 46th page of his collected
pamphlets, when referring to the Old Testament, writes
thus ; —“ What confidence, then, can Catholics or Pro-
testants have in these half-destroyed, corrupted, mutilated
Hebrew manuscripts. All, therefore, is uncertainty as to
the Hebrew and Greek manuscripts of the Old Testament,
they can be proved to be changed, added unto, and cor-
rupted in almost every text ”
What shall we say of those who thus publicly proclaim
that they do not believe in the “ generally corrupt” state
of our Bible, whilst in their authorised publications they
maintain that it is “ corrupt in almost every text.” Can
they be lovers of truth ? I doubt it.
Again, on the same page, 0. Pratt, concerning the
New Testament, writes—“ It is abundantly proved by
various learned writers, that the Greek copies of the New
Testament are awfully corrupted in almost every text.”
Again, page 47, “what shall We say concerning the
Bible’s being a sufficient guide.” Again, page 48, writing
on the divided state of Christendom, he says —“ Satan
has taken advantage of tkeir dark and benighted condition
and robbed the world of a great number of the sacred
books, corrupting those few that remained to such a de-
gree, that he has got the whole of Christendom quarrelling
about them true meaning.”


Here, then, we have one who claims inspiration and a
special call to the apostolic office (Doc. and Cov., page
208), maintaining the awful corruption and unfitness as a
guide, of either the Catholic or Protestant Bible. And
on the other hand, we have priests Batin, Jones, and
Eohb, disavowing! Have the Sydney Branch turned
rebels against the Apostles ? Or, did they tell the truth,
when they said “ they disallowed and never maintained”
the statement contained in my proposition ? I leave the
public to judge.
In the last paragraph, John Jones charges me with
having withdrawn myself from the debate. This he
knew was a false statement. In the presence of many
witnesses, I challenged Wandell personally to discuss the
principles he promulgated. Jones appears in the reply,
and not Wandell; therefore, Wandell has withdrawn.
But it matters not to me whether Wandell or Jones was
my opponent—either would suit me ; if they were willing,
and had not as a body withdrawn, by placing in my way
what they have published to the world—they believe
impossible for the whole world to do—namely, to “ pro-
duce the original tablets and manuscripts” of the Bible,
that they may be compared with their newly revealed
Bible—not the Book of Mormon.
Concerning those manuscripts, Orson Pratt writes (page
45) —“ The whole Catholic and Protestant world cannot
produce the original writings of one single book of either
the Old or New Testaments. The originals are nowhere
to be found among Christians, Pagans, Jews, or Maho-
medans.”
If Wandell, or Jones, or any of them, had desired the


debate to proceed, they would not have asked me (as a
condition of proceeding with the debate) to do what they
acknowledge is impossible for the whole world to perform.
This shews the infidels’ craftiness.
Suppose, however, that I could produce those “ tablets
and manuscripts,” what advantage would be gained by
comparing them with their newly revealed Bible ? None.
In fact, if the autographs of the prophets and apostles
could be produced, the Mormons would not have the
opportunity of claiming a new revelation on the subject.
If they have, as they say, our Bible newly revealed, they
should place it alongside “ the awfully corrupt” one, that
its truthfulness might more prominently appear.
Again, they require that I shall represent a particular
sect; this would do well enough if our debate was to be
on sectarian peculiarities. Such not being the nature of
my proposition, no particular sect was individually and
separately interested. It affects all sects of professing
Christians, whether Catholic or Protestant; this the Mor-
mons knew. Their endeavour, therefore, to shift the sub-
ject to sectarianism shews their desire to shirk the debate.
But men who believe that “ the Devil was turned out of
heaven because he wished to save all mankind from the
consequences of sin,”* may publish anything they please.
Weather and health permitting, I intend to be on the
Racecourse for several Sundays.
JOHN DAVIS,
Canterbury.
* “ Miljenial Staj - ,” N. 18, A.D. 1853. See Note 3.


TO THE PUBLIC.
1. Mr. John Davis, of Canterbury, in a letter published in
your issue of the 17tb instant, has endeavoured to make
the public believe that the Latter-day Saints have shrunk
from a public discussion of their principles, but a slight
examination of the correspondence already published in
relation to this matter, will satisfy any candid mind that
it is Davis that has shrunk from the debate.
2. In his letter dated January 27th, he required the
compliance With a condition, the which, according to his
admission on Sunday, the 13th instant, he knew to be
impossible. The condition referred to is the following—
“lt will be necessary for you to produce the newly
revealed Bible which you profess to have received from
Joseph Smith.”
3. On Sunday, the 18th instant, he stated that Mr.
Bobb, in a conversation, told him that we had not the new
translation —that it was not printed—that the time had
not come for publishing it.
4. Now, when he asked for the production of the
inspired translation at the debate, did he not require that
which he must have necessarily believed to be impossible.
The motive for so doing must be apparent.
5. The condition requiring the production of the tablets,
&c., was relative, and depended upon the one named in
his letter cited above.
6. If Davis had only withdrawn the condition with
which he knew the Saints could not comply, the necessity
for the other wmuld have ceased to exist.
7. When Mr. D., in company with his friend, applied
for an answer to his communication, he was plainly told


by myself that we did not hold the Bible to be an unfit
guide, but that it was an insufficient guide. He was chal-
lenged to produce the word unfit in 0. Pratt’s works.
8. This he has failed to do. It is not to be found in
any of the sentences cited by him.
9. It is true that he has found the word insufficient;
this we allow, and are prepared to meet him upon it.
10. If he does not understand the difference between
an object being unfit and insufficient, let him apply to his
prompter (4). Perhaps he will inform him.
11. Apostle 0. Pratt, in his series of pamphlets on the
Divine authenticity of the Book of Mormon, takes the
following positions : —lst, more revelation, not unscriptu-
ral; 2nd, more revelation, not unreasonable; 3rd, more
revelation necessary.
12. One of the arguments adduced by him in favour of
the last named position, is the admitted corruption of the
Bible, in proof of which he cites the following authors :
Brett, Bonfrerius, Torniellus, St. Chrysostom, Justin,
Jerome, Bellarmine, Cressy, and Usher.
13. (The public will be able to appreciate Davis’s con-
duct, in keeping this fact back.) (5.)
14, From these admissions, 0. Pratt argues the insuffi-
ciency of the Bible, and the necessity for revelation, and,
on the 48th page, he expresses himself in the following
manner :—“ The true cause of all the division which dis-
tracts modern Christendom, is the want of inspired apos-
tles and prophets : they, through wickedness and apostacy,
lost the keys of revelation some seventeen centuries ago,
since which time they have been altogether unable to open
the door of knowledge. Satan has taken advantage of


their dark and benighted condition, and robbed the world
of a great number of sacred books, corrupting those few
that remain to such a degree, that he has got the whole
of Christendom quarreling about their true meaning.”
15. The above quotation will show to the public that
the grand question of difference between Latter-day
Saints and the so-called Christian public, is Revelation (6).
The Latter-day Saints contend that the foundation of the
Church of God is Revelation—its true organisation, living
Apostles and Prophets, &c. Why did not Mr. Davis
meet his propositions boldly, as an enquirer after truth ?
Was he afraid? If so, he shall be accommodated in his
own way j he shall be dealt with as a spoiled child, who
will cry and whimper, and not only disturb its own peace,
but the peace of all around it, unless it gets its own way.
16. Mr. Davis shall be met on the proposition that he
has presented to the public.
17. He, by his advertisements, letter, and discourses,
has stigmatised Mormonism as infidelity. I now, there-
fore, challenge him to public discussion of the following
proposition (7): —
Is Mormonism Infidelity ?
18. Should he agree to meet me on this proposition, he
or his friends may leam the name and address of those
whom I have appointed to make the necessary arrange-
ment, by application to Mr. Robb, of George-street. And
if he does not meet me, I shall esteem him as unworthy
of the waste of any more time, pen, ink, paper, or money.
JOHN JONES.
Saturday, Feb. 26.


MORMONISM, OR INFIDELITY UNMASKED.
To the Public.
1. Mr. John Jones, of Chippendale, has published a
letter in the issue of this paper (The Empire ) on the 26th
of last month, wherein he charges me with endeavouring
to give a false view of the correspondence between me
and Mr. C. W. Wandell.
2. The statements I made in my letter, as published in
this paper on the 17th of last month, I refer the public to,
and still maintain their correctness (8).
3. In the second paragraph, he, in part, states my con-
dition respecting their newly revealed Bible, and says,
“ according to his (my) admission on Sunday, 13th instant,
I knew it to be impossible ; ” and then, in his third para-
graph, ascribes to me a statement which I never made,
nor did I say anything approaching thereto. When Mr.
Jones sent that paragraph to the Press he knew it did
not state the truth, but infidelity has, at all times, endea-
voured to throw a blind over the public mind (9).
4. A week or two previous to my decision to oppose
Mormon Infidelity, or the doctrine of the Latter-day
Saints, as they call themselves, in conversation with Mr,
Robb, I asked him why they did not publish their newly
revealed Bible to the world ? The only answer he made
me was, “ The world would not receive it.” This is what
I stated on Sunday, the 13th. Until Mr. Jones published
his letter, I did not hear, nor did I ever say I heard, that
they (the Mormonites) had not a “ newly revealed Bible.
5. A book may be printed for the use of a society, and
yet not be published to the world. As, for example, the
Private Prayer of the Beardies, or people “ surname!


Israelites.” When a fresh supply is forwarded to them
they, in order to keep them from the world, are com-
manded to “burn” the old ones.
6. I was somewhat surprised when I read, in Mr.
Jones’s letter, the denial of the possession of this hook,
knowing as I do, that they boast of having our Bible re-
revealed to them through Joseph Smith, and in their pub-
lications give extracts from it. See Doctrine and Cove-
nants, page 9, par. 5 ; page 11, par. 21. (10.)
7. Joe Smith professes to have received a Revelation,
commanding him, when he received the Scriptures in full,
he was to “teach them to all men.” This was in Feb-
ruary, 1831. In the month of March of the same year,
he professes to have received power to translate the New
Testament, an extract from which appears in the “ Pear
of Great Price,” under the title of “an extract from a
translation of the Bible, being the xxiv. chap, of Matthew,
commencing with the last verse of the xxiii. chap.” Doc.
and Cov., p. 127, par. 15; and p. 137, par. 11. Pearl,
p. 30.
8. Here, then, we have on the one hand, “Joe Smith,
the Mormon Prophet, Seer, and Revelator,” as they call
him, laying claim to the authorship of this “Newly
Revealed Bible.” And in their Standard Books we have
reference made thereto, and extracts from this “inspired
translation,” as they term it; on the other hand, we have
Mr. Jones disclaiming its possession by them. Who are
we to believe, Mr. John Jones, or Mr. Joe Smith, their
so-called prophet ? (11.)
9. These pretended Revelations are 22 years old —Joe
Smith is about 8 years dead. And yet, although he was


commanded to “ teach them to all men,” Mr. Jones says
“they have not got such a book as the Newly Translated
Bible, and therefore it was impossible for them to produce
it.” Well, I suppose we must believe Mr. Jones, and then
it follows, as a matter of course, that Joe Smith w r as an
arrant impostor and a liar.
10. Paragraphs 4 and 5 depend upon the previous
11. His 6th paragraph is intended to lead the public to
suppose that I had been requested to withdraw my condi-
tion. Such a proposal was never made either publicly or
privately, nor is it even hinted at in their published reply
:o my communication. ( Empire , February 12.)
12. When in company with my friend, I saw Mr.
Jones. He told me “ there was one condition with which
[ should comply before they would hold a discussion with
me—namely, that I should appear as the accredited repre-
sentative of some religious sect.’’ ( Empire , February 12.)
To this condition I demurred, and told him, I never did,
mr would I now, in my controversial movements, appear
is a sectarian. His reply was (nearly verbatim), “Well,
then, there can be no discussion with you, as otherwise we
might be annoyed by every sweep who chose to give a
challenge.” Not even a whisper was uttered about the
impossibility of their complying with my condition. Their
cry, then, of “ impossibility,” in the present state of the
case, can be viewed by the public in no other light than
as a desire to avoid the discussion of my proposition,
namely—“ Is our Bible so generally corrupt as to be an
unfit guide in faith and morals.”
13. The public will now see that the desire to with-


draw a condition was made by me, and not by Mr. Jones,
or any one on bis behalf.
14. Those who have candidly read my letter, as pub-
lished in the Empire of the 17th of last month, are, I have
no doubt, satisfied that I have proved the proposition I
stated for discussion is contained in their publications. As
a further confirmation of my charge against them, I quote
the following from 0. Pratt’s Works, p. 46, par. 46.
“ Mr. Cressy writes in these words ‘ln mj hearing,
Bishop Usher professed, that whereas he had of many
years a desire to publish the New Testament in Greek,
with various lections and annotations, and for that purpose
had used great diligence, and spent much money to furnish
himself with manuscripts ; yet in conclusion, he was forced
to desist utterly, lest if he should ingeniously have noted
all the several differences of reading, which himself had
collected, the incredible multitude of them in almost every
verse, should rather have made men atheistical, than
satisfy them in the true reading of any particular passage.
Let those who take the Bible for their only guide think of
this. If the few manuscripts procured by Bishop Usher,
contains in almost every verse an incredible multitude of
different readings, what grounds have Protestants for con-
fidence in one of these readings more than in another ?
Out of a thousand different manuscripts, differing in almost
every text, who can select the true one ? Indeed, there
would be almost an infinite improbability as to any one
copy being true. Now it was from such a mass of contra-
dictory Greek manuscripts that the English New Testa-
ment was translated.” Again, “ What shall we say, then,
concerning the Bible’s being a sufficient guide ? Can we


rely upon it in its present known corrupted state as being a
faithful record of God’s Word Who knows
that even one verse of the whole Bible has escaped pollu-
tion, so as to convey the same sense now that it did in the
oiiginal ? The Catholics and Protestants do not know
because tradition is too imperfect to give this knowledge.”
So writes Orson Pratt,
15. From the above, it will be seen that when the
Mormonite pretends to argue out of our Scriptures, he does
not mean to bow to the divine authority of the sacred
writers. If he can by specious reasoning make them
speak his own opinions, he will avail himself of their
authority over the multitude, that lie may have greater
success in undermining their faith. Whenever the Bible
is shown to contradict their doctrines, they hide themselves
under the charge of its “ awfully corrupt state.”
16. But is our Bible so “ awfully corrupted” that no
“ confidence ” can be placed in it ? NO, God be thanked,
NO. Can we not rely upon it as a “ faithful record of
God’s Word ?” YES, God be thanked, YES. Nothing
that I can say will so clearly prove this as the following
quotations from the writings of men who spent the greater
part of their lives in studying this subject Great pains
have been taken by learned men, and especially by the
diligent and judicious Dr. Kennicott, to collate the remain-
ing manuscripts of the Hebrew Bible, and the result has
been satisfactory in the highest degree. Many various
readings of a trivial kind have been discovered, but scarcely
any of real consequence. These differences are indeed of
so little moment, that it is sometimes absurdly objected to
the laborious work of Dr. Kennicott, which contains the


collation of nearly 700 (seven hundred) Hebrew manu-
scripts, that it does not enable us to correct a single
important passage in the Old Testament; whereas, that
very circumstance implies that we have in fact derived
from that excellent undertaking the greatest advantage
which could have been wished for by any real Iriend to
revealed religion; namely, the certain knowledge of the
agreement of the copies of the ancient Scriptures, now
extant in their original language, with each other and with
our Bible. This point thus clearly established is still fur-
ther confirmed by the general coincidence of the present
Hebrew copies with ALL the early translations of the
Bible, and particularly with the Septuagint Version, the
earliest of them all, and which was made 270 years before
Christ.” (Tomline’s study of the Bible, part 1, chap. 1.)
The reader will be able to see the points of •omparison
between this and Orson Pratt’s statement.
17. In his 12th paragraph, Mr. Jones says, that “in
proof of the admitted corruption of the Bible, 0. Pratt cites
the following authors,” and then gives a list of names.
18. I now distinctly state, that this assertion of Mr.
Jones’s contains a known falsehood. 0. Pratt does not
refer to all those authors as having admitted the “ awful
corruption” of our Bible.
19. Brett is cited by Pratt as an authority for the
opinion that the originals of Moses and the earlier prophets
were destroyed by the Assyrians about 600 years before
Christ, and that the copies used by Ezra were destroyed
by Antiochus Epiphanes (page 45, 46). This has nothing
to do with the corruption of the Text, as there then were
numerous correct copies in existence. Deut. xvii. chap.
18 v., and vi. chap. 7 v.; Dan. ix. chap. 2v. (12.)


20. With reference to the venerable Usher, it will be
seen by my 14th paragraph that it is merely a hearsay
statement 0. Pratt quotes. He does not quote Usher, as
Jones would lead the public to suppose.
21. Bonfrerius and Torniellus, are cited as noticing
some additions which appear to have been made to some of
the Books, Gen. xxxvi., xxxi.; Deut. xxxiv. Not a word
is said about the corrupt state of the Text. 0. Pratt
might, with equal propriety, have also quoted Tom Paine,
who like himself refers to the same and other similar pas-
sages, as objections against the authenticity and genuine-
ness of the Bible. Infidels, and none but infidels, have
always referred to these passages as standing objections.
But why do they not carry out their principle, and object
to the authenticity of every book to which some future
editor has affixed an account of the author’s death ?
22. Had I so falsely quoted their own writings, as Mr
Jones has done, he might well accuse me of misrepresent-
ing their doctrines. But infidels make a fair show, that
they may the more easily deceive, “ and no marvel, for
Satan transformeth himself into an angel of light.”
23. Mr. Jones’s pretended treatment of me as a
“ spoiled child,” so clearly shows the vexed spirit of the
man, that I pass it by with contempt.
24. When Orson Pratt, the Mormon Apostle, and
Messrs, Jones and Wandell, placed themselves side by
side with the notorious Tom Paine, in their objections to
the genuineness of our Bible, they well knew that such
statements were demonstrated falsehoods. But what can
we expect from men who endeavour to reduce the power
of the Great Jehovah, to that of a clever man. Orson


Pratt writes, “ when man makes light, he does so by ope-
rating upon the substances of nature so as to render the
latent light visible, and in no instance does he create the
light from nothing. Therefore, reasoning from analogy,
we have good grounds for believing that God makes light
the same as man does.” ’ (Great First Cause, p. 4.) In
this quotation, and in the whole of the tract from which it
is taken, Man and God, as regards their creative powers,
are placed upon a level. The atheistical tendency of such
doctrine is too plain to need comment.
25. Mr. Jones’s quibble about the words “ insufficient”
and “ unfit” is, when we consider the subject in hand, so
supremely contemptible as scarcely to deserve a reply. If
we are commanded to appeal to the “ law and testimony
for knowledge, as to what the prophet or priest may teach
us (Isaiah viii. 20), and it at the same time be ‘ awfully
corrupt, in almost every text,” is it not, I ask, not only an
insufficient, but also a totally unfit director ? Again, if we
obey our Lord’s command, and “ search the Scriptures
(John v. 39), and they at the same time be “ awfully cor-
rupt,” will they not give uncertain direction, as to the line
of duty we are to pursue ? Is it not, therefore, not merely
insufficient, but totally unfit for the object it proposes to
accomplish ? If what 0. Pratt says were true, the Bible,
of all books, would be the most unfit to read.
26. To split hairs about the words “ unfit” and “ in-
sufficient,*’ when the salvation of the soul is at stake, is
just about as rational as it would be to tell the mariner,
who by trusting to an incorrect chart, was wrecked, that
it was not an unfit chart that led him astray and caused
the wreck of his vessel, but only an “ insufficient ” one.


Would he not at once contemptuously exclaim, “ Sir, is
it because you think me a madman that you draw such
distinctions where there is no difference ?”
27. The proposition I have placed before the public is
the integrity of the text of our Bible, and its fitness as a
guide in faith and morals. This the Mormonites wish to
avoid. The man who is either afraid or ashamed to have
his foundations examined, must be conscious of a rotten
cause.
28. That our Bible has been preserved almost miracu-
lously pure, has been shown in the quotation from Bishop
Tomline, and will, if possible, more fully appear from the
following statement from the pen of that celebrated bibli-
cal critic. Dr. Adam Clarke“ Notwithstanding all the
helps which the varions manuscripts and ancient versions
afford for the illustration of the Sacred Text, the reader
must not imagine that in those manuscripts and versions
which do contain the whole of the sacred text, there is
any essential defect in matters relating to faith and prac-
tice, and consequently to the salvation of the Christian
THERE is NO such manuscript, there is NO such version.
So has the Divine Providence ordered it, that although a
number of mistakes have been committed by careless
copyists, as well as by careless printers, not one essential
truth of God has been injured or suppressed. In this
respect all is perfect, and the way of the Most High is
made so plain, that even, in the poorest copies,#the way-
faring man, though a fool, destitute of deep learning and
critical abilities, need not err therein. All the OMISSIONS
of the ancient manuscripts put together would not coun-
tenance the omission of one essential doctrine of the
c 2


Gospel relative to faith or morals, and all the additions
countenanced by the whole mass of manuscripts already
collected do not introduce a single point essential to either
faith or manners.” (13.)
I have many more things to write, and quotations to
make from 0. Pratt and others; but, as I have already
written a long letter, and printing is expensive, I must for
the present bid the public adieu.
I will, if possible, be on the race-course next Sabbath.
My subject will be—“ Is Man independent of God :or
did Man in his pre-existent state make this World ?”
JOHN DAVIS,
Canterbury.
19th March, 1853,
*.* The figures in the body of the foregoing Correspondence
between parenthesis refer to the Notes.


NOTES.
Those who take the trouble to compare my question
with that quoted by Mr. Jones from Orson Pratt, will see
that mine has an equal right to be called a proposition.
So much for Jones’s judgment in the matter.
In this reply to my note, the reader is requested to
observe the following particulars. They, the Mormons,
admit as standard Works : —The Bible, Book of Mormon,
Doctrine and Covenants, Yoice of Warning, and other
writings of the Twelve Apostles of their Church. Brevity
prevented me extending these quotations to a much greater
length. The careful reader will not fail to see the object
0. Pratt had in view when he made such assertions ;
namely, to undermine the Divine authority of our Bible,
and thus make room for the blasphemies he subsequently
puts forth.
Take a specimen—“ The creation of something from
nothing is not a truth founded on divine revelation. We
learn from the revealed Truths, which God has been
pleased to give to man, that the sun, moon, stars, heavens,
earth, and all things, were created by Him ; but we no-
where learn in those sacred oracles that any one of these
things were created from nothing. The original words


rendered in our language, create and make, are synonymous
terms, signifying, as we have every reason to believe, the
formation of things out of the original elements; at least,
we are nowhere informed in revelation, that these words
had any other meaning. It has been said, that as God
created all things, and as elements are things, therefore
he must have created them also. But if all the elements
be included among the things created, then the Deity
must have created the elements, or parts of which He
himself consists, which would be the very height of
absurdity, for it would suppose Him to exist and not to
exist at the same time; hence the phrase ‘ all things’
cannot mean the elements, but only the c all things that
are created of the elements. Therefore, the creation of
something from nothing is not a truth founded on divine
revelation.” Great First Cause, p. 3.
Now, what can be more blasphemous than the substance
of the above quotation. God is composed of the same
materials as the elements —but the elements are eternal,
therefore, the elements are God ; that is to say, earth, air,
fire, water, &c., are God. What absurdity!
According to the above theory, there is in reality “no
God,” or in other words, Atheism is the true religion.
The above statement has a special object in view—
namely, to make way for the quotation I have inserted in
the 24th par. of my last letter. Many other quotations
of a similar character might be made. But as Ido not
wish to, unnecessarily, enlarge this pamphlet, one upon the
Holy Spirit shall suffice.
“ The Holy Spirit being one part of the Godhead, is
oi=o a material substance, of the same nature and proper-


ties, in many respects, as the spirits of the Father and Sou.
It exists in vast immeasurable quantities in connexion with
all material worlds. This is called God in the Scriptures,
as well as the Father and Son. God the Father and God
the Son cannot be everywhere present; indeed, they can-
not be even in two places at the same instant; hut God
the Holy Spirit is omnipresent—it extends through all
space, intermingling with all other matter, yet no one
atom of the Holy Spirit can be in two places at the same
instant, which in all cases is an absolute impossibility.
Each atom of the Holy Spirit is intelligent,
and, like all other matter, has solidity, form, and size, and
occupies space Its distinguishing character-
istics from other matter are its almighty powers and infi-
nite wisdom, and many other glorious attributes which
other materials do not possess. If several of the atoms of
this Spirit should unite themselves together into the form
of a person, then this person of the Holy Spirit would be
subject to the same necessity, that is, it could not be
everywhere present.” Kingdom of God, Part 1,, p, 4, 5.
The astonished reader may perhaps enquire what is all
this about ? what is its object ? what is its tendency ?
Its object is to make way for their doctrine, that
“ Adam” (our father Adam, who brought death into our
world, and all the woes attendant thereon), is the only God
with whom we have to do, and to whom alone we pray,
when we say, “ Our Father who art in heaven.” See
Brigham Young’s Sermon in “ Zion’s Watchman,” Nos.
18 and 19.
What a pretty God the Mormons have gotten. Truly
of them it may be said, “ like father, like son.” They


shew themselves worthy of their origin; “of the earth
earthy.” The attempt to materialize the Deity is not
new. It was the practice of all the heathen world, as
may be seen in their personifications of what they supposed
the attributes of Deity should be ; hence the various forms
of idolatry. The Mormons have once more exalted the
“ Goddess of Reason” in their attempts to perform a task
which the Word of God declares to be impossible —“ Canst
thou by searching find out God ?”
Robert Owen, the celebrated Socialist, shewed a little
more honesty of principle when, rejecting the Holy Scrip-
tures, he boldly asserted, “it was absurd to render wor-
ship to a Being about whom we neither knew, nor could
know anything.” I say this assertion was more manly
and honest than the Mormon procedure, as it at once told
you the man and his principles.
This atomic theory has given rise to many wild, un-
manageable theories, and to none more than this of Orson
Pratt, that matter is possessed of the power “ of changing
its own state or condition.” I think we should prepare
for some wonderful change in our world; for if matter he
self-moving” and can “ change its own state or condi-
tion,” perhaps the particles of matter composing the houses
in our towns may take a fit of change and become ships ; or
the matter of which our ships are composed, being “ self-in-
telligent and self-moving,” may hold a consultation as to
the propriety of transforming themselves into water, stone,
or clay, and thus leave us in the lurch, after all our trou-
ble in preparing them for our use. The subject is really
so ridiculous, that one can scarcely treat it with gravity.
0, how unlike the Mormon God is the God of the Bible !


“Do not I fill heaven and earth,” saith the Lord. He
asks the question—“ Where is the house that ye build
unto me ?” (Isaiah 61, 1.) This at once upsets Orson
Pratt’s idea of God occupying “ a few cubic feet of space
about the size of an ordinary man.”
“ God,” says Elder John Jones of Sydney, “is one
eternal round;” or, in the words of 0. Pratt, an “ eternal
series;” which, in plain terms, is eternal nonsense, for to
have a series you must have No. 1 to begin with, and that
which has a beginning is not eternal. But if God be
“ one eternal round,” then there has been an “ eternal
generation of Gods”—which is the Mormon doctrine, and
thus the idea of one self-existent Being is a fallacy, and
our Bible is a book of lies. Yerily it is not for nothing
the Mormons endeavour to sap the foundations of the di-
vine authority of the Bible. This, infidels have in all
ages attempted, but, blessed be God, their attempts are
futile; they may indeed bend their bows against the
Almighty, but their arrows will rebound against themselves
to their utter confusion and dismay, “ when the Lord
ariseth to shake terribly the earth,”
The greater portion of the so-called argument of the
above quotations is built upon the mere supposition of the
words “ create and make,” being synonymous terms, that
is, words signifying one and the same thing ; but, so far
is this supposition from being correct, that we have every
reason to reject it.
Firstly.—lt is well ascertained that the words trans-
lated “ created and made” literally means “ created, to
make;” thus we see the proper signification of “ create”
is to bring into being or existence that which did not pre-


viously exist; and the word “ make,” to put into form or
arrangement that which was brought into existence.
The remarks of Dr. Adam Clarke (a witness well quali-
fied to give evidence upon this point) may not be unac-
ceptable to my readers. Under the word created, he has
the following;—
“ Created. —Caused existence, where previously to this
moment there was no being. The rabbins, who are legiti-
mate judges in a case of verbal criticism on their own
language, are unanimous in asserting that the word bara
expresses the commencement of the existence of a thing,
or egression from nonentity to entity. It does not in its
primary meaning denote the preserving or new forming
things that had previously existed, as some imagine, but
creation in the proper sense of the term, though it has
some other acceptations in other places. The supposition
that God formed all things out of a pre-existing, eternal
nature is certainly absurd ; for if there had been an
eternal nature besides an eternal God, there must have
been two self-existing, independent, and eternal beings,
which is a most palpable contradiction.”
Secondly.—We have Scriptural testimony to this dis-
tinction of signification. The Apostle, writing to the He-
brews, says : “ Through faith we understand the worlds
were framed by the word of God; so that things which
are seen were not made of things which do appear.” Heb.
xi. 3. Now, if matter is eternal, it matters not whether in
separate atoms or in combinations, it must have had, eter-
nally, “form, size, and solidity,” and consequently must
have appeared, or been visible. But this world was made
of things which “ did not appear,” that is, which had neither


“form, size, nor solidity.” Therefore, the matter out of
which this world was made, did not exist eternally. See
also Rom. iv. 17.
In these syllogistic remarks, I have used Orson Pratt’s
definition of matter.
The first verse of the first chapter of Genesis, when trans-
lated, according to Kimchi, Ainsworth, Buxtorf’s Talmudic
Lexicon, and Walton’s Polyglot Bible, reads thus—“ God
in the beginning created the substance of the heavens and
the substance of the earth, that is, the prima materia or first
elements, out of which the heavens and the earth were suc-
cessively formed.” See Dr. A. Clarke.
The Mormons, when laying on hands for the gift of the
Holy Ghost, willingly deceive their converts; for they
must know that the Holy Spirit, according to their doctrines,
is mere intelligence—light or power obtained by study.
Nay, that the Holy Spirit is merely the promise of “eternal
life—the earth and the power thereof, even the earth upon
which we stand.” Doc. & Cov., p. 97, sec. 7.
From this definition, which is Joseph Smith’s, it appears
that when they baptise in the name of the Father, Son, and
Holy Ghost, they use the Christian form for the purpose of
deception. With the forms and claims of divine truth, they
entrap the unwary, and lead them on from one stage to
another, until at last they get them to believe that the
Elders of the Church have absolute control of the destinies
of God’s people ;* then no doctrine, however disgusting or
degrading it may be, is to be disputed or investigated. To
dispute is to doubt; to investigate is to reason upon cer-
* “ Millenial Star,” yol. 14, pp. 274, 276,
D


tain premises laid down, both which states or conditions of
mind are absolutely prohibited in their Church, because
they well know that those who investigate their system in
relation to divine revelation never join them. To doubt
the words of the Elders is to question the voice of God,
and therefore damnable. Doc. & Cov., pp. 158, 165, and
177.
INFALLIBILITY
Is another subject which may with propriety be noticed in
this place. It is contained in the above quotation from
the Millennial Star. Then an “ absolute control
over the destinies of God’s people,” is claimed to be exer-
cised by the “Presidency” and “Priesthood” of the
Mormon Church. The grounds of this right to an absolute
control is stated to be—lst, the unalterable requirements
of the laws of God; and, 2nd, the constant guidance of
the priesthood (in virtue of their ordination) by the Holy
Ghost.
It follows, therefore, as a matter of course, that those
Elders are, and must continually be, infallible —i.e., not
liable at any time to err in judgement. For, to admit
they were liable to error, would destroy their claim to
absolute control. But as their doctrine of infallibility has
various phases, it will be well to consider the various
points contained in the following extracts from their own
writings:—
First, then, we shall notice
COLLECTIVE INFALLIBILITY.
“ You are aware that one of my counsel is gone home,
therefore the first presidency here is not full, so it will be
necessary that another be chosen to fill up the vacancy.


On these matters we always get the voice of the people,
the which, when it is united, is the voice of the Lord.”
See “ Zion’s Watchman,” vol. i. p. 91.
Fox populi vox Dei is the language of the above
extract. But, observe, it must be the “ united voice.”
Here, then, we have the doctrine of Infallibility taught in
relation to numbers ; for, although it may not matter
whether many or few be present, they must be “ united ,”
or infallibility ceases. Supposing, then, that twenty persons
are present, and that only one dissents from the proposition
before the meeting ? Infallibility does not exist, and
therefore the decision of Ttl of the assembly is not “ the
voice of God.” What a monstrous doctrine this! If
infallibility is thus measured by quantity, by what rule is
the measurement to be taken ? Suppose 900 persons are
present, and that 10 or -§V dissent from the proposition ?
Here, again, infallibility is tossed to the winds. But,
supposing this same proposition be again brought before
the same 900 persons, and that during the interval that
has elapsed, the former dissentients are induced to change
their minds, and that upon the second time of voting, a
united, or in other words, unanimous vote is given, up
starts Infallibility in all the panoply of her power and
plenitude of her glory. Truly, this is a wonderful—a
mighty transformation; 890 fallible erring mortals are,
by the addition of 10 equally fallible and erring sons of
Adam, transformed into one whole infallible. That is,
900 nothings make one something; or, in other words, 900
purblind persons become, when united in their decisions.
One Omniscient God. For the faculty of infallibility
must, of necessity, pre-suppose the existence of the attribute


Omniscience in the being or beings claiming it. To claim
infallibility for any one being or number of beings who do
not possess the attribute of Omniscience, is irrational—is
absurd.
Nihil tam absurdam, quod non dictum sit ah aliquo pbilosophorum.
In the above extract we perceive the deference that is
paid to the voice of the people, and, if the subject rested
here, we would be led to suppose that in the Mormon
Church the people were everything, and the elders subser-
vient to their wishes ; we now come, however, to some-
thing like turning the tables. Upon the same day, and
upon the same occasion that the above remarkable words
were uttered by Augustus Farnham, then President of the
Sydney branch, he gave utterance to the following:—
“ That Paul counselled to be subject to the powers that
“be, and as the Saviour said, ‘ Many did err not under-
“ standing the Scriptures so / may say, many do err not
“ understanding the will of the Lord, This will is not
“ written. The Lord said, ‘ I will write my law in their
“ hearts.’ Honour the Counsel belonging to the Church
“ that has been appointed by the first Presidency. This
“ appointment cannot be set aside ; it has also been con-
“ firmed by a vote of the Conference. The instructions of
“ this Counsel being sustained by the voice of the Gonfer-
“ ence, is the voice of the Lord.” Ibid, p. 93.
In the above extract we have the following state-
ments :
1. Many err through ignorance of Scripture.
2. Many err through not understanding an un-written
3. The un-written is written upon their hearts.


4. The branch presidency or counsel appointed by the
first president to be honored.
5. The counsel thus appointed cannot be set aside.
6. The instructions of this said counsel when backed by
the voice of the people becomes the voice of the
Lord.
Ist Point.—What is Scripture —it comes from the
Latin Scriptura, which signifies—to write —Scripture, then,
is that which is written. Therefore, when Jesus said,
“Ye do err not knowing the Scriptures,” he condemned
his hearers for not being better acquainted with the
Word of the Lord us written. In no case does He
condemn his hearers for not understanding an un-written
law.
2nd Point.—We are called upon to obey the un-written
will of God. If such be the case, a question naturally
arises—How are we to become acquainted with this
unwritten will of God. In the
3rd Point—We are told that this unwritten law is
“ written upon their hearts,” —the hearts of whom ? If
we trust the Scriptures for an answer they tell us—-the
heart of every believing Israelite. And the object to be
obtained by God in thus writing this law upon their
hearts is also clearly stated, “ And they shall teach no
more every man his neighbour, and every man his brother,
saying know the Lord ; for they shall all know me, from
the least of them unto the greatest of them, saith the
Lord : for / will forgive their iniquity, and remember their
sin no more ” —Jeremiah xxxi. 33, 34. Thus, then, we
at once perceive a manifest contradiction between Mor-
monism and the Bible upon this point also. Mormonism
d 3


says, “ Many err not understanding the unwritten law.
although that law is written upon their hearts.
The Bible says this unwritten law will be written upon
the hearts of every believing Israelite, and that they shall
all so know or understand it as to require no other
instructor: because they thus know God, and rejoice in
union and communion with him. The least or humblest
in the land, as well as the greatest or most exalted
amongst them, are to be alike in this respect. They shall
know their sins forgiven. Thus the Word of God.
But as we have seen that Mormonism contradicts the
Bible upon this point, perhaps there is another contradic-
tion connected herewith. The 4th point says: “ The
counsel appointed by the first presidency is to be honoured.’
Why does this claim to honor follow so close upon the
quotation, the law written upon their hearts—but to show
the reason why honor should be given, namely—
That upon the hearts of the counsel, presidency, or
priesthood, is the law of God written, and, therefore, the
necessity of the people attending to priestly instruction ;
lest, by not understanding it they should commit sin.
That this priestly exaltation is the point intended to be
carried is plain from the position they claim to occupy by
virtue of their appointment by the head of their Church.
This appointment cannot be set aside.” An hour or so
before this we heard that the voice of the people was the
voice of God, and dear Farnham tells them they cannot
set aside his appointment. No, not if he were the great-
est vagabond the earth could produce, the Conference over
which he presided dare not disturb his appointment. If
they wanted to remove him, they should take a journey to


the Great Salt Lake Valley, and lodge their complaint
before the First Presidency, by whom alone all bishops and
high priests are to be tried. “ And again, no bishop or
high priest, who shall be set apart for this ministry, shall
be tried or condemned for any crime, save it be before the
First Presidency of the Church.” Doc. & Cov., p. 160.
0, ye Australian Mormons, what now becomes of your
Voxpopuli vox Dei. Be you ever so united in your wish
to get rid of a wicked president (if you should have one),
your union will not avail you. No ! no infallibility in
your decisions now. You have no local power by which
to rid you of a depraved president.- 0, awake—examine
the slavery to which you have subjected yourselves. No
civil liberty for you ! You dare not interfere with the
appointments of your rulers.
You are told that your united voice is the voice of God,
but have you considered what the circumstances are under
which this apparently great privilege is conceded to you.
It is only when you agree with the instructions given by
your Presidency or Council. This you will find to be the
case if you examine the subject of our last or 6ih point.
“ The instructions of this Council being sustained by the
voice of the Conference, is the voice of the Lord.” Here,
again, we have infallibility under another form. The
decisions of the Conference and the Council united become
the voice of God ; but suppose a wicked president gives
counsel with which the Conference disagrees, there is no
authority attached to the vote. And as you possess no
power to meddle with his appointment, he may act as
independently of you as he does when establishing his
mission, and you are bound by the rules of your associa-


tion to obey his mandates, if he utters them in the name
of the Lord: as, according to the laws of your Church,
each individual member of the priesthood is the voice of
God to the people, or, in other words, infallible. When,
therefore, they tell you that the “ voice of Conference is
the voice of God,” it is but a sham—a mockery, by which
these arrant imposters puff up the minds of their followers,
to lead them off the scent, and thus draw them, by
degrees, into the most debasing slavery ; a slavery which
debases reason, thereby trampling in the dust that lirth-
right of every man — Liberty. They profess to give you
liberty, and free you from the galling yoke of priesfcraft
and priestly aggrandisement.
“ The world,” says President Pochards, “is enshvecl
by priestcraft and superstition, which darken the mind, and
destroy the capacity of the soul, and a just sense of the
obligations men are under to one another, both in heir
temporal and spiritual relations.” “ Mill. Star,” vol.dv,
p. 277.
Bear in mind, these kind-hearted, benevolent, anddii-
lanthropic elders of the Mormon Church, lament thesad-
effects of priestly rule and government throughout the
world. What sort of tears have they shed ? Did heir
weeping arise from cutting onions, or rather have theynot
shed what are proverbially called “crocodile tear?”
The following extracts will shew; —
INDIVIDUAL INFALLIBILITY OF THE PRIESTHOOD.
“ And, behold, and 10, this is an ensample unt< all
those who are ordained unto this priesthood, wlose
mission is appointed unto them to go forth; and ths is
the ensample unto them, that they shall speak as hey


are moved by the Holy Ghost, and whatsoever they shall
speak, when moved upon by the Holy Ghost, shall be
Scripture, shall he the will of the Lord, shall he the mind
of the Lord, shall be the Word of the Lord, shall he the
voice of the Lord, and the power of God unto salvation :
behold this is the promise of the Lord unto you, 0 be my
servants.”—Doc. and Cov. pp. 158-9.
In the above we have the following points ;
1. The positive promise of the Holy Spirit to all tire
priesthood.
2. Whatsoever they shall speak shall be the will of the
Lord, and the power of God unto salvation.
My dear Mormon readers, do you not see the error into
which you were led in supposing you possessed the
slightest power in the Church of which you are members.
You have a Conference, it is true, but of what use is it ?
whatever your president says, you must agree to, as you
have already acknowledged him to be the “ Voice of
God,” and whatsoever he says is, therefore, and must be
law, for by resisting him you would professedly be
resisting “the mind, the will,” “the Word, and Hie
Voice of God”: and in so doing you would reject, what,
by your connection, you acknowledge to be the “ power of
God unto salvation.”
The claim set forth in the above quotation is a very
important one. Inspiration direct from heaven, giving a
positive claim to absolute “ control over the destinies of
God People.”
Before such a claim can be substantiated, evidence
of a stronger nature than mere assertion must be pro-
duced. Any person may say he is inspired. We,


therefore, as rational and accountable creatures, have a
right to enquire. What evidence do you produce, that I
may examine it and test it in the crucible of reason, guided
by the word of revelation we already have ?
You answer, “we are called with the same calling
as were the Apostles in the time of Christ, and therefore
are in possession of the same power and authority.”
Again reason rejoins. If you were called, as were
the Apostles of old, and possess the same authority, why
do you not produce testimonials of the same character,
viz.—Working all manner of miracle ?
You answer, “ We have the gifts of healing amongst
us, but are not permitted to exercise that power upon any
who have not faith to be healed, and also desire it.”
Reason—guided by the history of Christ and his Apostles,
replies:—This position destroys your premises, as the
Apostles of Christ went forth amongst the unbelievers and
healed all manner of diseases, for the purpose of attesting
the divine origin of their doctrine and authority ; and that
such was the effect produced, is evident from the rapid
spread of the Christian doctrine, as well as from such
expressions as the following; “We know thou art a
teacher come from God : for no man can do these miracles
that thou doest, except God be with him.” When, then,
and not till then, Mr. Mormon, you can do this, you may
present your claim to absolute authority.
Let us now look at another link in this chain of infalli-
bility. In an article concerning the orderly government
of the Church, we read, “ the exercise of every function
of the body or priesthood produces life as its legitimate
fruit, and thus salvation flows unto the people.” “ And
those saints who can commit their souls’ salvation unto the


priesthood, but cannot their money, are making a mock of
their profession, and fooling away their time.”
Again, “Be not over anxious, but be ye ready to
respond to the counsel of God’s servants, who control the
destinies of His people.” “ Millennial Star,” vol. 14, pp.
273, 275, 276.
The following is from the address of Heber C. Kern-
hall, delivered in the Tabernacle, Great Salt Lake City,
April 2nd, 1854 :
“ God will not be trifled with ; neither will his servants;
“ their words have got to be fulfilled, and they are the
“ men that are to mould you.”
From these extracts we learn —
1. The priesthood constitute the body or Church.
2. The orderly exercise of their office is life producing.
3. That this life works salvation in the people.
It may, perhaps, be objected, that the disjunctive “ or”
between the words “ Body and Priesthood,” does not
make the two words identical. If such is not the inten-
tion, why place them in contrast with “ people ?”
4. That as the salvation of the soul is in the hands of
the priesthood, so also is the disposal of the money
of each member of the Church.
5. That our minds are to be moulded by the priesthood.
If we had no other evidence of the slavish tendency of
Mormonism than the above five points, there is sufficient
in these to stamp the Mormon system as the most despotic
that ever existed upon the earth. The Mormon priest-
hood thus declare, that unless they have the absolute con-
trol even of all the money, it is no use for any to remain
members of society. Away, away for ever then with


Orson Pratt’s tirade against priestly domination and its
consequent evils. 0, ye Mormon rulers—hypocritical de-
claimed against the tyranny of the priesthood of Christen-
dom ; how can ye escape the damnation of hell ? Ye come
with the clothing of liberty—calling upon all to cast oft’
their chains—assert their freedom of thought—judge all
things for themselves, and enter into the liberty of the
children of God; hut, as soon as your victims are fast
within the fair formed net you have cast around them, free-
dom is no more !—liberty of thought vanishes—the priest-
hood are infallible salvation flows from them; they,
therefore, have absolute control of the souls and bodies of
their victims. Hence, your followers must not —dare not
think for themselves.
0, Popery, Popery, under another name ! How thou
dost struggle to exalt the ,clergy and depress the laity—
destroying freedom of action wherever thy government
is submitted to !
How unlike the apostles of the meek and lowly Jesus.
They, although proving the infallibility of their doctrine
by numerous signs and wonders, in healing the sick and
raising the dead to life, would not be “ lords over God’s
heritage.” They did not claim the right to dispose of the
people s money : ‘ 4 Is it not thine own, and in thine own
power ?” was their language. See the Apostle Paul,
working with his own hands to support himself. Was this
lording it over the people’s money ?■ St. Paul’s highest
ambition was to depress himself and exalt his Master.
He desired to be a “ fellow helper of the people on their
way to eternal glory. Jesus, and Jesus alone, was ever
held up to View. No trusting to the infallibility of the


preacher at the expense of private judgment. “ Prove all
things: hold fast that which is good,” was their constant
injunction, with a full assurance, that if they laid aside
every weight and their besetting sins, steadily looking
unto Jesus, they would have an unction from the Holy
One, even the Spirit of Truth, to guide them into all truth.
Pieader, is it thus with you.
The Mormon system differs from Popery in its idea of
infallibility in a very material point. Popery has not yet
settled the question as to whether infallibility resides in the
Pope as an attribute of his office, in a general council, or in
both united. But as we have shown Mormonism claims
infallibility for each of its members when they unite in car-
rying a proposition—they then become the “ voice of God,”
then we have the infallibility of the priesthood, of course
in a higher degree, otherwise they could not claim the
right to “control the destinies” of the people. “Your
conscience is mine,” then, is the language of the Mormon
priesthood as well as of the Church of Rome. But what
saith the Scripture ? —“ We must all appear before the
judgment seat of Christ: so, then, every one of us shall
give account of himself to God.” Rom. xiv.
To consider the influence of the higher grades of infal-
libility, as possessed by the quorum of the seventy, and
the twelve apostles, and the bishops, is needless, as it all
flows from one source or centre —Universal Bishoprxck.
“ I will be merciful unto you, for I have given unto you
the kingdom, and the keys of the mysteries of the king-
dom shall not be taken from my servant, Joseph Smith,
junior.” So says Joseph Smith, see Doc. & Coy., p. 155.
“ I myself hold the keys of this last dispensation, and


will foe eyee hold them, both in time and in eternity.”
Prophet, pp. 195, 196.
This bangs the Pope. Poor old Pope has claimed infal-
libility whilst walking on terra firma, and asserted his right
to rule in “ heaven, earth, and hell,” but never to autho-
rity over the Church after he died. Not so, however, is
it with Joe Smith—he rules in eternity also. The Pope
does not appoint his own successor, into him infallibility is
crammed by the majority of the conclave of Cardinals.
How any number of acknowledged fallibles can cram infal-
libility into one of their own number is a nut too hard for
common sense to crack. Here again the Pope is outdone.
Joe Smith appoints his own successor, and “ none other is
to be attended to”—Doc. & Cov., p. 130. Query—Did
Joe Smith ordain Brigham Young ? *xf not, the Mormons
have no leader.
The poor Pope has been called Antichrist, and truly
there are, and have been “ many Antichristsbut the
Apostle speaks of a character that in its embodieraent
shall exalt himself above all that is called God, or that is
worshipped or honoured. Is not this Joe Smith ? Are
not all the principles of Anti-Christianism centred in him 1
He claims the government of this dispensation in the spirit
world, and consequently is the source of the measure of
infallibility that rests on, or dwells in Brigham Ymng (the
present leader); and he also is the source of infalibility to
the priesthood, which they receive by virtue of their
appointment from him. Here then is a new cbctrine—
the transmission of infallibility. Truly, brother Pidgeon
was right when he took as a text, “ Mormonism is a lie:’
But then the Mormons may here object, “ Si’, you do


us wrong in speaking thus of our claim to infallibility by
virtue of our appointment. True, we must be regularly
ordained; but then we are under the constant guidance of
the Holy Spirit, whom you acknowledge as the guide into
all truth.” True, Mr. Mormon, we acknowledge the Holy
Spirit as the guide into all truth : but then, how can he
possess this knowledge and power if he is not a perfect
being ? Your Holy Spirit is something gained by study—
not the direct influence of God upon the believer’s heart,
instructing him in things to come. By the use you make
of the Holy Spirit of the Bible you only lie in wait to
deceive. You under the influence of the Holy Spirit?
Yes, truly, but it is the one of your own creating ; for you
boldly tell us he is not yet a complete God. “He also
may obtain glory with the Father, even as Jesus does.
Yea, a fulness of the Godhead by himself ” (Spencer’s
letters, p. 64.) Here, then, you advance a step further to
direct atheism, and resolve all creative energy and direct-
ing power into mere intelligence, and thus every intelligent
being is the Holy Spirit, because that signifies light or
intelligence.
I feel it very difficult to condense my thoughts upon this
point. Priestly dominion is an awful theme—a tremen-
dous power to be exercised by any man ; but, blessed be
God we need not believe it—the Bible is against it. The
following extract from Weaver’s View of Puseyism shall
conclude this part of our subject:—
“ See the Puseyite clergyman of a parish. He assumes
to himself the direction, the sole direction of his parishion-
ers in their eternal concerns. He alone has a right to
make them “ members of Christ, Children of God, and in-


heritors of the kingdom of heaven'’ by the sacrament of
baptism, which, as administered by him of the apostolical
succession, not only regenerates them, but justifies, and
sanctifies, and confers upon them all spiritual blessings.
No one but himself has authority to instruct them in the
way of salvation, or to direct them in the way to heaven.
At length, they draw near to their final account, when it
becomes all-important that they have “administered to
them, as it is termed, “ the consolations of religion.” He
reads the prayers and service appointed, administers to
them the sacrament, which, in his hands, communicates
life to the soul, and having pronounced the absolution of
their sin as professing to be penitent and believing, he dis-
misses them for heaven. Now, what is the obvious ten-
dency of such power as this upon the mind ? Feeling
that their everlasting interests are in so great a degree in
his hands, they must, of course, look up to him with a sort
of awe, bordering upon dread; nor will they dare to dis-
please him. Nothing remains for them but an implicit
obedience to his injunctions, and the reception of his say-
ings as unerring truth. And still more will this be the
case, if he can persuade the congregation of his hearers
that he is a “ successor of the apostles,” that there is an
efficacy in the sacraments as administered by him ; and
that, by his consecration of the elements, he can bring
down the presence of Christ in the bread and wine ! How
sacred must be the person of such a man ! Can any one
doubt then that these tenets exalt the power of the clergy ?
That they minister to the pride and ambition of the human
heart ?”
“ It may not be amiss to remark that it was not on


such grounds as the above, did Paul require that the
Christians at Thessalonica should “ esteem highly in love”
those that were “ over them in the Lordnot on such
grounds did he himself claim the regard of those to whom
he wrote. He could appeal to the Ephesian Bishops
(emaKOTTovs') that, when amongst them, he had been
“ serving the Lord with all humility of mind ; and to the
church over whom they had been made bishops, in writing
to them, he calls himself “ less than the least of all saints.”
And, when writing to the Corinthian Church, it will be
seen that he possesses the same spirit. Hence he uses
such expressions as these—“ I have planted, Apollos wa-
tered, but God gave the increase. So then, neither is he
that planteth anything, neither he that watereth, but God,
that giveth the increase.” Again, “ Not I, but the grace
of God that was with me.” “By the grace of God lam
that I am.”
“ The doctrines of grace, such as free forgiveness in the
name of Christ, justification freely by grace through the
redemption that is in Jesus Christ, salvation by grace
through faith, and eternal life as the gift of God, when
rightly understood and believed by a convinced sinner, will
burst the bonds of sin, and break the bonds of Satan; and
by causing the Holy Spirit to take possession of the soul
will introduce it into a state of sacred freedom : and the
soul will delightfully say in consequence, “ 0 Lord, truly
I am thy servant, I am thy servant —thou hast loosed my
bonds.” But what else will produce such freedom ? Not
assuredly the sacraments —the belonging to the so-called
Apostolical Church —or a rigid adherence to rites and
ceremonies, &c., without the mind being informed, or an
£ 4


intelligent faith produced. These sacraments, these ad-
herences, in themselves have no adaptation for the pur-
pose. They communicate no knowledge, they give no
understanding, they impart no true faith, they bring no
promises to the mind, that is well-applied promises, to fill
it with joy and peace in believing, nor can, in such cases,
“ the joy of the Lord be our strength.” Should the con-
science of a man be awakened, what must he do ? ‘ Do,’
says a Puseyite, ‘he must repent and believe, it is true ;
but by all means he must comfort himself with his bap-
tism, with his relation to the true Church, and he must
take the Lord’s supper, and pray, and do as well as he
can. But what adaptation is there in all this to ease his
conscience, and set his mind at liberty ? If he were led
to the cross of Christ, and shown that therein God’s holi-
ness was cleared, his justice satisfied, his law established,
so that with infinite “ wisdom and prudence,” God can
“ glorify his mercy” in pardoning and saving the chief of
sinners, there -would indeed be something to relieve him :
but not so in the way above specified. And then, what
adaptation is there in adverting to sacraments, to church
relation, to the power of the ministry to induce him to re-
nounce his former servitude of sin, and to live as “ the
Lord’s freeman ?” Ah, an apostle would teach us that it
is the blood of Christ believed in, that, while it “ purges
the conscience from dead works,” disposes “to serve the
living God.” This sacramental religion, this trusting to
the church and its ministry, therefore, not only keeps the
sinner in his state of slavery, but stands in the way of his
being brought out into the 4 liberty’ of 4 the Spirit of God.’
-44 But there is a direct mental bondage produced by


this Puseyism or High-churchism. What is its language ?
* To the episcopal clergy, and to them alone, belong the
ministry of the word and sacraments ; and your salvation
is in great danger, to say the least, if you attend to other
ministrations.’ Suppose, then, that a man lives in a
parish wherein such a clergyman resides. As his parish-
ioner, he must then receive him as his sole spiritual guide.
The man, of course, if he is convinced of sin, will desire a
‘ servant of the most high God,’ who can and will ‘ show
him the way to salvation but, alas ! it so happens, that
his‘authorized’ guide does not know the way himself.
Again ; the parishioner may be already in the way, and
wishes to be furthered in it —the same difficulty occurs.
The clergyman neither is in it, or knows it, and of course
is utterly unfit to guide or lead others, And yet he must
attend his parish church, and sit under his ministry ? Is
not this bondage ? Does not such Puseyism and High-
churchism tend to enslave the mind ? But what makes it
more grievous—in the same parish there is a ministry
where I may not only learn the way of salvation, but may
be furthered in it ; and under which I may be
quickened, comforted, and established ; but the minister
is an * unauthorized teacher’ —‘ it is dangerous to hear
him”—if he hears him, he not only endangers his salva-
tion, but the clergyman, the esquire, the churchwardens—
all become his enemy ; and whatever charities may exist
in the parish he shall not partake of them. Is not all this
calculated to bring his mind into a state of slavery ?—yes,
of complete slavery. Nor is this all: the unhappy man
has a feeling for his neighbours who are in the same
wretched situation ! The good Lord, in His mercy, inter-


pose to deliver our fellow creatures and fellow countrymen
from such thraldom!
“ The tenet concerning the necessity, or, at least, the
general necessity of the sacraments, urged as they are as
necessary to salvation, induces mental slavery. A child
is bom to a parishioner—it is unexpectedly seized with
convulsions —it is on the point of death—that it may he
saved, it must be baptized ; but 10, the minister who alone
can administer the ordinance effectually is not at hand!
The father, the mother, the nurse, are all of them con-
cerned for the future welfare of the child —but what can
they do ? They wait, and wait, and wait in vain; and
the child has expired without the saving rite ! Is not an
exposure to such a state of mind, a bondage ? Yes ; even
though the parents may hope that the will will be taken
for the deed. The same may be said in the case of the
sacrament of the Lord’s Supper, as to its administration to
the dying. Both the dying man himself and his attendant
friends may suffer greatly in their minds, having been
taught by their minister to lay such stress upon the sacra-
ments.
“Moreover, I must surrender, it seems, my private
judgment to the judgment of the Church and to my minis-
ter, and believe as they believe. This doctrine may very
well accord with the feelings of the slothful, who will not
take the trouble to think for themselves; but to one who
knows how to value his intelligent and voluntary nature,
and who deems himself responsible for the use of his intel-
lects and will, it must necessarily be repulsive; and perpe-
tually to have enforced upon his belief what he deems
absurd and unscriptural can be considered as nothing less


than a state of bondage. Yes, God has made me a free
agent; my body may be imprisoned, my mouth may be
gagged, but my mind must think ; and if I am not allowed
to think freely, I am in bondage ; and this bondage becomes
more intolerable, when I consider that the God who made
me, and gave me my thinking powers, requires me to
search the Scriptures for myself, to see whether the things
I am told are so or not —requires me to ‘ prove all things
and to hold fast to that which is good,’ and not to
‘ believe every spirit, but to try the spirits whether they
are of God.’ If, then, I find myself forbidden by man to
think and judge, while I am required to do both by my
Maker, am I not held in mental bondage ? But, ‘ whether
it be right to hearken unto man rather than unto God,’ let
the reader judge.”
The statement referred to is as follows: —“ When the
Father made proposals concerning the salvation of man,
when he should sin on the earth, Jesus offered to redeem
all who would repent and keep a celestial law ; Lucifer,
a younger brother, offered to save all; Jesus’s offer
was accepted by the Father, and Lucifer’s was rejected ;
and yet Lucifer’s proposition appeared so plausible—so
much more liberal, noble, benevolent, and kind-hearted —
that one third part of the sons of God believed it and
joined Lucifer’s standard.
“ That was what made division hi Heaven, and war
followed ; Lucifer, with one third of the spirits in Heaven,
which he drew around him by his sophistry and false phi-
lanthropy, declared war against Jesus and the two thirds


that rallied round his standard to maintain the truth ;
and they fought until Lucifer and his followers were over-
come, and cast out of Heaven, even unto the earth, and
were cursed with this curse, even that they should not
receive unto themselves bodies on the earth, like the two
thirds who maintained their integrity, and fought by the
side of Jesus.
“ This curse came through imbibing and exercising a
false spirit—a sympathising spirit—a spirit that will sym-
pathise with misery or punishment, when misery is justly
due by punishment. Lucifer made his followers believe
that he was a far more tender hearted and merciful being
than Jesus, and got all he could to help him sympathise
for the miseries that must follow the abominable crimes
of man on the earth ; that they went it for salvation any
how—right or wrong ; they were so good—so holy, and
so benevolent—they could not do otherwise.
“ But what is the benevolence of Heaven —the sympa-
thy of the Holy Ones in such matters ? Down to hell,
where David went. Down to hell, ye murderers ! Ye
whose sins cannot be pardoned—ye have taken the blood
of your fellows, and ye can’t restore it. Therefore, howl
ye, for hot wrath is upon you, and he that sitteth in the
heavens will laugh at your calamity, and mock when your
fear cometh.” “ Millennial Star,” vol. 14, p. 278.
Eeader, I will not tire you with further quotations from
this precious article ! The above paragraphs give the
whole spirit of the subject. From it we learn the follow-
ing particulars:—
First—That God held a council with the spirits of
men, as to what should be done with man—or, in


other words, themselves, when they would sin on the
earth.
Now, this idea of a council—of war, we might call it —-
is in direct opposition to the doctrine of pre-science, as
taught in the Word of God. “ Who hath directed the
spirit of the Lord: or, being His counsellor hath taught ?
With whom took He counsel ? and who instructed Him,
and taught Him in the path of judgment: and taught
Him knowledge, and shewed to Him the way of under-
standing?” Isaiah xl. 13, 14. The whole of the chap-
ter is in direct opposition to Mormon ideas of Deity,
Secondly—We learn that Lucifer, or the Devil, was
the younger brother of our Lord Jesus Christ.
Now this idea contradicts the doctrine of the essential
divinity of the Lord Jesus, as taught in the Holy Scrip-
tures. “ For by Him were all things created that are in
heaven, and that are in earth, visible and invisible, whe-
ther they be thrones or dominions, or principalities, or
powers: all things were created by Him, and for Him.
And He is before all things, and by Him all things con-
sist ” Col. i. 16, 17,
Thirdly—We learn that if the Devil had his will, not
one soul would be lost.
Now this idea is in direct opposition to the character
given of him by the Word of God. “Be sober, be vigi-
lant ; because your adversary the devil, as a roaring
lion, walketh about seeking whom he may devour.”
1 Peter v. 8.
“Ye are of your father the devil, and the lusts (or
desires) of your father ye will do. He was a murderer
from the beginning, and abode not in the truth, because


there is no truth in him. When he speaketh a lie, he
speaketh of his own : for he is a liar , and the father of
it.” John viii. 44.
Fourthly—We learn that philanthropy, or man love,
caused war in Heaven, and that the poor Devil was beaten,
because Jesus had two to fight against his (the Devil’s) one.
Let the reader bear in mind that, according to Mormon
doctrine, these were the spirits of men fighting against
their brother spirits in the spirit world.
Now this idea contradicts the victorious character of
Christ in single combat, as given in the Holy Scriptures.
“I have trodden the wine-press alone, and of the
people there was none with me; therefore mine own arm
brought salvation unto me.” Isa. Ixiii. 35.
“ For this purpose was the Son of God manifested,
that He might destroy the works of the devil.” 1 Jolm
iii. 8 ; Heb. ii. 14, 15 ; Isa. xxv. 8.
Here the Mormons may object—ls it not written in
your Scriptures that there was “ war in Heaven—that
Michael and his angels fought against the Devil and his
angels, and beat them, and cast them out into the earth ? ”
Lev. xii. 7 —13.
I answer. The battle there described has yet to take
place ; this is evident from its connexion with the context,
and the careful reader will see that it is prophetic of the
future purgation of the Church through the fire of perse-
cution, and also the final triumph of truth over error.
But the Mormons, by their own doctrine, are shut out
from such objection ; because they never apply the name
Michael to Jesus, but to Adam, as the supreme God of
this world, and to whom alone we are to pray.


Fifthly—We learn that all who sympathise with their
fellow men in misery are followers of the Devil.
“ Sympathise ! ” What is this so-called devilish princi-
ple ? Why, it is to be affected by the feelings of another
—to have mutual feeling.
Now the condemnation of such feelings contradicts the
teachings of God’s Word. “ Therefore, all things what-
soever ye would that men should do unto you, do ye even
so to them ; for this is the law and the prophets.” “If
thine enemy hunger, feed him; if he thirst, give him
drink.” Matt. vii. 12; Rom. xii. 20.
Sixthly—We are here taught that murder is an unpar-
donable sin.
Now this idea also contradicts the whole tenor of the
Word of God. For Jesus prayed for his murderers,
saying—“ Father, forgive them, for they know not what
they do.” John xxiii. 34. The martyr Stephen, in the
moment of death, prayed for his murderers. “ Lord,
lay not this sin to their charge.” Acts vii. 60. “ Love
your enemies, bless them that curse you, do good to them
that hate you, and pray for them that despitefully use you
and persecute you; that ye may be the children of your
Father which is in heaven.” Matt. v. 44, 45.
Seventhly—We are here taught, that because of the
murder David committed, he was sent to hell.
Now this idea is also in direct opposition to the plain
statements of the Bible. “ And Nathan said unto David,
the Lord also hath put away thy sin; thou shalt not
die.” 1 Sam. xii. 13.
To put away sin is to pardon it, which implies that,
although the temporal consequences of our transgressions


may continue, yet the spiritual punishment is removed,
and a clear sense of such removal imprinted on the mind.
This David rejoiced in—“ I acknowledged my sin unto
thee, and mine iniquity have I not hid. I said, I will
confess my transgressions unto the Lord; and thou for-
gavest the iniquity of my sin.” Ps. xxxii. 5. This the
believer in the present day rejoices in. “If we confess
our sins, He is faithful and just to forgive us our sins, and
to cleanse us from all unrighteousness.” 1 John i. 9.
Eighthly —From the entire quotation we learn that the
Mormon system is utter selfishness—that benevolence has
no part or lot in their arrangements ; thus stamping their
system as being, in every sense of the word, “ earthly,
sensual, and devilish.” “ Devilish ” for malignity in all
its withering power, is Mormonism. No wonder then that
we hear of such deeds of darkness Laving been commit-
ted and sanctioned by their leading men in their own dear
land of Deseret, as the following statement of One Hun-
dred and Fifteen Emigrants who spent a winter at Salt
Lake when on their way to California testifies ;
“ s—That the summary manner in which persons are
sometimes privately despatched and put out of the way,
without trial, judge, or jury, if they happen to he obnoxious
to the Mormon Church, is abhorrent to humanity, recreant
of justice, and unworthy of a civilised and Christian peo-
ple. 6 —That the system of having a class of persons
called ‘ Danites, 5 appointed for the express purpose of
pursuing obnoxious individuals not only throughout their
•wn dominions, but to other countries, in order to pri-
vately despatch them , is murderous, and in imitation of the
savage, who with relentless hate pursues his victim to


death.” Extract from a series of Resolutions published
in California, A.D. 1851.
How unlike the Godlike system of self-sacrificing bene-
volence as taught by our Saviour Jesus. “ Who though
he was rich, yet for our sakes became poor, that we
through his poverty might be made rich.” And requires
all his followers to carry out this self-sacrificing principle
in their lives. “If thine enemy hunger feed him, if he
thirst give him drink.”
I have been thus particular in placing before my
readers this general view of the tendencies of Mormonism,
to prepare them for the consideration of some other of
their doctrines, which will be referred to in the sequel.
For the convenience of comparison with my reply I
have numbered the paragraphs of this letter. Who Jones
means by my prompter I know not, nor am I conscious of
being prompted to my present course of conduct by any
person. The development and maintenance of truth
being my sole object.
The quotations I have made clearly state the writer’s
object. The careful reader will see by my reply, that
Jones does not regard truth. His only object in this
paragraph is to gain a point by misrepresentation; but
what other can we expect from men who believe that
God commanded falsehood.


“The grand question of difference” is not “revela-
tion” simply considered; but are the pretensions which
the Mormons make to the possession of revelation well
established. The fact that, in order to establish their
claims, they endeavour to make the public discredit our
Bible, shews their utter inability to prove the truth of
their system.
Infidels have always endeavoured to sap the founda-
tions of Christianity by upsetting, if they could, the
authority of our Scriptures, and raise upon its ruins the
baseless fabric of a vision,” leaving a miserable wreck
behind.
True the Book of Mormon is, professedly, a translation
of certain ancient records which were engraved upon
plates having the appearance of gold ; and three persons,
Harriss, Cowdry, and Whitmer, declare that after this
translation was complete, an angel shewed them the
plates, and declared that Joseph Smith had translated the
writings which they saw upon them. See testimony,
Book of Mormon, p. 5.
Of this testimony, Orson Pratt in his pamphlet on the
“ Evidences of the Bible and Book of Mormon Com-
pared,” makes good use. In the fifth section he asks the
question—“ Is there not a possibility that these four* wit-
nesses are all wicked impostors who have colleagued toge-
ther to deceive mankind ? We answer, that there would
be a possibility if there were no other evidences to con-
firm their testimony. But when we take into considera-
* He here includes Joe Smith.


tion the boldness of their testimony, and the circumstances
connected with it, there is no probability that they
WERE WICKED MEN.”
Now, this answer plainly and unequivocally contradicts
two separate statements made by Joseph Smith concerning
Martin Harriss. The thirtieth section of the “ Book of
Doctrine and Covenants” professes to be a revelation
given in July, 1828, in which Martin Harriss is called a
“ wicked man.” This statement is repeated in the thirty-
sixth section of the same book, in a revelation given May,
1829. It is again repeated three times in the 27th chap-
ter of “Joseph Smith the Prophet;” a book written by
Smith’s mother. It is again repeated in the “ Millennial
Star,” vol. 8, p. 124.
Well, what shall we say to this contradictory account?
Orson Pratt, one of their divinely inspired (?) Twelve
Apostles, says there was no probability of these men being
wicked. Two revelations with 10 months between them,
positively assert that Martin Harriss was a “ wicked
man.”
Now these revelations are true, or they are false. If
true, then Orson Pratt knowingly wrote a falsehood. But
if Orson Pratt has stated the truth, then these so-called
revelations are false, and Joseph Smith is thereby proved
to be an impostor.
Let the reader bear in mind that these revelations
were given during the progress of the professed trans-
lation.
Again, Oliver Cowdry was one of those three witnesses
upon whose testimony so much stress is laid. Concerning
him, there is a revelation stating that he was not faithM


enough to be trusted alone with the papers and monies of
the Society. Doc. & Cov., sec. 28, date 1831.
Now, this so-called revelation plainly charges Oliver
Cowdry with dishonest intentions, and is either true or
false. If true, then Orson Pratt wrote a wilful falsehood
when he said there was no probability of Cowdry’s being
a wicked man. But if Orson Pratt has written the truth,
then Joseph Smith is the liar, and thus proved to be an
impostor.
The Mormons may take which side they please.
Orson Pratt, in the ninth section of the tract referred to,
attempts to shift his ground, and argues that, supposing
all the witnesses were the worst of men, it would not
invalidate the testimony they gave concerning the truth
of the Book of Mormon previous to their departure from
the paths of virtue ; inasmuch as the whoredom and
murder committed by David, and the perfidy of Peter in
denying his Master, did not invalidate their previous tes-
timony to the truth of the revelations they had previously
received.
This argument may be very specious, but it is built
upon false premises. So far from the character of the
witnesses having nothing to do with the truth or falsehood
of the system which they promulgate, it has everything
to do with it; for if men whose character is uniformly
evil propound any system of a moral nature, it is unrea-
sonable and contrary to experience to suppose them actu-
ated by pure motives, unless we are willing to admit that
light and darkness are identical.
To refer to the case of David, reminds one of the idea
of straining at a gnat and swallowing a camel, David


was not an habitual liar and murderer; of his deep and
heartfelt repentance and sorrow for his sins we have ample
evidence in the Bible. He did not attempt to bolster up
his iniquitous conduct by pretended revelations as Joe
Smith has done. In every State in which Joe Smith
resided, his universal character was that of a “ liar and
swindler .” It is contrary to common sense to argue, in
the face of such testimony, that Joe Smith was an honest
and holy man, unless we suppose, what is clearly impossi-
ble, that the majority of the inhabitants of all those
States had combined for the purpose of traducing his
character.
Again. The reference to the Apostle Peter denying
his Lord and Master is a very unhappy one for the truth-
fulness of Orson Pratt. At the time Peter denied Christ,
he was ignorant of his real character. It is a well-known
fact, that until after Christ’s resurrection, the Apostles did
not understand the nature of their Master’s mission.
They trusted in the power of their Messiah to elevate the
Jewish people above all the nations of the earth.* No
wonder then that they, in this most critical trial of their
faith, should give way.
But, further, Orson Pratt has knowingly put Peter’s
testimony concerning the glory of Christ upon the Mount
of Transfiguration in a false position, by placing this tes-
timony before his denial of his Master.
Now, the contrary is the fact, as neither Peter, James,
nor John, gave any testimony about this affair until after
the resurrection of Christ. This silence they maintained
* Luke xxiv. 13—21; Acts i. 6,


in obedience to their Master’s command. Matt. xvii. 9;
Mark ix. 9 ; Luke ix. 36. Concerning Peter’s repentance
for his sin and acceptance with his Master, we have abun-
dant evidence in the New Testament. Matt. xxvi.
69—75 ; John xxi. 15—17.
Therefore, the argument for the divine authority
of the Book of Mormon, which Orson Pratt attempts
to raise upon this false position, tumbles to the
ground.
It matters not what a man was, but what he is when
he comes before the public to give evidence in matters of
importance. Will any court of judicature take the evi-
dence of a man for the honesty of another, when it is
well known that he is himself a swindler ? Certainly
not.
This attempt of 0. Pratt’s to build an argument upon
so absurd an idea, stamps his character as a religious
swindler of no mean order.
As I intend, in a separate pamphlet, to answer his
divine authenticity of the Book of Mormon, I shall close
these observations with Martin Harriss’s statement after he
left the Mormon Church. When asked if he had actually
seen the gold plates, he said —“ He did not see them with
his natural eyes ; he only saw them in his mind ln
other words, he imagined they existed because Joseph
Smith had told him they did.
“ Here deception was practised by the witnesses in pre-
tending that they saw gold plates, when, in point of fact,
they never saw any, and none existed. Prevarication
was employed in using language which, according to its
obvious and legitimate import, conveyed the idea that


they saw with their eyes what they saw only with the
mind or imagination.”
These two paragraphs contradict each other. The
16th says, I shall be met on my own proposition. The
17th states a proposition totally different from mine. My
own proposition is contained in my letter to Wandell; 1
did not relinquish it—nor will I. Before I attempt to
build the house, I must have the foundation well laid. I
do say, and I believe what I say, that infidelity in its
most dreadful aspect is Mormonism.
There is something in a name. In ancient times, a
name was always descriptive of character or circumstance
—so with the word Mormon. It means something terri-
ble in its nature—that which is calculated to scare or
frighten ; a place where wild beasts congregate together.
This we leam from the 180th page of the Book of Mor-
mon, which reads thus—“ And it came to pass, that as
many as did believe him (Alma), did go forth to a place
which was called Mormon, having received its name from
the king; being in the borders of the land, and having
been infested by times, or at seasons, by wild beasts.”
The Greek word Mormo, means—“ Bugbear.” Oh,
who would be a Mormon!
The 18th paragraph depends upon the 17th, and as I
have shewn that to be false, I regard this as unworthy of
notice.
VIII.
See my reply to Jones’s first letter.


Mr. Jones was present when I made the statement he
pretends to quote, and therefore I have said he knew I
did not make it.
This course of misrepresentation is no new thing in
Mormon history, for they can say and unsay when it suits
their purpose. Witness the 12th paragraph of their con-
fession of faith, as given in the Appendix to “ Doctrine
and Covenants,” p. 334 : —“ We believe it just to preach
the gospel to the nations of the earth, and warn the right-
eous to save themselves from the corruption of the
world ; but we do not believe it right to interfere with bond
servants, neither preach the gospel to, nor baptize them,
contrary to the will and wish of their masters , nor to
meddle with or influence them in the least to cause them
to he dissatisfied with their situations in this life, thereby
jeopardizing the lives of men; such interference we
believe to be unlawful and unjust, and dangerous to the
peace of every Government allowing human beings to be
held in servitude.”
A flat contradiction to the above will be seen in the
following pretended revelation, as given February, 1831:
—“ Lift up your voices and spare not, call upon the
nations to repent, both old and young, both BOND and free,
saying, prepare yourselves for the great day of the Lord.”
The reader will at once perceive the contradiction referred
to. This revelation says—“ Call upon bond and free.”
In the 12th paragraph of their political creed, as above
quoted, they tell us that they do not believe it right to
preach the gospel to, nor baptize bond servants.


Now, this revelation is either true or false. If true,
then the statement contained in their political creed is
false ; for they are diametrically opposed to each other.
Again : If their political creed contain their real senti-
ments, then this supposed revelation must be false, and
thus Joseph Smith and all his coadjutors are proved to be
liars and impostors, who will vary their creed to suit the
circumstances in which they may be placed.
The fact that they thus publicly declare, they must
wait for the slave-holder to give his consent before they
will preach to, or baptize any of their slaves, demon-
strates the time-serving character of their mission. How
unlike the unflinching boldness of the heralds of the Cross
in the first ages of Christianity, or the burning zeal of
Missionaries in our own day.
So time-serving, in fact, was Joe Smith, that at one
time he would not allow even “ free people of colour to
join his Church.'’’
The quotation referred to, beginning at the sth para-
graph of second section, Doc, & Cov., p. 8 ; —“ We shall
now proceed to examine the situation of man at his first
creation. Moses, the historian, has given us the following
account of him in the first chapter of the Book of Genesis,
beginning with the 20th verse, and closing with the 30th.
We copy from the new translation .”
The quotation on the 11th page begins thus;—“We
next proceed to present the account of the direct revela-
tion winch man received after he was cast out of Eden,
and further copy from the new translation .”


The fact that Jones was in possession of those extracts
from the newly revealed translation of our Bible, and yet
denied the existence of such a book ; and the fact that
Wandell, the then President of their Australian Mission,
allowed such a denial to be publicly made, and that offi-
cially too ; whilst at the same time, a part, at least, of
that translation was in print, shews them to be men
unworthy of credit, in a religious point of view. The
system which requires to be bolstered up with falsehood
must be rotten at its core, and has its rise in Communist
or Socialist principles.
That this is the foundation of Mormonism is evident
from their system of Polygamy, or many wives, and the
manner in which they endeavour to hide it from public
notice.
Wandell, that Arch-apostle of infidelity in these colo-
nies, unblushingly and publicly denied that such a doctrine
was held by them. While, at the same time, he well
knew that it was practised and preached at Salt Lake
Valley, in accordance with a professed revelation given to
Joseph Smith at Nauvoo, on the 12th July, 1843; in
which he took good care that he should be first served
with virgins, reserving to himself and all future “ First
Presidents” the sole right of giving away virgins. See
“ Zion’s Watchman,” Nos. 2 and 3, Sydney, September
24,1853.
But Wandell and Jones were not alone in the uttering
of this notorious falsehood; for they had the authority of
the First Presidency and Council of their Church so to do.
As will be seen from the following extract from the Book
of Doctrine and Covenants, under the head of Marriage,


page 330:—“ You both mutually agree to be each other’s
companion, husband and wife, observing the legal rights
belonging to this condition ; that is, keeping yourselves
wholly for each other, and from all others, during your
lives.” “ May God add His blessings and keep you to
fulfill your covenants, from henceforth and for ever.
Inasmuch as this Church of Christ has been reproached
with the chime of fornication and polygamy, we declare
that we believe that one man should have ONE wife, and
one woman but one husband; except in case of death,
when either are at liberty to marry again.”
This denial of the doctrine was published in the stereo-
typed third European edition, in AD. 1852, just NINE
YEARS after the command to practice polygamy was
given. Does not this barefaced denial of their real senti-
ments prove that the whole of the Mormon rulers are a
set of infidels, whose only aim is, by a show of piety and
seeming reverence for divine truth, to gull the unwary
and induce them to emigrate to “ Salt Lake,” and thus
build up in the next generation a community of sworn
enemies to the gospel of our Lord and Saviour Jesus
Christ ?
This system appears to me to be the last effort of his
infernal majesty to root out genuine Christianity from the
face of the earth. Long has he tried open and avowed
infidelity. He has had in his service men of no ordinary
talent, yet he has failed—yea, and will fail to accomplish
his object. The wit of Voltaire—the learned mythology
of a Volney—the bombastic style of a Paine—the sly
insinuations of a Hume or a Gibbon —the objections
of a Woolston, Tindal, and Collins —and the open
G


atheism of an Owen, have fallen short of their
mark.
To return. The argument sustained by Orson Pratt is
very clear —showing much ingenuity in that style of argu-
ment called “ begging the questionand is founded
upon the so-called revelation given by Joe Smith. The
following paragraph of which, will fully illustrate the
position they take :
“Abraham received concubines, and they bare him
children, and it was accounted unto him for righteousness,
because they were given unto him, and he abode in my
law; as Isaac also, and Jacob, did none other things than
that which they were commanded ; and because they did
none other things than that which they were commanded,
they have entered into their exaltation, according to the
promises, and sit upon thrones; and are not angels, but
GODS. David also received many wives and concubines,
as also Solomon and Moses my servant, as also many
others of my servants, from the beginning of creation
until this time ; and in nothing did they sin, save in
those things which they received not of me." “ David s
wives and concubines were given unto him of me, by the
hand of Nathan my servant, and others of the prophets
who had the keys of this power; and in none of these
things did he sin against me, save in the case of Uriah
and his wife, and therefore he hath fallen from his exalta-
tion and received his portion; and he shall not inherit
them (his wives) out of the world, for I gave them unto
another, saith the Lord.”
Observe here. God gave the father's wives unto his son
_i.e,, David’s wives were given to Absalom,


The above statement makes room for another, which
we find in the 24th paragraph of this revelation, concern-
ing “ the law of the priesthood” :—“ .... And
if he have TEN virgins given unto him by this law, he
cannot commit adultery, for they belong to him , and they
are given unto him ; therefore is he justified.”
Irom this so-called revelation we learn the following
particulars :
1. That Abraham’s wives and concubines were given
to him by the Lord.
2. That having children by them was accounted to him
for righteousness.
3. That David, Solomon, and Moses, received their
wives from the hand of God.
4. That David did not sin save in the case of Bath-
sheba.
5. That because David thus sinned, God took his wives
from him, and gave them to another.
Now, the above revelation is true or it is false. If
true, then the following four particulars, taken from the
Doc. & Cov. as above quoted, are absolutely false. From
that quotation we learn—
1. That Polygamy is a crime.
2. That one man should have but one wife.
3. That a man cannot have a second wife till the first
one dies.
4. That both the husband and wife are bound to keep
themselves for each other, and from all others,
during their fives.
I leave the Mormons to reconcile these two revelations
if they can.


The following revelation from the Book of Mor-
mon will set the question in a still stronger
light —
In the 4th paragraph of the Book of Jacob, we read
that during the reign of the second king of the people of
Nephi, the people “ began to grow hard in their hearts,
and indulge themselves somewhat in wicked ‘practices, such
as like unto David of old, desiring many wives and con-
cubines, and also Solomon his son.”
In the 6th paragraph of the second chapter of the
same book, we have the following words —“ For behold,
thus saith the Loed, this people begin to wax in
iniquity, understanding not the Scriptures ; for they seek
to excuse themselves in committing whoeedoms, because of
the things which were written concerning David and Solomon
his son. Behold, David and Solomon truly had many
wives and concubines, which thing was ABOMINABLE
before me, saith the Loed; wherefore, thus saith the
Lord, I have led this people forth out of the land of Jeru-
salem by the power of mine arm, that I might raise up
unto me a righteous branch from the fruit of the loins of
Joseph. Wherefore, I the Lord God will not sufeee
that this people shall do like them of old. Where-
fore, my brethren, hear me and hearken to the word of the
Lord; for there shall not any man among you have
save it be one wife, and concubines he shall have
none ; for I the Loed God delighteth in the chastity of
women, and whoredoms are an abomination before me,
thus saith the Lord of hosts. Wherefore this people shall
keep my commandments, saith the Loed of Hosts, or
cursed be the land for their sakes.”


In tins revelation We have the following particulars
1. The people began to wax or increase in iniquity,
because they understood not the Scriptures.
2. David and Solomon had many wives.
3. That this practice was abominable in the sight of
4. That because polygamy had obtained in Jerusalem,
the Lord had led the people of Nephi out of that
land into America.
5. The reason for this procedure: That “He (God)
might raise up unto Himself a righteous branch
from the loins of Joseph.
6. Because the Lord had this object in view, He would
not suffer them to do as David and Solomon did.
7. Therefore, as this conduct was wiclted and abomina-
ble in the sight of God, “ one man should have
BUT ONE Wife.
8. Thai this one wife system preserved the chastity of
women.
9. That any other practice than the one wife system is
whoredom, and brings the curse of God.
My reader will at once see that the above nine particu-
lars positively contradict every one of the assertions of
Joe Smith in pretended revelation commanding polygamy.
It is a rule in law that, where the majority of wit-
nesses in a cause agree, the verdict shall be ruled thereby.
Now, in this case we have two witnesses agreeing against
one witness —that is, we have two statements condemning
and reprobating polygamy, and one revelation commanding
it. Which are we to believe, the two or the one ? Lea-
son and revelation inform us that by two or three witnesses
g 3


a thing shall be established, we are therefore bound to
accept the one wife system— there being two evidences in
its favour to one against it.
But, further, we are informed that “ the gospel is as
clearly stated in the Book of Mormon as it is in the New
Testament, and are the same.” If this be the case, then
another witness is appealed to —what saith it ? Ha'v e
ye not read that He which made them at the beginning,
made them male and female. And said, for this cause
shall a man leave father and mother and cleave unto his
wife, and the twain shall be one flesh ? Wherefore,
they are no more twain, but one flesh.
In the above we are taught—
1. That at the creation, God made but one woman for
one man.
2. That a man is to “ leave both father and mother,
and cleave unto his wife ” —not wives.
3. That by the matrimonial union, twain becomes
one flesh. Mark, —“ twain.” Not three, nor
four, nor twenty ; but “ twain ” —simply, two.
Therefore, as according to the Mormons’ own admis-
sion, we have three divine testimonies against 'polygamy foi
the 'pretended one in favour of it, we are bound to reject
it as “criminal,” “ wiclted,” and “ abominable ” in the
sight of God.
From this comparison of their own witnesses, we prove
Mormonism to be a lying system, and Joseph Smith an
arrant impostor.
I am well aware that in the Book of Mormon, a single
sentence is thrown in between my quotation and the
remaining portion of the section, which can be twisted


into an opening for a future command to practice poly-
gamy ■* but this is so flatly contradicted by what follows,
as well as by what I have quoted, that this attempt to
make God contradict himself is the lamest I have ever
read.
Brevity prevents further observations upon this subject
in this place. I would observe, however, that one third
of the subject is scarcely half exhausted. I might have
shewn from the necessary unchangeableness of God, that
what was a principle of His moral government in the
days of David and Solomon, must he so now. And there-
fore, what was “ wicked ” and “ abominable ”in the days
of David and Solomon, must be so still; unless we admit
that the Lord God of Hosts is changeable in His attributes,
and therefore no God, and thus, at once embrace open
atheism, which is the evident tendency of Orson Pratt’s
argument in his “ Great First Cause.” A pamphlet,
cleverly written, but containing as much downright
atheism as was ever published by the Communist, Robert
Owen, in his book called the “ New Moral World.”
When I commenced to write this book, I intended to
treat the subject of polygamy in a separate pamphlet, but
as many may see this that may not see the next, I thought
it better to make this brief reference to the subject in this
place. Especially to the Book of Mormon, as Orson
Pratt claims more overwhelming testimony to its divine
authenticity, correctness, and genuineness, than he allows
to Protestant Christians to prove the resurrection of
* Sentence referred to —“ For if I will, saith the Lord of Hosts, raise
up seed unto me, I will command my people; otherwise they shalihearken
unto these things.”


Christ. See section 7, “Evidences of the Bible and
Book of Mormon Compared.”
To all who may have any doubts about the fulness of
the evidences of Christ’s resurrection, I would recommend
a careful perusal of Gilbert West’s observations thereon.
First quotation referred to —“ Thou shalt ask, and my
Scriptures shall be given as I have appointed, and they
shall be preserved in safety ; and it is expedient that thou
shouldst hold thy peace concerning them, and not teach
them until ye have received them in full. And I give unto
you a commandment that then ye shall teach them unto
all men ; for they shall be taught unto all nations, kind-
reds, tongues, and people.”
Second quotation—“ And now, behold, I say unto you,
it shall not be given unto you to know any further con-
cerning this chapter, until the New Testament be trans-
lated, and in it all these things shall be made known;
wherefore I give unto you power that ye may now trans-
late it.”
This translation was completed on the second day of
July, 1833 : —“ We have this day finished the translation
of the Scriptures.” “In a letter mailed last week, you
will doubtless, before you receive this, have obtained infor-
mation about the New Translation. Having finished the
translation of the Bible a few hours since.” See letter to
the Brethren in Zion, written at Kirtland, and signed
Sidney Eigdon, Joseph Smith, junior, F. G. Williams.
“ Mill. Star,” vol. 14, p. 451.
In May, 1833, Joe Smith professed to have received a


revelation, of which the following is an extract : —“ And
again, verily I say unto you, the second lot on the south
shall he dedicated unto me for the building of an house
unto me for the printing of the translation of my Scrip-
tures.” Doc. & Cov., page 248.
If, then, above 20 years ago arrangements were being
made for the printing of the (so-called) “ New Translation ”
of the Bible, is it not rather curious that it is not yet
printed and circulated throughout the world ? Why are
they afraid to publish it ? Is it because “ the world
would not receive it?” Or, are they afraid its contents
would rouse the indignation of the world ? Why do the
Mormons so contumaciously persist in disobeying the
divine (?) command to teach their new translation “ to all
nations, kindreds, and tongues ? ” Surely, if Jones’s
denial be true, I am right in calling Joe Smith an impostor
—an imitator of Mahommed.
The command referred to is as follows :
“ And it shall be when He sitteth on the throne of his
kingdom, that He shall write him a copy of this law in a
book which is before the priests the Levites.
“ And thou shall teach them to thy children, and thou
shalt talk of them when thou sittest in thine house, and
when thou walkest by the way, and when thou liest down,
and when thou risest up.*’
When the children of Israel were located in their differ-
ent allotments, they could not—in fact, it would be impos-
sible for them to, obey this command, if they had not
numerous copies of the law dispersed amongst them.


That copies of both the prophets and the law were in the
hands of the Jews during the Babylonish captivity is evi-
dent from the words of Daniel —“ In the first year of his
(Darius’) reign, I, Daniel, understood by books, the number
of the years whereof the word of the Lord came to Jere-
miah the prophet, that he would accomplish seventy years
in the desolations of Jerusalem.” In verses 10 to 13,
the law of God as written by Moses is spoken of as then
existing.
It matters not if the autograph of Moses was lost or
destroyed in the Assyrian invasion when Manasseh was
carried captive to Babylon, since we have abundant evi-
dence of the existence of numerous exact copies of it; but
that the original was not destroyed by the Assyrians we
have strong presumptive evidence in the finding the
book of the law in the Temple during the early part of
Josiah’s reign. This, I apprehend, was the copy referred
to by the prophet Daniel.
XIII.
The following quotation from Horne’s introduction, sec-
tion 3, will set the argument in, if possible, a still stronger
light
“ And first, with regard to the Old Testament, although
the Jews have been charged with corrupting it, yet this
charge has never been substantiated, and, in fact, the thing
itself is moeally impossible.
“ There is no proof or vestige whatever of such pre-
tended alteration. The Jews have, in every age, regarded
the Pentateuch as the genuine and uncoeeupted work of
one single person, and have equally respected every part


of it. Indeed, if they had mutilated or corrupted these
writings, they would doubtless have expunged every rela-
tion of facts and events that militated against the honour
and credit of their nation. Besides, when could such an
alteration or corruption have been executed ? It was not
possible , shortly after the death of Moses, for the memory
of the transactions recorded in the Pentateuch was too
recent for any one to venture upon corruption or altera-
tion, which public notoriety would have contradicted.
The Pentateuch, therefore, could not have been altered or
corrupted so long as Joshua and that generation lived,
who were zealous for the worship of the true God.
(Josh. xxiv. 31.) From that time to the age of Samuel,
the Israelites were under the direction of civil governors
or judges, who braved every danger in defence of the
form of civil government established in the sacred books.
“ Further, if they had wilfully corrupted the books of
the Old Testament before the time of Christ and his apos-
tles, the prophets who flourished from Samuel to Malachi,
and who were neither slow nor timid in reproving the sins
of both rulers and subjects, would not have passed
over so heinous offence in silence. After the separation
of the ten tribes, at least, the books of Moses were kept
in the kingdom of Israel; and the rivalry that continued
to subsist between the kingdoms of Israel and Judah was
an insuperable bar to any corruption or alteration, for it
could not have been attempted in either kingdom without
opposition and detection from the other, of which some
notice must have been taken in their historical books.
Besides, if the Old Testament had been corrupted in the
time of Jesus Christ and his apostles, the Jews could not


have passed without censure from them, who rebuked their
hypocrisy, incredulity, and wickedness, with so much
severity. If there had been any alteration or corruption ,
it must have been the work either of one or many persons.
It cannot he conceived that any one person could do it with-
out heiny exposed; nor that any one could have vanity
enough to expect success in an attempt to alter facts in a
hook so universally read and so much esteemed. The unity
of design, the correspondence of sentiment, and the uni-
form reference to the same facts, which are observable
throughout the Old Testament, forbid us to imagine that
many were united in corrupting or altering any part of it.
In a word, no man or number of men, could make an
attempt of this kind without being exposed. Nor is it
rational to suppose, that any man or number of men could
have capacity competent to effect such a design, who
would not also have had the sense to observe the necessity
of making it more agreeable to the natural tempers of
mankind, in order that it might obtain credit in the
world.
“ Again, if the Old Testament had been mutilated or
corrupted after the birth of Christ, out of malice to
the Christians, and in order to deprive them of arguments
and evidences for proving their religion, the Jews would
unquestionably have expunged or falsified those memorable
prophecies concerning Christ, which were so irrefragably
cited both by him and by his apostles. But, no such
OBLITERATION OR ALTERATION HAS EVER BEEN MADE ; On
the contrary, those very passages have continued in their
original purity, and are sometimes more express in the ori-
ginal Hebrew text than in the common translation.


“ The agreement of all the manuscripts of the Old Tes-
tament (amounting to nearly eleven hundred and fifty),
which are known to he extant, is a clear proof of its un cor-
rupted preservation —Horne.
“ The Old Testament has been translated into a great
number of languages ; but the only versions, to which we
shall now advert, are those which were made either pre-
viously to the Christian era, or very shortly after its com-
mencement. At that period, almost all the books of the
Old Law had been translated into Chaldee, for the use of
the Jews in the East, with whom the original Hebrew had
ceased to be a living language; the whole had been ren-
dered into Greek (two hundred and eighty-two years before
the birth of Jesus Christ,) for the Jews of Alexandria, who
were still less acquainted with Hebrew ; and at the close of
the first, or in the beginning of the second century, the Old
Testament was translated into Syriac, for the Syrian Chris-
tians. These three versions have been preserved to our
time—numerous manuscript copies and printed editions of
them are extant; and, with the exception of a few unim-
portant differences, they represent to us the same books,
the same predictions, and the same phrases. Now, this
agreement is not the result of any design on the part of the
translators, or of any fraud on the part of learned men.
These three sister versions having once issued from their
common parent, have been for ever separated by events, and
by a rivalship which still subsists. The Chaldee version,
which was carefully preserved and consulted by the
Hebrews, remained unknown to the Christians during the
early ages of the Church, and has been in their hands only
for two or three centuries. The Christians of Syria knew


as little of the Greek version as the Greeks did of the
Syriac; and the Greek version—which was diffused
throughout the West, and translated in its turn into Latin,
and which, under this second form, became the object of
exclusive respect in the Eomish Church —could not borrow
anything from the other versions, of the existence of
which the inhabitants of the West were utterly ignorant.
The agreement, therefore, of these three witnesses, is so
much the more remarkable, as they never could have
heard that these versions belonged to rival and hostile
Churches, and were the work of inveterate enemies—of
Christians and Jews, of Eastern and Western Christians,
of Jews of Palestine and Alexandrian Jews. They do,
however, agree together. Therefore, they give us with
certainty, the ancient and true text of the Old Testa-
ment, precisely as it was extant before the time of Jesus
Christ.”—Cellerier, de I’Origin Authentique et Divine de
TAncien Testament, pp. 148—151, as quoted by Horne.
Equally satisfactory is the evidence for the integrity
and uncorruptness op the New Testament in any-
thing material.
1. The same facts and the same doctrines which we
believe on the authority of the New Testament, were
believed and received in the first two centuries of the
Christian era.
2. Because it would be impossible to corrupt every
copy in existence, and not the slightest trace of such cor-
ruption can be found in history.
The Christian Church was early rent with fierce con-
tention upon doctrinal points: each party appealed to the
Scripture as a warrant for their peculiar ideas. Therefore,


f ‘ if one party was inclined either to omit what opposed
their peculiar tenets, or to insert what might afford them
additional support, there was always some other party both
ready and willing to detect the fraud. And even if they
persevered in altering their own manuscripts, they had not
the power of altering the manuscripts in the hands of their
opponents. Though the corruption, therefore, might he
partial, it could not become general. Nor must we forget
that the books which compose the Greek Testament, have
been transcribed, beyond all comparison, more frequently
than the works of any other Greek author. And it is evi-
dent, that the difficulty of corrupting the Greek manu-
scripts must have increased with every increase in their
number. Though it cannot be denied, therefore, that
there is stronger temptation to alter a work which relates
to doctrines than to alter a work which relates to matters
indifferent, the impediments to the alteration of the Greek
manuscripts were still more powerful than the temptation.
The Gospels, which were written in different places, and
the Epistles, which were addressed to different communi-
ties, were multiplied in copies, dispersed in Palestine and
Egypt, in Asia Minor, Greece, and Italy. Under such cir-
cumstances, a general corruption of the Greek manuscripts
was a thing impossible; for it could not have been effected
without a union of sentiment, which never existed —nor
without a general combination, which could not have been
formed before Christianity had received a civil establish-
ment ; but if such a combination had been practicable, it
could not have been carried into effect without becoming a
matter of general notoriety, and ecclesiastical historians
are silent on such a combination. The silence of history is


indeed no argument against the truth of a fact established
by induction, if the fact was such that it could not be gene-
rally known. But the silence of history is important in
reference to a fact which, if it ever existed, must have been
a subject of general notoriety. Whatever corruptions,
therefore, may have taken place in the Greek manuscripts,
those corruptions must have been confined to a few, and could
not by any possibility, have been extended to them all.” —
Bishop Marsh’s Lectures, part 6, pp. 10, 11.
Scores of similar quotations on the same subject might
be given, but the above, I think, will convince any candid
mind, that Orson Pratt’s assertion that “ the Bible manu-
scripts were awfully corrupt in almost every text,” is proved
to be false, unfounded, and irrational.
Those who wish to see the subject of the genuineness,
authenticity, and uncokeuptedness of the manuscripts
from which our Bible was translated, treated in full, would
do well to consult—
Bishop Tomline’s Introduction to the Study of the
Bible
Home’s Litroduction to the Critical Study of the
Bible
Dr. Larduer’s Works, &c., &c.
[N.B. —I wish to inform the reader that the reference acciden-
tally omitted after the last clause of Note IX., p. 61, about free
people of colour, will be found in the “Mill. Star,” vol. 14, p.
471. There also, we learn that such were not allowed even to
live in the Mormon State. This was in A.D. 1833, just two
years after the pretended revelation to “ call bond and free” was
given.]


APPENDIX.
Now, my clear readers, having gone through the foregoing
pages, and having unexpectedly, room for a few more
observations, allow me to fix your attention, by a few
brief remarks, upon a very important subject. I know
that the various contradictory systems and pretended
revelations have induced many to view religion as a hum-
bug or a bugbear, to scare the “vile herd” of mankind
and keep them in order. But such do not exercise right
reason in this most important of all subjects ; for, as
“ Truth lies somewhere,” instead of being turned away
from its contemplation by incongruous systems, we should
the rather be led to more minutely investigate the matter.
The study of the Bible, with prayerful attention, will dis-
sipate all our fears. It contains indubitable evidence of
its divine origin. It appeals to our hopes and fears for
the future—it warns us of coming danger, to lead us to
repentance, and thereby enjoy coming glory. And, in
order that we may not labour under any mistake about
the matter, its language is at once simple and sublime—
so simple, that a “ wayfaring man, though a fool” in the
concerns of time, “shall not err therein;” and yet so
sublime, that the mightiest intellect cannot exhaust its
stores.


As a specimen, we shall briefly consider the following
passage from 1 Peter ii. 2 :
“As new born babes, desire the sincere milk of the
word that ye may grow thereby.”
A “ new born babe.” Why, this is an every day
occurrence —what can there be so extraordinary in a new
born babe that it should be so prominently set before us
as a test for self-examination ?
“Newborn” implies a previous state of darkness and
non-relationship to the surrounding world. In the world
they are, it is true, surrounded by the light of the sun,
yet heeding it not nor enjoying the pleasure of its beams.
Thus it is a fit emblem of every child of man. Mere
moral or social excellence alters not our position—for
“ all have sinned and come short of the glory of God.”
“ The light shineth in darkness, and the darkness compre-
hendeth it not,” Here then, the analogy between the
babe before its birth and every son of Adam is complete.
The one surrounded by the light of the orb of day, yet in
darkness, the other surrounded by the light of the sun of
righteousness as it beams forth from the Word of God,
yet still in darkness, heeding not the dread thunders of
His wrath, nor the still small voice of everlasting love.
Reader ! art thou one of those ? 0, be wise in time
—delay is dangerous ; “for there is neither knowledge nor
device in the grave whither thou art hastening.” It is an
awful truth—“ As the tree falleth, so it lies.” If death
overtakes us in an impenitent state, the dire denunciation
is—“ He that is unjust, let him be unjust still; he that is
unholy, let him be unholy still ”
“ New born babes desire.” Have you never noticed


this ? When the babe is healthy, how soon it cries out
for food. And why, because it feels its need—it breathes
a different atmosphere, and therefore requires different
food. Thus it is with the Christian—formerly he was
satisfied with the food of this world, its pleasures enticed
him ; in the midst of its vanities he sought happiness, as
the babe drew its sustenance from its mother’s womb and
yet was dead to all the surrounding activities of conscious
existence. So was he “ dead whilst he lived,” drawing
his sustenance from nature’s darkness without relationship
to God as his Father—“ secure, insensible.”
But, what a change. He is born again. Bom, not of
the womb of nature, but of grace—free grace. “ Born,
not of corruptible things such as silver and gold, but by
the Word of God which liveth and abideth for ever.” He
now desires, and like the babe, expresses that desire in
earnest prayer to the “Father of lights” for the healing
beams of the “ Sun of Righteousness” to warm and invigo-
rate his soul. And, like the babe that, feeling its utter
helplessness, clings to its nurse, and cries and struggles—
regardless of her convenience—till its wants are satisfied,
he exclaims —“ I will not let Thee go, except thou bless
me.” Such are described by our Lord as “ they who
hunger and thirst after righteousness.”
The “ new born babe desires” neither the intoxicating
draught nor the strong meat of the full grown man, but
its mother’s breast—that food which is calculated to
strengthen and perfect its embryo frame ; so the new
born Christian desires not the exciting draught of theolo-
gical disquisitions, nor the strong meat of sectarian tech-
nicalities, but the “ sincere milk of the Word.” Mark


the word “sincere.” There is a “pure word” as well
as an impure. “ Beware,” saith our Lord, “of the
leaven (or doctrine) of the Pharisees ;” there is, therefore,
a word which “ ministers grace to the hearers” as well
as one which “ corrupts.” The desire, then, of the soul
that has been awakened to a sense of its lost condition by
the thunder of Sinai which rings in his ears —“ Cursed is
every one that continueth not in all things written in the
book of the law to do them ;” or, drawn by the endear-
ing strains of compassion sounding in his ear—“ Why
will ye die.” The desires of such, I say, are earnest
—an intensity of feeling is manifest. Whilst, with an
intolerable burden of sin upon his back, he endeavours to
flee from the “ city of destruction,” and set his face
toward the heavenly country. Once, in the hardness of
his heart, he thought he was rich—rich in moral excel-
lence—alive without the knowledge of the requirements
of God’s law ; but now, the law has come into his soul,
and he dies —dies to the pride of fame, to the pomp of
wealth, to all “ the pomps and vanities of this wicked
world,” the “ fashion whereof passeth away.”
And why is he thus dead ? because—he lives. He has
received the truth, the Word of God—in the belief of it.
He is born again, and is therefore conscious of his abject
poverty in spiritual matters. He beholds himself abso-
lutely naked of all that can be of service to him in “that
day, when the Lord shall judge the world in righteous-
ness.” Once he breathed the foetid air of hell, now he
breathes the salubrious atmosphere of the Celestial coun-
try, which whets his appetite—strengthens his spirit’s
digestive organs, and in the eagerness of his soul, he


exclaims—“ Who will shew me any good ? ” The word
of Truth has thus been a “ lamp to Ms feet” in exMbit-
ing his danger, and now becomes “a light to his path”
to lead him onward in the “ new and living way.” Oh,
how he delights to meditate upon that Word by day and
night. It directs his attention to the blood-stained tree ;
there he beholds “ a spectacle of woe”—his astonished
soul contemplates the sad scene; but, hark! a voice is
heard—“ Look unto me and be thou saved.” This is
what he wants—nothing less than salvation—complete
salvation —will satisfy his soul. The crown of thorns—the
dying agony—the bleeding side—the pierced hands and
feet—present unmistakable evidence that “He loved me
and gave himself for me.” “ This truth—this blessed
truth —sets him free” from the weight of sin. He leaves
his burden at the Cross —joy fills his breast, and his
enraptured soul exclaims—” Thanks be unto God for His
unspeakable gift.” Unspeakable indeed, is the believer’s
joy it must be felt to be known. The change from a
dunghill to a throne is not to be compared to those feel-
ings which possess the soul of him who, having trembled
on the brink of hell, feels that he now possesses the title
deeds “to an inheritance incorruptible, undefiled, and
that fadeth not away.” He enjoys the earnest of that
inheritance by “ the spirit of adoption,” whereby he is
enabled to “ cry—Abba, Father ;” therefore, he is filled
with “ joy unspeakable and full of glory.”
Reader !is it thus with thee. If not —be no longer a
soul murderer. Flee for thy life to the “ city of refuge”
(Jesus) for justice, “ the avenger of blood is at hand.”
The object to be accomplished by satisfying the desires


of the “new born babe”—is growth. Growth implies
progression, or advancement from one state or condition to
another ; thus the babe, by proper nourishment, advances
from infancy to youth—from youth to manhood. So also
the babe in Christ “ desires the sincere milk of the Word,”
that he may not only “ grow in knowledge,” but also
“in grace” or favour with God. His desire is to behold
“ the wondrous things which the law of God contains,”
that he may “ cleanse his way by taking heed thereto,”
As he advances in the “ knowledge of his Lord and
Saviour” his desires increase, and his hungry soul cries
out —“ Satisfy me early with thy mercy,” for “ Thy
loving kindness is better than life.” His soul thus “fol-
lows hard after God.”
Another feature. See the babe, when danger threatens,
nestling upon its mother’s bosom in conscious security.
And why, because it has read the language of her heart
in her looks; how often has its little soul rejoiced in that
expression of a mother’s love—her looks, more expressive
than her words, has enchanted its little heart. Then,
why not fly to the source of its joy as a harbour of safety
when danger is nigh ; in so doing, it expresses full confi-
dence in her love.
So also the believing soul, having felt the loving kind-
ness of his God—having with “joy drank water from the
wells of salvation,” he runs to “ the dear bosom of his
God,” and is safe in the pavilion that surrounds the
Throne of grace —is safe from the fiery darts of the
wicked one. The lion may roar —the tiger may growl
and grin ; but within the precincts of Jehovah’s arms,
they dare not come. Thus he proves the truth of that


Scripture—“ The Lord is a strong tower : the righteous
run into it, and are safe,” Safe “ amid death’s alarms ”
—he can “ smile to see a burning world.”
This fleeing to Jesus to “ hide him till the storm be
overpast” is an expression of deep and holy confidence in
His power and willingness, to “ save even unto the utter-
most all that come unto God hy Him.” He desires no
other instructor—for Jesus only “ hath the words of eter-
nal life.” The Holy Spirit, as the nurse, has prepared
Ms food ; and while he sucks at the breasts of the Gospel,
he knows—he experiences the glad truth, that Jesus is
unto him “ wisdom,” to guide him in every season of
difficulty or danger; Ms “righteousness” to cover him,
“ that the shame of his nakedness may not appear.”
“ Clothed in this rohe how bright he shines.
Angels might envy such a dress—
Angels have not a robe like his,
The robe of Jesus’s righteousness."
He feels that Jesus is to him “sanctification” to cleanse
him from all iniquity, and make him “ pure in heart.”
The expei ience of these unspeakable blessings assure him
that Jesus will be his complete “redemption”—even
“ from the power of the grave ;” and that there is laid up
for him “ a house not made with hands, eternal in the
heavens.”
Reader, is it thus with thee ?
_ ];eho-euc es to the portions of Scripture quoted in the aboveßom
’ Ml 11 * 1 - 5 > Eccles. ix. 10: Rev. xxii 11; Jer. iv. 3- Matt xiii 22-
? Peter i. 8; Luke vi i, 18 ; Gal. iii. 10; Ezek. xvhi. 31; Rom vif 9-12 •
j n Co, h v, >' 31 ; Zach. in. 3, 4 ; Ps. ix. 8; Acts xvii. 31; Ps. iv. 6 Ind cxix!
- s - 20 > Isa. xlv. 22; Gal. ii. 20; 2 Cor. ix. 15; 1 Peter i. 4 8- Gal
Ixiii ’ Ps • - cxix ' 9 > !8, and xc. 14, and
ixiii. o, o . isa. xll. o , Ps. Ixi. 3. 4 : Proy. xviii 10 • vvvi on • ttoH
yh. 26; John vi. 68; Rev. iii. 18;. Hosea xiii. 14; 1 Cor. i. 30; 2 Cor. y. 1.


As all the Subscription Lists have not yet been for-
warded to me, I cannot insert the names of the Country
Subscribers ; should a Second Edition be called for, this
defect can be remedied. The following have come to
hand :
T. Barker, Lord Bishop of
Sydney
Sir Alfred Stephen, Chief
Justice
Honhle. Robert Campbell,
M.L.A.
Honhle. A. P. Lutwyche,
M.L.C.
John Fairfax, Esq.
Rev. Alexander Salmon,
(Free Church,) Sydney
Rev. Wilkinson, Enfield
Rev. Joseph Beazley (Con-
gregational)
Mr. Pearse
Mr. James Pemel
Mr. W. Terry
Mr. John Crofton Mollay
Mr. S. Potter
Mr. John Walker
Mr. R. P. Armstrong
Messrs. Jones & James
Mr. Howit
Friends at Dungog, 20 copies
Mr. D. Cunningham
Messrs. Learmonth&Buyers
Mr. Skinner
Mr. James Robey
Mr. Callaghan
Mr. Lusty
Mr. Parker
Alderman Neale
Mr. John Neale
Friends at Clarence River, 12
copies
Mr. W. Henson
Mr. John File.
Printed at the Empire General Steam Printing Office, Hunter-street,
Sydney.




