

v — s ’ n ■■ y
_ TT » n . pmnn
[T Q OR 1 (tTN AND Cid AKA vlJu K«
1 1 U V it J. U i
FOr FCTIC REVIEW
licit iXiU xiiUm ixxpj <
-to an JniraMmt,
i BY JABEZ BUNTING. I
Second Edition.
SYDNEY:
PRINTED BX W. LAMBERT, 159, PITT STREET, OPPOSITE THE SCHOOL OP ARTS.
SOLD BY MU. T. LUSTY,
356 (late 285), brickfield hill ;
MB, S. GOOLD, BOOKSELLER, PITT STREET; MU. MUSPIUIT, WILLIAM
STREET, WOOLLOOiIOOLOO ;
_ . ITrrT . , TnTmTl? nT>T> WTNTJfiba
he. BLAIR, MAITLAND ; AND ME. MOITNXFOED, WINDSOR.
Sixpence.




ITS ORIGIN AND CHARACTER.
REPRINTED FROM THE ECLECTIC REVIEW.
■to zn
BY JABEZ BUNTING.
Second Edition.
SYDNEY ;
pjcrarTßD bt w, lambeet, 159, put stebet, opposite the school op arts.
SOLD BY ME. T. LUSTY,
556 (late 285), bkickfteld hiix ;
ME. S. GOOLD, BOOKSELLER, PITT STREET ; ME. MUSPEATT, WILLIAM
STEEET, WOOLLOOMOOLOO ;
ME, BLAIE, MAITLAND ; AND ME. MOUNTEOED, WINDSOR.
SUpence,




K*2>3*s jt-t Kf
•7* ”2. -
INTRODUCTION.
It is a fact which speaks volumes for the Divine origin and autho-
rity of the Scriptures, that the various religious impostors who have
seduced mankind with “all deceivableness of unrighteousness” since
the sacred canon was closed have, without exception, been compelled
to borrow everything good in their system from its inspired pages.
But, whatever amount of deference for the Word of God may bo
professed by these deceivers, it is clearly only assumed, its express
declarations, as well as its whole tenour and spirit, being condemna-
tory of their proceedings. The Bible does not lead us to expect any
other book, or writings, or messages, inspired of God. The witnesses
of Christ have left their testimony in the Hew Testament,'and the
Hew Testament proves the Divine authority of the Old. There is no
occasion for any further witnesses. We may here know all that
needs to be known. The way to worship God, to approach him fox-
salvation, to please him by a holy life, is as plain as possible. The
character of God, his promises, his commandments, his revelation of
a future judgment, and of an eternal state of happiness or misery, are
given in clear words, fully, strongly, and repeatedly. Moses and the
Prophets foretold a future Teacher. Jesus gave his Holy Spirit to
the Apostles. The Apostles did their work, and left the Gospel in
the Churches for the instruction of all nations and ages. They did
not foretel, as the ancient Prophets had foretold, that there would be
a new Prophet, an additional revelation, another Bible ; but they did
foretel that there would be pretenders to inspiration, boasting
teachers, false prophets; and these have appeared in all ages, from
Simon Magus, Menander, Montanus, Manes, and Mohammed, in the
earlier part of the Christian era, down to Richard Brothers, Joanna
Southcote, and Joseph Smith, in later times. The delusive preten-
sions of Smith, the founder of a sect called “ Mormonites,” are


-exposed in the following pages; and the usual pleas of “ misrepre-
sentation,” “ persecution,” &c., advanced by the abettors and the
victims of the delusion against its opponents, will have little weight
with any candid mind, as the statements now put forth are contained
in a critical notice by the “ Eclectic Review” (an English periodical
of the highest authority) of the Mormons’ own text-books, and of the
official report of the TJnited States’ exploring expedition to their
settlement. From those it is abundantly evident that Christianity
and Mormonism are, in doctrine and practice, utterly inconsistent
with each other. The Bible and the Book of Mormon both claim a
Divine origin—both cannot be true—one of them must therefore be
a blasphemous lie. Let the reader judge which.
J. B


MORMONISM, &c.
Wk have no desire to misrepresent the conduct of the “ Latter-day
Saints,” or to excite prejudice against them. But we are concerned
that people should know what they really arc, and not be led away
by men who have a worldly interest in giving representations which
are either untrue, partial, or highly coloured. We have examined
their own reports, comparing them with those of respectable witnesses
who have lived among them. They, like the Papists, profess them-
selves to be the only true Church of God on earth ; and for whatever
they do they produce what they call the express authority of God in
his inspired servants.
It is only reasonable, then, that we should bring such high preten-
sions to the test. We must have proof that these men deserve to be
trusted in this matter. One would hardly trust one’s money in the
hands of a stranger, without proofs of his honesty. We seek proof
of a physician’s skill before we trust our life to him. A witness must
know what he says, and be owned as a man ol truth, Indore a jury
will take his evidence. Yet thousands of people are trusting their
money, their lives, and their eternal welfare to a company of men
who, in our judgment, ai’e not worthy of such a trust.
We cannot look upon the life of Joseph Smith without a convic-
tion that ho was a deceiver. The books he published are imitations
of the Bible, without one proof of their being given from heaven, and
abounding with proofs that they were not, and could not be. The pe-
culiar doctrines taught by him and his followers are contrary to the
plain meaning of the New Testament; though they profess, in com-
mon with Christians, to revere that book as the Word of God.
It may be said that these arc mere opinions, and that the Mormons
have as much right as avc have to hold their opinions and to preach
them. We admit this. We Avould use neither force nor any other
unfair means to abridge their liberty. But Avhen avc are convinced
that the opinions of a community arc unscriptural, and Avhon we find
the most active exertions arc made to gain proselytes by attacking the
religious views of all existing Churches, it becomes our duty to ex-
pose their errors and their false pretensions. Errors and pretensions,
such as those which we are considering, cannot be otherwise than
mischievous in their effects on society, as well as on the spiritual
state of the individuals who maintain them. The mischievous effects


are not, however, those which we may only infer from general consi-
derations —they are real facts. To these facte the attention of the
reader is requested.
Mormonism is, from first to last, a singular scheme of social life ,
originating in imposture, managed hy the cunning of politicians pre-
tending to be priests, and carried on by a plan of proselytism to a pro-
fessedly religious system.
Imposture is all the more vexatious and terrible in its consequences
when it is built on extraordinary religious pretensions. Now we know
that Smith belonged to a family notorious among their neighbours for
bad character. They employed their time in digging in the earth
for money and other hidden treasures. “ They used what are called
in Scotland ‘ seer-stones,’ through which, it is imagined, persons boni
under peculiar circumstances can see things at a distance, or future
things passing before their eyes, or things buried in the earth. Such
a stone was dug from a well by one Willard Chase, which was loaned
to the prophet Joseph, and retained by him, and with which some of
the family declared he read in the Golden Bible The family also
used peach and witch-hazel rods to detect and drive off evil spirits
when digging for money ; and such branches are supposed by many
to point out streams of running water beneath the surface, and are
used by miners frequently to find the lodes of mineral, for the currents
of water are supposed to run parallel with the veins. They take a
forked stick, and hold a prong in each hand, the stem pointing up-
ward, and walk about the field. If there are any underground springs
the stick will turn downward towards them, in spite of the holder.
Tales of such discoveries are told among this people and firmly be-
lieved at present, not only by them, but by persons in every part of
the country.” (Gunnison’s “Mormons,” p. 89.) The fame acquired by
Smith for money-digging induced an old Dutchman in Bainbridge,
New York, to employ him in search for the wealth which Avas gene-
rally supposed to have been buried by the original inhabitants, or by
wandering Spaniards, on the banks of the Susquehanna.
While labouring as a professed money-digger, Smith persuaded
Miss Hale, at Harmony, Philadelphia, to elope with him, and they
AA'ere clandestinely married. He had already cheated a man by pro-
mising him a share of silver ore, Avhich he told him he had disco-
A’ered on the Susquehanna; but the mine could not be found. He
also induced the old Dutchman at Bainbridge to remove him and his
wife to Wayne County, by offering half of a bar of gold, which he
pretended to have found in a cave near to his father’s house—which,
of course, Avas not forthcoming. When he had obtained possession of
the “Manuscript Found,” there Avas a prevalent report that a
golden Bible had been dug up in Canada. Smith persuaded his family
to bclicA'e that he had found a golden Bible, though he refused to let
them see it. They spread rumours of this discoA’ery in all directions.


But it is important to observe, that the complete history of its super-
natural origin was not given until after its publication.
It was by the promise of great rewards that he swindled Martin
Harris out of his entire worldly property. As soon as a church was
organized at Kirtland, Ohio, in 1830, the year in which the “ Book
of Mormon” was published, “ the family of the Smiths rose from
poverty to opulence. A large mercantile house was started on a tithe
basis, and obtained credit to a considerable amount; and in 1837 a
bank was set in motion, and property assumed fictitious values. The
temple, with its various compartments for giving and receiving, en-
dowments, or for imparting and obtaining the gifts of the Spirit, was
so far advanced that the rites were actually held. For some days
wine flowed freely—wine that had been consecrated , and declared by
the prophet to be harmless and nut intoxicating. This, with previous
fastings, expectations wrought to the highest pitch, and other means
used to create mental excitement, produced unheard-of effects, if wo
may credit the witnesses of these proceedings. Visions, tongues,
trances, wallowings on the ground, shoutings, weeping, and laughing,
the outpouring of prophecies, and terrible cursings of Missourians ,
exhoi'tations from house to house, and preaching to unseen nations—
these, and other fantastic things, were among the ‘signs following’
at Kirtland.
, “ Kot long after followed the crash of the speculations. The im-
provident habits of sudden wealth, the unwise investments in lots,
houses, and mills, and the loose management of the mercantile firm,
brought on embarrassments in 1838. The bank failed, and the
managers were prosecuted for swindling. Smith and Higdon secretly
departed for the Far West, the Aew Zion, and thus escaped to the
‘City of Refuge’ from the Sheriff and his writs, and perhaps from
the Penitentiary.”—(Gunnison, p. 107.)
The Mormons now rapidly increased, and their advance was marked
by outrages of the most flagrant character. The official publications
of the State, and of the United States Senate, contain the evidence of
the trial of Smith and his companions as the ringleaders in these out-
rages. Whatever may be said on behalf of their deluded followers,
no fair-minded man will question that Smith and his immediate asso-
ciates deserved punishment for wholesale robbery. It is a matter of
serious regret that they escaped from prison, leaving the victims of
their imposture to suffer for their crimes.
All that we know of Joseph Smith assures us that worldly gain, in
the first instance, and then worldly power, were the objects at which
he aimed. When he found how easily he could command followers
as a pretended prophet, he made use of their credulity, their fana-
ticism, and their talents. He was himself a man of great natural
abilities. He could read the dispositions of others. He could
influence their conduct by studying the motives from which they
acted. He showed himself in the character most attractive to them.


He employed them in the way most agreeable to themselves, and
most likely to secure and extend his power. By the great number of
his followers, in several of the states, ho was rapidly acquiring in-
fluence on political questions. He published his views of govern-
ment. He made use of Harris’s money to publish his “ Book of
Mormon—of Higdon’s methodical talents to organize a church,
and draw up a system of doctrines to which he prefixed his own
name —and of Cowdry’s writing, to make up for his own want of
penmanship. To the Jews he held out the expectation of their long-
looked for Messiah • to the American Indians he gave a fabulous account
of then’ origin, and foretold their future grandeur; to the Christian
he offered a divine explanation of many parts of the New Testament;
to all his followers he exhibited the most alluring prospects of
worldly riches. The industrious were encouraged to labour, though
he claimed to be excused on the authority of a pretended revelation.
The brave were drilled in military bands. The inquisitive and
loquacious were employed as missionaries. If any dissented, their
characters were blackened, and their persons exposed to every kind
of annoyance. He had one doctrine for the many; another for the
initiated and trusted few. He became not only the head of a church,
but the mayor of a city, and the commander of a legion- He forcibly
resisted the constitutional authority of the government under whicn
he lived. He abetted the destroyers of the property of those who
reproached him. It was when arrested on a charge of robbery,
murder, and treason, awaiting his his trial at Carthage, and defend-
ing himself with fire-arms from the violence of the citizens whom he
had exasperated by his proceedings, that he was shot, as he attempted
to escape by leaping from the window of his gaol.
An intelligent Englishman, who visited Nauvoo, heard Smith
preach, and conversed with him in private, describes him as a person
of rude manners, fond of low jocularity, but shrewd, and of great
powers in the pulpit. Referring to a long conversation he had with
him in his own house, he says—
“He did not like some of the questions I put to him. When speaking of
his first vision, I inquired'which of the persons of the Trinity it was who
appeared to him V He replied—' It was the Father with the Son on his right
hand, and he said, ' I am the Father, and this being on my right hand is my
Son Jesus Christ.’ There was nothing in his appearance to indicate any aber-
ration of intellect, or that he gave himself to any degree of mental abstraction.
My conclusion was that he was an impostor.”—lntellectual Repository:
“ Letter of Adam Howarth, Cincinnati , August 12, 1843.”
When we consider the extraordinary career of this singular man, and
the deep hold which his doctrines have on the minds of thousands, it
is not wonderful that contradictory opinions should be entertained of
his true character. He had too much sagacity and selfishness to be
the honest enthusiast which some would represent him to have been :
for, in whatever degree he may have been led by the dreams of a
heated imagination to believe his own lie, there is nothing in the


general experience of mankind, in similar cases, to prevent our con-
cluding that he was one of the most daring and artful of impostors.
What other consistent explanation can be given of his early tricks—
his repeated acts of barefaced robbery—his turning every event to
his own glory and advantage—his grasping at power —his tenacious
holding of that power—and his reliance on force, where fraud could
not avail, even to the last moment of life ? For his celebrity, for the
long continuance of his name, even after what men call his religion
will have vanished before the light of Truth, he will be more indebted
to the circumstances of his death than to any part of his life. His
followers are not likely to receive with patience the assurance, from
impartial persons, that it is a mere perversion of language to call him
a martyr. A martyr is one who suffers death rather than renounce his
faith. Joseph Smith was not asked to renounce Iris religion: his
doing so would not have saved him. The American government
neither had, nor wished to have, anything to do with his “revela-
tions,” as he called them. The mob that murdered him cared
nothing for his faith. The people of Missouri would have left him
alone, had they not believed that he had committed crimes for which
he would have been legally tried if his life had been spared. To
compare the unexpected end of such a man with the death of Stephen,
or any of the other holy men who have suffered for the name of Jesus,
whether in apostolic or in later times, is to confound things widely
different, and is but the perpetuation of the imposture. We know
how vain it is to reason on this subject with the upholders, or the
dupes, of that imposture. But we may hope to convince not a few
of those -whom they are seeking to proselytize in this country, that—
whatever Joseph Smith was —his being murdered while attempting to
escape from the gaol in which he was confined as an arrested traitor
cannot entitle him to the venerated name of martyr.
Now, as the whole of this worldly scheme began in religious im-
posture, so it has been carried on to the present time by a policy
which is represented as given by revelation from heaven. This policy
is in the hands of men pretending to be priests. Knowing that reli-
gious organization has always been one of the most powerful means
of managing mankind, and living among republican people, they have
taken care that no law shall be recognised by them but the “ Mor-
mon” law. The Seer is the highest magistrate; the Bishops are
the justices; the Judges are “ high priests,” or “apostles.” To any
other tribunals they will not submit. If any Governor but their
“ Seer” should be appointed, no regard would be paid to his pro-
ceedings. This is the corner-stone of the whole system. The go-
vernment is a government of priests , who are not chosen by tho
people. The law of marriage taught in the writings of the Mormons
is the same as that acknowledged by Christians. The practice of
their priests, however, is described by writers who have had an op-
portunity of observing, ia a way which delicacy requires us not to


conceal, but only to expose. The Judges of the Utah territory re-
ported to the Congress—
“ We deem it our duty to state, in this official communication, that
polygamy or ‘ plurality of wives’ is openly avowed and practised in the
territory, under the sanction and in obedience to the direct commands of
the church. So universal is the practice that very few, if any, leading
men in the community can be found who have not more than one wife each,
which creates a monopoly, and which is peculiarly hard on the officers
sent to reside there. The prominent men in thechurch, whose example in
all things it is the ambition of the more humble to imitate, have each many
wives, some of them, we are credibly informed, and believe, as many as
twenty or thirty, and Brigham Young, the governor, even a greater num-
ber. Only a few days before we left the territory the governor was seen
riding through the streets of the city in an omnibus with a company of his
wives, more than two-thirds of whom had infants in their arms—a sure
sign that the evii is increasing. It is not uncommon to iind two or more
sisters married to the same man, and in one instance at least a mother and
her two daughters were among the wives of a leading member of thechurch.
This practice, regarded and punished as a high and revolting crime in all
civilized countries, would, of course, never be made a statutory offence by
a Mormon Legislature, and of a crime at. common law the court would be
powerless to correct the evil with Mormon juries.’’—“Times,” Jan. 20,
1852.
Captain Howard Stansbury, the commanding officer of the United
States exploring expedition to the Great Salt Lake of Utah, states
expressly—
“ I heard it proclaimed from the stand (pulpit), by the president himself,
that he had a right to take a thousand wives if he thought proper, and he defied
any one to prove from the Bible that he had not. At the same time, 1 have never
known any of the community allow that he himself had more than one, although
that such was the fact was as well known as any fact can be.”
Lieutenant Gunnison, an officer in the same expedition, says—
Of all the children that have come under our observation, we must in candour
say that those of the Mormons are the most lawless and profane. Circumstances
connected with travel, with occupations in a new home, and desultory life, may
in part account for this ; but when a people make pretensions to raising up ‘ a
holy generation,’ and are commanded to take wives for the purpose, we naturally
look at the qualities of the fruit produced by the doctrines, and surely they would
not complain of the Scripture rule, —‘ By their fruits ye shall know them.’ ”
“ The Mormons,” p. HiO.
The practice of polygamy lias been publicly vindicated by the
Mormon apostles. Their arguments are of the most offensive cha-
racter. With a tone which we cannot distinguish from speaking “ a
word against the Son of Man” (Luke xii. 10), one of them has not
been afraid to print the following :—“ If, at the marriage of Cana in
Galilee, Jesus was the bridegroom, and took unto him Mary and
Martha, and the other Maty whom Jesus loved, it shocks not our
nerves !!” —(Orson Hyde : Guardian , Dec. 26, 1851.)
Wo have sufficient evidence of the propagation of this vile and
horrible doctrine even in our country, although the preachers of Mor-


monism openly deny it, or represent it as merely the personal fault of
individuals. Parents, husbands, and all who care for purity of morals,
and the happiness of families, cannot he too much on their guard
against these lying prophets and lascivious “ saints.”
In the Deseret News of November 15, 1851, there is a report of
the trial of Howard Egan, before the United States District Court for
the territory of Utah, on indictment for murder of James Monroe. In
the charge of the Judge it is clearly laid down that “ the law does
not permit a person to take the redress of grievances into his own
hands.” But, as every territory is governed by its own laws, the
prisoner, according to the laws of the territory of Utah, was pro-
nounced by the jury “not guilty.” Such are the ideas of right and
wrong, of crime and justice, in that territory, that a man who kills
another in cool blood, to revenge a personal injury, and who, accord-
ing to the laws of the United States, as well as of England, would bo
condemned as a murderer, is acquitted according to the common law
of Utah ; and this acquittal is published by Mormons in England as a
“refutation of the calumniating charges which are so lavishly be-
stowed upon an injured and unoffending people ! ”
A Christian reader would naturally ask —What has all this worldly
system which you call “ Monnonism” to do with the religion of Jesus
Christ ? Our answer is—that it is looked at favourably by not a
few who are opposed to that religion. By some, it is liked better
than the religion of Christ, simply because it is so worldly in its
character. Eor one man that cares to be instructed in right views of
God, as our Maker, Lord, and Father—of man in his fallen state and
misery—of the way of restoration to God’s favour by trusting entirely
to the righteousness of his Son our Saviour —of the grace of the Holy
Spirit, by which alone we can be created anew unto good works—and
of the life to come, revealed in the Gospel, as our encouragement to
holiness, and our comfort in distress, there are many thousands
eagerly seeking wealth, freedom, independence, and power, to whom
the bold pretensions and large earthly promises of Mormonism aro
very captivating.
Persons ignorant of the Scriptures cannot see through the absurdity
of their tivo priesthoods, which are contrary to the plain meaning of
both the Old and Hew Testaments, and have no authority but in the
dreams or pretended visions of Joseph Smith. Heither can such
persons see through the silly mimicry of the things done by the
apostles, who were sent forth to be witnesses of Jesus Christ as a
Saviour risen from the dead, and their violent applications of ancient
prophecies to the Book of Mormon.
Hothing is easier among the ignorant multitude than to pei’suado
them to believe in quack advertisements and ridiculous stories about
miracles. One of their apostles says, of what he calls the “evidences”
of Mormonism, they arc “ such as will prove the salvation of every
creature that receives the message, and the damnation of every soul


that rejects.” (“ Divine Authority,” by Orson Pratt, p. 16.) “No on®
can be saved who rejects baptism. Baptism is the condition of for-
giveness. Baptism is essential to salvation.” u Faith, repentance,
and baptism are three essential conditions preceding' remission of sins.
Each arc equally important.” “There is no other way or plan under
the whole heavens that will save men ” “No church, either among
the Papists or Protestants, have taught all the first principles of tho
Gospel in their proper order. By this we know that they arc not tho
church of God. God is not with them. Their sins arc not forgiven.
Tho Holy Ghost is not given to them, and they cannot be saved in
the fulness of the Glory of the Father’s kingdom, neither they nor
their fathers for many generations past.” “They have the bold con-
fidence to call themselves Christian churches ; —but they have nothing
to do with .Christ, neither has Christ anything to do with them, only
to pour out on them the plagues written. He has not spoken to any
of them for many centuries, neither will he speak to them, only in
wrath and in the fierceness of his anger, when ho riseth up to over-
throw, to root up, and to destroy them utterly from earth.” (“ Tho
Kingdom of God,” Part 11. p. 8.)
None of us can deny that there are many evils in this country.
Wide doors of escape from some of these evils are opened by the Pro-
vidence of God in distant lands. It would be most unfair to deny
the great ignorance, superstition, and false preaching, which abound
in this countiy. We are not surprised, therefore, that there should
be persons willing to follow leaders who have much zeal, speak with
great earnestness, and are constantly employing specious arguments
in favour of their own teaching. It would be equally unfair not to
admit that many important truths are taught by Mormons. But
they have no truths which are not already taught in the Bible; and
they teach for truths many other things—and these are their distin-
guishing doctrines —which are not only not taught in tho Bible, but
contrary to the things which arc taught there as the distinguishing
doctrines of the Gospel.
Persons who know little or nothing of the proceedings of the Mor-
mons are of necessity unacquainted with “ The Book of Mormon,”
“ Tho Book of Doctrines and Covenants,” or the numerous publica-
tions in the form of pamphlets and magazines, in which the divine
authority of those “Books” is defended. We have felt it to be our
duty to examine the “ books,” and a considerable number of these
magazines and pamphlets, for ourselves. Now, while there are many
proofs of gross ignorance, manifest trickery, and glaring contradic-
tions in these writings, it is not easy for ordinary readers to detect
them; while some of them are written with considerable intelligence
and skill. We are, therefore, not at all surprised at their gaining
proselytes, who, being once gained, resolutely shut their eyes
against everything opposed to tho system they have adopted, while
(hey eagerly receive and magnify whatever may be said on its behalf.


Tlio advocates of Mormonism persist in denying all that has been
proved, on the clearest evidence, against the character of Joseph
Smith. They hold up men who have suffered for criminal offences
as martyrs to the truth. They denounce all who oppose them by
argument as persecutors. They clumsily make use of Protestant ar-
guments against Roman Catholic traditions, and of Roman Catholic
arguments against Protestant declarations of the sufficiency of Scrip-
ture as the only rule of faith. They borrow the most plausible objec-
tions of infidels against the truth and divine authority of the Bible.
Though Joseph Smith and his assistants copy the exact words of the
English Bible , translated in the reign of James 1., Orson Pratt has
scraped together all he knew, apparently, of the oft-refuted objections
to the Bible as wo now have it, for the express purpose of establishing
the superionty of the “ Book of Mormon” to the Bible, which same
Bible the Lai ter-day Saints profess to believe as the Word of God,
and to which they appeal as an authority for many of their funda-
mental doctrines. It requires some thought, and not a little informa-
tion, to be able to expose the ignorance, craft, inconsistency, and the
utter falsehoo I of a writer who makes such violent efforts to draw
the English people from the Bible to the American “ Book of
Mormon.”
At the present time, these fanatics, finding that their bold asser-
tions of the purity of their prophet’s character go for little, have
adopted a new plan. They say—
•• Some people, who cannot find anything better to do, speak mOtcli evil of
Joseph Smith. Now, the character of Joseph Smith is not the question. Was Joseph
Smith sent of God, —and did he preach the true principles of the everlasting
Gospel ? Here is a fact: Joseph Smith introduced the pure principles of
the everlasting Gospel to this generation, and every faithful Latter-day Saint
knows this for himself; he is not dependent on the testimony of others alone, for
he has proven the thing on the principle pointed out. Now, no matter if Mr.
Smith apostatized from the truth, died a villain, and is gone to hell —this then i»
plain, this generation will be under condemnation if they obey not the gospel
which God revealed through Joseph Smith.”—Millennial Star,” Ap. 1, 1852,
p. 140.
This is sheer fanaticism. The character of Joseph Smith is the
question. If ho was an impostor, the “ Book of Mormon ”is an im-
posture—the “Book of Doctrines” is an imposture— the whole
system of Latter-day Saints is an imposture. We have no proof
that Joseph Smith was sent of God. His own testimony and that of
his “witnesses” are of no value. Mr. Orson Pratt sets up for a
prophet himself, and, after producing what he calls “evidence” in
favour of the “Book of Mormon,” he gravely says—“l now bear
my humble testimony to all the nations of the earth who s hall read
this series of pamphlets that the “Book of Mormon” is a divine
revelation, for the voice of the Lord hath declared it to me. And
having been commanded of the Lord , in his name I humbly warn all
mankind to repent of all their sins, to turn away from their false
doctrines, and forsake the precepts of uninspired men.”


Such is the style in which false teachers have been deceiving men
from the beginning. By such bold assertions men have in all ages
been drawn away from the pure religion of the New Testament.
Besides boasting of inspiration possessed by thousands, the Mormons
constantly assert that the “ Book of Mormon” is composed by miracle ;
and they have marvellous stories of the healing of the deaf, the dumb,
the blind, the lame, the leprous, ruptures, fevers, fits, cholera
These miracles are said to present a thousand times more evidence-
than we have for those recorded in the New Testament. Such has
been the boast of the Koman Catholic Church for centuries down to'the
present day. Individual impostors have deceived great numbers of
persons in this country'. Mesmerism has produced what would bo
called incredible wonders, if they had not been received as true by so
many. Millions of people have believed in magic, and witchcraft, "and
quack doctors. Almost any thing unlooked for is apt to be called
miraculous.
An infidel might say,—“ So it is with your Bible miracles.” To
him our reply would be this: the miracles recorded in the New Tes-
tament were publicly wrought in the presence of enemies, uncontra-
dicted, incapable of being explained by natural causes, perfectly
attested by men who gave every proof of intelligence and honesty—
appealing to hundreds of living witnesses who entered on a new course
of life in conformity with doctrines which were worthy of the miracles,
even as the miracles were worthy of the doctrines the whole com-
posing a religious system of whose origin no other account can be -
given, and which survives the tests, persecutions, and corruptions of
eighteen hundred years.
But the Mormon cannot consistently say what the infidel says. He
professes to believe the miracles of Scripture. Now, there must be,
there is, an essential difference between true and pretended miracles.
Beal miracles are wrought by the power of God—pretended miracles
are the cunning tricks of the men who work them, or mistaken views
of natural events on the part of ignorant beholders. Let any one
compare a chapter in the New Testament with the accounts of-
miracles published by the Mormons, and he will see what a difference
there is between the one and the other. The history of Joseph Smith
in the “Millennial Star” (vol. iv.) relates some extravagant stories
of this kind, and a collection of them is printed in a pamphlet by
Orson Pratt. A calm consideration of each of these cases has con-
vinced us that no miracle was wrought in any one of them. There
is not any of the same kind of evidence on which we believe the
miracles of the New Testament. They are like thousands of cases
called miracles in the legends of the Koman Catholics. They are
connected, also, with pretended revelations from heaven, and are all
brought forward to prove the divine authority of the Book of
Mormon. Enough has been said in these pages to prove that the
whole scheme is an impudent imposture. Our Saviour told his


disciples of “ false prophets, who shall show great signs and won-
ders.” The Apostle Paul expressly foretold that there would be
“ lying wonders,” leading men to “ believe a lie;” and the last
prophet of the Bible describes one who “ doeth great wonders, and
deceiveth them that dwell on the earth.”
Morraonism is a more compact system of “priestcraft” than
Romanism. Its priesthood is an unscriptural usurpation; its miracles
are impostures ; its doctrines are contrary to those of Scripture; its
practical working is that of worldly-minded, crafty, and ambitious
priests on the ignorance, credulity, and superstition of their followers.
Mormonism differs from all the Christian professions in the world
except the papal, in making all the things of religion serve the worldly
selfishness and ambition of priests. This is not an abuse of the
system: it is the system itself; a tenth paid; of the property of the
Mormons goes into their hands; and they are the supreme rulers in
all things, both temporal and spiritual.
The Mormon preachers and writers arc most bitter in their railings
against all churches and ministers except themselves, calling them by
the most disgraceful and insulting names, and dealing out against
them the most burning curses. When any one opposes them by fair
discussion of their claims, and calm exposure of their delusions, they
cry out that they are persecuted. We are little moved by all this.
It provokes only compassion for their ignorance, and prayer to God
that Ho would give them a better mind. The wide spread of this
system is a serious fact, however, and wc view it as likely to produce
great mischief. It is a bad thing for men to be puffed up with the
notion that they have got a new Bible, a new priesthood, a new reli-
gion. It is a bad thing for men to have a spirit of greediness, and
fighting, and trickery. It is a bad thing for men to get into the way
of believing doctrines not contained in the Bible as revelation from
God. Yet this is Mormonism:.
We may be asked—How is this to be prevented ? Our answer
is—by teaching people what the Bible is, as different from other books,
helping them to understand the proofs we have that it is the Word of
God ; by setting them the example of the practical religion which it
teaches; and especially by sympathizing with them in their struggles
against poverty and other ivorldly evils. So long as we neglect to use
such means, we must not complain when those whom we have
neglected are carried away by ingenious and earnest teachers who go
among them as the champions of Mormonism. It is, in many cases,
too late to check the evil after it has begun. It is better to prevent
it. It can be prevented —if those who secure the*confidence of the
people by Christian kindness will fairly explain to them what Mor-
monism is, and how it differs from the pure faith of the Gospel, inits
evidences, in its doctrines, in its practices, in its spirit, and in its
effects on societv.


These views are now published in the hope of drawing attention to
the subject. We have not formed our judgment rashly. We have
taken much pains to procure information. We know that Mor-
monism cannot be successfully defended by true statements and fair
argument. We believe that, like other delusions which have had
their day, it will vanish ; but not before it has done much injury.
At Utah, its present head quarters, it is gradually losing much of its
original character. As the present generation passes away, it will
probably undergo great changes, some of them necessitated by poli-
tical causes, of which the signs are already visible to thoughtful
observers. Better territories, and more accessible, offer more inde-
pendent homes to industrious emigrants. People are becoming more
informed. Christians of various denominations are taking more
seriously to heart both the social and the spiritual condition of the
multitudes, among whom the Mormon preachers in this country gain
their converts. We wish to help forward these ministries of Christian
love. There is great need for them. They need to be conducted
with great intelligence, with much patience, with untiring faith in
the truth of God, and with earnest prayer for the power of the Holy
Spirit to turn men from sin to holiness, through believing on the Son
of God.
What the Gospel has done, it can still do ; but then it must be
preached fully, clearly, lovingly, and wisely : so as to meet the errors
of the present day, by understanding them first, then by seeing
and showing whence they have sprung; and, finally, by appealing
to men’s judgments and consciences on behalf of what we know to
be God’s own message, in humble reliance on his promised grace. To
all who thus preach, w© bid “ God speed.”
W, LA.HBERT, PRINTER, 169, PITT STREET, SYDNEY.




