

Mother
Madge
LOUISA M. DITCHAM
[?]


Allen, T. o rr
L (LLbnc 6 storis


flDotber flDaboe




Mother
Madge
BY
Louisa M, Ditcham
LAUNCESTON
A. J. PASMORE, 51 PATTERSON STREET
1899


A- J. PA3MORE,
PRINTER ANb PCJBU,TMER,
■5 I PATTERSON STREET, LATJ NCSSTON


flo
mg bear tfrienb, .
■
of ikclso,
this JBoof? is
Htfectionatelß ©ebicatcb
bfi tbe Sutborcss
ROCK LYNN,
LAUNCESTON




MOTHER MADGE
CHAPTER I.
fE were a large and I am afraid rather a
troublesome family to be left to the entire
care and management of so young a protectress
as our dear sister Madge, whose sweet patient
face and gentle ways I look back to with feelings
of deep love and almost reverence.
My father, when Madge was barely seventeen,
met with an accident which proved fatal, and my
dear mother, whose heart was weak, and who had
very indiffeient health at the best, was so over-
come by the shock that it resulted in a serious
illness, from which she never recovered ; and so
in one short year we were left orphans.
It was a dark time for poor Madge, who realised
our forlorn condition more than any of us, we
children being almost too young to feel how
great was our. loss. Besides, young as she was,
B


we had been in the habit of looking up to her
and going to her in most of our childish troubles.
Our mother’s health being delicate, dear kind
sister as she was, she had always tried to do her
utmost to take the heaviest part of the burden
herself; so perhaps we had got to look upon her
somewhat as a mother. Be that as it may, Madge
had all the burden on her young shoulders, and
while we looked to her, she looked to someone
higher, and carried all her troubles to that Friend
who has promised to be the Father of the
fatherless.
I have said that we were a large family, seven
in number. Well, I should have thought that
considerably large if I had been left to manage it.
What a mercy it was not so ! What a muddle I
should have made of it all! To. tell the truth, I
had always had a great longing to be a boy, and
as we had only one boy to our six girls, thought
it rather hard lines that I had come into this world
a girl when I felt sure in my own mind I should
have made a far better boy. However, I consoled
myself with the thought that if I had been one I
might have grown up to disgrace the family in
some way or another, and bring sorrow upon my
dear old Madge.


But to go on with my story. I was saying we
were seven, and one did in the churchyard lie, for
one had died in babyhood between Madge and
Claude, making four years between them. The
former, as I have already remarked, was seventeen,
and my brother Claude thirteen. Next came
myself and twin sister Muriel, in our eleventh
year. ' Next Nellie, and then two little ones, Elsie
and Violet.
Why I was ever made a twin with my sister Muriel
will always remain a mystery to me, as no two on
this earth, I am sure, could ever have been more
unlike : Muriel, with her soft beautiful violet eyes,
shaded by long dusky lashes, and her lovely
golden-brown hair, perfect features, and sweet
expression ; so different to my Oh dear,
how shall I describe myself ? Well, people called
my eyes grey, but I thought that was just when
they wanted to please me, as 1 could see more
green in them than any other colour ! and my
nose well, it had one redeeming quality—it
turned slightly heavenwards, and I am afraid in
those days that it was the only religious part
about me. My mouth was not so bad ; but I had
a good share of freckles, which perhaps was not to
be wondered at, considering in those days I lived


more in the open air without a hat than with one.
But I had one beauty, which I must not forget, as
it was my only one—my hair—which hung in
thick curly golden masses to my waist, and, as our
old servant said, was ‘ like a picter, and as unlike
my face and ways as could be for I was not a
favourite of hers, having, I am afraid, many times
led her a troublesome life.
Nellie was dark, and just one of those bright
sunny little creatures that everybody seems to
take to.
Claude was much like myself, a limb for mischief,
but good-natured, generous, and handsome, and
not so much spoilt as one might imagine, being
our only boy.
The two younger ones you will hear more about
as my story goes on.
And now what can I say of Madge, our dear
little mother ? She was beautiful in my eyes, and
always will be ; and I believe I was very dear to
her heart, though more trouble to her than any of
my sisters. I think I see her soft gentle eyes
looking at me now in that old tender reproving
way : they were grey—that real beautiful grey—
fringed with black lashes to match her glossy hair.
Her face was pale, with a half sad look about the


beautiful red lips ; her figure tall and slender, with
a peculiar grace of its own ; but I think after all
the chief attraction of her face lay in the peace
and calmness written in every feature. Not fiom
her face so much as from her quiet dignified ways
and tall figure, she might have been taken for two
er three years older than she really was.
Our father had left us tolerably well provided
for, but Madge was obliged to make some slight
alteration in the arrangement of our household
expenses. Amongst them was dispensing with one
of our domestics and teaching the two younger
children herself.
Our house, rather a large one, was situated in
one of the suburbs of Melbourne, just a short
railway journey from the city.
At the back of the house we had a large
rambling old garden, where flowers and fruit grew
in abundance together —just such a garden as the
town folks loved to come out to, and where we
children spent many a pleasant hour under the
shade of its lovely trees. In the front of the
house was a grass plot, green and velvety, and on
either side many bright flowers grew, shedding
their sweet fragrance all around. It was a two-
storeyed house, with no balcony, but one long


low verandah covered with jessamine, honeysuckle,
ivy, and climbing roses ; not a grand place by
by any means ! oh no ; but just a dear old home ;
and as I write of it my eyes fill with tears, for
clinging round the old homestead is the memory
of childhood days and happy girlish dreams.
But I must rouse myself, as I have now to speak
of a personage with whom sentiment had little
if anything to do, and one whom I had almost
forgotten to mention—a maiden sister of my
father’s—the only relative out here belonging to
either side, and who, on hearing of our forlorn
condition, came at once to visit us and see what
was to be done. She offered a home for one of
us with her, thinking it would be a relief to
Madge, who thanked her but declined, saying
she did not wish to part with any of us ; at
which my aunt fired up, and said she considered
Madge was acting very foolishly, and was sure
she would regret it all her life, etc., etc.
I know this, that it would have been a hard
matter to have persuaded any one of us to go
back with her, for I have a lively recollection of
peeping through the keyhole and seeing a queer
personage, very tall and looking as if she had
swallowed a poker, with a stern face, compressed


lips, and small eyes that seemed to pierce you
thiough, and wearing coloured glasses and a
bonnet that looked as if it might have been more
respectably worn fifty years ago. As I gazed at
her I certainly could not trace any resemblance
to my dear father, whose sister she was. It was
quite easy to hear all she said, and when I found
she was wanting to take one of us off with her, I
remember hiding myself up in one of the ward-
robes ; but I need not have alarmed myself, as
Madge would never consent to part with one of
her family while she could manage to keep us
all together.


CHAPTER II.
so you would have found us an unbroken
family if you had peeped into our dining-room
one wet Saturday afternoon just tvvo years after
the events recorded in the last chapter. It was
quite chilly, though it was the middle of January,
one of our hottest months ; but it had been one
of those sudden changes that come so often in
our Victorian climate, from extreme heat to cold,
and made us glad to shut ourselves in, with just
such a comfortable fire as we were indulging in
that afternoon.
Elsie and Violet were in front of it on the
hearthrug, as happy as could be, dressing and
undressing their dolls. Madge was working away
industriously at her machine, bending over it with
a face from which some of the old sadness had
passed away, and a bright and more cheerful
expression had taken its place. Muriel, like a
good girl as she always was, sitting quietly turning
down hems for Madge to put through the machine,
making a pretty picture, with her long dark
lashes resting on her flushed cheeks as she bent


over her work. Nellie with her elbows on the
table, and head resting on both hands, deep in a
fairy tale ; and myself perched on the head of the
sofa, supposed to be darning my stockings, but in
reality looking out of the window, and up to the
first piece of mischief that presented itself ; Olaude
drawing caricatures of me—‘quite a picter for a
hartist,’ as our biddy exclaimed when she came in
to replenish the coal-scuttle.
Poor Jane ! I don’t think she would have been
so amicably disposed towards us if she had known
of the ticket, marked ‘Only i/ii,’ that Claude
had ready to pin on her back as she stooped down
to attend to the fire. lam afraid 1 was a party
to this ; but our little game was soon put to an
end by Madge turning suddenly round and casting
on us one of her reproving looks. When Jane
had gone out of the room, Madge gave Claude
and myself one of her wise old lectures, ending up
by saying, ‘And Katie dear, I do wish you would
give your mind to those stockings and get them
done out of the way, for I am tired of seeing them
about.’
‘ Now, Madge,’ I say, * you know I told you
before it’s no use trying to make a needlewoman
out of me.’
0


1 Nor anything else, for the matter of that,’ says
Claude.
‘ Now, Master Claude, you just mind your own
business,’ I return, sticking the point of my needle
into him.
‘ Come, now, Mick, I say, you’re getting
spiteful’ (Mick was one of my nicknames), ‘and
I think it’s high time you altered your ways.
Do you know, young lady, you will enter your
teens this day week ? ’
‘Oh, so I will; I had almost forgotten,' I
answer, looking up at him ; and then, turning
to Madge, ‘ What do you say to a party P Three
birthdays all in one week : Muriel’s and mine the
same day, and youis three days after. Fancy,
Madge! you will be nineteen—just ending your
teens, and I and Mu beginning.’
‘Oh yes, let's have a parly!’ I say, jumping off
the sofa in my excitement, and putting my arms
round Madge ; ‘ now, mother dear, say yes.’
‘ I don’t know, Kitty,’ she answers, looking up
rather sadly ; ‘ I know it has all been very quiet
and dull for you children for a long time, so I
should like to give you some pleasure ; but if we
have a party, dear, it will have to be just our old
friends, and not a large one.’


‘ Oh, of course,’ I say, quite satisfied.
‘ And then, Katie dear, it will have to be on
certain conditions, mind—that you finish those
stockings and behave yourself better generally,’
says Madge, smiling.
‘ All right,’ I say, perching myself again on the
top of the sofa, and working away vigorously ;
‘remember, it’s a promise, Madge.’
‘Who shall we ask ?’ put in Nelly, getting
interested, and lifting her head from her book for
the first time.
‘ Oh, I see you can come back from fairyland
when there’s a party in the wind. Ask ? Why,
Kit knows heaps of. people, as she calls ’em—has
made acquaintance with the baker's and butcher’s
families all round, and the sweep’s too, haven’t
you, Kit ? ’
‘Now, Claude, don’t you talk nonsense. Madge,
we could ask the Parkers, Fords, Peters, and of
course Miss Fleming and her brother.’
‘And the Whites,’ put in Nelly.
‘ And don’t forget the Browns, Jones, and
Smiths,’ says Claude, vvho could not be serious for
the- life of him.
And so we rattled on, and finally decided to
have our little party in ten days time ; that would


bring it to Madge’s birthday ; also to have tea
spread out in the garden on long tables under the
trees, provided we had a return of our bright warm
weather.
The notable stockings were duly finished and
put away in my drawer, but not till they had been
rolled up, tossed in the air, and thrown two or
three times at Claude’s head. I had promised to
behave myself, so of course I had to try ; but I
found it hard work to keep from mischief, as my
spirits were unusually high anticipating the party
and looking forward to it with the delight and
excitement that is felt only by children and very
young people of my own age.
Of course we had to go to school, and what
with our music, errands to go for Madge, and
many other little things, the days soon passed and
the eventful one arrived, beautiful, bright, and
warm—just a lovely day for a garden party. To
add to our enjoyment we were allowed a holiday
from school to help prepare for our visitors.
Claude and I carried out two tables, one for the
children and another for the ‘ helders ’ (as Jane
called them) ; and in many ways most of us
managed to help Madge, till Jane, contrary to her
usual custom, praised us up and said she never in


all hei life ‘ see children more hactive and ’elpful.'
All the children were early, and the Parkers,
who came from town, got out by the four o’clock
train, and the others arrived nearer five o’clock.
We children all had our tea first, Jane attending
to us ; after which we amused ourselves roaming
about the grounds, picking fruit, and playing all
sorts of games.
Ours was a lovely old garden, abounding in
lovers’ nooks, summer-houses, etc., and at one side
a tennis-court, to which all the elder ones, after
tea, strolled and played tennis till dusk.


CHAPTER III.
J 5) EFORE going on any further I must introduce
(} you to some of our friends, as they will have
to do with my story later on. The Parkers were
a large family, but the four who came out to the
party are all I need mention here ; fessie, Muriel's
friend ; Eric, Claude’s chum ; Vera, my
and a little one named Flossy, whom Elsie and
Violet claimed as their special property. As I
have already mentioned, they lived rn Melbourne,
and as they had a town house, and we called ours
the country house, of course we naturally enjoyed
staying at either of the homes, or, I should say,
changing places for awhile.
The Fords lived only a few doors off, and though
we were great friends, we seemed to make special
ones of the Parkers. But then we had known
them longer, the Fords not having been a great
while in the neighbourhood ; still, we had become
pretty intimate, and were often at their house and
they at ours. Marion, the eldest girl, rather plain
but clever, was eighteen ; Alice, the second, a
pretty girl of sixteen ; and Wilfred just one year


older than myself. Beulah, a jolly little thing, was
Nellie's mate and companion ; and then there
were two little ones invited for Vi and Elsie’s
benefit.
We had several others at our party, but as they
have nothing to do with my story they need not
be mentioned, except two—whom I must not
forget—Miss Fleming and her brother Douglas.
May Fleming was just two years older than Madge,
and they were close friends. A nicer girl you
could not find anywhere, I think, than May. We
all loved her. Douglas was the elder of the two,
and a promising young lawyer. They were the
only son and daughter of dear old Dr. and Mrs.
Fleming, who lived in a lovely house a few miles
from us.
The doctor and his wife had been kind friends to
Madge all through our trouble, and indeed seemed
a second mother and father to us children. Douglas
and May were not much alike, May being fair and
her brother dark. The former might have been
called pretty, but Douglas was decidedly handsome.
About seven o’clock our garden was alive with
shouts of children, laughter from the tennis court,
and a gentle sound from the rackets. The little
ones had made off for the swing under the willows,


and Claude, Eric, and vve elder children were
having a rather rowdy game of hide-and-seek 5
and a fine old place our garden was for such a
game.
It was my time to hide, and I had managed to
get to a splendid old place, where I did not believe
even Claude would fin! me out a tangled old
spot just behind the summer-house. I had just
managed to screw myself down into the middle of
a great bush, and covered myself so well with the
large ferns and grasses that not a vestige of me
could be seen, nor was it a place where they were
likely to look for any one. I cannot say I was
very comfortable, but of course that did not trouble
me much.
I was keeping very quiet and still, listening to
their vain efforts to find me, and chuckling to
myself at my grand hiding-place, when I heard
steps approaching the summer-house. Thinking
it was some of my enemies, I laid perfectly still,
scarcely daring to breathe. The steps came
nearer and nearer, and at last I could distinguish
the voices. It was Madge and Mr. Fleming.
They had reached the summer-house now, and
were sitting down. They went on talking quite
distinctly, though in under-tones.


‘ Madge,’ he was saying—and I thought then
that I had neyer heard a man speak with such
tenderness (remember, I was only thirteen, and it
was a revelation to me) —‘ Madge dear, give me a
little hope. I will wait for you as long as you are
pleased to name, but marry anyone else I never
will. You know I have loved you ever since that
time we met four years ago.’
‘ Yes, Douglas, I know, and I loved you too, but
that was before dear mother’s death,’ Madge said
gently. Now, you know how different it all is for
me. How could I leave the children ? ’
‘No, dear,’ Douglas replied; ‘I am not asking
you to do that—you know I would not —but just to
give me a little hope that some day, when Katie
and Muriel are old enough to take your place ’
‘Ah, that will be a long time, and I cannot bear to
keep you tied down to me for so long.’
‘ Madge !’— and Douglas Fleming’s voice was
almost stern —‘ how can you talk like that ? Tie
I me down! I see you do not realise how much I
care for you. Besides, Katie and Muriel will be
seventeen in four years; and you took charge at that
■age.’
‘Ah, but, Douglas, I was trained for it. Being the
eldest, managing became second nature to me, and I
D


think I was older for my age than most other
girls.’
‘Yes, indeed, darling,’ he replied, ‘ I am sure you
have had far too much on your young shoulders, and
I long to take you out of it all.’
‘ Then Muriel is delicate,’ Madge went on, ‘ and
Katie—well, she is a good-hearted little soul, but— ’
‘Not at all domesticated, eh?’ and here Douglas
Fleming laughed outright.
Now, though I can call myself plenty of bad
names, when it comes to other people calling me
them, it sounds quite different; and at that moment
felt (much as I liked Douglas before) I could have
boxed his ears, kicked him, or have done something
desperate. What right had he to say what I could
or could not do ? Wait awhile : I'd show him !
Dear old Madge ! How I loved her ! She would
not utter a word against me, though I knew I
deserved it.
It seemed awfully mean of me to be listening to
all this, but how could I help it? and if I had
moved away after they had come, they might have
seen me, and confusion would have ensued on both
sides; besides, I was so wedged in and caught by
bushes and briars that it would be no small task to
extricate myself,


‘ Douglas, we must go,’ exclaimed Madge suddenly;
‘ they will have finished their game and have missed
us, and will think I am a nice hostess. Why, we
must have been away twenty minutes ! ’
‘Yes, I suppose we must go back. But May will
have filled your place for that short time, dear.. And
now before we go, my darling,' will you not give me
my answer?’
“ Can you wait till Katie and Muriel are twenty ? ’
asked Madge, quietly. ‘ I should not like to leave
them before.’
‘Seven years?—that is the time Jacob waited for
Rachel; and it seemed but a short time for the love
he bore her. Tis a long time, Madge, but I will
wait;’ and his voice was full of hope and tenderness.
And then I heard a long passionate kiss, and they
were gone, and their voices died away in the
distance.


CHAPTER IV.
fND now what ever would my playmates be
thinking of me all this time, and how was I
to get out of this tangle ?
But I did get out, and I trust and believe I came
out a changed girl, with a firm purpose in my heart
that, come what might, I would turn over a new leaf,
strive to do better, and take my place in the home,
that dear Madge should not have to wait seven years,
or even six, if I could help it; and my eyes filled
with tears as I thought of the great sacrifice my dear
sister was making for us all, and I resolved that from
that time forth I would alter my course, for in spite
of all my rough rowdy ways I believe I had deeper
feelings than I might have been credited with, and a
strong will, which has helped many a one over a
difficulty before.
Now, of course all this time there had been a great
hue and cry as to where on earth Kit could have got
to. Claude said he expected she had hidden in
some outlandish place. It was just like Mick; and
no doubt they would find her some day in a mud
hole with her heels sticking out.


I got over the difficulty by saying that I had
waited a good while in my hiding-place, and when
they had not turned up, I had tried to get out, but
was so caught by briars that I had no little trouble to
extricate myself. But no amount of persuasion would
make me reveal my hiding-place, for of course I
thought it might all come out to Madge, and she
would then know how close I had been to her and
Douglas.
It was now about eight o’clock, and most of our
party being tired of games and running about, easy
chairs were brought out for our visitors on the front
verandah, and we all seated ourselves about, to watch
the rising moon and enjoy the soft summer breeze
after the heat of the day.
I had seated myself on the stone steps in front of
the hall door. Douglas Fleming was standing a few
yards off, with his hands behind his back.
‘ Well, Miss Kitty,’ he exclaimed, quite suddenly,
1 I’ve scarcely seen anything of you. Where have
you been hiding yourself ? ’
Hiding myself ! I wished that minute that the
verandah would open and let me through. Surely he
couldn’t know! And I felt the hot colour rushing
up into the very roots of my hair. But I managed to
stammer out something by way of reply, and to my


great relief, after a few more remarks, he passed over
to where Madge was sitting with two or three of our
friends.
After he had moved away, I sat thinking. Surely
he couldn’t know, I said to myself j that was
impossible. Oh, no; it must have been just for
something to say. Hiding, indeed ! I think it was
he who was hiding. If he had only known I had
heard all ! Well, he wouldn’t have looked quite so
unconcerned, I guess ; and fancy pretending he had
missed me ! I don't believe he had given me a
second thought—the hypocrite !
Just then a pebble struck me on the nose, and
Claude’s voice called out, 1 Look at Kit; she looks
as if she is contemplating going into a nunnery.’ And
I glanced down at the bottom of the steps, where he
and Jack Peters were standing and had been amusing
the others with puns and riddles, which usually I was
so interested in; but to-night I heard only in a far off
dreamy way. I was roused for a time by Claude’s
remark, and joined in the conversation. But my
thoughts wandered back to the old subject as I
watched Muriel and her friend Jessie Parker standing
on the steps with arms around one another, the
front door thrown wide open, the light from the hall
and the soft rays of the moon (which had fully risen)


shining upon them, making a pretty picture; Jessie
with her sweet face, fair curls, and blue frock, and
Muriel with darker hair, perfect features, and all in
white.
So thought Eric Parker, as he stood just below
them, with hands in his pockets, gazing at Muriel.
My eyes saw wonderful things that night; but
remember what a lesson in love I had had. No
wonder if I had made couples all round. ‘ Yes,’ I
thought, as 1 looked at them, ‘there will be a match
there some day, I suppose, when you two are old
enough, and I shall be left “ with the family all on
my own hands.” Why, Eric is sixteen —so he is ;
and I suppose he fancies himself a man,’ I said to
myself, shaking my head, for though a child, I was an
old-fashioned one, and, I think, had a few wise
thoughts in my brain, and seemed to be two years
wiser, if not older, since getting up that morning.
‘ Oh, well, I shall have to be an old. maid, that’s
all, and look after the family; besides, there’s no one
likely to want me, so it won’t matter;’ and with this
I seemed to wake up again.
What a lovely night it was ! The beautiful moon
had risen high in the heavens, and was casting its
silvery rays on grass-plot, tree, and flower; the leaves
just shone and shivered again, stirred by a gentle


breeze, and the soft air was laden with delicious
scents of honeysuckle and jessamine. Through the
half open window came strains of music May
Fleming’s clear sweet voice as she sang the beautiful
old song, ‘ The Waiting will soon be o’er, Love.’
It seemed so appropriate to the occasion that back
I wandered to my old thoughts, till at last I said to
myself, quite severely, ‘Now, Kitty Everard, are you
the same being that got up to a picnic, this morning ?
Look at your friend Vera standing over there all
alone ; how you are neglecting her.’ So I sprang up
suddenly, and said, ‘ Ye, come for a stroll round the
walk,’ and put my arm round her in a gentle way.
She looked at me in astonishment. ‘ Why, Kit,’ she
exclaimed, ‘ What’s come over you ? ’ For I had
been in the habit of roughly putting my arm round
her, and jumping or running her along, rather than
walking.
‘ Never mind,’ I said, managing to change the
subject ; and so we stayed about the grounds till we
were all called in for some refreshment. Then our
party broke up and our guests went home, all but the
Parkers, as they had to go back by train, so we
persuaded them to stay the night.
Claude went with Mr. Fleming to put his pony
into the buggy. Soon all was ready, and he and


Miss Fleming drove off, giving us many invitations to
come soon and see them.
All were tired, and as soon as our visitors had
gone the girls made off for bed, the little ones having
been in dreamland some time, put there by Jane.
Madge and I were the last up, and as I was saying
good night to her she said, ‘ Why, Kitty, you look
quite pale.’
I DoI ?’ I answered. ‘ Oh, I’m only tired;’ and I
hid my head on her shoulder and put my arms
round her neck. ■ ‘ Good night, dear,’ I said at last,
looking up and kissing her.
‘ Good night, darling.’ she replied, kissing me in
return. She did not say any more, but I think she
wondered at me a little.
Then I rushed away, not daring to trust myself
any longer, in case I should break down. Up to the
nursery I went, where a bed had been prepared for
me, in consequence of having four extra to sleep. I
was glad it was so to-night, as I wanted to be alone
and indulge in a good cry to relieve my feelings,
which, as soon as I had closed the door, I gave way
to. The light of the gas, as I turned it up, fell on
the faces of the three sleeping children. How sweet
and innocent they looked in their cots all in a row,
little Flossy Parker’s brown rosy face and dark curly
E


hair making a pretty contrast to our two little girls on
either side of her, with their fair sunny faces and
golden curls lying on the snowy pillows. I kissed
them, undressed, then knelt down, not to gabble
over a few words that I had been in the habit of
doing, and thinking no more about them after; but
a prayer that I know came straight from my poor
little troubled heart, that God would make me a good
girl and fit me to take my place in the home; such a
prayer as I feel sure had never passed my lips before.
Then I got into bed, but not to sleep, for I lay for
hours thinking. Only fancy Madge—our dear little
mother—leaving us ! Such a thought had never
before entered into my childish head. What ever
would the place be like without her ? And with
these sad thoughts I cried myself to sleep.


CHAPTER V.
sjfT ext morning I was awakened with ‘ Kit, Kit,
you lazy thing, get up, do ! it’s ever so late.’
It was Vera’s voice.
‘Oh,’ I said, rubbing my eyes, and yawning,
‘is it?’
l Of course it is; why, we’ve finished breakfast
and have to make a rush for this train, or if we miss
it we will he late for school. Goodbye, Mick; I
can’t stop;’ and, giving me a hurried kiss, she was
off. and downstairs before I could get my scattered
senses together. ‘ This comes of lying awake
dreaming,’ I said to myself, springing out of bed,
‘and a bad beginning of turning over a new leaf.’
I could hear the commotion going on downstairs,
Claude’s voice above the rest (for he too went to
school in town every morning)— ‘ Look sharp, girls,
or we’ll lose the train.’ Then the hall door banged,
and I knew they were off; and now if I did not want
to be late for school, I should have to ‘ look sharp ’
too. Not that it was far to walk : it took us about
ten minutes, Murie, Nell, and I; but the others
would have had their breakfast, so I must hurry.


After our party was well over, the days passed
much as usual. We all went back to our studies.
Madge went on with her household duties and
teaching Elsie and Vi ; Claude to town to school
every morning, bringing home the city news at night
to enliven us up, adding his own nonsense to it.
Indeed, if we had not had Claude in the home it
would have been a great loss, though he was at times
a terrible torment. Jane went on as usual, doing her
work industriously, but grumbling every now and
again at us children for making, as she called it,
such a ‘ hupset of the house,’ and saying if we didn’t
halter she didn’t know what we’d come to in the
hend.
Poor Jane; she was very ignorant; she could
neither read nor write properly, which was rather
awkward, having a lover living some distance from
her. But she always managed to get one of us to
write her letters for her at her own dictation.
Claude and I especially were always eager to do
this job for her, getting more fun out of it, I think,
than the poor creature was aware of. Muriel some-
times undertook the task out of sheer kindness of
heart, and the young man must have wondered very
much sometimes at the different concoctions of the
epistles, as I know for a fact Claude often stuck in


his own composition, such as, 1 Keep up your pecker,
old fellow,’ and, ‘Oh, Jim, I’m dying to see you.’
And I am very much afraid I was not above doing
the like myself.
I will here give the reader a specimen of one of
the epistles, written by Claude at Jane's dictation,
that young man, in his mischievous way, writing it
down exactly as Jane worded it herself.
‘ My darlint Jim,
‘ Your letter as come a Wednesday hupset
me reg’lar. I couldn’t get on with my work nohow,
a seein’ you a-lyin’ in that there hospital with yer
broke harm. Oh, Jim me darlin’, this is a hawful
world, and I can’t offer you no constellation [con-
solation] whathever, as I’ve knowed parties as never
come hout of them theie places alive. One party
(Mary Jane Turner) went in with a haccident, and
took measles and fever atop of one another, and was
dead in less than a month. You’ll have to lie there
hanyways, Jim, and take yer chance. But I must
write to yers more, to cheer yer hup-a bit. Yer
know Bill Parsons. Well, his wife’s a dyin’ with a
cancer, and there’s no hopes on her ; and Will
Barnes has pisoned hisself.
‘Jim, me darlin’, yer face has riz up afore me
like a picter, I ain’t been nowheres of late ’ceplin’
to a hintertainment give by the church people.
There was beautiful singing, and one party give a
lovely resurrection [recitation].


1 And now, Jim, me darlint, if ever yer come out
of that there place alive, I s’pose yer’ll be walking on
stilts [crutches], so Jim, me dartin', be sure an’ mind
yer footin', or yer may have a worser haccident.
‘And now good-bye, hopin' this 'ere letter will
have livened yer hup a bit.
‘ Yer sincere and lovingest
‘JANE BROOMHILL.’
As time went on and I would not join in these
tricks as of yore, Claude began to wonder what had
come over me, for though there was no very marked
change in me, and many times I broke out into my
old ways and got into scrapes, still on the whole
there was a decided improvement, and after many
weeks it began to be noticed.
One day, about three months after our party, when
Claude and I were in the hall, and he was wanting
me to be up to some fresh mischief which I would
not join in, he pushed back his cap, put his hands in
his pockets, and stared at me.
‘ Look here, Kit,’ said he, ‘ what’s come over you ?
You ain’t the same girl—l declare you ain’t. Let’s
see, since when ? Why, I believe it’s ever since that
picnic. What on earth can it be ? Oh, I’ve got it!
You’re in love ! ’
At this I laughed outright.


' Me in love ! fancy !’ I cried ; ‘ who ever with ?’
‘ Ah, that’s best known to yourself,’ said Claude.
‘ Let’s see : Eric Parker ? No, he’s sweet on Mu ;
and there’s Will Ford and Jack Peters. You won’t
get them, so you’d best brighten up, for they think
as much about love as I do.'
‘ Claude, I say, don’t be such a donkey.’
‘ Donkey ? don’t you believe it; it’s you that’s the
donkey, for I’m blessed if I haven’t got it this time !
It’s that fellow round the corner. His father’s a
cobbler. I’ve seen you making eyes at one another
in church. I always said you’d marry some half-and-
half sort of chap, and disgrace the family. Oh, you
may laugh. I’ve seen it coming on a long time.
You’ve been that down in the mouth —I s’pose that’s
how it comes on. Anyway, I’ve done with you.’
And off he went, banging the back door and
whistling—
My love he is a baker,
Just living up the street,
And every night, upon the sly,
My love and I would meet.
I laughed heartily to myself when he had gone
and thought how wide he was from the mark.
I in love, at thirteen ! How ridiculous. And
what would become of all my plans ? No, that was


the last thing I was going to do ; nor did it give me
a moment’s trouble, as then I thought I was never
likely to be. Whether my views changed, only
future years will reveal.


CHAPTER VI.
summer had gone, and the winter had now
fairly set in. One cold and frosty Saturday
morning, I walked into the kitchen and astonished
Jane by wanting her to let me make a pudding and
give me some directions how to make it.
‘ Bless the child, what’s hup now ? You make a
puddon ! ’ she exclaimed. ‘ Why, the stars ’ll fall
next. A nice sort of puddon you’d make, I’m sure.
No, don’t come bothering me. It’s Saturday, and
I’ve no hend to do.’
Madge overheard us, and no doubt was as much
surprised as Jane, though she kept her thoughts to
herself, like a wise woman, and was secretly pleased
to see me inclined to be domesticated. Leaving her
own occupation, she came into the kitchen and said,
* I will show you, dear; but what kind will you
make ? I think it had better be a baked rice to
begin with. It will be easier, and I will give you a
few eggs to make it nice. We have some stewed
fruit, so they will go nicely together for dinner.
Claude likes that kind of pudding, and as it is
Saturday, he will be home to dinner to-day.’
r


So it was decided, and when Madge had given me
full directions she went about her own duties.
I finished my pudding, put it in to bake, then
went to take my hour’s practice at the piano. I was
very anxious not to get my pudding burnt, so I tried
to keep half of my thoughts on it and half on the
music, and with Madge’s kind reminders it turned
out of the oven, looking very nice, and I of course
felt immensely proud of it, especially as Claude
would be home for dinner, and I wanted very much
to show him what I could do, as he always declared
I’d never be able to cook a bit of dinner fit for a
fellow to eat. Now he would see, I thought to
myself. And Douglas Fleming, too—didn’t 1 just
wish he was coming to dine with us, and I would
then be able to show him what I could do.
Well, the dinner hour arrived, though it seemed a
long time to me, as I was longing to bring on to the
table the wonderful pudding.
The first course being over, it was placed upon the
table, and much was the surprise when it was known
that Kit had made it. It looked a nice rich pudding,
and I got a good deal of praise, even from Claude
(though of course he must tease as well), for he
nodded his head, looked very wicked, and said, 1 Oh,
I know; she’s trying to get her hand in. He’s a


poor chap, you know, and she thinks she’ll have to
do her own cooking.’ And here he winked at
Madge.
‘Claude, don’t talk such rubbish, don’t. Why,
Kitty is only a child. Do not put such ideas into
her head,' exclaimed Madge, smiling.
‘ Don’t you believe it, mother; she’s got more
ideas in her little noddle than you dream of,’ said
Claude.
I thought that was very true, but not in the way he
meant.
The pudding had been duly served round, and all
at once there was a great commotion, coughing and I
don’t know what, especially from Claude.
‘ Mercy on us, Kit ! What on earth did you put
in it ? It’s like brine.’
Of course there was a general laugh, and I felt
myself going red, white, and all colours.
‘ I know,’ said Claude, laughing; ‘ she’s put salt
into it instead of sugar. Poor Jim Turner! You’d
have him poisoned before a week was over his head.
I always said you’d never make a cook.’
By this time I was ready to cry, and thought what
a mercy it was after all that Douglas was not there.
At last Madge, seeing my distress, said, quite
sternly for her, ‘ Claude, stop it, or yon must leave


the room. It is Kitty’s first attempt, and you must
make allowances for her.’
‘ And I hope it will be her last,’ said Claude.
‘ Never mind, dear,’ said Madge, gently, turning to
me; ‘it was all very nice except for that one little
mistake; and you must not be discouraged, for you
will do better next time.’
So ended my first attempt at cooking, and it had
such a depressing effect on me that it was many
months before I tried anything in that line again; and
Jane did not improve matters by saying she knowed
all along that she’d only make a mess of it, and
children ‘didn’t ought to be allowed to go hum-
bugging about with the wittles.’
It was now mid-winter, and our holidays had
begun. It had been arranged as usual that Vera
and Jessie Parker should come from Melbourne to
our place to spend part of the holidays, and some of
us girls should return with them for the other half.
Beulah Ford, Nellie’s mate, whom I have
mentioned before, lived so near to us that she
was in our place during the holidays oftener than
at her own home ; so we were a merry noisy
party, making our old garden ring again with
shouts and laughter, especially when Claude was


with us, playing hide-and-seek, rounders, and other
games, but most ot his holidays were spent with
Eric Parker in Melbourne, which I think Madge
and Jane were devoutly thankful for, for he was
so full of tricks and mischief, there was no holding
him in. And indeed I think the beautiful clear
frosty days made us all more or less frisky.
When Vera and Jessie had been with us three
weeks, Muriel, Nell, and I returned with them (as
had been promised) to town. What a jolly time
we had those three weeks—everyone so kind to
us, even to Mr. Parker, who drove us out several
times in their vehicle, and let Eric take us when
he could not go himself. It was a wagonette, and
held seven or eight of us, and as they had a good
strong horse, as many often went. We three—
Vera, Jessie, sometimes Maud, the eldest girl,
whom I have not before mentioned, and sometimes
Flossie or some of the other little ones—would go,
Eric or Hugh driving us ; but when we went in a
muster like that, it was usually to St. Kilda, to the
beach, for the day, which was a great treat. How
lovely the sea was, and how we enjoyed ourselves
as only children can. Then there was sight-seeing,
concerts, and the Botanical Gardens and Royal
Park to visit; for though we did not live a great


distance from Melbourne, we children did not get
into town very often. Sometimes on Saturday
afternoon was about all.
Well, it came to an end, as all good things do,
and we had to return home and settle to school
duties again. When we got back to 1 Mervyl,’ you
may be sure we children had plenty to relate to
Madge. We chatted away at a great rate, and she
told us how, after we had gone, Miss Fleming had
driven over and insisted on taking her and the
little ones over to stay a few days with them ; and
how, when she had spoken to Jane about getting
someone to be with her in her absence, Jane had
declared she would have no one staying with her.
What for, indeed ! To be 1 more bother than they
was worth. Frightened, indeed!’ She’d like to
see the man that would come in to rob while she
was there. She’d soon settle him with the broom
handle 1
So they—Madge and the little ones—had driven
off, and enjoyed themselves at ‘ Viadale’ equally as
well as we had in town, and they certainly looked
much better for the change. So we all went back
fresh to oiir work and duties.


CHAPTER VII.
f inter passed away, and the lovely spring set
in—for I alwavs think that is the best season
of the year. All the hawthorn hedges were out, and
our hack garden was a picture, with the fruit trees in
blossom, pink and white, and the lawns soft and
green.
It was Saturday afternoon, and we were all enjoying
the lovely spring day outside, engaged in various
occupations—Madge in an easy chair, with her work,
on the lawn; Muriel seated on the verandah painting;
Nellie gathering flowers; and myself in the hammock
reading. Claude was off shooting, with Wilfred Ford;
the little ones, Vi and Elsie, playing in the garden.
There had been rain the previous night, which made
everything more lovely. The air, fresh and beautiful,
was laden with delicious scents, and the hum of
insects and songs of birds made life seem a thing
worth living ‘ Isn’t it lovely !’ I exclaimed, looking
up from my book, and no sooner had the words passed
my lips when we heard the sound of carriage wheels
coming up the drive. Of course we all jumped up td


see who it was. ‘ I believe it’s the Fleming’s trap,’ I
said, and I was right, for in a few minutes they came
in view—Douglas Fleming and May.
‘ What a happy family! quite a picture ! ’ cried
May’s cheery voice as she caught sight of us ; and
Douglas raised his hat. All of us hurried to give
them a welcome, for we were always so pleased to
see any of the Flemings. I saw Madge change
colour—which I expect I should not have noticed
had I not known what I did.
Douglas sprang down from the trap and pressed
Madge’s hand; then, turning to me, said—‘Why,
Kitty, you are looking quite rosy and plump.’
‘Oh yes, of course I am,’ I said, laughing. ‘ You
know I had a nice long holiday in town in the winter.
No wonder I look well : we had such a splendid
time.’
‘ Yes, I remember,’ he replied, ‘ staying with the
Parkers, weren’t you ? That was the time Madge
was with us,’ he said, looking at her with love-lit eyes
And so we chatted on, till May told us she had
come on a special errand, to ask us over to a small
gathering of friends the following Wednesday, and we
were to be ready early in the afternoon of that day,
as they would send the carriage for us about three
o’clock.


We were all delighted ait the invitation, as we were
always so pleased to pay a visit to them, such kind
friends as they had ever been, and also glad to go
again to 1 Viadale,’ such a lovely place as it was.
We persuaded our friends to stay to tea (though I
do not think Douglas needed much persuasion), and
as the Ford girls happened to drop in, and Claude
brought Wilfred with him after their shooting expe :
di ion, we were quite a large party.
• After tea we went into the drawing room, and
there had plenty of music and singing Marion and
Alice Ford were good players, and May and our
Madge sang two- or three solos and a duet together.
Dr. Fleming did his part, and I think we all con-
tributed a small share to the evening’s entertainment.
The time passed so quickly and pleasantly, that when
May found, on looking at her watch, that it was past
ten o’clock, she exclaimed, ‘ Really, Douglas, we
must go They will wonder at home what has become
of us, as I told Mamma we should be back for
tea;' and she would scarcely give in to Madge’s
pressing invitation to have some refreshment before
starting.
The Flemings making a move to go broke up our
little party—if so small a gathering can be called by
that name. When our farewells were said, and fresh
O


reminders given to be ready when the carriage came
on Wednesday, they took their departure.
• •••»•
Much to our disappointment, when Wednesday
came it was wet. Nellie and I were very much put
out about it, and made a great fuss and to do. But
Madge kept her regrets to herself, and cheered us
up by saying it was spring weather, and would most
likely clear up and be quite fine in the afternoon,
which it did, and the drive through the fresh spring
air, with scents of hawthorn blossom, etc., was most
delicious. They had sent the carriage, as the pony
trap would not have held us all, Madge, Muriel,
myself, and the coachman. Douglas would doubtless
have driven over for us himself, but business of
course had to be attended to, and Saturday was the
only half-holiday he allowed himself. We very soon
reached our destination, for it was only a three-mile
drive. And now I think here I cannot do better
than give the reader a shoit description ot ‘ Viadale.’
The Flemings were well-to-do, as my reader may
have already imagined, so that no expense had been
spared to make it a lovely place. The long carriage
drive led up through an avenue of beautiful trees;
the lawns, always well kept, were wearing at this
time of the year their softest, tenderest green ; two


or three small, but handsome, fountains, whose
waters sparkled in the sunshine, were to be seen
here and there on the grounds. The shrubbery lay
to the left and a hothouse and lovely fernery to the
right. Roses and other flowers grew in great
luxuriance ; beautiful trees dotted here and there
cast a cool inviting shade. The tennis court was
more towards the back, also the summer-house,
and beyond that was a large and well-filled fruit
and vegetable garden.
It was a two-storeyed house, with balcony and
verandah, commanding a pleasant, if not extensive,
view, and in one part of the grounds (which 1 had
almost forgotten to mention, but was really one of
its chief attractions), was a miniature lake, where
grew lovely lilies and floated graceful white swans.
One drooping willow bent over its blue waters,
under which was a rustic seat. Soft wavy ferns
grew here and there, and altogether it was a lovely
spot—so lovely that I had always said if ever I so
far lost my senses as to fall in love, it would be
there. Our own dear old home, though very
pleasant, was quite put in the shade by 1 Viadale.’


CHAPTER VIII.
Fleming, still a handsome man, was a good
Cyr way over fifty. Douglas and he would be
taken for father and son anywhere ; and if it had
not been for his white hair and beard, the doctor
might have passed for a man quite ten years
younger than he really was. He had such a kind
genial face, bright and intelligent. Mrs. Fleming
was one of those loving motherly sort of women
you take to at a glance ; and she was just what she
looked. We girls loved her with all our heaits, for
had she not acted as mother to us many times since
our own parents’ death.
We had now driven up the avenue, and were
just alighting from the carriage. The hall door
stood wide open. Mrs. Fleming and May were
already waiting to welcome us. It was Mrs
Fleming who spoke first. ‘ Dear girls,’ she ex-
claimed, ‘how nice it is to see you all again. Why,
I think it must be a couple of months since you
were here, is it not, Madge ?’
‘ Oh no, not so long as that, deat Mrs. Fleming,’
replied Madge, as she returned her warm greeting.


‘Well, it seems so to me, dear; and now come
and take your hats off and have some refreshment.
lam glad it has turned out fine. I was afraid this
morning that it would continue wet all day.’
‘So were we,’l replied. ‘But Madge proved a
true prophet, for she said all along that it would
clear up.’
‘Wise little woman; that's right; always look
on the bright side of things ;’ and Mrs. Fleming
patted Madge lovingly on the shoulder.
By this time we had entered the house and were
disrobing ourselves. The inside of the house was
as beautiful in its way as the outside. But I think
I will leave the reader to imagine rather than
weary with a long description. Suffice it to say
the rooms were large, lofty, and beautifully fur-
nished, but arranged with such artistic taste and
refinement, that there was an air of comfort and
ease rather than grandeur and display, that one felt
at home almost at once.
After we had had some afternoon tea, Mrs,
Fleming, May, and Madge went into the garden
and sat down on a seat under the trees to have
a chat, while we three strolled off to our favourite
place—the lake.
The afternoon was a most enjoyable one, and we


girls were quite sorry when we had to go in for
tea, as the time seemed to have passed away all to
quickly.
Dr. Fleming, Douglas, and Claude had arrived
from town. The guests were not expected till
between seven and eight, so we had a little time to
ourselves and a nice game of tennis before dark,
Dr. and Mrs. Fleming coming out in their homely
way to watch us.
‘ Claude,’ exclaimed the doctor, suddenly clapp-
ing his hand on his shoulder, ‘You are growing
quite a fine chap, old fellow. See, what age are
you now?’
‘ Not much over thirty, sir,’ said Claude, looking
wicked.
‘ I never saw such a boy,’ put in Mrs. Fleming,
laughing. ‘He never can be serious.’
‘Oh yes, I can, Mrs. Fleming,’ he returned.
‘ But you know it makes a fellow feel old when he’s
got all these girls to look after. They’re a terrible
lot, I can tell you, especially that one over there’—
pointing to me. ‘ What do you think she’s up to
now?’ and here Claude shook his head very
gravely.
‘Now, come, this won’t do, said the doctor,
telling tales out of school, you know, Mr. Claude.


l Oh no, sir, not at all. ’Tis a serious matter
this, and I think in your fatherly way you might
interfere. She’s taken up with a ’ And here
I glanced at Claude in snch a threatening way that
he had to stop and laugh. But he soon went on,
‘■Well, she’s fallen in love —lost her head, or what-
ever you’d call it—with a—with a —well, not what
we’d call a very desirable connection with the
family.’ And here Claude managed to get up such
a serious face that both Doctor and Mrs. Fleming
looked across at me in rather an amused but
questioning way.
‘ Don’t you believe him,’ I said, getting quite hot
and coming over to were they stood. I He ought
to be ashamed of himself; he is always up to
mischief. I shall just tell Madge,’ I said, nearly
crying.
‘See how she takes it,’ said Claude. ‘lt’s got a
terrible hold. Never mind, Mick ; cheer up. He’s
not a bad sort of a chap, and it might all come
right in the end. Besides, there’s one great
inducement; we could get all our shoes mended for
nothing, aud (aside to Mr. Fleming) his father’s a
cobbler, you know.’
‘ Now, did you ever see such a young rascal,’
returned Dr. Fleming, giving him a cut with a


twig he held in his hand, and turning to me,
patted my cheek and said— 1 Don’t- you mind him,
Kit ; he’s a good-for-nothing fellow ; and ’ —with a
side wink— ‘ he has got someone on the brain him-
self, you know, or he would not be so full of it all.
Who is it, now, Mr. Claude ? Just confess.’
‘No fear,’ said Claude. ‘ I wouldn’t be bothered
with a girl. I’ve had enough of them all my life.
Six to one boy ! Only fancy.’
‘I don’t know what you would have done
without the girls, Claude,’ put in Mrs. Fleming,
smiling.
1 Nor I,’ said the doctor ; 1 and you know, Claude,
it’s always the persons who pretend such a lot in
these affairs who do the opposite. Now, when I
was your age I used to say something similar ; but
you see I altered my views, and was actually
married before I was twenty-two.’
Claude was a very precocious youth, aud he
answered—
‘ Ah, well, you see I might be tempted to, if I
come across someone as attractive as Mrs. Fleming
—and here he glanced with loving and admiring
eyes in her direction, for he had as soft a place in
his heart for her as any of us.
1 Thank you, Claude,’ she replied, smiling back


at him, for she understood him, fortunately, and
did not take it for forwardness but as a compliment.
‘And now you haven’t told us your age, Claude,’
said Dr. Fleming.
‘ Let’s see! Blest if I know. Two years older
than you, Kit, aren’t I ? not far off sixteen ; is that
it, Mick ?’
‘ Fifteen and a half, you are, Claude. Your
birthday is two months after mine, and I am
fourteen in January.’
‘Yes—thought I was right; but you seem to
know more about it, Mick.’
Then there was a shout of— ‘ Come, Claude, it’s
your turn to play and this broke up our con-
versation. After a while the tennis ended and we
all went in. The other guests arrived and we had
a very pleasant and enjoyable evening—music,
games—and wound up with a carpet dance ; after
which we were all driven back in the moonlight by
Douglas.
H


CHAPTER IX.
Tit was washing day, showery and altogether
elk unsuitable weather for getting clothes dry and
out of the way. And as our wash was usually a
pretty heavy one, Jane was by no means in the
sweetest of humours. She had a pretty stiff temper
at the best of times, but to-day she was put out
more than usual.
* It’s halwast the way,’ she exclaimed, wrathfully,
as she tramped about with no gentle tread.
‘Whenever I’ve got hextra washon on hand there’s
sure to be hinfamous weather!’ and so saying she
banged the large clothes basket down on the wash-
house floor, brim full of unwashed garments.
Jane was a very tall thin woman, with rather
sallow complexion and decidedly red hair. What
her young man could see in her to admire remained
a mystery to us. But there is no accounting for
taste. Perhaps it was her fine figure, for she
certainly was very tall, though not quite as Claude
had remarked in his exaggerating way, ‘ level with
the lamp-post.’ But we must give the young man
credit certainly for choosing a good worker, for


Jane was all that, and a real honest girl into the
bargain.
We children had a fortnight’s holiday, it being
Michaelmas ; and Madge, having some important
business she was obliged (in spite of the rainy
weather) to attend 'to in town, had gone by the
train, leaving us all at home. Claude was in one
of his mischievous humours, though to tell the
truth Ido not know when he was not. But some-
times he had what Jane called hout and hout bad
turns. To-day was one of them. And poor Jane
thuded about the wash-house and trotted backwards
and forwards to the kitchen, when occasion de-
manded, all unconscious of a piece of paper attached
to her back by Claude (this being one of his
favourite tricks), with the following original verses.
1 know a maiden cross to see ;
Take care!
She can both sour and crabby be ;
Beware!
She has two eyes that pierce you through !
Look out!
For, oh, ’tis wet, and the washing day
Is all about.
And she has hair of a carroty hue ;
Take care!
And on her nose is a smut of blue ;
Beware!


And oh, her form would scare a host ;
Take care !
For she is level with the street lamp-post;
Beware !
Which was not so bad considering Claude composed
it on the spur of the moment.
He was about the wash-house plaguing the life
out of the poor soul, and she was abusing him right
and left, till at last she exclaimed angrily, ‘Now,
Master Claude, just be off out of this. I’ll take no
more of your himpudence and, trying to bundle
him out of the door, ‘you’re hactin’ disgraceful. I
wonder you ain’t downright ashamed of yourself.'
And taking the broom (her favourite weapon) out
of the corner of the wash-house, she made for him.
After two or three unsuccessful attempts to strike
him in the head, the top of the broom, being loose,
flew off and went clean through a pane of glass in
the wash-house window.
‘Now you have done it, old lady ! I hope you’re
satisfied,’ exclaimed Claude, roaring with laughter.
‘lt’s hall your fault,’ returned Jane, looking
distressed, ‘and I shall just tell a nice tale about
you to Miss Madge when she comes home. You’re
the dreadfullest boy I ever set heyes on.’
Claude was all this time making vain efforts to
stick the glass back in its former place.


‘ li’s no use you tryin’to mend that there winder,
so get hout of this, do and so saying she picked
up a handfull of soapsuds and threw it all over
him. A good deal more scuffling went on, in
which you may be sure Jane got the worst of it,
and then Claude made off. After a time, Jane
having gone into the kitchen to attend to the
baking of a pudding Madge had left in her charge,
Claude, though a little out of sight, was standing
not far from the wash-house door, and seeing the
coast clear, ran into the building, and looking
round, seized a long black print skirt of Jane’s
which was lying ready for the wash-tub. This he
hurriedly fastened round his neck, and it reached
far down past his feet. Then glancing about for
another black article, he saw a smaller garment (a
black apron). This he tied over his head, his
hands being hid under the black skirt, making him
look just a live black thing. What he resembled it
would be difficult to say, unless, as Jane remarked
afterwards, he was for all the world 1 like the Hold
Gentleman himself.’ I have no doubt the reader
has seen the long clothes basket. Well, it was at
the bottom of this that Claude, when he had
finished his toilet, settled himself right at the very
bottom of all the unwashed garments, and as it was


full to overflowing he must have had rather a
stifling time of it, his head being tied over into the
bargain, to add to his discomfort. But what do
boys care for this ? A trick is a trick, and the
inconvenience does not amount to much, but seems
rather if anything to add to the excitement.
After he had been hidden about five minutes—
which no doubt seemed more like twenty —Jane
came blustering into the wash-house mumbling to
herself— 1 Well, I don’t know when on hearth I’m
goin’ to get this ’ere washon done. The hindrance
that there boy’s been. I wish his father was alive,
I do. Bless me 'art, he’d get a thrashin’ every day
—leastways he’d deserve it, if he didn’t. He’s a
sp’ilt hanimal, that he is, a sp’ilt hanimal, and I’m
thankful he’s cleared hout of this.’ And after
having given vent to these remarks, she rubbed
away vigorously at the clothes. ‘ Thete’s one
thing,’ she went on—‘l couldn’t get the things
hout to-day by the look on it. And her words
were verified by another heavy shower coming
pelting down on the wash-house roof. ‘Bless me!
if it isn’t rainin’ cats, and poor Miss Madge hout in
it all and with this she turned her steps in the
direction of the long clothes basket. ‘ Oh, well,
I’ll get heverythink washed, and hang ’em all hout


heaily to-morrow morning if it’s hanyways fine,’
she said, beginning to take the garments out of the
basket, when there was a very low moaning sound I
Now, I must here inform the reader that Jane was
a great believer in the supernatural, so as soon as she
heard the peculiar sound she began to quake and
draw a few steps backwards.
‘ What on hearth’s that ?’ she said, turning white.
‘I never did like this ’ere wash-house. I’ve heard
queer nises here afore ever since the poor Missus
died.’ She stood considering a moment, then ex-
claimed— ‘ This ’ere won't get my washon done, so I
must make a wenture at that there basket;’ and so
saying she took the boiler stick, which enabled her to
stand a yard or two off, and by this means to hand
the clothes into the tub. Then there was another
low moan. Jane gave a slight scream, and exclaimed
breathlessly, wringing her hands, 1 I’m sure it’s the
Missus ; she used to moan just like that —well I
remembers it.’ After a time it was all quiet again,
and Jane, feeling nearly desperate to make headway
with her washing, made a third attempt to lift the
garments out of the basket. ‘ I don’t believe it’s
nothin’ after all,’ she said, gaining courage. ‘ Perhaps
one of them cats that comes around.’
All at once something seemed to touch the boiler


stick. And then a great black thing rose slowly but
surely out of the basket.
‘ The Lord have mussy on us!’ she screamed,
throwing down her boiler stick and making a rush for
the door, exclaiming, ‘ It’s the divil himself—it’s the
divil himself!’ Then running into the house, she
cried, ‘Miss Kitty, Miss Kitty, I’ve seen him—l’ve
seen him !’
‘Seen who?’ I exclaimed, hurrying towards the
kitchen. ‘Whatever is it, Jane?'
1 Oh, Miss Kitty, the divil, the divil! he’s in the
clothes basket —he is.’
‘ Nonsense, Jane,’ I answered, laughing. ‘ It’s that
Claude, depend upon it, playing you some trick or
other.
‘ No, Miss, I should have thought so myself—but
I’m sure I seen him going off into Ford’s,’
‘ No, you didn’t, Jane. You may be pretty sure it's
him,’ I answered confidently.
‘ Well, if it is, Miss Katie,’ she said, drying her
eyes, ‘I shall leave these ’ere premises to-night, if that
boy ain't made to turn over a new leaf. He’s rale
sp’ilt, Miss Kitty—rale sp’ilt,’ she repeated.
‘ Now, Jane,’ I said consolingly, ‘ you keep quiet,
and I’ll pay him out for this. Come into the wash-
house, and we will see what it is.’


But Jane could hardly be persuaded. I drew a
large pail-full of water, and said, ‘Now, Jane, walk
quietly behind me to the wash-house ; ’ which she
did (and a good way behind, too). She looked in
wonderment at the pail of water, but seemed almost
too scared to ask any questions about it- So as soon
as we reached the building I motioned to her to stay
at the door, and I crept softly up to the long clothes
basket, and threw the contents of the pail on the top
of my gentleman, Claude, who I felt certain was at
the bottom of it, waiting to do further mischief. This
soon brought a change in the scenes ; for it was no
spirit that flew out of the basket, tearing the apron off
his face, but a live healthy boy. He scampered after
me, I just flying through the air into the kitchen,
upstairs to the bedroom, and having reached my
destination, with a hysterical laugh banged the door
and locked it. ‘I am safe now,’ I said, shaking with
laughter and throwing myself breathless on to my
bed. Claude had found it a more difficult task than
usual to catch me. Being rigged up in woman’s
apparel, he had run only a few yards when Jane’s
long skirt fastened round his legs, and down he went
sprawling, to the great delight and amusement of Jane,
who stood watching him, with her hands on her sides,
shaking with laughter.
i


‘ Now, me gentleman, I hope that 'ill larn yer not
to play no moie tricks and so saying she banged her
wash-house door and locked it.
Claude answered nothing, for he had given himself
a pretty good shaking and cut his knees on the hard
pebble yard. After he had thrown aside Jane’s old
skirt, he ran up to my room to find, to his great
disappointment, I was past getting hold of.
‘ I’ll pay you out for this, Mick,’ he cried, revenge-
fully, banging at the fast closed door; but no answer,
only a stifled laugh.
‘Now, come out of there, I say, or I’ll make it hot
for you.’
After a good many threats and more hammering
at the door he went off down-stairs, and in a few
minutes more was throwing pebbles by the dozen up
at my bedroom window.
I took no notice, thinking it the best plan, but got
a book out of my drawer and settled myself for a
good read, intending to stay in this place of security
till Madge’s return from town.
And now that I have related one morning of the
Michaelmas holidays I think I can safely leave the
reader to imagine the state of things generally in the
house till the holidays were over ; for though I was by
no means as bad as Claude for tricks, and I certainly


was trying earnestly to be good, yet I cannot say I
altogether kept out of mischief, for I seemed to be a
different being to my other sisters, and especially
unlike my twin sister Muriel, who was such a quiet
demure little thing, with such an innocent way and
expression that it was difficult to imagine, as you
looked at us both, that we had arrived in this world
at the very same day and hour. Muriel was clever in
her own quiet way, and had great taste for painting
and music, both of which she bid fair to excel in.
Nellie was quite a romp, and when she and Beulah
Ford were together they were as happy as the day
was long. But there was no particular mischief in
Nell; she was quite a harmless little soul; and it was
just as well, for I am sure if Madge had had more
children like Claude and myself to manage, her cup
of bitterness would have been full indeed.


CHAPTER X.
fERY often it was the case that on Friday afternoon
after school my friend Vera Parker would come
out to ‘ Mervyl ’ to stay till Monday. Sometimes
Jessie, Murie’s friend, would come out with her ; then
another week Murie and I would go to Melbourne
and spend our Saturday with the Parkers. So it
happened this Saturday I am about to mention, that
Vera had come out to see us—Eric too, having been
invited by Claude. Usually the two boys would go
off fishing or shooting, but somehow this afternoon
they had stayed with us girls in the garden. Beulah
was in from next door, and we were all playing games
as usual. We were having our favourite hide and
seek, and it being Vera’s and my turn to hide, we
agreed laughingly between ourselves to get right up
into an almond tree which had grown to a great
height in our garden. We were perched right at the
top, keeping very quiet, but inwardly convulsed with
laughter, as we watched Claude, Eric, and the girls
hunting for us below, of course not dreaming to look
in the tree for us. After having searched in every
conceivable place, Claude scratched his head and


said thoughtfully, ‘ Where in the dickens can they
have got to ?’ Whether it was the slight chuckle
Vera gave that Nellie heard, I cannot say, but she
looked up suddenly and cried excitedly, ‘ There they
are, Claude ! there they are.’
‘Where?’ said Claude, glancing all round; ‘I
don’t see them.’
‘ Look up in the almond tree,’ answered Nell.
‘ Mick, you humbug, that’s cheating ; come down
out of that ; and here he started throwing up stones,
pieces of dirt, and I know not what, Nellie and
Beulah joining in, till we fairly screamed for mercy.
‘ You shouldn’t have done it, then; that’s not
hiding,’ he called out, and went on pelting us till
Muriel, always so tender hearted, started almost to
cry, and Eric, who never could bear to see Murie
upset, tried to put a stop to it.
After we had, with Eric’s help, come down from
the tree, we all stood in a group chatting about
different things —just that kind of talk that boys and
girls delight in. Then Claude started teasing Muriel.
Now, though I know he was very fond of Murie, she
was so very susceptible to teasing that it seemed to be
the delight of this imp to torment her. She was so
innocent, and always took everything in such real
earnest, that I must say with a boy like Claude it was


a great temptation to tease her, and one which he
could not resist. She at last burst into tears, and
Eric, who could stand it no longer, boxed Claude’s
ears (a thing that young man would have stood from
no one else), and turning to Muriel, put his arm
round her and said, ‘ Never mind, Murie; he is a
disagreeable pig, and I’ll pay him out for this; and
putting his hand in his pocket, produced a packet of
chocolates, which he told her he had brought out for
her special benefit.
‘ Give ns one,’ said Claude, putting on an air of
humility ; ‘ I’ll be such a good boy.’
‘Get out with you,’ returned Eric, giving him
a slight kick.
‘Look here, old chap,’ Claude said, trying to look
grave, ‘you’re getting too sweet on Mu, and I’m
going in to inform the missus, so you’d best
behave yourself, I warn you. Madge looks on Mu
as a mere baby.’
Of course we all laughed at this, and Eric
changed colour.
Eric was a fine-looking lad, and though only just
sixteen he was tall enough for two or three years
older. He had fair hair, deep fearless blue eyes,
and a high, broad, intelligent forehead. There was
a winning brightness about his manner, and though


he too liked plenty of fun, he had such a kindly
disposition and was so manly for his years, that
he was usually a favourite with everyone. He took
it upon himself always to protect Muiiel, and
seemed to look upon her as his own property.
Though many were the admirers Murie had
amongst Claude’s companions as she grew older, to
none did she give any encouragement but to Eric
Parker, though at the age of thirteen she was too
much of a child to know she was learning to care
for him, and what now was only childish confidence
would some day grow into a deep and lasting love.
As time went on Murie did not grow vain, as
some girls might have done, for my pretty little
sister was loved and admired by almost everyone.
But her disposition was so sweet and good that
Murie went safely through it all unspoilt.
It was about twelve months after what I have
just related, and Claude had been kept away from
school, having caught a very bad cold on his lungs.
It was really amusing to see the difference in his
spirits: he could hardly be recognised as the same
boy. And I think, if I may venture to make such a
remark (hoping my reader is not a man), that it is
usually the way that if a male is at all indisposed,


it is seldom taken with any great degree of
meekness (of course there are exceptions). Anyway
it was so with Claude : perhaps it was because he
was a trifle spoilt. We had all been at his beck
and call for the last week or two. It was Kit here
and Kit there ; Nell, do this, and Mu, do the other ;
till Madge said we would have him quite spoilt if
we waited on the boy so constantly. At the end of
a fortnight he was so much better that he began to
get back his usual spirits, which by Madge and
Jane were regarded with feelings of dread, knowing
he would soon show signs of mischief. He did not
seem well enough to be sent back to school, as his
lungs were still weak ; and it being damp cold
weather, Madge was afraid of his getting a return
of his illness. Their feelings of alarm as regarded
his tricks and general love of mischief were not
without grounds, for he soon started his perform-
ances, taking the laths out of our bedsteads at
night to let us fall through, putting all sorts of
rubbish in our beds to frighten us, and giving Jane
quite a lively time, poor thing, (ill Madge at last
declared that the next week he should go back to
school without fail, wet or fine. Having no lessons
to learn at night gave him plenty of leisure in the
evenings as well as in the day.


One evening, Jane having gone out, he got into
her bedroom, rigged up in her dress, cape, and
morning sunbonnet—which was so large that it
nearly concealed his face. Getting a basket out of
the store, and placing a pair of live fowls in it (out
of our own fowl yard), he went round to the back
door, and having knocked, to his extreme satisfac-
tion the door was opened by Madge herself. It was
quite dark, being rather a rough night—and in a
well-feigned voice he told a pitiful story of having
lost her husband and having been left with a large
family to provide for. Madge, who had a tender
heart, was quite touched, and bought the fowls,
quite unconscious of their belonging to herself all
the while. Claude kept the secret to himself, not
even telling me, as was usually his custom. The
fowls were killed and plucked by Jane, who
pronounced them ‘reg’lar tough uns.’ She always
declared she knew a good fowl from a tough one
the minute she clapped eyes on it. So she went
on abusing them, and saying she expected the
woman as sold them to Miss Madge was a
himposture (impostor).
The notable fowls were roasted and placed on
the dinner table; and many were the remarks
concerning them.
K


‘ I say, Madge, where did you buy these birds ?’
Claude remarked gravely, after he had eaten a few
mouthfuls.
‘Some poor woman came round the other night,
and she related such a pitiful story that I could not
help but take them of her,’ said Madge, looking
mournful. ‘lt was such a stormy night, too. I
felt sure she must have been in real trouble to be
out in it all.’
‘ Oh, I expect she was some humbug,’ said
Claude, taking a drink out of his glass to hide a
smile.
‘Now, that is very unfeeling, Claude. You
should have just heard her sad story and the
pathetic way she told it.’
‘Mother dear, if you listen to all the cock and
bull stories you hear, you will have something to
do. Oh, well, she’s taken you in, Madge, for, as
Jane says, they are reg’lar tough uns.’
The next morning, after Jane had fed the fowls,
she came into the dining-room and said to Madge,
‘There’s two of them hens gone, Miss. I’ll be
bound that woman that was here the other night
shook ’em.’
‘Oh, I do not think so, Jane,’ answered Madge ;
‘she looked such a quiet decent person, and quite


subdued by trouble. Are you sure you have not
made a mistake in counting them ?'
‘ No, Miss ; there’s just heighteen, and we had
twenty, if you remember.’
There was a great to do about these fowls, and
then somehow or other suspicion began to fall on
Claude. For one thing the basket he had used to
convey the fowls to the house was nowhere to be
found, but after great searching was discovered in
his bedroom : he had placed it under his bed,
intending the first opportunity to restore it to its
proper place, but being out of sight he had
forgotten to do so. Jane’s skirt, too, which Claude
had worn, had a suspicious slit in it, and both
articles (the sunbonnet and skirt) were hung in
the wrong places, he having not noticed the exact
spot he took them from. Now, Jane was very
tidy, and always kept her things orderly and in
their right places ; and so she declared she knowed
that young rascal had been hup to her things while
she was hout, and said it wasn’t the fust time
neither. Many other little things occurred which
cast suspicion on Master Claude, and finally he was
found out ; though of course, as he said, he had
only done it for mischief, and very willingly gave


up the money to Madge that she had paid the
young scamp for her own fowls.
I pause in my writing, and with a mixture of
tears and smiles I ponder over the dear old days in
the dear old home. What scenes rise up before
me and beloved familiar faces, some of which have
passed away into the better land. Oh, childhood,
happy childhood, with all your bright hopes,
happy dreams, and trustful nature, and your tender
spirits untouched by care or disappointment 1
How can we look frowning on the mischief or
tricks of a bright intelligent boy or girl ? Surely in
after life they will need all that buoyancy and
spirit to combat a cold and calculating world.
If my reader is not in sympathy with my brother
Claude and his tricks, I can only answer that they
are true to life, and that, if the reader has not been
brought up in a large family of boys and girls, he
certainly is not in a proper position to judge.


CHAPTER XI.
f|r , HREE years had passed away since the notable
5© garden party when Mu and I celebrated our
thirteenth birthday, and we were now sixteen. I
had become quite a passable cook, and even Claude
had pronounced me a stunner at it. At any rate I
was so far advanced in domestic affairs that I tried
to persuade Madge, who was far from well, to take
a change to Sydney, where she had been invited
by some of our friends. I was very urgent for her
to go, as she had never left us for more than two or
three days, or a week at the most, all the five years
that she had had the charge of us, and then only
staying a short time in Melbourne or a few days
with the Flemings.
Madge was very loth to go, partly, I think,
because her heart was at 1 Viadale,’ and partly she
felt, I expect, half afraid to leave us long, in case
something might happen. But I was determined
she should get over that anxiety, as I knew there
was not the slightest occasion to fear, for we were
well able to take care of ourselves now.


One day I said to her, in talking it all over,
‘What conceit you elder sisters have got, Madge.
Don’t you think Mu and I are capable of managing
the house yet ? Surely it's time you gave us a
fair trial. You know you might want to go away
altogether some day,’ I said, giving her a sly look,
and wondering if I had ventured too much, though
I think she must have known that we elder ones
had guessed by this time how things lay between
her and Douglas. But she looked so taken aback,
and coloured so, that I was almost sorry I had made
any allusion to it ; but thought after all it was just
as well, for it had to have a beginning, and the ice
must be broken sooner or later.
1 Yes, I think I can trust you, Kitty dear. You
really have become a splendid little housekeeper,
and perhaps need only to be left entirely tn your-
self to become more reliant.’
‘Well, Madge dear, make up your mind to go ;
there is no earthly reason why you should not.
You think too much of other people and not
enough of yourself. Why, you are looking terribly
thin, and needing a change badly and I nearly
let slip, ‘lam sure Douglas will manage to do
without you for a time,’ but I smiled and checked
myself.


So the end of it all was Madge did go, and
Muriel and I were left to keep house.
All went very well. Claude cf course behaved
himself, for he was now eighteen, and, like Murie
and I, had left school; and he had a situation in
one of the Melbourne banks. He still retained a
great deal of his former love of fun and mischief,
but had sobered considerably, and grown a fine
handsome young man, and was trying hard to
cultivate a moustache, which we teased him about.
He really had something to be proud of, with his
fine features, black hair, and deep blue eyes ; he
was also tall and broad shouldered.
It was just about a week after Madge’s departure
one fine day (a half holiday) that Douglas drove
over in the pony chaise to ask if one of us girls
would care to go for a drive. Nellie was out, and
I wanted Muriel to go, but she said no, as she was
very much engrossed in an oil painting she was
trying to get finished to give to Jessie Parker on
her birthday.
‘You go, Kitty,’ she said, looking up from her
picture. 'You look as if you needed an outing, and
I am sure Douglas would rather you went, you are
so lively and know how to talk and make things
pleasant.’


‘ Thanks, dear, for the compliment, but I did not
know I was so clever before. Anyway, if you are
set on getting that painting done, and don’t wish
to go, I may as well I suppose.’ And sol tiotled
away to get my hat, and we were soon off.
‘ Where shall we go ?’ asked Douglas.
4 Oh, anywhere you like,’ I answered ; 1 it is so
lovely this afternoon ; I don’t mind where.’ And
so we turned in the direction of St. Kilda.
4 How are you getting along at 4 Mervyl ?’ he
asked, after we had been driving along a few
minutes.
‘ Oh, splendidly,’l answered. 4 Madge need not
trouble herself to come back for six months ’
(looking at him mischievously).
1 Six months ! ’ and his countenance fell. ‘We
couldn’t do without her all that time, Kitty ; ’
and I knew he had let slip more than he had
intended to, for he looked confused, and coloured
a trifle.
‘Oh no, of course we couldn’t,’ I answered
quickly ; 4 it’s only my fun, but I think she needs a
good change, Douglas ; she has not had a holiday
for so long.’
‘Do you think she is really seriously unwell,
Kitty ?’ he returned ; and his face looked so


troubled that one might have imagined she was
going into a rapid decline.
‘ Oh dear me, no,’ I answered, glancing laugh-
ingly into his serious face ; ‘ she is not so bad as all
that, and it’s my belief she will come back looking
quite rosy and stout.’
He looked greatly relieved, and as I glanced at
him I noticed for the first time that he was thinner
and graver than he was five years ago on that
eventful party night.
‘ Poor Douglas,’ I thought, ‘ you do not find it
quite so easy waiting for your Rachel after all.’
How I longed to tell him I was not going to let him
wait much longer if I could help it. But how was
I to manage to bring it about? That was the
difficulty.
We talked on several other subjects as we drove
along ; then all of a sudden Douglas said to
me, ‘I suppose by this time you are a grand
cook, Kitty.’ Poor fellow, he could not get the
subject out of his head ; his thoughts ran all in
one direction.
‘ Of course I am,’ I answered, 1 and if Madge
wanted to get married to-morrow, she could.’
1 Now I’ve done it,’ I said to myself. ‘ That's
splendid.’
£


I thought Douglas would have started out of the
trap, he was so taken aback ; but he managed after
awhile to bring himself to his senses sufficiently to
say, with a smile, ‘ Perhaps it’s just as well you are
so prepared, Kitty, as she may meet her fate
while she is away in Sydney, you know.’ But he
looked as if it was very much against him to say it
and as if it was the last thing that he wanted her
to do.
I thought to myself, ‘ You hypocrite. You little
know what I heard in the garden that night and of
course I’m not going to tell you.’
We only went a short distance further, when he
said, ‘What do you think? shall we turn now or
go on further ? and’—looking at his watch— ‘’tis
nearly five o’clock.’
‘ Oh, we had better turn,’ I answered, ‘or we
shall not be home by tea time.’
So we turned, and he whipped up the horse, and
we trotted briskly back. But I noticed what a
change had taken place in Douglas Fleming. His
whole face was lit up with such a look of joy and
hope that it was a real pleasure to me to think how
I had been instrumental in bringing it about, and I
quite congratulated myself on my afternoon’s work;
When we arrived at ‘ Mervyl’ I tried to persuade


Douglas to stay to tea, but he declined, saying he
had no lights, and as there was no moon he had
better get back before dark. I have no doubt he
longed to be alone to think over his plans, and
what, as he thought, I had innocently said, but had
no idea that in saying it I had had a set purpose,
for I think he still looked upon Muriel and me as
mere children, and did not. give it a thought that
we were fast growing up, and our minds and ideas
developing at the same time.
It had for some time been known in the
Fleming family that there was a mutual under-
standing between Douglas and Madge, but no
decided engagement, as Madge would not consent
to that ; but as far as the outside world was
concerned, and we children, it remained a secret,
at least it was supposed to be. But my reader
is well aware that it was not so as regarded
myself, and since Claude and Muriel had grown
up I could see that they had guessed it too.
While Madge was away, Muriel went on with
Elsie’s and Violet’s lessons, and also-attended to
their music. She was a great help, too, with the
needlework, so we got on famously, to which effect
I wrote Madge, hoping to induce her to prolong
her visit and enjoy herself.


Things went on nicely till one day, about three
weeks after Madge had left home, little Vi was
taken ill. She complained of headache, pains in
her limbs, and sickness. I put her to bed, and
Jane and I did what we could for the poor little
thing. But towards evening she grew so very
much worse that I got alarmed and sent off for Dr.
Fleming, who, when he came, pronounced it to be
a case of very malignant scarlet fever.
I was terribly upset, and it was then that I longed
for dear old Madge, for I felt so helpless, never
having had much, if anything, to do with sickness
before, Madge always being the nurse when any-
thing was the matter. Dr. Fleming advised me
to send for her, but I said, ‘Oh no ; perhaps it
will be all right, and Jane will be such a help, I
know, and Muriel can look after things in the
house while I nurse her. It would be such a pity
to upset Madge’s holiday, and I trust we will be
able to get on all right without her.’
‘ Very well, Katie,’ he answered ; ‘ perhaps you
are right: it may be better not to send for her.
But I will get May to come over. lam sure when
she hears of your trouble she will only be too
willing, knowing Madge is away.’


* Oh, doctor, that is too kind ; I should not like
to trouble her so much,’ I replied.
‘I am sure she will think it no trouble at all, and
1 shall ask her to come ; so, dear, say no more
about it.’
When the doctor had gone my heart sank
within me, for I felt that he must have considered
little Violet’s case very serious, wanting to send for
Madge. But I carried my troubles to the Great
Friend I had learnt to go to in all difficulties and
sorrows, and I gained strength and help to go
steadily on, trusting all would be well.
Miss Fleming arrived the next day about noon,
and glad enough we were to see her. It was a sad
time for us all. Little Violet grew worse and
worse, and at last Dr. Fleming gave very little
hope of her recovery. Poor Elsie was in great
trouble about her little sister, for they were almost
inseparable companions. She would often come
to the door to inquire how she was, and beg so
hard to be permitted to come into the room to see
her ; but with tears in my eyes I had to decline.
We had all had the fever, except Elsie and Vi,
when our mother was alive, so we were terribly
afraid that the former would be the next to be
down with it, and did our best to keep her away


from the room. The Flemings had tried hard to
persuade her to go to ‘ Viadale ’ to stay till all
danger was over, but as yet all efforts had been
fruitless. At last, with my entreaties and Douglas’s
persuasions, she reluctantly gave way, for Douglas
was a very great favourite of the children’s and he
could do almost anything with them ; so greatly to
my relief one afternoon they drove away in the
pony trap, Mrs. Fleming herself coming over with
Douglas, and, taking Elsie on her knee in the
vehicle, tried to console her at leaving Violet, and
also attract her attention to different objects of
interest as they drove along.
And so we got over one of our difficulties ; but
our dear little girl lay delirious night and day. At
last we determined to send for Madge, as we
considered if anything serious happened she might
blame us for not having let her know before.
Claude was greatly cut up, for he loved little Vi
very dearly. He would have taken his turn at
sitting up with her if we had let him, but knowing
he had to be at business every morning, I would
not hear of it, till one night, when we were nearly
worn out with watching and anxiety, he insisted
on taking his turn, and it was arranged that he
should call us if any change for the worse took place.


CHAPTER XII.
®Vnd so our darling Violet lay just between life
and death; and oh how I prayed that she
might be spared to us, or if not, that she might linger
on till poor Madge arrived. Dear little soul, she lay
tossing restlessly about, her golden curls all cut off
her poor little head. She was only seven years old,
and so small that she might easily have been taken
for five. I was watching her, with tears in my eyes,
when the door suddenly opened, and no one less
than Madge herself appeared, looking white and
troubled. We had been expecting her, but did not
think the steamer would be in till late in the after-
noon. Douglas had found out all about it, had driven
for her, and brought her straight home. Oh, how
thankful I was ! I could scarcely speak for joy and
sorrow mixed
‘Oh Kitty,’ she exclaimed, ‘ how is this ? Why
didn’t you send for me before ? Does Dr. Fleming
think there is any hope ? Douglas was so silent on
the matter. Do tell me, Katie.’


‘ Not much, Madge,’ I answered in a husky
whisper; and then we were both too overcome to say
any more for a time. And so the weary hours passed
away and night came on. Then Madge wanted to
sit up with her. I protested strongly and said, ‘No
indeed, not to night. You have had a long journey
and you need rest. To-morrow night if you like,
Madge;’ and so she reluctantly obeyed.
Next morning before six o’clock Madge slipped
noiselessly into the room where I was watching the
sick child, and said, ‘ Katie, I have had a dream.
Our little Vi will recover; lam convinced of it;’ and
her face wore a look of hope and peace that was a
stranger to it the night previous.
‘ I am not as a rule a believer in dreams,’ she said,
‘ but I know this one was sent me by God. Before
dear mother’s death I had a dream—a very sad
one —but it all came true; and last night, as I lay
asleep, I saw as it were an angel hovering over me,
with, oh, such a sweet face; and it said, “ Fear not,
for this child shall not die, but live.” And I awoke.
Then I knew for a certainty that our prayers had
been answered.’
‘ Thank God,’ I said; for I felt somehow an
instinctive feeling in my heart that she was right, and
that Violet would recover.


It was about two days after this, not quite ten
o’clock in the morning, and we were wailing anxiously
for Dr. Fleming to arrive—Madge, May, and myself.
The former was sitting by Violet, and bending slightly
over the bed, when suddenly she opened her blue
eyes, smiled, and just in little more than a whisper
uttered Madge's name.
‘ Kitty, May, see, she is conscious; she knows me
and then we both came up close to the bedside.
She tried to raise her poor little head, but could not,
she was too weak, so lay back, closed her eyes, and
fell, for the first lime, into a quiet and peaceful
sleep.
Not long after Dr. Fleming arrived, and we told
him what had happened. ‘Yes,’ he said, ‘there is a
decided change ; she will pull through now. I have
little doubt the worst of the danger is over, and you
may hope. But she will need every care. She will
pull through, though,’ he repeated, looking at her
again and trying her pulse.
And so she did, and began to rally quicker than
we had thought possible.
May Fleming of course returned home, but not
before Madge and I had expressed our very warmest
thanks for her kind help and assistance, for she was
U


indeed a friend to me all through, and I do not know
what I should have done without her.
And now I will conclude this chapter, as I do not
wish to dwell any longer on its sad contents.


CHAPTER XIII.
Tit was some months after Violet’s illness, and she
d> was running about almost as strong and well as
ever. That afternoon, as we were all sitting in the
dining-room, engaged in various occupation?, Marion
Ford popped in on us.
1 Have you heard the news, girls ?’ were her first
words after greeting us.
‘ No,’ we said, almost all together. ‘ What is it ? ’
‘Why, Maud Parker has eloped with that handsome
stranger who was staying near to them last summer.’
‘ Never!’ we all exclaimed in a breath.
‘You remember him, Muriel,’ Marion went on.
‘ It was when you and I were down in Melbourne,
staying with the Parkers. He used to come in very
often of an evening. I never liked his face, though
he was so good looking, and I believe she will rue it.’
‘ Why, I can hardly believe it of Maud,’ answered
Madge. ‘ I thought she was such a different girl—so
quiet, too.’
‘ Oh, it’s the quiet ones who mostly do these
things,’ returned Marion; ‘ and I can’t say I liked
her. I always thought she was deep.’


‘ But how did it all come about ?’ I asked.
‘ Oh, of course they fell in love, and all that sort of
thing, and Mr. Parker would not give his consent,
which was not to be wondered at, he being a perfect
stranger. Mr. Parker somehow had taken a ereat
dislike to him, and distrusted the fellow, and he had
never encouraged his visits to the house; but he (the
stranger), had always managed it so cleverly that
somehow he did come, and this is how it has ended.’
‘Oh dear, lam sorry,’ said Madge. ‘ The Parkers
will feel this so. How old is Maud ? about twenty,
isn’t she ?’
‘Yes, that is her age, I think,’replied Marion.
‘Oh yes, the Parkers are terribly cut up. Poor Mrs.
Parker is quite ill over it. It has been such a shock
to her.’
Poor thing! and her eldest girl too. It must
indeed be a grief.’
‘ But where did she meet him ?’ asked Madge. ‘lt
seems a strange thing, friends as we are, we have
heard nothing about it before.’
‘No, it has not been going on very long—only
since the summer. They met at some party or other.
But I must go,’ she said suddenly, ‘ for we are
expecting some friends to tea, and I see it is nearly
five o’clock. But I thought I would just run in and


tell you about it; and, oh, Nellie, Beulah wants to
know if you will lend her that book you were reading
the other day. I think it was “Claribel;” and when
Nellie had given her the book she was off, and we sat
pondering over the sad news, feeling very sorry for
our old friends, for we knew what a terrible blow this
would be to them.
About a week after the exciting news brought by
Marion Ford, Madge received a very kind note from
Mrs. Fleming asking her to come to ‘Viadale’ to stay
a few days. Now, though there was nothing very
unusual in this proceeding, as she had been invited
there many times before, yet somehow the way it was
done and perhaps a sort of presentiment, induced me
to think that something was to come out of this visit
that would affect us as a family generally.
Violet’s long illness had, I felt sure, put a stop to
Douglas speaking to Madge as quickly as he had
intended (on her return) of the subject nearest his
heart; as I was convinced that he had noticed very
particularly what I had said that day we were out
driving with regard to Madge not being altogether
indispensable in the home ; for had I not remarked
that she might be married to-morrow if she liked ?
Oh Douglas Fleming, you do not know what it cost
me to say that —to give up our dear old Madge.


Yes, it would be a great sacrifice to us all; but it
must be done. So I was secretly glad when the note
came.
May drove over for Madge, and I knew nothing
more till she was driven back by Douglas himself,
and he led her, blushing, into the dining-room, where
I was sitting alone, and introduced her to me as his
future wife, and with a humble and quaint expression
asked if I would give my consent. Pleased I certainly
was, and of course I had to pretend to be very much
surprised.
‘Consent,’ I answered, laughing; ‘it’s rather late
for that, isn’t it ? you look as if it was quite a settled
thing already.’
Long after the others were in bed Madge and I sat
up talking, for she took me quite into her confidence,
and said that Douglas had told her all about the
conversation that had passed between‘us while out
driving, which had brought matters to a climax.
‘And after what you had said, Kitty,’ Madge went on,
‘ and the way you managed so well, while I was in
Sydney, I promised to marry him when you were
eighteen, if you did not object.’
‘ Object!’ I said ; ‘ what right would 1 have to do
that ? Besides, I would rather you married Douglas
than anyone else in the world. I think he is the only


one I could spare you to, dear good old Madgeand
here I threw my arms round her neck, something in
the old way, and kissed her. I had a hard battle to
keep from breaking down, as I believe Madge had
too ; but we hid it from one another.
‘ He will make you a splendid husband,’' I went on.
1 But you will make him quite as good a wife, dear,
so it will be equal.’
‘ I hope so at anyrate, Kitty,’ she returned, smiling,
‘ for I know Douglas is all you say, and more.’
' But, Madge, why keep the poor fellow waiting
nearly two years longer ? surely you could marry when
Mu and I are seventeen. I don't like such long
engagements,' I said, with a wise shake of my head ;
‘ and poor Douglas looks quite thin on it.’
‘ Why, Kitty,’ answered Madge, laughing, ‘ jou are
a regular old granny, and I believe you could manage
a household with double the family.’
l Of course I could,’ I replied, laughing too. ‘ But
now seriously, Madge, decide to have your wedding on
our seventeenth birthday. Don't think I wish to get
rid of you, Madge dear,’ I said, my lip quivering, and
half crying, half laughing; ‘but I feel we must not be
selfish, and I am sure Douglas does not care to wait
two years longer,’
So after a good deal more talking Madge decided


to tell Douglas that the marriage might take place in
a little less than twelve months.
It was only a few days and then I think it was
pretty well known all round the place that Douglas
Fleming and Madge Everard were engaged ; for such
things usually get about very mysteriously, and more
quickly than the persons nearly concerned are
agreeable to. But as Claude remarked—‘lf people
will do such foolish things, they must put up with the
consequences.’


CHAPTER XIV.
TSt was summer time again, for the winter and
JL spring had passed rapidly and uneventfully
away since Madge’s engagement, and we were now
close on January. It wanted only a fortnight to
the wedding day. Such preparations were going
on both at our home and ‘ Viadale.’ The wedding
breakfast was to be held at 1 Mervyl ’ and the party
at night at ‘ Viadale.’
As you may imagine, being the first wedding in
the family, it caused great excitement amongst us
girls. Claude of course was to be best man, and
May first bridesmaid. I thought it would make
too many if we were all bridesmaids, so after a
good deal of persuasion I got Madge to have me
left out, for, as I said laughingly, I would only spoil
the whole affair—though Claude had paid me, only
a few weeks ago, the compliment of saying I was
getting quite good-looking since I had had the
sense to keep a hat on outside, and if I went on
improving as I had done the last few years, I’d
manage to ‘ hook the cobbler’s son’ yet; for Claude


was still a terrible fellow and an inveterate tease.
So it was decided for Muriel and Nellie to be
bridesmaids, also Elsie and Violet, Eric Parker and
Wilfred being the former’s groomsmen, and the
two little girls to walk together.
Perhaps here it would not be uninteresting to
the reader to give a short description of the dresses
that were to be worn, and which had the last few
weeks taken up so much of our time and thought.
May Fleming and the two little girls, being fair, in
white and heliotrope, and Muriel and Nellie in
buttercup and white. The dresses were of some
thin gauzy material suitable for that hot time of
the year, with plenty of beautiful white lace about
them, and the colour mixed in in such a becoming
way that it is better imagined than described.
The two little ones looked very pretty in their
white frocks, cut low in the neck, and wearing
heliotrope ribbons and sash, and on their pretty
little bare white arms carrying each a basket of
lovely cream roses, maidenhair, and heliotrope
flowers, cut from the ‘ Viadale ’ conservatory.
Of course Madge was to be all in white. It was
to be white silk, and I knew how lovely our dear
little mother would look in it when the day arrived
for her to put it on.


What a commotion there was that last week,
and how we all hoped for lovely weather.
The day arrived at last, fine, but very hot, which
was not to be wondered at, being the middle of
January. But, as Jane said, ‘ what could people
expect if they would have weddin’s at such a
hawful time of the year ?’
‘How lovely you look,’ I exclaimed, as Madge
and I stood in her bedroom putting the finishing
touches to her toilet ; ‘just as beautiful as I
expected, darling and I went a few yards off, and
gazed at her with eyes full of love and admiration.
‘Don’t say too much, Kitty,’ she answered,
smiling, but with tears in her eyes, ‘or I shall
become quite vain.’
‘ No, you won’t, I replied, kissing her ; ‘ you are
too sensible for that, Madge.’ I dared not say one
word of how we should all miss her, in case I
should break down altogether, and I noticed she
avoided the subject herself ; so after having clasped
one another in a long silent embrace —the carriages
having come—we went quietly downstairs.
Two hours after, the bridal party had returned,
the wedding breakfast was over, and the speeches
had begun. Claude had of course something very
amusing to say, and his really was a very good


speech ;so was Dr. Fleming’s. Then several other
gentlemen spoke, amongst them Mr. Ford and Mr.
Parker ; the latter, be it here remarked, having
given Madge away. And so it was soon all over,
and amid laughter, tears, kisses, and showers of
rice, the happy pair drove off.
Fortunately for us we had our company to
consider, so could not give way to feelings of
depression or sit down to brood over our loss ; for
loss it was indeed, as had we not in parting with
Madge lost a mother as well as a sister? —at least
so it seemed to us—and we knew well what a blank
would be felt when the excitement was fairly
over.
We were all standing on the verandah to see the
last of them, and as soon as they had gone Dr.
Fleming turned quickly round to me and said, in
his jovial way, ‘ I wonder who will be the next to
go. I expect you, Miss Kitty.’ Such remarks and
speeches are usually made at weddings, but some-
how I was not just in the humour for it, and my
eyes, already full, began almost to overflow ; but I
managed to get control of myself sufficiently to say
laughing, ‘Oh no, not me, Doctor and then I
glanced to where Eric and Muriel were standing
just like lovers already, and I thought the doctor


would have been nearer the mark if he had
mentioned those two. I could not help admiring
them—Eric with his tall manly figure and his fair
good-looking face, as he stood watching Muriel,
who, I thought, was a perfect picture in her white
dress and lemon-coloured ribbons —her brown hair,
which still retained some of its gold, hanging in
wavy masses to her waist, her cheeks flushed with
a soft pink tint, and her lovely violet eyes—now
wet with the recent tears—reminded one of the
innocent flower (whose colour they matched) wet
with morning dew. The sweet little mouth was
now wearing a smile as she gazed shyly into Eric's
face to answer one of his remarks ; then her eyes
would be cast down, and the long silky lashes rest
tenderly on her flushed cheeks. And as I gazed
at her, I thought, as I had thought many times
before, that Muriel was decidedly the prettiest of
my sisters, and 1 could see plainly that Erie would
quite agree with me.
A great deal of talking, laughing, and joking
went on ; then a good many of our party left.
Some drove away, others went by train ; and now
just ourselves, the groomsmen, and a few of our
most intimate friends stayed behind, and as it had
all been previously arranged, vehicles from‘Viadale’


and hired ones came and took us all out driving, to
finish up the rest of the afternoon.
About eight o’clock the evening party began at
‘ Viadale,’ and there was a great gathering—over
seventy persons. They had every convenience
there for entertaining visitors ; the large and hand-
somely furnished drawing and dining rooms
leading out into one another by folding doors,
and through a smaller door, which led out from
the drawing-room, was a lovely fernery, and here
many of our party retired to refresh themselves
after dancing; and truly it was a cool delightful
spot, a miniature fountain playing in the centre.
All the rooms were brilliantly lighted up, and
games and dancing freely indulged in.
There being no moon, Chinese lanterns were
hung all over the grounds, making a veritable
Fairyland. The lake; a short distance from the
house (which I mentioned in a former chapter),
was a great attraction to the lovers ; but as two are
company, and three are none, many of them had
to repair to the summer-house and other parts of
the grounds, for, as Claude remarked next morning
at breakfast, the lovers about were as thick as bees.
What part he shared in it of course he kept to


himself, as he never acknowledged being guilty of
such things.
It was a lovely evening. A beautiful balmy breeze
had sprung up after the heat of the day, and so
it made everything very enjoyable. The supper
was got up in grand style ; but as my readers
will feel, I expect, little or no interest in the good
things provided, and as I really think myself it was
past all description, I will leave them to imagine it.
Our most enjoyable evening came to a close at
last, as all good things must, but not till three
o’clock in the morning.
Everyone expressed themselves delighted with
the evening’s entertainment, and all seemed loth to
break up and leave for home ; but at last we
managed to tear ourselves away from lovely
‘ Viadale.’ And so came to an end the celebration
of our dear old Madge’s wedding day.


CHAPTER XV.
TST was no wonder—after all the rush and
J, excitement that had prevailed throughout our
household for some weeks past and the still greater
excitement of the wedding—that we girls found it
somewhat difficult to settle down again to the
ordinary routine of life. Nellie thought it, she
said, very tame to have to go on with the hum-
drum lessons ; and even Muriel, usually so
contented and quiet, complained of the house being
dull, and as if a death had entered it. Indeed the
house did seem lost without dear Madge, and I
think we missed her more and more every day,
though I tried to console myself and the others
with the thought that after all it was not as if she
had left us and had gone to some distant land.
Then we might grieve indeed. But her home was
to be at Kew, only a distance of a mile or two, so
that we need not be long without seeing one
another. After a time we managed to settled down
and go on with our various employments.
Muriel was a great help to me with the needle


work, for she was always fond of sewing and really
clever at it. She also (as she had done when
Madge was away) carried on the children’s studies
and music ; but I took the general management of
the household affairs, for, though we were both the
same age, I always seemed, as Muriel said, the elder
of the two, and she was quite willing I should act
the 1 little mother.’ Jane still continued with us,
for, as I have omitted to mention earlier, she had
given up her lover, or he had given her up —we
never knew which. However, she did not appear
to take it much to heart, as she remarked that men
was always a bother, and she couldn’t think how
she’d come to be such a fool as to let him go so
fur. Whether she really cared as little as she made
out we could not tell, but I secretly hoped that
none of the foolish speeches Claude had put now
and again into her letters to the poor young man
had done any irretrievable mischief and caused the
separation. Any way, however it came about, we
reaped the benefit, for Jane was an invaluable
Servant, and with all her rough ways and queer
speeches, she was decidedly good at heart, indus-
trious, and altogether a splendid worker. She, I
knew, loved us all very much in her own peculiar
way, and felt the loss of dear Madge almost as
0


much as any of us ; for had I not found her, the day
after Madge’s wedding, weeping in the kitchen with
a black smut across her nose, left there bv the
recent attempts to wipe away the falling tears with
a hand that had just been using the blacklead
brush ; and when I attempted to console her, she
broke out into sobs, saying between them she
knowed afore how it would be when Miss Madge
had gone—just like a desert hiland (island).
About a week after the wedding, perhaps less, we
received a letter from Madge, which all, from
Claude downwards, gathered round me to hear
read out. I must here inform the reader that the
day after the wedding Douglas and Madge had
taken for their honeymoon a trip over to Tasmania.
Douglas had often run across on business, but
Madge had not been since our parents’ death:
then she had gone with my mother, being at that
time only nine years of age ; so that she
remembered little, if anything, of the place or its
beauties. They intended visiting Hobart before
returning home, but so far had only reached
Launceston, where they were to stay part of the
time. They were well, she wrote, and enjoying
themselves very much. The passage over had
been fairly good. Her letter was all full of love


and tenderness for us at home, and she concluded
it by saying she would have more to relate in her
future letters, when they had had more time to go
about.
It was six weeks after this letter that we received
one to say they would be home by the next steamer,
and great was the joy of us all anticipating their
arrival.
We had of course been expecting their return
somewhere about this time, so Muriel, Jane, and I
had been very busy preparing the house at Kew,
and when it was finished very proud were we of
our work.
It was about twelve months after Madge’s
wedding day that one afternoon, when I was sitting
with my sewing on the verandah, I heard steps
coming up the gravel path, and glancing up I saw,
of all people in this world, Aunt Sarah, my father’s
sister and the one who I daresay it will be
remembered visited us soon after our parents’
death, I recognized her at once, though I could
only have been nine years old when she came to
our house before; but she had not altered much,
except that it might be she had grown a trifle
greyer. I wondered what ever could have brought


her to'Mervyl House,’ and hoped it was not on
the same errand as before (wanting one of us to go
back with her), and I smiled as I thought of the
old fear years ago. By this time she had nearly
reached me, and of course I had to go forward to
meet her and show her the best welcome I could
manage to extend.
‘Aunt Sarah!’ I exclaimed, not thinking what I
was sayingj ‘you are the last person I expected
to see.’
‘ I’ve no doubt I am, child,’ she answered, with a
grim smile. ‘You know it’s the unexpected things
that always do happen. But I shouldn’t have
thought you would have known me, for you could
only have been six years of age when I visited here,
when your poor father was alive ; and the last time
I came I did not see anyone but your sister Madge.’
What could I say ? I could not tell her I had
seen her through the keyhole the last time she had
paid us a visit, when I was between nine and ten ;
so I hesitated, then answered, ‘I remember seeing
you say good-by to Madge at the hall door last time
you were at“Mervyl House”’—which was perfectly
true, for had I not crept out of my hiding-place,
when I thought the worst of the danger was over,
and peeped over the staircase.


‘ Oh, I see ; nice habits ! prying into older people’s
affairs ; for I’ve no doubt you were listening to all
that went on, or you would not have seen what you
did. Oh, well, that comes of children being left to
the care of a chit of a girl not much older than
themselves, and not fit to give them proper train-
ing;’ and my Aunt gave a tremendous sniff which I
suppose was meant to convey to me how much better
she would have managed us.
I had a quick temper, and it was being tried very
severely while I listened to her unjust remarks
about Madge. But I managed to control myself,
and say, ‘ Why, Aunt Sarah, you forget ; Madge
had scarcely had the training of us then, at least not
all by herself, for our dear mother had not been
dead more than a fortnight when you came to visit
us the last time.’
‘Oh, very, well, child, I forgot ; it doesn’t matter,’
she replied.
My Aunt would not come inside, as she said we
could have a chat outside just as well and better,
and she didn’t want to hinder me with my work,
for she didn’t like lazy people, and was glad to find
I had been taught something that was useful,’ etc.,
etc. So I brought her a chair out on the verandah,
and got Jane to make her a cup of tea.


Perhaps there was nothing to surprise me so
greatly in a visit from my Aunt, for she and Madge
had parted on fairly good terms, Madge being the
peace-maker, I felt sure. She was in the habit, it
seemed, of making periodical visits to ‘ Mervyl
House’ when my father and mother were alive, but
she had not been near us for eight years. Her
home was in Sandhurst, and she always made it a
boast that she never wasted her money in unneces-
sary expense by taking too frequent train journeys ;
so I wondered not a little why we were honoured
by this special visit. And it seemed almost as if
she was reading my thoughts when she said
abruptly, 'I suppose you wonder what has brought
me here. Well, I don't think myself there is
anything so wonderful in an aunt coming to see
her own dead brother’s children, if you do, child ;
and I think it’s high time someone saw into
matters a bit. A nice affair it is indeed, your sister
Madge marching off and leaving all you chits to
manage this big place—pretty goings on—and she
next door to a child herself.’
‘ Aunt,’ I said, with dignity, ‘I am eighteen and
Madge is twenty-four.’
‘ Eighteen ! What’s that, I’d like to know ? why,
I’d scarcely left school when I was that age, and


was kept down a sight more than you chits are
now. But, there, children are different beings to
when I was a child.’
And here 1 nearly disgraced myself by laughing,
as I pictured to myself what kind of a child she
could have been, or whether she could ever
possibly have been one at all.
‘Well, I expect you and Muriel have made a
pretty mess of things between you or if you
haven’t already, you will do, mark ray words ! ’ and
with this she look a long draught of tea.
I did not answer her for I knew it was useless,
but I did sincerely wish she would cut her visit
short, it would have been such a relief.
After a while she said, ‘ Well, he’s a decent young
man she has married—in a good position I mean
(that’s the main thing) ; none of your love in a
cottage for me ; but I hope it will all end well, for
I haven’t much faith in lawyers myself; they’re
mostly a parcel of rogues.’ (Poor Douglas ! if he
could only have heard her.)
‘ Aunt,’ I said at last, ‘ you had better come in
and take off your things.’ I felt that I must be
polite, but I secretly hoped saying this would bring
matters to some sort of a climax—which it did.
‘No, I must go,’ she said, ‘ for I had to do some


business in Melbourne, and thought while I was
down from Sandhurst I might as well come out and
pay Madge a visit and after saying this she left as
abruptly as she came. 1 was greatly relieved, and
stood on the verandah smiling to myself, and
thinking what an eccentric old body she was, and
pitying poor Madge as I thought of the treat in
store for her of a visit from such an unexpected
quarter. I knew quite well she was only going out
of curiosity and to give Madge a piece of her mind,
as she called it.
When Nellie and Muriel returned from town
I informed them they had missed a treat, for I had
Nhad a visitor while they were away and told them
to guess who it was. Of course they guessed
everyone but the identical person, and you may be
sure were not a little surprised when I told them
it was no other personage than their Aunt Sarah.


CHAPTER XVI.
uch a lovely autumn day, and we were all
& expecting Madge over to spend it with us; and
oh, joy to us girls ! to bring with her our first niece !
for eighteen months had passed away since Madge’s
marriage, and she possessed a dear baby girl just six
months old ; such a beauty of course we all thought
her. The first grand-children usually are great
wonders, I suppose. But I really think little Winifred
was one of the finest and prettiest babies I had ever
seen; such a merry fat little soul, with a smiling
contented little face, rosebud mouth, and big blue
eyes. I cannot tell which one of us thought the most
of her, for from Claude downwards there was always a
fight as to who should nurse her.
Madge still looked the same dear old creature,
perhaps a trifle thinner, but so sweet and motherly
looking that when she and baby were sitting together
I often wished I was an artist and could make a
picture of them.
‘ Come to your auntie,’ I said to the baby (for
Madge had arrived and was taking off her things); at
P


which she held out her arms, for she was a friendly
little thing, and knew us all.
‘ You dear little soul,’ I said, tossing her high up
in the air. Now your mother shan’t get you a bit
more to-day; and so, laughingly, Madge and I walked
into the sitting-room, I carrying the baby, who was
crowing away quite happily and as if she knew well
she was in good quarters and likely to have a good
time.
We had a great deal to talk about, Madge and I, all
the morning, and when lunch was over we went into
the garden and sat under the trees with the baby.
And Madge said how it seemed like old times.
‘ Except for you, Miss,’ I said, pinching and kissing
little Winnie at the same time.
We talked about all kinds of things, and then
Madge gave me a long description of Aunt Sarah’s
visit —what a lecture she had given her, how she had
said she quite expected a judgment from God on her
for having left the family before they were able to
look after themselves, and that she had no doubt her
husband would turn out like all lawyers—a rogue ;if
he didn’t he would be quite an exception to the
general rule.
The baby had been quite upset by the visit from
her Great Aunt, and had cried so, that Madge had to


have her taken out of the room. No doubt it was
the green spectacles Aunt Sarah always wore that
frightened the child most; anyway she did not leave
a favourable impression on her Great Aunt, who said
she was afraid she wouldn’t have much pluck in her
when she grew up, if she couldn’t stand the sight of
her own relations now. Of course I related my
interview with Aunt Sarah too. So we laughed and
chatted away, the afternoon soon came to a close,
and after we had got an early tea Douglas drove over
for them, and with great reluctance we parted with
Madge and the dear baby.
This vvas not by any means our first visit from
Madge since her marriage, for she had been very
many times before, but each visit was always looked
forward to with as much zest and enjoyment as if it
was her first. Jane declared the baby to be the
beautifullest she had ever clapped heyes on, and just
for all the world like her Pa the latter remark
being very true.
Elsie and Violet were nearly crazy over the new
baby, and wanted half their time to be staying with
Madge, but as they were now getting to an age when
it was needful for them to keep close to their studies,
some firmness had to be used. Nellie, who was
now a little over sixteen, was soon to leave school,


and Vi and Elsie were to be sent in her place,
relieving Muriel of her duties as regarded them. We
seemed to be all growing up so, that I remarked to
Muriel one day that soon there would be no little
ones left. Elsie was getting quite tall. She was
much like Madge in face and figure, only being
fairer and blue eyed instead of grey. Vi and Nellie
were, like myself, rather inclined to be short.
It was about a couple of weeks after Madge had
spent the day with us that we elder girls and Claude
were invited to the Fords to spend an evening.
They had a few friends, they explained, to meet a
Miss Johnson, from Adelaide, who was staying with
them, and wanted us to come too, so we went.
After being in this Miss Johnson’s company for a
short time I came to the conclusion that, somehow or
other, I did not like her —why I could not say, for she
had most fascinating manners and was what I suppose
would be called a very handsome girl; but I was not
at all favourably impressed by her, though I said
nothing to anyone, as I did not wish to do the girl
harm or perhaps do her an injustice; so when we
arrived home at night I said nothing to Muriel or
Nellie about not having a good opinion of her.
I am sorry to say that during the evening I had
noticed Miss Johnson and Claude appeared very


friendly with one another, and I thought I had never
noticed him so taken up with a young lady before.
Time went on, and Beulah Ford—who was at our
house a good deal with Nellie —let slip how often
Claude was at their place of an evening, and
laughingly said she thought Myra Johnson was the
attraction. I got alarmed, but what could I do ?
Claude, my brother, nearly three years older than
myself ! was it likely he would listen to my advice ?
No, I thought it would be better perhaps to keep
silent, and let matters take their course. In time no
doubt he would see through her (for I believed firmly
she was a desperate flirt, and that in my eyes, as it
should be in the minds of all right thinking people,
is a grave fault). But he did not see through her, as
I had hoped, for it was not very long after this that
Claude informed me, much to my sorrow and pain,
that he and Myra Johnson were engaged.
‘ Oh, Claude,’ was all I could get out when he told
me, and then I burst into tears. It was not the
wisest thing to do, that was certain, but I could not
help it, for it was such a shock to me- I had not
dreamt things had gone quite as far as that with
them.
‘Well, I’m sure, that is a strange way to take it,
Katie,’ said Claude, looking terribly annoyed. ‘ I


thought you would have been quite pleased to have
received such a handsome girl as Myra for a sister. I
can’t see what ever you have got to cry about. I
always thought you liked her; but I must have made
a mistake;’ and so saying he went hurriedly out of the
room, shutting the door sharply after him. I locked
it then, and threw myself on the floor in a
passion of tears, exclaiming, 1 oh, Claude, Claude, my
dear, handsome, clever brother, how came you to be
so infatuated with such a heartless girl as Myra
Johnson —you who could have gained the heart
of almost any girl in the place, to throw yourself away
on such as she!’ and I felt very bitter towards her,
for I knew she would never make him a good wife,
and I did not, and could not, make myself believe
she cared anything for him, but thought his handsome
face would do nicely to add to her string of already
made victims.
I may appear to be rather hard on Myra Johnson,
and the reader may wonder why I, who had seen less
of her, should be able to judge her so much more
accurately than my brother. Well, it is just possible
that by nature I had a keener insight into human
character, or it may be that in my presence she
unconsciously unmasked herself, for is it not usually
the way with persons of this class, that, though they


manage to show themselves so fascinating in the
presence of the opposite sex, in the company of their
own they reveal themselves in their true character ? a
girl who is animated only in the society of gentlemen,
and who coldly repulses any attempt at friendliness on
the part of another woman, is not to be trusted.
Myra Johnson had not shown me, perhaps, quite all
this, for she knew it would, under the circumstances,
not be wise to do so; but the friendliness always
seemed to be an effort on her part, or forced as it
were. It is just possible she shrank from me, having
an instinctive feeling that I could see through her.
I felt very bitter against her, especially now that she
had come between me and my brother ; for I never
remembered him speaking so angrily to me in all my
life —certainly not since we had grown up —as with
all his sharp sayings and teasing ways, I knew he was
very good at heart, and loved us as much as we loved
our dear only brother. He had been such a
protector to us since Madge’s marriage, and now,
only to think of his having taken up with a girl that I
felt sure I could neither love nor respect. Truly,
as Aunt Sarah had said, it was the unexpected that
always happened.
After awhile I said to myself, ‘ well, this will not
mend matters,’ so I dried my eyes and sat down to


think what would be the best thing to do under the
circumstances; but the tears only started afresh as I
thought what a difficult position it was. I felt so
utterly helpless that at last I threw myself on my
knees and cast my load on the great Burden-bearer,
asking Him to send guidance and direction and to
put a stop, if it was His will, to this marriage.
Having done so, I felt more cheerful, and decided to
leave it in the hands of the all-wise Father, for surely
He would do right. And I knew it would be foolish
for me to interfere with Claude’s affairs any further, so
I made up my mind to let the matter drop. Muriel,
too, was in a great state on hearing about it, for
though she had not taken such a dislike to Myra as I
had, she said she was not the kind of girl she would
like Claude to marry, and, to tell the truth, I think
it would have had to be a very exceptional young lady
that would have satisfied us as Claude’s wife.
I was very thankful that we were prevented the
ordeal of having Myra at our house to tea or to
spend an evening before her departure. She had
been sent for, her mother being ill, and she (Myra),
having a very bad cold the last week of her stay,
was obliged to remain in to nurse it ; so of course
Claude was at the Fords every evening, you may
be sure, that last week. We had only invited her


once to the house. All the five vveeks she was at
the Fords’, and then it was not my wish by any
means her coming. But somehow there was no
getting out of having her.
The last week of Myra Johnson’s visit came to
an end, to my great relief, and she left by the
steamer for Adelaide, Claude seeing her off.
While she was with us I had to be civil to her, but
she certainly, from my manner, could not think I
was at all elated at the match, though I am sure this
did not cause her a moment’s uneasiness, for she
did not appear to care in the least whether she
pleased me or not, and I noticed a cold gleam
would come into her eyes when they met mine—
which was not very often, for she had a habit of
looking down in what might to some people be
considered a very bewitching way.
I believe Claude was genuinely sorry for having
spoken so sharply to me, though I could only see it
in his looks, as he said nothing about it, seeming to
want to avoid the subject altogether.
Things went on as usual for about three months,
letters coming regularly from Adelaide, in a lady’s
handwriting, to Claude—of course we knew who
from ; but after a time their frequency stopped, till
at last one day a letter came, the contents of which
Q


I never accurately knew, but the purport of it was
that she wished the engagement broken off. More
we never knew, and not this much till some weeks
after, when I made a remark to Claude about their
future, doing it really as an opening for him to say
something about it, for I felt sure from the poor
boy’s sad face and upset manner that he was
terribly cut up about something, and I guessed it
was some of this wretched girl’s doings.
‘ Oh, that’s all over a long while ago, Katie,’
he said, with a bitter smile, and hastily left the
room.
I have remarked that we never knew more—but
I mean from Claude. Marion Ford had afterwards
told us that Wilfred had heard, in a letter from a
friend of his in Adelaide (who happened to know
Miss Johnson), that she (Myra) was ‘ stringing on ’
two others at the same time she was engaged to my
brother, and had now broken it off with them both,
and had run away with a married man who was
rich.
Sorry as I was for dear Claude, I was thankful
indeed that the wretched engagement had come to
an end. It was more than likely that if Claude
had been well off she would have kept to the
engagement, and married him. What a blessing


he was not; his whole life would have been mined ;
and I thanked God that such a union had been
prevented.


CHAPTER XVII.
7jT was about the middle of winter, and little
Js Winnie, who was now over two years old, was
staying with us at ‘ Mervyl House.’ Muriel was
out at Kew, keeping house for Douglas, while
Madge and her three-months-old baby had gone for
a change of air. Madge had taken the nursegirl
with her, and left one servant behind.
Things were going on much as. usual at
1 Mervyl.’ Claude had now regained some of his
old cheerfulness, but he never seemed quite the
same as before, and he looked older and much
graver. He and little Winnie were gieat friends,
and when Uncle Claude was at home all her
Aunties were nowhere. He used to carry her
about on his shoulder, make boats for her to sail in
the bath, and hardly ever came home from town at
night without bringing lollies or some treasure for
her in his pocket. She was a dear little thing, but
I am afraid between us was in a fair way to be
spoilt. I think we were all disappointed (especially
Douglas) that Madge’s last baby was not a boy.
But as I said to Madge, perhaps it was a good


thing after all, as the baby and Winnie would be
such a nice little pair, and companions for one
another when they grew up. We had called the
last child Claris Muriel. Madge had wanted to call
one of the children after me, but I protested
strongly against it, saying 1 could not bear the
name of Kate ; so Winnie had been named Elsie
Winifred, after her Auntie Elsie, which pleased
that young lady not a little.
We seemed to need Winnie in the house to keep
us alive, Jane and I—for Nellie was away in
Sydney staying with some friends, Elsie and Violet
being at school all day, Muriel over at Kew, and
Claude at business. It would have been quite
lonely, only for this dear little chatterbox, who
seemed quite contented and happy away from
home. To tell the truth, I think she was a wise
little woman, and knew when she was well off—so
many to wait on her, hand and foot. Douglas was
very fond of his little girl, and popped in to see her
often on his way driving into town. We begged
to have her left with us till Nellie’s- return home,
which we expected would be in about ten days time.
It was close upon two years since the engage-
ment between Claude and Myra Johnson had been


broken off, and my brother had never mentioned
the subject to me since the few words that passed
between us, when he owned that the engagement
was quite at an end.
One evening as I was standing at the hall door,
watching little Winnie at play on the grass plot,
Claude came up behind me, put one arm gently
round my shoulder, and looking down into my face
with a half tender smile, said, ‘You’re a good little
soul, Kit, and a wise one too, and it would have
been well for me if I had listened to you long ago.’
His lip quivered, I looked up at him, and my eyes
filled. I only pressed his arm but said nothing.
He stooped down, kissed my lips, and then walked
silently away. Poor Claude ! I knew he wanted to
ask my forgiveness, and had appreciated all my
sisterly love in trying to prevent a union with so
unworthy an object ; but he never blamed her to
me. Dear old Claude, he had too noble a nature
for that, and had loved her far more than she ever
deserved. But he would get over it, I felt sure ;
and I hoped and believed he had done so already ;
for how could an honourable right-thinking man
retain any respect or affection for a girl (I cannot
call her a woman) who had behaved in so disgrace-
ful a manner?


Well, to go on with my story. It wanted
scarcely a week before we were expecting Nellie
back, and I remarked to Claude at breakfast
that if she intended coming home about the time
mentioned in her last letter we ought to get word
that day, what steamer to expect her by.
It was in the afternoon following this conversa-
tion, that, whilst I was sitting sewing in the
dining-room, Jane brought me a letter. It was a
rainv afternoon, and I had persuaded Winnie to
bring her doll and play with it on the hassock
beside me, and it was while we were thus happily
engaged, I not dreaming what awaited us, that
Jane handed me the letter. I took it joyfully, not
stopping to glance at the handwriting, but
exclaimed, as I opened it, 1 Oh, I expect it’s from
Nellie ; for I had missed her so much, and as she
had been away nearly three months we were all
looking forward with pleasure to her return.
As I read, the letter fell slowly from my hands,
for, oh, how shall 1 ever relate what that epistle
contained ! It was from Mrs. Anderson, where
Nellie had been staying. She broke the nevvs as
gently and kindly to me as she could, poor soul—
how at a farewell picnic they had given to Nellie,
near the river, my dear sister, in trying to reach


some ferns, had fallen in. She was rescued by a
young man of the party, and taken to their house ;
but all efforts to rouse her to consciousness were in
vain.
And so she was gone ! Our bright sunny Nellie
dead ; was it possible ? and the letter fell from my
hands, and I remembered no more till I came to
consciousness ; then I was on the sofa, and Jane
bending over me with a smelling-bottle in one hand
and a glass of water in the other, looking white and
anxious, and as I learned after, had been summoned
there by little Winnie, who, seeing me fall, had
been terrified and had rushed to Jane, screaming,
‘ Arney Taty dead ! Arney Taty dead ! ’ which
had brought her rushing into the sitting-room.
1 could not speak when I saw Jane ; and
when I remembered all, I went off into half
unconsciousness again. Poor Jane was at her wits’
end ; but I came round after a time, and then
slowly and sadly I told her all.
Oh, that sad, sad time—the breaking of the news
to the others, the long weary days that followed—
shall I ever forget it ? and those only can sympathize
who have in their own experience had death come
in so suddenly and snatch away a dear one far
away from home with whom no parting word or


look has ever been exchanged. Truly there are
strange mysteries in this world of ours ; but, oh, I
know, I feel they will all be made clear and plain
in the next. And even here, all things are working
together for our good, and fitting us for that blessed
life beyond, where no foe can enter and no loved
one depart.
But I will pass over that sad time (as I do not
wish to linger over that which gives me so much
pain even now to write), and tell you of brighter
events that followed.
Madge had now two boys and two girls. Elsie
and Violet had left school, and Muriel was engaged
to Eric Parker ; for between three and four years
had passed away since the sad events I have
related. I was now past twenty-three, and began
to fancy myself quite an old woman. Muriel was,
I think, if possible, lovelier than ever—at least so I
thought that evening, as I saw her waiting for Eric
on the verandah in a soft grey dress, with a cluster
of maiden blush roses and ferns fastened gracefully
in the folds of her well-fitting bodice, her golden-
brown hair now coiled up in a becoming style on
her shapely little head.
‘ You are late, Eric,’ she exclaimed, as he
suddenly made his appearance in the walk.
B


‘ Yes, darling,’he answered, ‘I know it. ’Twas that
wretched train : I missed it, and had to wait for the
next ; and I begrudge every moment away from
you, my precious one,’ he exclaimed, pressing her
to his heart and kissing her many times.
1 1 knew you would have been here if you could,
Eric,’ she answered, raising her violet eyes to his
face.
‘ Ah, I should think so, my darling. But how
you tremble, little woman. What is it ?’
‘ Oh, Eric, I am often so afraid that something
may come to separate us, and to-night I was so
fearful that an accident had happened to the train.’
‘ Dear silly little thing,’ he said, looking down at
her with eyes full of tenderness. ‘No, dearie, don’t
brood over things like that. Poor little woman,
you are looking quite pale. What have you been
doing with yourself all day, sitting inside? Come
out in the old garden, precious, and you will get rid
of all those strange fancies ;’ and so saying he
wound his arm round her waist, and they passed
slowly out of sight.
Perhaps my reader will think that I had no
business to hear all this ; but 1 must inform him
or her that I was lying on the dining-room sofa by
the half open window. It had been a very warm


day, and I felt languid and not at all inclined to
stir ; besides I did not think it worth while, as Eric
was never very shy in my presence, and used
almost as endearing terms to Muriel as if I was not
in the room. When they had moved away I
smiled to myself, thinking if ever my time came I
should certainly know what to expect, as I had had
enough lessons in love already. But that was not
likely, I said to myself, as I was wanted here ;
besides, I never had come across the man that I felt
interested enough in to fall in love with ; though I
must here admit a little secret —that I had had two
offers of marriage.
While I was thus meditating I fell asleep, and
was awoke suddenly some time after by someone
tickling my nose with a straw ; and there were Eric
and Muriel standing beside me with arms round
one another.
‘ A nice one you are to mind the house, old lady,’
he said, as I slowly opened my eyes and commenced
to yawn. ‘ The front door wide open, some burglar
might have popped in, robbed ' the place, and
carried you off bodily.’
1 Not much fear,’ I answered, smiling ; ‘ I was not
so sound as all that. But where are Elsie and
Vi ? ’


‘ They have gone off into town with Claude,’
replied Muriel.
; ‘You see how your family plays up when you’re
snoozing, Mother,’ said Eric. ‘Three of them off
gallivanting into town.’
‘ And two of them making love down the
garden,’ I answered, laughing.
‘Ah, well see, what we do is all open and above
water,’ said Eric ; ‘ but when people lie on a sofa
pretending to be asleep, and the hall door stands
wide open, it looks very suspicious, I tell you ;
don’t you think so, Murie ? and you just confess,
Miss Katie, what young man has been courting you
on the sly.’
And so he rattled away, till at last, looking at his
watch, he found it getting very late, and, turning
to Muriel, he said, ‘I must be off, dearie, if 1 am to
catch this next train.’ Then, turning to me, said,
‘ Look here, Kitty, you must make this child go
out more. I found her quite moped up when I
came to-night.’
‘ Very well,’ I said, laughing ; ‘ I will try ; but
it’s not likely she will mind me. You ought to
have the most influence.’
‘ Ah, that’s a sure sign you’ve never been
engaged,’ he answered, trying to look very hen


pecked. ‘ I tell you it’s not what you want your
lady love to do. It’s what she makes you do.
And without waiting for any reply he passed his
arm round Muriel, and said, ‘ I am going to have a
half holiday to-morrow, dear, so you be ready by
three o’clock, for I shall bring a trap out to take
you for a drive. Now mind, darling, be ready
and with this Eric said good-night to me, and he
and Muriel passed on to the hall door.


CHAPTER XVIII.
early twelve months after what occurred in
ijl*< the last chapter, Eric and Muriel were married
and living in a pretty little cottage (only a short
distance from us) called ‘ Mizpah.’ They were as
happy as two turtle doves; but lam afraid it would
not have suited Aunt Sarah, being regular love in
a cottage. Eric had a situation in one of the
wholesale firms in the city, and his salary was
certainly not a large one ; but this did not appear
to trouble them greatly. They were a very
devoted couple, and, as Jane said, they were ‘ the
most lovingest pair as ever she see in all her life,
and if anythink was ever to happen to Miss Muriel
she knowed Mr. Heric would sink into a hearly
grave.’
Of course being so near to ‘ Mervyl,’ Muriel was
continually popping in to see us, and we as often
returning the compliment. Very frequently Murie
and I would spend the long summer afternoons in
our old garden with our work, while her husband
was at business; but after a time a baby boy


arrived, and then vve found plenty to do and to
interest us. We called him Mervyn. Strange to
say he was not at all like his mother or father,
but we thought he resembled Claude more than
anyone else.
About four months after the baby came I was
sitting in Muriel’s dining-room making a garment
for little Mervyn, Eric was reading the paper, and
Muriel nursing her baby, for he seemed quite lively,
and all efforts to put him to sleep had been
fruitless.
‘ Give him to me, little woman ; you look tired
out,’ said Eric, putting down the paper.
‘ No, I am not weary of him, dear ; he is so
good,’ she answered, looking lovingly down at her
little son.
‘ Come to me, young squire,’ said his father,
holding out his arms to take him. 1 Now, Kitty,
don’t you notice how thin this poor little wife of
mine is getting ? What I want her to do is to go
for a change, but you see ’ (casting on her a tender
glance) ‘she cannot tear herself away from me.
Isn’t that it, dear ? ’
‘ No, you conceited fellow, of course not. But
where could I go, Eric, and take a baby ? Not to
a stranger’s, certainly.’


‘No need for it, my child. Hasn’t my sister
Jessie asked you several times to come and stay
with her at Geelong ? Why not go and take the
youngster ? Look here, Kitty, you make up your
mind to go with her. You haven’t had a trip
yourself for a good while.’
1 I daresay I could go,’ I answered. 1 Elsie
and Jane would no doubt manage quite nicely
for a short time.’
‘ Yes, I should say so. Why, Elsie is nearly
nineteen, isn’t she ? so it would be the best thing
to let her get her hand in, anyway. What do you
say, little wife ? Come, make up your minds, both
of you.’
‘ I believe you want to gel rid of me, Eric,’ said
Muriel, laughing ; but he looked at her with such
a tender reproachful glance that she answered
gently, ‘I am afraid you would not be able to
get along without us, dear.’
‘Who is conceited now, I should like to know ?
I’ll manage all right, and will be well repaid if only
you come back looking your old self, darling.’
And so it all came about, in less than a week
after this conversation, that Murie, baby, and I
were all on our way to Geelong, where Jessie
Parker (now Mrs. Weston) lived.


It had been arranged that Violet should go,
after our departure, and keep house for Eric. She
now fancied herself quite a young lady, being over
sixteen, and was very proud at having been trusted
to fulfil so important a duty. Muriel kept only
one servant a young girl of fifteen, but very
strong, and a willing and industrious maid ; so
she and Violet managed very well for the few
weeks that we were away, though Eric told us
afterwards that he several times had some strange
concoctions for dinner. I was not surprised at
that, as I knew Violet had not had much experience
in cooking or domestic affairs generally.
Muriel and I came home in about a month’s
time, looking quite rosy and well, and having
enjoyed our little trip immensely. Eric was
delighted to have his wife back, and seemed as
if he could not make enough of her.
A few weeks after our return I was sitting on
the verandah nursing little Claris, who was staying
with us, when Elsie brought me a note, which she
said had just come from 1 Viadale.’- Opening it I
found to my sorrow, as I read, that May Fleming
had been taken very ill, and the doctor was afraid
it was typhoid ; she had every symptom of it. The
letter was from Mrs. Fleming, and it went on to
fi


say that they were expecting a young lady to stay
with them (a Miss Stafford, from Brisbane.) She
was then on her way, so, nothing preventing her
arrival, could we take her in ? for it would be so
unwise to have her at ‘ Viadale,’ and May being
very ill, it would be dangerous for the young lady
herself. If we could take her, the letter went on
to ask us to send an answer in the affirmative, but
not to trouble to meet her at the steamer, as the
doctor would do that himself, and bring her out to
‘ Mervyl.’
I read the note to Elsie. We talked it over, and
of course decided to take her in, sending back a
letter to Mrs. Fleming to that effect.
We were all very sorry indeed about dear May,
and in the afternoon I went over by train to see
how she really was, and if I could do anything for
them. I found her very ill and delirious, and poor
Mrs. Fleming greatly cut up. They had a nurse,
and plenty of help, so after a cup of tea, which
Mrs. Fleming would insist on my having, I took
the train back.
Our visitor was not expected till the next day,
towards evening. There were preparations, of
course, to be made for our guest, and this kept us
busy. We were not a little curious to know what


this Miss Stafford would be like, and hoped she
was a nice person and would be easy to get on
with; and many were the remarks made concerning
her before the poor young lady arrived, which I
have no doubt would have made her very
uncomfortable if she had heard them ; not that
they were uncharitable or unkind remarks, except
perhaps Jane’s, who said she hoped she wasn’t ‘ one
of them stuck up sort —people as she couldn’t
abear.’


CHAPTER XIX.
She next day, between five and six, as Elsie and
I sat in the parlour with our sewing, we heard
the sound of carriage wheels coming up the drive.
‘ There they come,’ cried Elsie, springing up, and
we both ran to the window and looked out. They
soon came in sight, and we hurried to the hall door
to welcome them. I had expected (I don’t know
why) to see a tall stately young lady, and one much
older. Imagine my surprise, then, when I saw
Dr. Fleming handing out of the trap a pretty
young girl not much taller than myself, and, to go
by her appearance, not more than nineteen years of
age.
‘ So you see we have arrived,’ said Dr. Fleming,
cheerily. ‘ This is Miss Stafford : allow me to
introduce you to Miss Everard and Miss Elsie
Everard.’
When the introductions and greetings were over
Dr. Fleming turned to Miss Stafford, smiling, and
said, ‘ now I go away happy, for I know, Miss
Irene, I leave you in good hands, and I prophesy


that before a week is over you girls will be sworn
friends. Isn’t that usually it, Miss Elsie ? now I
must be off; my services may be required at home;’
and here his bright manner changed, and a look of
care settled on his kind old face. I felt very sorry
for him, for I knew how he doted on May, and she
was just as fond of her father.
When the doctor had taken his departure I
escorted Miss Stafford upstairs to take her things
off and refresh herself generally.
‘ What a nice homely old place this is,’ she said,
in such a friendly way that 1 felt drawn to her at
once. ‘ And what a lovely garden,’ she added,
glancing out of the bedroom window, where there
was a fine view of the rambling old place.
‘ Yes,’ I answered, smiling, ‘ the garden is very
pleasant, especially on a warm summer afternoon ;
but beyond that there is not much attraction, the
view being very ordinary.’
‘Oh, do you think so?’ she replied. I thought
it was a very pleasant view. You see in Brisbane
just now everything is so scorched up that it seems
refreshing to me to see so much green about.
I glanced at her as she was saying this, and
thought how lovely she was. She had now
changed her travelling dress for a cooler one of


delicate pink colour. Her almost black hair was
fastened up in a fashionable and becoming style.
Her soft dark eyes glowed with real pleasure and
contentment. Her dark clear complexion was well
set off by the pink shade of her gown, and the
duskiness of her skin was relieved by the rich
colour that mantled both lip and cheek. Hers was
an uncommon kind of beauty, and captivated me
altogether, and more so because she had such a
natural graceful air and freedom from vanity. I
thought what a contrast she was to Muriel, and
how lovely they would have looked together if
Murie had been still at home.
‘lf you are ready we will now go downstairs,’ I said
to her when I noticed she had finished her toilet.
‘Oh yes, thank you,’ she replied in a sweet
unaffected voice; lam quite readyand so we
walked down to the dining-room together, where tea
was prepared.
The days passed brightly and happily while Irene
Stafford was with us, for instead of having, as we
expected, a stranger whom it was dificult to entertain,
in her place was a bright pretty girl, whom I can say,
without any exaggeration, we soon got to love and
admire very much. We tried to make her visit as
pleasant as we could, to compensate in some small


measure for the disappointment in having her plans
so rudely upset with regard to ‘ Viadale,’ whose
beauties she had heard so much about, but never
been privileged to see; then coming to Victoria to
find May so ill of course was a sorrow to her. But
all through we hoped May would soon recover; and
in the meantime we did, as I have already said, what
we could to make Miss Stafford’s visit a pleasant one.
Little picnics were got up and trips into town ; and
Claude, who I could see greatly admired Miss
Stafford, was only too ready to escort us to entertain-
ments of all kinds and enter into any arrangement
that was likely to afford our visitor pleasure. So
while Irene was with us we had an enjoyable time.
The only drawback to our pleasure was poor May
being so ill.
After Irene had been with us about a month, the
sad news came from 1 Viadale’ that poor May was so
much worse that the doctor gave no hope of her
recovery, which put a stop to everything, and cast a
great gloom on us all.
Poor dear May ! what trouble for the Flemings,
and almost in their old age too. We all felt genuinely
sorry for them.
It was not many days after this that she passed
away; and after the funeral was over, and things


settled down a little, Irene went to stay at ‘ Viadale ’
to see if she could help to cheer up the old folks.
She was a dear unselfish girl, and always so glad to
do any act of kindness. The time allowed for her
visit was drawing to a close, but this sad event
happening, she had written to ask if she could be
spared from home longer.
Irene was one of the older girls in a large family,
so her services were usually a good deal in demand.
It was not at the doctor’s or Mrs, Fleming’s request
that she had written to this effect, hut she could see,
if it was agreeable to herself, how glad they would be
for her to prolong her stay. She received a favourable
reply from her home, and it resulted in her remaining
at ‘ Viadale ’ a couple of months longer ; at the end
of which time, as I quite expected, Claude had lost
his heart completely in that quarter ; and I felt sure
that it was not altogether a onesided affair. Ah,
what a different choice this was to his former one !
How thankful I was that Myra Johnson was miles
away, and that dear Irene Stafford had taken her
place.
I think I have mentioned that my first impression
on seeing Irene was that she was only nineteen ; but
she afterwards told us herself that she had just passed
her twentieth birthday, so that Claude was six or


seven years her senior, which did not matter in the
least, I told myself, but was rather an advantage
than otherwise.
The autumn was nearly over, and in the air there
was just that slight tinge of frost that often makes the
days at the end of that season so delightful. It had
been a glorious day, bright and bracing, and the
berries about the gardens and hedges were wearing
such a lovely scarlet hue, that (if there is any truth
in the saying, that the brightness of the berry fortells
the coldness of the winter), there was every probability
of our having a very cold one indeed.
It was Irene’s last week, and she had come over to
have tea with us, and spend the evening. How
lovely she looked as she came-in from the garden
with Claude. She wore a dark rich ruby blouse of
velvet, and a skirt of the same colour in cashmere, a
hat to match, with drooping feathers, her dark hair
and clear dusky skin being set off to perfection by it.
They were now engaged —had been for some weeks —
and as the time for her departure was so close at
hand, Claude and we girls seemed as if we could not
make enough of her; for Brisbane seemed such a
long way off, and I think poor Claude felt very
trembly over it, remembering his last unfortunate
T


affair. Not that he had the slightest doubt in his
heart of Irene’s faithfulness. How could he con-
descend to class her with Myra in his own mind for a
moment ? But he naturally felt that so many things
might cause a separation. All this I seemed to read
in his face, as his eyes followed her every movement
with anxious and tender looks. However, the day
dawned when he was obliged to part with his lady
love, but not till he had her promise that their
marriage might take place in the following year.
If the reader feels inquisitive enough (or, I beg his
his pardon, interested enough) in Claude and Irene’s
courtship to wish to know more about them, I must
here inform him that my brother was not quite so
open as my brother-in-law, Eric, and he never let me
see behind the scenes.
And now I must close this chapter, but cannot
without feelings of deep sadness stealing o’er my
spirit, as when doing so I draw a curtain over the
dear old home for ever, with all its old associations,
its childhood days, its happy girlhood dreams, its
sweet and its sad memories that seem to cling so
pertinaciously to one, while often nearer events have
been forgotten and vanish from the mind.
But why after all should I regret to draw a veil over
the old homestead ? Do not all these changes, sad


and joyful, bitter and sweet, only bring us nearer and
nearer to our eternal home, where sorrow is unknown,
partings are over, and death can never enter ?


CHAPTER XX.
UCH a sunny little cottage it was, the low
verandah all covered with jessamine and roses,
and from it such a glorious view of the sea, which
was distant but a few minutes walk, being divided
from the house only by the small strip of garden,
now bright with summer flowers Whose could it
be, I wonder ? Well, we will see by and by.
1 Mamma, mamma, do turn on the beach. I
want to dit some shells. ’Ou said ’ou would and
a tiny little child, scarce two years old, came
running on to the verandah, where a lady was
standing watching the white sails of a little boat as
it glided peacefully along on the bosom of the great
ocean. It was a lovely summer day, and the sea
lay calm and blue, with scarcely a ripple upon it.
‘ Will ’ou turn ?’ the little child repeated, looking
up beseechingly into the mother’s face.
‘ Yes, my darling, in a little while and the
mother caught the child up in her arms, kissed her
tenderly, then attracted her attention to the little
boat sailing so gracefully on the water.


The lady was only of medium height, with rosy
cheeks that told of health and happiness, grey eyes,
and a wealth of dark golden hair done up in a coil
at the back of her head.
‘lsn’t it pitty ?’ cried the child, pointing in the
direction of the boat.
‘ Yes, darling. See, there is another one,’ as a
second boat came in sight.
The child was delighted, and clapped her chubby
little hands gleefully. She was a pretty little
thing, with soft brown eyes and fair curly hair.
‘Mummy, when will ’ou turn on the beach?’ the
little one repeated, stroking her mother’s cheek in
a coaxing way, and looking sideways into her face.
‘ Deckly, mummy ?’
‘ Not till father comes in, deary. lam expecting
him every minute. He has got to drive away in
the cart on business, and I want to see him before
he goes. He is away at the farm just now, so you
run and play like a good girl, till I call you,’ said
the lady, beginning to put the little one down on
the ground, when a strong manly.voice called out,
‘ I’m back, little mother. Where have you got
to ?’
‘ Here, dear ;’ and she went quickly forward to
meet him, the child running behind her.


‘I am going now, darling’—addressing his wife.
‘ Joe has put the horse in while I was up the
paddock. Have you any commissions for the
Leven ?’
‘Yes, we are out of a good many things, dear.
I have made out a list, and will just run into the
bedroom and get it, if you will wait a moment.
‘ Right you are, little woman.’
‘ Daddy, tan I go wis ’ou ?’ asked the little one,
who was now in her father’s arms.
‘ Not to-day, birdie. Daddy is in a hurry, and
has a lot of business to do. Next time you and
mother shall both go,’ he added, kissing her.
‘ Here is the list, Bernard ; and will you have
time to leave this parcel at the Hamiltons on
your way ? ’
‘Yes, wifey, I will make time; but I shall have to
hurry now, as I am nearly an hour behind.
Good-bye, sweethearts,’ he said, folding his wife and
child in his arms. ‘Mind you take care of your-
selves.’ And he was off.
‘Your overcoat, Bernard,’ cried his wife, running
after him with it on her arm. ‘You have forgotten
it, dear.’
‘Good little wife! But I don’t think I shall need
it, darling.’


‘ Yes you will,’ she returned, putting it in the
trap. ‘lt may turn quite cold before you come
home, and it will be safest to have it.’
‘ Right you are, little woman and so saying he
drove off, throwing a kiss to his wife and child.
He was not what would be called a handsome
man, but he had such a cheerful, good-natured,
manly face, and he was strongly built and healthy
looking, with a decidedly taking manner. His age
was between thirty-two and thirty-three.
‘ And now, Nellie, dear, we will go for our walk,’
said the mother, taking the little girl by the hand,
and walking into the house to get their hats on.
By this time my reader may have guessed who
the cottage belonged to, and who was the mother of
the little child and wife of the stalwart farmer. If
not, I will now imform him that it was no less a
personage than myself—Kitty Everard—now Mrs.
Wilson.
Perhaps a young reader may be saying, ‘ oh,
bother Kitty Everard ! we had enough of her all
the time she was at “ Mervyl House,” and she is
such an uninteresting character too.’ But having
started my story, I must risk all these remarks.
Another reader may have possibly taken rather an
interest in the homely Kitty, and is wondering not


a little how she comes to be right away on the
North-west Coast, with a husband and a little child
too—she who was never going to fall in love. So
I will tell you.
Claude and Irene’s marriage came off quite
happily, and just about when they expected it to.
Some months after this I was called away to
Madge, who was dangerously ill. It was after the
birth of her fifth child, and she was in such a
precarious state that her life was almost despaired
of. Douglas was in a terrible way, poor fellow, till
the worst was over, and she began to slowly
mend.
The strain upon me while Madge was so ill had
been very great. Not only the nursing and watch-
ing, but the anxiety that she would not recover,
had so unnerved me that it was thought needful
for me to take a through change. A young lady
(a Miss Owen, from Emu Bay, Tasmania) had been
staying with us. She came a week before Madge’s
illness, and was a friend of Elsie’s. They had met
in Melbourne at a friend’s house, when Miss Owen
was on a visit before, and became very intimate ;
so it came about that she was asked to stay at
‘ Mervyl House.’ She remained with us two or
three months.


After I came home Miss Owen’s visit was
drawing to a close. She spoke of having had a
nice time and thanked us for our kindness j and
knowing I needed a change, she begged me to
return home with her. Soon after I received a
pressing invitation from her mother, and I guessed
it was at Lily Owen’s request. It ended in my
accepting the invitation, and we both started for
Tasmania a week after the arrival of the letter.
To make a long story short, at one of the picnics
given by the Owens in honour of my visit I met a
Mr. Bernard Wilson. We took an unaccountable
liking to one another, and as we met pretty
frequently while I was staying at the Bay, I
conclude that I can safely leave my reader to guess
the rest.
y


CHAPTER XXI.
JHI ernahd and I were engaged about a fortnight
before I left for home. I would not give any
decided time as to when our marriage should take
place, so he said, with my consent, after the harvest
was well over, he would take a short trip across to
Melbourne, and then perhaps I would be able to
tell him more definitely. So it was arranged that
in less than three months after I returned he
should pay a visit to ‘ Mervyl House.’
There was a good deal of chattering amongst us
girls, and not a little surprise was created by my
engagement to a Tasmanian farmer. Of course
they all wanted to know what he was like and all
about him. Having with me a very good photo of
my intended husband, I was able to some extent to
satisfy their curiosity, and, fortunately for myself
and my lover, they were favourably impressed by
the photograph,
Bernard came at the time appointed, and when
his stay with us was drawing to a close, he said he
was not going away until I had fixed a definite


time for our marriage.. What he suggested doing
was breaking up the home and taking Elsie and
Violet over to Tasmania with us, also Jane, if she
would consent to go so far away. But I told him
that the girls and I had talked it all over before,
and as Muriel very much wished Elsie to live with
her, and Elsie herself had expressed a desire to do
so, we had arranged it that way.
Mrs. Fleming had a private interview with me,
and said how delighted she would be to have Violet
to live with her. She remarked that she did not
wish to be selfish, and would only like Vi to come
if it was her own free will and choice.
I had a long talk with Violet, and she not only
decided, but seemed quite pleased to go to
1 Viadale,’ Mrs. Fleming seeming more like a
mother than simply a friend.
Before Bernard left, the time for our marriage
was decided on, and he went away quite happy,
Mrs. Fleming I could see was very desirous of
having Violet as soon as possible, though I know
she did not intentionally convey that impression to
me ; she was too unselfish for that. But I knew
what a blank had been felt since poor May’s death,
which they never really seemed to get over. I
was pleased indeed if we could do anything to


compensate in any way for their great loss ; and
I knew Violet, with her bright winning ways and
musical talent, would be a great comfort at
‘ Viadale,’ and would no doubt do much in
cheering up dear Doctor and Mrs. Fleming, and
help them in some small measure to forget their
terrible trial.
As for Violet herself, she would have a beautiful
home and every advantage, and would, I knew, be
treated just like a daughter of their own. I felt
I could leave her very happily in their hands.
I may appear to be writing very calmly of all
this, but I felt far from calm and undisturbed when
it came to the breaking up of the old home and
separating from all my loved ones, to go into new
and untried scenes. It was a great wrench, but I
knew it was all for the best, and had all come about
in the order of God’s providence. It was none of
my own seeking. My Heavenly Father had led my
steps where He wished them to go, had chosen for
me a husband, not handsome, not rich, but what
was better far, a good, a Christian man, but not
till my work was completed in the old home. The
two girls left (now quite grown up) seemed to need
my care and attention no longer ; and as I looked
back over the past my heart was lifted in deep


thankfulness to Him who had so strengthened and
helped me over many difficulties and trials, all of
which I have not wearied the reader by relating.
Having been brought thus far on my journey, it
was with confidence and faith I felt I could go on
to meet whatever awaited me in the future; for
with new scenes and new faces I knew would come
new joys and new sorrows. But I had every
confidence in my future husband, though I had
known him but a short time ; and I can truly say
that my confidence has not been misplaced, for my
husband has proved to me all and everything I
could have desired.
Perhaps before I conclude my story the reader
would like to know a little of what became of some
of our Melbourne friends.
Jessie Parker was married and living in Geelong,
as I have already mentioned. She had no children
of her own, but had adopted a little girl, whom I
will speak more of presently.
Vera, my friend, remains single, and takes care
of the home, where she is much needed.
Maude Parker, whom you have heard a little
about in some former chapter, and who had the
runaway match, did indeed, as Marion Ford


predicted, rue it, for in about two years after their
marriage her husband left her, and it was commonly
reported that he had a wife and children some-
where else. Poor Maude came home broken-
hearted to die, leaving a little child about twelve
months old, whom Jessie took and brought up as
her own ; this being the little girl I have already
spoken of.
My brother Claude and his wife live right in the
city of Melbourne. They have two fine boys of
their own, the eldest being three years and little
Ronald eighteen months.
Madge begins to feel quite an old woman, she
says, having now six children round her.
Eric and Muriel are still as devoted as ever, but
have only the one child (Mervyn), having lost a
dear little girl and boy, which was a great grief to
them.
Elsie still remains with Muriel and Violet with
the Flemings. What the future has in store for
them perhaps some day a sequel to this story may
reveal.


CHAPTER XXII.
TJt was evening—a beautiful summer evening.
JL The moon was shining right across the sea,
making a wide and glorious pathway ; and as I
gazed at it, it seemed to remind me of that
beautiful text in the Bible—‘The path of the just is
as a shining light, that shineth more and more
unto the perfect day.’
We were sitting on our verandah, my husband
and I. It was the anniversary of our wedding day.
We had been married just three years. ‘My
Katie,’ he was saying, as he passed his arm round
my waist and I leant my head confidingly on his
shoulder. Then, looking tenderly into my face, he
asked— ‘ It has been a happy three years, hasn’t it,
my darling ?’
‘ Yes, Bernard,’ I answered softly, ‘ very happy,
my dear husband.’
‘And you look as young and lovely as ever, my
Katie,’ he went on.
‘ Lovely !’ I answered, laughing, this statement
knocking nearly all the sentiment out of me.


‘ Yes, little woman—why not ?’
‘You are the first person who ever said so,
Bernard, and I don’t think I ever heard even you
express yourself so strongly about my looks before.’
‘ But I thought it just the same, sweetheart.’
‘ Oh,’ I replied, looking up at him, with perhaps
just a shade of disappointment in my voice, ‘I
thought when you fell in love with me it was for
something more than good looks, dear. They will
soon fade—if 1 really have any,’ I said doubtfully.
‘And you were right, my Katie. I did fall in
love with something far better, far purer, and far
more noble than good looks, when I fell in love
with you, my good little wife.’
‘ Thank you, Bernard,’ I said, with tears in my
eyes ; ‘ but I am afraid it is all too flattering.’
‘No, darling, it is not. And I am now just
going to give you a little picture of yourself as I see
you. A little woman with a wealth of golden
hair ; a pair of tender grey eyes that are full of
truth and candour, and, best of all, light up at my
coming ; a forehead smooth, while, and intelligent ;
and other features, if not perfect, lit up with such
an expression of sweetness, good-nature, and
contentment, that it rpore than compensates
for ’


‘ Bernard, Bernard,’ I said, laughing, and putting
my hand over his mouth, ‘ please stop or I shall
become quite vain.’
‘ No, you won’t, little woman,’ he answered, and
pressed me to his heart, and we were silent.
The old moon shone down on us, then shyly
glided under a little cloud, and peeped out again
to see if we were gone. No ; we were still there,
locked in one another’s arms too happy for
words.




EPILOGUE.
fY little story, though decidedly not of a
strictly religious character, I sincerly hope
will not fail, in some small measure,to do good; for
the hours spent in writing the narrative would
have been wasted indeed if the reader, after
perusing it, should put down the little volume and
say, ‘ I certainly cannot see anything to learn in
that book, or any character in it that I should ever
care to emulate.’
I think I may venture to say that ‘ Mother
Madge ’ is a suitable story to be read, both by old
and young, but is, I consider, more likely to
interest the latter. Therefore, in case it should fall
into the hands of children, I should like here to
offer a word to them.
‘Mother Madge’ is a tale of domestic life,
therefore it has been mv aim to relate as nearly as
possible what really occurs in the everyday life of a
family of boys and girls. Since I have written the


narrative, the thought has crossed my mind that
the book probably might foster a love of mischief
in some of my very young readers, and so it is
regarding this subject that I wish to put in a word
of advice.
If at any time bent upon playing a trick, be
quite sure before doing so that it is of a perfectly
harmless nature, not calculated in any way to
injure anyone concerned. Remember, that it is
only a mean cowardly nature which can delight
in a trick regardless of consequences. Much
terrible and irretrievable mischief has been done
by heartless selfish trick-playing, resulting often
very seriously not only to the victim upon whom
the trick has been practised, but also to the person
who has created the mischief; for we must always
bear in mind that God’s watchful eye is ever upon
us, and will cause us, sooner or later, to reap the
consequences of our own ill-doing.
