

FM r ;1 i
DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE,
SYDNEY, NEW SOUTH WALES.
Miscellaneous Publication, Ho. 230.
Mount Sea view and the way thither:
r
J. H. MAIDEN,
4lovrrnmthl oak! DvFtctor of the JiotnnU’ awrfltx*, Sy<lwy.
SYDNEY: WILLIAM APPLE! 5 ATE OULLICK, GOVERNMENT PRINTER.
2fi514 a
1898.




DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE,
SYDNEY, NEW SOUTH WALES.
Miscellaneous Publication, No. 230.
Mount Seaview and the way thither
J. H. MAIDEN,
Government Botanist and Director of the Botanic Gardens, Sydney.
SYDNEY: WILLIAM APPLEGATE GULLICK, GOVERNMENT PRINTER.
26514 A
1898.


I
J
t
>
♦
»


Extract from Agricultural Gazette of N.S.W.
June , 1898
Mount Seaview and the way thither
By J. H. MAIDEN,
Government Botanist and Director of the Botanic Gardens, Sydney.
Port Macquarie.
I*r the year 1884, the late Baron yon Mueller first wrote to me suggest-
ing that I should go to Mount Seaview, as the mountain promised a
harvest of rare plants. To the very last the Baron still urged a
botanical exploration of the place, although he became aware that the
mountain is only about half as high as it was at one time supposed.
An opportunity presented itself for making the journey in November
last, and as no botanist has previously visited the mountain, I propose
to give some account of what I saw, only prefacing my remarks with
the statement that the mountain itself was disappointing from a
botanical point of view, and that I obtained better results in other
parts of my tour.
Accompanied by Mr. William Forsyth, Overseer of the Centennial
Park, I took steamer for Port Macquarie. I had thirty-six hours’
stay there, as I had to obtain a suitable vehicle, horses, driver and
camp-attendant, and to fix up things generally. Before starting I
drove to Tacking Point, 6 miles distant, where the Port Macquarie
lighthouse is situated, taking Shelly Beach, a pretty little bay, by the
way. The road to Tacking Point is rich in brush plants, while at
Shelly Beach there are many interesting seaside ones. Following are
the chief plants I noted or collected on this little journey. They are
arranged in natural orders, and the orders in proper sequence.
Hibhertia linearis (Dilleniacese), a very hirsute form. Eupomatia
laurina (Anonacese). Pericampylus incana, otherwise Cocculus
Moorei , a large-leaved Menispermaceous climber. I noticed that the
flowers of Elseocarpus cyaneus (Tiliaceas) were of a beautiful pink
colour; they are of course usually white. Zieria furfuracea, a Rutaceous
plant, was observed ; also Synoum glandulosum, or bastard rosewood,
at least 40 feet in height and capable of yielding logs over 2 feet in
diameter. Of the native grape-vines (Ampelideas), Vitis antarctica
and V. clematidea were observed, and Cupania semiglauca (Sapin-
dacese) and a coarse, large-leaved, broadly lanceolate and blunt form
of Dodonzea lanceolata were both observed on Shelly Beach. So also
was Sophora tomentosa, a leguminous shrub of 12 feet in height and
bearing yellowish flowers. Bauera capitata and Schizomeria ovata are
plants very dissimilar in size, both belonging to the Saxifrage®.
Eucalyptus haemastoma, var micrantha, was abundant on the Tacking
Point Road. The suckers are blue-green, a little glaucous, and the


twigs purple-brown. Other myrtaceous plants observed were
Rhodamnia trinervia, Rhodomyrtus psidioides, the so-called “ Native
Guava,” not unlike the preceding plant in size and habit, Melaleuca
linariifolia, Melaleuca thymifolia, Kunzea capital a, and Myrtus
acmenoides. Amongst the Umbelliferae, a glabrous form of Didiscus
pilosus was noted, while Loranthus dictyophlebus (Loranthacese), a
gorgeous parasite, was found on Eupomatia laurina. The splendour
of the crimson flowers of this plant render it a very striking object.
Turning to the Compositae, Senecio lautus formed masses of succulent
foliage, and Wedelia bifiora, long-trailing plants ; both at Shelly Beach
on the sea-sprayed rocks. Goodenia bellidifolia and G. stelligera were
apparently the commonest representatives of the Goodeniaceee. The
übiquitous Myrsine variabilis (Myrsinese) and Achras laurifolia
(Sapotacese), the “Black Apple,” were common; likewise Lyonsia
induplicata (Apocyneee), most of whose fruits were attacked by an
insect which destroyed the seeds and caused a brown, resinous stain
on the outside of the follicles. Clerodendron tomentosum (Yerbenaceae)
attained the dignity of a tree of 30 or 40 feet near Tacking Point.
Lantana is eaten when young by cattle in this district, according to
Mr. Forester G. R. Brown. It is hard to learn anything good
about Lantana. Teucrium corymbosum (Labiatae), Polygonum
strigosum (Polygonese), Mollinedia macrophylla, Monimiaceae, were
all abundant. Anopterus glandulosa has large verticillate leaves,
and handsome white flowers. It would be a striking object
for cultivation in the coast districts. Another Proteaceous plant
observed was Persoonia lucida, one of the Geebungs. Wihstroemia
indica (Thymelae) was common on the coast, and patches of the
succulent Euphorbia eremophila, also Cleisanthus Cunninghami, were
common in the brush, likewise Croton Verreauxii and Glaoxylon
australe; these four plants belong to the Euphorbiaceae. Crinum
pedunculatum (Amaryllideae) was not uncommon on cliffs overhanging
the sea, flourishing with apparently hardly any soil. Dioscorea
transversa (Dioscorideae), the Native Yam, was readily indicated by its
silvery angled fruits. Kreyssigia multijlora (Liliaceae) and Cordyline
stricta, with pink striped flowers, a neat plant for cultivation, were not
rare. Xanthorrhoea hastilis and X. macronema were common, and I
saw the young spikes eaten down by cattle. At Shelly Beach are a
number of Pandanus pedunculatus, locally known as “ Bread-fruit ”
rooting in almost bare rock. Sparganium angustifolia (Typhaceae)
and Flagellaria indica (Liliaceae) were common in the swamp near the
town. Sorghum plumosum is a common grass towards Tacking Point,
while amongst the ferns Aspidium unitum was rather common, and
Alsophila australis was the representative of the tree-ferns near
Tacking Point.
Lower Hastings River.
Having got all our things together, —tent and accessories, food,
cooking utensils, and appliances for the collection of specimens, we
found that some of the luxuries of life had to be left behind as our
space was limited. About 9 o’clock on the morning of a terribly hot


day we took the Walcha Road. At 12 miles we arrived at the village
of Wauchope, a township on the Hastings, which mainly depends on
the timber industry, and boiled the billy for our midday meal on the
banks of the Yeppen Yeppen, a creek 4 miles further on. The heat
had become well nigh unbearable, the vegetation burnt up, and no
water in any but the largest creeks. We passed over the Hastings at
CameroiTs Crossing, a well-paved crossing 16 miles from the Port (as
Port Macquarie is almost invariably alluded to within a radius of 100
miles), and here is some strikingly beautiful river scenery. But the
place was more beautiful in my eyes from the circumstance that here
I first saw Potamophila parviflora, R. Br., one of the rarest of our
grasses in collections. It is a tall, pale-coloured, erect, cane-like grass,
forming large tussocks in the water several feet in diameter. It is
chopped by cattle wherever they can reach it, and is probably a very
nutritious grass. Mr. G. R. Brown, the C. P. Inspector and Forester
at Port Macquarie, informs me that these tussocks resist the floods
wherever the grass occurs in the creeks, and hence it is not in danger
of extermination.
At 18 miles we passed through the straggling but prettily situated
township of Beechwood (so called from the forests of Beech, Gmelina
Leichhardtii, formerly found in the district), on the left bank of the
Hastings. Here we leave the telegraph office and all communication
with Sydney until our journey is over. It is now late in the afternoon,
and through some pretty brush country we reach McLennan’s Cross-
ing (21 miles). But our horses are tired and when they get into the
river they want to stop there. So we passengers dismount, take off
our boots, &c., and put our shoulders to the wheels. But the wheels
get frequently jammed in the big cobble stones in the bed of the river,
and our bare feet get very sore on this river-bed, and we don’t care
whether we get wet or keep dry, and finally the horses make a
supreme effort and ascend the bank on the opposite side. It is now
dusk and we decide to camp where we are. We put up the fly, have
a good tea, and fall asleep to the music of the Morepork. Early next
morning we continue our journey, the road roughly following the
course of the Hastings. The road is getting more of the up-hill and
down-dale character, and we frequently walk both to spell the horses
and to botanise. But the vegetation continues to be burnt up by a
pitiless sun.
The road, steep as it is, is constantly being improved by the Govern-
ment, and what it used to be, in the old short-cut days, I can only
imagine. In the good old days this road was the means by which the
New England wool was brought to the Port for shipment to England.
Then the bullock-team ruled the road, and inasmuch as the grades and
the roads were so steep, and the roads so cut up, and (in wet weather)
so boggy, one wonders how it paid to convey the very few bales each
team could convey for a distance of 110 miles on a journey that might
occupy two or three months. The railway to New England changed
all this and although through freights between Walcha and the Port
are all but abolished, the roads are being steadily improved, which
makes the old hands wish that it could have been their lot to travel


on such roads in the long ago. Here and there we see traces of the
old road, and it is not difficult to believe the blood-curdling yarns of
the driver who recounted upsets which happened to teams on nasty
pinches.
All this beguiles the journey, as botanising is for the greater part
of the distance out of the question, since the vegetation is for the
most part either scorched by the sun or completely burnt up by bush
fires.
The brush along the cuttings is very pretty and is intermixed with
open forest scenery ; in many places there are glimpses of the river
below. The timbers are Ironbark (E. paniculata and E. siderophloia),
Grey-gum (E. propinqua), Bloodwood (E. corymhosa) , Tallow-woods
(E. microcorys) , Stinking-gum (E. tereticornis) , and Apple-tree (Ango-
phora suhvelutina) . The country is very hilly and progress con-
sequently slow with our heavy load.
We come to a nasty pinch at Long Flat (30 miles). Our driver
contrives a marvellous brake appliance out of stout saplings, and we,
on foot, hang on to the back of the waggon like grim death (as the
saying is), but we go down that hill at a pace that would be admired
by an athlete. We are now ready for our dinner, and we camp on
the bank of the Hastings, about a mile past a clean-looking little
hotel at Long Flat (31 miles). The river is low, but the water is
limpid and cool. Our horses have gone on an excursion of their own,
but they are found in due course, and we pass over country very
similar in character to that which we have seen between the 20 and
30 mile posts. The timber continues much the same, but the forest
is rather more open in character.
* At about 36 miles we cross a fine bridge over the Ellenborough River,
but before crossing it we walk about a quarter of a mile along a
tongue of land at the junction of the Hastings and Ellenborough
Rivers, the latter river entering the right bank of the Hastings. The
banks of both rivers are high at this place, and the scenery very
pleasing. There are no townships in the district, only a few settlers
on the Ellenborough and a station or two. In fact, settlement for
the last few miles is quite sparse. The hilly nature of the country
and the timber upon it continues much the same.
Towards dusk we arrive at Rushers Creek, at a spot 2 miles before
it joins the Hastings, where we decide to camp for the night. Here
we see our last ironbark; I am informed that, on this road, one
will see no more of this tree until one reaches Bingera, in Hew
England.
We now enter fenced and ringbarked country for 5 miles, until we
arrive at Yarras, a station on our right, on Yarras Creek, and perhaps
half a mile from the road. The country is very hilly, and if the
Roads Department had not cut down some of the hills and graded
the road, travelling on this route would be more exciting than it is.
We have here undulating country with views of mountains in the
distance, and fringes of brush near by on our left. The scenery is
very fine in many places —broad, open views which cannot fail to
impress the beholder with their grandeur.


We now arrive at Joe Yeldham’s, and, as a matter of convenience,
we may refer to tire remainder of the river as the Upper Hastings.
The few plants which will now be enumerated as having been
observed on the Lower Hastings could have been largely added to in
spite of the bad season, but I hadn’t come to botanise on the Lower
Hastings, which was a class of country I knew well enough already.
Stringybark was in full flower all along the valley of the Hastings.
There is a small-leaved form of the Lillypilly ( Eugenia Smithii).
It is very abundant on the banks of the Hastings River, where it is
up to 30 feet in height and 1 foot in diameter.
It is a small-leaved tree with leaves (say) 1\ in. x in. Leaves
much the same shape as those of E. Smithii, but much smaller. This
characteristic is constant over a large area, and I therefore propose
the name of minor for this variety. It was in flower when I collected
it, and I thought it might be E.parvifolia, 0. Moore, but the spreading
calyx shows that that cannot be the case. Leaves, flowers, and fruits
are alike smaller than those of the normal species.
One also noticed Hovea longifolia, R. Br., var. pannosa, Benth, a
variety which appears to run into H. acutifolia, A. Cunn., and the
very handsome trailer Lonchocarpus Blackii, with trusses of crimson
flowers. Pimelea altior was plentiful about Wauchope, and the com-
monest geebung appeared to be Persoonia lucida. Astrotriche floccosa,
var. incana, was not uncommon, nor was Solanum densevestitum.
Daviesia genistifolia was common in the paddocks about Rushe’s Creek
Other plants were Cupania nervosa, Mollinedia macrophylla, Acacia
longifolia, var . florihunda (Sally), Croton Verreauxii, and the Cockspur
Thorn, Cudrania javanensis and Nelitris paniculata. The weedy
Solanum aviculare was also seen, and also Carex longifolia and.
Eragrostis diandra.
Upper Hastings River.
As a matter of convenience, we may consider the Upper Hastings
to begin at Yarras (Yeldham’s), 55 miles from Port Macquarie. Here
I was met by Mr. J. P. Campbell, the resident surveyor of Walcha,
who was my guide, philosopher, and friend for the rest of the journey.
On the banks of the river, near Yeldham’s, we note a remarkably
handsome tree. It has white flowers and Elder-like foliage. It is
perhaps 50 feet high, is very shapely, and affords excellent shade.
We notice this tree at various other places up the river, and in all
cases it was found to be badly infested with the cocoons of some
lepidopterous insect. It is undoubtedly well worthy of cultivation.
Its botanical name is Cuttsia vihurnea, and it belongs to the Saxifrage®.
I have never seen finer specimens of it than here.
Leaving Yeldham’s we follow the right bank of the river and
ascend a rather steep cutting. Tall grass-trees are common on the
hillside. After 2 miles we cross Ralfe’s rivulet once, and also the
Hastings five or six times in the 5 miles or so to our camp. The
banks of the rivulet and of the river are alike steep, and we are glad
to arrive at our destination. We leave the Port Macquarie-Walcha
road after 57 miles, where we strike off to the right to cross Ralfe’s


rivulet, and henceforth have only a track, and what with the steep
hanks of the river, and the rough country generally, our driver’s skill
is taxed to the utmost during these few miles. At length the waggon
can be brought no further, and we are on the banks of the Hastings
about a quarter of a mile from Tobin’s Creek, and within a couple of
miles of Mount Seaview, which, from the particular view we get of it,
presents much the appearance of a gigantic hemispherical mass, or
rather the shape is more elongated, reminding one of a hard felt hat
without the brim. The highest part of the mountain is not observ-
able from our camp. The mountain was not a bit like what I had
pictured it; I thought it was a peak, but here it was, and I already
felt a certain amount of happiness in sleeping almost under its shadow,
which had been an object of longing to me for nearly fourteen years.
We are camped on the banks of the Hastings, and before we com-
mence our ascent of Mount Seaview, let us have some idea of the
vegetation of the vicinity of the river at this part. In the first place
the river winds a good deal, its banks are often steep, and it is
frequently clothed with vegetation, much of it consisting of large trees,
to the water’s edge. There is very little flat land in the district;
one would have to travel for miles to find a piece suitable for the least-
exacting cricketer.
The common forest trees are Forest Red-gum ( Eucalyptus tereti-
cornis) and Broad-leaved Apple (. Angophora subvelutina) , with Dog-
wood ( Jachsonia scoparia) and She-oak ( Casuarina suberosa ) on the
ridges. Along the river the River Oak ( Casuarina Cunninghamiana )
is abundant, and trees 80 to 100 feet high and 2 or 3 feet in diameter
are not uncommon. Then we have the Water Gum ( Tristania laurina);
Corkwood ( Duboisia my op oroides) , very fine trees; Blackwoods
( Acacia melanoxylon) ; Red Ash ( Alphitonia excelsa) ; White-thorn
*( Bursaria spinosa), 30 feet high and a foot in diameter; Cuttsia
viburnea, Nettle-trees ( Laportea gig as) . All these wex*e common within
an easy distance of our camp.
Hymenosporum flavum, the so-called yellow Pittosporum, was
simply ablaze with its yellow blossoms. It was 30 feet high and 6
inches in diameter, and, although not uncommon in the district, it
did seem wicked to have to cut one down for a ridge-pole for our tent.
Other trees more or less plentiful were White Cherry ( Schizomeria
ovata), Cupania semiglauca, Cryptocarya microneura, Native Cherry
[Exocarpus cupressiformis) , Ehretia acuminata, Black Apple, Cargillia
australis, Pkyllanthus Ferdinandi, together with a little Beech [Gmelina
Leichhardtii), and less Cedar ( Cedrela australis). Acacia decurrens,
var. pauciglandulosa, is the common Wattle along* the Hastings, while
I found two trees (no others were known in the district) of Acacia
pruinosa, at the foot of Mount Seaview. This locality appears new.
It has been recorded from New England, but this locality is over
2,000 feet below New England, and over 30 miles away from the
nearest part of it.
Leaving the trees, the following shrubs and smaller plants were
observed : — Hibbertia volubilis (Dilleniacese) ; lonidium suffruticosum
(Yiolaceoe), common between stones on the banks of the river.


Gommersonia echinata (Sterculiaceas); Pomaderris apetala (Rhamneae);
Dodonsea viscosa, Native Hops (Sapindaceas) ; Swainsona galegifolia,
var. alhucifiora, Cassia sophera (the weed known as Yellow Darling
Pea or Yellow Indigo), Legnminosae ; Baeckia virgata, Leptospermum
fiavescens, Callistemon salignus, var. angustifolius, all three belonging
to the Myrtacese, the Callistemon forming dense shrubs on the river
bank. Loranthus alyxifolius (on Casuarina suberosa), a very beautiful
mistletoe. The following Composites : —Senecio vagus, Crepis japonica,
Glossogyne tenuifolia, Myriogyne minuta, Gnaphalium luteo-album,
Eelichrysum semipapposum, Helichrysum Bechleri (a tall, straggling
shrub), also Helichrysum diosmifolium. On the river bank I found one
plant of Goodenia grandifiora with leaves up to 4 in. x in.; Myrsine
variabilis (Myrsineae) ; Notelsea longifolia (Jasmineae); Lyonsia reticu-
lata (Apocyneae); Asclepias curassavica (Asclepiadese), a pretty red-
flowered South American weed which is spreading; Convolvulus
marginatus (Convolvulaceae) ; Gratiola pedunculata (Scrophularineas);
Eranthemum variabile (Acanthaceae), and Justicia procumbens among
stones by the river side. Alternanthera triandra (Amarantaceae);
Teucrium corymbosum (Labiatae), Plectranthus parvifiora, and A jug a
australis, belonging to the same order. Muhlenbeckia gracillima
(Polygonaceae) ; Persoonia linearis (Greebung), and Lomatia silaifolia
(two Proteaceous plants); Pimelea linifolia (Thymelaceae); Croton
Verreauxii, Alchornea ilicifolia, Acalypha nemorum, Cleistanthus
Cunninghamii (with bisexual flowers), four Euphorbiaceous plants.
Santalum obtusifolium (Santalaceae); Geitonoplesium cymosum, and
Eustrephus latifolius, two Liliaceous climbers with black and yellow
fruits respectively. Scirpus riparius, Cyperus gracilis, Cyperus
tetraphyllus, Cyperus trinervis are four sedges observed, while JDoodia
caudata, a fern, was common. Amongst the grasses were Potamophila
parvifiora, already referred to, Andropogon afiinis, Andropogon refractus,
Panicum marginatum, and OplisrAenus setarius, while Poa csespitosa was
everywhere. In the river were Myriophyllum verrucosum, Potamogeton
obtusifolium, and P. perfoliatum.
Mount Seaview.
From our camp we passed the junction of Tobin’s Creek with the
Hastings, then made for a grassy spur about a mile away. This spur
was rather steep, and being covered with dry tussocky grass [Poa
csespitosa) about 2 feet long, and prostrate, the ascent was very
slippery. The trees on this grassy portion were Forest Redgum (Euca-
lyptus tereticornis), Apple ( Angophora subvelutina), and Forest Oak
(i Casuarina torulosa) . After an ascent of a few hundred feet the grass-
land and the brush began to alternate. On the side of the grassy
slopes were steep gullies with brush, but the alternation of which I
have spoken was in the form of belts, some of them being quite
narrow. Black cockatoos made a great noise, and we found we had
disturbed their meal of seeds of Casuarina torulosa, the cones being
broken up by their powerful beaks. I was not previously aware that
black cockatoos fed on these seeds, and whether it is their ordinary


food, or whether they were driven to it by drought and bush-fires, I
do not know. But cockatoos have a good deal to learn. It must be
very slow work to break up these hard cones for the seeds which are
so carefully and solidly embedded in them; it would be a charity to
teach the birds that if they would simply peck the cones off the trees
and leave them for a day the seeds would shed freely.
To return. I noticed Alchornea ilicifolia, then thickets of Croton
Verreauxii, then Bluegum ( Eucalyptus saligna) towering amidst the
vegetation. Then, intermixed, Rhodamnia trinervia, Tarrietia argyro-
dendron, Hibiscus heterophyllus (one of the Kurrajongs, with its
beautiful, though fugitive, large whitish flowers, with purple centres),
Stringybark (one of the numerous forms between E. capitellata and
E. eugenioides) , and Tallow-wood [E. microcorys).
The grass up the hill continues to consist almost entirely of Poa
csespitosa.
We notice Cargillia australis (one of the Native Plums), Tarrietia
argyrodendron, with its beautiful silvery under-leaves, and Elseoden-
dron australe.
Other trees were Acronychia Baueri and Blackwood ( Acacia melan-
oxylon). One also observed Senecio amygdalifolius (a yellow daisy-
like plant), Cleistanthus Cunninghamii, Rhagodia hastata (a salt-bush),
Eustrephus latifolius and Paspalum scrohiculatum (a widely diffused
grass).
We then, to our surprise, come across a cedar track, and very steep
it is. I have long arrived at the conclusion that cedar-getters are as
venturesome and undergo as great privations as gold-diggers ; the
cedar-getter is the pioneer of the trackless brush, and brush country
is often in deep gullies. I have often admired the enterprise of cedar-
getters away in the fastnesses of the mountains, and I would like to
behave as tenderly to them as the regulations will permit in some
cases in which they mistake Her Majesty’s cedar for their own.
But I am digressing, forgetting that I observe Sterculia lurida with
its beautiful lace-like layers of bark, also Cupania nervosa and the-
native Tamarind ( Diploglottis Cunninghamii) , which towers its head
gracefully with much of the beauty of a palm.
We have travelled about 1,000 feet in vertical height to just above
surveyor’s mark aB9, where a terribly steep pinch begins.
I sit on a fallen tree to get my breath, and then note Gallistemon
salignus, 40 feet in height; Birds’ Nest Ferns [Asplenium nidus),
Dendrobium striolatum, Mollinedia macrophylla, Eugenia myrtifolia
(Brush Cherry), Stenocarpus salignus (Beefwood), Doryphora sassafras
(sassafras), and we are in a Cedar Brush. We now begin to feel spots
of rain; but, excelsior ! we must go higher ; yet we cannot make
many notes or collect many specimens in the rain. We, however,
notice that the giant Grass-tree ( Xanthorrhoca arborca) which is usually
a sign of sterile hill-sides in the Upper Hastings country, is with us,
and also some Blackbutts and Peppermints.
We have been steadily ascending for about 1,850 feet (by our
aneroid) since we left camp, and for the last 300 feet it has been rain-
ing heavily. We at length get on to the top of a ridge. It is flat-


topped for a considerable distance ; and as in the rain and fog we
cannot see very far, we hope that this is the top of Mount Seaview.
But this is not the case, as we observe, through a temporary break in
the clouds, higher country ahead of us. The top of this ridge is
redolent with the odour of Peppermint ( Eucalyptus amygdalina)
of which there are many fine trees. The rain continued to come down,
and as the trees were too straight to afford shelter, and as the whole
place was wind-swept, we endeavoured to ignore the rain altogether,
and started a fire to boil the billy. This was no easy task, but the
hot tea repaid us for all our trouble. Our very modest repast at an
end, we marched on again. I observed Pittosporum undulatum,
Trochocarpa laurina, dense thickets of Psychotria daphnoides, fine
trees of Synoum glandulosum, Cargillia australis , and Stringybark.*
. We are on a saddle,'and have some pretty steep ascents to make
through a dense undergrowth of brush, the rain coming down in
torrents the while. We had by this time got soaked through, so, as
we could not get much wetter, we recklessly dashed into the ferns and
other vegetation. Pocket-book in hand, I recorded Tristania conferta
(Brush Box), Panax elegans, Native Tamarind, Blue Gum, the trailing
Phipogonum discolor obstructing progress, Tallow-wood 5 feet in
diameter, Drimys aromatica, and Sassafras.
There seemed no end to the climbing, but at last we emerged on a
comparatively flat place. It was strewn with pieces of rock, and, as
there was much bracken and other undergrowth, locomotion was very
difficult. This comparatively flat ground continuing, we began to
surmise that we might be at the top of Mount Seaview, but we could
only see a few yards ahead of us. I botanised as well as I could, and
finally came to the cairn on the summit. It will not be a matter for
surprise that a Scotchman was sitting upon it (in the person of my
genial friend, J. F. Campbell, of Walcha). The beacon was inscribed
A over C 89, 1889 being the date of erection. Although I had for
some time known that there was a trigonometrical station on the
mountain, I felt a little disappointed when I saw it, for I realised that
we were not by any means the first visitors to the summit. But as
far as I can learn no botanist has previously been there, so that my
notes, imperfect as they are, may possess some interest which would
otherwise not belong to them.
We are on the top of Mount Seaview, and here may appropriately
be given the notes I received from the Trigonometrical Branch of
the Lands Department, through the kindness of Mr. Gerald H.
Halligan.
Counties Macquarie and Hawes, parish Hastings.
Upon a range locally known as Mount Seaview or Kokomerrican, on north-west
boundary of parish of Hastings, and on boundary between counties Macquarie and Hawes.
A connection has been traversed from H. A. Coombe’s 60 acres, portion No. 13, parish
Hastings, about 3 miles to a peg on the summit of the range, and bearing 100° 23' distant
12‘3 links from black butt, broad-arrow over c over 89. The is identical with this
peg, the position of which was carefully marked before its removal, and the “ plug ” set
in large stone in the same place. The connection to peg is therefore connection to .
* I have given some notes on the Eucalvpts found on Mount Seaview in a paper
read before the Linnean Society of New South Wales in March.


Large red brick tower, C.E., Port Macquarie...
87
23
0
43
Port Macquarie
94
48
0
43
John
121
23
30
36
High range...
15
45
0
18
(?) Banda Banda Range
33
11
0
18
(?) Mount Kippara Range
48
6
0
28
Mount Cairncross Range
77
0
0
20
Wauchope Peak Range
98
39
0
30
Broken Bago Range ...
102
5
0
25
Queen’s Peak Range
104
7
0
35
North Brother Range
112
25
0
36
Comboyne or Signal Hill Range
117
5
0
28
Kerewong Range
145
13
0
22
High Range ...
182
54
0
15
(?) Mount Laurie Range...
242
56
0
30
High Range
251
39
0
20
... ••• ••• •••
304
48
0
3
This range is stated on map to be 6,100 feet high, but it appears to be only about 3,000
feet. There is a range about 1,000 feet higher, distant about 3 miles, bearing about
304° 48'.
Objects observed.
° ' " Distance (miles).
Station is marked by a metal plug in a large stone sunk about 1 foot below surface of
ground, under a mast 7 X 7 in. x 14 ft. 2 in., surrounded by pile of stones 7 feet high.
From top of plug to centre of vanes 11 ft. 2 in.
Access. —From Port Macquarie by the New England road to Yarras P. 0., 55 miles ;
thence by same road to O’JDoherty’s farm, Rail’s rivulet, about 3 miles; thence by a
road north westward up the Hastings River past Geo, Branson’s to H. A. Ooombe’s
60-acre portion referred to, about 6 miles; and thence in same direction on to a “ grassy
spur ” at foot of Mount Seaview, about 1 mile, where remains of my camp will be seen.
From near it, a slide road crossing the gully to the westward leads up the range, on to
the first top, about 1 mile. Follow the slide track until it turns to the left into a steep
gully; then follow a blazed and roughly-cleared track along the top of the spur to ,
about 1 mile. Ascent from camping-place about 2,250 ft. (aneroid). The road from
Ealf’s rivulet to Coombe’s portion is very steep in places, the Hastings River has to be
crossed six times on it, the crossing-places being very rough with large stones, and the
banks on either side at some of them are very steep. If vehicles are taken only light
loads should be carried. There is a good camp on the “grassy spur ” referred to.
Tlie rain to which I have already alluded continued and increased.
We found the top of Mount Seaview enveloped in a thick mist, and
we looked down upon clouds everywhere. I believe the views from
Mount Seaview are superb on a favourable day, and the table just
given shows a number of objects, some of which are a considerable
distance away. The smoke of bush fires has been in the atmosphere
all the way from Port Macquarie, and residents of the Upper Hastings
informed me that for weeks past it has been difficult to see a few
miles from this cause. We were not able to see Mount Seaview from
Port Macquarie ; it is usually a beautiful object, high away in the
clouds, as seen from that place. So that our views from Mount
Seaview were a complete failure. The rain began to be a source of
anxiety. The wind began to be cold; we were thinly clad for the
ascent, and we were simply soaked through. There was no shelter
and the fog was thickening.* The notes I made in my pocket-book
were washed out as fast as I made them, and they had to be largely
transcribed from memory next day.
» We found later that no rain other than a drizzle had fallen at the foot of the moun-
tain, and that it had apparently stood in the way of or attracted a scud from the table-
land when rain had fallen.


We now commenced the return journey. The broken ground at
the top made locomotion very difficult, but when we began the actual
descent we made bee-lines as far as we could until such time as we
came across a track. We found the descent more tiring than the
ascent, and we returned to our camp at about 9 o’clock, after an
absence of about eleven hours.
For a list of the plants found by me on the summit, see a paper in
the Proceedings Linnean Society, N.S.W., for March, 1898.
It will be appropriate for me to give at this place extracts in Oxley’s
own words* from his account of the explorations which led to his
discovery of Mount Seaview (or Seaview Mount as he called it). It
is not possible, in this mountainous country, to define precisely his
tracks in the Upper Hastings country, but it is very possible the
mountain at present officially referred to as Mount Seaview was the
one so named by Oxley.
September 22, ISIB. — . . . We had no choice in the route we pursued this day,
taking that which appeared most practicable for men and horses ; it was a continued
ascending and descending of the most frightful precipices, so covered with trees and
shrubs and creeping vines, that we frequently were obliged to cut our way through.
, , . About two hours before sunset, after a descent of upwards of 5,000 f feet, we
found ourselves at the bottom of the glen, through which ran a small stream ; but a
passage down it was impossible, as it fell over rocky precipices to a still greater depth.
The opposite side was a mountain equally steep with the one we had just descended.
September 23. —We proceeded to ascend the mountain, the summit of which was
nearly 2 miles distant, and in many places extremely difficult and abrupt
Bilboa’s ecstacy at the first sight of the South Sea could not have been greater than ours,
when on gaining the summit of this mountain we beheld the Old Ocean at our feet :
it inspired us with new life: every difficulty vanished, and in imagination we were
already at home. We proceeded sufficiently far to discover that, although our descent
would be both difficult and dangerous, it would not be impracticable. The country
between us and the sea was broken into considerable forest hills and pleasing valleys,
down the principal of which we could distinguish a small stream taking its course to the
sea. To the north and south the country was mountainous and broken beyond anything
we had seen. Indeed, some idea of those barrier mountains may be formed from the
circumstance that, although we could distinctly see the ocean and the waving of
the coast line (which within the distance of 10 or 12 miles from the beach appeared
low), yet we were still nearly 50 miles from it. I estimated the height of this
mountain at between 6,000 and 7,000 feet; and yet the country north and south
appeared equally elevated. ... It must not be supposed that we attempted to
climb these hills in a direct line ; it would have been scarcely possible for a man to do it;
we wound round them in every practicable direction, and the loose rich soil, of which
they were generally composed, together with the thickness of the timber, by preventing
our falling, favoured our progress. In the course of the afternoon I tried the angle of
elevation and depression on various parts, and found it to be from 30 to 35 and even 40
degrees. By the same means we found that the mountain which we had descended
yesterday evening exceeded 4,700 feet in height on those angles. The mountain we shall
have to ascend to-morrow is very considerably higher, but, with one or two exceptions,
the ascents are not so abrupt. After the provisions were brought up all hands were sent
to cut a road for the horses through the brushes, which surrounded the bottoms of the
steepest ascents, and without which it would have been impossible for them to pass
laden, the vines which crossed each other in various directions forming an almost
impenetrable barrier. It may seem superfluous to speak of soil and timber among such
mountains as these, yet I will say that, except where the rocks presented a perpendicular
face, and along the highest ridges, the soil was light and good. The timber consisted of
blue-gum and stringybark, and forest-oak of the largest dimensions. The gorges of the
valleys were covered with loose, small stones, and in those gorges all the trees which are
usually found in places of a similar description in the district of the Five Islands* (with
* “Journals of Two Expeditions into the Interior of New South Wales,” by John
Oxley. London, 1820. t These heights are far too great, being based on miscalcu-
lations. X Now known as Wollongong.


the exception of the red cedar) were to be met with. The stones and rocks were mixed
with a considerable portion of quartz, and were generally in loose, detached masses of
various sizes. The mountain from whence we first saw the ocean was named Seaview
Mount, and, I should think, might be distinctly seen by ships at some distance from the
coast.
September 24.—At 8 o’clock the horses began to ascend the mountain, and it was 12
before we reached the summit, a distance of exactly 2 miles. How the horses descended
I scarcely know ; and the bare recollection of the imminent dangers which they escaped
makes me tremble. At one period of the descent I would willingly have compromised
for a loss of one-third of them to ensure the safety of the remainder. It is to the exer-
tions and steadiness of the men, under Providence, that their safety must be ascribed.
The thick tufts of grass and the loose soil gave them a surer footing, of which the men
skilfully availed themselves. The length of the descent was two measured miles and
three-quarters, and upon first an angle of depression of 40 degrees for 1,254 feet. We
then slightly ascended 4 or 6 degrees for 4,620 feet, and from thence the descent, in a
continued straight line to the run of water at the base, was on the various angles of 28,
32, 35, 40, and 46 degrees, 8,580 feet; from whence I deduce the perpendicular height to
be nearly 6,000 feet, which is certainly underrated. The descent terminated in a very
narrow, steep valley, down which we proceeded for near three-quarters of a mile, when
the small stream before mentioned joined a very considerable one, seen yesterday from
Seaview Mount.
September 26. —We proceeded between 4 and 5 miles down the river, which was named
Hastings River, in honor of the Governor-General of India ; the vale gradually opening
to a greater width between steep and lofty hills, the soil on which was very stony but
rich, and covered with fine grass 2or 3 feet high. At the place where we stopped small
rich flats began to extend on either side, and confirmed our hopes that we should find a
more regular country as we approached the sea. The route which we had travelled lay
over steep and sharp points of mountains, ending on the river, but did not offer any
obstruction.
[Oxley then describes his journey down the Hastings to its mouth
at Port Macquarie, which he discovered and named. We journeyed
from Port Macquarie to the Apsley River over much the same ground
that Oxley did, but, of course, in a reverse direction.]
Mountains in the Seaview Range higher than Mount Seaview.
Two days afterwards we set out for the higher mountain already
referred to on page 586 as “a range about 1,000 feet higher, distant
about 3 miles, bearing about 304° 48'/’ As subsequent experience
showed, this distance was much understated.
The Hastings River in this district winds very considerably, and
about 2 miles above our camp the sides of mountains come so close to
the stream as to render travelling a matter of difficulty. The bed of
the river contains large boulders* of serpentinous rocks, also rounded
altered slate and gneissose (granitoid) rocks. The granite boulders
appear to have travelled from the parent belt of that nature which
crosses the stream some 8 or 10 miles above the part now being
referred to. Here and there were masses of shingle, and growing
amongst them, and in fact all along the river, were fine trees of the
River Oak fCasuarina Gunninghamiana).
We travelled over undulating country for about a mile to cut off a
bend in the river. It was open forest land, moderate grazing country.
The trees were Rough-barked Apple, Forest Oak, Forest Red
Gum, Jacksonia scoparia and such vegetation, indicative of rather
poor soil, with plenty of Blady Grass (Imperata), Tussock Grass
* It must be remembered that we were travelling during a period of drought, and that
the river was lower than it has been known to be for many years.


(Poa csespitosa), and Xerotes longifolia. In the small gullies traversed
I noticed Ficus rubiginosa (Small-leaved Fig), Bcolopia Brownii, Gryp-
tocarya microneura, Eugenia Smithii, Callistemon salignus, the ordinary
form, and Callistemon salignus , var. angustifolia , a yellow-flowered
plant, forming a dense scrub, 6or 7 feet high/on the banks of the
river Hastings. There seems to be strong grounds for considering
this variety as one of the connecting links between C. saligmis, DC.,
and C. pithyoides, Miq. Pittosporum undulatum was not rare.
We then forded the river on boulders, which it was possible to do
without getting very wet. Walking along one bank or the other, for
we had to cross and recross several times, we noticed a form of
Phyllanthus Ferdinandi, Leptospermum jlavescens , Hakea saligna, the
Sand-paper Fig (Ficus asperaj , and an erubescent form of the Calliste-
mon (C . salignus, var. angustifolia) , which has usually yellow flowers.
There were also the Red Ash (Alphitonia excelsa), Hibiscus heterophyllus
(a Kurrajong), and Banksia integrifolia, apparently identical with that
found on the summit of Mount Seaview. I also noticed a large-leaved
Fig, in foliage only, which was probably Ficus macroplnylla, and
possibly F. Bellengeri. In addition, there was a Ficus (F. eugenoides)
with small yellow figs.
Clerodendron tomentosum was not uncommon, while the gullies were
showy with Hymenosporum flavum, and the tall shrubs of Myrsine
variabilis were simply loaded with fruits, deep blue to purplish in
colour, which rendered them very ornamental. Here and there were
carpets of Panicum pygmseum, while the rancid-smelling Plectranthus
parviflorus was abundant in rocky situations, both on the banks of the
river and in other parts of our journey.
We had now travelled 6 miles, and had ascended 115 feet, since we
left our camp. We had crossed the Hastings about ten times in the
6 miles. We had arrived at a part of the river most convenient for
an ascent of the higher mountain of which we were in search, and
here we pitched our camp. We had a dip in the river, had a frugal
meal, and were soon fast asleep. The animals were very tame, the
kangaroo rats coming quite close to us on their way to the river, and
the opossums ran up and down the fly (we brought no tent) as
if it had been fixed for their benefit. At 4 okfiock Mr, Campbell
woke us up, and long before swe were having our breakfast. This
meal over, we commenced the ascent, and we were much hampered
with rugs, &c., which for the present we decided to carry, as we were
in such difficult country that we feared we might not be able to find
our belongings again if we left them behind.
We ascended a grassy spur which was steep, and the grass was
thoroughly dry and slippery, making the ascent difficult. The spur
soon developed into a larger mass, and the country became more and
more timbered, the timber being of the character usual in this district,
and which has been already described. Thus several hundred feet
were climbed, and here and there we came across masses of rocks,
which afforded shelter to plants which were not found on the grass-
land. For instance, I noticed Bursaria spinosa, Leptospermum Jlavescens ,
and Backhousia myrtifolia (Grey Myrtle), each with stems 9 inches in


diameter; also Pittosporum undulatum, while on the face of a rock
was a patch of Dendrohium Kingianum, an orchid with pretty purple
flowers.
Finally, after a great deal of climbing, we reached the top of this
mountain, which Mr. Surveyor Campbell pronounced to be the same
height as Mount Seaview. He declared it to be unnamed, and named
it Mount Forsyth, after my assistant and fellow-explorer, Mr. William
Forsyth.
On the very top, I observed, for the first time, a remarkable arboreal
Daviesia (D. corymhosa, var. arhoreaj 25 feet high, and with a trunk
a foot in diameter. It forms a handsome small tree, and afterwards
I found it on other parts of the range, sometimes nearly at the level of
the Hastings.
On the top of this mountain messmate, stringybark, and white
mahogany were found, and smaller plants, of which the following may
be enumerated: —Five composites, viz., Senecio australis (dryadeus) ;
Olearia elliptica, with its very sticky leaves; Helichrysum ohcordatum
and diosmifolium; and Helipterum anthemoides, with crowded, mostly
filiform leaves (about j-inch long), and resembling those of Anthemis
Cotula. There were also leucrium corymbosum, Plectranthusparviflorus
and Prostanthera nivea amongst the Labiates. In addition, I collected
Beyeria viscosa, a very sticky form of Goodenia ovata, Indigofer a
australis, var. gracilis, and an orchid, Sarcochilus falcatus.
We had hoped that we had got on the highest peak in the neigh-
bourhood, but observation soon showed that a mountain to the west,
at no great distance from us in a direct line, but separated from us
perhaps by an impassable gully, was higher still. We decided to leave
everything we possibly could on Mount Forsyth and make a plunge
for this higher mountain. We first descended for about 100 feet and
then came to a narrow ridge or saddle (a veritable razorback), which
was covered with dense scrub, and paved with sharp masses of rock,
rendering progress along very difficult and slow. At the end of this
ridge there appeared a practically impassable gully, but descent of
200 or 300 feet showed an easy ascent to the foot of the mountain
mass. Looking back for a few moments, the plants observed or
collected on the stony ridge or saddle were large grass-trees (Xanthor-
rlnoea arhoreaj ; Westringia glabra and Prostanthera ovalifolia, var.
latifolia, both Labiates; also Backhousia myrtifolia. There was also
Goodenia grandiflora and G. ovata, Muehlenbeckia adpressa, var. rotun-
difolia, Callistemon salignus, and Stenocarpus salignus. Notelesea
longifolia. and Siebera Billardieri were rather abundant, and so were
the small trees of Bursaria spinosa. Two orchids were also observed,
viz., Sarcochilus falcatus and Dendrohium striolatum. In the descent
from the stony saddle to the foot of the mountain, or rather to the
side of the mountain, the soil much improved in quality, and well-
grown trees of Tristania conferta and Eucalyptus saligna were common,
while there were several patches of Codonocarpus australis, a small tree
which grows in brush-land.
It was now 2 p.m., and we were fairly on the side of the higher
mountain. Before making the ascent we determined to rest and eat


the last of the food we had brought with us from our flying camp.
We had a little water in our billy, but as we had been carrying it for
nearly nine hours, mostly in a broiling sun, we had an occasional sip,
and so there was not much left with which to make tea. We also
knew that we could get no more water until we returned to the
Hastings.
But this small allowance of tea was so refreshing that we travelled
splendidly up the side of the mountain, blazing the trees as we went
along. The side of the mountain is well timbered, so that we could
not see far ahead, and did not know how much ascent was in front of
us, but at last a coo-ee from Mr. Campbell rang through the clear air,
which announced that he had got to the summit. Mr. Campbell is an
athlete, and it seemed impossible to tire him. When I arrived at the
top I rested for a time, but he did not rest. He came to me to
announce that the mountain was the highest in this range, being 300
feet higher than Mount Seaview, and consequently, in accordance with
the officially-recorded height of Seaview, 3,400 feet above the level of
the sea. He took me to what he pronounced to be absolutely the
highest point of the ridge, on which was growing a Peppermint or
Messmate (. Eucalyptus amygdalina) , from which he had stripped a
shield of bark facing east, and then deeply cut into the wood the
broad-arrow, and underneath the words “Mt. Maiden.” The ascent
was made on 17th November, 1897.
There was no sign of a mark or trace of any human being. No
view in the direction of Port Macquarie was possible on account of
the trees on the summit in that direction, but a vista was available
towards the west, and a fine view obtained of the table-land. This
view made me realise, perhaps better than any other view I had had,
the precipitous nature of the surrounding country. It may be noted
that near the top was a massive white ants’ nest (about 6 feet high),
and such a nest was seen perhaps on every hill and mountain in the
district, forming a kind of cairn.
Although probably of inferior botanical interest to Mount Seaview,
a brief account of the vegetation of this higher mountain may be of
interest.
There are the usual eucalypts noted on these ranges; White Mahog-
any {E. acmenoides ) and Peppermint [E. amygdalina ) predominate, a
tree of the latter species being at the very summit, both here and at
Mount Seaview. There is some fine tallow-wood, but the bulk, though
large, is poor. The timber generally is poor.
The arboreal Daviesia is plentiful at the top. The Daviesia is the
peculiar tree of these mountains. Here one was measured, 1 ft. 6 in.
by 1 ft. on the trunk. I did not notice any on Seaview. Other trees
are Cupania nervosa , Banksia integrifolia (Honeysuckle), Elseocarpus
cyaneus , near the top, and 50 feet high, Casuarina torulosa (Forest
Oak), Exocarpus cupressiformis (Native Cherry) ; I also observed
Persoonia linearis and P. lucida, var. latifolia ; also Santalum ohtusi-
folium.
Plants of lesser size were Prostanthera ovalifolia, var. latifolia ,
Solanum violaceum, Eianella (perhaps coendea), Haloragis teucrioides 3


Goodenia grandiflora (much stunted in comparison with the same plant
found on the banks of the Hastings), Senecio amygdalifolius, Galium
umbrosum, yar. geminifolium, Hihhertia voluhilis , while the prevailing
grass was, as usual, Poa csespitosa.
There were tree-ferns ( Alsophila australis) within 50 feet of the
summit.
Within 100 feet of the summit, on the south side, is a belt of brush,
and it seems likely that, had we ascended the mountain from that side,
belts of brush would have been found on this mountain as on Mount
Seaview. I did not enter the brush, but noted the following plants on
the skirts of it.
More tree-ferns, also grass-trees ( Xanthorrhoea arborea), and Pteris
aquilina (Bracken). The trees included Cryptocarya glaucescens and
Tristania neriifolia. Amongst lesser plants there were Trochocarpa
laurina, Drimys aromatica (Spice-bark), Goodia lotifolia, Pimelea
ligustrina, Leucopogon lanceolatus and Smilax australis.
We had now to return to our flying camp, and although we did the
return journey in far shorter time than the ascent, jogging down steep
hills is very tiring, and it was 8 p.m. before we arrived at the flying
camp. We then had some supper, and at 9 o’clock decided to walk the
6or 7 miles to our main camp while the atmosphere was cool. The
night was very dark, and the moon was not due till 2 o’clock. We
were heavily laden with specimens, rugs, tent-fly, &c. We had a few
wax-matches to give us light while we forded the Hastings, but at the
very first crossing we realised that travelling by daylight and dark
were two different things, and all of us got wet above our knees.
We soon found that as there was no track we in the dark had to go
very slowly, for we made all sorts of false steps. When the banks of
the river got very steep we looked out for a ford, and sometimes we
found it and sometimes we didn’t. We had, of course, to cross
the river nearly a dozen times, and, after a while we did not care how
wet we got so long as we kept our bundles dry in crossing. The
bush seemed to teem with animal life. Flop ! Flop ! Flop ! Every
footstep seemed to disturb some beast or other, which would jump
into the river and make a great splash. Sometimes they seemed to
spring from under our feet. Others would drop from trees, and
reaching the ground just in front of us, scamper away. After a bit
we began to wonder why we hadn’t trodden on a snake, for we had
seen some fine ones by the river-bank on our day-light journey. This
walk gave me a more vivid idea of the enormous amount of animal
life in the bush than I had ever had before. Doubtless many of these
beasts were nocturnal animals, and we realised the presence of so many
because they were either coming down to the river to drink or to
prey on those who had come on such an errand.
The journey seemed interminable. We had to proceed with painful
slowness because of the pitfalls, and then, just before 2 o’clock, it
occurred to us that perhaps we had overshot our destination, and we
decided to halt and wait for the moon. It soon rose (above the horizon,
but not above the hills), and then we could not make out where we
were, but we determined to plod on, and so, after numerous small


adventures, some of them annoying at the time, hut now only subjects
for laughter, we arrived in the vicinity of our camp at the dawn of
day, and marched into our tent at 4‘30 a.m., having been on the march,
in rough country, with heavy loads, little food and short meal-hours,
for 244 hours at one stretch. We were soon asleep, and when we
awoke about noon and found that the thermometer in our tent registered
105 degrees we decided to shirk work for the remainder of the day.
Mount Seaview to the Foot of the New England Range.
Coming back to Ralfe’s Rivulet, it is about 2 miles to Lahey’s, at
the foot of the New England Range.
The country is steeply undulating, and the timber consists of Stringy-
bark {E. eugenioides) , Stinking Gum {E. tereticornis), Apple [Angophora
subvelutina) , and She Oak ( Casuarina suberosa) . About midway are
some very large gum-trees, candelabra-like, apparently flourishing on
the sides of a hill composed of slate-rock, of the most sterile nature
imaginable. The species is Xanthorrhoea arborea.
Ralfe’s Rivulet winds very much, and in this brief journey we cross
it four times, once at the start, twice about half-way, where its
course is marked by much vegetation, and again near Lahey’s, where
it forms a considerable creek. Lahey’s Creek is the last crossing at
its junction with Ralfe’s Rivulet, which rivulet we crossed five times
in all. There, as on the Hastings, the River Oak ( Casuarina
Cunninghamiana ) is both abundant and large in size. The timber is
comparatively pale coloured (pink when fresh) and is used for
bullock-yokes. It is not very durable when exposed to the weather.
There, as in many other parts of the Colony, it is C. suberosa and not
C. torulosa that is known as forest oak, and locally it is much used for
both posts and rails. lam not certain why E. tereticornis is known
here as stinking gum. I heard the name applied to the same species
on the Lower Hastings some years ago, but have not heard it applied
in other districts. Perhaps it is because the flowers have a sickly
smell; Ido not think the smell of the timber is objectionable. Per-
haps some of my readers can set the point at rest. There, in the
vicinity of Ralfe’s Rivulet, the tree grows on ridges, but it usually
occurs on flats. It is very different in lasting character to Grey Gum.
Both are used for fencing (posts and rails).
At Lahey’s I observed the Grey Gum ( E . propinqua) for the first
time this trip, and was informed that it is not found between here and
Port Macquarie along the road ; it is, however, found across the ranges.
It occurs for about 6 miles up the mountain road (towards New Eng-
land), and then disappears. The timber is used for posts and rails
whenever it can be got.
At the foot of the range we noticed Blue Gum [E. saligna), which is
locally used for slabs and rails, and any purpose where it is necessary
for it to be put in the ground.
The Bloodwood {E. corymbosa) is here esteemed for posts, and is
brought down from the New England Ranges.


Lahey’s selection is prettily situated on Ralfe’s Rivulet, and is of
nterest inasmuch as it is the last dwelling until New England is
reached, i.e., at Yarrowitch, 30 miles away and 2,500 feet higher.
Oranges will not grow in New England, but at Lahey’s are some
fine trees planted by the father of the present owner, forty years ago.
Bullock and other teams come down the mountain from as far as
Walcha (60 miles) for these oranges. In one orange orchard on the
Upper Hastings I noticed that a number of pigs were confined. They
fed and flourished on the windfalls, and the scamperings after the
golden fruit, which was seized by the pig who was nearest, or who
was fleetest of foot, almost as soon as it reached the ground, gave rise
to many amusing scenes.
It was pleasant to get a few oranges and get a shakedown in the
barn, and although the maize-husks felt a little lumpy at first, wo
were so weary that we soon fell asleep.
Our difficulty in regard to transport now really began. All the
collections, and everything that experience showed us we could possibly
do without, was sent back to Port Macquarie by the man who had
brought us so far. We saw him depart with regret, for we had our
misgivings about getting any further for some considerable time. We
heard that a bullock-team was on the road, and Mr. Campbell went
some miles back after the owner, who hesitated about tackling the
mountain, as the bush-fires had burnt all the feed for his bullocks, he
thought, and next day he gave a refusal, saying that he would wait
for rain. The journey up the mountain being so long (34 miles)
and steep, and drought having existed for so many months, while
bush-fires had devastated the whole country, we found no one very
willing to transport us and our belongings to New England. At last
a man was persuaded to act as guide and bring horses at break of the
next day. We were up very early, had breakfast, packed up, but
towards noon our man had not arrived, and Mr. Campbell rode back
some miles, and having met him sent him back, after having extorted
from him a solemn promise that he would be up at daybreak next
morning. We desired to make an early start, as the heat was intense.
At 10 o’clock he turned up with a miscellaneous assortment of horses,
and as we were afraid that if we again sent him back we might have
to stay where we were, perhaps for weeks, we decided to start. One
of our pack-horses had not had a pack on for years, and when my
herbarium presses were put on him he started an acrobatic per-
formance. At length we started, making quite a cavalcade. Four of
us, including the guide, were mounted ; there were four pack-horses,
and we had one spare horse for an emergency.
Ascent to New England.
I have not much of a scientific character to record in regard to the
ascent. We had to hurry, as if we stopped this side of Yarrowitch
our horses would return to the Hastings ; and really there was little
to stop for, as most of the country which was not burnt out was still
on fire.


For several miles of ascent there is an admirable road. There is
much brush and mountain scenery, some parts of the road presenting
enchanting views, but there are no large vistas until the Myrtle Scrub
is reached.
After 6 miles we are abreast of Ealfe’s Peak, a very fine moun-
tain.
Less than a mile up, grey gum and bloodwood appear. We have
also forest red gum, Native Cherry, Casuarina suberosa and torulosa
(the two She-oaks); Stringybark and Jacksonia scoparia ; these trees
show what barren country we are passing over.
Towards 4 o’clock we not only felt the pangs of hunger, but we were
very thirsty. Our guide (an experienced bushman in the mountains)
assured us we would soon come to a spot which had never been dry
within the memory of man, and finally he disappeared into the bush.
In a few minutes he came back and told us there was no water. He
was the only member of the party who had taken the precaution of
bringing a little water from Lahey’s for his own private use. As he
had moistened his lips with it on the way up on several occasions, there
remained but half a bottleful, but we gladly accepted his offer to
boil it and make tea, and we were thankful for a table-spoonful apiece
of this precious beverage.
Having loaded up our caravan again, we started, and did not stop
until we arrived at Bullock Flat, 5 miles east of Yarrowitch, and
2 miles west of the county boundary (counties of Macquarie and
Hawes), at 1 o’clock in the morning. We had been fifteen hours in
the saddle, with but a brief break, and during the hours of darkness
we had to lead the packhorses over a bad road. Having fixed up
things a bit by 2 o’clock, we got a few biscuits, and shortly after-
wards we went to sleep. Joyful to relate, we had a cool night; a
thing unknown to us on the Hastings.
The Port Macquarie-Walcha Eoad, on leaving the valley of the
Hastings, ascends the principal spur on the western slopes of the
Seaview district. This spur divides the waters of the Manning and
Hastings Eivers, and along its lower end is a series of razor-backs
which, before the road was formed by side cuttings, presented almost
unsurmountable barriers to vehicular traffic. In those days three
or more teams used to travel together, in order to render mutual
assistance up and down the precipitous tracks, and many are the
tales yet told of incident and adventure in connection with this
pioneer road.
The road over the mountain contains the usual brush vegetation
common to that district, but appears to call for no detailed description.
We observed Orites excelsa (a Silky Oak), Acacia hinervata, and
penninervis, Callicoma serratifolia, Quintinia Verdoni (a hazel-like tree
with well-marked leaf-veins), Hakea eriantha, and JDrimys aromatica.
In addition, there were Erechtites prenanthoides, Helichrysum Beckleri,
Cassinia longifolia , its variety straminea, and the rather rare C. lepto-
cephala. Other plants noticed, none of them rare, were Pimelea
ligustrina , Oxylohium trilohatum, Solarium violaceum, Cynoglossum
latifolia , and Indigofera australis. I would have liked to have made


this mountain ascent without haste, and during a favourable season,
before the devouring flames had consumed so much. Under the
conditions of my hurried visit, it was impossible to do justice to the
vegetation.
Myrtle Scrub to Yarrowitch.
We now enter the Myrtle Scrub, but unfortunately in the dark. The
path could not be seen—in fact, there had been very little of it for
miles past —so we let our trustworthy horses take charge of us. This
is the highest part of our journey, the height being about 4,000 feet
above the level of the sea.
We are now on the New England table-land, and the night air
began to be very cold. What a change since the previous night!
We had been sweltering for a fortnight, and in a few hours we are in
another climate. We push on, crossing a little plain, then pass through
more forest, and finally, after 5 miles from Myrtle Scrub, cross Bullock
Flat Creek, and in about a mile beyond this we arrive at a swamp
where Mr. Campbell had left his buggy, the only safe place while
bush-fires were raging all over the country. It was now nearly 2 a.m,,
and both we and our horses were thoroughly tired. Tents were
pitched, and we were glad of rugs to keep us warm. As soon as I
awoke, I saw that we were surrounded by White or Cabbage Gum
[Eucalyptus coriacea), a sure indication of cool nights and a less ener-
vating climate. I welcomed the tree as an old friend. About our
camp were large quantities of a gorse-like plant, Daviesia umbellulata.
E. coriacea has white or leaden coloured blotched bark, smooth, and
more or less scribbled. It is not known as Cabbage Gum here, but
White Ash (not to be confused with the White Ash of the southern
mountain ranges near Victoria), in contradistinction to E. stellulata,
which is known as Black Ash. About the camp were mats of Scsevola
Hooheri, and a very small form of Gnaphalium japonicum was abun-
dant in the short grass.
On Bullock Flat Creek I observed Banhsia integrifolia, Leptosper-
mum Isevigatum, and Callistemon salignus marking its course.
A little distance from the creek I had the good fortune to find
Eucalyptus regnans, better known as the Giant Tree of Victoria, the
tree which is sufficiently tall to have so many stories told about its
height. It is a peppermint with rather thick leaves (they get
considerably thinner in drying), and white wood, brown towards the
heart, and with many gum-veins. The butt has fibrous bark, and the
branches are ribbony. Most of the trees about here are small, though
a few are 3 feet in diameter. I gave an account of the tree, which
had not hitherto been recorded further north than from the extreme
south of the Colony, in a paper I read before the Australasian Asso-
ciation for the Advancement of Science in January last.
As I had travelled through the Myrtle Scrub in the dark, I deter-
mined to go back as far as the time at my disposal would allow. The
scrub consists of a dense brush of small trees ( Cargillia Sfc.J, and the
country in the vicinity will probably well repay careful botanical
exploration, because of its height and exposed situation. The scrub,


or rather brush, is succeeded, going west, by a handsome forest of
large trees, with undergrowth of ferns, flourishing in a rich stony
basaltic soil. Proceeding west again towards Bullock Flat, the soil
becomes poorer, and the trees in consequence more stunted and the
forest more open, till when we reach the flat, where E. coriacea forms
the predominant arboreal vegetation. The ferns above alluded to are
principally tree-ferns (Alsophila australis and Dicksonia antarctica) ,
Aspidium aculeatum, and Bracken, with Xerotes longifolia and Poa
csespitosa forming tussocks.
Let us come back for a few moments to this fine forest.* The trees
were 100-150 feet high, and 2 or 3, and more, feet in diameter, sound
and straight. They consisted principally of two kinds, a white or
ribbony gum and a stringybark. The very coarse foliage of the
latter puzzled me a good deal, till at length I found a limb that had
been broken down, and to my delight found that it was no other than
the Tasmanian and Victorian Messmate (E. ohliquaj , hitherto not
recorded with certainty north of Braidwood. The Ribbony Gum
proved to be E. viminalis, which here 'vas so fine that it might readily
be confused with the Blue Gum (E. salignaj of the coast as far as
general appearance goes. These straight, handsome trees contrasted
greatly with the same species on the poorer soil towards Bullock Flat.
There the Ribbony Gum is more or less rough about the butt, some-
times up to the first fork and further, the rough bark falling off in
ribbons, giving the tree an untidy appearance. Sometimes the ribbony
bark takes on such a twisted appearance as to cause the whole tree
to strongly resemble the E. tereticornis of lower elevations, E. ohliqua
does not leave the rich basalt soil, but E. viminalis (becoming inferior
as already indicated) passes on to Bullock Flat, where it mixes with
E. coriacea.
The Messmate is a handsome, umbrageous tree as Eucalypts go. In
this district it is sometimes known as Bastard Stringybark. The bark
is fibrous on both trunk and branches, though not as much so as in
the case of a typical stringybark, while the ultimate branchlets are
alone smooth.
The timber is brownish. When I arrived at Yarrowitch I found it
used for building purposes, verandah floors, &c., but not for standing
in the ground. It does not occur as far west as Yarrowitch, but the
timber is conveyed several miles. Mr. Nivison states that it occurs
as far north as the Clarence River, and that it is also found at
Callaghan’s Swamp. {“ Callaghan’s Swamp ”is a station or run on
the Great Dividing Range, situated 30 miles in a south-westerly
direction from Yarrowitch along the county boundary between Yernon
and Hawes.)
My companion, Mr. J. F. Campbell, recognised the tree as occurring
in plenty round the county boundary (counties of Hawes and Mac-
quarie, and Hawes and Vernon).
* Part of this forest is probably alluded to by Oxley {Journal, p. 303) in the following;
words “ September 18, 1818. We .... soon entered a forest of Stringybark
and Blue Gum trees of great beauty. The soil on which they grew was a rich vegetable
mould covered with fern trees (Alsophila australis of Brown) and small shrubs.”


The viminalis-ohliqua country contains a few Mudgerabah [Acacia
melanoxylon) scattered here and there. They are 40 or 50 feet high,
with trunks 2 or 3 feet in diameter. See Agricultural Gazette for
March, 1894, page 129. %
We spent two days botanising in the neighbourhood of our Bullock
Flat camp, and then journeyed on to Yarrowitch, a distance of about
5 miles. There is chocolate soil for the most part in this district, and
drought and bush fires were telling severely on the country. En route
I noticed much She Oak ( Casuarina suberosa ), also White Honeysuckle
[Banksia integrifolia) with trunk-diameter of 1 to 2 feet.
A Tea-tree [Leptospermum flavescens) , was noticed chiefly bordering
creeks, a tall drooping, hazel-like shrub strongly reminding one of
the hawthorn of the old land in the general appearance and perfume
of its profuse whitish (with just a of greenish-yellow)
inflorescence.
Eucalyptus stellulata, the so-called Black Ash, was abundant; axe-
handles are made of it, but it must be seasoned carefully.
But the most interesting plant in this 5 miles is one which, although
subsequently frequently seen between here and Walcha, was observed
2 miles from Bullock Flat for the first time. There it is a small tree,
with small glaucous leaves, the foliage sparse and somewhat drooping.
When young it forms a dense bush of very small leaves, forming a
plant, in this stage, highly eligible for cultivation. Small trees may,
at a little distance, be reasonably mistaken for a Wattle (say Acacia
penninervis) .
Further on in my journey I found it an Apple-like tree, over 3 feet
in diameter, gnarled, and yielding a reddish timber liable to gum-
veins. It may provisionally be placed under Eucalyptus Stuartiana,
or amongst the group of plants which at present go under that name.
It is a well-marked variety, if not a new species. I may mention that
I found Loranthus pendulus (a Mistletoe) on this tree.
Yarro witch.
A mile or so before we came to Yarrowitch Station we had an
extensive and very beautiful view from a ridge overlooking the river
Yarrowitch and the Yarrowitch Station property, the view westward
being limited by a long range near Tia. Descending this ridge and
approaching the station the country reminded me strongly of much
of the Monaro, not only in general features and soil, but also in the
vegetation it bore.
At Yarrowitch Station Mr. and Mrs. W. J. A. Nivison asked us to
dinner, and the excellent repast was thoroughly appreciated by us.
We had been living on tinned things for nearly a fortnight, and
return to vegetables and real bread was hailed by us with much
satisfaction. I only hope we did not shock our kind host and hostess
with the size of our appetites.
My botanical exploration at Yarrowitch was of a very cursory
character, as we had to push on. Amongst trees, medium and small,
I noticed Blackwood (Acacia melanoxylon), and also Black Wattle


(A. decurrens), which was very abundant. Banksia integrifolia was
not rare, neither was a small-leaved form of the Box-thorn (Bursaria
spinosa) .
Callistemon salignus was also observed. Bracts are known in this
genus, but owing to their falling off so early are not often noted;
the bracts of this particular plant collected here were entangled by
some threads of a spider’s web. They are about long, acute
at the apex, boat-shaped, and about a line broad; glume-like, smooth
inside, and covered on the outside with minute hairs.
Shrubs of a smaller size included Leptospermum flavescens (on
banks of creeks), and in similar situations Prostanthera lasiantha (?),
with nearly entire leaves, and in bud only; also Zieria Smithii (Stink-
bush), and Aristotelia australasica. There was also a composite, which
is'probably Olearia megalophylla , but it was in bud only. The intro-
duced Solarium sodomseum was not rare. By the sides of the road
were bushes of the prickly Daviesia genistifolia, while Dillwynia
ericifolia , var. phylicoides, was ornamental with its pretty yellow
flowers. I also observed the Cryptandra- like Pultensea microphylla,
and in grass-land Dianella longifolia was not rare, while Leptorrhyn-
chus squamatus and Goodenia hederacea were common; so also was
the white-flowered Pimelea linifolia, the leaves somewhat concave,
and perhaps more inclined to incurved than recurved margins, as in
P. collina.
There were also, in the closely-cropped turf, mats of Polygonum
prostratum and masses of a smaller size of the paler-green Sderanihus
bijiorus. The fern Aspidium aculeatum was abundant amongst some
rocks. Amongst the introduced weeds I noticed Thistles, Polygonum
aviculare (Wire-weed), and Epilobium glabellum.
Mr. Nivison has laid down English grasses (also Kentucky Blue
Grass) very extensively in his paddocks, and has devoted much study
to the subject. I regret that I was not able to see what had been
done in this direction. Mr. Nivison has Holcus lanatus (Yorkshire
Fog) in a swamp, and thinks most highly of it in such a situation. I
jotted down the following native grasses I observed near the home-
stead : —Kangaroo Grass (Anthistiria ciliataj , Dichelachne sciurea,
Echinopogon ovatus, Sorghum plumosum, Agropyrum scabrum, Ehrarta
stipoides, Poa csespitosa (Tussock Grass), Pennisetum compressum
(Fox-tail), Deyeuxia Forsteri, Eragrostis Brownii, and Cynodon dac-
lylon (Couch).
Amongst introduced grasses there were Festuca bromoides, Ceratoch-
loa unioloides (Prairie Grass), Dactylis glomerata (Cocksfoot), Folium
(Rye Grass), Poa annua and pratensis.
Mr. Nivison informed me that he had continuously resided on
Yarrowitch for twenty-seven years, and that the present was, un-
doubtedly, his worst season.
I had a chat with him about colonial timbers, and he showed me
weatherboards, flooring-boards, and rafters of Sassafras (Doryphora
Sassafras) which had been in the old station homestead for forty
years, and had been ten years in the new house. They are perfectly


sound now, and will, undoubtedly, last for many years more. Eucalyp-
tus ohliqua (called here White Stringybark) is used for flooring-
boards. E. stellulata forms here umbrageous small trees, while there
are scrubs or woods or copses or thickets of the same species near
Yarrowitch, the plant being gregarious.
Yarrowitch to Tia.
We then set off for Tia, 8 miles distant. The country is open forest,
chiefly of Eucalyptus. There is a little Sweetbriar here and there.
A pity it is not eradicated. Amongst the trees are Native Cherry
and an occasional Blackwood (Acacia melanoxylon). There is also
She-oak (Casuarina suberosaj . I have not seen C. torulosa this side
of the Myrtle Scrub.
I also observed a handsome variety of A. decurrens , the tree being
striking by reason of the profusion of glaucous purplish pods. The
young twigs present a similar appearance.
The pinnules are nearly half an inch long, linear, broader at the
apex, and the glands are specially numerous and prominent. I have
not seen this form before, but the varieties of A. decurrens are infinite.
Two miles past Yarrowitch shale appears, and continues (along the
road) more or less to Walcha.
Past Yarrowitch Eucalyptus tereticornis reappears, and we also have
E. coriacea, E. stellulata, E. eugenioides (a Stringybark), and E.
viminalis (Ribbon Gum). Here and there E. amygdalina (Pepper-
mint) was in full flower. I have not seen an Angophora this side of
the Myrtle Scrub.
Towards Tia we come across trees with Box-like bark, sparse foliage,
very glaucous broad-leaved suckers, and small fruits. This tree
resembles a good deal in bark and fruit that tree already alluded to
as having been noticed on the other side of Yarrowitch, and which I
have provisionally referred to E. Stuartiana. The tree of which we
are now speaking is undoubtedly a form of the same species, and it
may be convenient, in this article, to refer to it as the “ Broad-suckered
Peppermint.” The suckers at once distinguish the two trees, but the
two trees are undoubtedly much alike.
The following small plants by the side of the road will help to give
an idea of the vegetation :
Billardiera scandens (Lemon-floweredßoly-poly), Stylidium gramini-
folium, Stackhousia viminea, and the small cushiony Scleranthus
hiflorus. The only Leguminous plant to attract attention was Oxylohium
trilohatum, sometimes called “Native Holly” owing to the shape of
its leaves. There were four Composites, viz.:— Olearia myrsinoides,
Helipterum anthemoides, Ammohium alatum, and Cassinia longifolia,
var. straminea. There was a Tea-tree ( Leptospermum jlavescens) which
has been so often seen on this trip, and Alternanthera triandra forming
mats. There we have Velleia paradoxa, Lissanthe strigosa, and Meli-
chrus urceolatus, also Pimelea glauca, and the handsome sedge, Cyperus
lucidus. Amongst the grasses there were Deyeuxia quadriseta,
Dichelachne crinita, and Danthonia penicillata.


Tia.
We are now at Tia, and through the generous hospitality o£ Mr. and
Mrs. Augustus Hooke, of Tia Station, we are enabled to break our
journey, and examine the country in the vicinity, which is more than
ordinarily interesting. On the station, and only a mile or two from the
homestead, is a gold-field, partly, at least, on an old river bed. The
country is quite as interesting to the geologist as to the botanist, and
my travelling companion, Mr. J. F. Campbell, has been good enough
to give me the following sketch of the geology of the country passed
over since we left the Myrtle Scrub, with especial reference to Tia.
“ The Hew England table-land, according to geologists, is simply the
upthrow side of a fault that runs more or less parallel to the eastern
coast line of the continent. It belongs to the earlier Palaeozoic or
primary division of strata, and the portion of country under consider-
ation probably represents the Devonian and Silurian periods. Evidence
of the former has lately been obtained immediately to the west of
the Great Dividing Range.
“ The ancient character of the rocks forming the greater part of
the country is well shown by the immense plications of the once
nearly horizontal strata, the contemporaneous and subsequent dis-
locations and contortions, and the ultimate submersion of the greatly
denuded surface under the repeated flows of early tertiary lavas.
“ The old cretaceous river bed at Tia, now being worked for gold,
is a splendid record of past geological times. Perched on the northern
end of the spurs leading from the country boundary, about 200 feet
above the Tia River and tributaries, this feature of a continent,
differing in configuration to the Australia of to-day, reveals to us in
the portions that remain the natural conditions of life and landscape
of that age.
“On entering the tunnels being made along the bed of the old
stream, through the soft slate on edge, we see the gravels of the
river in situ, and can trace its flow towards the west by the indication
of the flat water-worn pebbles, and the various other indications of
direction of flow as seen in the rivers of to-day.
“ The flora and fauna of the period have been found between the
granite and overlying basalt. From the huge water-worn boulders,
and the canon-like excavations along the course, it would appear that
the volume of water was very considerable, surpassing the coastal
rivers of to-day.
“The flow being westerly to the great cretaceous sea that covered
the present northern half of the continent, the water-shed of this
river must have existed to the eastward, which fact may in a measure
fix the relative ages of the old river, the great coastal fault, and
the now extinct volcano, that rose apparently in the course of the
stream.”
The country about Tia has been largely cleared for pastoral and
mining purposes. I noticed the small Grevillea trinervis peeping out
of the grass, and a lovely plant it is, with its crimson flowers ; Colletia
pubescens, a prickly plant ; Lomatia Fraseri amongst rock masses, and


plenty of Poly gala japonica, which is used by Chinese as a sudorific.
We have here two widely different forms of the Yellow Everlasting
(Helichrysum hracteatum) . Of one the foliage was glutinous, and the
other woolly ; the one had nearly linear leaves, and the other spathulate
leaves, nearly an inch across. Tussock Grass ( Poa csespitosa) continued
to be in abundance and in at least three forms. Chloris truncata and
Dichelacline crinita were grasses also in flower. In the grass I also
noted Pimelea curvijiora, very silky hairy, with leaves irregularly
opposite in some cases ; also lonidium filiforme, with its pretty blue
flowers, and Swainsona coronillsefolia, a pretty pea-like plant, allied
to the Darling Pea, but furnishing good feed for stock. Hydrocotyle
candollei (ironically named “ Mignonette ” because of its ill odour),
was noticeable near the Tia mines; while Sneezeweed ( Myriogyne
minuta) was not rare. There was some Silver Wattle (Acacia dealhata ),
but it did not appear to be very plentiful. I was sorry to see that an
introduced weed of smothering habit (Eryngium expansum ) had got
into the cultivation paddocks, and was making a stand in the grazing
paddocks.
The Tia Canon. —About 3 miles from the homestead, in a north-
easterly direction, the Tia River, whose banks have become steeper
and steeper, opens into a grand gorge which is known as the Tia
Canon. The gorge is about a mile across, and we can see along it
for a distance of about 5 miles. The top of the gorge is fairly
horizontal. The sides of the gorge are precipitous, forming, perhaps,
an angle of 40 degrees with the bottom. The Tia River becomes a
succession of falls—we can see four in one coup d’oeil —and, in the
distance, becomes a mere silver streak. The predominant and most
striking vegetation is pine (Callitris MuelleriJ, of which there are
forests, reminding one of the firs on steep mountain sides in Europe.
The pine always grows in these inaccessible localities on the slopes,
never on top, and not large enough for milling. We noticed it in no
other place in New England.
The beauty and grandeur of the Tia Canon made a great impression
on me. It is worth journeying hundreds of miles to see. I would that
I had a facile pen, to enable me to make a word-picture of it : but,
let me say at once, that it forms one of the most beautiful scenes-in
New South Wales. Contemplation of it causes a thrill, and Tia
Canon is worthy of a place in the most select list of beautiful scenery
in the Colony. lam ashamed to say that I had never heard of Tia
Canon before. Let me commend it to tourists who desire to see what
is best and grandest in New South Wales.
I will add an interesting note from Mr. J. F. Campbell, to whom I
wrote for information in regard to the Tia Canon, so imperfectly
seen by me :
“ The Tia Canon is one of a series of gorges tributary to the Apsley
River, varying in size, form, and grandeur. The Apsley also runs
through a magnificent gorge, entering at the famous Apsley Falls,
distant 12 miles from Walcha, and gradually widening and deepening
to its junction with the Styx, from whence it is known as the Macleay
River.


“ For mountain scenery, this portion of the New England tableland
will compare favourably with any other part of the continent. The
altered slate, which forms the basal formation of the district, weathers
rapidly into shale on exposure to the air, and is easily disintegrated
into canons. lam of opinion the age of these dates subsequently to
the “ great coastal fault/’ The gorges vary from 100 yards to miles
in width, and from 500 to 3,000 feet in depth, and are generally
impassable on the upper reaches, owing to sheer perpendicular preci-
pices forming their sides. Vegetation of a kind suitable to the varying
inclinations of the ground clothes the sides of the ravines, excepting
on perpendicular rocks and the more indurated slopes, such as
“ Paradise Rocks,” and I think this must be the country alluded to by
Oxley, in his description of the parts through which he travelled
before reaching the eminence from which he saw the ocean.”
Here I found Yellow Box (Eucalyptus melliodora) for the first time
on this trip. It was on the top of the Canon, and I was informed that
it skirts it for many miles, never descending below the top.
Here also was the Dogwood (Jacksonia scopariaj, eaten by cattle
when grass is scarce, and a very ornamental small-leaved Pomaderris
(probably P. ledifolia, but it was in foliage only), forming hazel-like
thickets.
The sides of the Canon were so steep, and the foothold so treacherous,
that I had to be content with a very cursory examination of the plants
on the slope. I did not descend more than 100 feet, but found a very
floriferous Kurrajong fStercula diversifolia) • Leucopogon neo-anglicus,
a shrub of 4 or 5 feet, not only 1 to 2 feet as stated in B. FI. iii, 223,
Celastrus Cunninghamii, Nephelium connatum, Myoporum montanum,
and Pimelia microcephala.
Tia River. —The Tia River is an interesting stream of the clearest
water, and, particularly where it flowed over a shingly bed (the river
being very low at the time of our visit), it was a convenient place for
collecting aquatic plants. We obtained four species of Potamogeton,
viz., P. ohtusifolius , P. crispus, P. perfoliatus, and P. natans. Ranun-
culus aquatilis was exceedingly abundant, forming large tangled
masses, and Sagina apetala formed wet masses by the side of the
stream. I also obtained an interesting Myriophyllum in bud, perhaps
undescribed, or a small-leaved variety of M. latifolium. The same
plant I found in Ralfe’s Rivulet, at the foot of the New England
Range.
Just a word or two about the Eucalypts. I noticed five, viz.,
Broad-suckered Peppermint and its ally already alluded to (both of
these at present included under E. Stuartiana) , Stringybark fE. euge-
nioides), White Ash fE. coriaceaj, and Black Ash fE. stellulataj.
The Black Ash is here up to 2 or 3 feet in diameter; it burns well
and suckers readily. The Stringybark is here known as Red Stringy-
bark, and is used for flooring-boards at Tia, and also to timber the
mines. It is employed for posts as well as rails, and is considered to
be very durable. This is one species with a double operculum (or lid);
several other species, possessing a similar characteristic, were found
on the trip.


I was given some manna at Tia, where it is very abundant, although
I did not collect any. Mr. Hooke informed me that it was gathered
from the Broad-suckered Peppermint near the mines, so this adds
E. Stuartiana to the list of Eucalypts known to yield this saccharine
exudation.
Tia to Walcha.
We now leave Tia, and are on our final stage to Walcha, 24 miles
distant, and at that pretty little country town the botanical portion of
our expedition is at an end.
The country in the vicinity is pleasantly diversified, being undulat-
ing, with belts of trees, and ranges in the distance on almost all
sides.
As we leave Tia going west we note that the Eucalypts continue to
be stellulata, pauciflora, eugenioides, narrow-suckered Peppermint and
viminalis (large trees).
In the paddocks, amongst the little plants with yellow flowers are
Podolepis acuminata , Leptorrhynchus squamatus, Helipterum bractea-
tum, and Helipterum incanum (the two last being “ Everlastings ”).
White ones , are Helipterum anthemoides and Pimelea linifolia. Pink
ones are Geranium dissectum and Epilohium glabellum. Then we have
the übiquitous Bluebell ( Wahlenbergia gracilis ), while other plants
are a grass ( Dichelachne sciurea ) and an Umbellifer ( Oreomyrrhis
andicola).
Within 3 miles we ascend a ridge, and note a large-fruited E.
viminalis (Ribbon Gum).
It may be mentioned that, between Tia and Walcha, E. coriacea
(the White or Cabbage Gum), often here called White Ash, is fre-
quently ribbony and resembles viminalis a good deal, but viminalis is
larger and is not scribbled on the bark.
After miles from Tia, and therefore about 20 from Walcha, we
pass Tiara station.
About Tiara we again notice E. amygdalina (Peppermint) in flower.
There is also plenty of viminalis; in fact, it is the prevailing White
Gum about here, but more umbrageous and gnarled, and not forming
the fine straight trees of Bullock Elat.
Wattles (the Purple-podded Acacia decurrens ) reappear also, and so
do also the narrow and broad-suckered Peppermint, the latter being
very abundant. E. coriacea is here decidedly ribbony, yet not so
ribbony as viminalis ; the leaves are larger and more fleshy than those
of the latter.
About the 18-mile post (from Walcha) some White Gums with a
plum-coloured bark appear. Timber red, full of shells and rings of
kino, and of a watery sap. The sucker-foliage is glaucous and plum-
coloured. It is found on flats, and there are great numbers of them;
it has a double operculum. There is very little rough bark at the
butt, and few if any ribbons; it would not be called Ribbony Gum ;
it must, however, be placed under E. viminalis for the present, in
spite of its broad suckers.


At 17 and 16 miles the narrow-leaved Peppermint (the E. Stuart-
iana?) is abundant, and Yellow Box (E. melliodora ) reappears, the
inner bark yellow as a guinea, the wood brown —a grand timber when
well grown.
The broad suckers of E. tereticornis reappear; I had not noticed
it along the road for many miles.
Just before the 16-mile post there is a tree 2 or 3 feet in diameter,
with narrow linear drooping foliage, peppermint-like bark, red wood,
very small flowers and fruits. It is gracefully pendulous and a really
beautiful tree. I refer more fully to this tree (under E. Stuartiana)
in my paper read before the Australian Association for the Advance-
ment of Science.
There is a good deal of mostly stunted coriacea about the 15-mile
post. There are also many viminalis, which here have more rough
bark than usual. There is also some Stringybark [E. eugenioides),
a little Narrow-leaved Peppermint, and a very little Yellow Box, but
most of the timber here is E. viminalis, of the kinds with ribbon bark
and plum-coloured bark.
We pass Wilson’s Creek and begin to approach the right wall of
Apsley Canon. The timber here is a fair sample of the Falls country
skirting the gorges. Being well drained by the canon as well as by
the natural drainage of the slate on edge, the country is of a sterile
nature and the timber slow of growth but very durable. It includes
Stringybark, Yellow Box, White and Red Gum. The grasses are repre-
sented chiefly by Poa csespitosa, Andropogon affinis, Danthonia semi-
annularis, Sorghum plumosum, and Anthistiria ciliata. Here and
there are patches of Aristida ramosa and some of the Stipas.
At 14 miles we are alongside Stony Creek, which is here crossed by
a bridge.
The trees are E. viminalis, Stringybark and a little Yellow Box.
Some of the viminalis trees are very twisted, reminding one of
E. tereticornis in this respect. E. viminalis is still the prevailing tree.
At 13 miles we still have viminalis, with some Yellow Box and
Stringybark. Some of the Yellow Box is of large size.
Here tereticornis (Red Gum) reappears, but not in quantity, although
there are some large trees.
At 12 miles we have a little Silver Wattle ( Acaci,a dealbata ) (the
first having been noticed a few miles back), also Stringybark and
E. viminalis. The Stringybark continues to be E. eugenioides.
Yellow Box is not uncommon, and Swainsona galegifolia (Indigo)
is now in evidence a good deal. It is a very pretty plant with crimson
pea-blossoms. The prickly Daviesia genistifolia has been accompany-
ing us all along.
The country begins to be more open about here, and to the north
we catch a glimpse of the Canon of the Apsley, but, as we are
desirous of pushing on, we have no time to see the celebrated Apsley
Falls.*
The timber around here is stunted and poor.
* Twelve miles from Walcha.


At 11 miles the timber [E. viminalis) is all ring-barked, and there
are fine views of open country to be obtained hereabouts. The
Swainsona seems to increase in abundance.
At 10 miles there is similar country,—undulating grass-land with a
little timber (ring-barked), and wooded hills, to 1 mile from the
road.
We now skirt the Apsley River and arrive at Waterloo Station.
The Briar is perhaps more abundant than it has been for some distance
along the road.
The dwarf Polygonum (P. prostratum) of Yarrowitch is abundant,
forming carpet-like patches.
At 9 miles the country is undulating.
At 8 miles there is Broad-suckered Peppermint on the flats, also
viminalis. Here we have fine grassland, rich flats of basaltic soil, and
a little scattered timber.
At 7 miles the country is thinly timbered, the trees being viminalis
and scrubby broad-suckered peppermint. I found Manna under the
latter here. It has a Peppermint bark on the whole of trunk and
small branches even.
At 7 miles I also saw an Apple-barked tree (up to ultimate branch-
lets), with brownish fruits. It is typical of E. Stuartiana.
E. coriacea continues.
The Swainsona is abundant, but gives no trouble here.
E. viminalis continues to be surprisingly variable in its bark. We
see more twisty-barked viminalis. There is some with patchy bark,
almost like a Spotted Gum; some with brown patches as well as
plum-coloured ones. The timber is nearly all viminalis, but mostly
scrubby, there being a few large, but no really fine, trees.
Owing to the drought, most of the creeks were dried up; so, when-
ever we saw water, we made a point of visiting it. At this place we
crossed Money’s Creek, 6 miles from Walcha, and observed a stoloni-
ferous form of Villarsia reniformis, with its pretty yellow flowers.
Ranunculus rivularis, var. major, Heleocharis cylindrostachys,
Triglochin procera, Carex vulgaris (csespitosa), and C. inversa. In the
neighbourhood were the grasses Chloris truncata, Andropogon affi,nis,
and Deyeuxia Forsteri, which are very abundant in New England.
There was also Arthropodiumfimbriatum, while the handsome Podolepis
longipedata, var. rohusta, recently described in the Linnean Society’s
of N.S.W. Proceedings from specimens brought by me from Mount
Kosciusko, was also obtained.
At 5 miles, E. coriacea is abundant, and E. stellulata forms scrubs.
We have also Broad-suckered Peppermint. The sucker foliage of
some is plum-coloured, of others glaucous.
There is much Swainsona galegifolia here, and right into Walcha.
At 4 miles we have still viminalis, mostly scrubby. lam informed
there was also stellulata, but most of it has been cut for fire-
wood.
At 2 miles there is plum-coloured viminalis and still viminalis, with
much sweet briar. The suckers of viminalis are here rather narrow
and glaucous.


Around Walcha there is much of the scrubby, glaucous, broad-
suckered, rough-barked peppermint, similar to that which we saw
before we came to Tia. •
The glaucousness, remains to some extent when the leaves become
lanceolate; at all events, the young lanceolate foliage is glaucous.
And so we arrive at Walcha, on the Apsley River, which is here
spanned by two long wooden bridges. It is one of the most prettily
situated towns in the Cokmy, and before the opening of the railway
to Armidale it was a more considerable place than it is at present, as
much of the traffic between England and the coast used to come
to Walcha. Wool, &c., used to be conveyed along the Walcha-Port
Macquarie Road, and was often two months on its way to Port
Macquarie before the present road was formed through the Myrtle
Scrub route. The railway is at Walcha Road, 12 miles away; and
after an interval of twenty-four hours, which was occupied in gathering
the collections of the expedition together, and driving about in the
Walcha district to solve some botanical questions that required
attention, we had a pleasant, though chilly, drive in the moonlight to
the railway station to catch the midnight train for Sydney. [At
Walcha Road Railway Station I said good-bye to Mr, John McElhone,
M.P., my fellow-passenger on the box-seat, whom I had also met at
Tia. I felt certain he was breaking up, and his death was recently
announced. I have met few men on my travels with a more profound
knowledge of New South Wales and its products than our lamented
friend.] And thus ended a journey which, in spite of our having to
rough it a bit, was most profitable to us, for we came home laden
with specimens, and also, I trust, with knowledge of the topography
and botany of one of the least known, yet one of the most interesting,
parts of New South Wales.
[One map.}
Sydney : William Applegate Gullick, Government Printer.—lB9B.


