

1/ f C/fewa-wj 6
In The North-Eastern .
, sGippsiahd Districts




RUNNING parallel with the eastern coast line
of the great island continent of Australia is a
mighty chain of mountains, the Great Dividing
Range, known locally as the Australian Alps,
and stretching from tropical Queensland in the north to
temperate Victoria in the south.
Although Australia cannot boast of an awe-inspiring
Mont Blanc, with ice-capped summit and yawning cre-
vasses, scenes of an impressive description are to be
found in the Australian Alps. In winter, when
mighty “ Bogong,” which proudly rears its crest 6508
above the sea, and its attendant satellites, “Fea-
thdrtop,” 6303; “ Hotham,” 6100; “ Buller,” 5811; and
th 4 “ Buffalo,” with its “Hump” (5600 feet) and
“Horn” (5760 feet), are clothed in a mantle of white,
scenes of an enchanting Alpine nature justify the
appellation of the district as the “Switzerland of
Australia.” The best months of the year to see and
explore the mountains when clad in winter’s garb
are from June to September, although snow is visible
on Bogong and the highest points during the greater
part of the year. A visit to the mountains during the
winter months entails a great deal of hard work in
climbing, etc., which is less difficult in summer.
It is only since the opening of the railway to Bright,
in October, 1890, that the natural beauties of the district
been made accessible to the ordinary tourist, and
this pamphlet is issued with the object of bringing them
under the notice «sf those desirous of spending a holiday
for the recuperation of health, or of rambling ’mid
scenes of rugged grandeur. In order to enable tourists
to see the mountains to the best advantage, and to move
comfortably from point to point, visitors should makt
the trip between December and April.


A Peep at the Buffalo Ranges, Porepunkah.


Leaving Melbourne, the line passes through agricul-
tural and grazing districts, and crosses, near Seymour,
the River Goulburn, the famous valley of that name
bearing away to the left; thence onward north-easterly
through the fertile plains surrounding Wangaratta to
Everton, where the laboured beat of the engine de-
notes that the mountainous district is being entered.
From Everton, which is the junction of the Beech-
worth and Bright sections, the line runs in a south-
easterly direction through the valley of the Ovens for
35 miles, to the terminus at Bright.
Named after the famous British states-
RRIfIHT man ’ a P rett y little town, usually
*'****'“•*** made the headquarters from which
all the places of interest are visited. It
has two hotels and several private establishments catering
for the wants of visitors at reasonable charges ; here also
are the headquarters of the Bright Progress Associa-
tion, which body is ever ready to afford the utmost
assistance to visitors. They may have' the advantage
of having tours arranged for, and snow shoes, alpen-
stocks, and the usual winter mountaineering parapher-
nalia provided.
The town, the streets of which are lined with oaks
and elms, has an old-world appearance, and, situated
in the valley of the Ovens, over a thousand feet above
the sea, surrounded on all sides by spurs of the ranges,
is a pleasant place to spend a quiet holiday. Within
walking distance are many interesting views, and the
roads in the valleys are suitable for cycling.
Within two hours’ stroll is the Gap, from which a
splendid view of the town and the Wandiligong Valley
is obtained, while from the Ovens Bridge, Bogong, with
its snow-capped summit, may be plainly seen.
Another pleasant walk is to the “ Clear Spot ” on
the peak of the ranges, 3500 feet above the sea level,


and tourists gaining the summit have a magnificent
view across the ranges. Following on from the “ Clear
Spot,” the track, which is blazed on the trees, brings
one to a second “ Clear Spot,” from which extensive
panoramic views of the great Alpine chain open out.
Three and a half miles from Bright is the old-
settled mining township of Wandiligong, originally
called Growler’s Creek. Coaches run out from Bright
to Wandiligong twice daily, the fare being sixpence
each way.
A climb to the top of the Oriental Hill will repay
one’s exertions by the extensive view over mountain
and valley.
One of the most popular drives, 13 miles out from
Bright, is to the Buckland Valley, which was originally
settled in 1852, and where very rich yields of gold
were obtained from the alluvial; here the miners sum-
marily settled the “Chinese Question,” when they drove
the Asiatics from the field cn masse —the incident,
which caused considerable excitement at the time, being
known as the Buckland Riot. Traces of the early
digging operations are still visible.
The slopes of the valley are extensively cultivated,
and the lighter tints of the growing crops form a
pleasing contrast to the darker hues of the forests
clothing the side of the Buffalo Range, which runs
parallel with the road the greater part of the way.
From the road the stately proportions of the range
can be appreciated, and an impressive view of the
Buffalo Falls obtained; these falls descend about 650
feet from a break in the wall of the mountain, and,
from the first break, dash foaming down another thous-
and feet.
The Buffalo Plateau
THE GARDEN OF THE GODS
This magnificent wonderland of natural beauty and
superb scenic attractions is now easily accessible by a
splendid road recently constructed by the Public Works
Department, and opened for traffic on gth October, 1908.
Visitors to the Buffalo may travel either via Myrtleford,
Porepunkah (nearest way), or by Bright. The distance
from Myrtleford is 20 miles, the first fifteen of which
may be driven or ridden, but the last five lie along the
crests of spurs of the main range and must be under-
taken on horseback or on foot.
From Porepunkah a coach runs out the four miles to
the Buffalo Falls Hotel at the foot of the range, where
a stop-over is made for the night, and continues the
journey to the summit next morning. Total distance.
16 miles.
Coaches run from Bright to the plateau (20 miles)
along the Buckland-road to its junction with the track
from Porepunkah, which crosses the Ovens and Buck-
land Rivers and joins the new Buffalo-road shortly be-
fore reaching the Eurobin Falls.
These are a series of cascades formed by the Eurobin
Creek rushing over granite boulders, whose grey crests
jut out here and there from the foaming waters, form-
ing a picture which needs a visit to appreciate its
beauty.
On the course of the Falls Creek, as the stream
flowing from the foot of the Gorge is called, occurs a


further beautiful fall known as the Ladies’ Bath. This
fall is of about 40 feet, into a deep, rocky basin, and
is distant about a couple of hundred yards from the
Eurobin Falls.
Following up the track by the creek, a finger-post
indicates the road to the cavern, from the interior of
which the immense power of the falling water may
be gauged.
The newly-constructed Buffalo-road starts from the
Eurobin Valley, a short distance past the Buffalo Falls
Hotel, and as soon as the hotel has been left behind,
a magnificent view of the far-famed Buffalo Gorge and
Falls is obtained from a turn in the road. Shortly
afterwards the new bridge over the stream is seen with
the foaming waters dashing from all directions to form
the Eurobin Creek. Proceeding now along the western
bank of the creek the gradually ascending track turns
the flank of a spur of the range and continues along its
northern face for some distance, every turn of the road
affording an outlook over fresh country till Mackey’s
Lookout (3600 feet up) is reached, from which point a
magnificent panoramic view is obtained, embracing the
valleys of the Eurobin Creek, the Ovens and the
Buckland rivers, the lesser foothills with the Australian
Alps from Bogong to Hotham in the background, and
even on a clear day to distant Kosciusko.
Turning sharply from here the road passes through
granite country past Morgan’s Lookout, along the wes-
tern face of the range in full sight of the North Buffalo
and overlooking the valley of the Buffalo Creek, until
the summit is attained and the track crosses the plain
near Carlisle’s Hospice, terminating at the bridge span-
ning the creek, whose water forms the great Buffalo
Head of Buffalo Gorge.


Falls. Following along the creek for a short distance
there suddenly bursts into view, like a transformation
scene, a panorama which is probably unequalled any-
where in Australia-
On advancing to the flat rock at the lip of the gorge,
which is at an elevation of 4500 feet, the visitor stands
in mute admiration. Eighty-five miles distant is faintly
outlined Kosciusko (7328 feet), the father of the Aus-
tralian mountains; in the middle distance stands Bo-
gong, and to the right Mounts Fainter, Feathertop and
Hotham, serrated ridge upon ridge of mountain and
range stretching away into the dim and distant purple,
the snow-capped peaks relieving the darker hues. Im-
mediately below are the Eurobin Falls and the Buck-
land Valley, with the tortuous winding road plainly
discernible. The valley is dotted with smiling farms,
green of emerald hue, where the influence of droughts
is unknown.
On the left-hand side the ravine goes precipitously
down a savage cliff of barren rock, where, 1600 feet be-
low, giant gums appear as shrubs. On the right the
rocks are more broken, the faces covered with mosses
and lichens, and here and there heathy scrub and stun-
ted trees cling like limpets to the interstices of the
boulders, while, tumbling with mighty roar into the
abyss below, the water tosses into flying spray, scin-
tillating and flashing in the sunlight, forming innumer-
able rainbows.
Turning back from the gorge, the plain is again
crossed, and in about two hours’ travelling the “ Hump ”
13600 feet) and the Cathedral Rock are reached. This
immense rampart of rock has never yet been scaled.
Under this rock a shout is repeated fourfold. After
trying the weird effect of the echo, a visit should be
paid to the Leviathan Rock, an enormous mass 75
The Ovens River at Bright.


feet high, 150 feet long, and 60 feet broad, which rests
on a base of about 6 feet, and under which a small
army could shelter.
From the “ Hump ” to the “ Horn ” is about an hour’s
travelling, and from the latter’s summit, about 5760 feet
above the sea, the most comprehensive view ot
the north-eastern part of Victoria may be gained.
To see the sun rise on Chamouni is reckoned as one of
the sights of the European Alps, but the sunrise as
viewed from the “ Horn ” will bear favourable compari-
son. In the early dawn the valleys till with mists,
which, wind-tossed, beat against the bases of the hills
like an angry sea.
To fully exhaust the places of interest, a few days
should be spent on the Buffalo trip. Accommodation
may be had at Carlisle’s Hospice and at Manfield’s
Chalet. Host Carlisle was the guide of the pioneer
party which made the first winter ascent of the Buffalo,
in August, 1906. A site has been chosen, and designs
have been prepared and approved, for a Hospice to be
erected by the Public Works Department upon the
Buffalo Plateau, at a spot on the south wall of the
Gorge, and close to the Buffalo Falls. As some little
time must elapse before the building is erected, ar-
rangements have been made for accommodating visitors
in comfortable military tents during the ensuing excur-
sion season, and Mr. W. Tossell is the successful ten-
derer for the right to cater for tourists. Those desi-
rous of obtaining accommodation, at the tent camp re-
quire to apply early by letter to him, care of Connelly
and Co., Coach Proprietors, Bright.
THE AUSTRALIAN ALPS.
On returning again to Bright, after having exploited
the sights on the Buffalo, Mounts Feathertop and
Hotham (Baldy), lying to the south-east, should be
visited. The drive from Bright to Harrietville fol
lows along the course of the Ovens, and is a charming
one. About six miles out the mining village of Free-
burgh is passed, and a little farther on the river
flats are being turned over by dredging.
Harrietville is a pretty little township, containing
three hotels at which accommodation may be had. From
the township the ascent to Feathertop may be made in
about six hours, a trip to the top of which will test the
lung powers of sturdy mountaineering pedestrians. The
journey can also be made on horseback, and the return
by way of Mount Hotham along Razorback to Bous-
tead’s (St. Bernard accommodation house, 5080 feet).
As the name implies, the Razorback is a ridge of the
range, and the track along it for a considerable dis-
tance is only a few feet wide. The sloping sides, with
deep, gloomy ravines on either hand, make the ride an
awe-inspiring one.
From the ridge at the back of Boustead’s,
which is the backbone of the Dividing Range, a
view can be obtained over the great watersheds of the
rivers flowing north into the Murray, and southward
into Gippsland.
If the time can be spared, the best way to see the
glories of the Alps is to take the round trip from Mel-
bourne to Bright by rail, and coach thence to Bou-
stead’s, and on to Omeo, rejoining the Gippsland rail-
way at Bairnsdale. Through circular rail and coach
tickets are issued.


About twenty-nine miles in a north-westerly direction
from Bright is the town of
BEECHWORTH,
originally known as the May-day Hills. Elevated 1805
ft. above sea-level, and built on the slopes of the hills,
Beechworth is par excellence adapted for a sanitorium;
and for purposes of a quiet holiday, combined with the
enjoyment to be derived from the contemplation of
beautiful and rugged scenery, it is well worthy of a
visit. The temperature during summer is, maximum
90, and mean 74 degrees. Resting on granite and sand-
stone formation, the town is admirably drained, its
streets, planted with English deciduous trees, are cool
and refreshing looking even on the hottest days. The
atmosphere is delightfully bracing, and numerous hotels
and boarding-houses are available for accommodation
at reasonable rates.
Beechworth has many historical associations, and in
the excellent free library (which is available for the
use of visitors) are many records of interesting events
connected with the early days. Among them is Richard
O’Hara Burke’s Bible, the only personal relic re-
covered when the body of that daring and ill-fated
explorer was found in the unknown wilds of Central
Australia. Burke having occupied the position of super-
intendent of police for the Beechworth district, his
memory is perpetuated by a memorial window erected
in the library.
In addition to current newspapers and about 10,000
volumes, the library contains a splendid collection of
works of art, and aboriginal and South Sea Islanders’
Clear Creek Falls, Beechworth.


weapons and domestic utensils. Mineral, ornithological,
and conchological specimens worthy of study may also
be inspected by those whose interests lie in that direc-
tion.
Adjacent to the town are many pretty walks where
Nature has piled the rocks in various fantastic forms.
These are most noticeable in the valley of the Spring
Creek, a bold and rugged ravine, which has three dis-
tinct waterfalls along its course. Near the central of
these falls is the Sphinx Rock—a grotesque monolith,
bearing a decided resemblance to the human face,
hence the name. Gold in great quantity has been and
is still being won from the Woolshed Valley lying
below. It was in this valley that once 20,000 diggers
camped, who, when they decided to nominate one of
their number to represent them in Parliament, sub-
scribed the £2OOO qualification in two minutes, and
when he was elected shod his horse with shoes of vir-
gin gold for his triumphal ride into Beechworth. Dur-
ing fourteen and a half years, ended June, 1866, three
and a quarter million ounces of gold, valued at about
£12, 500,000, were won here. Stream tin, as well as
ruby, sapphire, jasper, cornelian, topaz, diamond, and
other precious stones have been found.
Six miles out from the town is the mining village
of Stanley, which nestles in the valley at the foot
of the range of that name. From the summit of Mount
Stanley (3444 ft.) are obtained extensive views of
the valley of the Ovens, and the lofty pinnacled and
rugged heights of the Buffalo.
Between Stanley and Beechworth is Lake Kerferd,
which is the reservoir supplying the town with water.
The lake is fed by races running from springs in the
ranges above.
The hilly nature of the country furnishes abrupt
watersheds, and in the gullies rapids and waterfalls
are numerous.
On Mount Pilot, a favourite picnicking ground, bold
masses of rock thrust their adamantine heads high
above the surface, and from here Albury, Wahgunyafi,
Rutherglen, and Eldorado may be seen.
Many other spots of varied interest are to be seen—
The Tors, Ingram’s Rock, Zig Zag Pass, Flat Rock,
Buckland’s Gap (where Power, the bushranger, once
held up the coach). Bowman’s Forest, Murmungee,
and Yackandandah furnish pleasant drives.
Wild flowers, orchids strange in shape and colour,
the Dianeyella, the Fringed Lily, and other rare
flowers, also numerous varieties of ferns, grow in
abundance in the valleys.
The Secretaries of the Progress Association, Bright,
and the 1 ourists’ Club, Beechworth, invite intending
visitors to communicate with them, and they will
gladly furnish information as to projected tours. The
Progress Association, Bright, also publishes (price 6d.)
an illustrated guide, giving detailed directions how to
reach the various places of interest.


■• A' \ **•
... 4S
4a #/
*. “■’ * L -
|:*v ..By - / / *
Snow on the Buffalo Mountains.
Wil#/ J«F
•, ■ j ‘/ /! ?^*
- -*'« 1kL ?mT
v ..„,. jjg;- A|y '# ..I *
STO^,;i ;)^:,!( t .1
'■ ■' ,%
.,-■>• — - * f i h
*•■•■• & - ■■ *&?•- *-«2(F ,} ■"-...—> n
P|ggj^' -B^
Railway Viaduct, Tallangatta Line.


Omeo lies
lies upon the Livingstone Creek, and its popu-
lation of 800 inhabitants is principally engaged in
mining. Many of the public buildings and principal
business establishments are substantially built of brick.
There are three hotels. It is accessible by coach
services from each of two railway terminals, Bright
and Bairnsdale. There are in the neighbourhood of
the towmship splendid views of the surrounding moun-
tainous country.
The Brothers, 4000 ft. in height, and the Sisters,
scarcely less elevated, lie to the north and north-east,
while the Australian Alps, rising in places to over
6000 ft., are to the westward. From The Brothers
may be seen Mt. Kosciusko (7328 ft.), Australia’s
highest peak, the Pilot (6025 ft.), The Cobberas (6020
ft.), and Forest Hill (5000 ft.), the source of the Mur-
ray. Across the Alps to Omeo is an excellent guide
to this mountainous district.
The Bright-Omeo-Bairnsdale circular trip is
an exceedingly interesting excursion, the cost of which
is 99/- first class, or 86/6 second class. One coach
a week runs from Bright to Omeo, leaving early on
Tuesday mornings, and reaching the Hospice, where
the journey is broken for the night, at about 5 p.m.
Another early start is made on the Wednesday, and
Omeo is reached the same evening. As a daily coach
runs from Omeo to Bairnsdale via Ensay, Cassilis, and
Bruthen, passengers may break for a day or two here
if they desire; but a break at the Hospice means
waiting a week for the next coach.
Victoria Gorge, Omeo. —


Melbourne Jo Beechworth ..
34
6
23
0
„ Yackandandah
37
3
24
11
,, Myrtleford
36
0
23
II
„ Porepunkah
39
0
26
(1
„ Bright
39
8
26
5
,, Tallangatta
43
0
28
10
Tallangatta,
2i 2/ miles from Melbourne, lies upon the junction of
fhe Tallangatta Creek with the Mitta Mitta River,
amid charmingly picturesque surroundings. There are
two hotels in the township, as well as two coffee
palaces and a number of stores. The sport in the
district is excellent.
EXCURSION FARES.
Excursion Tickets, available for two months’ return
are issued each year, from the 15th November to the
30th April following, at the undermentioned fares: —
MOUNTAINOUS DISTRICT EXCURSION TICKETS.
Ist Class 2nd Class
s. d. s, d.
Journey may not be broken on them, but holders
of Bright tickets may terminate their forward jour-
ne}q or commence the return journey on them at any
station from Myrtleford to Bright inclusive.
RAIL AND COACH THROUGH EXCURSION TICKETS.
Melbourne to Buffalo Plateau and return via Porepunkah
Ist Class .. 51s 6d .. .. 2nd Class .. 38s 6d
Via Bright—
-Ist Class .. 54s 8d .. .. 2nd Class .. 41s 5d
Journey may not be broken on rail portion of these Tickets.
Tickets must be presented at the booking office at
the station from which they are available, to be
stamped when commencing the return journey, other-
wise they will not be recognised.
Trout Pool on Little Devil River, near Mansfield


MANSFIELD
131 miles north-east from Melbourne, is the terminus
of the line branching off at Tallarook from the through
road to Sydney.
A daily train leaves Spencer Street at 6.15 a.m.,
passengers changing carriages at Tallarook, where
also breakfast may be obtained. From Tallarook on-
ward, the line passes through rugged and picturesque
country, and Mansfield is reached at 2 p.m., in time
for a late lunch.
The town is prettily situated in a basin surrounded
by a circle of bold hills, and the more distant heights
are snowcapped for a good portion of the year. The
streets are wide and are planted with deciduous trees,
pines, and blue-gums. The climate is temperate, the
nights, even in the height of summer, being cool and
enjoyable; mosquitoes, the terror of summer nights
elsewhere, are here unknown.
There are good hotels, a coffee palace, and several
boarding houses, so that visitors may rely on bemg
able to procure comfortable accommodation.
Those desirous of viewing outlying parts of the
district can hire the necessary horses and vehicles at
moderate rates from livery stables in the town.
Within reasonable distance of the town lie many
points of interest and attraction, Mount Battery, Blue
On the Rubicon River, Alexandra.


Range, and “ The Paps ” offering opportunities for
enjoyable walking excursions.
Good sport is procurable in the vicinity of Mans-
field, wild duck, pigeon, quail, plover, and rabbits and
hares being found within easy walking distance, while
the Delatite River and other streams are stocked with
trout, cod, bream, etc.
Merrijig lies n miles east of Mansfield, and the
road between the two points is suitable either for rid-
ing, driving, or cycling. The surroundings are pic-
turesque, and there are in this neighbourhood many
beautiful fern gullies. The local streams provide
excellent trout fishing, and accommodation is procur-
able at the Hunt Club Hotel.
The Tolmie Tableland, Holland’s Creek Falls,
Power’s Look-Out (called after the once notorious
bushranger), and The Porthole, are all points of in-
terest well worth visiting.
Power’s Look-Out, the favourite haunt of the famous
bushranger of that name, lies near Tolmie, and might
be easily visited in the course of a week-end run from
Melbourne to Mansfield. Leaving town by the morn-
ing train on Saturday, and reaching Mansfield at mid-
day, passengers could drive out to Tolmie, 12 miles
distant, stay overnight, and next day visit the Look-
out, from which Power used to scan the surrounding-
district, and from whence magnificent views of the
valley of the King River and the Alpine Ranges arc
obtained. The return journey to Mansfield may be
made in time to join the afternoon train for Mel-
bourne on Monday, arriving in town at n p.m., and
the excursion would afford an opportunity of viewing
the interesting and beautiful country in the vicinity
of Mansfield.
At Darby’s Hotel, Tolmie, visitors will obtain com-
fortable accommodation and directions as to the various
attractions in the vicinity.
Coaches leave Mansfield daily for Jamieson, travers-
ing country watered by many streams, the Delatite,
Howqua, Jamieson, and Goulburn being crossed cn
route.
Jamieson, a small mining township, is 25 miles
from Mansfield, and 42 miles further on is Wood’s
Point, to which the coach runs tri-weekly. The jour-
ney from Jamieson is through particularly mountain-
ous country, and the journey of 42 miles across the
ranges takes 10 hours to accomplish. Wood’s Point
lies 4700 ft. above sea-level, and the mountain scenery
all round is magnificent.
MOUNTAINOUS DISTRICT EXCURSION TIC-
KETS to Mansfield, available for two months,'are is-
sued from 15th November to 30th April each year, at
the following fares:—lst class return. 26/5; 2nd class
return, 17/7. Break of journey is not permitted, and
tickets must be presented at the booking office at Mans-
field to be stamped before the return journey is com-
menced.


. . Alexandra
Four miles from Alexandra Road Sta-
tion. which is 97 miles from Melbourne.
The train leaves Spencer Street Sta-
tion daily at 6.15 a.m., passengers
changing carriages twice en route —at
Tallarook and Cathkin—arriving at
Alexandra Road about noon, after
which a coach conveys them to the
township.
Alexandra is encircled by hills, and
has broad, well-planted streets. The
surrounding country is well calculated
to attract tourist traffic to this town
as trips in any direction repay excur-
sionists with extensive panoramic views
of great beauty.
Amongst other points worth visitin
may be mentioned the “ Niagara
Falls on the Snob’s Creek, 6 miles ou
the newly-discovered falls on the Ru
bicon River, 16 miles distant, and the
Puzzle Ranges, from 4 to 10 miles dis-
tant.
Through Rail and Coach Tickets are available for the
journey, Melbourne to Alexandra and return, and for
tourists wishful to make the round trip—Melbourne to
Melbourne —across the Blacks’ Spur and through some
of the finest bush and mountain scenery in the State.
The Ooulburn at Alexandra.
The route is either by rail to Alexandra Road and
coach thence via Marysville to Healesville, and rail
back to Melbourne, or the reverse way.
This is undoubtedly one of the most enjoyable trips
is is possible to take.


Through Tickets are issued from 15th October to
30th April each year at the following fares: —
Ist Class 2nd Class
s. d. s. d.
Melbourne to Alexandra and return 21 9 15 4
Circular Tickets—Melbourne to Melbourne 28 0 23 0
Good for two months’ return. No break of journey
on rail portion of ticket, and return -journey must be
stamped at either Alexandra Road or Healesville Sta-
tion before commencing the homeward journey.
The other Booklets of this series for free distribution
are :—
“Day Trips to the Mountains.”
“Scenes in the Midland District.
“ Summer at the Seaside.”
“ The Gippsland Lakes, Buchan Caves, and Wes-
ternport Bay.”
“PICTURESQUE VICTORIA”
THE TOURIST S HANDBOOK.
Fifth Edition. Price Sixpence
Head o! Snob’s Creek Falls, Alexandra.


The tourist track across the Baw Baw Ranges, com-
mencing at Warburton and ending at Walhalla, opens
up country which, if not quite fresh, is at any rate
new to the majority of excursionists. En route are
passed the Yarra Falls, the sources of the Yarra, flow-
ing west, and the Thomson, flowing east, a fine beech
forest, and Mt. Whitelaw, with its forest of snow-gums
and huge weathered granite boulders, which are found
also farther on at Mt. Erica. A diversion from the
main track between Mt. Whitelaw and Talbot Peak, a
corner of Mt. Erica, leads to Mt. Baw Baw (5062 ft.).
The last stage of the journey across the range is rapidly
downhill through another beech forest to Walhalla.
The Lands and Public Works Departments have
cut a track, well defined and easily followed, and
have also erected three shelter sheds en route,
at convenient distances apart. These have each
Bush Scene, Warburton Ranges.


been furnished with stretcher beds with wire
mattresses, enamelled cooking vessels and plates,
a bucket for water, an axe and a broom. Par-
ties of excursionists proposing to make the trip require
to take with them their bedding and sufficient provisions
for the journey, which may be comfortably accomplished
in five days from Melbourne to Melbourne, although, if
it be desired to extend the time by prolonging the stay
at any point between the terminals of the track, the
stock of provisions must be proportionately increased.
If it be decided to hire horses for the journey between
Warburton and Walhalla, it is necessary to write in
advance to Mr. M'Veigh, hotel proprietor, Walsh’s
Creek, who will quote prices and make arrangements
for their supply.
In the event of the trip being made in the reverse
direction, and Walhalla selected as the starting point
of the tour, a letter to the secretary of the Walhalla
Tourists’ and Mountaineering Association will ensure
obtaining the required horses.
Starting from Melbourne by morning train daily,
Warburton is reached before midday, and on three
days a week—Mondays, Wednesdays, and Fridays—a
coach leaves the township for Wood’s Point, by which
passengers travel to Walsh’s Creek, 20 miles distant,
arriving at about 3.15 p.m. From Walsh’s Creek, a tri-
butary of the Yarra, a start is made on the journey
across the ranges, and for the first part of the way the
track lies along the banks of the Yarra, now running
Waterwheel, Stringer’s Creek, Walhalla.


level with the stream, and ancn rising to cross a pro-
jecting spur of the ranges. A track to Neerim, 30 miles
distant, branches off at Alderman’s Creek, 3 miles out,
and at Contention Creek. 5 miles farther on, is a
•quartz-crushing battery driven by the waters of the
■creek. Fourteen miles from Walsh’s Creek is the first
rest-house, and this may be reached in time for the
•evening meal the first day out from Melbourne. Ten
chains from the main track at this point lie the Yarra
Falls, upon the Falls Creek, and although a way has
'been cut from the foot to the head of the falls, of
which there are seven in the space of half a mile, it is
a work of considerable time to make the ascent to the
'head of the first fall. The total height of the succes-
sion of falls is 750 feet.
At the shelter six stretchers have been provided, and
■a good night’s sleep will afford the party the rest neces-
sary to enable them to view the neighbouring falls the
following day, and push on to the second rest-house, at
a point a mile beyond Mt. Whitelaw, along a gradually
rising track, and passing cn route the watershed of the
rivers Yarra and Thomson. The distance between
the two rest-houses is 13 miles, and at the second halt-
ing-place there are four stretchers only. From here to
the last shelter is ten miles, and midway a side track
from the main road, a mile and a half in length, leads
to Mt. Baw Baw. From the summit of the mount a
magnificent panoramic view is obtained over Moe, Tra-
Giant Black Butt, Moondara.


falgar;" 'Tarragon, and the intervening
i country. The third night’s camp is
Imade at the rest-house at Talbot Peak
.(Sooo ft.) (six stretchers), and on the
fourth day the last 14 miles may be
quickly covered, Walhalla being reached
in time to enable tourists to have a
igood look round this curiously placed
mining township ere leaving by coach
■for Moe to take train thence to Mel-
bourne.
Rail and Coach Circular Tickets, avail-
able for two months’ return, are issued
ifrom November 15th to April 30th each
year from Melbourne to Warburton by
rail, thence by coach to Walsh’s Creek,
returning by coach Walhalla to Moe, and
by train from there- to Melbourne, or
for the reverse route, at the following
fares:—
First Class, 26/1. Second Class, 21/10,
Tourists must make their own ar-
rangements for the journey between
Warburton and Walhalla. and journey
may not be broken on the rail portion
of the through ticket.
Yarra at Launching Place.


3 1508 00785551 8


H. J. TROWBRIDGE
PHOTO STOCK
:: DEALER :: ::
Agent for
Wellington & Ward’s
:: :: CREAM CRAYON BROMIDE :: ::
Same as used by Victorian Railways
CAMERA HOUSE,
296 COLLINS STREET, MELB
; H)
Keawick, Pride, Nuttall Pty. Ltd., P.O. Place, Melb.
