

MOUNT MORGAN:
THE FIELD AND MACHINERY,
Special 'Correspondent of “Engineering
Eocfefjampton ;
Printed at the Bulletin Machine Printing Office.
1892.




MOUNT MORGAN:
A special correspondent of Engineering some
time ago made a careful examination of
Mount Morgan, its machinery, and system of
working, all of which he describes at length
in five letters to that paper, beginning with
the issue of the 22nd of January. We append
the first letter, and the others will follow in
due course :
Rockhampton, one of the principal towns of
Queensland, on the eastern seaboard of Aus-
tralia, is built nearly under the tropic of
Capricorn, on the Fitzroy River, some thirty
or forty miles from the coast. The outlook,
in almost any direction, is picturesque, being
almost entirely surrounded by mountains, the
streets are laid out in a modern rectangular
fashion, they are very wide, quite flat,
generally dazzling with glare and very hot.
When the place recovers f -ora the shock of
the late sudden check to wild speculation,
which was caused by there being found,
almost within its area, “the greatest gold
mine in the w 7 orld,” it will doubtless go ahead
quickly ; it probably has a big future, being
the port of a magnificent back country.
Aw-ay in the ranges, about twenty-five
miles to the south-w 7 est of the town is this
noted mine, locally known as “the Mount.”
Half the journey may be done by rail, the re-
mainder is over a heavy mountain road. A
straggling congregation of small wooden
dwellings and shops, built along a w'inding
watercourse, serve to make the township of
Mount Morgan, wherein dwell some 4000
people ; right in front stands the mountain.
Plainly, it is a mountain not distinguishable
to any casual observer from its fellows, or the
range near by. The characteristics of all the
hills in the neighbourhood are the same;
similar trees and foliage, similar grasses,
similar rocks, and general appearance ; a wild,
rocky, uncultivated and somewhat uninterest-
ing locality. Mount Morgan differs from its
surrounding in these important particulars,
it is the repository of an immense mass or
masses of gold-bearing iron pyrites; over-
lying these masses, and more or less impreg-
nated with gold, are bodies of matter result-
ing from the decomposition of the country
rocks together with portions of the pyritous
Hall and Mr. Roger
THE FIELD AJStD MACHINERY.
deposits; and uppermost, but now partially
removed, a cap composed of a cellular silicious
iron-stained gozzan and limonite, or more or
less gold bearing, and all, or nearly all, far-
more heavily charged with gold than the still
unaltered pyritous masses lying beneath,
below the point of decomposition.
So, by this reading, ’tis a simple matter
after all, the new Golconda. It upsets no old
theories, alters no v ell-ascertained facts,
shows gold, g'ozzans, and pyrites under no
new conditions; in fact, docs nothing but
show that the ordinary conditions observable
on half the goldfields of tire world are here to
be seen, save that they are in one spot, re-
produced upon a scale of magnitude hitherto
undreamt of.
It goes without saying, that such a common-
place unweaving of the web of singularity and
wonderment, revelled in by writers on this
great gold mine, will bring down upon my
head the scorn and contumely of the many,
who, ere this, have essayed to tell the public
the true, the only solution. Feeling this
fully, later on, in detail, will be given the
chain of evidence upon which my simple story
is founded; but, before doing so, it may be-
interesting to cull from the literature put for-
ward by those most intimately connected
with the property.
Amongst others, two gentlemen known to
the world of science have reported on this
property, Mr. Robert L. Jack, Government
Geologist of Queensland, and Mr. J. Mac-
donald Cameron, F.G.S , &c.; their views I
will discuss later.
Mr. Cameron, however, appears to have, in
his report, expressed incorrectly the views of
the two chief officials engaged in the active
management of the mine, and in one of the
pamphlets before referred to, bearing date
18S9, which the secretary of the Mount
Morgan Gold Mining Company kindly sup-
plied me with, I find Mr. Cameron’s mistake
explained as follows :
‘ ‘ It may be well before proceeding furthei’,
to clear away a misunderstanding into whifch
Mr. Cameron has fallen with regard to the
opinion said to be held by JVb'w J, AFesl^


manager. Mr. Cameron seems to have springs, ami its absence from Mount M irgan
thought that the opinion held by Mr. Hall must needs imply the local absence of lime-
and Mr. Lisle was that the heat resulting stones among the rocks from which the spring
from the oxidation of a mundic lode had
melted the quartz, and that subsequently water
from below causing a chemical outburst, the
gold had been precipitated along witli the
material which now forms the stalactites.
This view Mr. Hall, immediately on the pub-
lication of Mr. Cameron's report, emphati-
cally disclaimed. That officer, to whom so
much of the success of the mine is due, did,
it is true, express an opinion that the decom-
position of a mundic lode had put the quartz
silica into a molten state, and that water from
below had produced a chemical outburst,
during which the gold had been precipitated ;
but the decomposition of a pyrites lode is but
a very different thing from a heat arising
from oxidation so great as to melt quartz.
When this theory and its explanation have
also been subjected to “ patient analysation,
I desire to draw attention to the reports of
Mr. Jack and Mr. Cameron.
Mr. Jack first visited the mine in 1884, and
then propounded a theory of a geyser or
thermal spring, which in his own werds he
describes as follows :
“ After careful study of the whole founda-
tion I have come to the conclusion that
nothing but a thermal spring in the open air
could have deposited the material under con-
sideration. The frothy silicious sinter agrees
in every respect with the deposits of Hew Zea-
land and Iceland geysers, and of the still more
wonderful hot springs of the Yellowstone
National Park, so graphically described by Dr.
A'. C. Peele. * The ‘frothy ’ and cavernous
condition of tho silicious sinter of Mount
Morgan may be accounted for by the escape
of steam, while the silica was yet (after the
deposition on the evaporation of the water) in
the gelatinous- condition so frequently ob-
served in the deposits of hot springs. Ihe
aluminous silicates represent the familiar out-
bursts and flow of mud. The iron oxide ap-
pears to have been deposited in some cases
along with the silica and alumina, and in
others to have been deposited later, its
solvent fluid having been, as it were, injected
into interstices, vesicles, and caverns of
the silica and alumina. In sonie cases
it may have been originally pyrites, as
stones among the rocks from which the spring
was fed. The siica would be found abun-
dantly in the quartzites, and the alumina in
the shales and greyvvackes of the country in
the neighbourhood, and possibly both
silica and alumina may have come
in part from deep-seated underlying
granite. The gold, and to some extent
iron, may have been dissolved out of the iron
pyrites of such reefs as the ‘Mundic reef’
seen in Mundic Creek ; the gold possibly by
chlorine produced by the contact of hydro-
chloric acid, derived from the decomposition
of chlorides, with manganese, which occurs
sparingly in the form of pyrolusite along with
the ironstone of Mount Morgan.”
It was generally understood that shortly
after the appearance of this theory it was
abandoned by Mr. Jack himself, and further
theories were put forward by him in a sub-
sequent report, from which the following
quotations are made :
“ The evidence now to hand, in my opinion,
goes to confirm my original view that the
auriferous material w'as deposited by a
thermal spring. The deposit is freely inter-
sected by felstone dykes, and lies on and is
surrounded by the pyritous quartzite country
rock. Numerous dolerite and rhyolite dykes
intersect the country rock, but not one has
been met with in the auriferous deposit.
Had the auriferous deposit been merely the
silicious skeleton remaining after the removal
of the pyrites from the pyritous quartzite, the
dolerite dykes w'ould still have remained to
attest the original identity of the two masses.
But there is at least one clear instance of a
dolerite dyke intersecting the quartzite
country rock (in No. 1 tunnel, 120 ft. north
of the shaft sunk from No 5 floor), and not
intersecting the overlying sinter (in the south
branch of the Freehold Tunnel, oidy 33 ft.
higher). This shows that the sinter and iron-
stone were deposited on and were not altered
portions of the pyritous quartzite country
rock. It is hardly credible that the highly
auriferous silicious and ferruginous rocks now
being worked represent merely a weathered
condition of the pyrites, with which the
quartzite ‘ country rock ’ is so highly charged
and wffiich is so poor in gold. Again, the
fact that the sinter is mainly a hydrous silica
it now and again occurs in cubical hollows, fact that the sinter is mainly a hydrous silica
Calcareous sinter is very common in silicious is an argument against its being the skeleton
produced by the solution of masses of pyrites
Annual, Report of the United States Geolo- f rom an anhydrous quartzite. A sample of
focal and Geographical Survey of the Territories. Part sinter from the Freehold Tunnel W’as sub-
»wi to Mr. A, VV. Clarke, late Govern-


mcnt Mineralogieal Lecturer, who favoured reef grew smaller at once, and the gold con-
me with the following interesting note :
“ ‘ A very large proportion of the substance
is soluble in strong potash solution, the
residue being nearly pure crystalline silica.
This is what ought to be expected of a
-silicious sinter, as, of course, the • silica
would be hydrated and colloidal, and the
presence of some quart z in it (or crystalline
silica) is quite conceivable.” ’
As far as I am aware, none, excepting a few
solid-gold-right-down-in-the-bottom men, or
believers in the old fire-and-brimstone theory,
attempt to deny that the present condition of
Mount Morgan is due to anything but aqueous
action. But why thermal spring ? Whether
thermal or co I d—so far as I could see, learn,
or imagine—there is not one particle of evi-
dence whereby to decide ; and in either case
the result would be the same. The mountain
lias been burrowed through and through by
tunnels driven in all directions. I could, in
them, see no evidence of a central pipe or
pipes through which could have passed “ ex-
plosive discharges of gases or steam,” or any
•channel or pipe to carry any direct upward
flow; none were shown to me, none were
spoken of, neither Mr. Jack’s report nor dia-
grams attached indicate the location of any
such outlets ; and I am of the belief that were
any discovered or known the fact would be
published w idely all over the English speak-
ing world.
I hold the opinion that if any thermal
spring ever existed it was purely qf a per-
meating or filtering character, and not accom-
panied by “explosive discharges of gases or
steam.” With great masses of decomposing
pyrites heat would be generated, and the
amount of heat woukLbe governed by the
bulk of pyrites and the rapidity of decomposi-
tion, taken in conjunction with the moving
volume of water. As to the fact of the
pyrites below, so poor in gold, and the
silicious ferruginous rocks above, so highly
charged with gold, being a proof that the
upper crust could not be merely a weathered
condition of the lower strata, I can in no way
agree with Mr. Jack. Saving this addition —
a weathered condition of the lower strata,
with the addition of saturation with
mineralised waters from around. Within the
limit of my own observation this condition
of things is the rule, not the exception. 1
instance (perhaps) 50 per cent of reefs on the
goldfields of Queensland, w'here the brown
iron ore, near the surface, has given pheno-
menal yields of free gold, and when the
pyrites below was reached the width of the
tents suddenly Lss to a marked degree, leav-
ing nothing but a poor ore, difficult of treat-
ment. In all these reefs we have simply a
“ weathered condition ” of the original lode,
plus the corrosive action of mineralised waters
affecting and saturating with gold salts and
other mineral matters, not only the weathered
or decomposed lode but the country rock
in its immediate vicinity.
The same is true of mines in other parts of
Australia. Bethanga (grid), Victoria, is a
notable instance ; Silver ton and Broken Hill
(silver), N.S. VV.; Wallaroo and Moonta
(copper), S.A.; and the list could be extended
ad infinitum to refer to mines throughout the
world. In all the above, heavy and rich ore
deposits are (or were) found uppermost, and
below lies the sulphide ore, narrower in the
vein and poorer in quality. The Bethanga
mines are an excellent illustration of this
action. The decomposed portion of the lode
was shaped like a large V or upper portion of
a Y, varying from 40 ft. wide on top until the
lower part of the Y was reached, which re-
presents the sulphide lode—in thickness vary-
ing from 1 ft. to 3 ft. Like a large lamp wick,
loose and fuzzy on top and hard and com-
pressed below the line of moisture. All the
upper part of the Y has been removed ; it
was rich in free gold and easily treated. The
big fuzzy portion of the wick no longer re-
mains to exert capillary attraction on the
mineralised waters in which the lower part of
the wick is steeped ; but nature is daily pro-
viding v hat man has removed. On the top
of the sulphide lode their lies an inch or two
of black frible decomposing pyrites, which
works back a little into the inclosing country
rock. The pyrites shows a natural concen-
tration of gold from the lode beneath, there
being no capillary medium, hence it accumu-
lates ; assays made from it gave gold at the
rate of from Boz. to9oz. per ton, while the
undecomposed lode frmn which it is derived
gives by assay about 1 oz. of gold per ton.
It is now more than two years since I wrote
describing this action of natural concentration
and chlorination which is daily going on in
pyritous lodes, and at the time cited Mount
Morgan as an instance. *
With reference to the silica question—the
stuff that looks like sinter is, in the main,
not colloidal silica aird is not soluble. The
colloidal or hydrous silica occurs mostly in
the limonite, and its phyffcial characteristics
* “ Notes on the Treatment of Gold Ores.” London.
Exgxxeerixg 1889.


may be examined by any one who will take certainty has been dispelled by the assiduity
the trouble to digest a small lump of this of Mr. James Smith, of Rockhampton, who
limonite in cold hydrochloric acid. It is so
fragile that the structure will be all destroyed
if boiled in the acid. The soluble silica has
been deposited from the mineral water to-
gether with the limonite and the gold, and is
found all through the cap of Mount Morgan,
just as it is found in the brown iron ore caps
of numberless lodes such as already instanced.
The hundreds of analyses made by analysts of
the various geological surveys in the different
colonies, do not show a single instance of a
mine water without silica in solution, and it
may be said the same is characteristic of
every mine water in the world.
Quoting further from Mr. Jack’s report we
have the following ;
“In view of the enormous quantities of
pyrites associated with the quartzite country
rock, it may not be so necessary as it once
seemed to ascribe the presence of gold on the
summit of Mount Morgan to the solvent action
of hot water, charged with chlorine, on a
number of auriferous pyritous reefs, since
even if gold existed in the pyrites in the
country rock in a very infinitesimal propor-
tion, it might be collected by a thermal spring
charged with chlorine from the pyrites over a
wide area.”
The reasoning in the above paragraph is, to
my mind, not at all clear. Pyrites does not
sweat out chlorine ; thermal springs are not
generally “charged” with chlorine—hot
water won’t hold chlorine—and could one be
so imagined at Mount Morgan it would have
created far greater disturbance and alteration
in the adjoining rocks than now exists.
Again, there is no evidence of chemical action
in these surrouding rocks to show that they
have contributed in any way to the auriferous
deposits of Mount Morgan, their minerals are
undecomposed and their contained pyrites is
bright and unaltered ; but the pyrites in
enormous masses immediately beneath the
auriferous cap of the mountain, show every
evidence of partial decomposition, and this
gradual alteration is going on now and is to
be seen any day—even a blind man could de-
tect it, the smell of sulphurous acid being so
overpowering in some of the tunnels and
drives.
The concluding paragraph of the portion of
the report referring to Mount Morgan is as
follows :
“ In my former report I referred to the un-
certainty regarding the age of the quartzites,
greywackes, and shales which form the
* country rock ’ of Mount Morgan ; this un-
has found in the rocks in question an abun-
dant marine fauna, proving according to Mr.
Robert Etheridge, Jun., Paleontologist to the
Geological Survey of New South Wales and
Australian Museum, their identity with the
‘ Gympie beds,’which are on the horizon of
the ‘ Bowen River beds,’ (Carbonifero-Per-
mian). Pyritous rocks of this age have
furnished gold to the reefs at Gympie, and in
the vicinity of Mount Morgan, and, consider-
ing the immense quantities of pyrites in the
quartzite immediately beneath and around
Mount Morgan, might well supply, under the
stronger influence of a thermal spring, charged
with chlorine, even enough .of gold to enrich
the now famous Mount Morgan mine.”
This paragraph appears to bear away from
the sinter and the tufa, &c., —all more or less
evidence of some great convulsion of nature—
and to incline to the more simple theory of
gradual accumulation of gold from the pyrites
beneath by the medium of aqueous action
going on throughout ages of time, except
that “the stronger influence of a thermal
spring charged with chlorine ” is clung to.
The evidence supporting this thermal spring
theory is not put forward. Where are the
traces of its upward flow ? and if a spring,
why necessari’y hot, which must of necessity
reduce to a minimum the volume of chlorine
the water could carry?
The natural reactions are as follow : De-
composing ptyries, when oxidised in the
presence of moisture, supplies sulphate of iron
and sulphuric acid ; this sulphuric acid is the
active agent which brings about the next
reactions; these reactions which take place
depend of course on the surrounding mineral
matter, but it is the sulphuric acid coming
into contact with waters containing chlorides
which generates hydrochloric acid. This
again brings about another series of reactions,
and if manganese is present (and Mr. Jack
says it is), chlorine is formed to dissolve the
gold left after the decomposition of pyrites,
and this dissolved gold will be carried and
deposited wdieresoever the stream of water
charged with it flows. The thermal character
of this water depends entirely on the mass
undergoing decomposition and the rapidity of
the change.
SECOKD ARTICLE.
Mr. Macdonald Cameron, in his report,
says:
“ The extent of the metamorphism has
made it aknost impossible to determine the
exact strike and dip of the original raundic


iodes to which I believe most of the gold of bery, Mr. Robert Etheridge, Jun., and Mr.
Mount Morgan is due. . . .”
Had Mr. Cameron seen the mountain opened
out as it is now by tunnels, he, most pro-
bably, would have said “all the gold. ’ It
is hard to say whether the pyritic masses
below are lodes or not ; there are masses of
rock laden with pyrites, sometimes, seem-
ingly, without end. One tunnel I went into
was driven through 80 ft. of granular pyrites,
without a trace of rock ; so friable that it
could be crumbled to grains by rubbing a
portion between the palms of one’s hands.
Later on in his report, Mr. Cameron, in en-
deavouring to account for the gold of Mount
Morgan, states, that in the rocks under the
mountain pyrites should be found in in-
finitesimal quantities, and he writes in this
strain :
“ We have not far to seek
for the original source of its gold. During
the decomposition of these by saline acidulated
waters, their contained gold would become
dissolved and deposited along with the
soluble silica in the crevices of the softer and
more porous rocks of their vicinity.”
Had Mr. Cameron known of the practically
immeasurable quantity of auriferous pyrites
■below the cap of the mountain, I believe he
would have written as I do now ; and it
would have been clear to him that the ap-
parently tufaceous material, resulting from
the breaking down of the silicious skeleton
which once held the pyrites, and the “so-
called silicious sinter,” was none other than
the residue from decomposing pyritous masses
of extraordinary magnitude.
In order that reasonable evidence could be
.adduced in support of the explanation ad-
vanced, I carefully broke off specimens of
rocks, &c., at varying points along each
tunnel and drive through and beneath the
mountain ; these I brought to to
submit to Mr. J. Cosmo Newbery, R.Sc.,
■superintendent of the Technological Museum
■.and analyst to the Mines Department, and to
Mr. 0. R. Rule, petrologist to the Technical
Museum, Victoria, so that these gentlemen
might read the record Nature has left, telling
of her work. Their readings of these rocks
appear below. Every specimen is, in their
opinion, either the result of the actions de-
scribed, or, a rock into which specimens near
the surface had been altered.
This conclusion as to the nature of the
auriferous deposit of Mount Morgan has not
been arrived at hurriedly or without thought.
The views expressed are held by such well-
known men of science as Mr. J. Cosmo New-
0. R. Rule. Separately and together we
have many times talked this subject over and
experimented with ore specimens. Although
the gentlemen mentioned have not personally
inspected this particular deposit, they are so
strong in the belief that this view is the cor-
rect one that I am authorised by them to
publish their names in support of the opinions
hereby advanced. We endeavour to show
how the natural action, which may be seen
going on daily will, however infinitesimal,
slowly and surely accumulate during ages and
produce the result now visible. Doubtless
any such readings will be disappointing to
those who require a cataclysm calling together
all the forces of nature—natural and imaginary
-—with sensational eftects, fire, smoke,
vapours, steam, and all the fearful groanings
of the world in labour, to bring forth an off-
spring, whose wondrous birth, the only
historical parallel in creative miracles, is to be
found detailed in the Rook of Genesis, C hap.
SPECIMENS OBTAINED IN TUNNELS, <C.
In every case the level given is the depth
below the top of the mountain.
No. 5 Tunnel: Level, 140 ft.; length,
167 ft. . ,
Specimen from near entrance: partly de-
composed dyke-stone, largely composed of
quartz, the felspathic portions have evidently
been removed except a small quantity of
kaolin.
Specimen near entrance lying contiguous
to above baud: vesicular quartz matrix full
of kaolin.
Specimen some distance along tunnel:
quartz sand of a creamy lying quite
alongside hard bars of ironstained spongy
silica of aqueous origin.
Specimen about 130 ft. along tunnel: brown
ironstained sand, which runs litre water ; this
is the result of a fine quartz skeleton which
has entirely broken down.
Specimen taken from quite close alongside
above : pieces of dense limonite.
Specimen taken from close alongside the
two previous ones : silicious and coloured
with limonite, and containing some iron
pyrites.
No. 4Crosscut: Level 167 ft.; length, 2-oft.
Specimen : Silica skeleton which once held
pyrites. . .....
Specimen ; Ferruginous specimen ot silica
skeleton with oxide of iron filling up cavities.
Specimen: Silica skeleton, pure white,
light as froth, and in appearance of texture
like cuttle-fish bqne,


Freehold Tunnel: Level, 220 ft.; length, and granular quartz, cavities filled with
800 ft.
Specimen : White cavernous quartz;
structure, large tripe-like cellular forms;
this is evidently the result of infiltration of
silica into cracks and fis ures of other rocks,
such rocks being subsequently removed, leav-
ing quartz skeleton.
Specimen : Cavernous quartz in similar
forms to above, more yellow and ironstained,
with beautiful iridescense of a pale olive and
golden green.
Crosscut, Freehold Tunnel : Level, 220 ft.;
length, 270 ft.
Specimen : Ferruginous clnystoue ; from its
appearance might be mistaken for a lump of
yellow ochre.
No. 1 Tunnel: Level, 253 ft; length,
1100 ft. °
Specimen : Pale blue powder ; sulphate of
copper, near'y pure and, quite soluble in
water; portions of the bottom, sides, and
roof of this tunnel are such that if brushed
lightly it falls like snow ; it is continually
falling by slow degrees, and on the floor is so
thick and soft that one’s footfalls sound as if
the drives were carpeted with soft snow ; the
rocks from which it falls contain sulphate of
iron and sulphate of copper in cavities and as
incrustations.
Specimen ; Silicious metamorphic rock of
peculiarly mottled appearence.
Crosscut No. 1 Tunnel: Level, 253 ft.;
length, 140 ft.
Specimen : Quartz rock densely impregnated
witli iron pyrites ; sometimes the quartz
skeleton cementing and separating the pyrites
grains, is so fine as to be indistinguishable,
and fragile and friable, that when rubbed be-
tween the hands the whole specimen breaks
into coarse crystalline pyrites grains ; in some
places the pyrites is so dense as to look one
mass, as no rock is at all visible; in such a
case were.the pyrites removed the most deli-
cate sponge-like silica skeleton would remain,
light like a feather and fragile as snow.
Road Tunnel: level, 298 ft.; length not
noted, but is from 400 ft. to 500 ft.
Specimen : Cavernous quartz comparatively
dense. A considerable quantity of dense
quartz is visible in this tunnel.
Specimen : Iron-stained silicious skeleton,
spongy and tufa-like.
Specimen : White spongy silica.
Specimen : Decomposed felspathic rock
containing grains of pyrites.
Specimen ; Decomposed felspathic rock con-
taining minute grains of iron pyrites, all
more or less decomposed. Heavy cellular
kaolin.
Specimen : Brown sand, light coffee colour,
coloured by oxide of iron ; resulting from the
decomposition of (? quartzite rock) felspathic
rock.
Specimen : Light spongy quartz, some por-
tions like pumice, and coloured a deep orange
by iron oxide.
Sunbeam Tunnel: Level, 846 ft.; length,
800 ft.
Specimen : Quartz rock, densely impreg-
nated with iron pyrites, the quartz showing
strongly amongst the pyrites.
Sugarloaf Tunnel: Level, 431 ft.; length,
1156 ft.
Specimen: Quartz and iron pyrites, par-
tially decomposed into sulphate of iron ; this
falls on the floor of the tunnel and lies like
snow—greenish in colour.
Specimen : Granular quartz, cavities filled
with kaolin.
Specimen ; Dense kaolin, white claystone.
Specimen ; Quartz rock strongly impreg-
nated with iron pyrites ; in some places the
pyrites is so dense that not a particle of rock
or cementing matter is visible. The decom-
position of this results in brown and cream-
coloured sand, sponge-like silica, or skeleton
quartz.
South Spur Tunnel or “Rip and Tear”:
Level, 460 ft.; length, 645 ft. This tunnel is-
driven along the base of the hill at a small
depth under the surface, the crosscuts are
driven at right angles from it towards the
heart of the mountain, and from these speci-
mens were taken ; the main tunnel is chiefly
in soft clayey materials.
East Crosscut Rip and Tear Tunnel: Level,
460 ft. ; length, 364 ft.
Specimen : Soft claystone.
Specimen : Felsite-porphyry. For about
the first ICO ft. along this crosscut the:
material passed through is a claystone result-
ing from the decomposition of propyritic
rocks; the remainder of the tunnel, about
264 ft., is driven through dense felsite-
porphyry, seemingly without a vein or crack.
Long Crosscut Rip and Tear Tunnel r
Level, 460 ft.
Specimen : Felsite-porphyry.
West Crosscut Rip and Tear Tunnel:
Level, 460 ft.; length, 171 ft.
Specimen : Purple and green mottled clay-
stone, resulting from the decomposition of
felspathic rock.
Specimen : Claystone of dull grey colour,
similarly derived as above specimen.
Surface Workings Benches 1,2, 3, and 4;,


levels cut in steps 35 ft. each. at the base, and 500 ft. high, the quantity of
Specimens ; Several pieces of silicious material absolutely barren of gold is almost
quartz skeleton, coloured with iron oxide,
varying from deep brown coffee-colour to
light yellow, and in density varying from
stuff that could be crumbled in the fingers to
hard heavy material, requiring several blows
of a hammer before fracturing.
Specimens : Pieces of limonite coloured with
the most beautiful rainbow tints and glisten-
ing like jewels.
Specimens : Pieces of ordinary dark brown
lustreless limonite.
Specimens : Ferruginous claystone ; might
from appearance be mistaken for lumps of
yellow ochre.
Specimens : Several pieces of clay stone in
colour from pure white to dull browns and
greys ; decomposed felspathic rocks.
Unfortunately the only plans I can supply
are those attached to the public report of the
Queensland Government Geologist. The ex-
ecutive officials at the mine appear to be
extremely sensitive ot criticism, as they have,
since my visit, refused to supply certain pro-
mised particulars, plans, and drawings, but
to the chairman of the company, Mr. James
Stewart, of Rockhampton, I desire to tender
my thanks for the courtesy and kindness
which he personally showed me.
Any estimate of the present value of Mount
Morgan, or opinion as to the probable per-
manence of the existing state of affairs, to my
mind would be only wild conjecture. If any
persons are at all within an approach of this
knowledge, it is alone they who are possessed
of the results of all assays made during the
course of prospecting. The mining manager
showed me over the property and answer d
questions about the quantity of gold contained
by ores, as revealed by assays, in d'tie rent
parts of the workings and prospecting; all
my information on this point is consequently
hearsay knowledge ; I had neither time or
facilities to make check assays, indeed, any
such work would have been almost entirely
impossible and quite out of my province.
The quantity of rich gold-bearing ore
pointed out to me was certainly very large,
and constitutes reserves of the greatest value,
which could not be exhausted by the present
rate of treatment —from 1000 to 1500 tons
weekly—for some considerable time to come.
The quantity of low-grade ores-that is to
say, value 40s. per ton downwards —pointed
out was enormous, so much so, that it was
almost difficult to see an end to them. And
then, as may be imagined, in a mountain
(perhaps) nine or ten miles in circumference
incalculable.
It is quite a mistake to imagine, as many
do, that even in the auriferous zone of the
mountain the gold is evenly disseminated
throughout the ore. This is not so, and in
this mine gold is found in “shoots”—or any
other term used by miners to indicate these
phenomena—differing in extent and richness
in a similiar manner to the way it is found in
every gold mine that has come within my
knowledge. It is this peculiarity in the de-
position < f gold which renders it extremely
difficult to know how long a “shoot” will
continue, or how soon it will come to an end,
rendering estimates of permanence of go'd
mines somewhat hypothetical, unless the
most systematic prospecting has been carried
on. Working on shoots of gold alone is what
miners understand by the term, “ picking,the
eyes out of the mine.”
The following is part of the plant and
machinery on the property :
There are two ore treating works. One,
the upper works, fixed about 400 ft. down the
mountain ; the other, the lower works, built
near the bank of the creek nearly three-
quarters of a mile away, in a direct line from
the hill top. The upper works are supplied
by ore run to them in small trucks on a 24-in.
or 30-in. gauge tramway. The -ore sent to
the lower works is carried by skips holding
cubic feet each, fixed at intervals of T2oft.
on an overhead wire tramway, in length,
about 1100 yards. There is also an old mill,
nearer the creek bank, close to the lower
works ; this consists of a 10-head stamper
battmy and two berdan pans.
The plant and machinery at the upper (or
“new”) works consist of two Krom’s 14-in.
by 7-in. stonebreakers, one revolving drying
furnace Oft. in diameter by 14ft. long, fitted
with dust Hues, two Krom’s 20-in. by
stonebreakers, two sets of Krom’s belted rolls,
fixed in series of three, of the following
dimensions: No. 1, diameter 26 in. by 16 in.
face; No. 2, diameter 30 in. by 16 in. face;
No. 3, diameter 30 in. by 16 in. face ; hoppers,,
screens, dust Hues, and exhaust fans to com-
plete dust chamber. Trucks to run crushed
ore to furnaces. Eighteen reverberatory
furnaces for roasting ore, 11 ft. long by 10 ft*
wide by 20 in. crown, and 6 ft. outside
measure. Trucks to run roasted ore to the
cooling floor, and from thence to chlorinating
barrels. Twenty-one chlorinating barrels
each to hold 22cwt. of ore. Eighty-four
leaching vats —round tubs, lead lined, with


false bottom and filter bottom, varying in
diameter from 5 ft. to 6ft., and each 4 ft.
deep. Vacuum leaching pumps. Sixty-four
charcoal pyramidal filter boxes 4 ft. by 4 ft.
on top, and 18 in. by 18 in. at bottom, each
o ft. in depth. Two or three reverberatory
furnaces in separate building for burning
charcoal upon which gold has been deposited ;
these arc of similar dimensions to ore-roasting
furnaces. There are two chimney stacks
100 ft. high and 12 ft. square at base. Power
to drive above machinery: Five Cornish
boilers 6 ft. 6 in. in diameter by 26 ft. long;
feed water heated by exhaust steam from
engine. One compound horizontal non-con-
densing 80 horse-power engine, high-pressure
cylinder 20J in. in diameter, low-pressure
cylinder 30in., stroke 33 in., working pres-
sure 601 b. Power transmitted from a 12-ft.
diameter flywheel on engine to a 9-ft. pulley
on the line shaft; one 20 horse-power engine
to drive stonebreakers. Near by is the
sulphuric acid works, constructed so as to
supply 20 tons of acid weekly if necessary.
The plant and machinery at the lower (or
“ old ”) works consist of : Ore bin or hopper
to receive stuffs from skips on wire tram ;
one jaw stonebreaker for rough breaking ; one
drying furnace fitted with dust flues; one
javv stonebreaker for fine breaking. Four
p urs of Krom’s rolls ; No. 1, diameter 20 in.;
No. 2, diameter 20in.; No. 3, diameter 20 in.;
No. 4, diameter 26 in,; hoppers, screens, dust
flues, and exhaust, fan to complete; dust
chamber ; trucks to run on to roasting fur-
naces ; 10 reverberatory roasting furnaces of
same construction and dimensions as those at
upper works; cooling floor; chlorination
works: Ist series, 4 barrels and 16 leaching
vats ; 2nd series, 10 barrels and 10 leaching
vats ; vacuum leaching pumps ; 28 charcoal
filters Power to drive above machinery : 2
Cornish boilers 6 ft. 6 in. in diameter and
26 ft. long ; one 40 horse-power engine, 65 lb. '
working cylinder 22 in. in diameter, 1
stroke 33 in. This engine also drives a saw-
mill. Close to these works there is a machine
shop,_ where brasses, bushes, lead castings,
chlorinating barrels, vats, &c , are made and
general repairs effected. The works are *
lighted by electricity—arc lamps. Owing to
having been promised full and detailed plans 1
of the machinery and works, my notes, espe- 1
cially regarding the lower works, are a’rnost
barre n of dimensions. - t
THIRD ARTICLE.
The manner of working and treating the
ore in vogue at Mount Morgan is as follows :
u At the time of my visit (February, 1890) all
.. the ore sent down for treatment was obtained
r from the cuttings at the top of the mountain ;
. in fact, I believe lam correct in saying, this
a is the only ore which has been treated in bulk.
f Little or no prospecting was being carried on ;
y in No. 5 tunnel some men were employed
; fixing it up where it had fallen in—l remem-
y ber no other work in tunnels.
3 The auriferous portion of the top of the
r mountain had been quarried away, in open
i cuttings, worked in benches. Bench No. 1
; was 32 ft. deep from the crest of the hill;
i No. 2 bench 20 ft. below that; both of these
- benches have been removed, though a barren
■ portion of the mountain top, lying to the
s west, remains. Benches Nos. 3 and 4 are
■ each 35 ft. in depth, leaving the floor of No. 4
a total of 122 ft. below the original crest. All
oyer these floors men were working in different
: places ; some taking down auriferous material
; and tipping it into a central shaft to the tram-
ways, running it to the upper works or send-
ing it to the ore bins feeding the skips on the
overhead wire tramways, supplying the lower
works. Others were filling trucks with barren
stuff', or stuff containing less than lOdwt. of
gold to the ton, and these were run along a
tramway leading through a tunnel to the
west, or back of the mountain, where it was
shot down a gorge. Barren stuff, medium
stuff, and lOdwt. stuff all go together indis-
criminately, just as it happened to be run out
in the trucks. At the time of my visit there
was (perhaps) over a million tons shot down
the valley ; it is difficult to make a correct
estimate of a heap of “mullock” so tipped.
I quote from my notes, made on the stage
high above the tip head, from the dictation
of the mining manager, “ the whole bulk
would average about 7 dwt. to the ton, thou-
sands of tons would go lOdwt.” In order
that the ore considered fit to treat may be
distinguished from that of the grade thrown
away, assays of samples are being continually
made, and it is by observing the results of
these assays that the selection is made.
Roughly, the manipulation is as follows:
U hen delivered from the trucks or skips
all the ore passes through coarse stonebreakers,
from there through drying furnaces, thence
through fine st mebreakers, then direct to rolls
where it is ground so as to pass through
36-mesh screens. It is then harrowed or
trucked to roasting furnaces, dumped through
a hole in the roof, and calcination is carried
on for several hours; the red-hot ore is then
harrowed out on to cooling floors, where it is
left for three or four days. While still so hot


•as to convert into steam any liquids or niois- gold per ton, barely one-quarter of the cou-
ture remaining in the chlorinating barrels, tents were saved. The ordinary “ Plattner ”
these receptacles are filled with it, together vat method was tried, and did not give as
with the customary proportions of chloride good results as this most inefficient amalga-
AT imp finrl Qlimhnnp ar*in Pl-.lnnno in n iiaa.j*• ,1 • • . .
with the customary proportions of chloride
of lime and sulphuric acid. Chlorination is
carried on until considered complete, the
barrels are opened, and the excess of gas
hisses from under the manhole covers like
escaping steam, fills the shed, and drives all
the workmen away until the wind blows the
place clear. Then the barrels are emptied
into fixed open vats, the liquor continuing to
give off chlorine gas ; this gas-laden liquor is
pumped direct into charcoal filters, where the
carbon may, as best it can, break up the gold
chloride and precipitate the metal. The now
acid-charged liquor which passes through the
•charcoal filters is pumped to a receptacle and
used over and over again in the chlorinating
barrels. The residues in the vats, when suffi-
ciently leached, are dug out with shovels and
harrowed to the tailing heaps. The auriferous
charcoal is burnt in a reverberatory furnace,
and the ashes collected and fused. In this
manner is the gold extracted from the Mount
Morgan ore.
This method of treatment is certainly
capable of very considerable improvement.
Every pound of ore treated is put through
the stonebreakers, and as a very large propro-
tion of this ore (perhaps 50 per cent), is already
in a condition as fine as sand, if it were first
passed over grizzlies (Le.) screened), the work
of the breakers would be facilitated, improved,
and reduced.
The necessity for roasting tire Mount
Morgan ore is solely in order that it may be
•dehydrated, and out of the whole bulk so
treated it is only the now comparatively
limited proportion of limonite which actually
requires it, although all the ore would be the
better of a rapid passing through a dehydrator
■to prevent sliminess in the leaching vats.
According to M. Berthier, limonite derived
from the decomposition of iron pyrites con-
tains some 10"3 per cent of water ; in this
hydrous ore even the most impalpably fine
gold grains are found to have an impervious
coating of hydrous oxide of iron ; it is for the
purpose of liberating the gold kernel that this
shell has to be cracked by fire. So far as is
known at present a fire method is the most
efficient; mechanical stamping or grinding is
entirely ineffective. I learned, from reliable
sources, that in the early attempts to treat
this ore, when working almost entirely on
limonite, that with the most careful treatment
in a complicated amalgamating plant, with
ore containing by assay from 6 oz. to 8 oz. of
mation. At one time in the history of the
mine some 20,000 tons of material were
stacked, all of which had been previously
treated, and then it contained by assay some
6 oz. of gold to the ton. So ineffective had
the vat chlorination proved that the manage-
ment would not listen to any proposal which
was based upon the lines of chlorination. But
with the practice of dehydrating the limonite
all this was changed, and vat chlorination—
though slower—gave as accurate results as any
other system.
The system of calcination and order of
crushing in vogue is certainly costly, and may
even be described as wasteful. An ore crushed
to an almost impalpable powder is passed
from one set of rolls to another, carried on
belts, sucked through pipes, filled into barrows
or trucks, and wheeled from one place of
treatment to another, eventually dumped into
a reverberatory furnace? lift. long by 10ft.
broad, and laid in a bed about 6 in. deep to
be calcined. In consequence of this method
the dust-laden air of Mount Morgan is so
dense that it can be said truly the men work
in a golden atmosphere. The roads are a
grey-red ; the roofs are grey-red ; the trees,
leaves, grass, and stones are grey-red; white
men, white horses, white cats and dogs, and
even white cocks and hens, show the prevail-
ing tinge. We all know how a sunbeam fall-
ing aslant a shadow reveals the quantity of
dust carried by the air; but this atmosphere
requires no sunbeams to light up the dust it
carries, it can be seen as described, and inside
the works felt in the mouth and nostrils. All
this impalpably fine dust contains gold to a
far higher degree than the average of the ore
treated ; in the same way that slimes in wet
methods assay to a higher value than the ore
from which they result. The Mount Morgan
limonite simply requires heating to a cherry-
red so as to render it sponge-like; the tem-
perature must not be raised too high, or the
sponge shrinks and the pores close. Again,
if the temperature is raised a little further,
the oxide of iron unites with the silica with
which it i£ impregnated, and the ore begins
to slag. Unlike the roasting of pyritous ores,
heated air passing through the furnace does
not rapidly become vitiated, so that the sooner
it is got rid of the better, yet no furnaceman
that I ever heard of would attempt the roast-
ing of pyritous ores with a shorter reverbera-
tory floor than from 35 ft. to 40 ft.; yet, in


the Mount Morgan furnaces, where all the
heat obtainable from the fire may be utilised
without detriment, only such heat is made
use of as that which can be taken while
moving along a passage-way of 11 ft.; then it
at once goes into flues leading up the chimney
into the open air. With a furnace so con-
structed rabbling becomes a work of great
difficulty. Little knowledge is required to
know that to crush ore to fine dust and then
lay it in a bed about 6 in. deep upon the flat
floor of a reverberatory furnace in order to
roast it, is to put that ore into a condition
inconsistent with economical, efficient, and
rapid calcination.
Many of the foregoing difficulties might be
avoided, and also much expense, if the ore,
broken by a stonebreaker to lumps about the
size of a hen’s egg, was passed through a
properly constructed Krom’s kiln, or other
like contrivance, where it would not only be
dried but actually which is the
whole point in these costly and cumbersome
calcining furnaces. The balance-sheet for the
last half-year of 1889 shows £1 2s. sd. per
ton as the proportion of cost chargeable to
furnaces and chlorination —to allow one-half
of that for chlorination should be ample. The
previous half-year’s working resulted in a
cost of £2 ss. Oud as a total cost of ore treat-
ment ; the proportion then chargeable to fur-
naces and chlorination -would be higher.
With the treatment of 38,415 tons in a half-
year it is easy to see what enormous saving
could be made if the cost of dehydration was
reduced to a minimum. At the upper works
300 tons of firewood are consumed weekly ;
how much of this quantity is consumed in the
boilers, and at the sulphuric acid works, I
cannot say, but in all probability the propor-
tion is not lai’ge. All these furnaces should
be superseded ; they are simply dust-making
machines. Even were they necessary they
are capable of considerable amendment.
Dehydration prior to crushing would render
the matter more easy. The balance-sheet
gives the proportion of cost chargeable to
crushing at the extremely high figure of
7s. sd. per ton ; especially, taking into con-
sideration the fact that a large proportion of
the ore is in sizes like fine sand before it goes
near the crushers. As nearly 40,000 tons of
ore are crushed in the half-year, there is a
large figure to come and go upon when making
even a small reduction per ton. Dehydra-
tion before crushing would also reduce the
dust difficulty. Dust from calcined material
is cleaner, sharper, and falls with at least
double the rapidity of dust from uncalcined
matter—let any one try the experiment with
dust from dry brick clay and dust from a
burnt brick. At present there is a system of
flues and fans to draw the dust into chambers,
where it is supposed to settle ; but, notwith-
standing tall chimneys, it may be seen con-
tinually passing away from the top like thin
grey smoke. At one time at these Mount
Morgan works moist steam was passed into
the chamber to make the dust settle, but as it
made everything into a hopeless clog the
steam method was abandoned. Dr. Percy,
in one of his earliest writings, said that this
was the rudimentary idea of man when en-
deavouring to allay fumes, and that the
rudimentary man tries it once, but never
again. What is the Londoner’s choking
yellow fcg but vapours and soot particles
moistened by aqueous vapour ; they condense
and gather low, but never settle. Mr. J.
Cosmo Newbery’s advice, in his laboratory
report for the Mines Department, Victoria,
might here be followed with advantage.
“In connection with calcination, the sub-
ject of the collection of volatile products,
dust, and fumes, is of great importance, and
the centrifugal machine may be again used
with advantage. A machine has been devised
for collecting the dust from flour mills, which
might be easily adapted to metallurgical
works, and do away with the necessity for
tall chimneys, dust chambers, long flues, &c.,
and at the same time save all the products of
the furnaces, which are now carried away sus-
pended in the atmosphere. In it they receive
direction and velocity, and are delivered
through a slit in the periphery. Opposite to
the slit in the centrifugal, and separated from
it only by a narrow space, is another slit or
opening into a closed box. The velocity im-
parted to the solid particles by the centrifugal
action of the machine throws them across the
space between the two slits, and once they
enter the closed box there can be no return,
as the machine keeps a strong air pressure
against the opening ; and all the compounds
of arsenic, antimony, lead, zinc, and other
solid fumes would be easily collected in this
way ; and it is more than probable that the
sulphur of the ore may be saved by a similar
contrivance. When pyritous ore is calcined
in the ordinary furnace sulphurous anhydride
(SO a ), and ferric oxide (Fe,, 0 3 ) are formed,
and when SO.- is passed over freshly made
ferric oxide with air and moisture, sulphuric
acid is the resultant. This is a well-known
lecture-table experiment.”
To the importance of giving the closest
attention to the dust difficulty the practice.


in one particular, lately in vogue in the
Mount Morgan works will point. The fur-
nace fires are made with wood, and until
about nine months ago it had been the prac-
tice to throw the ashes away. It occurred,
however, to the mining manager to have the
ashes assayed, when to his surprise they were
found to contain gold varying in quantity
from 6dw T t. up to IJoz. per ton. This wood
does not come in contract with the crushed
ore ; it is only such dust as may be carried
into the grate with a black-splash when a
charge is being dumped into a furnace, or
wafted back when the dampers are too closely
shut and the draught comes out of the fur-
nace door, that falls on this ash, or any such
sprinkling of dust as may fail on the few
billets heaped ready for firing lying near the
furnace door when a charge of ore is being
withdrawn, or any of such atmospheric dust
as may fall on the wood heap outside, that
carries gold to this firewood ; yet so impor-
tant, the attention to this channel for waste
that all the furnace wood ashes are now put
through the old battery. For some time the
average of the return has been : For an ex-
penditure of 30s. hi the total cost of collec-
tion, cartage, labour, power supplied, crush-
ing, and amalgamating, See., a net result of
84s. Bd. worth of gold is obtained. The
plant by which these ashes are treated is :
The 10-head battery originally in use when
Mount Morgan was first opened ; about 8 ft.
of amalgamated copper plates, and 16 ft. of
blanket strakes to each 5-head. The blanket-
ings are further ground and amalgamated in
two Berdan pans. -A return of 84s. Bd. for an
expenditure of 30s. must be considered re-
markably good, for the gold on the ash cannot
be other than impalpably fine. These results
might suggest that the old boots and clothing
of the furnace men and chlorinators would be
worth treating.
FOURTH ARTICLE.
When the red-hot ore is removed from the
furnaces it is wheeled into a cooling floor a
few yards distant, and under the same roof.
It there gives off its heat, but for days after
the surface has become a dark purple. If
broken with a shovel the ore beneath is still
found to be glowing. The ore beds are never
sprinkled with water, nor is any artifical
means adopted to hasten cooling or prevent
the rising of dust. The hot dust rising in
this building and the decomposition of the
salts in the ore, which on cooling gives off the
suffocating vapours commonly ascribed to
burnt air, render the place almost intolerable
to workmen. From these hot beds of ore
iron, wheelbarrows are filled and wheeled up
inclined planks to the charging hoppers fixed
above the chlorinating barrels. The ore is
then run into the barrel, moist from the last
chlorination or with some liquors still remain-
ing, then in many cases begins a fight be-
tween the steam generated in the barrel try-
ing to get out, and the fine hot dust being
poured down the shoot trying to get in ;
more auriferous dust rising like clouds of
smoke follows this method of filling. It is re-
puted to be necessary to restrict the size of
the manholes or openings in the barrels to
their present extremely modest dimensions
owing to the construction being of wood,
hence the steam and dust difficulty is aug-
mented.
The general practice in barrel chlorination
is to first put in the charge of acid, then the
ore, and last of all before closing the barrel
the chloride of lime and water. At Mount
Morgan the procedure is reversed. After a
small sprinkling of hot ore, acid is poured
into the barrel, and a charge of chloride of
lime (unmixed with ore) is dumped in.
When any acid liquors remain in the barrel'
from the previous charge and come into con-
tact with this chloride of lime, chlorine gas is
at once generated, which in common with
steam evinces a desire to escape from out of
the same small charging hole through which
the hot ore is endeavouring to enter. In
cases where there are no liquors to evolve
chlorine gas, the chloride of lime has certain
vicissitudes to pass through before it can give
up a portion of its contents for the purpose of
dissolving gold. The hot ore upon which this
chlorine of li re lies and the streams of hot
ore pouring in upon it, in part decompose it,,
render it proportionately valueless, and form
chlorates and chlorides of calcium, which are
unnecessary and detrimental auxiliaries in
the process of chlorination. When a barrel
is filled to the desired capacity with ore,
additional complication and difficulties are
crowded, in with astonishing rapidity in the-
shape of volumes of acid-charged water which
has been used over and over again in the pro-
cess. The purer the water and the more
moderate the temperature, the more rapidly
and effectively may barrel chlorination be
carried out. At the Mount Morgan Works
the water, which is carefully saved to be
used again and again, is highly charged with
salts—mostly chlorides and sulphates of
calcium, sodium, and iron—and it is rarely at
a temperature less than from 80° to 90° Fahr.,
at which temperature elementary text-books
of chemistry state that even pure water will


absorb chlorine, whilst the presence of gold was taken out, dried, and weighed,
salts in water renders even at a slightly lower when it was found to have lost ‘Ol9 grain,
temperature a partial absorption almost an
impossibility. Therefore, the gold-dissolving
agency provided in these barrels, is the
volume of compressed chlorine gas, which
gathers above the liquids, through which the
wet sludge is occasionally splashed as the
vessels are revolved ; of course if this process
were continued for a sufficient length of time
all gold contents would eventually be dis-
solved even were the grains the size of
marbles. I understand that it is the practice
at Mount Morgan to “water” the high-
grade ores {i.e. , to mix with poor ore) and
reduce all to an even value. Why this should
be so I have not yet been able to learn or
imagine, except perhaps it follows as a con-
sequent necessity the reduction of the dissolv-
ing medium available in their barrels. The
quantities of chemicals used in treating a
charge of ore weighing 22cwt., vary from
.25 lb. to 40 lb. of chloride of lime of commerce
—bleaching salt —and 30 lb. to 35 lb. of
sulphuric acid of 1 - 60 specific gravity, or 70
cent of H 2 S0 4 , pure acid. I have known of
gold to the extent of 40 oz. to be extracted
from a 1-ton charge at the United Pyrite
'Works at Sandhurst; no trouble was ex-
perienced, only the usual time and quantity
of chemicals were consumed.
A better illustration cannot be given than
that contained in the investigations of Mr.
Newbery of the widely divergent results
existing when work is carried on under con-
■ ditions approaching accuracy, and those when
well-known and ascertained truths are disre-
garded (see laboratory reports, Victorian
Mining Department, referring to Victorian
work) “Of methods for the extractions of
gold by chemical means, that known as barrel
chlorination is giving the best results. How-
ever, some workers have a difficulty in ex-
tracting successfully the gold from ore con-
taining more than 5 oz. to the ton. Some
trials were made, first in the laboratory and
. subsequently on a large scale at Daylesford,
;and no difficulty was experienced even in
treating ore containing 20 oz. The best and
most rapid results were obtained when the
water was limited to an amount just sufficient
to thoroughly moisten the ore. The follow-
ing are some experiments tried at the labora-
tory to show the influence of excess of water
on the action of chlorine on gold :
“1. 1 ’396 grains of gold (sheet) were
placed in a bottle and then covered with a
saturated solution of chlorine and allowed to
.stand one hour, at the end of which time the
which is equal to I’3 per cent.
“2. UO6 grains of sheet gold were treated
the same as No. 1, with the exception that
the gold was exposed to a moist atmosphere
of chlorine ; at the end of the hour it weighed
•779 grain, which is equal to 26 5 per cent
lost.
“In the above experiments a button of pure
gold was rolled, and contiguous pieces taken
for the two experiments. Further experi-
ments with pressure and elevation of tem-
perature are still being conducted, and I
expect to be able to demonstrate that both
will be needed in a perfect chloriuator.
These data seem to prove that the ore should
be simply moist, and that an elevation of
temperature was an advantage instead of
being detrimental as in the present barrel
methods.”
The above are only two out of very many
experiments made—being present myself
during the process of some of them—the re-
sults of all teach a similar lesson to the above.
I cannot see how the Mount Morgan practice
would give even as good a result as 1 - 3 per
cent—the result of experiment No. I—for in
this experiment pure water was used, which
absorbed chlorine gas, and in the former, as
already shown, with high temperatures and
waters charged with salt, but little chlorine
gas could be taken up by the water ; that por-
tion remaining undissolved would collect out-
side it as a cushion of gas between the liquor
and the sides of the barrel.
As before stated, the barrels are made of
wood. In the early days of barrel chlorina-
tion at this mine some wrought iron lead-
lined barrels were tried, but being too slight
for the internal pressure they bulged and
had to be cast aside. Instead of making
others of stouter metal, ironwork was con-
demned as not being the thing, and wood
was substituted ; the economy in this depar-
ture was thought highly of. They are now
made of ironbark staves 3 in. thick with ends
of 4 in. material; the dimensions are outside
5 ft. 4 in. by 3 ft. 6 in. in diameter, inside
4ft. Gin. by 3ft. in diameter ; there are six
bands of Sin. by J in. iron shrunk around the
parallel sides, and a cast iron X crosshead
with short trunnion is fixed on to each end ;
the whole is thickly smeared with pitch out-
side. Some of these vessels last from ten to
twelve months, others fail after four or five
months’ wear ; the wood wears away to about
half an inch in thickness, then a stave bursts
out, scattering desolution and auriferous slush


over everything near. I understand it costs
about £6 to replace the woodwork of a barrel.
The economy in using these wooden chlorina-
tors is, to my mind, somewhat visionary.
When original cost is taken, together with at
least yearly renewals ; the value of the gold-
bearing sludge showered over everything like
so much brown oxide paint ; the small faulty
charging holes and consequent time lost in
filling and emptying daily, also prevention
of filling with anything but dry ore, w'hich
will run like water ; and the time lost and
cost of cleaning up after an explosion, &c.;
make it seem as if a properly constructed
wrought-iron lead-lined barrel would in the
end be cheaper—the danger of explosion from
a wooden barrel should also be considered.
A modern iron lead-lined barrel costs, I be-
lieve, about £5O, but they last for years, and
with most moderate care do not get out of
order. At the United Pyrites Works at
Sandhurst one has been in use for about six
years, day and night, with hardly ever a
stoppage, and the manager assured me it was
as good as the day it w as put up.
Fixed vats under the barrels cause much
labour in digging out and wheeling away of
the tailings. At the Ravenswood Chlorina-
tion Works (Queensland) everything is
automatic, from the time the cold damped
ore from the cooling floor is filled into the
lifts feeding the hoppers above the chlorina-
tion barrels. The stuff is never touched
again ; the barrels are filled automatially ;
they discharge automatically into tipping vats
beneath, which when leached are turned over
in about ten seconds with a screw gear by one
man giving a handle three-quarters of a turn,
then a small stream of water from a hose
w'ashes the residue away.
To facilitate leaching, the method at
Mount Morgan is to use a vacuum pump, but
owing to the nature of the material an
average of fifteen hours is occupied in leach-
ing every 22cwt. of ore. I believe that a
little experiment in the practical application
of a centrifugal was her would entirely re-
volutionise this step in the process, and re-
duce the cost. Quoting again from Mr. New-
bery, who is throwing much light upon im-
provements in chlorination :
“ Another difficulty has been the separation
of the chloride of gold solution from the finely
divided ore, and several new types of filter-
pumps have been devised, but I think the
most efficient method of all will be found in
the centrifugal machine. We found we could
get perfect w'ashing in a high-speed centri-
fugal, with a top delivery for the solution..
After the first liquid has been removed fresh
water is added, and then a brake is applied
to retard the motion ; the water continues at
the high speed, and washes down the sand
and slime from the periphery ; increased
speed immediately throws the washed solid
particles back and delivers the water bright
and clear.”
At the Mount Morgan Works, as at all
others, when the liquor is drawn from the
leaching vats it is redolent wdth the vapours
of chlorine. As all observant workers in
chlorination know, an auriferous liquor con-
taining free chlorine running into a charcoal
filter already charged with gold will redis-
solve the gold already deposited on the char-
coal, and, if connected, will carry it away
through a second, even to a third filter, until
all the free chlorine is spent, then the gold
will re deposit itself. To obviate this the
usual practice is to nearly boil the leached
liquors by running a steam pipe into their
receptacle, and thus drive off the free
chlorine. At Mount Morgan, where there is
only one filter bed through which the liquors
have to pass before being considered free
from gold, no method is adopted for dissipat-
ing the free chlorine. This surprised me
greatly, especially when told that it was not
necessary ; on inquiring further, it was stated
that in cold weather the liquors were warmed
to improve the deposition of gold on the char-
coal. As the w r aste liquors are used over and
over again, it perhaps accounts for the even-
tual catching of the gold; of course with a
water highly charged with salts not the same-
heating is required as with comparatively
pure water, the latter containing so much
more of the dissolving agent. In any case
these charcoal filters are a relic of the past*
and should all be swept away together with
their furnaces, and more modern practice in-
troduced. There are now several methods of
collecting gold from auriferous liquor which are
without doubt more rapid, effective, and pre-
ferable than deposition on charcoal. For
instance, sulphide of copper filters as recom-
mended by the State Mineralogist, Cal. State
Mining Bureau.
“ . . . . a better way would be to let
the gold solution flow slowly through a series
of small filters containing the sulphide*
When the copper sulphide in the first filter
is almost entirely replaced by gold, that filter
must be emptied, refilling with copper
sulphide, and replaced as the last of the
series, the former second becoming first, and
so on. ”


Miners
130
.. 7s. 6d. to 8s. 4d.
Millmen
112
.. 8s.
Furnacemen ..
215
.. 8s.
Chlorinators ...
202
.. 8s.
Labourers
96
.. 7s. 6d. to 9s.
Mechanics
55
.. 8s. to 12s.
Carpenters
IS
.. 11s.
Electric light ..
6
.. 10s. (average.)
Acid works
5
.. 8s.
Wire overhead tram..
0
.. 8s.
Roadmakers ..
12
.. 7s. Od. to 8 s. 4d.
Ore Treated.
Per Ton. Amount.
tons cwt. qr.
£
s.
d. £
s.
(I.
Minin"
at
0
2
11 = 5,639
8
11
Dry crashing:
39,925 8 2
at
0
7
5 =14,820 17
7
Furnaces and
chlorination
38,415 10 0
1
2
5 =43,040
4
0
General ex-
penses
38,415 10 0
V»
0
0
0J =11,618
16
8
Mr. Newbery also recommends a somewhat
■similar procedure.
“ The separation of gold by means of char-
coal filters has not been found altogether satis-
factory, and vvc have found that the cen-
trifugal machine here again is useful. The
gold precipitated by sulphate of iron, and in
suspension, is immediately sent to the
machine, and it is completely separated from
the liquid almost as fast as it can be run in.
Other filters may be substituted for charcoal
with advantage ; a filter made of spongy iron
discs, or the same of sulphide of copper,
answers well; chloride of gold coming into
contact with either is immediately decom-
posed, depositing spongy gold. No chloride
of gold will pass through the first disc until
nearly the whole of the re-agent is dissolved.
When the discs are removed, any remaining
base metal may be easily dissolved by placing
them in an acid bath for a few minutes.
This arrangement of a series of filter discs will
prevent a loss of gold of which some workers
•complain, and which seems to baffle them.
When gold is deposited in the ordinary char-
coal filter light particles are very liable to be
carried away, for it must be remembered that
the gold is in extremely fine films, and as the
charcoal upon which they are deposited is
used up, they may be set free and carried
away by the filter and lost; the filter having
been so open that the w r ater will pass
through it, there is little chance of gold being
arrested.”
Personally I am strongly in favour of the
centrifugal separator wherever anything like
a quantity of auriferous liquor has to be
treated ; its action is more like magic than
the working of a simple mechanical law.
These criticisms have run into far greater
length than originally intended, but the fact
being that almost every step of the process
used at Mount Morgan is so primitive, that if
mentioned at all more modern practice and
improvements must be suggested, and, with-
out practical details, any such suggestions
would be valueless.
Over 800 men are employed by the Mount
Morgan G. M. Company, the wages sheet
showing the subdivisions as follows :
WAGES SHEET.—FEBRUARY, 1890
Classification. Number Rate of Wages
employed. per day of S hrs.
Boys are paid from 3s. to 7s. 6d. per day.
In addition to the above, there are
number of men working on contract system —
such as firewood getting, charcoal burning,
&c. If all these could be entered in the
books they would show the actual number
employed for the work of the mine to be
about 1000. The price paid to contract men
for firewood is Bs. per ton of 5-ft. lengths and
9s. per ton for 4-ft. lengths, stacked in the
depots.
The executive staff is not large, being com-
posed of the general manager of the company,
resident at the mine, a mining manager, a
mechanical engineer, three or four assayers,
a book-keeper, and a few clerks, and a store-
keeper ; then of course there are the bosses in
the different sheds and sub-divisions and
gangers at the machines and at the mine.
The head office of the company is at Rock-
hampton, where a staff of clerks work under
the direction of Mr. Hollyoake Woodd, the
secretary of the company, to whom I am in-
debted for pamphlets, figures as to pay-
sheets, general statements of accounts, &c. I
had not the pleasure of meeting the general
manager of the company, he being absent
from the district, so I had not the oppor-
tunity of exchanging ideas with that gentle-
GENERAL STATEMENTS.
During the first half-year of 1880 the total
cost per ton of ore treated was £2 ss. (Hd.,
arrived at by dividing the total expenditure
by the quantity of ore put through.
For the last half of 1889 the details are as
follows :
Expenditure for ha If wear Total 75,169 7 2
Equalling cost of ore treated, £1 18s. 9£d.;
a reduction of 6s. 3d. per ton on the cost
during the previous half-year.
BRIEF HISTORY.
First discovered and worked as a gold mine
in about the year 1883 or 1884 by the Morgan
Brothers, great secrecy was observed as to
returns until stories of fabulous wealth lying
there hidden were circulated a year or two
later. Then a selling of shares to a syndicate
at a price valuing the mine at about


£lOO,OOO ; then further re-selling of syndicate
shares at prices valuing the mine from
£250,000 to £350,000. Nothing was publicly
known of the returns until floated into a
public liability company, during about the
middle of 1886, at a capital of £1,000,000
with 1,000,000 shares value £1 each ; at the
time this was considered a most audacious pro-
ceeding. The shares gradually rose in value
until eventually a craze set in and sales were
made at figures above £l7 each ; they then
went down very rapidly to about £5 each.
Printed at the Bulletin Office, Rockhampton.
In 1886 the dividends paid amounted to
£33,333 6s. Bd.; in 1887 dividends were
£250,000 ; in 1888 dividends were £275,000 ;
the dividends daring 1889 amounted to
£1,100,000. Since being fioatedlnto a public
company, and up to the middle of 1891, about
£2,000,000 sterling has been distributed in
dividends, and at that time shares were
valued something over £7 each.


