



THE
JBuffalo pi ateau
Running in a direction generally parallel to the eastern coast line
of the great island Continent of Australia is a lofty chain of mountains
—the Great Dividing Range, otherwise designated the Australian Alps—
and stretching from tropical Queensland in the north to temperate Vic-
toria in the south.
Although Australia cannot boast of an awe-inspiring Mount Blanc,
with snow-capped summit and yawning crevasses, the scenery of the
Australian Alps is of commanding interest and a delight to tourists.
In winter, when Mount Bogong, the highest summit in Victoria (6,508
feet above sea level), and the lower peaks “ Hotham,” 6,100 feet;
“ Buller,” 5,811 feet; and “Buffalo,” with its “Hump,” 5,000 feet,
and “ The Horn,” 5,645 feet, are clothed in a mantle of white, the truly
Alpine conditions justify the appellation of “The Switzerland of
Australia. ’ ’
The best months of the year in which to see the mountains in their
winter garb are from July to September, though snow is visible on
Bogong and other very high points during the greater part of the year.
The only portion of the mountain range of the North-Eastern dis-
trict of Victoria with which it is proposed to deal in these notes is
the Buffalo Plateau, and it can safely be asserted that at any season of
the year this unique tableland offers special attractions to the tourist,
the artist, or the botanist.
This magnificent wonderland of natural beauty and superb scenic
attractions is accessible by a very fine road constructed by the Public
Works Department, and opened for traffic on the 9th October, 1908.
Coaches run from Bright to the Plateau (20 miles), passing Pore-
punkah, crossing the Buckland River on the newly-formed road at a
point a short distance below the Eurobin Falls.
Soon after passing the Buffalo Falls Hotel, at a turn in the road
a magnificent view of the far-famed Buffalo Gorge and Falls is obtained,
the Eurobin Creek and bridge forming a very pretty picture with the
Falls in the far distance.
Reached by an easy walk along the creek above the bridge are the
Eurobin Falls, formed by the water which flows from the surface of the
Plateau through a deep glen known as the Haunted Gorge, and which
are really a couple of separate falls with a connecting basin between
the upper and lower. On the course of the Falls Creek, as the stream
flowing from the foot of the Buffalo Gorge is called, occurs another


beautiful fall known as the Ladles’ Bath. This fall is about 40 feet
deep into a rocky basin, and is distant a couple of hundred yards from
the Eurobin Falls.
A short distance after crossing the bridge a finger post on the-
roadside indicates a path leading along the bank of the Falls Creek to
a cavern under the overhanging ledge of the Ladies’ Bath Falls, from
THE LADIES’ BATH FALLS, EUBOBIN
the interior of which some idea of the immense power of the water may
be gained. Returning to the coach and proceeding now along the
western bank of the Eurobin Creek, the gradually ascending road turns
the flank of the spur of the range, and continues along its northern
face for some distance, every turn affording an outlook over fresh
country till Mackey’s Lookout (3,600 feet) is reached, from which
point a magnificent panoramic view is obtained, embracing the valleys
of the Eurobin Creek, the Ovens and Buckland Rivers, and the lower
hills of the Australian Alps, from Bogong to Hotham, in the back-
ground, and even on a clear day extending to distant Kosciusko.
Turning sharply from here, the road passes through granite country
past Morgan’s Lookout, along the western face of the range, in full
sight of the North Buffalo and overlooking the valley of the Buffalo
Creek, until the summit is attained. The track then traverses a small


plain, crosses the bridge spanning the creek whose waters form the
Buffalo Falls, and terminates at the main entrance to the Government
Chalet, erected at an elevation of 4,590 feet above sea level.
Within a short distance of this commodious building, on the flat
surface of an enormous granite boulder, a metal breast-work has been
constructed overlooking the stupendous chasm of the Buffalo Gorge.
From this outlook, at the lip of the gorge, which is at a height of
THE MONOLITH AND LOOKOUT
4,500 feet, the visitor gazes in mute admiration. Eighty-five miles;
distant is faintly outlined Kosciusko (7,328 feet), the highest peak in
Australia. In the middle distance stands Bogong, and to the right
Mounts Fainter, Feathertop, and Hotham. Ridge upon ridge of moun-
tain ranges stretch away into the dim and distant purple, the snow-
capped peaks relieving the darker hues of the lower hills. Imme-
diately below are the Eurobin Falls, and in the Buckland Valley the
winding road is plainly discernible. This valley, in which the influence
of droughts is unknown, is dotted with smiling farms.
On the left hand side the ravine shows a serried cliff of barren rock,,
where 1,600 feet below giant gums appear as shrubs. On the right
the rocks are more broken, their faces are covered with mosses and
lichens, and here and there heathy scrub and stunted trees cling like
limpets to the interstices of the boulders, while, tumbling with a roar
into the abyss below, the water is tossed into spray, flashing in the
sunlight and displaying beautiful rainbow effects.


A formed road runs In a south-westerly direction from the Chalet
and leads to the Horn, the highest point of the plateau (5,615 feet),
and passes at a distance of three-quarters of a mile the newly-con-
structed Buffalo Lake, 60 acres in extent, surrounded by wooded hills
which slope to the water’s edge. The following points of interest are
then passed in succession:—Lyre-bird Hill, the Leviathan Rock, an
isolated monolith, estimated to contain 30,000 tons of granite, 75 feet
high, 150 feet long, and 60 feet broad, which rests on a base of 6 feet,
and under which a small army could shelter. Then follow Le Souef’s
Peak, 5,110 feet, and a little further on a by-track leads to the
Cathedral Rock, under which a shout is repeated four-fold. Afte;
trying the weird effect of this echo a visit should be paid to the Hump,
an elevated peak on the plateau. From the Hump to the Horn is
about an hour’s fair travelling, and from the latter’s summit, about
5,615 feet above the sea, the most comprehensive view of North-
Eastern Victoria may be gained. To see the sun rise on Chamouni is
reckoned one of the sights of the European Alps, but sunrise as viewed
from the Horn will bear favorable comparison with the famous
spectacle. In the early dawn the valleys are often filled with mists,
which, wind tossed, beat against the bases of the hills and suggest the
THE FROZEN LAKE
billows of an angry sea. The total distance from the Chalet to the
Horn is about 6 miles, but many shorter excursions may be made to
various interesting points, notably to the Monolith, with its specially
constructed lookout breast-work, to Edinboro’ Castle (1,600 feet), “Og,
Gog, and Magog,” and Eagle Point; to Mount Dunn (1,386 feet), or,
farther still, to Anderson’s Peak, on the North Buffalo (5,100 feet).
The roads and tracks shown on accompanying plan are well defined,
and places of interest are indicated by finger-posts.


For the enjoyment of tourists, golf links have been formed, and
this popular sport may be enjoyed under unique conditions at an eleva-
tion of between 4,000 and 5,000 feet.
Boats are also provided on Lake Buffalo, and by the erection of
bathing boxes for both sexes on the bank of the lake, special facilities
for bathing are afforded, neck to knee costume being insisted upon.
ACCOMMODATION FOR TOURISTS
Visitors may secure accommodation at the Government Chalet
situated close to the edge of the Buffalo Gorge, a newly erected estab-
lishment built especially with a view to comfortable housing of
tourists. It is sewered on the septic tank system and lighted with air
gas. The principal rooms are large and lofty, and there are special
apartments reserved for smoke rooms and sitting rooms. Postal and
THE GOVERNMENT CHALET.
telegraphic facilities are afforded in the building. The Tariff charged
is Bs. per day or £2 10s. per week. In the summer season especially
it is advisable to apply for rooms early in order to avoid disappoint-
ment. Correspondence should be addressed to the lessee, Mr. J. Newton,
who has also a number of floored tents available for those who prefer
to sleep under canvas.
Accommodation is also provided for visitors by Mr. Carlisle,
Buffalo Hospice, at 425., and at Mrs. Manfield’s Buffalo Bungalow, at
425. per week.
For the convenience of campers two camping places have been
established, one near the Monolith, adjoining the main road, the other
near the Horn.
The fee for permit to camp on Mount Buffalo is 2s. 6d. per week for
one tent containing not more than four persons.
For the convenience of persons making a short stay, Mr. J.
McKinnon, Crown Lands Bailiff, will let 6ft. x Bft. tents at the rate of
2s. 6d. per week.


At the appointed camping grounds, fire-places, water and wood are
provided, and visitors are required to keep the camp in sanitary con-
dition, and burn or cover all litter before departing.
BOATING ON LAKE BUFFALO.
Visitors camping on the mount must take their own provisions and
other requisites, or make local arrangements for supplies, which may
be purchased from Mr. Newton, lessee of the Chalet, at a slight advance
on store prices.
RAIL AND COACH SERVICES AND FARES.
Trains leave Melbourne for Porepunkah or Bright on four mornings
a week (Monday, Wednesday, Thursday, and Saturday), and on Tuesday
and Friday afternoons the Albury express connects at Wangaratta with
the night train to Bright, where a night is spent, and where excellent
hotel accommodation is available.
Should passengers elect to alight at Porepunkah they can obtain
comfortable accommodation at the local boarding-house for the night,
and go forward by Bright coach as shown, or, from the station a con-
veyance runs out 4 miles to Manfield’s Buffalo House, at the foot of
the range, where a stop-over may be made for the night, and continue
the journey to the summit next morning. Total distance, 16 miles.
Passengers proposing to travel thus should first notify Mrs. Manfield,
who will arrange to Imve them met at the railway station.
The coach service varies according to the season of the year, and
inquiries should be made at the Government Tourist Bureau for correct
information on the subject.
During the winter months a start is usually made from Bright at
9 a.m. on Wednesdays and Saturdays only, and the summit is reached
earlier or later in the afternoon according to the state of the roads,
lieturning coaches leave the Chalet on Wednesdays and Sundays.


Prom about the middle of November till the end of April each year, an
extra coach is run to and from the Plateau, leaving Bright on Thurs-
days, and the Chalet on Fridays; further provision is made for heavy
m Wi m -*•
TOBOGGANNING AT MOUNT BUFFALO.
traffic at holiday seasons. All coaches call at Porepunkah going and
returning. Through Rail and Coach Combined Tickets are issued all
the year round as under: —
Via Porepunkah. Via Bright.
Ist Class. 2nd Class. Ist Class. 2nd Class.
s. d. s. d. s. d. s. d.
From—Melbourne 51 6 38 6 .. 54 8 41 5
Seymour • • 38 11 30 1 .. 42 3 33 3
Benalla . . 26 9 22 2 .. 30 0 25 0
Wangaratta . . 21 11 18 11 .. 25 4 22 0
Albury . . .. 30 0 24 2 .. 33 0 27 1
Beechworth 21 0 18 3 .. 24 1 21 2
Parties of three or more passengers desiring to go through via Pore-
punkah the same day will, during the summer months, be met by special
arrangement with Crawford and Co., and driven to the summit the same
evening at ordinary fares.
The return journey may be made by morning train from Bright or
Porepunkah on Mondays, Wednesdays, Thursdays, and Saturdays, reach-
ing Melbourne at 1.50 p.m., and by midday train on Tuesdays and
Fridays, arriving in Melbourne at 11 p.m. on Tuesdays, or 10.20 p.m.
on Fridays.
During the summer months (from 15th November to 30th April each
year) Mountain District Tickets are issued from Melbourne at the
following fares, and are available for two months return: —
Ist Class Return. 2nd Class Return.
s. d. s. d.
To Porepunkah .. 39 0 26 0
To Bright .. . . 39 8 26 5
Any further information required will be supplied at the Govern-
ment Tourist Bureau, corner Collins and Swanston streets, Melbourne.
’Phone 174 Central.
Copies of this Tourist Plan and Notes may be obtained at the
Tourist Bureau and Inquiry Room, Crown Lands Department.
By Authority; J. Kemp, Government Printer, Melbourne,




Photo htkoq.vphrd at the/Department of Lands and/Survey Melbourne* by I.F.M9<raurarv
