

MOUNT WINGEN
AND THE WINGEN
COAL MEASURES
W. E. ABBOTT


MOUNT WINGEN and the WINGEN COAL MEASURES




PRINTED FOR PRIVATE CIRCULATION
BY
W, C. PENFOLD & CO. LIMITED
183 PITT STREET, SYDNEY


MOUNT WINGEN AND THE
WINGEN COAL MEASURES
IT has been suggested to me by Mr. H. L, White, of
“ Belltrees,” who has been collecting old records of Mount
Wingen and the Upper Hunter, that, as my father took up
in 1845 the country on which Mount Wingen is situated, and I
have lived within sight of it all my life, a record of changes that
have taken place in the burning area by a continuous observer
would be of interest in the future and might be of value. The
suggestion seemed to me a good one and, as Mr. White has
placed at my disposal all his records from the date of the first
discovery in 1828 of the only Burning Mountain in Australia, I
am in a position to make the story fairly complete.
Mount Wingen was first discovered by one of the early
settlers on the Hunter who was out exploring or hunting on the
mountains west of the Kingdon Ponds valley with a small party
of blackfellows. Observing a smoke rising from the mountains
east of the valley he asked the blacks if their tribe was setting
fire to the country, and was then informed that the smoke seen
rising was from a burning mountain which they called Wingen.
The next day he visited the mountain, and afterwards, no doubt,
informed the Government of his discovery. The name of the
settler is not mentioned in any of the accounts that I have seen
of Mount Wingen, but I have no doubt it could be found in the
official records of that date, if a search were made. Such infor-
mation would be of interest to his descendants, if they are still on
the Hunter after nearly 100 years; but the old settler and pioneer
evidently was not anxious to immortalize his name.


Of the various early accounts of Mount Wingen as it appeared
previous to 1852, when, as a boy eight years old, I first visited
it, there are two which for scientific accuracy stand out above all
others. The first is an account of a careful examination made by
the Rev. C. P. N. Wilton, a geologist, which appeared in the
Sydney Gazette, and is dated from “The Female Orphan
Institution,” Parramatta, March I Oth, 1829. The second is by
Sir Thomas Mitchell, and is contained in his report of “ A
Journey in Search of the Kindur, 1831-2.” In consequence of a
story told by an escaped convict named George Clarke, who had
lived for some years with the blacks, Mitchell started out to look
for a navigable river named the Kindur, taking boats with him to
explore the river to its mouth. The Kindur was supposed
to run west into the centre of the continent of Australia.
Mitchell’s route was up the Hunter, and across the range
near where Murrurundi now stands, and, passing up the
Kingdon Ponds valley, he stopped at Wingen to make an
examination and survey of the Mountain. The result of this
examination and survey is given with a plan of the Mountain
shewing where it was then burning, and also a considerable part
of the surrounding country.
These two descriptions are, I think, the most accurate and
careful records of Mount Wingen that we have as it was when
first discovered in 1828. Mr. Wilton was a geologist, and Sir
Thomas Mitchell was a surveyor, and both were careful scientific
observers. Mr. Wilton says, writing March 10th, 1829, from
Parramatta, to the Sydney Gazette: “So many opinions have
been formed and so many theories advanced respecting the nature
of the Burning Mountain in the neighbourhood of Hunter River
—A gravely maintaining it to be a real volcano, B pertinaciously
affirming it to be a mere seam of coal on fire, while C triumph


antly announces it to be a mass of sulphur on fire. . . . The only
written description of this mountain which it seems has hitherto
met the public eye appeared in the Australian Newspaper of the
30th of July last, and was copied into the Australian Quarterly
Journal in October Now this description is decidedly
incorrect, for in the first place there is no mouth or crater at all,
nor does such an opening lie ‘ between the peaks of two mountains
to which the blacks have given the appellation of Wingen.’ That
portion of the Mountain of Wingen where the fire is now burning,
and which is a compact sandstone rock, comprehends parts of
two declivities of one and the same mountain. The progress of
the fire has of late been down the northern or highest elevation,
and it is now ascending with great fury the opposite and southern
eminence. From the situation of the fire having been in a hollow
between two ridges of the same mountain, Mr. Mackie (observer
of July 30th, 1828) was probably induced to give the clefts in the
mountain the appellation ‘ crater.’ The fact is, the rock, as the
subterraneous fire increases, is rent into several concave chasms of
various widths. I particularly examined the widest of these.
The rock, a solid mass of sandstone, was torn asunder about two
feet in width, leaving its upper or southern side exposed to view;
the part so torn asunder slipped, as it were, down and sunk into
a hollow, thus forming the convex surface of the heated rock, I
looked down the chasm to the depth of about 15 feet. The
sides of the rock were of a white heat like that of a lime kiln,
while sulphurous and steamy vapours arose from a depth below
like blasts from the forge of Vulcan himself. I stood on the
portion of rock which had been cleft from the portion above, and
on hurling stones down into the chasm the noise they made in
their fall seemed to die away in a vast abyss under my feet.
The area over which the fire is now raging is about half an acre in


extent. There were throughout it several chasms varying in width
from which are constantly emitted sulphurous columns of smoke,
the margins of these beautiful with efflorescent crystals of sulphur,
varying in colour from the deepest red orange, occasioned by
ferruginous mixture, to the palest straw colour where alum pre-
dominated. The surface of the ground near these clefts was too
hot to permit me to stand any length of time upon it, neither
were the vapours arising from them by any means the most
grateful to the lungs. A black, tarry and lustrous substance I
observed on the edges of several of the clefts; specimens of this
and other substances found about the burning part of the moun-
tain will be forwarded to Mr. Brand for analysis. No lava or
trachyte of any description was to be met with, neither did I see
any appearance of coal. There is a spring of excellent water on
the ascent of the mountain by the southern side. ... In a gully
at the base of the mountain I remarked the presence of black
limestone, while here and there were scattered over the side of
the mountain red sandstone and fragments of ironstone. I also
found on my ascent some specimens of chalcedony and agate.”
— Wilton.
Sir Thomas Mitchell’s description of Mount Wingen, which
is given in his report of “A Journey in search of the Kindur
River in 1831-2,” was made from notes taken on December 2nd,
1831. Sir Thomas only spent a day on the mountain on that
occasion, but seems to have visited it before. His description
agrees generally with that of Mr. Wilton, but his observations
seem to have been more cursory. The value of Mitchell’s
description is that he gives a plan of the mountain shewing the
position of the fire and the prominent features of the surrounding
country which, with Wilton’s description, helps to fix the exact
position of the fire when Mount Wingen was first discovered, and


SIR THOMAS MITCHELL’S PLAN SURVEY OF MOUNT WINGEN.


so gives a starting point for my observations which began in
1852 and continued on to the present day, December, 1917, a
period of sixty-five years. Sir Thomas Mitchell says: —
“ Wingen, the aboriginal name, is derived from fire. The com-
bustion extends over a space of no great extent (see Plan Survey)
nearer to the summit of a group of hills forming part of a low
chain which divides the valley of Kingdon Ponds from that of
Page’s River. The blue smoke ascends from rents and cracks,
the breadth of the widest measuring about a yard. Red heat
appears at the depth of about four fathoms. No marks of any
extensive change appear at the surface near these burning fissures,
although the growth of large trees in old cracks on the opposite
slopes, where ignition has ceased, shews that this fire has continued
for a very considerable time, or that the same thing had occurred
at a much earlier period. In the form of the adjacent hills I
observed nothing peculiar, unless it be a contraction not very
common of the lower parts of ravines. The geological structure,
as might be expected, is more remarkable. Other summits of
the range are porphyritic, but the hills of ‘ Wingen ’ present a
variety of rocks within a small space. In the adjacent gullies to
the south of the hill we find clay of a grey, mottled appearance,
and shale containing apparently a small quantity of decomposed
vegetable matter, and near the fissures then on fire occurred a
coarse sandstone with an argillaceous basis. To the north-west,
in a hollow containing water, which drains from beneath the part
ignited, is a coarse sandstone in some places highly charged with
felspar and containing impressions of spirifers. The hill nearest
to the part on fire on the south-west (b) consists of basalt, with
grains apparently of olivine, and on a still higher hill on the east
(a) I found ironstone. A small hill (c) connecting these two,
and nearest to the part actually burning, appears to consist of trap


rock, and is richly strewn with agates. The hills on the opposite
or south side of the valley are composed of compact felspar, with
acicular crystals of glassy or common felspar and grains of horn-
blende, crevices of the stone being coated with films of serpentine
or green earth.” — Mitchell, December 2nd, 1831 .
The date of Mitchell’s visit as written above is December 2nd,
1831, but the date on the plan is February, 1829, so that he
must have made an earlier visit within a few months of the first
discovery of Mount Wingen, towards the end of 1828.
These two tally in almost every particular, and fix the exact
position and appearance of the fire up to the end of 1831. The
date on which I first saw it was in 1852, or just 21 years after
Sir Thomas Mitchell’s visit. From that time on until the present
date (1917), a period of 65 years, it was constantly under my
observation, as it formed part of the Glengarry run, on which I
lived until 1877, from which date I have been living at Wingen,
within a mile and a half of the Mountain. When I saw it first
the main fire as described by Mr. Wilton was at the bottom of
the hollow. Up the northern burnt-out slope there were small
jets of steam and smoke rising; some of them as much as sixty
yards up the slope, while quite a large volume of smoke rose
steadily from the hole described by Mr. Wilton at the bottom of
the hollow. Mr. Wilton says the fire had begun to climb the
southern slope, but does not say how far it had climbed. When
I saw it in 1852 smoke was ascending from a number of cracks
running about east and west across the Mountain on the southern
side for a distance of about fifty yards up the slope, but the main
fire was exactly as described by Mr, Wilton and Sir Thomas
Mitchell, at the bottom of the hollow. Probably the fire had
climbed the slope twenty or twenty-five yards further than when
Mr. Wilton saw it, as the movement has been a little more than


a yard a year in the same direction ever since up to the
present date, having moved not more than about eighty yards
in sixty-five years. In the last fifty years Mount Wingen has
been very carefully examined by many eminent geologists, includ-
ing the Rev. W. B. Clarke and Professor David, and it has
been established beyond the possibility of doubt that the cause of
the fire is the combustion of a very thick seam of coal, which lies
up against the basaltic mountains of volcanic origin, situated to the
eastward of the Burning Mountain Range and which form the
divide between the valleys of Kingdon Ponds and Page’s River.
The coal measures of the Kingdon Ponds valley, apparently
without much local disturbance, have all been tilted by the same
action as that which tilted the Greta seam (now burning). This
displacement varies in places from 55 to 80 degrees from the
horizontal; but on the western side of the valley the coal
measures are almost level, and are capped by a range which
Professor David considered to be composed of Hawkesbury
Sandstone (see Plate 2). The exact point at which the tilted
seams end and the level seams begin has not been determined,
as it is covered by the deep alluvium of the valley.
During the last 65 years the fire of Mount Wingen has
climbed almost to the top of the southern slope of the hollow
in which it was situated when discovered in 1828, and, as it
moved south, all signs of fire have disappeared from the northern
slope and from the hollow, and for about half way up the
southern slope. I cannot say whether this southward movement
has been regular or not. When I saw it first, twenty odd years
after Mr. Wilton and Sir Thomas Mitchell described it, my
recollection is very distinct that it was just as they described it.
Now their descriptions would not apply, as all signs of fire have
disappeared from the whole area described by them as the scene


of combustion. For the last sixty-five years there has been a
gradual dying down as the fire moved south—an appearance of
going out. During the whole time the fire was moving up the
southern slope of the hollow the rocks to the west of the line of
fire kept cracking into long fissures nearly parallel to the line of
fire and sinking down in steps, and some similar cracks, at right
angles or across the line on which the fire was advancing, were
always forming in advance of the fire just as they are now. This
of course was caused by the burning out of the underlying Greta
coal seams, and, as the subsidence in places is more than twenty
feet, it proves that the burning seam at Wingen is very thick.
In the Maitland coal fields, where it is being worked, I believe
that this seam is in places thirty feet thick.
In making a geological examination of the Wingen district,
which I did many years ago with the assistance and under the
instruction of the late W. B. Clarke, then a very old man and
unable to climb about the mountains, I found, shewing in the
recently built railway line, a well-defined basaltic or dioritic
dyke over thirty feet wide, running in the direction of the Burn-
ing Mountain (see Plate 1). If this dyke connects with the
basaltic formation east of the Burning Mountain —as it very
probably does—it would cut all the coal seams, and this may
account for the gradual dying down of the fire in the last sixty-
five years.
This dioritic dyke is of considerable geological interest, as it
probably cuts right across the coal measures of the Kingdon
Ponds valley, and connects the basaltic mountains to the west
of the Wingen Coal Measures with the mountains of similar for-
mation which form the eastern side of the valley, though I have
not been able to find it anywhere but where it is cut by the


railway line. Possibly this is due to the filling up of the creeks
since the country was ringbarked, referred to below.
In 1846 my father, who knew nothing of minerals or
geology, was building a house on some land he had bought
adjoining and just north of what is now the village of Wingen,
and, coming up from Muswellbrook where he lived, to
measure up timber for a pair of sawyers, on his way back from
the saw-pit picked up a piece of ore which from its appearance
he thought might be valuable. All he told my mother was that
he picked it up on his way back from the saw-pit, and that he
thought it would make his fortune; then he sent it to England
for analysis. This was before the discovery of valuable metals
in Australia. When the analysis came out it shewed a very rich
silver ore, but in the meantime my father had died. My mother
handed the analysis over to the Rev. W. B. Clarke, who was a
personal friend of my father, and the greatest geologist of his day
in Australia. Mr. Clarke spent a fortnight at Wingen looking
for the lode from which the ore had come, and reported to my
mother that there was no indication of ore in the country over
which my father could have travelled in the time he was away
on foot measuring the timber for the sawyers, as it was all coal
measures with no indications of mineral lodes of any kind. This
closed the search until after I had left school and taken charge
of the station for my mother, when I resolved to have another
try for it.
To equip myself for the work I began the study of Geology,
Mineralogy, Chemical Analysis and the use of the blow-
pipe, and soon became deeply interested in the science of
Geology for its own sake, and, though I did not find the silver
lode, I never regretted the time given to the study of these
sciences, which have made the face of every country in which I


have been an “ open book ” to be read with never-failing
interest. From the facts which I have given, and the search
made by Mr. Clarke, I came to the conclusion that my father
must have found the silver ore in the gravel drift of Kingdon
Ponds Creek in the same way as Mr. Wilton found coal seven
miles below Mount Wingen, which had travelled down that
creek for about ten miles, from the seam in the Parish of
Tinagroo (see Plate 3). If my surmise were correct, the lode
from which the ore had come must be somewhere on the water-
shed of Kingdon Ponds Creek, above the site of the Village of
Wingen. I gradually acquired the ownership of nearly all the
land within this area, which only amounts to about 20,000 acres.
For many years I kept up the search while attending to my work
as a grazier. I found nothing. Then I was forced to the con-
clusion that the ore found by my father must have been washed
out of the conglomerates through which nearly all the upper
waters of Kingdon Ponds Creek run. This would mean that the
ore came from the watershed of the ancient river by which these
conglomerates were formed, which might have been a thousand
miles away from Wingen.
I then gave up the search until many years after the
railway had been carried past Wingen, when I noticed the
diorite dyke which crosses the railway (see Plate 1).
Then, as I had read somewhere that Mr. Wilkinson, our
Government Geologist, when the Broken Hill silver lode was
discovered, after his first examination before it was opened, had
pronounced it “ a diorite dyke not carrying mineral enough to
make it worth working,” I thought this Wingen dyke, across
which all the creeks which drain the upper watershed of Kingdon
Ponds Creek run, might at some point be a silver lode, and so
the origin of the ore found by my father. I endeavoured to


trace its course across the Kingdon Ponds Valley, but failed to
pick it up anywhere but in the railway cutting (Plate 1). I then
took specimens from the exposed face of the railway line, and
had them analysed. The result was traces of silver and gold
of no commercial value,” and that was the end of my work.
Possibly someone else may be more successful, and this record
may help.
Neither Mr. Wilton nor Sir Thomas Mitchell seems to
have made any attempt to determine the extent of the burnt-
out country north of the fire, when they made their observations.
If they had they would have found what is called “ The Little
Burning Mountain,” about a mile and three-quarters from the
main fire, m a direction a little east of north on Portion 271,
which forms part of the estate of Bickham, the property of
H. A. Wright, Esq. The country between the two fires is
completely overgrown with heavy timber, which now shews no
sign of a fire ever having passed through it, but the line can
easily be traced by the fissured rocks and evidence of subsidence
like that which has taken place along the western side of the fire
at Mount Wingen. The Little Burning Mountain has not
changed its position since I saw it first many years ago, nor
altered its appearance in any way. The only indication of fire
is the rising of sulphurous smoke and steam from a few cracks or
holes in the ground, over a surface of a few yards where the
surface is comparatively level. Probably the fire has become
stationary and is dying out, because the coal seams here are more
nearly horizontal, in which case the falling in of the roof would
cut off ventilation.
The coal seams which are burning in Mount Wingen can
be traced in the direction generally east of north, sometimes
going more to the east right across the valley of the Page


River, through E. G. Cory’s grant of 870 acres, Portion 65,
Parish of Murrulla, crossing the Page River near the north-
west corner of Hughes and Hoskins’ grant, Portion 12, of 1,220
acres, then turning to the east through that portion following the
line of basalt formation as at Mount Wingen; that is, the coal
measures are tilted up against the basalt (see Plate 2). The
farthest north that I was able to trace the coal seams was to a
place on or near the boundary of Portion 88, Parish of Isis,
W.R. 122, on the head of Sandy Creek. Here they were
tilted against the basalt at a high angle as in the Kingdon Ponds
valley (see Plate 2).
With reference to the level coal seams shewn in the valleys
of Kingdon Ponds and Petwyn Creek (see Plate 2), a
couple of thin seams used to shew in Petwyn Creek (Plate 2)
where the section crosses that creek, but they are now covered
up by debris washed down from the mountains. These seams
were apparently thin and soft, weathered-out, as they were
above the water level; but in the Parish of Tinagroo,
further north, there was a seam of very hard, good coal shewing
in the bottom of a small creek, of unknown thickness (see Plate
3). This seam is now covered up by debris washed down from
the mountains. This silting up of the creeks —which is pretty
general on my Murrulla Estate—is caused chiefly by ringbarking
country, which was formerly heavily timbered, and partly by the
introduction of a very valuable fodder plant, called “ swamp
couch.” When the timber dies the limbs of the trees fall into
the creeks and obstruct the waterflow, and the “ swamp-couch ”
forms a green mat in the bed of the creek, which prevents the
debris being washed out, even after the timber has rotted. This
makes the country much more difficult to the geologist than it
used to be fifty years ago, when most of the creeks shewed a
rock bottom.


The coal which Mr. Wilton found, as reported in his
account (quoted earlier), was probably from this Tinagroo
seam, as all the upright seams in Kingdon Ponds valley are so
oxidised or weathered-out at the surface that there is nothing
left but a thin seam, apparently of soot interstratified with the
coal-bearing rocks. On following down one of these thin sooty
seams (see Plate 1) only a foot thick at the surface, I found that
at about 70 feet it had widened out into a solid coal seam
seventeen feet thick, and another, eight inches at the surface, was
eight feet thick at the same depth with only one inch of clay band
in the centre. This filling up of the creeks since the country
was ringbarked, accounts also, I think, for my failure to
find the black limestone formation which Wilton reports having
found “in the gully at the base of Mount Wingen.” I looked for
limestone very carefully, as it would have been valuable to me,
but never found any trace of it.
Some six or seven years ago, wishing to find out what
the level coal seams on the west of Kingdon Ponds were
like, I made a contract with the Government to put a bore
down with the diamond drill to a depth of 2,000 feet or
further, if I was prepared to pay. The bore was started
on Portion 194, of 88ac. 3r., Parish of Wingen, but unfor-
tunately had to stop at 121 feet, as the drill, after passing
through a small seam of coal about a foot thick, struck a con-
glomerate in which the pebbles were so loosely cemented they
would not stand. The result was the Government was compelled
to give up, leaving £4OO worth of diamonds at the bottom of the
hole. My reason for starting this venture in prospecting was
that, as these level coal seams of the Kingdon Ponds series pass
under the Hawkesbury Sandstone to the west, the kerosene shales
that have been worked at Wolgan Valley in the west and at


Murrurundi, about 13 miles north of Wingen, might be found
here in a much more convenient position for working than at
Wolgan or Murrurundi; but someone else will have to test it
now. Seven or eight years ago I sank a shaft to test for coal
seams of the upright or tilted series, shewn in Plate 1, on the
section line given in Plate 2, just east of the railway line. The
shaft was taken down at an angle of about 65 degrees, to a depth
of 200 feet, and at that depth a tunnel was driven west
for about 100 feet. The first seam sunk on widened gradually
from the surface, where it was only a sooty formation about two
feet wide interstratified with coal measure rocks. But at seventy
feet it became a seam of sound coal, rather soft, seventeen feet
thick. The tunnel driven west cut a harder coal seam two feet
ten inches thick, and a second harder seam eight feet thick, with
only one clay band in the centre one inch thick. The drive was
not continued far enough to cut the fourth seam showing on the
surface, because at that point it is too near the railway to work.
I did not work these seams because it seemed to me that, with a
coal mine working at Muswellbrook, only twenty-five miles south
of Wingen, and Curlewis and Gunnedah eighty miles to the
north, and the Government railway the only consumer, there
would be no profit.
To the east of the Greta coal seam, which is the oldest
or lowest in geological series of all those worked in Australia,
there are a number of seams of ironstone, interstratified with
slaty shale of the carboniferous series. These bands or seams
of ironstone, lying at the same angle as the coal seams (see
Plate 2), may be found just north of the northern boundary of
the village of Wingen, where they are of rather poor quality,
and from that point can be traced all along the edge of the
basaltic formation which lies to the east of the Burning Moun


tain, and across the Page River into Hughes and Hoskins’ grant
of 1,220 acres, Parish of Isis, then turning more to the eastward
and passing out of that grant near the north-east corner. At
Wingen village they appear to be poor clay-band ores, but no
attempt has been made to test them here. Following them in a
direction nearly north-east, to a point about half-a-mile north
of where the fire is burning at Mount Wingen, we find them
changing into very rich hematite and black magnetic ores—the
magnetic ores breaking just like cast iron (see Plate 1).
I have found these black magnetic iron ores at and north of this
point, melted like a glaze or enamel over the surface of the slaty
shales, which had evidently been converted into hard pottery ware
by the same heat that melted the iron. Probably the heat which
caused this change was the heat of intrusive basalt from the east,
but may have been from the burning out of heavy coal seams.
The low grade iron ores were in places partly smelted and
changed into magnetite. In 1873 I collected about three
hundredweight of this black magnetic iron ore from a place
about half a mile north-east of the fire at Mount Wingen (see
Plate 1), where it seemed to be richest and most plentiful. I took
the stones from the surface, and sent them to England for test.
The ore sent proved to be of very high percentage, and, being
free from sulphur or phosphorus, was particularly fitted for the
production of high class Bessemer steel, the production of
Bessemer steel being then a new industry. The result was that
a large firm of steel makers sent a mining engineer out to examine
the ore-bearing land, with a view to starting steel works at the
nearest point at which good smelting coal could be found.
When Mr. W. B. Clarke heard of the arrival of this mining
engineer he asked me to make arrangements for him to go over
the land with us, as he told me he had found, and spent some


weeks in examining, these ores when he was a young man in the
very early days of settlement on the Upper Hunter, and would
like to see them again to verify his conclusions. This I did, and
he and I and Mr. Larsen, Mining Engineer, went over them care-
fully together, and fixed points at which trenches should be cut to
expose and test the iron ores. Mr. Clarke then told me that,
when in the early days he found these Mount Wingen ores, he
spent a good deal of time in examining them because of their
purity, but came to the conclusion that there was not enough ore
to be worth working, and that on trenching we should find only
small veins interstratified with the slaty shales of the carboniferous
series, and these widely separated. This was exactly what we
did find—no vein of the extremely rich ore being quite six
inches thick.
Then Mr. Clarke told me that in his early explorations he had
found a place where he thought iron in workable quantities might
be got, but he was not very sure about the direction, as the country
had all been ringbarked and much changed in appearance since
he first saw it. As he was a very old man and not able to go
and look for the place, we rode to the top of one of the peaks
near Mount Wingen which gave a wide view of the valley of
the Page, and he pointed to a place north of the Page River,
about the western boundary of Hughes and Hoskins’ grant of
1,220 acres, in the Parish of Isis. Afterwards I made a careful
search, and found a good deal of ironstone somewhat similar to
that at Mount Wingen, but not nearly so rich, and nothing, as far
as I could see, to indicate a greater quantity of ore. There is
not much more in connection with my geological examination of
Mount Wingen and the Wingen Coal Measures —an examination
extending over more than an average lifetime—that seems to me
worth recording, on the chance that it may be of use when the
Geological Survey of the State reaches Wingen.


It seems to me, however, that in one part of the Wingen country
there is a fair possibility of the existence of rock-salt, which
would be a very valuable find. I therefore give the result
of my observations in reference to it. There are three small
creeks flowing from Mount Wingen west from the burnt out area
to Kingdon Ponds Creek, through Portion 112, of 243 acres.
The headwaters of these creeks are on the burnt-out land which
is riven with fissures caused by subsidence from the burning out
of the coal seams. They flow across the upturned edges of the
strata which are inclined, dipping to the west, as shewn in Plate
2, but not at quite so high an angle, the angle here being about
50 degrees. Probably it was in one of these creeks that Mr.
Wilton found the black limestone which he mentions, as, from
the geological formation of the country, there is no other part of
Mount Wingen at which it would be likely to be found, and in
these highly tilted strata it would only shew in the bottom of a
creek. These small creeks do not run, or hold any water in
average seasons, but, after a very wet season when they run for a
time, the water is more salt than sea-water. In their courses, as
they cut across the uptilted strata, considerable quantities of
crystallized gypsum, or sulphate of lime—in some cases mixed
with red clay—may be found. This crystallized gypsum is a
substance which is always formed underlying beds of rock-salt in
every part of the world where rock-salt has been found, and it
has been shewn that rock-salt cannot be deposited anywhere
except as a formation overlying this crystallized form of gypsum
or sulphate of lime, for reasons which 1 will endeavour to make
clear.
Archibald Geikie says (Text Book of Geology):—“The
study of the precipitations which take place on the floors of
modern salt lakes is important in throwing light on the history


of a number of chemically-formed rocks. The salts in these
waters accumulate until their point of saturation is reached, or
until by chemical re-actions they are thrown down. The least
soluble are naturally the first to appear, the water becoming
progressively more and more saline, till it reaches a condition
like that of the mother liquor of a salt work. Gypsum
begins to be thrown down from sea-water when 37 per
cent, of water has been evaporated, but 93 per cent, of
water must be driven off before chloride of sodium (common
salt— W.E.A.) can begin to be deposited. Hence the concentra-
tion and evaporation of a salt lake having a composition like that
of the sea would give rise first to a layer or sole of gypsum,
followed by one of rock-salt. This has been found to be the
normal order among the various saliferous formations in the
earth’s crust. But gypsum may be precipitated without rock-salt,
either because the water was diluted before the point of satura-
tion for rock-salt was reached, or because the salt, if deposited,
has been subsequently dissolved and removed. In every case
where an alternation of layers of gypsum and rock-salt occurs
there must have been repeated renewals of the water supply,
each gypsum zone marking the commencement of a new series
of precipitates.”
Now, seeing these highly tilted gypsum-bearing formations
interstratified with the coal measure rocks, the geologist would
infer that in all probability they had been overlain by formations
of rock-salt, and that subsequently the salt, being much more
soluble than the gypsum, has been washed out and wholly
removed. This, of course, is true as to these formations we
now see at the surface. But if, when the strata were tilted
up, the rock-salt were still in existence, it would only have been
removed to whatever depth the surface water continued in


motion. When a depth was reached at which the subterranean
water ceased to have any movement it would become super-
saturated with salt, after which no more rock-salt would be
dissolved. This must be true, else there would be no rock-salt
in the world, because all the rock-salt in the world is in contact
with water —but not moving water, which is the only kind of
water that can dissolve it and carry it away. The rock-salt
might, of course, have been dissolved before the strata were
tilted up, leaving only the gypsum-bearing strata in situ, but this
supposition is contradicted by the action of the small creeks after
wet seasons. The slope of these creeks from the burnt-out area
of Mount Wingen at their heads, to Kingdon Ponds Creek,
about one mile, is about 400 feet.
My theory is that the surface water, entering the fissures at
the heads of the creeks, and also the interstices of the up-tilted
strata across which they run with a head of two or three hundred
feet, are able to force some of the super-saturated brine from
just above the rock-salt to the surface for as long as the head con-
tinues, which would not be for more than a few weeks. Of
course it would be impossible to compute the depth at which the
rock-salt lies, if it exists.
Some years ago, when, from long continued observations, I
had arrived at this theory, knowing that rock-salt was mined
in England at a cost of 4s, 6d. per ton on trucks, and
sold in Australia at an average of about £3 10s., I decided
to spend a few thousands in testing my theory; but first made
enquiry as to what would be my position if I found the rock-salt.
The land was owned by me at that time, but had been bought
from the Crown since 1884. What I found was that if, by an
expenditure of three or four thousand pounds, I succeeded in
finding a good salt deposit, by the issue of a proclamation


according to our N.S.W. mining laws the salt would be
declared the property of the Crown, and my capital would be at
the mercy of whatever Government happened to be in power,
and I should have no legal standing at all. Under these circum-
stances I decided to let the Government find its own rock-salt;
but what I have written may be of use to some future prospector
when perhaps our mining laws have been altered so as to give
him better security.
I have appended a geological map covering the whole
area dealt with. This map is the result of a visit which
Professor David made for the purpose of examining Mount
Wingen about twenty years ago. As Professor David could
only give three days to the work, I asked him which places
he wished most to see. This was arranged, and by working
very strenuously for long hours we got over a great part of the
country which I have described. I was considerably surprised
by the Professor’s capacity for continuous and strenuous physical
exertion —the same capacity which afterwards carried him
through his South Polar expedition and subsequent war work—
but of course it is not safe to judge by appearances in such cases.
The result was this map, compiled mainly from Professor David’s
own personal observations, with details filled in from my earlier
work. This map must be of value in the future when the
time comes for the exploitation of the mineral wealth of the
Upper Hunter, whether that exploitation is carried out by our
descendants or - by the Germans, if we show ourselves incapable
and unfit to hold what we have.
“ Murrulla,”
Wingen, N.S.W.
Tiecember 15 th, 1917.


NOTE
Since the foregoing was written Mr. H. L. White’s
researches have brought to light what is almost certainly the
earliest printed record of the discovery of Mount Wingen and,
as the name of one of the oldest pioneers of the Wingen district
is mentioned, it is more than probable that he or some of his
family were the first discoverers of the Burning Mountain. Dr.
Little’s grant was called “ Cresfield ” by the original grantee, and
still bears the same name. It is situated near Parkville, about
ten miles south of Mount Wingen, and is now owned by Mr.
David Hall.
EXTRACT FROM THE AUSTRALIAN.
Sydney, March 19, 1828.
“A Volcano has just been discovered in the vicinity of Hunter’s
River. It is situated among the mountains at the distance of
about one hundred miles in a north-westerly direction from New-
castle—twelve miles beyond Houldsworthy’s Plains, and fourteen
from Segenhoe. The distance of the Volcano from the sea is
calculated to be about ninety miles. Of the existence of this
phenomenon there can be no doubt. It has been visited by
several persons. Dr. Little, we understand, has been to it, and
we have at this moment a portion of the lava, consisting chiefly
of sulphur, taken from the side of the mountain, in our possession.
When discovered the Volcano emitted a brilliant light, and had
every appearance of being long in a state of activity. It is
thought that it has not hitherto claimed particular observation, on
account of its resemblance at a distance to the sight, which is


frequently witnessed in various parts of the Colony, and to its
being mistaken for deep grass on fire. The composition which
rolls from the furnace readily ignites, and without any test
besides burning, the sulphuric smell which accompanies the flame
immediately betokens its nature.”




SECTION SHEWING FORMATION OF KINDON PONDS PETWYN VALLEYS
Cross Section from East to West (See Plate I )


SHEWING OUTCROP OF COAL SEAM
HORIZONTAL IN CREEK
POR.217. PARISH OF TINAGROO.
COUNTY OF BRISBANE


MOUNT WINGEN.
Subsidence, in rocky ground, caused by destruction by fire of coal seam underneath.


MOUNT WINGEN.
Showing course of underground fire. When first observed by Mr. Abbott in 1852, the
fire was burning where the figure, under cross, stands. From that point to the
present position of fire, where smoke is seen rising from the ground, is 80 yards, a
distance which has occupied the fire 65 years in travelling.
Photo taken in January, 1918.


MOUNT WINGEN.
Looking N. W. over the burnt-out ground; showing subsidence.


MOUNT WINGEN.
The smoke shows probable present position of main underground fire. The subsidence
in foreground of photo is ahead of the main fire.
Photo taken January, 1918.


