

Mr. A. W. MACK AY on SIR
C. MITCHELLS REPORT.
MY attention was last night directed to
paragraphs 57 and 58 of the Report by Sir
Charles Mitchell, published in your issue of the
24th ult., wherein appear certain very uncom-
plimentary references to the Sydney Press
accounts of the persecutions in Tonga ; and as
some of these references to a letter appearing in
the Sydney Morning Herald of March 3rd, 1887,
and signed by me, take the form of serious and
damaging charges, I beg to request that you
will grant me an opportunity of refuting those
charges, and of giving to your readers the other
side of the question.
Herewith I beg to hand you for reference
certain documents from which it is necessary to
quote. All are duly numbered for reference.
Enclosure 1. Letter signed A. W. Mackay,
appeared in Sydney Morning Herald, March 3rd,
1887. Referred to by Sir Charles Mitchell as a
mass of exaggeration.
Enclosure 2. Letter signed Duncan Camp-
bell. Appeared in same paper.
Enclosure 3. Letter signed by the Rev. J.
E. Moulton. Appeared in same paper.
Enclosure 4. Letter by the Fiji Times' “ Own
Correspondent,” reprinted in Sydney Morning
Herald, April sth, 1887.
Enclosure 6. Letter from Evening News’
“Special Correspondent.” Appeared in issue
of March 28th, 1887.
Enclosure 6. Letter from Evening News'
“Special Correspondent.” Appeared in issue
of April 11th, 1887.
Enclosure 7. The original account of the
“ Malinoa Massacre,” written by Mr. H. Van
Hagen, the only white witness of the massacre
who understood the Tongan language. This
account is in Mr. Van Hagen’s own handwriting,
was written immediately after the barbarous
event, and was placed in my hands by Mr. Van
Hagen himself, with permission to do whatever
I thought best to do with it.
Enclosure 8. Letter Signed H. Van Hagen,
to the Fiji Times. Published June 15th, 1887.
Enclosure 9. The Report by Sir Charles
Mitchell, hereinafter referred to as the Report.
Enclosure 10. The Sydney Daily Telegraph,
Sydney Morning Herald, and Even,ing News ac-
counts of the trial of Mr. Robert flanslip, of
April 2nd, 1887, wherein some awful disclosures
are made public regarding the means used in
order to procure the evidence necessary to
legalise the murder of innocent men.
Enclosure 11. The South Australian Ad-
vertiser of September 24th, giving some English
opinions on the Report by Sir Charles Mitchell.
Enclosure 12. Pamphlet entitled “ Appeal
for the Persecuted Wesleyan Church in Tonga.”
Enclosure 13. Copy of my letter to the Rev.
F. Langham, Bau, Fiji, referred to by Sir
Charles Mitchell, and sent with enclosure 1 to
Sir Henry Holland.
Enclosure 14. Copy of the account of the
Malinoa massacre given by Mr. Van Hagen to
the British Pro-Consul on his return from the
massacre.
Thanking you in anticipation for publishing
this and enclosed pages.
I am, Sirs, Yours faithfully,
A. W. MACKAY.
In the Report, paragraphs 57 and 58, the
British Government, and the public of Great
Britain and her colonies, are informed as
follows
Ist. That the execution of Tobui and five
others had been described by me as attended by
circumstances of a very barbarous and revolting
nature.
2nd. That Mr. Van Hagen admitted, when on
oath, that “the description” was grossly ex-
aggerated, and so modified the account as to
deprive it of almost all that was revolting in it.
3rd. That Mr. Bindemann believed that
Tuuhetoka sung to cheer the drooping spirits of
those concerned.
4th. That His Excellency believes that the
executions were conducted with all “ reasonable
decency.”
For the purpose of criticism and comparison
with other accounts, I give my description (as
referred to) verbatim and complete. It reads as
follows“ I believe that others are publishing
newspaper reports of the execution. I shall not,
the details are too horrible. Tuuhetoka, the
Minister of Police, behaved like a very demon,
danouig and singing, tormenting and jeering at
the unfortunate men in their last moments,
remarking, ‘Now we will try your courage!
Now you will go to hell! Now I will have your
daughters,’ &0., &c.” This is the grossly ex-
aggerated and revolting description in full.
Enclosure 4 gives details far more horrible and
revolting than the above; yet in enclosure 8, Mr.
Van Hagen, referring to the account in enclosure
4, declares that with two trifling exceptions
(which I shall explain further on) “ all the rest
of the statements in your correspondent’s
letter were correct, though, I may say, strongly
written.”
The two exceptions are as follows: —lst.
Tuuhetoka’s dancing and singing. Enclosure
8, signed, “ H. Van Hagen,” says, “ The truth
is that at the place of execution ‘ il se dandinait'
(no English expression for the word), and sang
snatches of hymns to show his utter unconcern
at the dreadful scene that was being carried out
under his orders. This, I believe, His Excellency
took to mean hymns of encouragement to the
dying men, and not light and derisory staves,
which they were really meant lo be. ”
Again, in the same he says, “ I am sorry to see
that His Excellency believes the statements
made by the newspapers against Tuuhetoka to
be untrue, but I have found no reason as yet to
refuse to believe evidence to my own eyes and
ears.” In enclosure 7, written by Mr. Van
Hagen on his return from the massacre, he says ;
“ The poor fellows had no one to pray for them
at the last, but were scoffed at by Tuuhetoka, a
parvenu, half Fijian, half nigger, and a creature
devoted body and soul to Baker.”
The second exception which Van Hagen makes
is the word “ daughters,” In enclosure 8, he
says the words used by Tuuhetoka to the poor
men about to die were, “ Now you’ll go to hell,
and I’ll have your children.”
Mr. Van Hagen further states, with regard to
this subject; “The brutality of making them
(meaning the condemned martyrs) look on while
their friends were shot one by one was not suffici-
ently insisted on.” Again, he says, “ I was sud-
denly called on to give evidence in this case at the
enquiry a few minutes before the one o’clock
adjournment, so that the Court rose before I had
said half that I wanted to say, thus leaving a too
lenient idea in the mind of the Court towards
Tuuhetoka. When I returned into Court I
heard His Excellency say that he was satisfied
with Tuuhetoka’s behaviour. I would much
have liked to have argued the point with him,
but, as that is not allowed, I had to keep my
arguments to myself.” Had someone asked
Tuuhetoka how many times he had been in
prison ? and for what offences ? His Excellency
might not have been so “ satisfied with Tuuhe-
toka’s behaviour.”
His Excellency must have been in a great
hurry with this most-important case when Mr.
Van Hagen, the only witness who could give a
correct account of the language used at the
massacre, was allowed to be passed over with an
examination of only “ a few minutes. ” Regard-
ing the “dancing,” &c. at the massacre, Mr.
Van Hagen, on the day following, distinctly told
me that Tuuhetoka had behaved like a very
demon, laughing with fiendish glee, and that he
danced from one foot on to the other in Tonga
fashion, throwing his arms about with bravado,
while the shooting was going on. This is ex-
pressed by “il se dandinait.”
These movements form part of the native
Tongan dance, or “ laka-laka.” Mr. Van
Hagen told me on his return that the scene was
so revolting that Laifoni had to turn away dis-
gusted and horrified. Mr. Bindemann also
turned away. Enclosure 14 shows that Laifoni
interfered when they were ill-treating the poor
wretches. (Laifoni is the Crown Prince.)
Members of the shooting party have given me
corroborative descriptions. Report, paragraph
57, quotes Mr. Bindemann’s evidence ; but the
Report admits that Mr. Bindemann’s is hearsay
evidence, and only “ what Mr. Van Hagen told
him.” When I was on oath before the Court,
as the only witness from Vavau, my evidence
was refused when it was hearsay evidence. Yet
Mr. Bindemann’s is taken, and quoted as note-
worthy, while Mr. Van Hagen, the only white
witness who understood the Tongan language is
allowed to pass by with only a few minutes ex-
amination. I have given you quotations from
Mr. Van Hagen’s written accounts, and these
quotations go to show that Tuuhetoka behaved
with brutal levity, and that the circumstances
attending the butchery of human beings, carried
out under his directions, were of a barbarous and
revolting nature.
Your readers will, no doubt, form their own
conclusions as to His Excellency’s statement in
paragraph 57 of his Report :—“ I believe that
the executions were conducted with all reason-
able decency.” Perhaps His Excellency means
“ with such decency as might be reasonably
expected from such as Baker and Tuuhetoka.”
In Report, paragraph 57, I am said to write at
the request of Mr. Moulton. My letter states
“ At the request of the Rev. J. E. Moulton, I
forward you a memo, of a few facts. ” This is
all; I do not imply that Mr. Moulton is re-
sponsible in any way for these facts, or that he
even knows what they are. The truth is, that
as I was leaving Tonga, February Bth, last, Mr.
Moulton asked me to send to Mr. Stephinson an
account of the brutal outrages that we had
witnessed on the previous day (Black Monday.)
I therefore wrote the letter referred to, and
mailed it to the Rev. W. G. R. Stephinson,
President, of Wesleyan Conference. Mr. Moulton
had not seen it. In paragraph 58 his Excellency
makes a point of remarking that Mr. Moulton
“absolutely repudiated any responsibility for
them,” meaning the Press reports. I don’t
think that any of Mr. Moulton’s friends has
ever sought to claim that he was responsible for
any Press reports. The object intended was to
give the Rev. W. G. R. Stephinson, President
of the Wesleyan Conference, an outsider’s ac-
count of the brutal outrages of Black Monday.
The permission to publish was an afterthought.
In enclosure 9, paragraph 58, his Excellency
quotes from a letter from Father O’Dwyer.
The facts of this case are as follows.
The statements referred to were not at
all my own “incorrect effusions." My
letter (enclosure 1) distinctly states that the
narrative was heard by three, viz., Messrs.
Parker, Payne, and myself, on the night of
February 7th (midnight). The interview took
place within the hour following the last of the
events described in the letter, and therefore
while the events would be still fresh on the rev.
narrator’s memory. Immediately after the in-
terview we (all three) adjourned to the residence
of Mr. G. W. Parker, and we there endeavoured
to record as faithfully as possible the narrative
that we had heard within the preceding hour.
The greater part of the narrative was written by
Mr. Parker. He wrote the first part, and I
wrote the latter part. Each sentence was pro-
posed and checked before being written down,
and the published account is almost a verbatim
copy of the original.
Messrs. Parker and Payne are two well-known
and highly respected residents of Tongatabu,
and I understand that Mr. Parker is a nephew
of the Right Hon. W. E. Gladstone.
Since the publication of our joint-article, or
report, we have met, and we agreed that the
report as published was what it purported to be.
I think that I have said sufficient to
entirely clear myself from the incorrect and
uncalled for charges which are recorded against asking for protection. ’’ His residence was only
me by Sir Charles Mitchell, and I regret that about 500 yards from the mission house, yet
his Excellency did not fully enquire into this nearly an hour elapsed between my first visit to
matter before placing it on record. He might him and his arrival at the Mission house,
at least have given me an opportunity to defend The rest occurred as described in my letter,
myself; but a similar haste seems to have enclosure 1.
characterised the whole of his decisions regard- A letter signed J. E. Moulton, appearing in
ing the Press accounts of the persecutions. Daily Telegraph of March 3rd, corroborates my
This I will proceed to show. Enclosures 6 accounts of the brutal outrages of February 7th,
and 12 contain details far more horrible, brutal, giving also one instance where a girl of high
barbarous, and revolting than those referred to rank, who turned over to the Free Church, only
in my description, and worse than any yet men- did so to save herself from ‘ irremediable disgrace.’
tioned. Here are detailed accounts of brutal In paragraph 52 of his Report his Excellency
floggings of girls, women, boys and men, college admits that “ there was undoubtedly a feeling
students, &c. Flogging till the victims swooned; in the minds of all concerned that any action
flogging on the chest, breast, stomach and face ; that should end in the extinction of the ‘ Faka-
flesh cut open with the lashes, &c., &c. Details oga ’ (Wesleyan) Church would not be unaccept-
of hair torn out by the roots in tufts, eyelashes able to the King or to Mr. Baker. ”
cut off, and in some cases parts of the flesh cut One of the extracts from Mr. Moulton’s diary,
off with the hair. Here are references to alleged published in Daily Telegraph of March 18th,
disgusting treatment with which I shall not gives an account of the state of a poor woman
shock your readers. These atrocities occurred who received 25 lashes on “Black Monday.”
in Yavau. Regarding them the Yavau corres- Paragraph 55 of Report would be amusing
pondent of the Fiji Times states:—“Many of were the subject less horrible. Be the “ packed
the Europeans here are willing to corroborate jury, browbeaten jurors, and the mock Judge,
these statements;” and again, “I make no state- we learn that “none of these reports were
ments which I cannot substantiate.” proved by evidence to be true.” Likely enough.
Picture to yourselves these poor boys working I think I have shown that no Tongan with any
from daylight till dark, with the prospect of respect for his life would dare to give evidence
another flogging at the end of it. Think of them against this awful Court. Further down we
with their raw eyelids shorn of the lashes, broil- learn that “ from the evidence adduced on that
ing all day in the tropical February sun, with no point the Court appears to have been fairly con-
shelter. This I have seen with my own eyes, ducted.” Jury chosen by ballot, &c. Para-
Here is a leaf from my diary of that period, graph 56 tells us how the evidence was produced,
“ Called away to visit more victims. Visited by Baker, who was the prosecutor also : still,
Jione Havea and Mele Tahi. Jione (a boy) had Baker does not “ appear to have exceeded his
received 75 lashes. His back was one swollen duties as prosecutor.” Was it, then, one of the
black mass of bruises, weals, and congealed prosecutor’s duties to procure evidence by such
blood. Mele (Mary) a girl, had been flogged an awful means as that recorded !
till she swooned. ” In same paragraph we learn that Baker does not
Is it necessary to exaggerate such brutality I appear to have interfered with the Judge; but in
I can assure your readers that the Yavau the ver .V next sentence we have grave doubts on
atrocities have not been exaggerated. Indeed, * hat sub i ect ’ for tbe Government of Tonga is Mr.
the half was never told. paker. Regarding the choice of jury by ballot—it
Here the positive unfairness of his Ex- S a slngular f c “ n . oldenc « * hat , the j T ar y were all
i j -• r it, Government officials, and Haabai or Vavau men. no
cellencys general condemnation of the Press Wesleyans or Roman Catholics,
reports will be apparent when I tell you that in 7.) From paragraph 10 we learn that the King is
ms Keport, paragraph 9, he admits that “ the capable, clear-minded, strong-willed, decisive-man-
Yavau evidence was not procured.” nered, independent-charactered, and not under Mr.
Of the Haabai atrocities, and the Black Hole Baker’s control; yet Baker’s presence with the
of Lifuka, his Excellency must have got very King is advisable for the preservation of the peace,
little reliable evidence, as the brave little band If this be so, how did the Tongans ever get along
of Haabai Wesleyans, including Salote (the without Baker ?
King’s eldest daughter), the Rev. David Tonga In paragraph 41 of Report we learn that his
and wife Rachel, and other ministers, had all ExceUenoy thinks that such evidence was forth-
been deported to Fiji, and elsewhere. Several a f to J” 3t , ,fy the belief that Tobui instigated
months ago some of them were marooned on the attack on Baker. There was never a greater
® , . . ... J . , J * m . mistake. But paragraph 56 shows how “such
the barren and uninhabited island of Tofua. evidence was produced.”
These unfortunates are still there. Amongst The real instigators were named by the real
the refugees at Koro, Fiji, are some who speak assassins on their way to execution. On both oooa-
English fairly well, and now that they are out sions they declared that Tobui had nothing what-
of the reach of the Tongan Government they ever to do with it. In the Daily Telegraph of April
might be induced to speak out fearlessly. Some 16th I have told who Tobui was. He was a gentle-
of these can describe the Haabai and Vavau pan. and a true hero. It will be long ere his like
atrocities, if his Excellency really cares to know is again seen in Tonga. Ask any British subject in
about them. Tonga (exoeptingtheGovernment officials), and they
It is a fact that should not be overlooked, that you *' bat Tobui would have been the last
in Tonga it is very difficult to get a Tongan to “ it aS “ atl ° D ’ ° r haVe
give evidence against Baker or the Government. Regarding the fairness of the “ trials ” (?) His
The poor people have been so terrorised by Excellency does not seem very clear, but the very
years of tyranny and persecution that they are f ac t that he took with him to Fiji six of the men
afraid to say a word. They were threatened who had been condemned to death, liberating them
that they should die if they dared to give on arrival, is sufficient comment on the said “trials.”
evidence against the Government, and what For instance, take the case of Tevita Fenau,
guarantee had the poor wretches that this threat ordained Wesleyan minister. His Excellency
would not be carried out. Even without the admits that Tevita Fenau’s offence consisted in not
alleged letters from Queen Victoria, and the having revealed a knowledge of the intention of the
assurance of the Acting British Vice-Consul assassins which he acquired just before the event.
Leefe, that “ the King can do as he likes with A e *^TJ ta F / uau ™> uld surely have been shot but
his own people,” these poor people have such a th £ ff ared ‘ h ® ™ ulkltude ’
j • ir- u ■ i i ~ In connection with Tevita Fenau, some of your
mysterious dread of their King, Tubou that it readers will remember a vile, calumnious attack on
is utteriy impossible for a stranger, such as Sir poor Tevita, published in the Daily Telegraph of
Charles Mitchell, to understand it, not having March IBth, 1887, by one Jabez Watkin, chaplain
lived amongst the Tongan people. In addition to Baker. This Jabez Watkin had once been a
to the almost overwhelming difficulty in getting colleague of the Rev. Tevita Fenau. This Jabez
his witnesses to apeak out, Mr. Moulton had Watkin sat in that awful closed court where
other tremendous odds to contend against, and murder was legalised, and innocent men condemned
the struggle was a most unequal one through- t 0 die. In what capacity Jabez Watkin sat
out. I admire Mr. Moulton’s energy, his there God alone hnoweth. At the time the letter
ability, his philanthropical self-sacrifice, and I was , writt ® u > P? or . T , evita was >y in fc' “ Prison
respect him more than any man that I know ; n . e , y mad > and with no prospect of ever being
maa evident to „! hi. (riend. tha, hi, "
virtues, his uprightness, and his true nobility Paragraph 12 of the Re t t ' lls us of 4000 folio 3
of character were a severe handicap to him in 0 f evidence relating to his Excellency’s enquiry,
fighting his wily and unscrupulous enemy, who There are many thousands anxiously waiting for
had on his side the almighty influence of the the publication of this mass of evidence, together
King over his people, who had at his disposal with the afore mentioned damning evidence which
all the machinery of a despotic Government, came to light during the trial of Mr. R. Hanslip.
and who did not hesitate to put these powers to ms Enclosure 11 tells us that Sir Charles Mitchell’s
their basest uses. Report “has not given universal satisfaction in
During the trial of Mr. Robert Hanslip, some his ° ritios “ c l °“ 3l "? i ° ns ” reach ® d
. *1? i i j ■ ~ 7 “ ° by him “do not seem logical.” “To some who
most awful and damning disclosures came to have been familiar with the past, and are anxious
light as to Mr Bakers method of procuring about the future of Tonga, Sir Charles Mitchell’s
evidence. Vide enclosure 10, and Report, conclusion is a riddle,” and, “as it is, some mem-
paragraph 56. These damning facts should bers of Parliament, and other gentlemen, are con-
throw grave doubt on the whole of Baker’s sidering a course of action designed to bring about
evidence, and should be taken into considera- a reversal of Sir Charles Mitchell’s decision on this
tion when reading paragraphs 41, 55, 57, and point.”
58 of the Report. Thus far I have omitted any The announcement by Laifoni, at the execution,
reference to my account of the brutal outrages v ' z- > h erea fter the island would be accursed,
of Black Monday, February 7th, 1887, which B ive , a hia comment. (Enclosure 14.) His other re-
signalised the arrival of R. B. Leefe, our new “ Maumau lagala, by which he meant
Acting British Vice-Consul. This comes under , ,^ hat a cn " u waste of good hves (Enclosure
lu u a c 4.u ii j .• i , 14), conveys its own reproach,
he head of the alleged exaggerations, and must j may y here remark l that Laifoni (the Crown
therefore be duly noticed. Prince) was never examined, although a most im-
-Ist. 1 would point out that, with the one ex- portant witness. He speaks English well, and is
ception of the gallant conduct of Mr. Leefe not afraid to speak out. His name was on the list
(ex-naval officer), the whole of the details given of witnesses when I left Tonga, but I have since
of these outrages have been borne out by sworn heard that the wily and unscrupulous “controller
affidavits, and by statements made on oath of Tongan evidence” had managed to get Laifoni
before Sir Charles Mitchell himself. Of the 3ent awa y before his time came,
raid on the mission premises, and the attendant d ma y bere remark (in conclusion) that, since the
brutal ill-treatment, I was an unwilling witness. enc P lir y. Mr. Van Hagen was my fellow-passenger
I therefore write from personal observation. boar d the U. 8. S. Co. us, fVamm, from Fiji to
Mr. Leefe’s gallant conduct happened as de- New , Zeala “ d - Mr Van Hagen then expressed h.s
• , , • e i ~ ... ~ vi “a great regret at the misunderstanding that had
scribed in my letter, with the exception that I Scourredfand assured me that, on his arrival in
went twice for him. At first he refused to come, London, he would take immediate steps to remove
telling me that I was a fool for troubling about R. Before leaving Tonga Mr. Van Hagen marked
it; that we were making a great fuss about the graves of the Malinoa Martyrs with a huge
nothing, etc. I told him that the lives and wooden cross, painted crimson, and bearing the
property of British subjects were in danger, inscription,
To this he replied, “ Tell Mr. Moulton to write “ Vengeance is Mine.”
me a letter stating such to be the case, and (Reprinted from Weekly Advocate, October Bth.)
