





MR. BAZALGETTE’S AGENT
BY
LEONARD MEERIOK
LONDON
GEORGE ROUTLEDGE AND SONS
BROADWAY, LUDGATE HILL
GLASGOW AND NEW YORK
1888


J. H. Harburton


Donated to the
National Library of
Australia
from the estate of
Anne Morris


[?]
MR. BAZALGETTE’S AGENT


R. BAZALGETTE'S AGENT
BY
LEONARD MERRICK
LONDON
GEORGE ROUTLEDGE AND SONS
BROADWAY, LUDGATE HILL
GLASGOW AND NEW YORK
1888


TO
THE EDITOR OF “WIT AND WISDOM,”
C SJe&uatr
THIS MY EARLIEST ATTEMPT AT BOOK-FORM,
IN GRATEFUL REMEMBRANCE
OF THE FIRST PROFESSIONAL ENCOURAGEMENT
I RECEIVED TO WRITE.
LEONARD MERRICK.
London, June, 1888.


MR. BAZALGETTE’S AGENT.
CHAPTER I.
July 4ih, 1887.
A deeaey boarding-house sitting-room command-
ing a view, when the slatternly domestic chances to
clean the windows, of an equally dismal London
street.
The society usually met with, I imagine, in an
establishment where a refined home and superior
cuisine are advertised as procurable in a musical
family at twenty-five shillings per week, and the
inevitable landlady who assures you, a propos of
nothing, she was “brought up to be a lady,”
evidently conscious you would never find it out.
The “musical family” has in this instance re-
solved itself into a red-haired child who murders
“ The Carnival of Venice ” with the pertinacity of
a barrel-organ deprived of its variety; and the
society, to be explicit, consists of several young
men who hurriedly depart after an early breakfast,
two middle-aged females, and a valetudinarian who
interests himself in floriculture, assiduously raising


something impossible to determine, but presumably
mustard-and-cress, against the wall in the back-
yard.
And these are my surroundings ! For the time
being, I am alone in the long bare apartment where
Susan will presently come to lay the dinner. The
piece de resistance yesterday was beef, resistance
indeed so strong that it defied your teeth; to-day
therefore the entree will be u curried mutton,” —
otherwise beef, but rechauffe and rechristened.
Let me review my position ! I have earned my
living in the schoolroom and on the stage; that is
to say, I was a governess until people discovered I
had been an actress, and I was actress till they dis-
covered I could not act. What next ? I have
nothing to do; lam eight-and-twenty; and I own
precisely four pounds thirteen and sixpence in the
world. Three weeks more of the u refined home ”
to anticipate, and after that the deluge, with
perhaps half-a-sovereign to buy an umbrella.
Truly, Miss Lea, your prospects are brilliant!
And yet I believe I could smile at it all in other
companionship; I fancy I could enjoy the present,
and leave the future to take care of itself, if
(detestable conjunction) there were only a present
to enjoy. The sepulchral gloom of this menage
communicates itself and weighs me down in spite
of my disposition; the ghastly silence and the faded
respectability play havoc with my nervous system.
Low spirits are as infectious as scarlet fever; and


there is nothing upon earth more infections than
scarlet fever, — excepting a rich man’s laugh !
I suppose it was dulness that drove me to these
blank pages as a confidant, on the principle on which
we always seek a friend, to share our sorrows, not
to divide our joys. This, by-the-hye, suggests
that if there were no trouble in life there would
be no friendship either; how unflattering a reflec-
tion for humanity !
Nevertheless I know that to commence a diary is
a mistake; I feel it while I yield to the temptation.
It permits you, that fatal volume, to write all the
spiteful things you must not say; and once begin
to make spiteful comments on your neighbours, and
you tacitly admit your own life to be a failure.
Mine is to be a success. Yes, future repository of all
my peccadilloes, I am not forgetting I shall be thirty
in two years; I am painfully aware that unless
something unforeseen turns up before the end of the
month I shall bid Mrs. Everett’s select circle a
reluctant adieu at the express recommendation of
my physician to try the South of France; and not-
withstanding, I repeat it emphatically,—my life
shall be a success ! How ? I wonder !—Goodness,
what a fool I am, and here is Susan with the
cloth!


July 7th.
When I penned the foregoing entry three days
ago, 1 was idealess ; to-night, on the contrary, I am
revolving a suggestion so positively original, that
for the moment it deprived me of breath. The
credit of this achievement belongs to a Mr. Claussen,
perhaps the only man in the house with whom my
conversation has extended further than admitting
it was a fine morning, or saying “ thank you ” for
the salt.
He is a clerk in an insurance broker’s office some-
where in the City, and being a foreigner contrasts
to advantage, socially, with the other residents,
Messrs. Smith, Brown, and Eobinson, —also clerks,
but British ones. This evening he came upon me
as I was studying the “ wanted ss sheet of the news-
paper, and, to my own astonishment, I presently
found myself explaining a good deal more of my
circumstances than was necessary, even going so far
as to hint that an occupation would not be totally
undesirable.
“ 1 Everything comes to him who knows how to
wait,’ does not the proverb tell us?” he remarked
in English. “ Ach, but that is a proverb so little
understood. He has to know how to wait, and by
the time he has learnt, the knowledge is of trifling
personal use; he is too old, yes ? ”
“Precisely,” I returned, “waiting in an arm-
chair, for instance, is scarcely the advice in-
tended ?”


“ Ha, ha, you see my meaning, you have per-
ception ! ”
“ Some while ago one of our periodicals published
a series of articles informing people how to live on
a pound a week; an interesting sequel would be
‘How to make it.’ The instruction does not go so
far as that, however,” I observed, “yet I wonder of
how many thousand lives it is the chief, the only
study! ”
“But,” said Mr. Claussen, “you are a lady of
brains, of education ”
“And,” I added boldly, “ I am looking here to
ascertain their marketable price! ”
“ So, so ! Nevertheless, my dear Miss, you are
wrong ; for it is not to this page, I would say to
such a woman, she should look! ”
He laid a squat forefinger contemptuously upon
it as he spoke, completely filling a vacant situation!
“Ho,” he repeated, “not there ! ”
“ ‘Hot there, not there, my child ! ’ Where then,
Mr. Claussen?”
“Turn to the last sheet, my dear Miss; to the
back of the paper instead ! ”
“You don’t mean the ‘ Agony Column ’ ? ”
“Yes,” he exclaimed, “ you have it now ! Cer-
tainly it has occurred to me that a woman of the
world, a woman of appearance, of capacity, with
whom, you follow me, the path is not of rosebuds,
might glance there with advantage ! Us ist nur ein
Einfall , but it has been my thought! Here is a


business where breeding must be a recommenda-
tion ; do they pay for breeding in the linen-draper’s
shop ? Here is a work where beauty is a passport;
it is no passport to the schoolmistress, not at all. I
am right, yes ? Look! ”
I did look, and this is what I read :
“Alfred Bazalgette, 7, Queen’s Eow,
High. Holborn.—Suspected persons watched
for divorce, and private matters investigated with
secrecy and despatch. Agents of both sexes.
Consultations free.”


CHAPTER II.
July Bth.
I passed a bad night; perhaps it was only to be
expected. At four a.w. I told myself even to have
considered such a vocation was preposterous ; at five
I decided that, should the weather be fine after break-
fast, I ought at least to obtain particulars; and
then I grew alarmed again, and prayed it might be
wet. It having rained persistently for three weeks
the compromise calmed me, and I finally fell asleep.
Alas, the “mocking sunshine,” as the poets have
it, deprived me of my last hope when Susan called
me some three hours later. So at noon, while the red-
headed prodigy is belabouring the piano, behold me
descending Mrs, Everett’s front-door steps, with
“ my courage in two hands.”
Praised be the saints, the sweet mama of the latest
little terror I tried to teach had a Parisian maid;
beneficent powers be also praised, I lent F(dise
French novels, and in return she made my dresses !
I am reminded of the fact as I contemplate my re-
flection in a plate-glass window, the hang of my
skirt, coupled with the consciousness of having ex-
pended I am ashamed to chronicle how much a yard


for the material, imparting an exhilarating certitude
about my costume. Yes, Fdlise; you had your weak-
nesses, notably a penchant for Zola, cigarettes, and
the footmen, the last of which predilections cost you
your place; but with this your creation on my back
I am charitably disposed, and my recollection is not
a harsh one!
In Oxford Street I turned, and bought a pair of
gloves, declining “ Our Eeliable Chevrette ” with
the delicate scorn of a millionaire, and disbursing
four and sixpence though my heart ached. I have
not sojourned eight-and-twenty years in this vale of
tears without discovering that the less you look in
want of the thing you solicit the more likely you are
to get it. My toilette being now calculated to in-
spire respect I proceeded towards my destination.
Wo. 7, Queen’s Eow, High Holborn, was con-
spicuous only by a highly-polished brass-plate
bearing the terse inscription—
“A. Bazalgette : Detective.” On the right of the
passage in entering I found the name again, painted
in black capitals on a white background, “ Second
Floor:—Bazalgette. Mendes.,” and to the second
floor I nervously mounted. I was admitted to a
small front-room, in which I took a seat, amusing
myself, while waiting, by the perusal of a printed
notice to the following effect.
“ Detectives are to present themselves daily at
II a.m. —All detectives to give voucher to Superin-
tendant for sums received.”


The announcement had a mysterious fascination
for me, and I was gazing at it still when an indi-
vidual appeared who politely inquired my errand.
He was a negative sort of man, inclined to stoutness,
who might have been any age from twenty-five to
forty. His hair was sandy, his very freckles were
sandy ; he was sandy from his suggestion of whisker
to the colour of his clothes; his cheeks alone dis-
carded the prevailing tint, and they were florid and
fat. You took him for the most simple, ingen-
uous of creatures until you met his eyes, and then
you started, they were so bright and cunning. It
seemed as if all the wickedness of the human race
must be known to the owner of those eyes, and there
could be no mortal depravity so uncommonly vile as
to surprise him.
I said, “Is Mr. Bazalgette in ? ” And he replied,
with the slightest tinge of foreign accent, “Ho,
madam; is it anything I can do for you ? I am
Mr. Bazalgette’s partner.”
“You employ women, do you not ? ” I resumed
diffidently. “ I was led to imagine so ! ”
“ Occasionally, yes : it depends on the business!”
“I , that is, what arrangements have to be
made ? ”
“I can’t tell you that without knowing what you
refer to; ” he smiled, “of course if you will explain
your case you may be sure we shall adopt the proper
measures.”
“You misunderstand me. I have no case to con*


fide, I learnt that yon—er —did make such engage-
ments, and being through reverses of fortune com-
pelled to adopt some mode of livelihood ,” I
began desperately, and then stopped suddenly short
for the overwhelming reason that I saw the man did
not believe me.
“Well, come now,’ 5 he said indulgently, “are
you in trouble, or is a friend of yours in trouble,
which is it ? ”
If at that moment the Brussels carpet could have
yawned at my feet, and engulfed me, I am confident
my sensation would have been one of unmixed
gratitude. To be regarded by this cheerful wretch
as a possible forger, or worse, scattered the last
remnants of my self-possession, and sent the blood
tingling into my face and neck with all the forty-
horse blushing power of an ingenue in book muslin.
“ Let us comprehend each other, Mr. Mendes,
please, for I presume I am speaking to that gentle-
man ! ” I said as steadily as I could manage. “I
have, as I stated, called to ask for employment on
your staff; have you a vacancy, or have you not ? ”
Bor an instant, to do him justice, he evinced signs
of being faintly disconcerted; then, “What are your
qualifications ? ” he demanded.
“ I speak French, German, and Italian; I have a
tolerable acquaintance with the Continent, and—”
“ Yes, yes ! why do you choose this work ? ”
“ Because I want money; moreover, because I
think I have some latent aptitude for it.”


“ What are your references ? ”
a Are references essential?”
u Indispensable ! We must always be certain there
has never been anything against the applicant.”
“ I can furnish you with a testimonial from a lady
with whom I lived in the capacity of governess, I
brought it with me in the event of such a thing
being required. It is, as you will perceive, dated
ten months back, but I can assure you I have not
committed a burglary in the meantime, and in it
you can see for yourself the reason of my quitting
her house.
u 1 Lady Edward Jones having ascertained Miss
Lea has occupied a position on the public stage, and
being unwilling that Master Pelham Jones should
imbibe any vulgar tendencies towards art, will
have no alternative but to dispense with Miss
Lea’s services at the expiration of the present
quarter.’ ”
Apparently unable to appreciate the subtle love-
liness of the extract I bad quoted, Mr. Mendes read
this precious epistle from the address to the final
full stop.
“ How have you lived since, Miss Lea? ”
“On my savings; the exposure of my terrible
past did not occur until I had been fulfilling my
duties for two years.”
“ Ah ; and you are staying now ? ”
“Where I have been staying ever since ; ” and I
gave him the number of the street.


I deemed it now time to put a few queries on
my own account.
u Might I ask what salary you usually allow ? ”
“We have no fixed figure, it varies; we dis-
charge all expenses, and pay per diem in accordance
with the nature of the undertaking, from five
shillings to , well, we have paid so much as four
pounds.”
“A day?”
“ A day.”
Good heavens, twenty-eight pounds a week! It
seemed incredible that a single member of the estab-
lishment should be remunerated at so vast a rate
till I reflected the client would probably be charged
double the amount in the bill.
“I need not tell you,” he continued, “ that was
in extremely rare cases, and in taking fresh persons
we try them on very small jobs.”
“ I should have thought,” I remarked with
emphasis, “ a lady would have been valuable from
the first; I have understood that Scotland Yard
will pay any amount for ladies and gentlemen, they
are so difficult to secure, and still more difficult to
keep ! ”
I had not understood anything of the kind, but it
was a venture, and it told.
“Of course,” he rejoined blandly, “we do not
get many applicants quite like yourself, but then it
is seldom we should want them; our principal inves-
tigations are for divorce, and we send out our female


agents most usually as ladies’-maids. Still, as you
observe, there are exceptions, and occasions
where ”
“ Where a knowledge of the Queen’s English and
the usages of society are desirable ! Well, what is
your reply ? ”
At this juncture we were interrupted by the
advent of a tall military-looking man with a springy
walk, moustache-points fiercely waxed, and a
brilliant silk hat set jauntily on the side of his
head. Mr. Mendes glanced round at him, and
nodded.
“How are you?” he said. “Will you go
through?” f « 4
The new-comer strode into the adjoining apart-
ment, through which I caught a glimpse of yet another
door, but his arrival had terminated my interview.
“ What is your reply, Mr. Mendes ? ” I re-
peated.
“We have no opening at present,” he averred
hurriedly. “ Should an occasion crop up we will
see ! How I must say ‘ good morning,’ madam.
If you are passing you might drop in in the course
of a week or two, —good day ! ”
And so ended my wild attempt towards this
strange career.


CHAPTER III.
July 19 th.
Eleven days have passed; two pounds ten of
my capital have gone to swell Mrs. Everett’s
exchequer, and on settling the account yesterday
morning I gave her a week’s notice, the next pre-
sented being the last I can defray.
lam in trouble about my trunk too. It would
doubtless look remarkable to leave it in her charge ;
people ordered abroad for the benefit of their health
usually take their portmanteaux with them. But
though with strict economy I shall have enough for
a cab-fare on Monday, and can depart in orthodox
style, if I am hampered by luggage, where on earth
am Ito tell the man to drive ? Without it I might
alter my mind on the subject of the previous
direction delivered with great distinctness for the
benefit of Susan ; get out; and complacently dis-
charge him well inside the shilling radius. I won-
der if the cloak-room at Charing-Cross , no, I
suppose not 1
Oh, “ dere diry,” I no longer feel the capability
of smiling if I had the provocation ! Baggage apart,


what is to become of me, homeless in this wilder-
ness of houses ? where am I going when I have
shaken the dust of Mrs. Everett’s Kidderminster
from my feet ? Eor ten months, with a roof to
cover me, I have endeavoured to obtain an occupa-
tion, and in vain; how then can I hope to find
one without a shelter, and deprived of food? It
is too terrible; in my most ultramarine fits of
abject depression, promoted by a protracted presence
of the two middle-aged females, I never imagined
a strait like this! It seems as if it could not be
real, and yet I know it is. Once, if another woman
like myself had told me she had tried during ten
months in London to get employment and failed,
I would not have credited it, or I should have said,
u My dear little simpleton, you have not set properly
about it I ” Kow from personal experience I learn
how very easy of occurrence such a thing may be.
Since I opened you last, my blotted volume, I have
made a succession of visits to all the agencies whose
books are adorned with the cognomen of u Miriam
Lea ” ; I have spent sixpence replying to three
bogus advertisements, and ineffectively walked my-
self tired to answer some genuine ones. Kismet!
Unhappily the sentiment is philosophical but not
filling, and one cannot live on philosophy,—un-
less, indeed, a publisher chances to appreciate it
too.
On consideration, my sole resource is to secure
the cheapest bedroom available; quit the Board


and Residence accompanied by my belongings, and
start pledging my wardrobe without delay.
And when it is gone ?—I give it up !
* * * * *
July 21 st.
In pursuit of more ordinary avocations I had
lost sight of Mr. Mendes’ permission to return.
Only three more days remain to me ; it is my last
chance; I will go.
*****
July 22nd.
I am engaged ! My hand is trembling so I can
hardly hold the pen. When I went in, Mr. Mendes
was exchanging some muttered confidence with a
portly personage I intuitively guessed to be his
partner. I did not devote much attention to the
latter, however; I only remember he struck me
as being considerably the elder of the two. My
previous acquaintance recognised me with what
appeared to me a slight indication of astonishment,
at which Mr. Bazalgette raised his brows interroga-
tively, and Mr. Mendes affirmatively closed his
eyes. Prom these rapid signals in woman’s own
deaf and dumb language I gathered I had been the
subject of their conversation, and had not inoppor-
tunely arrived. After a few preliminary observations
my suspicion was confirmed.
u I have been talking of you to Mr. Bazalgette,
Miss Lea,” said the younger man hesitatingly.


“ Indeed we thought it possible we might com-
municate with you.”
“ Indeed ? ” I remarked.
“Yon still believe yourself capable of conducting
a negotiation ? ”
“Decidedly.”
“Hem!”
“You are a linguist, I hear?” said Mr. Bazal-
gette, speaking for the first time.
“I know German, French, and Italian, yes!”
I answered.
“ And can converse in them fluently if need he?”
“In French as fluently as in English, I lived
many years in Brussels ; in German and Italian not
with equal facility, but well! ”
“You have accomplishments,—do music on occa-
sion, eh ? ”
“ I play and sing.”
“ So; come in here, Miss Lea, sit down ! ”
They preceded me into the inner office, which I
found larger and much better furnished than the other,
and I augured well from the invitation. Mr. Mendes
seated himself at a mahogany desk confronting me
where I lay back in the morocco leather arm-chair ;
while Mr. Bazalgette stood on the same side with
his back to the empty grate, staring at me also.
I was beginning to feel queer.
“How, Miss Lea,” resumed the former of the
pair, if we should consent to intrust a commission
to your charge, not a job of following a suspected


person on foot or in cabs, but with a really big case,
are yon willing to undertake it ? ”
“Yes
“ I think so !” said Mr. Bazalgette dreamily, as
if he had been asked a question too.
“Then listen, and when there is anything you
don’t understand have it made clear I Mr. Bazal-
gette’s services have been solicited by Messrs.
Wynn, May, Eeimer and Company, the financiers
of Lombard Street, to trace an absconded party.
Perhaps you have seen some particulars of the affair
in the papers ? The man we want is their late
managing clerk, Jasper Yining. On the eighteenth
of April this person pleading extreme ill-health sent
in his resignation, ostensibly intending a lengthy
sojourn in Australia. That there was any motive
beyond the explanation he tendered was not sus-
pected, for, although it is now ascertained he was
accustomed to plunge heavily at cards and on the
turf, he comes of a first-rate family, and had for
years enjoyed the entire confidence of the House,
His resignation at a month’s notice was therefore a
subj ect for regret; all the same they parted on the
best of terms.
“ After his departure, not till a month after, for he
had planned his coup well, it transpired that during
the four weeks previous to April the eighteenth he
had been systematically forging bills upon the firm’s
correspondents in Yienna, Berlin, St. Petersburg,
and Copenhagen to the tune of forty thousand


pounds; in his capacity of manager, himself opening
the letters containing the forged bills accepted, and
subsequently discounting them on the Exchange.
Besides this, taking with him in his flight one one-
thousand, and one fiye-hundred-pound bond of
Egyptian Unified Loan which had shortly before
come into his possession in the ordinary course of
his duties connected with the Stock-Exchange Settle-
ment. Is it plain to you so far ? ”
“ Quite, thank you; will you go on, please ? ”
“ Messrs. Wynn, May, Peimer and Company’s
first step on discovering the fraud,” continued
the detective, “was to immediately consign the
matter to the dexterity of Scotland Yard, whose
efforts, as yet, have not been crowned by success.
The time has certainly been short, but the inter-
ested parties growing impatient have now very
naturally come to us.”
If the “not” had been uttered in italics, the
“us” was delivered in capitals. Yo type in
Printing House Square, however, could have
rendered entire justice to the pronoun as it was
pronounced just then by Mr. Mendes.
“And now, Miss Lea,” he concluded impres-
sively after the briefest pause, “ I must inform you
Mr. Bazalgette, with the most signal mark of esteem,
has decided to confide the necessary operations in
this affair to you ! ”
“I am grateful for the opening! And those
operations will be ? ”


“ First to find the man ; then to he in his com-
pany till you have got sufficient information to con-
vince the authorities yon have a right to demand an
arrest! That yon may appreciate how exception-
ally fortunate a young lady you are,” insisted Mr.
Mendes, who did not appear able to lose sight of
the fact, u I may tell you that, in the whole course
of his experience, Mr. Bazalgette only remembers
two cases where important business like this has
been committed to raw hands, and then the posses-
sion of social polish in the agents was not merely
desirable, but absolutely indispensable ! ”
u I shall endeavour to justify Mr. Bazalgette’s
confidence,” I returned sweetly, u and yours too,
Mr. Mendes. But on the subject of the arrest:—
how am I to make it if he resists ? ”
“ You do not make the arrest at all, it is a
Treasury prosecution; simply communicate with
us ! ”
“ And I suppose I am to search for him any-
where but in Australia ? ”
u Exactly; he may be in any country but the
one he gave out he was going to, —although, I
don’t know ! He is smart enough to choose that
very one in preference to all others ! ”
u I think not I ” said Mr. Bazalgette, opening his
month again. “He would never risk a destination
where he could not arrive until after the exposure
in England had taken place; the voyage to Aus-
tralia is too long. Eegarding the Continent, a


swell like Jasper Yining lives in capitals or big
cities, and it mnst be borne in mind he was person-
ally known to those correspondents of his firm on
whom he drew the forged bills; therefore, unless
we except Hamburg as a probable refuge for a
bachelor, we may also dismiss Austria, Russia,
Denmark, and Germany ! 55
He accompanied his calculation by a rapid motion
of his forefinger, as if he were actually demolish-
ing the countries he named; indeed, under the
guidance of this wonderful man, the map of
Europe seemed to be dwindling to half its natural
size.
“We do except Hamburg ? 55 inquired his
partner. “ H-u-m-ph,—yes;’ 5 he rejoined, “you
will go to Hamburg first, Miss Lea ! In all towns
you visit under our instructions you will stop at the
best hotels, and wherever it is practicable, obtain
lists of the recent arrivals. 55
“ And if I see his name how am I to act ? 55
“You are not expecting him to travel as Jasper
Yining, are you ? The name will of course be an
assumed one, but it must be amongst the recent
arrivals you make investigations. Do you follow
me ? 55
“Yes. 55
“Here, 55 and he drew out a capacious portfolio,
“is the party’s photo ; it was taken a year ago, and
given by Yining to Mr. and Mrs. May. He is
handsome, well-made, and about forty years of age.


You will have this with you for purposes of identi-
fication, but be prepared for some alteration of
appearance, the loss of the moustache, the growth
of a beard, or such like! Every day you will send
ns a report of your movements ; in no case will you
leave a city without authority, unless upon sudden
and most urgent occasion. Here is a cipher, and
here the c key; ’ in the event of wiring the cipher
is to be used. See if you understand it I ??
“ It looks perfectly intelligible,—yes ! ”
“ The telegraphic address is ‘ Bazalgette, Lon-
don;’ letters you will direct to ‘A. Bazalgette,
Esquire, T, Queen’s Bow, High Holborn,’ don’t say
‘ Detective ! ’ Write that down —here is a new
note-book; and put the likeness, and the cipher, and
the 1 key ’ in the pocket of the cover. You had
better call yourself a widow — Mrs. Lea; good name,
( Lea,’ eh ? nothing conspicuous about it ? ”
Hr. Mendes signified approval.
“As a lady you will travel with your own
maid.”
“ Where shall I engage her, in London ? ”
‘ £ She will be provided; one of our female agents
will go with you in that capacity.”
“ I am to be under surveillance ? ”
u There is no question of £ surveillance ’ about it.
The conduct of the affair is in our charge, and the
finer portion of the actual work in yours, but it is
perfectly impossible that you could go alone, and
this woman’s knowledge of the rougher part of the


business you will doubtless find useful! Now, is
there anything further you want to know ? ”
“ Yes ; ” I said, “ to go to the best hotels as you
instruct I shall require several different toilettes,
which I don’t possess; walking costumes, dinner
dresses, etc.”
“ Can you manage on fifty pounds ? ”
“ Pretty well.”
“ Very good, then; you shall have the money.”
He wrote a cheque for the amount suggested, and
passed it to Mr. Mendes, with the request that ho
would see it cashed at once.
“I should like to know, too, what salary you
propose to offer; also, if out of my salary lam to
pay the bills and railway fares ? ”
“ All expenses we defray,” he responded; “ your
salary will be—a pound a day. Is that satisfac-
tory ? ”
“No,” I demurred calmly, “it isn’t I lam not
prepared to quit my home and friends, to be,
pardon the word, ostracized by society for a pound
a- day.”
“ I think you exaggerate,” he remonstrated.
“ Pecause you enter our employ you would hardly
be an ostracite ! ”
“No, lam quite sure of that! ” I answered, and
I nearly laughed aloud at his mistake. “ But you
must admit I should be renouncing a good deal
for a temporary occupation very poorly paid.
When I was here before, Mr. Mendes asserted you


seldom required the services of a lady; so that, on
the termination of this undertaking, I should he
without an engagement from you, probably find it
extremely difficult to return to more ordinary
occupations, and only have earned a trifling sum to
make amends for the embarrassment. JSTo, Mr.
Bazalgette,” and I inspected the tips of the fonr-
and-sixpenny gloves with gentle regret, “if that is
your proposal, I am sorry, but I must decline ! ”
“We might go so far as thirty shillings, I can’t
offer more! Do you agree or not ? ”
I dared not venture losing ten guineas a week by
stipulating for still higher payment, so bowed assent
as Mr. Mendes re-entered the room.
“Then that is settled ! Kindly affix your signa-
ture to this contract, Miss Lea, and to a receipt for
that fifty pounds. To-day is Friday,—you will
present yourself here to-morrow, be ready to leave
London on Monday, and a hundred pounds for ex-
penses will be placed in your hands on that morning.
Kow, good afternoon ! ”
#
July 25th.
I ca.n only make a brief note, but I feel this
portentous day should not be allowed to pass with-
out an entry of some sort. At twelve o’clock I was
with Messrs. Bazalgette and Mendes in their office;
at five my costumes came home, not bad considering
they were ordered barely four days ago, and that


yesterday was Sunday; at half past seven I bade
adieu to the hoarding house, though I did not deem
it essential to inform Mr. Claussen I had ever acted
on his •suggestion, and shortly after eight I met
Emma Dunstan at Holborn Yiaduct.
I found her on our introduction a hard-featured
woman of modest demeanour, quietly dressed in
black. I address her by her surname, and she calls
me “ma’am.” I had wondered whether she would
when we were oh the stage, I mean when we were
not acting; hut she did it as a matter of course, and
I suppose there are degrees even among policemen.
She occupies the second-class compartment behind
me now, and I, in well-padded and uninterrupted
privacy, am scribbling this in the train between
London and Queenhorough, en route for Hamburg.
I am not sorry to be alone, though my thoughts
are none of the pleasantest company. Mrs. Everett’s
face appeared, or rather disappeared, like the coun-
tenance of a friend as I saw it last from the window
of the four-wheeler ; the dismal habitation where I
have been bored so, assumed the proportions of a
lost haven of refuge when once it was forsaken, and,
oh, that sinking sensation of the heart as I rattled
away through the gaslit streets to the station, and
realised the nature of the mission on which I am
engaged.
The enormousness of the operation struck home
to me then with full force. Deprived of Mr.
Bazalgette’s reassuring presence, the magnitude of


this pin-in-a-haystack search for a man I have never
seen, frightened and appalled me. And all the
while beating its chilling sense into my brain, till
I dreaded to find myself unconsciously repeating it
aloud, was one sentence, one paramount thought:—
“ I am a detective ! ”


CHAPTER IV.
Hamburg, July 29th.
I arrived at ten o’clock at night three days ago,
and am quartered with “ my maid ” at the Ham-
burger Hof. Opposite me as I write is the Alster
Bassin, with ridiculously small steamers on it, like
penny toys puffing up and down. It is four p.m.,
and the entire population appears to have chosen
the Allee before my windows for their promenade.
I explained to the portier that I had reason to
believe a letter from my cousin had miscarried, and
was anxious to ascertain if she had reached Ham-
burg without my knowledge. A two-mark piece,
and a smile, made him my devoted slave, and
yesterday morning he presented himself to ‘ Madame
Lea ’ with a file of the £ Hamburger Fremdenblatt ’
of the past six weeks, containing a list of all the
arrivals in the town.
Deeming it just as well to prosecute my re-
searches a short time further back, however, I called
at Streitt’s Hotel, as well as the hotels St. Peters-
burg and De I’Europe, and with the same excuse
received permission in both instances to examine the
‘ Strangers’ Book.’ Having done this, I feel that I


have been brilliant but not successful! To per-
sonally inspect all the Mullers and the Schultzes,
and the Blancs and the Greys, who since the
eighteenth of May last have been deposited in this
bustling German port is beyond me. I can only
attentively study Jasper Yining’s photograph, and
frequent the places of most public resort. lam
going directly to the open-air concert at Uhlenhorst.
The work is not so bad as I had feared; there is
an excitement about it, and you live like a lady;
the only objection is you feel such an impostor
when a nice woman is friendly with you. I have
decidedly thrown away any chances of advancement
I might otherwise have had, but the chances were
not distinguishable, and ilfaut vivre I
How unevenly the world’s goods are divided;
and how useless making an elaborate arithmetical
demonstration to a socialist that he would only be
something three-farthings better off if the division
were to occur all over again ! It is like arguing
with a starving wretch on the futility of craving for
a single meal, because if it were given to him he
would still be hungry in the morning.
Here I am in a profession (is it a profession, I
wonder ?—I daresay; it is called a profession to
murder innocent men, Avhy then should it not be
one to detect the guilty !) Here lamon a mission
which if they knew it would cause people to shrink
away from me, and yet my offence is, that, after
struggling to obtain a livelihood for the best part


of a year in the greatest capital of modern civiliza-
tion, I was absolutely forced to make myself an
object of general abhorrence by the discreditable
fact that circumstances were stronger than I ! What
a crime ! Britannia rules the waves ! She would
be better occupied in finding food for the Britons !
But it was not to make cynical reflections in a
diary that I was sent here by Messrs. Bazalgette
and Mendes ; I am going out!
*****
August 9 th.
Hamburg, with all due deference to its manifold
attractions, is, so far as I am concerned, a failure.
I have more than once braved the perils of a fifteen-
minutes’ voyage to Uhlenhorst, where I was surprised
at the excellence of the music, until I heard the con-
ductor’s name; I have sipped coffee at the square
wooden tables of the gardens, and, observing a far-
away look in Bunstan’s eyes, decided it was occa-
sioned by a recollection of ’appy ’ampstead. I have
worn out a pair of shoes on the Jungfernstieg, and
cultivated a taste for Wagner, but, alas, I have not
encountered Jasper Yiniug.
By-the-bye, the capabilities of my coadjutrix do
not tempt me into any gushing dissertations ! Up
to the present all the-luminous ideas have been mine,
not hers. It is true I have not set the Thames on
fire, or (to throw in a little local colour) I have not
o


ignited tlie Elbe, but the ideas have been luminous
all the same.
You, my smudgy confidant, I admit have been
neglected, but I have not the time nor the patience
to keep a double diary, and my daily reports to
London recording my bills, walks, talks, and
thoughts, are detailed enough to satisfy a lady’s
confessor. They even appear to satisfy my em-
ployers now I have grasped the style of thing de-
sired. At first it was obj ected I digressed too much;
the firm was not anxious to learn I had been sleepy
when we arrived at Flushing, or to be favoured with
my opinions on the German scenery ; but now that
I comprehend the sort of particulars expected, and
couch them in the telegraphically brief sentences of
the French feuilleton , amiability reigns supreme.
In my last I communicated the unfavourable re-
sult of my investigations in this city, and by reply
am bidden to depart for Spain and Portugal, visit-
ing San Sebastian, Barcelona, Seville, Madrid, and
Lisbon in turn. I leave at 10-5 to-morrow morn-
ing, and am due in Cologne at seven the same night.
Dunstan does the packing. Fancy me with a
maid!
--- v- v * *
Pams, August Wth.
What a j ourney ! lam stopping here the day,
as there is no express until twenty minutes past
eight this evening. Lunstan’s fare from Cologne


cost as mucli as mine, only first-class compartments
being available unless we remained for the seven
o’clock train next morning; as it was we had to wait
three hours and a half !
The waiter informing Madame it was but five
minutes’ walk to the Cathedral, we went to see it, and
Dunstan declared it was u ’andsomer than the
Brighton Pavilion ! ” After that I discarded con-
versation for Galignani, and read it in the waiting-
room.
Among petty trials is there one more odious than
to view a sight which impresses yon in unsympa-
thetic company ? The primary sensation is one of
nnmixed delight; the second, a feeling of dumb rage
that is not reciprocated; and the third a keen annoy-
ance that you have been moved yourself.
If Dunstan had been a lady I should have
quarrelled with her. If I had not been a lady I
should have shaken her ! As it was I dissembled
with the newspaper, and chafed till half-past ten.
Paris looked delicious in the early sunshine as we
drove from the station to the Grand, and after my
night’s sleep in the ivagon-lit I was able to
thoroughly enjoy my breakfast, for which, including
vin ordinaire which I did not drink, I disbursed the
comparatively modest sum of five francs.
My ideas on the subject of expenditure I notice
are becoming regal!
I shall be glad when I have at length set foot in
San Sebastian; as yet I have done nothing worthy
C 2


to be mentioned, and, burning as I am to distin-
guish myself, it is aggravating to perceive my
present entry closely resembling the absolute
inanity of a guide-book !
% * % * *
San Sebastian, August 14 th.
“ I am here 1 ’’ I believe that was somebody’s
motto ; if it was anybody victorious I apologise, for
though I came and I saw two days ago, the
important climax of the Latin quotation would be
inappropriate. I am domiciled at the Hotel de
Londres (called ‘de Londres ’ presumably because,
being like an immense villa in the middle of a
garden, it immediately suggests Claridge’s or the
Langham), and under other conditions the place
would amuse me. You have to grow accustomed,
for instance, to only one woman in thirty wearing
a bonnet, the majority of feminine head-gears being
the mantilla; and it is a novelty to see fans
esteemed an indispensable adjunct to walking
costume in lieu of sunshades. How that the first
shock which these departures occasioned is begin-
ning to wear off, however, I am forced to admit
a couple of yards of black lace may, put on a
VEspagnole, make a very efficient substitute for the
creations of Louise, and to sorrowfully acknowledge
the language of the fan has been as utterly unknown
to me as the language of the land; more so, indeed,


for I found a strong resemblance between the latter
and Italian.
But the fan, what do these women not make it
say !
In the first place they carry it differently to us ;
in the second the wariest chaperone in Belgravia
would be baffled by its capabilities for speech in
the grasp of a Southern beauty of sixteen. “ I
like you,” and “You bother me,” “You may
follow me,” and “You are to wait here,” are, I
learn, among the commonest forms of expression in
this most mysterious of tongues.
There are a mama and her two daughters staying
in the Hotel; I say “ mama ” because the term
describes her so much better than “mother.” She
is the typical British matron, and the condemnatory
voice in which she talks about “ these foreigners ”
is glorious. She scans them superciliously in the
street through a pince-nez as if she were inspecting
the serpents at the Zoo, and, I verily believe,
regards their presence in their own country as an
unwarrantable intrusion.
I made her acquaintance this morning, the fact
of being English, and travelling with a maid,
probably recommending me to her favour. A maid
is a great credential, almost as “ tone-y ” as a
hyphen, and “ Mrs. Shoddy-Johnston’s carriage
blocks the way” sounds well, it is admitted,
else why the connecting dash ?
“So theatrical,” she finds the attire, she


informed me after entering into conversation as
graciously as if I did not know she would cut me
in Regent-street to-morrow if we met there, u so
theatrical, isn’t it ? The sort of thing one expects on
the stage, or at a fancy hall! ”
I shivered in the most approved insular fashion,
and agreed. Is it not my role to be on speaking
terms with as many persons as possible wherever I
may be ?
“ Quite so,” I assented, u it is a terrible blow to
one’s taste; only the chimney-pot hats of our com-
patriots in a measure relieve the eye ! ”
Here the daughters, enthusiastic art-students, it
transpired, flatly contradicted me with all the happy
spontaneity of short skirts.
“They couldn’t think that by any means,” they
cried in a duet, u the introduction of those conven-
tional hats into the picture seemed an anachronism,
fortunately they were rare I What, now, could be
more charming than the type of face ? Had I
noticed the colouring ? ”
Conscious of the mendacity of my statement I
temporized, and confessed the “ colouring ” had not
been duly observed.
“We are going to get some of the peasants to sit
to us,” they continued, mollified. “Mama wouldn’t
have come if it had not been for us, but one does so
much better work where one can select one’s models,
and sketch them from one’s own point of view I Of
course you know Weatherley’s ? ”


No, I did not know Weatherley’s, and they said,
u Ah, we forgot; you see we are so used to the
Art-world we take these matters quite for
granted ! ”
I converted a laugh into a cough, and attempted
to direct the discourse to more personal channels,
inquiring after the English tourists.
u Oh, we see nobody, nobody at all; we are certain
not to have met your friends (yon did say ‘friends ’ ?)
unless they are artists ! ”
“ Well,” I returned, u they happen to be ! The
friends I am hoping to meet are mostly singers and
musicians ! ”
It was undeniably weak, for I was scarcely
likely to derive any profitable information after
this, but these children’s assumption of superiority
was beginning to irritate me.
u Musicians ! ” they echoed coldly, “ Oh, but we
meant artists, ‘ painters ’ perhaps you would call
them, not, —not that sort of people ! ”
u Indeed, I used the designation in its wider
sense ! ” I responded humbly, and as the map of
Europe had appeared under the eliminating influence
of Mr. Eazalgette to be swiftly shrinking before my
eyes, so, during the remainder of the interview with
the ‘ art students ’ did the Art-world gradually
resolve itself into a territory devoted solely to
palette and brush, and bounded by Weatherley’s
class-room and the ‘ National.’
Interesting as this little family group may be, it


is plain its members will not advance me, so I drop
them. The full difficulty of my undertaking grows
upon me every hour, threatening at times the pro-
portions of a Frankenstein till I quail before it in
anticipation, and, analysing my emotions, I suppose
I must have looked forward to my efforts being
crowned with instantaneous results. Nevertheless
I know it would be absurd to feel discouraged so
soon, and, distant or near, success shall be mine
yet. I will find Jasper Yining ; I tvill find him ,
and when I do, if I fail to furnish a conclusive
proof of my abilities in the shape of his arrest, may
I , may I end my days listening to Czerny’s
hnndred-and-one exercises for eighteenpence an
hour!


CHAPTER V.
Lisbon, October the
Well, horribly near November! I am not
inditing a report, and I have a distinct aversion to
u coming to figures.’’
This reservation, being interpreted, means I am
ashamed to confess how long has passed since I
opened my diary last; how long it is since the
determination with which I perceive I penned the
foregoing lines has been succeeded by an ever-
increasing despair. Yes, it must be chronicled
these leaves have been untouched for the humiliat-
ing cause that I have had nothing to say; I have
not justified the confidence reposed in me, and my
ardour is damped by the knowledge. While in
Barcelona I had to ask for a further supply of
money, the initial hundred pounds, beneath the
claims of bills, railway-fares, and two weekly
salaries, having melted with awe-inspiring rapidity.
It was remitted forthwith, indeed Mr. Bazalgette
does not appear to regard my lack of success as
despondently as Ido myself. From what he terms
his “advices” he seems to think I shall be ex-
tremely useful in making Jasper Yining’s acquaint-
ance when he is encountered, but that his discovery


might be accelerated by the assistance of an “old
hand,” Anglick, a practised detective who should
travel with me as my brother, in place of Dunstan.
This suggestion I have respectfully but firmly
declined ; the Yicar of Daisies-on-the-Grass having
full cognizance of the occupation to which I have
lent myself, would, as it is, probably withhold an
invitation to “ drink tea ” with his gentle offspring ;
but, the vicar’s censure notwithstanding, I still
retain sufficient amour propre to object to trapesing
about Europe in the society of a strange man.
Dunstan, like port and the gentleman of the comic
song immortalised by small boys in the London
streets, improves with time; she is all right when
yon know her. She has favoured me with some
reminiscences calculated, if publicly dispensed, to
do away with the necessity for curling-tongs. If I
ever had the chance of presiding over somebody’s
establishment, I should, I think, be inclined to
eschew a femme de chambre. That is, —I mean, —
of course, if I were not a model of all the domestic
virtues I
“Here diry,” although it was only between you
and me, I am still red over that very equivocal
remark I
She tells me she is engaged to a young man in our
profession, and on the last job (she calls it ‘job’)
upon which she was employed, like Boisgobey and
a female Gaboriau, they worked in collaboration.
Her fiance’s mission was to drive a Hansom cab,


taking precautions to be, under various disguises,
crawling along Gate at the times conveyed to
him by her; so that without surmising it, the ‘ sus-
pected person’ was almost always driven by an
agent of the detectives. How nice !
She is helping me in my search as much as she
can, but avers that at this stage of the proceedings
dexterity is less potent than luck. It sounds an
unprofessional statement, but from experience I
should say it was true. Nobody could have tried
harder than I have, yet how far am I advanced ?
And I have the consolation of recognizing I may
continue in a similar fashion for months. I feel
myself developing into a sort of Juive errante with-
out an eventual abiding-place; the whole length
and breadth of the Continent may be traversed with-
out bringing me relief ! I pitch my tents in com-
fortable spots certainly (the dining-sa/ow here is the
handsomest I 'have ever been in), but the lurking
sensation of excitement which was at first a stimu-
lant has deteriorated into a perpetual uneasiness
which prevents me being still. I have no peace;
what a beautiful word that is, and under ordinary
conditions how seldom the want of it seems needful!
Why, at that wretched boarding-house at home, I
could compose myself on the sofa, and forget my
troubles in a book ; I cannot do that now. Grant-
ing I have the leisure, the printed paragraphs dance
up and down beneath my gaze, and swim stupidly
away into the margin where sense refuses to follow.


My sleep is broken, and my dreams are horrid. In
a sentence, my temperament is altering. Does not
Yictor Durny affirm that after changing man’s sur-
roundings for two or three generations you will
have changed his constitution, his ideas, and his
disposition as well ? It has not taken three genera-
tions in this case, merely three months, perhaps
because lam a woman. Good gracious, what a
monstrously egotistical production a diary is ! You
are £ swellin’ wisibly,’ my manuscript, like the
visitors at Mrs. Weller’s tea-fight, and to think
your contents are all about me! I wonder if I
could have scribbled so much of any other kind of
composition,—probably not; I suppose most human
beings find it easiest to be fluent upon themselves !
I have been exchanging confidences with the
waiter; au pied de la lettre , he was inclined to be
communicative, so I let him talk. Like the majority
of his compatriots in his own station, Josd has been
on the staff of English and French restaurants
besides the Portuguese, and his speech when he
essays u English as she is spoke ” is eccentric in
consequence. He came up to me just now to in-
quire backwards:
u Madame will not go out to visit the Passeio
Publico ? ”
u hTo, it is going to rain ! ”
ü ßut madame does not go out in the fine ! It
will not rain ! ”


I am not to be worried into the Passeio Publico
against my will, so I say crossly;
“ I have a headache, «Tos£, that is all! 55
At this the little man is genuinely concerned.
“ Shall he summon madame’s maid ? ” he demands;
“at least madame will permit him to draw the
curtains of the apartment where madame gives
herself the trouble to sit! ”
After insisting on carrying out this £ remedy ’
he disappears, to seek Dunstan, it transpires, for
he returns ten minutes later, much exhausted, with
the intelligence that she is not in the hotel. Having
dispatched her on an errand I was previously aware
of the fact, but the kindness affects me all the
same; affects me indeed to the extent of a gratuity
at which the pathetic monkey-face beams rapture.
“ Madame is too liberal, too good! It is the
same with all the English ! ” (If I had been a
Hottentot I daresay a similar national characteristic
would have been discovered.) “ Unlike his fellow
countrymen, who mock themselves of one’s distress,
the English people are generous to exaggeration;
otherwise how would a poor gargon exist in the
great London cafes, where he gets no wages and
must pay so much a day to be allowed to serve! ”
“ AH right, Jbsd, I am glad you are pleased, ”
I rejoin.
“ £ Pleased ’! He ecstasizes himself ! Is it not
again the method of the English gentleman who
stays at the H6tel Durand? Do not the beggars


in the Almada call him c milor ’ solely on this
account ?”
“ What is that Jose ? ” I ask with sudden interest.
“ The English gentleman who flings always away
the silver pieces ! ”
“ Oh,” I say, “ and how long has this millionaire
been here ? ”
“It is,” he must pause to recollect, “perhaps
six months since he first came ! ”
I do a rapid mental calculation; Jasper Yining
sent in his resignation with a month’s notice on
April the eighteenth; roughly, therefore, he left
for his unknown destination on the eighteenth of
May. June, July, August, September, October!
It is six months all but a fortnight! Why might
this not be he ? I can barely command my voice
as I continue :
“And what is his appearance, odiously ugly, I
suppose ? ”
“ i Ugly,’ not to think of it! He was tall, and
of noble aspect! 55
Hotter and hotter ! My fingers begin to twitch.
“I must see this paragon,” I exclaim; “handsome
and generous too, the combination is irresistible I ”
To verify Josh’s statement will, he assures me,
be the simplest thing in the world after dinner;
in the daytime, however, “Milor” seldom stirs
abroad. He undertakes, if I post myself according
to his directions, I may obtain a full view of the
object of my curiosity this very evening.


Can it be possible my efforts are at length on
the verge of fulfilment ? Scarcely, the information
has been too casually come by to lead to great
results ! And yet,—why not ? It is not in fiction
alone that a hint from an unexpected source supplies
the clue we have so elaborately sought in vain. I
may be sanguine, I may be foolish, but my pre-
sentiments seldom mislead me, and I have an
inward conviction now that I am at last on Jasper
Yining’s track!
% * # *
The “Milor” has been pointed out to me, at a
favourable moment, —he was removing his hat to
wipe his forehead.
He is as bald as a badger, and eighty years of
age! lam too disheartened to write another
word.
Jose has just handed me a telegram; it is
addressed ;
“Madame Lea,
Geand Hotel Cexteal,
Lisbon.”
The cypher runs :
“The man is by nature a gambler;
go to Monte Carlo.”


CHAPTER VI.
G-eand Hotel Central,
October 29th.
No, I have not gone to Monaco ; more than that,
I am not going; mere than all, there is a very
excellent reason why!
All day I superintended Dunstan’s arrangements
for onr departure, feeling, after last night’s disap-
pointment, a moral and physical wreck. What did
the position of bonnets matter to me ! I sat at the
edge of the sofa, and looked on simply to supply an
impression of assistance. Get crushed ? Let them ;
was not I crashed too !
The world, for me at least, was over; it no longer
existed, it had crumbled away. It is astonishing
how frequently the world does assume this Stilton-
like quality when there is a tinge of the 1 blue ’
mood about one’s self !
“ What will you travel in, ma’am ? ”
u I, oh anything,” I returned apathetically; a the
one hanging up ! ”
Reduced to black-and-white this question and
reply look ambiguous, to raise the most mild objec-
tion ; but though the word 1 dress ’ was mentioned


by neither woman it was perfectly understood by
both.
“ Then there is nothing but the embroidered
muslin to be put in, and that will go on the
tray ! ”
Dunstan’s tone as she confronted me on her knees
was complacent in the extreme. “ Now, ma’am, let
me fetch you something to eat ? ”
“ I’ve no appetite ! How can Ibe hungry after
this awful, this grotesque failure ? The man was
as old as the hills, and I had never thought to ask
that wretched Jose his age ! ”
“ Ah, you’re fresh at the business, ma’am,” she
responded consolingly ; “we get lots of false scents
like this ! Why, I’ll be bound Mr. Bazalgette
didn’t expect you to be no quicker than you’ve
been! ”
“ £ Than I’ve heen I ’ You talk as if I had finally
arrived at a result; Monte Carlo may be of as little
good to us as everywhere else.”
“ And what then! The longer it takes, the
better for Mr. Bazalgette, isn’t it; won’t he charge
according to time ? ”
This was an unconsidered aspect of the matter,
and brought comfort, for I had been frightening
myself into anticipating my recall. “Do take
something, ma’am,” she persisted; “ a plate of
soup ? ”
Like Mrs. Dombey, however, I could not “ make
an effort,” and decided upon waiting until the


dinner-hour, succeeding during the interval under
the soporific effect of a new novel in obtaining,
what I sorely needed, a nap.
Shortly after six I descended to the table cPhote,
and having taken my seat, was in the act of helping
myself to tournados a la Eossini, when my attention
was arrested by a man’s profile a few places lower
down on the opposite side. He was a stranger in
the hotel, most probably a new arrival in the city,
for I had never encountered him in my ‘ investiga-
tions/ but directly his countenance caught my eye,
it possessed some unexplained familiarity. Yet, so
oddly does our memory play us tricks, when he had
turned his head, and presented me with a “ front
view,” I was for several moments (to use an Ameri-
canism) unable to u fix ” it. .
It was the bearded face of a man who had lived
every hour of his possibly forty years, with a dis-
satisfied, cynical expression upon it augmented by
the droop of his brown moustache.
How did I know him? I had recourse to a
patent method of procedure of mine under these
circumstances which I usually find effectual; I, in
fancy, attired him in every variety of masculine
habiliment that occurred to me. I put him in a
postman’s uniform, and I did not identify him as
any postman I had been used to see; I clothed him
in railway garb, and he defied recognition as a
railway official. Then, with a reminiscence of
London, I measured him for a frock-coat, and it


fitted so admirably it might have been the handi-
work of Savile-row.
Simultaneously two senses were endowed with
occult properties: I saw a likeness lying in my
despatch-box upstairs, and I heard Mr. Bazalgette’s
voice saying “Be prepared for the growth of a
beard! ”
Had I become the dupe of my own eyesight;
was this another fallacious hope to be shattered ?
Or was he sitting there, the absconded managing
clerk of whom I was in search, Jasper Yining, bored
and tangible, divided from me only by five feet of
table-cloth, and an epergne ?
I have no recollection of what I ate after that;
I may have taken caviare with olives, or powdered
my ice with cayenne; I had one sole thought, to
remove any room for doubt as speedily as I could,
and to send a message to England rushing under
the sea :—“ J. Y. is here ! ” The lights confused
me; they seemed alternately to burn so low the
apartment grew dark, and to blaze into such phe-
nomenal brilliancy that I was dazzled. Still I kept
my watch upon the stranger, longing and yet fear-
ing for him to rise; he was amongst the last.
I had Jos£ at my side in a second:
“Is that gentleman staying in the hotel ? ” I
whispered.
“Ho, madame, he came to dine here; I do not
know where he stop ! ”
There was no time to lose then.


“ Send my maid to me, Jose, will yon, at once ;
and tell her to bring me a hat, I shall be going
out! ”
The object of my scrutiny was now lounging in
the entrance hall, rolling a cigarette, and as fortune
would have it, a waiter, with a salver full of glasses,
hurrying behind him as I passed slowly in front,
pushed his arm. The pouch dropped to the floor,
coming in contact with me as it fell, and scattering
the long shreds of tobacco over my velvet skirt.
He must apologise, though it was not his fault;
Trench or English, I wondered breathlessly. “ I
beg your pardon,” he exclaimed; “it was awfully
clumsy of me ; pray allow me to brush it off! ”
English by all that was happy, and without a
trace of foreign accent.
“Don’t mention it; I think it was the waiter
who was to blame, although it doesn’t appear to
have occurred to him ! ” I said smiling.
“Would he continue the conversation, or let it
die ? He spoke again :
“ What a lovely night, is it not ? ”
“ Divine,” I answered (always vary the adjective
in response to a platitude about the weather).
“On such anight one can hardly realise that all
the horrors of fog are just commencing at home, or
one would be more grateful to be abroad ! ”
“ Just so, —that is, I suppose they are ; of course
it will be November soon, as you say we forget it I ”
His native land did not seem a topic adapted to


arouse his eloquence, so I shifted to more general
ground.
“ What a pretty town Lisbon is! ” I remarked
inconsequentially enough, “ don’t you find it so ? ”
“If you are not used to the style it’s rather
interesting; but, for myself, I’ve lived on the
Continent for years at a stretch ! ”
He had been so ready to impart this piece of
information that he presumably felt some sort of
supplement to it essential, he added quickly:
“I haven’t many acquaintances in London,
and unless one has it is not lively ! ”
“So,” I observed, “you escape that common
malady of our compatriots abroad, —home-sick-
ness ! ”
“ 1 Home-sickness ’ ! ” he echoed with a little
laugh, “ don’t you think, deprived of the varnish
of sentiment, 1 home-sickness ’ generally means
being profoundly sick of the place you're in ! Are
you doing much sight-seeing, may I ask? ”
“I went to St. Eoque to visit the silver chapel.
I was told everybody ought to go there; but so far
from imbuing me with the proper devotional spirit,
I found all the lapis lazuli and mosaics had the
opposite effect of making me dreadfully covetous.
After that I gave up sight-seeing in despair! ” I
returned lightly. And at this juncture we heard
Hunstan inquiring for “Mrs. Lea” as a moment
later she approached us with my hat, she herself
ready to accompany me.


Now I could not invite this acquaintance of five
minutes to come too, undesirable as it was that I
should quit him for ever so brief a period at the
present stage, nor could I evidently postpone an
intended stroll for the pleasure of his society. Only
one course remained: I said “Good evening,” very
amiably, “ one must choose the breeze on the
promenade in preference to the stifling atmosphere
of a house ! ” and trusted to his following me.
It was a poor chance, remembering his experience,
and the limited opportunity I had had of being
nice, but I could not help myself.
Once outside, Dunstan laid her hand on my arm,
and muttered “ It’s him ! ”
Never did ungrammatical asseveration fall more
sweetly on a woman’s ears.
“You recognise the original of the photo-
graph ? ”
“ I’d bet my life on it! ”
The ‘lady’s maid ’ had vanished into air. We
were no longer mistress and abigail, but two
female police-agents on the right track.
“ Look back ! ” I murmured.
“It’s worked ' he’s coming out! ”
“ Then we’ll take the first seat, and he’ll join
us.”
The prophecy was fulfilled; he presently came
sauntering past, and interpreting my bow aright
paused beside our bench. Being no boy, however,
he spared me an involved demonstration that the


meeting had been accidental, and was content to
perceive lie had not offended.
Dunstan, again the discreetest of servants, moved
to the other end, so as to allow him the space next
me, and before long we were chatting together as if
we had been formally introduced.
Nevertheless, I wanted to ascertain his name, or
his alias, as fortunately as he had done mine.
“How we (we of John Bull’s island) drop our con-
ventionality as soon as we are safely across the
Channel,” I hazarded; “ here you and I, who only
spoke to each other half an hour ago, are talking as
freely as it would have taken us months to talk if
we had met at Morley’s or the Mdtropole ! ”
The bait did not draw.
“ Yes,” he answered, “but you see in a city like
London, a person is not an individual, he is only
one of a throng ! To use rather a vulgar exempli-
fication of my meaning, the Londoner’s bulk of
humanity is so very vast, he rarely takes the trouble
to sample it! ”
“I see the idea,” I rejoined; “perhaps that is
what the poet meant when he wrote about the
‘little look across the crowd,’ —there is seldom
time to have much more ! Owen Meredith, was it
not ? ”
“ I’m not sure,” he replied simply.
“ Ah, of course not; men do not go in for poetry,
do they ? ”
“Well, I can’t say; personally I am not one of


the lady-novelist’s heroes who are too languid to
read anything excepting an occasional French novel,
but nevertheless, quote Eer anger with singular
appropriateness when it is required to give point to
a paragraph. I have read poetry in my time, and
enjoyed it! ”
“You surprise me,” I remarked satirically; “I
imagined such frivolities as crewel - work and
Tennyson were confined to us ! How chilly it has
grown l ”
“ Chilly,” he cried, “ are you indeed! ”
“ Yes, the wind has changed, I fancy ; I wish
my maid had brought a wrap ! ”
“You should walk about for a while,” he advised;
“ it is only keeping in one position.”
“ Whatever the cause may be the effect is
decidedly unpleasant; and look, it is beginning
to rain ! ”
It was indeed, I rejoiced to note ! Two great
drops had already splashed upon the gravel at our
feet, and the skies were lowering.
“ Oh, Hunstan, why didn’t you bring my
wooley ! ” I exclaimed reproachfully. “You know
how easily I take cold; I have nothing to protect
my throat! ”
“ Allow me to supply the deficiency as well as I
can?” suggested our companion. “ Let me lend you
this handkerchief; it will be better than nothing.
We are only ten minutes from your hotel! ”
At last!


“ Oh, thank you,” I murmured, “ thank you
extremely if I shan’t he robbing you! But how
shall I send it back ? I won’t hear of taking you
out of your way; it promises a regular downpour,
and you are not staying at the Central, I think?”
“ ISTo,” he replied nonchalantly, “I merely dined
there this evening for a change; pray don’t trouble
to send it though ! Keep it until we meet to-
morrow ; I may trust to be so fortunate I hope ?
Good night! ”
“Good night, then, and thank you again! ”
Belay for a needless instant was unendurable;
no sooner had he left us than we sped homeward.
Bunstan preceding me, I mounted the staircase to
my room, hastily closed the door, and tore the
handkerchief from my neck. It was of silk, and,
as I had anticipated, it bore an embroidered mono-
gram. Trembling with excitement I held the
corner beneath the lamp; the initials were “I. Y.”
1 have found my man !


CHAPTER VII.
Grand Hotel Central,
November ls£.
It is the third morning since the occurrence I
recorded last.
The following afternoon I penned my daily report,
containing on that occasion the communication of
my discovery, and at six o’clock descended to the
dining-s«/ow devoutly wishing Jasper Yining might
he there once more. In this particular I was
doomed to be disappointed, though there was a
mitigating circumstance in the shape of a pleasing
item of intelligence imparted by Jose, from which
I was able to ascertain the ingenious alias my prey
has chosen.
This humble instrument of justice informed me
the gentleman concerning whom I had inquired
the night before, was, he had learnt par hazard , a
visitor at the Hotel de Bragamja ; he was a “ Mr.
Vane,”- —“Jack Yane.” “So far so good,” I
thought, as I subsequently reviewed the position of
affairs whilst disrobing. “ I now know his nom dc
guerre and his address ! ”
Therefore when I opened my eyes in the early


sunshine yesterday, and saw Dunstan standing at
my bed-side with a cup of coffee, I felt at once
I had awakened in the best of spirits. u He would
naturally have allowed twenty-four hours to elapse
before appearing here to reclaim his property,” I
told myself, “ but to-day,—to-day, surely he would
come.” Yet, the briskness with which I made
my toilette notwithstanding, yesterday was destined
to prove one of the most perplexing and unsatis-
factory of my life, for, in writing you up to date,
my confidant, let me put it down without any cir-
cumlocution, —he did not come ! No ; on Saturday
evening I parted from him on the Promenade;
to-day, Tuesday, at 5 p.m., by the indisputable
evidence of the clock in my own apartment, we
have still not met again.
Now this is a great deal more than a blow to my
vanity; it is a serious impediment to my plans.
What is to be done ? Let me think! There is
one way : the handkerchief must be sent round to
him with a polite acknowledgment of my obligation.
This method of proceeding is certainly liable to
suggest an undue curiosity on my part to have
discovered what he omitted to state, his name and
where he lodged, but I cannot afford to be hyper-
delicate, and after so flattering an indication of the
impression he has made on my susceptible heart, if
I know anything of mankind he will dine here
to-night beyond the shadow of a doubt.
“ Dunstan,” I exclaim, st take some tissue-paper


out of a bonnet-box, and wrap up the handkerchief
yery neatly; then go round to the Hotel de
Bragancja with it, and ask for our man, of course
as 4 Mr. Yane ! 5 ”
44 Yes, ma’am,” replies Dunstan, 44 what am I to
say ? ”
44 Say Mrs. Lea desired you to restore it, and to
thank him exceedingly for the loan; that is all,
but speak nicely, as if Mrs. Lea thought a lot of
his lending it! ”
44 Yes’m ! ” And presently she departs.
Have I been wise, I speculate; will he leap at
the conclusion I am an adventuress, and give me
a wide berth, or (still more horrible contingency)
under the idiotic belief, become so yery conciliatory
that I, on the contrary, shall be compelled to steer
clear of him? It has been a bold move, but I
remember Mr. Claussen’s interpretation of 44 Tout
vienf a lui qui suit attendre ,” and decide I have
done right!
I wonder if I may hope to gather any notion of
what he intends from the account of my messenger.
She has been long enough gone in all conscience;
I waited an eternity before I permitted myself to
look at the time.
Half-an-hour, three quarters of an hour loiter
by, (they do not “pass,” time never does when
one is in a fever of impatience) and yet she does
not return. One would imagine it was a pilgrimage
to the Eua do Ferrejial! Can he be out, and is


she remaining there to see him, or has she lost her-
self in a labyrinth of unfamiliar streets? I have
just determined in fayonr of the latter explanation
when the door is flung suddenly ajar, and Dnnstan
arrives.
Something in her face startles me ; instinctively
I feel she has important news.
“ What is it ?” I demand.
“ I went to the hotel,” she gasps, u and I asked
for ‘ Mr. Yane ! 5 ”
“ Yes, —well, —go on woman! Why, you have
the handkerchief in your hand,” I cry; “how’s
that ? ”
u Because 1 Mr. Yane ’ sailed yesterday by the
‘ Grantully Castle ’ for the Cape ! ”
With this particular she sinks into a chair, and
we gaze at one another in woe-begotten silence.
I rally with a forlorn idea.
“ Then we must cable—somewhere, and have
him taken when he lands ! ”
The stray crumb of consolation is denied me.
u Can’t! ” she says, u Only me and you know
he’s Yining; he’s not been identified yet by any
of the clerks or people who knew him in England,
and I’ll lay a wager Mr. Bazalgette reckons that
necessary before we can get an arrest! ”
Becasse , simpleton, imbecile that I was, the man
suspected me, and I had forgotten I was in a port!
“ Perhaps one of the Lombard Street fellows is
on the way out now ! ” she continues.


“ The report of the discovery only went Sunday ;
it’s not delivered yet! ”
“So much the better! ”
“ Well, if we can’t cable, what are we to do? ”
I moan.
Her answer is a terse one:
“ Go after him ! ”
It seems to me correct as well.
“Make haste,” I exclaim, “run downstairs, seize
someone, the head-waiter, Jose, anybody, and find
out when the next steamer goes.”
And in the interval I march up and down from
wall to wall in the manner of a frenzied Miss Trot-
wood, or a wild animal first caged.
In ten minutes Dunstan reappears accompanied
by a sober functionary who has evident doubt about
her sanity.
“There is no steamer for nearly a month,” she
ejaculates.
“ Is that so ? ” I inquire anxiously of the official.
“Yes, madame; only the c Castle ’ line puts in
at Lisbon, the next will be the ‘ Pembroke Castle ’
on the twenty-eighth.”
“ Is there another line, then ? ”
“Certainly,” he assures me in perfect English,
“there is the 1 Union.’ The ‘ Union,’ and the
‘ Castle ’ leave England on alternate weeks, but
only the 4 Castle’ vessels touch here, and, of them,
only one in every two.”
It sounds like algebra.


“ A Cape steamer of one sort or the other leaves
London every week, if I understand yon; are you
sure of that ? ”
Yes, he is quite sure.
“ Can you give me a 1 Bradshaw 5 ? ”
The 1 Bradshaw 5 is forthcoming, and three heads
are simultaneously bent over its pages.
There is a train at half past eight this evening,
November Ist. By dint of much study we ascer-
tain that, taking it, we shall get to Madrid at
1-35 p.m, to-morrow; have five hours’ f wait ’ there;
be in Paris early in the morning the day after, and
(cry Dunstan and I triumphantly in a breath) reach
London at s'lo p.m. on the fourth.
“ Pack, pack, pack. We’ll do it together ! ”
We fling our things wildly into the trunks,
dragging dresses from pegs, and shoes from under
the toilet-table. We have two hours fifteen minutes
to do it all in. Surrounded by a pile of garments
I pause for rest, and recollect I must wire our
projected movement to Mr. Bazalgette. I ring the
bell.
“ Make out my bill, please,” I request; “let me
have a foreign telegraph form at once, and should
any letters come for me after my departure, forward
them to me in London at the Charing Cross
Hotel.”
“Yes, madame.”
My throat is parched, and I feel as if I had not
been to bed for a fortnight. I glance around;


Huns tan’s countenance resembles an exhausted
chimney- sweep’s.
“ One moment,” I add, “ and send me up a pint
bottle of champagne.”
Two hours later we bid adieu to the Grand
Central, bound for the Cape of Good Hope.


CHAPTER VIII.
Aboard S.S. Drummond Castle,
November 2 6th.
How long it is since I have made an entry!
This though has been from no lack of leisure, but
rather for dearth of incident, for what can be more
monotonous than life aboard ship under conditions
like mine ! There is, however, my interview with
Mr. Bazalgette which I have postponed recording.
I reached London at the hour I had calculated to
behold it, and drove with Hunstau immediately to
Queen’s Eow. I found the office open, and the
partners within. They had naturally received the
intelligence of Jasper Yining’s presence in Lisbon,
and were perplexed at the message announcing my
return.
When I explained it, Mr. Bazalgette told me,
more kindly than I had expected, that my general
proceedings had been satisfactory, but had my ex-
perience been wider, I should have kept a more
careful watch on the man when once he had been
found. My departure with Dunstan for South
Africa he viewed as a matter of course, she and I
D


being, after the encounter, tire most useful agents
be could employ.
I asked him if her information had been authentic
when she declared the arrest could not be procured
without identification by someone to whom Tilling
had been personally known. He replied :
“ On the continent such confirmation would have
been resorted to because it would have been the
easiest form of testimony to lay before the authori-
ties, who would demand what evidence was fur-
nished beyond corresponding initials, and the
resemblance to the photograph. But in the Cape
this method would not be readily adopted owing
to the distance ; there what would be advisable after
running him to earth would be to obtain proof of
him possessing some portion of the property of which
he had defrauded the firm.”
“ But,” I remonstrated, “ the property is money I
Yon surely don’t require me to swear to sovereigns;
or to recognise bank-notes whose numbers the firm
itself cannot know ? ”
“You forget,” he spoke with the tolerance
Eichelicu or Machiavclli might have shown to the
argument of a precocious schoolboy, “ you forget
Messrs. Wynn and Co. state he defrauded them of
two bonds of Egyptian Unified Loan, one for a
thousand, the other for five hundred pounds. How,
as far as such a thing can be ascertained, these
bonds have not been disposed of; a cute man who
meant to get rid of them would have done it with


out wasting an hour, and Yining is a cute man;
what’s the deduction? He holds them still, and
haying already made a haul of forty thousand,
didn’t reckon it good enough to risk being spotted
for such a comparatively small affair as their
sale ! ”
u Granted,” I persisted ; u admit he did not sell
them, it does not follow he kept them ! ”
“ A business-man does not destroy marketable
stock ! ”
u Well then, he has them, but I can’t rummage
his boxes till I touch them with my fingers ! ”
u How look here, Miss Lea” (it sounded quite funny
to be called ‘Miss ’ Lea again), “I do a great deal
more with you than I do with many of my agents,
I can tell you,-—I give you my reasons ! Listen
to this : Yining is a gambler; if you had not
met him when you did in Lisbon, you would have
met him in a week’s time, directly the season com-
menced, at Monte Carlo, I’d give odds on it; our
ill-luck lias been that you ran across him too soon,
or too late, for in Monte Carlo he could hardly have
escaped you so easily. That’s past; what I mean
uoAv is that he’ll gamble wherever he may be, and
there is no question of forty thousand pounds in the
hands of a man like him being esteemed the fortune
it would be by you or I ” (Mr. Lazalgette also
shares the belief that “ ‘I ’ is so much more genteel
than ‘me! ’ ”) “ Suppose he is pressed for ready
money, we don’t want to wait so long if we can
D 2


avoid it, but it’s one chance, suppose he’s short,
what will he do then ? ”
The conclusion was obvious.
“ The bonds ! ” I answered.
“ Precisely,” responded the detective; “and
though I want to recover as large a part of the swag
as possible, the chief thing I go for is to take the
man himself ! ”
“Do you think, bearing his propensity in mind,
he could have squandered so big a sum in six
months ? ” I queried.
“ I think,” he retorted, “ the Cape will help him,
and when you do meet him you won’t be troubled to
stand by, and view him pitching Messrs. Wynn and
Co.’s coin about long, for he won’t have over much
left I”
And after a week’s delay in town through having
reached England just one day too late for the
“ Trojan,” it was with this not very brilliant pro-
spect of success I resigned myself to braving a
journey to South Africa.
I believe that is the right term; in books they
always talk of “braving ” a journey, as inevitably
as they speak of the “ good ship Twaddle ploughing
the main,” but anyhow it is correct in my case. It
does require bravery to lie back calmly in a deck-
chair the whole long morning and weary afternoon
when every nerve is strained in anticipation of
arrival.
Bravery ? Well, say “ Endurance ! ” The


qualities are near akin, though the latter un-
reverenced word has to slink through the language
associated with so far less pretentious a meaning ; —■
definition probably due to the fact that men write
dictionaries, and women endure I
I am beginning to hate this glittering expanse of
sea without the relief of a sail. lam beginning to
detest the evening refrains with which we are regu-
larly enlivened (?) in the saloon; to lament the
Bay of Biscay was ever created to lure weak
tenors into warbling nautical ballads, and be sorry
the nuisance of a u Midshipmite ” was saved.
If he had perished perhaps the u Cheery lads,
yo ho,” would not have made up a song about
him!
Madeira was welcome ; it took me out of myself
(and the vessel) for a little while, since we went
ashore in a party, and coming back, found the deck
converted into a kind of temporary Lowther
Arcade, and a swarm of tiny boats full of merchan-
dise and boys bobbing alongside. It was amusing
to see these curly-headed urchins, with eyes as
marvellously blue as the waves, diving for six-
pences, and re-appearing triumphantly with the
rescued silver between their teeth. The island was
picturesque, too; indeed, I secretly rejoiced the
“ Grantully Castle ” had not touched there, and
Yining could not have baffled me by making it his
destination.
Alas, the variety was of brief duration, and


presently we saw Madeira fade behind ns (it ought
to bo “to something-ward,” I expect, but I do not
know what!), and once more returned to the tedium
of maritime life.
Why is water so pleasant to hear in small
quantities, and so depressing in large ? I can
listen to the splash of a fountain for hours; the
roar of the ocean depresses me !
“ Delightful,” I have heard women say of some
such voyage; “I was so sorry when we sighted
land ! ” I wonder if they really were, or if the
charm existed, like the fascination of one’s school-
days, in retrospection alone ? From perception I
am inclined to divide it into three parts : the first
week, when each individual privately reflects how
enjoyable the trip would be in different company ;
the second, when they have all grown sociable, and
consider one another the most agreeable people they
ever met; and the third, when everybody is inex-
pressibly tired of everybody else.
And how kind an interest the female passengers
display to ascertain my reason for visiting the
colony ! Do men cross-examine their own sex so
rudely ?
Happily my explanation was invented before I
came on board. lam a widow going out to sec my
younger sister and her husband, who will shortly
join me in Cape Town. What an exposure if I left
this lying about; nine “ ladies ” out of ten would
read it before restoring it, with the casual remark


that they had u picked it up below just two minutes
since ! ”
% $
Dunstan has been distinguishing herself; yester-
day she saw a mouse in the cabin, and fainted. A
good-looking steward happened to be near at the
time to catch her. What a coincidence !
It seems he ran to fetch sherry, and, she tells me,
“ forced numberless glasses on her to bring her
round.” They will not be numberless when I get
my wine bill, I daresay !
The other evening we were beguiled by a
“Mock Trial” after dinner, a young gentleman
with a lisp and a tow wig hastily manufactured
(like his speech) impersonating the counsel for the
prosecution. Funny if they played “ Mock Trials”
on the “ Grantully Castle,” Jasper Yining must
have felt unwell!
Oh, that we were already on land ! Every hour
brings me nearer to him, and every hour he fills my
thoughts.
I am sure Dunstan is not equally anxious,
although she pretends she is; she will have to
leave her steward, as she has already been parted
from her fiance , and how faithfully a plain woman
does love each time I
Besides, the matter after all is of much less
importance to her than to me; it is I who will
taste the sweetness of success or the bitterness of


failure, and Ido long to be successful! If I could
only report, “ You need not be inconvenienced to
have Mm identified; you need be under no appre-
hension that the property is squandered; I have
seen the missing bonds in his possession—cable
next move! ”
What a magnificent achievement it would be;
should not I exult! And, apart from the honour,
it would please me to do it for Mr. Bazalgette’s
sake, he has been nice to me. Oh, how I yearn for
shore!!
# # # * ♦
Joy! Table Mountain is in sight! The news
spread round the breakfast-table like wildfire;
porridge, chops, and buns were abandoned of one
accord, and we all rushed on deck to strain our
eyes at that very indeterminable object in the
distance which appeared less like a mountain than a
cloud.
It has been growing more distinct all the
morning, and now we can make out some misty-
looking spires around it, which the captain informs
us are the Devil’s Peak and Signal Hill; he says
the commercial population will be staring up at the
latter to learn the precise moment we get in. They
cannot be more impatient for their mail than I am
for their city!
I am too excited to watch with the others. I


am scribbling this in my cabin, a deck one, and,
see! Something like a vast stone barge laden with
coloured porters and white hansoms is drifting past
us. How strange ! There is a perfect babel in my
ears; a tumult of cries from all parts, everybody
seems speaking at once. What can have happened?
How silly I am; of course the stone thing is not
moving at all, one would think I was a child'! It
is we who are floating by its side; —it’s the wharf,
—we’ve arrived, —thank Heaven !


CHAPTER IX.
St. George's Hotel,
Cape Town,
[Three days later).
This is my third evening here, and at the end of
my second I found myself confronted with a serious
difficulty; Yining was not staying beneath the
same roof, and I could not call and inquire for him
at the other hotels for fear the action should be
reported to him, and he might elude me again.
This obstacle necessitated consideration, but I
finally hit upon a compromise.
It was highly improbable he would recollect
Dunstan, weighing the fact that he only saw her
once for a moment in the hall of the Central at
Lisbon, and once in the dusk on the Promenade,
where he certainly did not pay her much attention;
so I have lent her one of my gowns, and she is
going to have luncheon or dinner at all the prin-
cipal hostelries, trusting to meet him thus. Let me
find out where he lodges, without allowing him to
suspect my proximity, and there is the first point
gained.
Under my superintendence she made her toilette,


and started this novel programme last night, but so
far without avail; nevertheless it shall be continued,
for there do not seem to be any restaurants here
likely to tempt him out of doors with their cuisine.
What a capital it is, with its wide roads, and its
dwarfed houses, and its niggers, and its Malays, and
its solitary theatre ! It is so old-fashioned it might
be the city Cain built when he wandered forth after
killing Abel, except that if it had been begun so
long ago it must by now have presented a finished
appearance.
I asked if many of the better people lived in the
environs between Papendorp and Wynberg, and
was told a Yes, nearly all the residents. 5 ’ I there-
fore hired a carriage, as being more suitable to our
purpose than travelling by train, and drove along
the high road, which at every mile or so has
apparently been given a fresh name just to vary the
monotony; no indication whatever of why Eose-
bank should leave off, and Eondebosch begin being
visible.
I did not discern any inn of sufficient importance
to make me deem it worth while alighting until we
reached the extremity of all, Wynberg itself.
Here Hunstan and I descended, and, entering the
porch, requested to be shown to a private-room, and
provided with something to drink.
Lemonade-and-claret I opined nasty enough to be
distinctly virtuous, so ordered that.
The proprietress brought it upstairs herself, and


when I saw what a cheery, comfortable sort of
woman she was, I repented I had not demanded
ale.
“What a nice view you have!” I remarked
encouragingly.
My experience on tour in the theatrical profession
has taught me all landladies like to he complimented
on their i view,’ if it only consists of oyster-shells
and clothes’-lines.
“Do you find it so, ma’am?” she responded
complacently. “It is mostly thought pretty ; this
time of year, of course, it’s at it’s best I ”
It sounded funny to hear of the country being at
its loveliest a few weeks before Christmas, but it
would not have done to say so, and thus admit I
was a stranger in the colony. “ Naturally,” I
replied, ‘‘ I have often noticed your house, though
I never came inside before, and have thought how
charmingly situated it was! Indeed, a gentleman
was questioning about the prettiest spot round here,
and I mentioned this, only the other day. Per-
haps he may have come to you, a Mr. , er,
Mr. ; what vjcis that gentleman’s name, can
you remember ? ”
“ Y Y ,” said Dunstan.
“ I know, ‘ Yane !’ ” I exclaimed. 11 So, you see,
without knowing you, perhaps I may have got you
a lodger ? ”
“ I’m sure it was very kind of you, ma’am, we’ve
no £ Mr. Yane ’ staying here, but he may call; and


much, obliged to you lam ! Won’t you try a few
biscuits with that ? ”
“ Thank you, no,” I returned, rising. u I am
afraid we must be going now; good afternoon, we’ll
be certain to look in when we are passing next! ”
“It was risky,” Dunstan observed, when we
were seated in the conveyance once more ; “if you
can go straight to work here, why can’t you do it
in the town too, ma’am ? ”
“ Because I knew you would say ‘ Y , Y ’
first, and as soon as she didn’t come out with ‘ Yane,’
it was a foregone conclusion he was not there, before
I uttered the name ? ”
The drive back was pleasant. The sun was going
down, and we could admire the scenery without
having our appreciation affected by the heat. The
fields where ‘ lilies blow ’ for nothing, and are
crushed under foot as recklessly as though they
would not cost a fortune in England, were observed
and marvelled at. They grew so closely together,
that the primary impression from our side of the
hedge was of the ground being covered with snow.
We also liked the effect (or I did) of a Kafir lying
at the foot of a cactus, with a clump of maiden-hair
fern for his pillow, and a golden cluster of bananas
in the dust at his side. I wish I could paint!
To-night, in furtherance of our plan, Dunstan goes
to dine at the Eoyal.


December Ith.
News ! This morning I said to Dunstan, “The
( hotel scheme 5 is a failure; we must conclude that
although it did not strike us as probable, he is
living in the suburbs ! ”
Ey-the-bye, we ascertained there was another one,
Greenpoint, which we had also visited without
success.
“ Now,” I continued, “I’ll tell you what I mean
to do; the people staying outside use the railway to
come in, it isn’t half an hour’s journey. There are
any number of trains running backwards and for-
wards ; I shall go down to the station, and watch
the arrivals and departures ! ”
Dunstan believed my plan might lead to results.
Accordingly I sallied forth. In five minutes I was
in Adderley Street; in five more I had reached the
station. It was magnificent weather, and lots of
people I found were loitering about the ticket-offices
and doorways. I was pleased at this; in the crowd
I fancied my prolonged stay would be unobserved.
I strolled with elaborate semblance of carelessness
through the wooden barriers which stood open and
unguarded, and ensconced myself in a corner of one
of the seats. Here, if I am noticed, thought I, it
will be supposed I am waiting for some acquaint-
ances by appointment, and that they are late.
The occupation began to get tedious. I looked up
at the clock; twenty minutes had passed, and no
traffic occurred. Only one long, empty train, which


evinced no signs of stirring, still extended the length
of the platform. I had thought the service was
more frequent.
My patience gave way. “ I must go through the
gates again, and buy something to read! ” I
soliloquised.
I sauntered down to the book-stall; —
“ What periodicals have you ? ” I asked the boy.
“ Eh ? ” he said.
“ What periodicals ? ” I repeated.
“ I don’t know what you mean by per ,
periocidals , we’ve got the { Cape Times ! ’ ”
It proved he could hardly have summed up the
selection better. During a lengthy survey in search
of some familiar wrapper, my gaze encountered
nothing but local journalism, and a handful of
octogenary novels, English ones of course—l have
not come across a novel of Colonial manufacture;
after newspapers without news, indeed, and wine
without flavour, I am puzzled to discover anything
they make in the Cape, excepting bread, and they
would have that imported if they could !
This being my prospect of obtaining amusement
at the station, I turned into the streets; possibly I
did not know the right places to essay, but at the
shops again the “Cape Times” was to all intents and
purposes the sole commodity in stock, and with the
weekly edition of this exhilarating publication I
was finally fain to return to my post of observation,
wondering as I retraced my steps if there were any


other country upon earth to whom Providence had
given so much, and man had done so little.
Meanwhile the sleepy platform had awakened.
Passengers and porters hurried to and fro; the
aggravatingly motionless train was about to start.
Resuming my former situation, and unfolding my
purchase that I might see without being perceived,
I eagerly scanned the features of the passers-by.
There were men in ordinary round felt hats, and
men in canvas helmets, men in slovenly, and men in
scrupulous attire. The masculine gender prepon-
derated, and amidst such embarras de richesse I was
confused.
Suddenly my glance fell on a countenance behind
the window of a first-class compartment; it was
partially bent as its owner coaxed the flame of a
vesta into'juxtaposition with his cigar, hut I fancied
with a leaping of the heart my vigil had borne fruit.
The instant that head should be lifted I could feel
sure. The green flag waved aloft. It was an
anxious moment; would the light reach the cigar,
or the guard blow his whistle first ?
The signal came, and the tobacco was ignited, for
simultaneously with the engine’s preparatory snort
the head behind the glass was raised, and I saw
Jasper Yining steam complacently past me emitting
a wreath of smoke.
I could have laughed aloud with joy, the revul-
sion of feeling from suspense to triumph was so
great.


“ When is the next train ? ” was my immediate
inquiry. “ Hofv long before the next ? ”
“ Are yon thinking of waiting for it, ma’am? ”
rejoined the official I had stopped.
“ Well, yes, I was ; why do yon ask ? ”
“ Only because you’ll have a precious long time
to wait,” he responded coolly, “ that’s all! ”
‘‘ I don’ fc understand yon; I thought the Wynberg
trains left frequently ? ”
“ 1 Wynberg ’! ”he said, “ That’s the platform
for Wynberg on the other side, not this! ”
“Act this?”.! echoed. “Then, —then,” the
whole mistake I had committed dawning across me,
“where does that train go, just left? Tell me
quickly, I have made some blunder; what train
was that ? ; ’
“ That,” he answered as he grinned like an idiot,
“ was the Diamond Fields express ! ”
And the cause of my discomfiture was in my
hand I There, when I lay prostrate on the couch
in the hotel; there, when I was foiled in the very
second of success; there, in those audacious, mon-
strous, prying columns positively forced upon me
and printed for every pair of eyes in the town
to see, Dunstan espied the following item of
intelligence :
“List of Passengers per S.S. ‘Drummond
Castle:’” amongst them
“Mrs. Lea, (and maid).”


CHAPTER X.
Queen’s Hotel,
Kimberley,
December 12th.
I am on the Diamond Fields of South Africa; I
had a flying survey of desolate tracts of u veldt ”
(pronounced u felt ”) and straggling settlements
where the u population ” rushed open-mouthed to
gaze upon this mode of locomotion, which was still
a novelty to them. I meditated the will-o’-the-wisp
chase I had undertaken was indeed leading me to
strange encampments, and consoled myself by re-
flecting the limit of that man’s retreat must now he
reached unless he elected to withdraw further into
the interior, and domicile himself in Zululand
among the u Kraals. ’’
I had a glimpse from the railway-carriage of a
sunset as vivid as ever Turner depicted to an incre-
dulous world; and then I did what I have never
done before at any place I came to, —I walked
straight to the door of my destination, and looked
out.
What did I see ! A large open space where
teams of oxen lay wallowing in dust three inches


deep; to the right and left of me a row of one-
storied shops and canteens, their corrugated-iron
roofs blazing in the sun. I saw hot-faced, wearied
men threading their way between the waggons to
the post office close by, issuing with brighter eyes,
and letters in their clutch ; or empty-handed and
hopeless, to slowly drag their feet across the loath-
some sand again. I saw within half a yard of me
that which would necessitate me announcing my
presence here as u Mrs. Lea,” nolens nolens , and
made the new-found alias under which I had
this time travelled unavailing,—Jasper Yining
himself!
I do not know which of ns was the more startled,
he or I; there was no excuse for ns avoiding each
other, there we were standing near enough to shake
hands.
It was better to recognise him, and I bowed.
“ How do yon do ? ” I said, advancing a step, with a
million possibilities of disaster whirling through my
brain; u we have met before, though we have never
been introduced! ”
u And what an original rencontre /” he faltered,
paling. u My name is ‘ Yane, —Yane ’; yours I
overheard in Lisbon from your maid. I have the
pleasure of speaking to Mrs. Lea, I believe ? ”
u Yes; we seem fated to dispense with les con-
venances, do we not ? She is there now, my maid, I
mean, seeing to the luggage. I had no idea ,we
should ever meet again here ! ”


I did not know what to talk about, I was
frightened of uttering the wrong thing; yet now it
had proved impracticable to keep the fact that I had
followed him secret, it was essential to make con-
versation of some sort, and if possible to dispel
suspicion.
“ May I ask if you have been here long, Mr. —
Yane ? At least, how foolish, I need not of course ;
unless you were übiquitous you hardly could ! Isn’t
it curious we should both have been on the point of
sailing for the Cape, and neither supposed it of the
other ? ”
Why would not the man say something ; he kept
staring at me as if I had dropped from the skies !
“ Oh,” I ejaculated, “ here is Dunstan ! Is every-
thing all right, Dunstan? ” I had a vague notion
she might cry out when she saw him. “I am told
I shall find the Queen’s Hotel comfortable, shall I ? ”
“ Have you not come to join your husband then ?”
he exclaimed, “that is, have you no relations
here?”
“Hone whatever; lam a widow; ” I answered
sadly: “itis a long tale the business that brought
me to Kimberley, I must tell it to you another time
if you will allow me!”
I certainly could not have told him at once; it
was not invented.
u ln that case ” —and I admired him for his
pluck, he shook off his stupefaction, and confronted
me c game s ; “in that case you cannot do better


than go to ‘ The Queen’s,’ Mrs. Lea. I shall feel
honored by your confidence, —I am staying in that
hotel myself! ”
So it happened that, of all persons upon earth, it
was the absconder I had been seeking who put ns
courteously into one of those two-horse cabs, and
gave instructions for onr heavier portmanteaux to be
delivered in the course of the afternoon; that it
was to no less an individual than himself I played
after dinner, and that it was to Yining alias Yane I
was presently confiding a detailed explanation of
my errand (evolved in the interval).
u Then yon really undertook so stupendous a
journey to ”
u To c gather materials,’ Mr. Yane ; that’s the
expression we writers employ I Does it sound
ridiculous ? ”
“ On the contrary, most praiseworthy ; I had no
idea when I read a description of a place in a novel
that I could regard it as real. Yon quite restore
my faith in human nature ! ”
u Oh, we seldom venture to take onr heroes into
countries we have not visited ourselves ; the reviews
might'be awkward, yon know I ”
I thought it would be more awkward when he
found out instead of writing stories I only told
them, but then an inevitable part of the vocation I
had entered was to lie.
u And do yon propose remaining long ? ”
“ That will of course depend on circumstances ;


I hope not very long! ” I answered with exceed-
ing truth this time. “I am afraid you are
encouraging me to make myself a nuisance though.
I shall be tempted to ask you what is the most
worth seeing, and rely upon you as on a kind of
colonial ‘ Eaedecker M ”
u I shall be delighted to place myself at your
service, Mrs. Lea; I have any amount of leisure at
present, but of course I’ve been here rather a short
while to act the cicerone with great effect! ”
“ If you are sure I shall not be troubling you,” I
said doubtfully, “you would really be assisting me
very much ! ” and so it was settled.
Later, when Dunstan and I discussed this
unlooked-for turn of affairs we decided the chance
encounter had after all been fortunate. Whatever
distrust he might have he had evidently determined
to put a bold front on it, and no matter how much
he might be on his guard the intimacy was bound
to afford me more opportunities of bringing my
mission to a successful issue than the conduct of
my investigations from a distance such as I had
originally contemplated. On the whole then it was
in no despondent frame of mind that I retired to
my room at the close of my first day on the
Diamond Fields.
The next afternoon he came in to luncheon while
I was there ; as I had found out the night before our
table was the same, and in the course of the meal
he offered to procure me a ‘pass ’ to inspect a mine.


“ Yon can go down, if yon like, Mrs. Lee,” he
said, “but I would not advise it, the way wants
knowing I ”
“Thank you,” I replied, “I think I’ll content
myself with viewing the machinery on the top ; I
should not care to he whirled down the wires in
one of those buckets I saw the men clinging to' an
hour or two ago ! ”
Oh, yon wouldn’t be asked to do that,” he
laughed; 11 there is a pathway, though it isn’t quite
so level as the Brighton pier ! Still yon will see quite
enough up above to make your head ache, I can
promise you ; the £ sorting ’ is most interesting, that
is the process in which they find the stones.”
“ Can I go with Dunstan ? ”
“Certainly, I will try to get a pass for three;
that may include mo in the role of guide,
philosopher, and friend? ”
The faint stress ho laid upon the last article of
the inventory was slightly embarrassing, but I
nodded a quick assent.
“ I should be ungrateful to say £ no ’ ; if yon will
come too, and explain, I shall naturally be pleased.
Men always understand more of these things than
women, and the glimpse I was able to obtain of it
from the market showed me a ‘ key ’ was a necessary
adjunct ! ”
“ Then as i key ’ or 1 friend ’ I am to make one
of the party; very well, Mrs. Lea, I will hunt up
all the diggers I have met, and endeavour to get


the desired paper from somebody. This evening
yon shall hear the result; in the meantime,
cm revoir I ”
I wish he had not spoken of being my friend; it
makes me feel mean !
# * * * *
December 19 th.
During the last six days, ever since that ex-
pedition indeed, a thought has come to me which
I have sufficient conscience to find distressing.
Whatever doubts he may have had earlier, I do not
believe the man suspects me now.
Were I wise, this, so far from troubling me,
should be a very reassuring idea, for, if a fact, it
must greatly simplify my task. I know that, I
keep telling myself so, but there is another side to
the picture : to take advantage of his good faith is
hardly a lady’s mode of action.
He is a thief; he himself has betrayed confidence;
more, he has broken the law ! I want to remember
it; I want to retain the knowledge in my memory,
and not allow it to slip away from me for so much
as a minute, because (it is an ignominious, puerile
confession) I am beginning to regard myself as only
one degree less vile !
It is terribly silly; here is the fulfilment of those
prospects I have painted in my most sanguine
moods; I grasp the very chance I have looked
forward to, and built upon; and now that all my


hopes and prayers are answered I falter within a
week, because, forsooth, it is not honourable!
What honour had he ? What scruples did he
permit to come between him and his design ? Then
why should his punishment be retarded by such
feelings as he cannot comprehend ! He had income,
position, and respect; all the things that make life
worth living, and ; no, I am wrong, not all!
There is one desideratum more, and sweeter: that
something I have gone without since a dull October
day; ah, how many years ago, when, an ill-dressed
pale-faced girl, they took me aside at school, and
said coldly:
“ Be very grateful to Heaven and to us, because
we are going to keep you here out of charity; you
have no longer a mother, she is dead ! ”
But he may have had love too, as well as he had
the rest. I see no cause why I should pity him ;
I am not going to suggest so false a sentiment!
He is to suffer for his crime in prison, and, as for
me, my course is mapped out: lamto be the
medium to put the handcuffs round his wrists.
All the reflection in the world cannot alter it.
I must write my Eeport for the mail!


CHAPTER XI.
January 9 fh, ISBS.
“ I can' hardly believe yon have been here a
month, Mrs. Lea,” he said to mo this morning; “it
seems impossible I ”
“ I suppose that is a compliment, seeing how
much of your time out of that month you have
spared to mo,” I rejoined; “is it meant for one ? ”
We were in the large apartment overlooking
Stockdale Street, and I was standing half on the
balcony, half on the rug, thinking how shamefully
neglected this record of mine had been.
“And yet,” he continued after a pause, “it
appears much longer, too, since you and I met ! ”
“ Why, so it is,” I answered; “didn’t we say
1 how do you do ’ in Lisbon more than as long ago
again ? Yours isn’t half a paradox ! By-the-bye,
that reminds me, I have never returned your
property, often as I’ve promised it; I have brought
it down to give to you now,—permit me, with
many thanks ! ”
“What, the handkerchief, —you are indeed con-
scientious ! ”
“ Honesty’s the best policy •”


u l ln small things? as some infidel added! ” he
remarked, as lie took it from my hand. “ There’s a
good deal of philosophy in that postscript, Mrs.
Lea ! ”
“ Dangerous philosophy, I opine, when it leads
to confusion between mciuu and tuum I ”
“ I daresay,” he sighed ; “ I haven’t tested it!
How is your book progressing ? ”
“My book! Oh, the only composition I am
engaged on, unless yon except correspondence, has
scarcely been touched since I arrived. I began it,
meaning to write a portion every day, but weeks
go by sometimes without my opening it; more
good intentions broken, yon see ! ”
“ The end of most good intentions ! You’ve not
shocked me, I’m to a certain extent a fatalist, a big
word which only means I am able to perceive
destiny is stronger than human beings ! Yon won’t
dispute that ? ”
“ I am not going to, at any rate, but don’t con-
strue silence into consent; that one is a mistake
like the majority of proverbs ! ”
“ Though you just had recourse to them your-
self ! ”
“ The privileged inconsistency of my sex ! ”
“ Play something ? ” he requested abruptly, going
across to the piano.
“I don’t care to, here,” I replied; “you saw
how the people stared the first evening; we are
not on the continent I ”


--“ But there is no one in now; the few women
there are have gone out, and none of the men will
be back till tiffin ! ”
“ I’d sooner you did not ask me, I don’t want to
make myself conspicuous ! ”
“As you please ! ” he responded, with a shrug
of the shoulders.
I took the seat he had placed for me, and with-
out premeditation strayed into the most exquisite
of all Chopin’s nocturnes , the second; that melody
wherein the mournful dissatisfaction which is its
keynote thrice rises in the treble until the culmina-
ting D-flat comes like a veritable sob of pain, and,
in playing, I was thinking of this man’s wasted
life. The advantages he had flung away ceased to
double his offence, they made the wreck more
pitiable; I thought what he might have been under
better influences, and what he was in fact, an exile
and a fugitive.
Then by a swift transition only explicable by
the dominion self wields over our holiest moods,
and by no association of ideas, my fancy sped back
to Seville; I was remembering how from my
window I had watched a beggar over there, and
envied him. He was blind, he was in rags, and
yet I envied him, for a little child would lead him
to his post in early morning, and put up her baby
lips to kiss him when she left. One day the beggar
did not come. He was dead, Then the child would
come alone, and cry upon the step where he had


been used to sit. “Who would cry for me if I
were dead?” I had murmured. “What voice
would falter as it spoke my name ?—How silly,
not one would even speak it! ”
For the last time came that wail mounting in
crescendo , and I wondered vaguely if I had been
given a brother whether all would have been still
the same. I yearned for the clasp of this unborn
brother’s arms to help and protect me; to feel I
had someone to say to me “ This is right, and that
is wrong; ” if I had had a brother I might have
been a softer woman.
“ Thank you,” said my companion earnestly,
“ thank yon very much ! ” My fingers rested on
the final chord.
For a moment I had a wild impulse to tell bim
what I was, and bid him hate me; only the re-
collection of the trust I should be violating held
me back.
“ It is beautiful, that nocturne , is it not? ”
“Yes,” he assented, “like much of Chopin’s
music, it says for us all we feel but do not know
how to say ourselves ! ”
“ It moved you like that too ? ” I exclaimed.
“ I felt whilst yon were at the piano, Mrs. Lea,
that I was unutterably base, and that I might be
superlatively good; contradictory emotions, but
simultaneous and sincere ! ”
“ And also evanescent! It is the same with all
of ns ; we see “Jo ” at the theatre, and give half-a


crown to the first vagabond we notice outside the
doors, but the next day we are ourselves again, and
pass the mother with six children selling grounsel
without remorse. Art is very potent, but human
nature is much more mean I ”
u Yet surely there are circumstances under which
one may become better, don’t you think so ? ”
“ I am twenty-eight years old, Mr. Yane, but
unhappily I haven’t found them ! ”
“ You wrong yourself sometimes,” he said; “ you
do indeed, nature never intended you for a cynic ! ”
“Unfortunately,” I answered rising, “it is not
nature’s intention which moulds us, but the world’s
lesson. There, pray don’t let us go in for drawing-
room metaphysics, they generally mean egotism
with a long name ! ”
“ I want to be egotistical,” he proceeded calmly ;
“ don’t go yet, I want to talk to you about myself,
may I ? I do not know why I should inflict my
private affairs on you, I’m not often taken commu-
nicative, upon my word, but 1 suppose the desire
for sympathy comes to most men sometimes, and it
certainly comes to me when I’m with you ! ”
u I am much too selfish a, person to make an ideal
I rejoined awkwardly; u I warn you
beforehand I ”
“ But I won’t be warned ; and if yon were half
as bitter as you pretend, you would attract me so, I
could never admire a feminine edition of myself I I
want advice, I’ve made an awful mess of my life,


that’s a fact; to put it in its mildest form, I’ve been
a fool. There are some things one can’t speak of
without glossing oyer to a woman, more especially
a woman whose opinion one yalnes; hut a short
while back I, in an unexpected fashion, came into a
lot of money ”
“ A legacy ? ” I faltered.
“Eh? Oh, yes, a legacy ; well, I ran through
the whole heap in a few months, played general
ducks and drakes with it till I found myself almost
broke, and then, in the manner of the bad little boy
who went fishing on Sunday, and seasonably re-
pented when he fell in the pool, I determined to
cut the whole game, the cards, and the turf, and
the tables, turn oyer a new leaf, and begin afresh,
blow do you believe a man who has come a cropper
can blot the page out, and make amends for—for a
terrible folly ? ”
What was Ito say ! His gaze pained me, and
the sunshine hurt my eyes; what could I say that
would not be a mockery ?
“ Do you think it is too late ? ”
“ They say it is never too late for good resolu-
tions,’ ’ I replied harshly; “ I hope for all our sakes
the axiom may be true ! ”
“ I have at least a chance of doing something,”
he resumed; “ one of the mining companies is to be
let; rich ground, by all accounts, and only vacant
through a heavy fall of reef which the present
lessees can’t afford to haul out. There’s a possi


bility of my going into it in partnership with a fellow
who has all the business at his fingers’ ends; if our
tender should be accepted, Mrs. Lea, I may bo a
rich man again ! ”
“ You have made an offer for the lease ? ” •
“Yes,” he responded cheerfully. “I ought to
have enough for my share of the starting capital,
and if I should require more, I hope to be able to
raise it! ”
The gong sounded as he imparted this piece of
information, and we went down. All the progress
I have made in the past three weeks is comprised
in the interview just chronicled. I lay my head on
the pillow with the knowledge of having gained the
confidence of the man I am going to ruin, and of
course lam glad and proud. Dunstan wearies me
with questions and prognostications of success, her
cruel satisfaction makes it a relief to be alone.
I have not seen him since two o’clock. I wish
that I might never see him any more !
* # * * #
January 1 6th.
His tender was the highest, and he is already
hard at work ; we never meet in the daytime now,
excepting for a few minutes at tiffin, when he comes
in hot and dusty, and looking, oh, so dreadfully
tired. The weather is growing insupportable, it
was 110° in the shade to-day.
They say there is a terrible illness, to which


Europeans are particularly liable during their first
summer here, known as ‘ Camp fever,’ and that it is
often contracted by too reckless exposure to the
sun. During the last four days I have missed a
woman, who used to sit at the table opposite to
mine; this morning I inquired the reason of her
absence, they said “ Camp fever ! ” This evening
I asked if she was better; they answered she was
dead.
What if he should fall ill in this fearful place
without a friend to nurse him ! What if, like that
poor woman, —
Oh, why did I not starve with my self-respect
before I became a spy ! What is it to me he is a
scoundrel, does his criminality lessen my degrada-
tion ? Who was the author of the precept, There
can be no friendship without respect ? Ealse every
word of it! For if it is not friendship I have for
this man what is it ? why am I trembling at that
horrid thought which crossed my mind ? Why do
I feel I would gladly take his guilt upon my
shoulders, work for him, suffer for him, so that he,
my friend, should be innocent and free ?
Beautiful sentiment, proverbial and profound
philosophy culled from our first French grammar, I
bow before your wisdom:
u L’amitie est me helle fleur dont Vestime est la
tige I ”
E


CHAPTER XII.
Junvnry 23rd
I have hud a frightful dream, a dream that
makes my bed an object of terror ; I could not go
to sleep again if I tried.
Under these circumstances I have lighted the
lamp, and prepared myself to wait for morning ; it
is not quite four a.m., and I want to write this
dream of mine down, just as all the incidents
occurred while they are still frightening me in
recollection by their semblance of reality.
I was in a wide, strange road; I knew it was
the Dn-Toits-Pan-road, for I had been in it often,
and yet it was unfamiliar. The light was dim, I
think it must have been dawn, since it was the
same light as is breaking over the house-tops now.
There were two men with me, and I was leading
them. They said, “Is this the way ? ” and I
answered “ Yes, this is the way ; you must follow
me ! ” My feet sank deep in dust; it hampered
my movements, and made each step an effort. It
seemed to me I must be very ill. I could see
nothing but dust in front of me, excepting a low
fringe of stunted bushes far away. The men.


murmured “We shall be late ! ” I shook my head.
I saidj “We are there !
We had come to a great building, and we entered
it; we passed silently through long passages lined
with doors until we came to one different from the
rest, a narrow door shaped like a coffin-lid, and
studded with nails; this we pushed open, and
walked inside.
Within the room the sunshine was streaming
hotly through a window, and two arms protruding
from a heap upon the floor extended right across
the threshold. We knew this heap was a human
body lying beneath the coverlet as it had rolled from
the bed in pain. The air was black with flies, and
they were crawling over the dead hands.
My companions turned to me: “ Where have you
brought us?” they asked. I cried, “My mission
has finished in a hospital ward ! ”
Then I was kneeling on the ground, I drew the
blanket from the face; it was the face of the man
I had hunted. Sight came back to the eyeballs that
stared up at me; the white lips moved. They
whispered, “My sin has parted us! Miriam, my
love, have mercy ! ” I said, “lam going to die with
you because I cannot save you. Hold me tight! ”
The features of the two men I had guided ap-
peared blurred by distance; I saw myself weeping
beside his corpse below, and yet it was not I, for I
was floating towards another life bearing him with
me, as I had known him in the flesh, breathing and
E 2


speaking to me. As we ascended nearer to the
heavens unclosing to receive us, a vast impenetrable
mist sailed between me and the world, sinking
earthward as we rose. Still I strained him to me,
and we clung together. Denser grew that cloud,
and I marvelled what it might he; voices answered,
“It is the sins of which one soul is purged ! ” At
the same instant my clasp relaxed, my arms dropped
asunder, and the man I loved fell downward beyond
my reach, beyond my sight, down —down—down
through Space, only his scream re-echoed through
the Universe, and I awoke !
* * * * *
January 2 5/Ji-
lt was two o’clock, the mining whistles had
sounded the hour for recommencing work, and I
was sitting alone in the hotel thinking. The im-
pression of that dream was yet upon me; it had
haunted me for forty-eight hours with miserable
persistency.
I knew now, as absolutely as I had known in
the vision, that I loved! that the man I was de-
ceiving had become to me far dearer than my own
existence. I knew it was no mere liking or regard
for him which made me shudder in the presence of
my accomplice, and shrink ashamed under her gaze,
but the unadmitted consciousness of a passion that
disgraced me. I could not dupe myself; I did not
try. If it was shame to care for him it was also


sweet! I longed again for the fancied touch of his
embrace about my neck, to hear him saying as I
had heard him in imagination, “ Miriam, my love ! ”
and yet I remembered I must never listen !
“ Playing truant, you see, Mrs. Lea ! ” The
door had opened, and the object of my thoughts
crossed the room to where I sat.
“Why, yes,” I exclaimed, starting, “I heard
the whistles some time ago.”
“ I daresay,” he answered ; “ the fact is there is
nothing to he done this afternoon, so I mean to
stop up here, and spoil your reverie.”
“How do you know I am going to stay at
home ? ”
“ Oh, come,” he remonstrated, “ you won’t pre-
tend you had any idea of taking a stroll, with the
thermometer making rapid progress towards boiling-
point ? I’ve been looking forward to this ‘ half-
holiday ’ all the morning, Mrs. Lea, —don’t be un-
kind I Why have you chosen that corner right in
the sun; let me make it more comfortable for
you!”
He pulled down the blind, and drew the curtains
across the window, screening me from the glare.
“ Hext a cushion,” he observed; “ there, is that
better, and will you stay now ? ”
“ Thank you,” I replied, “you are very good ! ”
“ The mail is in, and I have brought you some
of the English journals,” he continued. “ I always
think they are welcome out here myself ; there are


conditions under which a comic-paper may become
the connecting link of hemispheres,—see ! ”
“And after working harder than the niggers
since sunrise yon actually took the trouble to walk
about the camp buying those for me ? ”
“lio, I did not, because it wasn’t a trouble ! It
occurred to me as I was loafing in the engine-house
throwing pebbles at the boiler (arduous occupation,
was it not ?). I said, c ßy Jove, the mail’s due; if it’s
delivered before I go back to tiffin I’ll stroll round
to the main street, and take that poor little traveller
all alone in this Gott-verlassen hole something to
read.’ Behold the result! ”
He deposited a bundle of periodicals in my lap,
and stood looking down at me as I turned them
over.
u What is it ? ” he asked curtly ; u you are worry-
ing, tell me why ? ”
“ ‘ Worrying ’! ” I repeated. u What makes you
say that?”
“I am sure of it; you haven’t understood a single
one of those printed lines, you haven’t even
attempted to follow them. Tell me what’s the
matter? ”
“ There isn’t anything the matter ; I have a head-
ache, perhaps, that is all, —what should there be ? ”
“ There should be nothing if I could help it I ”
he said, with his deep grey eyes still fixed on me.
“ I can’t bear to see you wretched, and lately you
have been getting quieter every day; when you do


laugh, the laugh ends in a sigh. Is it only that
the place depresses you, or ”
“Nonsense, are you adding geloscopy to your
accomplishments ! I’m bored, moping, out of sorts,
that’s the alarming complaint; Kimberley isn’t the
most lively town for a stranger, —I wish with my
whole soul I’d never come to it! ”
He gave that quick gesture of the shoulder
which was a habit with him, and might mean any-
thing, and for a while we were both silent. Pre-
sently he spoke again.
“ That was not a considerate remark you made
just now! ”
“ What wasn’t ? ” I inquired briefly; “ I’ve quite
forgotten what I said ! ”
“ Thank you ; to refresh your memory, you ex-
pressed a profound regret that you had ever come
here ! ”
“ Oh, yes, so I did; well, after the preface, the
plot:—which was the remark you found inconsi-
derate ? ”
‘‘lt was that one! Do you suppose it could
have been pleasant to hear ? Oh, I know you are
going to reply that you did not regard me as re-
sponsible for Kimberley’s defects, that I didn’t
build it, or with some retort equally ridiculous; but
I think you might have kept that very heartfelt
sorrow to yourself ! ”
“It was a gaucherie” I rejoined coldly, “but
there is no occasion to be rude ! ”


He muttered something complimentary or other-
wise under his breath, (probably ‘ otherwise ’) and
picked out an air with one finger on the piano. I
wanted badly to own that if I had meant it it was
for his sake; to tell him how he himself must
repent onr meeting if I dared but hint its cause,
but I could not! I had to be dumb, and look
indifferent.
The notion crossed my mind that if he should, —
should grow to like me before my errand had been
completed, how much more vile he would hold me
when the blow fell; the thought was wonderful, it
was so full of mixed emotions. To be hated by him
would be torture, but —to be loved by him first I It
seemed to me there would be joy enough in that to
live upon in recollection through my future of
suffering ; besides I could always die !
And still that tune went on, jingling upon the
sunshine.
But for him, I was only thinking of myself !
Would not his punishment be greater if he were
fond of the woman who had denounced him ? If
during those years of miserable atonement he should
be deeming every sign of my affection false; be
cursing that very utterance in one happy moment,
when perhaps I had forgotten, as a trap to lead him
to his ruin ; greater ? Yes, immeasurably more
hard!
“Dout let you and me quarrel,” he petitioned,
closing the instrument with a bang. “ I beg your


pardon ; I didn’t know I was so sensitive ! By-the-
bye, you’ve not wondered about my being ‘ off duty,’
and after all my industry I expected it was going
to create a sensation ! ”
“ Why, is there another reason besides the one
you volunteered ? ”
“ Well yes, I didn’t go into details; it is true
there is nothing much to be done this afternoon,
but it’s because we have been hauling day and
night, got the last load of reef out, and are ready
to commence real work as soon as we have more
funds. That’s good news, I take it ? ”
“It is, indeed; ” I responded, “the claims being
cleared you can begin to dig for diamonds, of
course ? ”
“ Certainly; we shall soon know the value of the
ground now, and if it should yield well— ! Will
you shake hands, and wish me luck, Mrs. Lea ? ”
“What do you mean ‘As soon as you have
more funds ?’” I queried, evading the request;
u was not the sum you had sufficient ? ”
“The hauling operations cost more than I had
reckoned, but that’s of no consequence, I anticipate
being able to raise as much as is essential; shake
hands and prophesy me fortune, won’t you ? Tell
me I am going to make up for the past, and that it
will be my own fault if I’m ever reminded of it! ”
“How can I, I , I’m not a Sibyl,” I objected
nervously ; “ how could my prophecy affect you ? ”
“Hever mind,” he insisted, “gamblers are


notoriously superstitions; view it as a whim of
mine if you choose, or think more truly that I want
seriously to feel I have your interest as a talisman ;
think your encouragement would help me on, and
your faith in me would he something to justify !
Come, Mrs. Lea, it isn’t an enormous demand, you
will give me your hand, and say what I asked ? ”
As he stood waiting to clasp it in his own,
Dunstan interrupted us, bringing me a letter. The
glance I threw at the superscription was unne-
cessary ; it was a letter from my employers.


CHAPTER XIII.
January 26 i11.
Mr. Bazalgette wrote in reply to the Eeport
from Cape Town by which I had announced my
immediate departure for the Fields; and as the
amount with which he had furnished me on the eve
of my voyage to South Africa had at that date been
already so low as to warrant my application for
further supplies, he remitted a draft for a hundred
and fifty pounds.
A package of dilapidated notes, torn and pinned
together, is lying before me on the dressing-table,
and I have been sitting here all the morning stonily
staring at it with a prayer for strength in my
heart; for in cashing that remittance, I have this
day seen the detective’s prognostications fulfilled,
and the object of his instructions offering bonds for
sale in the Standard Bank.
I hardly comprehended the meaning of the teller’s
inquiry, u How will you take it ? ” I scarcely knew
what directions I stammered in response; I only
heard that fragment of the low quick colloquy on
my right, reaching my ears across the persons who
divided us : “ When will he be disengaged ? I


wish, to dispose of the bonds without delay, I am
pressed for ready-money ! ”
“ One fifty, five tens, and ten fives; you will find
that correct, madam ! ”
Without counting I thrust them into a roll, and
hurried out to meditate my mode of action ; and yet
I have done nothing. I have simply sat and asked
for the courage to perform my duty.
The course I should pursue is a very easy one;
it is to mail the intelligence to London. Easy—to
say ; easy and unavoidable according to the dictates
of the commonest honour; but there is an influence
at work in me stronger than honour, stronger than
justice, which bids me pause and draw back while
there is still time.
Oh, Heaven help me, what shall I do ? Am Ito
betray the employers whose bread I eat; or am I to
consign the man I love to gaol ?
Those people in England have paid me, put their
trust in me, perhaps saved me from starvation ; if I
deceived them should I not be the vilest wretch on
earth ? Gratitude, honesty, everything points one
way, all the sophistry in the world cannot blind me
to it ; the information shall be sent! * *
The Eeport is ready for the post; it lies beside
me now !
* * * * #
I had barely sealed the envelope when I heard
a step in the next room, —it was Ms. As I joined


him he came towards me evidently agitated by some
joyful event; I had not to wait long to know the
cause,
“Look,” he exclaimed triumphantly, “ our first
‘find ’! ”
It was a two-hundred-and-fifty-carat stone dis-
covered in the mine an hour before. Massive and
pure, without a flaw or spot, it might be expected to
realize, he told me, perhaps five thousand pounds;
no wmnder he was pleased.
“ You see,” he laughed, “you are bringing me
luck whether you will or no ! ”
Bringing him luck, I!
“If it should sell so well as that, it will be two-
thousand-five-hundred to my share; no fortune, as
I reckoned once, worth having now, though! ” he
continued; “Mrs. Lea, a diamond company is the
finest gamble I’ve ever tried ! ”
He was like a child with a new toy; he kept
spinning it on the cloth, and holding it up to gaze
at it against the light. “Wait till it’s cut,” he re-
peated again and again, “ it’ll be magnificent! ”
Then suddenly he threw it back upon the table, and
said quite seriously:
“ Are you glad ? ”
“ I should be glad if you could remain as happy as
you are at this minute,” I replied, and it was
true.
“Do you mean that ?” he questioned. “It rests
with you to make me always much happier I”


“No, now yon must listen to me; I didn’t intend
to say it yet, I had made up my mind to wait nntil
I had something to offer, but I cant wait, and you
shan’t go ! I love you,—pshaw, what does that
tell you ? The first syllables we learn to speak are
I I loye,’ and we go on wearing them threadbare
for the rest of our lives; what I want you to
understand is that you are more to me than any
woman I ever met, that you fill every one of
my thoughts and hopes. You are my hopes; do
you suppose I cared for this trumpery stone for its
own sake ? I cared for it for yours, because when
that hulking nigger brought it over to me in the
claims it seemed to he one step the nearer you!
Oh, I have no right to ask it; to win you is the
maddest thing a man in my position ever dreamed,
hut you’d he sorry for me if you guessed how I
have cursed myself lately for that folly you know
about; how I have wished we could have come
together before it happened. Tell me you forgive
me not being strong enough to stand by and run
the risk of losing you ; tell me you will forget how
broke I am, and be my wife ? ”
“ I cannot, it is impossible,” I answered thickly,
“ I entreat you not to say any more ! ”
My temples were throbbing; I loathed myself and
my existence, everything hut him I was sending
from me, and yet how could I make the dismissal
less harsh ?
“ Is my mistake irreparable?” he pleaded still;


“ won’t yon believe I would work for you, and get
something back ? I would, I swear it; you should
never be deprived of the comforts you are used to,
I would never deny you a single request! ”
“ It isn’t that, ah don’t talk of money ! What do
you imagine me to be, a successful writer ? I am a
beggar; not one line of mine will ever be in print.
I am a nobody without income, and without pro-
spects, but nothing can alter my decision; it is
useless for you to persist! ”
“ Do you care for anybody else ? ”
“ What does it matter for whom I care; you will
leave me, and only remember me to wonder how
you could have been so weakd ”
“Do you care for anybody else ? • Truthfully,
with your eyes to mine, is there someone you like
better ? ”
“ I have no one to be fond of in the world,” I
faltered, “no one to be fond of me; now go ! ”
“ Ho, I will not go,” he said fiercely; “ you have
confessed the reason you refuse! You fancy because
we are both poor you would be a drag on me, and
I should one day be brute enough to regret your
sacrifice; you are wrong ! Mrs. Lea—, to think I
should not even know your name ! What is it ?
graceful, and yet hard too, the same as you can be,
—tell me ! ”
“ It is 1 Miriam.’ ”
“A beautiful one,” he murmured gravely; “it
sounds like a prayer ! Miriam, my life is for you


to guide; give yourself to me, and I will be worthy
of your trust; reject me, and I shall be a failure
to the end! Don’t let false pride rob me of you,
my dear; don’t reply ‘no’ without trying to say
‘ yes.’ A woman is very powerful when she is as
much to a man as you to me, and you are able now,
because I love you, to shape my whole future with
a word! ”
“You are cruel to urge that,” I retorted; “it is
unfair ! ”
“ Perhaps,” he rejoined, “ but it is easy to be
brave when you are mistress of the situation; the
very consciousness which strengthens you makes
me a coward! It must be always so, the man can
only crave; a caprice may turn him away hopeless ;
a sentence is to decide his fate ; can you blame him
for appealing to all that is best in the nature of the
girl who is to speak it! Sweetheart, am Ito go
from here miserable or blessed ? Determine; be
yourself, throw off the wretched cynicism that hides
your real mind, and let us fight our difficulties
together, boldly, side by side ! ”
He was supplicating for more than he divined;
he was begging his escape of me, me who could
save him ! The knowledge made that petition an
agony to hear; I could merely signify my resolution
by a gesture.
“I can’t describe my feelings,” he cried, “I’m
not sufficiently clever; I never found out how
impotent speech was until I wanted it to express my


soul. Grant me the opportunity, and I will prove
my earnestness by my deeds ! Each act shall he a
witness of my sincerity, and an effort to deserve
you. Darling, won’t you have faith ? ”
The capability for pain was passing from me at
last; I was beginning to listen almost apathetically,
as under an anaesthetic one may bear some horrible
operation. How I waited dumbly for the trial to
finish.
“ Well,” he resumed coldly, “ I will not sue any
more; you are inflexible, and I have humbled
myself enough ! Good-bye,—do we part friends ? ”
Was it to be interminable ? I could have flung
myself at this man’s feet, but I might not aver I
was his friend ! I could only implore his pardon
mutely, and wait to be alone. Heaven can testify
the glance was not intended for encouragement,
yet it must have revealed my suffering.
The sternness died from his gaze, and he strode
towards me ; he seized me by the wrists, and drew
me to him :
“ Miriam, my love, have mercy ! ”
The phrase broke from him that had been borne
upon me in my dream. The room with its brackets
and its mirrors seemed swimming round me as I
strove to wrench myself free, and still he grasped
me firmly, beseeching, and upbraiding me by turns.
“Do you hate me?” he queried passionately, “is
the doctrine of affinity such a lie that I whom you
can influence for good or bad, sway like a child


according to your will, am only able to inspire an
antipathy in yon ? There is no sacrifice yon could
demand I would not deem it a privilege to make if
it brought me your thanks; there isn’t a task I
would shrink from if you said to me ‘do it, I shall
be pleased ; ’ and yet I am so utterly nothing to you
I cannot move you a hair’s breadth, that my distress
doesn’t even excite your pity ! Is it I love you so
absolutely you despise me, or is it indeed that you
have no sensibility to be touched ? I can compel
you to be passive, that is all; I can clasp your
hands, and detain you by sheer physical force as I
do now, but you, the real you who attracted me,
are as far away from me as ever, and I hold a piece
of stone! ”
I did not attempt to release myself any longer;
the limits of endurance had been reached. I was
guilty, I was wicked, but I was a woman, and I
loved him ! I lifted my face to his, and the joy I
saw in it out-balanced the cognizance of sin. He
caught me in his arms till my head lay upon his
shoulder, and our lips met.
“ You consent to marry me?”
“Yes,” I said, “you have conquered; I am
willing to be your wife ! ”
And now that he has left me, I am revolving
that promise, and the shame to which it pledges me.
I have no excuse to offer, I am committing an in-
famous action, and lam aware of it; I may even be
amenable to the law; let them punish me, —they


shall never have him! I have done with scruples
and conscience, and I will shield him against them
all • no information of mine ! God ! I had
forgotten the Eeport! # * #
Dunstan has posted it, the letter has gone !


CHAPTER XIV.
February 14 th.
I have had time to meditate on that catastrophe
while watching beside a sick-bed; Dunstan has
been very ill. A fortnight ago her life was de-
spaired of, and we thought Providence had destined
another victim of the fever to be buried in this
wilderness of sand. Then, when hope was least,
the delirium passed; by degrees the awful yellow
shade which had overspread her cheeks merged into
the pallor of convalescence, and I saw the woman I
had known so strong and self-reliant lying back
upon the pillows spared, but as helpless as a little
babe. She is now well enough to travel, and the
doctor recommends the invariable prescription in
such cases, a sojourn in the Colony. She will go
to Cape Town to-morrow, ignorant of the fact that
she and I will never meet again. In a week I shall
have betrayed my trust, and saved him who is dearer
than my honour. He pressed me to accede to a
brief engagement, and I readily consented, for my
reflection had shown me it was the wisest plan;
that intelligence is only now due in England; the
reply cannot be delivered till three weeks hence;


by then we shall have quitted Kimberley, and es-
caped together !
This illness of the companion I am deceiving
served as a pretext; I told him I was frightened to
remain. At my request he agreed to abandon his
work here, and to forsake the place. He will soon
be secure in another country, without even surmis-
ing the danger he has run.
I mean to restore to Mr. Bazalgette the accumu-
lation of the salary I have drawn, with an enclosure
simply bearing my name; I have considered every-
thing, I do not think there is anything else !
# * # * *
February I Qth,
Five mornings more to drag themselves away ; I
count the hours ! Dunstan’s departure has removed
the only obstacle to my design; when I shook hands
with her at the station I felt ashamed. The dust
is hissing along the streets, and darkening the
windows; my very diary is gritty. I have been
glancing through its pages, back to the first line of
all; what a change since the evening in London
when I scribbled it!
I can see the narrow room where I sat, as plainly
as if I were in it now; I can remember myself
nibbling the pen, and staring out at the opposite
houses, wondering if I should ever find anything
to do. It is funny that renewing the acquaintance
of one’s old self, and yet it is melancholy.


Ours will be a curious marriage, as it bas been
a strange betrothal; we shall leave the hotel
together and unaccompanied. What do we want
of friends when each of us can bring sufficience to
the other ? On the 21st, the anniversary of my
birth, I commence a new existence dedicated to my
husband; our hearts will hide their bitterness, but
everything save two secrets that are pain we give
and share. Ido not dread the prospect: dread !
Were my deserts as infinite as the bounty of Heaven
it could vouchsafe no greater blessing than this
which crowns a crime !
I wish I had not said that; it sounds like a
boast! It makes me tremble lest on the verge of
fulfilment I should be reminded of it. What has
Heaven to do with me, —with us ? To beg its aid,
would be a blasphemy;—l cannot see to write, lam
crying.—Oh, how helpless is a woman deprived of
the resource of prayer !
February 20/7/.
{Midnight.)
He left me an hour ago, and lam alone. It is
my wedding-eve ; the bare hooks, the strapped
trunk, the gaping dressing-bag, everything in the
apartment appears to announce it. There is nobody
to congratulate me, not a voice to say a kind word,
yet in twelve hours I shall be a wife.
It is curious I should feel the loneliness of my


position more acutely this evening, when it is
nearly over, than I have done at any other period
of my life; hnt I seem to be bestowing so worthless
a gift in going to him as a woman whom no one
will miss.
I suppose most girls on such a night whisper
their thoughts into a mother’s ear: I have no
mother, or I should like to forget my girlhood is
past, and to kneel to her now as I used when I was
a child!—l had better shut the window, and
undress, —how quiet it is !—The breeze blows
as softly .as your kisses, dear, —I stretch my
hands towards you through the mist!—lf the
spirits of the dead can listen, if they can intercede
for the beings they cherished upon Earth, mother,
oh, my dead mother up there amongst the stars,
ask the Creator you behold to protect the man I
love !
# # * # #
February 21 si.
I am ready,— absurdly early, but I was rest-
less. Three attempts to read the “ Independent ”
have resulted in failure. I am too unsettled to
concentrate my attention on a newspaper, and my
diary is the sole occupation available.
There has been a letter from Dunstan; she
writes she is already a great deal stronger, and
trusts to be back in time ‘ to witness Mr. Yining’s
arrest.’ I tore the epistle into fifty pieces,—why


did it not get lost in the post! I have forwarded
his money to Mr. Bazalgette, retaining only twenty -
five pounds; I cannot decide why I kept that; I
do not fancy I am avaricious, however had I may
he otherwise, nevertheless some motive I could not
analyse impelled me to pause before I determined
to make myself quite a pauper.
The chambermaid has wished me happiness, I
am so glad; somebody has said something pleasant
at last. I had rung for a cup of tea, and in
removing the tray she loitered to such an extent
that I glanced round ; she turned very red, and
murmured:
u I hope it isn’t a liberty, ma’am, but what I’ve
got to say is, may you be happy, ma’am, you and
the gentleman too ! ”
I could have hugged that girl, smudges and all!
And we shall be happy, he and I; remorse has
ceased to oppress me, I have flung it from me with
the fragments of that hateful letter; lam merely
terrified at the magnitude of my joy. I could
scarcely pin my bonnet on, my fingers shook so;
and to persuade myself it is later than the clock
will allow I have buttoned my gloves. My
costume is not much like a bride’s. I wonder if he
will think I look nice I—l hope he will think I
look nice, —the veil does not come far down if he
wants to !
How incomprehensible it is a man should have
the power of altering the whole current of my


ideas as he has done; I am as pliable under his
influence as if I were sixteen! The hardest
attendant upon matureness, it strikes me, is to love
deeply, and he conscious the while that the display
of your subjection must always have the appearance
of aping juvenility.
It is a problem, also, what attributes, imper-
ceptible to herself, a woman possesses to exert so
subtle a dominion over the man. What does he
see in me ? perhaps
There is a knock at the door, can it be— ? No,
it is the servant again; she has brought me a
telegram. A telegram! Who can have—. Oh,
why did I not take this contingency into account ?
What a fool I was not to remember they might
wire ! It must be a cablegram from London, the
answer I had calculated to avoid. My tones are
tremulous as I thank her; does she notice my
agitation ? She stares, I fancy, and leaves it on
the table. I have not the nerve to open it; it chills
me as though it had come to part us even now;
Mr. Lazalgette himself seems near; that orange-
coloured missive denotes danger,—l will throw it
away !
What cowardice, am I mad I My weakness may
be imperilling him; suppose duplicate instructions
have been cabled to the Kimberley police. I must
break the seal, and quickly. My darling, I need
all my courage now, for you;—the enclosure lies
before me !


I struggle to understand it, and I cannot, the
cipher has escaped my memory. lam going cold as
ice, —wait! The signs grow clear, the sense steals
over me. Word for word I translate it; word for
word the message handed to me on my wedding
morning means ;
“Jasper Yining was arrested by Scotland Yard
people yesterday in Yew York. Return. You have
been following the wrong man ! ”


CHAPTER XV.
Foe minutes I sit gazing at it numbed. I keep
repeating the sentence mechanically aloud; I hardly
master its significance.
u I have been following the wrong man ?” That
is to say I have been misled by a chance resem-
blance to a photograph? I do not know Jasper
Yining at all ? I have never seen him ?—I cannot
grasp it! u He was arrested in Hew York yester-
day?” Then I have met a man whose name is
what he states it to be; whose only fault is the
venial folly he candidly admitted, the squandering
of an inheritance which might have been a com-
petency. Is it a dream ?
But the bonds ? —Again how absolutely I have
been blinded by my own convictions ! why did I
leap at the conclusion they must be the stolen bonds
when I did not even hear they were Egyptian ? He
is sinless; stupefaction fades, and the full import
of the revelation crowds upon me at length. Hanger
does not threaten either him or me. Heaven be
praised, his innocence removes every cause for fear,
the path is open before us. Stop ! First I must


proclaim the truth. My concealment of the cir-
cumstances which brought us together has been
practised, from the time I abjured my mission and
its claims, as much for his sake as my OAvn ; what-
ever my offence towards my employers, I have since
then at least been staunch to him; but that is over
now. He is not Jasper Mining; he is a gentleman;
and reticence after this would not be delicacy any
more, it would be guilt.
My exultance is transient; it ebbs from me, and
is succeeded by a sensation of blank dismay. I have
been u staunch,” —to whom ? To Mr. Jack Yane ;
what will that avail me ? I feel suddenly as if I
were betrothed to a stranger; I shall be more de-
graded in his sight by that very treachery than if I
had been just. I have only been his equal while I
imagined him a thief, and he will refuse to marry
me.
Acknowledgment will deal the death-blow to my
own future ; confession is equivalent to telling the
man I love I am no longer fit to be his wife; I will
not do this thing, I cannot, no woman could !
Why should I not keep silence still ? It would
be a safe course; Hunstan must be apprized of the
intelligence, and she will return to England; expo-
sure could never overtake me, and I can be his wife
in spite of all, —Jack’s wife ! Ah, have I no
honour left ? Have I sunk low enough to be disloyal
to him? No! Ten thousand “noes.”—Hot that! I
will make the avowal, and I will go away; only I can


not speak it! lam going to be honest; lam going
to do what is right; —hut it must be a letter! lam
no heroine, I am flesh and blood, and with all the
capabilities of flesh and blood I am suffering now;
to make the declaration with my own lips, and to
watch the disgust upon his face would kill me.
It is fortunate I reserved some money, it will
take me from him. What is the time ? There is
no room for delay; the note must be written at once.
Let me collect my thoughts!—Hark, there are steps
in the passage,—they are stopping ; lam too late,
the ordeal I wanted to shun is at hand. I close my
diary; he is outside ; I shall not look at it again.
It might have finished better, but I shall never pen
another entry while I live. He is calling to me, —
oh, my heart —
Come in!
% * * *
* * * *
God is very good : Jack kissed me !
THE EK'D.


LONDON :
BRADBURV, AGNEW, & CO., PH INTERS, WHITEFRIAES.
