

MR . CHARLES WILLIAM CROAKER.
1851.
NEW SOUTH WALES.
Laid upon the Council Table, by THE COLONIAL SECRETARY, and Ordered, by the Council,
to be Printed, 19 th December, 1851.
RETURN to an Address of the Legislative Council of New South Wales,
dated 2nd December, 1851, requesting,—
“ A Copy of all Correspondence which has taken place
“ between the Government and Mr. Charles William
“ Croaker, in reference to the matter of over-rent paid by
“ him for a run called Cocomingla, in the Lachlan District.”
COPY OF CORRESPONDENCE ALLUDED TO.
Page.
1. Extract from Notice, inviting Tenders for Cocomingla Run, 14th April, 1849....1
2. Copy of Mr. Croaker’s Tender for the same, Ist June, 1849.....1
3. Chief Commissioner of Crown Lands to Mr. Croaker, accepting Tender 20th August, 1849 .... 3
4. Chief Commissioner of Crown Lands to Mr. Croaker, authorising possession, 13th November,
1849.....3
5. Chief Commissioner of Crown Lands to Mr Croaker, respecting boundaries of the Cocomingla
Run, 31st December, 1849 .....4
6. Mr. Croaker to Chief Commissioner of Crown Lands, respecting trespassers on his boundaries,
30th January, 1850 .....5
7. Chief Commissioner of Crown Lands to Mr. Croaker, in reply, 18th February, 1850 ......5
8. Mr. Croaker to Chief Commissioner of Crown Lands, continuing his complaint of trespassers on
his run, 26th February, 1850 .....6
9. Chief Commissioner of Crown Lands to Mr. Croaker, in reply, 26th March, 1850 ......6
10. Mr. Croaker to Colonial Secretary, applying for an alteration in the date of his Lease, 15th
May, 1850 ........6
11. Chief Commissioner of Crown Lands to Colonial Secretary, reporting upon Mr. Croaker’s ap-
plication, 4th July, 1850, with one enclosure .........7
12. Colonial Secretary to Chief Commissioner respecting Mr. Croaker’s complaint, 21st March, 1851. ............8
13. Chief Commissioner to Mr. Croaker, transmitting decision upon Mr. Croaker’s application, 17th
April, 1851 ......8
14. Mr. Croaker to Colonial Secretary, enclosing a memorial to His Excellency the Governor, sth
May. 1851 ..........9
15. Colonial Secretary to Mr. Croaker, in reply, 11th June, 1851 ...........10
152—a




No. 1.
[Extract.]
Crown Land's Office ,
Sydney , 14 th April, 1849.
FORFEITED RUNS,
It is hereby notified, that the undermentioned Runs of Crown Lands having been
forfeited for non-payment of the first year’s rent, within the prescribed time, Tenders in the
prescribed printed form will be received at this Office, until noon of Monday, the second
day of July next, from the previous applicants, and from any other persons who may be
desirous to enter into competition with them, for the purchase of the Lease of any one of the
said Runs.
2. Every such Tender must state the term of years (not exceeding fourteen) for
which it is proposed to take the Run; and whether in addition to the minimum rent required
by Her Majesty’s Order in Council, it is intended to offer any, and if any, what amount of
yearly premium per thousand sheep, or equivalent number of cattle, for the Lease.
3. As the grazing capabilities of these Runs have not yet been determined, it will be
necessary that each Tender contain an estimate of the number of sheep or cattle that the
Run will carry.
4. Until the Runs have been regularly surveyed, and their grazing capabilities
determined, the future lessees will be required to pay rent according to their own estimates,
as given in the Tenders; and in the event of the rent so paid proving to have been less than
that determined by valuation, they will be required to make up the difference previously to
the execution of the Leases.
5. It is also to be distinctly understood, that the Government reserves to itself the
right of excluding from the Lease of any of these Runs, any land which it may be deemed
proper to reserve for any of the purposes referred to in the 9th section of chap. 11, of Her
Majesty’s Order in Council, dated 9th March, 1847.
6. A separate Tender must be made for each separate Run.
7. Forms of Tender can be obtained from this Office, and also from the Crown Com-
missioners of the respective Districts.
(Signed) GEO. BARNEY,
Chief Commissioner of Crown Lands.
24. The Run known as “ Cocomingla ” formerly occupied by William Bolter, and estimated
to contain about 16,000 acres.
Bounded on the east by the Burrowa River; west by a gully running north and
south about 3 miles back from the River, which divides it from Evan Evan’s Run; north
by the Battery Range, which also divides it from Evan’s Run ; south by a gully running
from the Burrowa River, and thence by a line west to Bolter’s Gully, which divides it from
Kinghorn’s Station, Cucungilliga.
No. 2.
TENDER FOR A LEASE OF A VACATED OR FORFEITED RUN OF CROWN
LANDS.
INTERMEDIATE OR UNSETTLED DISTRICTS.
Lot 24, No. 8.
In accordance with the provisions contained in Her Majesty’s Order in Council,
published in the New South Wales Government Gazette, of the 7th October, 184/, and of
the Regulations of Ist January, 1848, published in pursuance thereof, I, Charles William
Croaker, of Bathurst, do hereby propose to take a lease for fourteen years, of the Crown
Lands known as Cocomingla, in the District of Lachlan, which lands are described in the
public notice relating thereto in the Government Gazette of the 16th day of April, 1849,
and also in the Schedule to this Tender annexed: And in consideration of such lease, lam
willing, and hereby offer to pay yearly in advance, the minimum rent of ten pounds, with


Commissioner’s
District and
General
Locality.
Name
of
Run.
Estimated
Number
of Acres.
Estimated Capability
for Grazing.
Description of the Lands by reference
to Leading Geographical Features,
and marked or determined
Boundary Lines.
Cattle.
Sheep.
Lachlan
District.
Cocomingla.
Sixteen
thousand.
16,000.
Four
thousand.
4,000.
Bounded on the east by the Burrowa
River; west by a gully running north
and south about three miles back
from the River, which divides it from
Evan Evans’s Run; north by the
Battery Range, which also divides
it from Evan Evans’s Run ; south by
a gully running from Burrowa River,
and thence by a line west to Bolter’s
Gully, which divides it from King-
horn’s Station “ Cucungilliga.”
two pounds ten shillings added, for every thousand sheep or their equivalent in cattle, above
four thousand sheep or their equivalent, which the Run shall, under the provisions of the
said Order in Council, be estimated as capable of carrying, and also the additional sum or
yearly rent, in advance, of ten pounds and five shillings for every thousand sheep or their
equivalent as aforesaid, by way of premium for the said lease.
Given under my hand this first day of June, A.D., 1849.
(Signed) C. W. CROAKER.
SCHEDULE REFERRED TO IN THE FOREGOING TENDER.
( Signature of Applicant. y
(Signed) C. W. CROAKER.
(Extract from the Government Notice dated, Colonial Secretary s Office, Sydney, Ist January,
1848.)
I.—FORFEITED OR VACATED RUNS.
1. —On the receipt of a notice from any person of his desire to purchase the lease
of a run, which, after having been occupied, may have fallen vacant, either by forfeiture or
surrender, and to the leasing anew of which no objection shall arise, a notice will be issued
in the Government Gazette, describing the boundaries and grazing capabilities of the run
applied for, stating the maximum number of years for which a lease thereof will be granted,
and fixing a time and place at which sealed Tenders, in a prescribed form, will be received
from the applicant, and from any other persons desirous to enter into competition with him
for the purchase of the lease of the described run.
2. —Every such Tender must state the term of years, within the limit mentioned in
the notice, for which it is proposed to take the run, and whether, in addition to the rent
required by the Order in Council, it is intended to offer any, and if any, what amount of
premium for the lease.
3. —The Tenders will be opened in the presence of a Board of Officers appointed by
the Governor, and will be disposed of in the manner directed in the 12th section of Chapter
II of Her Majesty’s Order in Council, a copy of which is annexed to this notice for more
easy reference.
4. —The lease will be made out as soon after the acceptance of the Tender as may
be practicable; and the intending lessee will be required to take up the lease by payment
of the first year’s rent, and the premium (if any), within sixty days from the date of the
notification of the acceptance of his Tender, in default of which the run will be again
declared open to public competition. .
5. —Until the lease has been actually taken out, the intending lessee will acquire no
title whatsoever to the occupation of the land tendered for.
(Extract from Chapter II of Her Majesty's Order in Council, dated 9th March, 1847.)
(Mode of acquiring Leases of forfeited or vacant Runs.)
Sect. 12.—When any run of lands, after being occupied, shall be forfeited, or be-
come vacant without the previous Occupant’s having exercised his right of renewal herin-
after reserved, it shall be competent for any person desirous of acquiring a lease of such
run of lands, to give notice to the Governor, or Officer for the time being administering the
Government of the said Colony, of his, her, or their desire to purchase anew the lease of
such run of lands, and immediately after such notice the Governor, or Officer administering
the Government of the said Colony, shall direct sealed Tenders to be sent in at such time
and place, and in such form as he shall think fit, by the person giving such notice as afore-
said ; and also by such other person (if any) as may be disposed to enter into competition
for


tor the said lease; and every Tender so to be made shall state the term of years for which
arrreeabTtftbo f 6 T-™? wbetbei > in addition to the minimum rents required
Order in Cm, V T. mons co » tamed ™ sections 2 and 3 of the second chapter of this
lease • TndtheiV a if wbat am ™nt of premium for the
lease , and the said Tender or Tenders shall be opened in the presence of two or more per-
mentof or Officer for the time being administering the Govern-
ment of the said Colony, for that purpose, and if there shall be more than one Tender, the
Tenders shall be opened at the same time, and if there shall be only one Tender, the lease
of the run shall be given to the person making such Tender, provided the rent offered shall
u D n ained iD SeCtiOHS 2 and 3of this cba Pter of the
t i ; tlf there shall be more corn P etl tors than one, the lease of the run
shall be given to such person or persons as shall tender the highest amount of premium for
the same ; but if two or more Tenders shall be made for the same run, and noone ofThem
r . esfc ’ a Putur ® da Y sball be announced by the persons who open the
J enders, on which day it shall again be competent to all persons to offer fresh Tenders in
tiie same manner as hereinbefore provided in regard to the first Tenders
No. 3.
COPY OF A LEŢER from THE CHIEF COMMISSIONER OF CROWN LANDS to
MR. C. W. CROAKER.
No. 24 of the Month
of April, 1849.
Slo, Crown Lands' Office,
Sydney, 20 ih August, 1849.
Sir,
I do myself the honor to inform you, that His Excellency the Governor has
been pleased to accept your Tender for the Forfeited Run, in the District of Lachlan, called
“ Cocomingla, ” subject however to the right of hereafter reserving any portion of the Run
for any of the purposes stated in the 9th Section of Chap. 11, of Her Majesty’s Order in
Council, dated 9th March, 1847. You will therefore, be good enough to pay into the
Colonial Treasury the amount of the first Year’s Rent, computed according to your Estimate
of the Grazing Capabilities of the Run, namely,—4ooo sheep or their equivalent in cattle,
together with the Annual Premium of ten pounds five shillings, per thousand sheep.
I beg to remind you, that until the first Lear’s Rent and Premium shall have
been paid, you will acquire no right whatever to the occupation of the Land, and further,
that if the first Year’s Rent and Premium be not paid within sixty days from this date, you
will forfeit any right acquired by virtue of your Tender.
As soon as the Colonial Treasurer shall have reported the receipt of the first
I ear s Rent and Premium, I will make a further communication to you.
I have the honor to be,
Sir,
Your most obedient servant,
(Signed) GEO. BARNEY,
Chief Commissioner of Crown Land
Mr. C. W, Croaker,
Bathurst.
No. 4.
COPY OF A LEŢER from THE CHIRF COMMISSIONER OF CROWM LANSD , to
MR. C. W. CROAKER.
No. 24, April, 49.
No. 348. Crown Lands 1 Office,
Sydney, 13 th November, 1849.
Sir,
The Colonial Treasurer having reported that you have paid into his hands the
sum of fifty-one pounds being the amount of the first year’s Rent for the Forfeited Run in
the District of Lachlan, called “ Cocomingla, ” your Tender for which was accepted in my
letter of the 20th August, 1849, I have the honor to convey to you, the authority of His
Excellency the Governor for your occupying the said Run, subject however to the following
conditions :
152—b


1., ip +i „ nf excluding from the Run any Lands which
1- —The Government reserves to itself the right g in the 9th gec .
it may he deemed proper to reserve for any o PP '
tion of Chapter 11, of Her Majesty’s Order in Council, dated 9th March, 1847.
2.—So soon as the number of sheep or cattle .hid. .to, Run shall have ten
determined hy valuation in the manner f he SxTd in accordance with
referred to, the Annual Rent to be paid for ae , determined,
such valuation. Until the Grazing Capabilities of theEun have *»*“£££ J
you will continue to pay Kent according to your own estimate o P etel . mine d by
In the event of the Bent so paid proving to have been less than
valuation, you will be required to make up the difference previously to the execution
of the Lease.
3 You will be entitled to a Lease of the Bun for 14 years; commencing from 15t
1849, subject to all the conditions prescribed in the said Order in ounci .
4.—The boundaries of the Bun, (of which a description is “-xed) must be regarded as
temporary only, and subject to any alteration or amendment
proper measurement of the Land.
I have the honor to be,
Sir,
Your most obedient servant,
(Signed) GEO. BABNEY,
Chief Commissioner of Crown Lands.
MR. C. W. Croaker,
Bathurst.
Cocomingla.
Bounded on the east by theßurrowa Elver; west by a “"^tfbyle
about 3 miles back from the Biver which ivi es l , a running from the
anV’thenclt; a Z wist to BolWs Gully, which divides it from
Kinghorne’s station “ Cucungilliga. G-EO. BARNEY,
Chief Commissioner of Crown Lands.
No. 5.
COPY OF A LEŢER from THE CHIRF COMMISSIONER OF CROWM LANSD , to
MR. C. W. CROAKER
I Q . Crown Land's Office,
No. 49-1594. Sjld „y 31 , t December, 1849.
SlK ’ I do myself the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your letter of the 9th
Instant, respecting the description of the boundaries of the Cocomingla Run, in the District
of LaeMan, 'lately obtained by you by Tender, and to info™ you that you will e enutled
to a lease of the aboye Run, according to the boundaries of it publ.shed on the 16th Ap
last, in the notice of Forfeited Runs.
2. In the event of any encroachment on the boundaries therein given, you will be
authorised to take proceedings for its removal. .
I have the honor to be,
Sir,
Your most obedient servant,
(Signed) GEO. BARNEY,
Chief Commissioner of Crown Lands.
Mr. C. W. Croaker,
Bathurst.
No. 6.


No. 6.
COPY OF A LEŢER from MR. C.W. CROAKER, to THE CHIEF COMMISSIONER OF CROWN
LANDS.
Cocomingla, 3 0th January, 1850.
Sir,
In reply to your letter of 31st December last, I beg to inform you that the
Messrs. Kinghorne are trespassing upon the Cocomingla Run, and forbid my occupying it
under the penalty of an action at law for trespass, and as there cannot be a doubt that I
should be put into possession of the Run by the Crown, I must request such protection as you
are capable of affording me.
The Run has been so long enjoyed by the adjacent proprietors that they look upon
the present possessor as taking so much ground from them, and therefore they will not shew
the Run ) the only way to put an end to all disputes is to get the Run surveyed as soon as
possible. This lam anxious to do, a licensed surveyor of the name of W. F. D. Perie re-
sides near here, who will immediately run the lines upon proper authority from you to do
so, as I am obliged to crowd my sheep until the run is pointed out to me, I shall be glad of
an answer as soon as possible. Will you forward me a blank form of application for the
purchase of lands outside the limits under the right of pre-emption. As regards the des-
cription of the Cocomingla Run, I beg to observe, that according to the advertised boundary
no such run can be made out, though, I presume, that if the 16,000 acres of land is here with
the old boundaries, that will be the run to which I am entitled j the published description
has on the west by Evan Evans, and on the north by Evans j on the other hand, Evans in his
application for a lease, states his run bounded on the south and east by Cocomingla; if he
is bounded on the south by this run, it is quite impossible he can be bounded also on the
east by it —indeed his eastern boundary is the Burrowa River four miles, which he has
omitted altogether, thus not much reliance can be placed upon these boundaries as to the
point of the compass. I claim for the Cocomingla Run the extent according to the description
I last forwarded to you, amounting to about 13,800 acres, none of the run so described is
claimed in the application of the lease of either Evans on the north, Wentworth on tne
west, or Kinghorne on the south.
I have the honor to be,
Sir,
Your most obedient servant,
C. W. CROAKER.
The Chief Commissioner
of Crown Lands.
No. 7.
COPY OF A LETTER from THE CHIEF COMMISSIONER OF CROWN LANDS , to
MR. C. W. CROAKER.
Crown Land's Office,
Sydney, 18 th February, 1850.
SIR; I beg to acquaint you that I have forwarded to Mr. Commissioner Beckham
your communication of 30th January, complaining that Messrs. Kinghorne are trespassing
upon the “Cocomingla” Run recently obtained by you by Tender, and directed that Officer
to put you in possession of the Run according to its published boundaries, and also to repoit
the names of any intruders thereon, in order that immediate steps may be taken for their
removal. I have therefore to request that you will be good enough to put yourself in com-
munication with Mr. Beckham, and afford him every necessary information.
I have the honor to be,
Sir,
Your most obedient servant,
(Signed) GEO. BARNEY.
Mr. C. W. Croaker,
Cocomingla,
Lachlan.
No. 8.


No. 8.
COPY OF A LETTER from MR. C. W. CROAKER, to THE CHIEF COMMISSIONER OF CROWN OF CROWN
LANDS
Cocomingla, 2Qth February, 1850.
Sir,
Herewith I forward you a copy of my letter of 30th ultimo, presuming that the
original has not reached you, or 1 should have been favored with an answer, since which
Mr. Kinghorne’s solicitor has addressed me the following letter.
<( Goulburn, 12 th February, 1850.
“ Sir
“ Mr. J. K. Kinghorn having been informed that you are trespassing to a great
“ extent on his Run at Cullen-gillingur, he has instructed me to inform you that unless you
“ at once make arrangement to prevent the continuance of the trespass, he must for his own
“ protection adopt proceedings at law to recover compensation for the damage he has already
“ sustained, as well as for any further injuries. •
“ (Signed) CLIAS. HAMILTON WALSH.”
When I first came here Mr. Kinghorn claimed all the Run but about 4,000 acres, with his
Attorney’s letter he is willing to make it up about 6,000 acres; thus lam kept in dread of
extending my Run, and unless I have an immediate answer, putting me in possession of the
Run (which every landlord is bound to do) I shall be compelled to send away my sheep.
The expense already incurred by me for this Run is £l5O.
I have the honor to be,
Sir,
Your most obedient servant,
C. W. CROAKER.
No. 9.
COPY OF A LETTER from TE CHIEF COMMISSIONER OF CROWN LANDS, to
MR. C. W. CROAKER.
219. Grown Land's Office,
Sydney, 2 6th March, 1850.
Sir,
In acknowledging the receipt of your communication dated 26th February last,
forwarding a copy of your letter of the 30th January, 1850, respecting an intrusion on your
Run called “ Cocomingla ” by Messrs. Kinghorn, I beg to refer you to my letter written
to you on the 18th of last month, informing you that your letter alluded to had been for-
warded to Mr. Commissioner Beckham, and that that Officer had been directed to put you
in possession of the Run according to its published boundaries, and also to report the names
of any intruders thereon, in order that immediate steps might be taken for their removal.
I have the honor to be, &c.,
(Signed) GEO. BARNEY.
Mr. C. W. Croaker,
Cocomingla, Lachlan.
No. 10.
COPY OF A LETTER from, MR. C. W. CROAKER, to THE COLONIAL SECRETARY
Cocomingla,
15 th May, 1850.
Sir,
I have the honor to inform you that I tendered for the “ Cocomingla” Run,
and the Chief Commissioner of Crown Lands informed me that as soon as the money was
paid into the Treasury he would communicate further with me. The money was paid upon
the 15th October, 1849, and my sheep were not upon until the middle of January, 1850.
I applied to be put in possession of the Run on the 31st December, 1849. The Chief Com-
missioner applied for information respecting intruders, to which I replied that Messrs.
Kinghorne claimed all but about 3,000 acres, and threatened me with an action if I occu-
pied more. On the 18th February the Chief Commissioner replied that my letter had been
forwarded


forwarded to the District Commissioner, which Officer would put me in possession of the
Run, which possession was given to me yesterday, by the Commissioner and a Surveyor,
and consists of about nine thousand acres.
On the 13th March the Commissioner forwarded the printed Circular authorising
me to occupy the Run, —lease to commence from 15th October, 1849.
With these facts before you, I trust that His Excellency the Governor will be
pleased to order that the lease should commence from the date of my authority from the
Crown to occupy, or from the day possession was given.
1 have further to inform you that there is vacant Crown Land at the back of the Coco-
mingla Run sufficient to make the Run in all thirteen thousand acres, and beg you will
allow it to be added to this Run, which will then be three thousand acres short of the
gazetted quantity • and I am quite sure the rent I am paying has not been equalled.
I have, &c.,
(Signed) C. W. CROAKER.
The Honorable The Colonial Secretary.
[The foregoing letter referred for the report of the Chief Commissioner of Crown
Lands, 23rd May, 1850.]
No. 11.
COPY OF A LETTER from THE CHIEF COMMISSIONER OF CROWN LANDS , to
SECRETARY.
Crown Lunds Office,
Sydney, 4th July, 1850.
Sir,
I do myself the honor to return herewith, accompanied by a Report thereon
from Mr - Crown Commissioner Beckham, the application forwarded by your blank cover
of the 23rd May last, of Mr. C. W. Croaker, that the lease of the forfeited Run “ Coco-
mingla,” obtained by him by tender, may date from the day on which his authority to
occupy that station was issued, instead of from the time he paid his first year’s rent for it,
on the ground that he has not been placed in occupancy of the full extent of country
advertised in the notice under which he tendered, and that he was not allowed possession
of so much as he now holds till recently.
2. It will be perceived by reference to the second and third paragraphs of the Report
of Mr. Beckham, that Mr. Croaker s statement, that the run has been curtailed, is incorrect,
but that the Run, nevertheless, does not contain as much by 4,000 acres as it was estimated
at in the Government notice.
3. This deficiency, or the greater portion of it, however, might be made up, should
the Government have, as the Commissioner anticipates it will, at its disposal a small tract
of country adjoining to the “ Cocomingla” Run.
4. finally, as to the late period at which Mr. Croaker obtained possession of the
Run, I beg to observe, that the delay was caused by encroachments made thereon by adjoin-
ing licensees; but that Mr. Beckham was directed, on the 18th February last, to put Mr.
Croaker in possession of the Run according to its published boundaries.
I have, &c.,
(Signed) GEO. BARNEY,
Chief Commissioner of Crown Lands.
The Honorable Tiie Colonial Secretary.
IE nclosuve in No. 11.]
(Copy.) C, 'own Commissioner’s Office,
Binalong, ‘2oth June, 1850.
Sir,
I do myself the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your letter of the 4th
instant, transmitting the enclosed communication from Mr. Croaker, respecting the Coco-
mingla Run, and requesting my report thereon ; and beg leave to state that the boundaries of
the Cocomingla Run have been marked by the Government Surveyor in strict accordance
with those advertised in the Government Gazette of the 14th April last. .
152—c 2nd.
Enclosure in


2nd. Mr. Croaker’s statement, that the Cocomingla Run has been curtailed, is in-
correct ; but it does not appear to contain the number of acres advertised (viz. 16,000
acres.)
3rd. The area contained within the advertised boundaries is about 12,000 acres.
4th. The published description of the Runs adjoining the Cocomingla Station appear
to have a small portion of land at the back of Cocomingla vacant and unclaimed; but it is
impossible for me to report definitely upon this until the boundaries of the adjacent stations
are defined.
sth. Should there be any vacant land adjoining the Cocomingla Run, I would beg
leave to recommend that the boundaries be extended, so as to embrace the number of acres
advertised.
I have the honor to be,
Sir,
Your most obedient Servant,
(Signed) EDGAR BECKHAM,
C. C. Lands.
The Chief Commissioner of Crown Lands,
Sydney.
No. 12.
COPY A LETTER from THE The COLONIAL SECRETARY, to THE CHIEF COMMISSIONER of CEOWN
LANDS.
No. 51-100. Colonial Secretary s Office,
Sydney 21 st March, 1851.
Sir,
I duly received your letter of the 4th July last, enclosing a communication
from Mr. C. W. Croaker, in which he requests that the Lease of the Run in the Lachlan
District, known as Cocomingla, may date from the day on which his authority to occupy
that Station was issued, instead of from the time he paid his first year’s rent, on the ground
that he has not been placed in occupancy of the full extent of Country advertised in the
Notice under which he tendered, and that he was not allowed possession of so much as he
now holds, till recently.
2. It appears from the report of Mr. Commissioner Beckham which accompanied your
letter, that Mr. Croaker’s statement, that the Run has been curtailed is incorrect, but that
the Run nevertheless does not contain as much by 4,000 acres, as it was estimated at in the
Government notice.
3. I am now directed by the Governor to inform you that in his Excellency’s opinion
Mr. Croaker does not appear to have much to complain of. When the Run was gazetted,
the Area was given not as the actual Area, but merely as the estimated Area; whilst the
actual boundaries being defined, it was quite competent for Mr. Croaker or any body else to
ascertain the real extent of the Run. At the same time if there be a small portion of land
adjoining the Cocomingla Run as stated by Mr. Beckham, which in the adjustment of
conterminous boundaries may be unappropriated, there will be little objection it is conceived
to add it to Cocomingla.
4. There is scarcely sufficient reason shewn for altering the period for the com-
mencement of the lease, but the matter appears to be very unimportant.
I have the honor to be,
Sir,
Your most obedient servant,
for the Colonial Secretary,
(Signed) W. ELYARD, Jun.
The Chief Commissioner
of Crown Lands.
No. 13.
COPY OF A LETTER drom THE CHIEF COMMISSIONER OF CROWN LANDS, to MR. C. W.
CROAKER.
Crown Lands Office,
Sydney, 11th April, 1851.
Sir,
1 had the honor to submit to the Governor your communication, in which you
requested that the lease of the Run in the Lachlan District, known as Cocomingla, might
date from the day on which your authority to occupy that station was issued, instead, of
from the time you paid your first year’s rent, on the ground that you had not been placed in
occupancy of the full extent of country advertised in the Notice under which you tendered,
and that you were not allowed possession of so much as you now hold, till recently.
o
jU.


2. From the report of the Crown Commissioner of that District which was obtained
on your letter and forwarded to His Excellency, it appears that your statement, that the
Run has been curtailed is incorrect, but that the Run nevertheless does not contain so much
by 4,000 acres, as it was estimated at in the Government Notice.
o. I am now directed by His Excellency to inform you, that you do not appear to
have much to complain of; when the Run was gazetted the area was given not as the actual
area, but merely as the estimated area, whilst the actual boundaries being definite, it was
quite competent for you or any body else to ascertain the real extent of the Run. At the same
time if there be a small portion of land adjoining the Cocomingla Run as stated to be by
Mr. Beckham, which on the adjustment of the conterminous boundaries may be appropriated,
there will be little objection it is conceived, to add it to Cocomingla.
4. His Excellency also directs me to observe, that there is scarcely sufficient reason
shewn for altering the period for the commencement of the lease, but the matter appears to
be very unimportant.
I have, &c.,
(Signed) GEO. BARNEY.
Mr. C. W. Croaker,
Cocomingla,
Lachlan.
No. 14.
COPY OF A LETTER from MR. C. W. CROKER, to THE COLONIAL SECRENARY.
Bathurst, 5th May, 1851.
Sir,
1 have the honor to enclose you a Memorial to His Excellency the Governor,
and will feel obliged by your laying the same before His Excellency at your earliest con-
venience.
I have, &c.,
(Signed) C. W. CROAKER.
The Honorable The Colonial Secretary,
Sydney.
[Enclosure in No. 14.]
(Copy.)
To His Excellency Sir Charles Agustus Fitz Roy, Knight Companion of the
Royal Hanoverian Guelphic Order, Captain-General and Governor-in-Chief of
the Territory of New South Wales and its Dependencies, and Vice-Admiral of
the same, &c., &c., &c.
The Memorial of Charles William Croaker, of Bathurst, in the Territory of New South
Wales, Grazier,
Sheweth,
That in consequence of an advertisement which appeared in the Government
Gazette of the 16th day of April, 1849, to the effect that a Run called “ Cocomingla,”
situate in the Lachlan District, in the Colony of New South Wales, and containing 16,000
acres more or less, was open to tender, your Memorialist was induced to offer a rent for the
said Run of <£sl per annum, which tender was accepted: That on or about the 15th day
of October, 1849, your Memorialist accordingly paid into the Office of the Colonial Trea-
surer the sum of £sl, as one year’s rent in advance for the said Run.
That your Memorialist, on proceeding to take possession of the said Run, was op-
posed by a Mr. Kinghorne and others; and on the 9th day of December, 1849, wrote to
George Barney, Esq., Chief Commissioner of Crown Lands, complaining of such opposition;
and on the 81st December, 1849, was informed in reply that he was entitled to a lease of
the said Run according to the boundaries published in the Government Gazette before
alluded to. >
That your Memorialist did not obtain possession of the said Run until the loth day
of March, 1850, and then only of 9,000 acres; in consequence of which deficiency your
Memorialist sustained a loss by deaths of 1,600 sheep.
That
Enclosure in No. 14.




That in May, 1850, the said Run was surveyed and measured by Mr. Surveyor
Larmer, and was then, according to the boundaries described in the said Gazette, found to
contain not more than 9,000 acres, being little more than half the quantity advertised and
paid for.
That your Petitioner has paid two years’ rent for the said Run, at £5l per annum,
having originally tendered that rent, and removed his sheep to the spot, in the expectation
of being put in possession of the full quantity advertised.
That there is an unoccupied Run at the back of the said Run called “ Cocomingla,”
containing about 4 or 5,000 acres, which in fact forms part of the “ Cocomingla” Run,
being described in the Gazette as bounded on the west by Evan Evan’s Station, but which
in reality is Mr. W. C. Wentworth’s.
That your Memorialist has sent in a tender for the last mentioned Run ; and has,
since taking possession of the 9,000 acres already mentioned, applied for an explanation of
the circumstances, with the view of obtaining a remission of a proportionate part of the
rent paid by him corresponding to the deficiency in the quantity of land of which he was
put in possession, but can obtain no relief.
Your Memorialist therefore humbly prays that your Excellency will be pleased to
take the above circumstances into your gracious consideration, and order a remission or
deduction out of the rent for the ensuing year commensurate to the period during which
your Memorialist was kept out of possession of his Run, and to the deficiency in the quan-
tity of acres rented as already mentioned, and that a lease of the said Run of “ Cocomingla”
and of the unoccupied Run at the back thereof may forthwith issue to your Memorialist,
or grant such other relief in the premises, as to your Excellency may seem meet.
And your Memorialist will ever pray, &c.
(Signed) C. W. CROAKER.
Bathurst, sth May, 1851.
No. 10.
COPY OF A LETTER from THE COLONIAL SECRETARY, to MR. C. W. CROAKER.
Colonial Secretary s Office,
Sydney, 11 th June, 1851.
Sir,
I beg to acknowledge the receipt of your letter of ‘the stb ultimo, covering
a Memorial addressed to His Excellency the Governor, praying that a reduction may be made
in the rent for the ensuing year of your station in the Lachlan District, known as “ Coeo-
“ mingla,” on the grounds that you have not been placed in possession of the full extent of
country advertised in the notice under which you tendered, and that you were not allowed
possession of so much as you now hold until the 13th March, 1850.
2. In reply I do myself the honor, by direction of His Excellency the Governor, to
inform you that there does not appear to be anything in the present representation to require
that His Excellency’s former decision communicated to you by the Chief Commissioner of
Crown Lands should be disturbed.
I have, &c.,
(Signed) W. ELYARD, Junr.
C. W. Croaker, Esq.,
Bathurst.
