

Northern Territory
P.R.G.S. NS. VI-1884
South Australia
Winnecke's


Published for the Proceedings of the Royal Geographical Society, 1884
PART OP
CENTRAL AUSTRALIA.
Surveyed by M. Winnecke.
1884.
Scale of English Miles


Mr, G, Winneeke's last Explorations in the Northern Territory,
South Australia.
Map, p, 614
The details of Mr. Olmrios Whmooko’s most recent explorations
(July 30 to December 2, 1883) in tiro Northern Territory of South
Australia, accompanied by an oxeollent nmp, on tho scale of 8 miles to
an inch (of which a reduction accompanies thoHo notes), liavo boon
roceivod from Mr. G. W. Goydor, Surveyor-General of tho Colony,
through tho courtesy of the London Agont-Gonoral, It will ho re-
membered that Mr. Winnooko in 1878 continued tho work conuuoncod
by Mr. Barclay in exploring tho unknown region oast of tho telegraph
line from Alice Springs, towards the western Queensland boundary,
and of which mention is made in tho K.G.S. ‘ Proceedings,’ 1871),
p. 334. Mr. Winnecko’s first results wore briefly notified in iWrmaim’s
‘ Mittlieilimgen,’ vol. xxv. (1879) p. 234; but ho appears from tho Koport
now under notice to havo again made important explorations in 1881, of
which there seems to be no accessible record.
Koughly speaking, lus last journey is through entirely unknown
country near the western Queensland boundary lino, from about 27“ 30'
S. lat., when he crossed the Kallakoopali crook (an affluent of {the
Maoumba, which feeds Lake Eyre on tho north side), to about 22° 43' S.
lat., his furthest point north of tho Marshall river, his furthest wostorn
point being 136° 46' 1. long.; and in this space, hitherto a great blank
on the most reoent maps, ho has not only shown with precision the


existing physical conditions (especially with a view to the existence of
water and other economic points), bitt has discovered and named various
minor lakes and mountains, and one river, the Hay, an important
feeder of the Marshall. As might he expected, the prevalent features
of the country are high red sand ridges, offering very great obstaolos to
travel, mostly running from north-west, to south-east, sometimes covered
with spinifex and low scrub, and separated by sandy valleys more or
less overgrown with the like plants, wattle, acacia, &o. Two so-called
rivers or creeks, the Field, a tributary of the Mulligan or Eyre’s river,
running across the boundary line, and the Hay almost parallel with it,
but more to the west, follow the general direction of these valleys, the first
trending south-east, the latter north-west. Like many other Australian
rivers, they widen out into flats, flooded or dry according to season,
often densely timbered with large gum and box trees, and covered with
good grass and herbage. The salt lakes discovered by the Expedition
also to a great extent follow the north-west and sonth-east direction of
the sandy valleys.
The party under Mr. Winnecke’s leadership left Earina (also called
“the Gums” or “ Government Gums,” the most northern station on the
South Australian railroad) with loaded camels on July 30, 1883, reaching
Oowarie Station, south of the Warburton, on August 11. Crossing that
river and the Kallakoopah creek, they worked northwards to Minna
Hill, an old trigonometrical station, near which a fair supply of slightly
bitter water was discovered (named Warman’s Well); from this point, a
north-westerly course was followed to the corner post of the Queensland
and South Australian boundaries, 138° E.long., 26° S. lat., through inter-
minable sand ridges, and past various intensely white salt lakes, mostly
long and narrow, the largest one being named Lake Dobbie, and a smaller
one Lake Florence. Some of these were firm enough to allow the camels
to walk aoross, though in places the surface was broken through ; and it
was noticed that all of them had an extremely high and very steep
sand ridge invariably abutting on their western side, while the country
near their eastern shore always consisted of low sand hills or flats.
(It may be noted that the elevated mounds on one edge of the “ fuljes ”
or deep horse-shoe shaped depressions in the similar sand-ridge district
of the Arabian Nefud, observed by Lady Anne Blunt, seemed to change
position with the wind.) From the boundary post, a more or loss north-
westerly route was followed on the Northern Territory side through a
perfectly desert country to about 25° S. lat., when an abrupt turn oast-*
wards was made over the line into Queensland. This region will never
be of much use to squatters, according to Mr. Winneoke, who is almost
certain that it has never been visited even by natives. Some idea of
the difficulty of travel in it may be gathered from the note that the
camels had no water for sixteen days hereabouts, during whioh time
they covered 278 miles; and that at every ridge they would lie down
No. X.—Oct. 1884.] 2 b


EXPLORATIONS IN THE NORTHERN TERRITORY, SOOTH AUSTRALIA.
and require much persuasion to cross, occasionally pitching thoir loads
(over 700 lbs. each) and saddles over thoir heads on the descent. Some
three weeks after passing this especially arid region, Mr. Winnooko’s
diary contains an entry of digging out an innnonso quantity of sand,
&c., at a native well, into which the wator drained very slowly, the
camels drinking about forty gallons each. Continuing eastwards from
the boundary lino, the Mulligan river was struck, its wator-holos teem-
ing with fish, while flamingoes, emus, dingoes, pigeons, &0., wore very
abundant; and from this point the party worked north-west, parallel with
the Mold creek (which apparently joins tho Mulligan), and then north-
east to Sandringham Station on tho lattor river, which is shown to ho
nine miles out of position on tho Government plans. After a rest hero,
Mr. Winneoko started again westwards, roorossiug the Mulligan and
Mold and following up tho lattor to a wator-holo called Ahmajoor, noar
its origin in hills named tho Adam Rangos, situated a little south of tho
23rd parallel. Tho flood marks of tho Mulligan wore ohsorvod for a
spaco of seven miles; it had no defined channel, but was a succession of
wide flats subject to heavy inundations. Continuing westwards by tho
Adam Rangos, two high points of which woro respectively named
Mounts Tiotlcens and Smith, a wide sandy orook, named tho Hay rivor,
was reached, and found to ho an affluent of tho Marshall. Hero tho
explorer struck northwards with tho object of connecting with his
former work, which ho sitooooded in doing, roaohing tho Taiiton Range
containing Goydor’s Pillars (both before named by him), in sight of his
Central Mount Hawker. This mountain is noar the westward and north-
ward termination of tho Jorvois Range, and “ is oxnotly in tho eontro of
all Australia, a spot which many explorers have vainly tried to diseovor,”
where in 1881 Mr. Winnooko appears to have undergone groat suffering,
walking 300 miles through dosort and spinifox, bootless, and ill from
scurvy and rlioumatio fovor. “ Goydor’s Pillars ” arc two very peculiar
white hills or peaks, situated on tho top of a spur in the range;
when viewed from a distanoo they havo tho appearance of white pillars,
being orowned by perpendicular kaolin rooks. Having named another
elevation, north of tho Marshall, Mount Cornish, tho party travollod along
tho Hay rivor in a south-easterly direction, naming Mount Winnooko on
its eastern hank, and making oxoursions into tho country on both sidos,
until arriving at a native well called Yarraourracoo, .from which point
further oxoursions were made to about 24° 34’ S. lat,, on ono occasion
coming very near tho Queensland border, not far from Eyro’s furthest point
in 1846. A short journey to tho west was also made, and a now lalco,
named Caroline, discovered, near Yarraourracoo well. This woll receives
most of tho drainage of tho day pan flats west of tho Hay rivor; no
impression could bo made on its wator, which then (October) averagod
1000 gallons a day; and it would probably hold wator for fully twolvo


months after rain. Leaving the well on October 5, the return journey
was commenced in a north-easterly direction to the Field river-, two
elevations on its western side being respectively named Mounts
Knuckey and Dobbie, and some further explorations were made in the
Adam Ranges among the creeks at its head, where Mr. Winnecke “ dis-
turbed a wild cat of an extraordinary size, nearly as large as a leopard ”
(presumably a Dasyurus). Sandringham station was once more reached
by a south-easterly cut across the boundary line, and after crossing the
Herbert and Mueller or Diamantina rivers (the latter a clay watercourse
six miles wide, overgrown with Polygonum), the party arrived at Farina
Station on December 1, and travelled from Beltana to Adelaide by
rail. 17
Mr. Winnecke appears to have paid considerable attention to the
botany of the region traversed, the productions of which, as being the
central point of the Australian continent, are of exceptional interest.
Baron F. von Mueller adds a list of 85 plants collected, several of which
are entirely new either as species or varieties, or afford structural
peculiarities.
