

t/iXxj
VM fc
fTKeßytFney Waning ffertflß, We3ne«3ay, WWv R (BWj
(ADVERTISEMENT)
MR. CHIFLE/ AND THE COMMUNISTS
HAVE THE SAM: OBJECTIVE SOCIALIZATION
The facts prove thei. selves let Labor challenge them if it can
FACT
By Red-anting the Trade Union Movement, the newly-formed Communist Party in 1920 forced Federal
Labor to adopt the Socialization Objective which the Reds had previously failed to foist on it.
COMMUNIST OBJECTIVE ADVOCATED 1921
LABOR OBJECTIVE ADOPTED 1921
“The Communist Party of Australia, together with the Communist International, accepts
the scientific theory that the capitalist system of production and distribution has out-
lived its usefulness . . . The Communist Party sets itself ... to abolish private owner-
ship of the means of production. Its aim is to establish social ownership of the means
of production.” (Communist Manifesto, December 24, 1920.)
“The socialization of industry, production, distribution and exchange.”
t (A.L.P. Rules and Constitution, 1921.)
It was adopted as Labor’s one and only objective.
Labor’s socialization objective is known as “the Red objective” because of its Russian origin.
Ihe overthrow of capitalism entails the abolition of private ownership of all the property used in every kind of primary and
secondary production, profession, transport, wholesale and retail trade, banking, finance and insurance.
FACT 2.
Russia planned practical methods of carrying out Socialization; The Australian Labor Party Conference
of October, 1921, adopted them.
COMMUNIST PLAN FOR INDUSTRY
AUSTRALIAN LABOR’S PLAN FOR INDUSTRY
1. “All organs managing industry have as their basis the industrial trade unions. The
apparatus of management ig constructed on this basis.
“(b) organization of workers along the lines of industry.
“The Supreme Council of public economy is the Central organ, defining the pro-
ductive programme for separate branches of industry and regulating and managing
industry.”
“(f) the establishment of an elective Supreme Economic Council by all nations
industries.
“The management of industry is thus based on the industrial trade unions and the
trade unions and their amalgamation take part in the organization of the national
economy just as they take part in the apparatus for the regulation and organization
of industry.”
—From the Australian “Communist ,” April 29, 1921, article on “How Industry is
Managed in Russia.”
“(e) Government of nationalized industries by boards, upon which the worke
industry and the community shall be represented.
<4 (s) The setting up of Labor Research and Labor Information Bureaux and of
Labor Educational Institutions in which workers shall be trained in the mar
ment of industry.”
—Adopted by the Australian Labor Party Conference, October, 1921.
2. The Communist Party has always called for the establishment of Labor and
Research Bureaux to educate workers in the management of socialized industry.
FACT 3.
The leaders of Labor and Communism agreed that The Australian Labor Party’s objective and method?
came from the Communists, and Moscow approved heartily what The Australian Labor Party had adopted
THE COMMUNIST VERSION THE LABOR VERSION
“The decision of your first National Congress in Melbourne in June, 1921, shows that
you have taken the right path, adopting the form of your organization structure which
corresponds to the specific conditions of your country and placing on the order of the
day the immediate tasks. . . .We ask you to send your delegates to the Second congress
of the revolutionary unions to take place in Moscow ... to deal with the present tasks
of the Labor Movement of the whole world.”
Mr. E. J. Holloway, now a Federal Minister, the president of the Trade Union conf
ence which drafted the Socialization plank, told the conference that before tak;
steps to summon it the Federal Executive of the Australian Labor Party had sought
“information from various countries of the world and delegates had gone to the Third
International at Moscow direct.”—Official Report, A.A. Trade Union Conference June
1921, page 5. *
—A letter from Red International Labor Unions, Moscow, August, 1922, to the
Trade Unions in Australia.
“If they set that out (i.e., the socialization plan as adopted), the Party was no longer
the Labor Movement. Why not call it the Communist Party? Is there any differ-
ence in that and the policy of the Communists? Is there any difference in their methods?,
... the exponents of the proposal were using the example of Russia to follow in the
control of industries.”— Mr. E. G. Theodore at the Australian Labor Party Conference.
October, 1921.
“In Melbourne ... we found we were able to change the policy of the Labor Party.
The Labor Party believed in the maintenance of a White Australia, believed in nationali-
zation. We changed the objective of nationalization to socialization of industry . . .”
— J. S. Garden, Political Secretary of the Australian Communist Party, November
20, 1921, at the Moscow Conference of the Comintern. (Official Report, page
FACT 4.
Labor has again and again reaffirmed the Red Objective, and still subscribes to it.
1. The Australasian Council of Trades Unions (A.C.T.U.) in 1928 at its inaugural meeting unanimously accepted the Red
objective as ks only objective.
2. Since 1921 all State branches of the A.L.P. have scrapped their old real Australian objectives and made the Red object-
ive their only objective.
3. At the last Triennial Conference of the A.L.P. at Canberra in September, 1948, after attempts by “moderate” delegates
to have this objective watered down, the Conference unanimously reaffirmed the 1921 Communist-inspired objective.
Mr. Chifley first stood for the Federal Parliament in 1925 on the Socialization Platform, as adopted by the 1921 Australian Labor Party
Federal Conference, signing the required pledge to support it without question.
Twenty-four years later he said (October 5, 1949) :
The plank of the Labor Platform on socialization was being used to create fears. I have never seen any reason to go away from that
plank -that if a public utility which is essential to the economic life of the people is not being conducted in the interests of the
people it should be nationalized after a judgment of the circumstances.”
Mr. Chifley’s qualification is utterly meaningless because “socialization” is not “nationalization.” Mr. Chifley could not “go away” from
Socialization, for he is pledged to it in writing.
FACT
Fhe Labor Party and the Communist Party are fellow travellers.
THE COMMUNIST VERSION
THE LABOR PARTY VERSION
“Unity of the Labor Movement is the key to our people’s future and the realization of
Socialism. The Communists try to achieve the ideals held in common by Labor and
Communist Parties.
“The workers propose a collective socialist system in exchange, (for the present system) .
That such a system will work is proved by the Russian example. The present policy of
the Australian Labor Party is to proceed to a socialist system of production by gradual
steps . . . Now that the war is over, we shall await with hope the steps to be taken by the
six Labor Governments of Australia to overthrow the profit motive and establish a
more rational system.”
Labor Digest,” official organ of the Henry Lawson Labor College, Sydney.
June, 1946. J
“The Australian Communist Party has as its objective the establishment of a classless
Socialist society. Only such a society, based on the ownership of the means of pro-
duction, can guarantee a fully planned economy.”
—The Australian Communist Party Constitution, 1948.
Let the electors challenge Mr. Chifley to deny that Labor and Communists have a common viewpoint and programme .
Ihe Honorable A. A. Calwell , M.H.R., Minister for Information , said on Oct. 5 , 1947
CAPITALISM IS COLLAPSING AND WE ARE GOING TO TAKE OVER.”.,, “WE ARE FIGHTING TO PUSH
THE PRIVATE BANKS OUT FOR GOOD. WE ARE ENGAGED IN THE PROCESS OF PLUCKING THE FOWT
NO ONE WILL BE ABLE TO PUT THE FEATHERS BACK ONCE WE HA VE PULLED THEM
' FERGUSON f-£p\
COLLECTION
FURTHER STARTLING
DISCLOSURES NEXT
WEDNESDAY, 9tt "OV.
INSTITUTE OF PUBLIC AFFAIRS, N.S.W.
Authorised by R. S. Coates, Director, 19 Bligh Street, Sydney
