

MR. HAVERFIELD’S
NOTES ON THE NORTH.




MR. HAVERFIELD’S
NOTES ON THE NORTH.
This is a third letter from Mr. Haverfield to the Bendigo Advertiser
on the subject of his late visit to the country around the Darling. We
gave the greater portions of his first and second letter on Tuesday and
Wednesday, and we subjoin to this such portion of his second letter as
we omitted on Wednesday :
Number Three.
Menindie a place, the name of which Mr. Burke’s expedition has
rendered familiar throughout the colonies is situated on the Darling,
about 180 miles from the junction of that river with the Murray. The
buildings consist of a publichouse, a store, and a hut in the occupation
of the police. The resident population numbers about fifteens souls, in-
cluding women and children. The township has only lately been surve-
yed, and has not yet been gazetted for sale.
It is situated principally on sand hills bordering on the river, which,
when clothed with verdure, as they have been this season, look pretty
enough, but in summer present anything but a pleasing aspect to the
eye, and retaining the heat as they do to a fearful extent, render the
locality at that season anything but a desirable residence.
Still Menindie is an important outpost, and at no very distant period
will become a depot for a country of very considerable extent. As the
whole of the pastoral tract lying between the Lachlan and the Darling


has been taken up, it can hardly he very long before a road is opened
from Menindie to Boolegall, a small township on the former river,
whence there is a beaten track to Lang’s Crossing place or Hay, as it
is now called —on the Murrumbidgce. From Hay, coaches are plying
three times a week to Deniliquin. By this route the stock and produce
of the Upper Darling and the back countries of that river will eventually
be brought down to the Victorian markets. But the canalization of the
Darling, a work which is sure by-and-by to be consummated, the more
especially as that talented and persevering colonist. Captain Cadell, is
interesting himself in the matter, will afford a perpetual means of water
communication between Menindie and Adelaide. I do not profess to un-
derstand anything about such matters myself, but 1 have been informed
by Captain Cadell that no river could be more easily or inexpensively
canalized. The Darling, although not a large stream, is easily navigable
in ordinary floods. On the 29 th September last there were three steam-
boats lying at Mount Murchison, the station of Messrs. H. and B. Jamie-
son, about one hundred miles above Menindie. These were the Ge-
mini, Captain Randell, just returned from a trip some distance up the
Namoi, about six or seven hundred miles from the junction of the Dar-
ling ; the Moolgewanke, Captain Johnson, from Fort Bourke ; and the
Lady Augusta, Captain King, on a trading trip up the river. The Wa-
kool, one of Cadell’s line, had previously been up to Mount Murchison.
There is a very practicable route overland from Menindie to Adelaide,
which in the course of settlement must be opened up. The South Aus-
tralian Squatters, whose energy is invincible in the face of very formi-
dable obstacles, are advancing rapidly on the Darling, watering the
hitherto waste country intervening by means of wells,- and they will soon
establish a more direct communication by land between the Darling and
their own capital than that afforded by the present road, which runs
along the banks of the Darling and Murray.
There "arc three large lakes in the immediate vicinity of Menindie
Pamamoroo, Menindie, and Cawndilla. These are dry at certain pe-
riods, when the river has been low for some time. At the time I left,
immense quantities of water were pouring into each of them. But alt-
hough the flood had then attained a great height, greater, indeed, than


it has been seen before by the whites, it is evident that at some former
periods it must have been considerably higher, as there is a dry lake to
the westward of Gawndilla of greater extent than the three others toge-
ther. Pamamaroo is at least ten miles in diameter, Menindic about the
same, and Gawndilla, which is of irregular shape, perhaps a little less.
The locality of Menindie has rejoiced in a variety of names. It is
known by the blacks as Wertonyillie. Sir Thomas Mitchell called it the
Laidley Ponds. .Captain Sturt mentions it as the Williorara,Greek, which
is the aboriginal name for a portion of the inlet to the lakes of Menindie
and Gawndilla. The inhabitants have given to the site of the township
the name of the middle lake, and the New South Wales Government,
with but little regard for euphony, have changed it to Perry. By whate-
ver name known, it will ever be a famous locality in the annals of Aus-
tralian exploration. At Sir Thomas Mitchell’s encampment, at a short
distance on the opposite, or proper left, bank of the river, the party
under his command had an unfortunate collision with the natives, which
is remembered and talked of by them to the present day. In 18A5, Cap-
tain Sturt left his encampment on the banks of the Toorayn, or inlet to
lake Gawndilla, on his memorable expedition to the great Stony Desert.
Mr. Burke started about this time last year from Menindie township,
leaving a party in camp about eight miles higher up the river, on the
inlet to Pamamaroo lake. That parly left their encampment about the
end of January of the present year, under the command of Mr. Wright,
whit what results it is pretty generally known. Mr. Howitt, with his
party, quitted the same place on the 6th of August last, in search of
Mr. Burke. ■
Of all these expeditions, that which has thrown the most light on the
region lying north and north westerly from Menendie, was that under
the command of the gallant and now venerable Captain Sturt. Sir Tho-
mas Mitchell has laid down a few leading features, such as Mounts
Babbage and Lyell. These, however, were not actually visited by him,
but were sighted from Mount Macpherson, Mount- Murchison, and
Scrope’s Range, eminences of considerable elevation, at no great dis-
tances from the Darling.
The « chivalrous Eyre » had previously penetrated to the forbidding


shores of Lake Torrens, and the indomitable Stuart lias since very nearly
crossed the continent, but I think that both of them would admit that to
Capt. Sturt belongs the great honour of having opened the door to the
vast central regions of Australia. Had Leichhardt survived his last great
attempt to cross the continent from east to west, he would most proba-
bly have borne away the palm, but Mr. Stuart has, undoubtedly, been
guided in a great measure, in his bold attempts to reach the northern
coast, by the knowledge he obtained during the two years of arduous la-
bour and privation which he endured in company with his commander
of 1845 and 1810,
I have been over a great deal of the country through which Captain
Sturt at that time passed, and the difficulties he had to encounter were
of a nature sufficiently formidable to have deterred a less determined
spirit from proceeding as far as he did, and to have prevented a less
prudent or experienced leader from bringing his party safely back'from
the dreary region to which he penetrated. The route which Mr. Burke
took to Cooper’s Creek presented few obstacles to the progress of
his parly, and he started from Menindie in an exceedingly favourable
season. The route of the former lay through a mountainous country,
while that of the latter was for the most part over wide extending plains.
I have seen something of both, and therefore speak confidently on the
matter. One traverses Sturt’s country, recognising at every turn some
feature laid down in the accurate chart, and described in his interesting
work. In some places the tracks of his drays are plainly visible, in others
they have almost entirely worn out. Ip the ( Coonbaralba Pass,Jiis diffi-
culties in making his way through which the readers of his work will re-
member, bis tracks are quite plain. After that, passing Piesse’s Nob, and
other features mentioned by him presenting the same appearance they
did fifteen or sixteen years ago, it is not easy to thrace him till we reach
the neighbourhood of the Rocky Glen, at the head of which, for a few
miles, one can canter along his tracks.
It is an interesting fact, and one which may, perhaps, at some time
or other engage the attention of our savans, when it shall have been di-
rected to it by abler bands than mine, that certain features of various
of the country visited antidescribed by Captain Sturt have under


gone a wonderful but, perhaps, not at all an unaccountable change. His
minute accuracy and perfect truthfulness with regard to those leading
features, which nothing but an extraordinary convulsion of nature could
have altered in the period that has elapsed since his visit to them, are
sufficient testimony that the changes I have alluded to have taken place;
hut as I am, perhaps, exceeding the limits of my allotted space, 1 will
for the present lay aside the pen.
When a man has been wandering, and, perchance, pondering, for a
couple of years on the outskirts of civilization, he may, perhaps, have a
great deal to say to his friends at home, but the difficulty is, where to
begin. The diary detail arrangement is not in some people’s style, and
is probably not the most interesting form in which the results of such
said wanderings and ponderings can be placed before the public. We had
better leave that sort of thing to gentlemen commanding heavy and ex-
pensive expeditions, such as Mr. Burke and Mr. Howitf. Private exploi -
ters are not to be expected to render in detail an account of every creek
crossed in their traverses of every mountain sighted or of every
new tree or flower met with. And, of the last in truth'there arc but
few to be found along the tracks I have made in the sand to the north-
west of the Darling. Dr. Beckler, of the Victorian Expedition an able
and persevering botanist complained of the poverty of the flora of
that_region,.and having botanised for a considerable time along the
norht-eastern coast, where the vegetation is in every respect magnificent,
he felt more than a casual observer would do the niggardliness of nature
in her adornments of that tract traversed by the party to which he was
attached. You meet with some pretty fuschias on the Lower Murray,
and, the lily of the Darling is really a handsome flower. It is to be met
with in the valleys of Scrope’s range, and I saw some in full bloom, in a
romantic glen, not far from Captain Sturt’s memorable camp on Flood’s
Creek. Sturt’s pea, a flower now well known throughout the colonics,
and of which, I understand, there are some in the Melbourne Botanical
Gardens, is the queen of the floral beauties in the far countries, into


■which, if you will bee good enough, Sir, to give me time, and allow me
my own way, I will by-and-by endeavour to give you a peep.
Speaking of Captain Sturt—who, by the way, is the actual « pioneer
of exploration » in the wild regions of the north—it has been urged by
persons wo would almost hope against hope for the safety of Mr. Burke,
that the former officer was shut up with his party for seven or eight
months at the Depot Glen—that is, in latitude about 29° 40’ —his ad-
vance and retreat being, as he then supposed, alike cut off. It must be
remembered that Captain Sturt had a large supply of provisions, and
there can be no doubt that the health of his party, and their ultimate
safe return with the loss of but one individual, was mainly attributable
to their having been prudently provided with fresh meal, in the shape of
a flock of sheep. Mr. Burke took with him three month’s provisions,
and has been absent from Cooper’s Creek ten months. Then, the cli-
mate of the Depot Glen is far superior to that of the more northerly
tracts of country in which M. Burke has been confined, and it is impos-
sible to ignore the fact of Captain Sturt’s immensely greater tact, expe-
rience, and powers of resource.
DINAN. DAZOUGE, PRINTER.
