

[?]




Mr. J. M. NEILD
Biographical Sketch of a
Remarkable Man
Reprinted from
“The Record”
Saturday, May 6, 1939


A Sketch by Ryan


TV/TR. J. M. NEILD—“Joe” Neild as he prefers to
be known—of “The Record” and the Middle
Park A.N.A., celebrated his 70th birthday on Thurs«.
day, May 4.
He has had a varied career, and has met all
classes of Australians, and many interesting visitors
from all parts of the world.
He was bom at 166 Collins Street, near the cor-
ner of Stevens Street (now Collins Place), on the
present site of “Lister House.”
His father. Dr. James Edward Neild, who filled
an important place in Melbourne’s early history,
was a medical man by profession, and a writer by
choice.
For many years he carried on salons at his re-
spective homes, “New Place,” in Collins Street,
and “Bilton House,” Spring Street, where Joe was
privileged to meet many personages, eminent in the
fields of science, literature, art, music, and the
drama.
* ♦ ♦
T\/TRS. Neild came to Port Phillip with her parents
1 (Mr. and Mrs. D. R. Long) in 1840, and was
a great social worker, who started her activities
with Mrs. Hornibrook, the founder of Victorian rag-
ged schools.
Joe attended the Model School, in the 70's,
went on to Scotch College, and began, but did not
complete, his medical course. He assisted his
father in pathological work, in connection with the
Coroner’s Court.
He was associated with the Kyahram Reform
Movement, which swept the State between 1902
and 1905, and lectured, in an honorary capacity,
throughout Victoria in connection with the move-
ment.
His early occupations included work in a small
brewery, the management of a motza-cake factory,
and the managerial side of a suburban harn-slorm-
ing company.
* * *■ »
TN 1905 Mr. Neild left Melbourne for what he
describes as “a nine years’ career of vaga-
bondage.” He travelled for the British Imperial Oil
Co. in New South Wales, worked in the property-
room of Her Majesty’s Theatre, under the manage-


166 COLLINS STREET EAST
(The present site of Lister House)


ment of J. C. Williamson; spruiked for a picture
show in Sydney and Brisbane, under the manage-
ment of Ward and Musgrove, and ran a barn-storm-
ing show on the western roads of New South Wales.
He found himself stranded at Cobar, 513 miles
from Sydney, and secured a job in the treatment
works of the Great Cobar Mine; did striking for
a blacksmith; worked in the office of a stock and
station agent; did coal lumping at the railway;
worked with a telegraph erection gang; and,
then, with a mate, humped his “drum” and started
out on the track, but did not stop until he drop-
ped his bundle at Morden Station, north-east of Wil-
cannia, after a tramp, per boot, of nearly 800 miles.
JOE tells an interesting story of his first camp
opposite Wilcannia, which is reached by a
draw-bridge across the River Darling, known to
bushmen as “The Gutter.”
On rising in the early morning, he found a team-
ster camped nearby cooking puftaloons. Their neigh-
bour camq across, and asked: “Pommies?” and was
told: “No,” but that Joe and his mate were some-
what new to “the track.”
“Ever cross that bridge before?” asked the
teamster, and was told, “No.”
“Well,” said he, “it’s a tradition that once you
cross that bridge you will have to serve an appren-
ticeship of seven fears to bush craft; and when
you have completed your time you will acknowledge
that it is the greatest education available in the
whole world. You will never again recognise any
man as your master, and you will learn to depend
upon yourself. If you don’t learn this lesson, you
may suffer fatal consequences.”
The term was served, and the lessons were learnt.
He found it a harsh curriculum, but well worth-
while for all it cost.
* ♦ ♦
TJE learnt many more useful lessons; but, chief
of all, the true meaning of Australian mate-
ship. Without the help of the splendid men he met
on his travels, he says, he might never have returned
to civilisation. His greatest pride is that, although
he was such an ignoramus in bush lore, these rough
diamonds respected his advice; and would have put


Block by courtesy of “The Age”
DRAWBRIDGE OVER THE RIVER DARLING AT WILCANNIA
where Mr. Neil d pitched his first camp.


him into Parliament had it not been against his
principles to sign a pledge.
These men took him into contract parties on the
stations and in the mines, although it was physic-
ally impossible for him to do his quota of work.
He later secured a bicycle, and wandered into
the Never-Never of New South Wales, Queensland,
and to the borders of the Territory, working in the
pastoral, agricultural, and mining industries.
He gouged opal at While Cliffs, Duck Creek, and
Kyahra; and worked on two stations owned by
“Jimmy” Rutherford, one of the original Cobh and
Co. drivers, who took over the coach lines from
Bourke into Queensland.
He saw this splendid man. hard as nails, at the
age of 85, start out in a buck-board with a beauti-
ful pair of spirited horses cross-country from Cun-
namulla to Dimanteena. He handled the reins as
only a master could. He was a master in all he
did, particularly in the manner in which he
handled Australian bushmen.
♦ * * *
JOE met and worked with many men who made
Australian history, as leaders in the shearing
strike of the 90’s. Others he worked with were
Arthur Blakeley, later member for the Darling and
a Labour Cabinet Minister; his brother Fred, who
cycled from White Cliffs to Darwin; and Mick
Considine, later member for The Barrier.
He also met Jack Bames, later Senator, and
John McNeil, of the A.W.U., and was associated
with Mr. (now Sir) Herbert Gepp, in the Broken
Hill Progress Association, which was the first to
establish children’s play grounds in Australia.
Joe was a member of the Bourke, Charleville, and
South Australian branches of the Australian Work-
ers’ Union; and the Barrier branch of the Amal-
gamated Miners’ Association.
In 1914, Joe returned to Melbourne, since when
he has worked in the building industries, the ad-
ministrative side of shipping, has been advance
agent for a blind concert company, and finished
up in journalism. He has been a contributor to “The
Record” for over 20 years, and on the permanent
staff for nearly 13 years.


A/TR. Neild has been a member of the A.N.A. for
nearly 30 years in New South Wales and Vic-
toria. He sponsored the first resolution on unifica-
tion placed before the annual conference, which he
took from Middle Park to Mildura, in 1922. The
motion was defeated on a close division after a pro-
tracted debate. A similar motion was adopted a
few years later, and has since been confirmed.
Mr. Neild is a fluent speaker, extempore and
on prepared matter. He has been a prolific writer
in prose and verse for over 50 years.
He is catholic in his tastes; a lover of science,
art, literature and music; a keen student of
economics, sociology, and youth welfare; and
numbers young and old amongst his friends.
His other interests include the Melbourne Shakes-
peare Society, the Henry Lawson Memorial Society,
the Australian Poetry Lovers’ Society, the Bread
and Cheese Club, and the Historical Society of Vic-
toria. He is the honorary official historian to the
City of South Melbourne.
* * ♦ »
Neild believes in the value of epigram as
a stimulus to thought and study, but not as
an end.
Two of his constant companions are Bacon’s
Essays and William Penn’s Fruits of Solitude; nor
is he afraid to admire his own work. He cares
not at all for the criticism of pedantic “official”
authorities.
Amongst his favourite quotations are:—
“Reading maketh a full man;
Converse maketh a ready man; and
Writing maketh an exact man.”- Bacon.
And three of his own:—
“Only thou knoweth thyself. Others may praise
or blame thee, without merit; so thou preserveth
thy self-respect, it is enough.”
“Nature is the best of all physicians; but.
usually, she is* treated as a quack”; and
“Mistakes are errors committed in lack of know-
ledge:
Blunders are errors committed in spite of know-
ledge:
Mistakes enrich us with added knowledge:
Blunders can only degrade us.”


BILTON HOUSE
Spring Street


