

%■




M3355/F
-i-n-
c 3Ehe (SjrbtUß Jlailg telegraph.
MR. NASH AND THE AUDITOR-GENERAL’S REPORT.
TO THE EDITOR OF THE SYDNEY DAILY TELEGRAPH.
Sir, —In the cause of truth and justice, will you permit me to call
your attention to the following extract from the Auditor-General’s eighth
annual report: —“ In consequence of repeated irregularities in the
accounts of the Superintendent of Stores, I feel it to be my duty to
bring the matter under the notice of the Colonial Treasurer, and recom-
mend a searching inquiry into the administration of the Stores Depart-
ment. As the board appointed to conduct the inquiry has not yet
brought up its final report, it would not become me, in this place, to
make any comment upon the subject matter of the irregularities
referred to.” Notwithstanding the above very strong language, I have
been deprived of my position and livelihood, and my family rendered
destitute, through endeavouring, in behalf of the public interest, to
bring about such an inquiry. Prior to making the attempt, I was
distinctly promised protection by the Auditor-General, on the authority
of the Colonial Treasurer, I had for a long period frequently called
the attention of the authorities to the irregularities complained of, and
was promised the protection of those in power if I spoke out
fearlessly. I did so, and have been dismissed, and my character
injured by so doing. By publishing the above, and giving publicity to
the facts stated, you will render great service to the cause of
truth and justice.—Yours, &c. J, F. NASH.
MR. NASH, who writes a letter in another column, had “a grievance”
on hand for some years while he was employed in the Govern-
ment Stores Department, and he has a much worse one troubling him
now that he has been dismissed. While he was a Government officer,
his trouble was that matters were conducted in a manner which vexed
his official soul to an extent which induced him to make such complaints
as caused a Board of Enquiry to be appointed. His grievance now is
that, for thus performing what he regarded as an imperative public
duty, he was dismissed from his situation and reduced to destitution.
As a matter of fact he was removed from the service for what was
regarded as a breach of discipline or act of insubordination; but as this
arose out of the inquiry, he looks behind it, and regards himself as the
victim of misplaced confidence. The Board of Inquiry closed its
labours on the roth June last, and by it Mr. Nash was condemned in
the most unmeasured terms for “rearing up such a structure of
falsehoods ” as were embodied in his charges. The Auditor-General


was personally and officially involved in the initiation of the inquiry,
and as three months have elapsed since the Board issued its report it,
appears reasonable enough to expect that he should have expressed his
opinion on it. He states in his last report, published a few days since,
that as the Board has not brought up its final report it would not become
him to express any opinion on what has been published ; but this
precaution is scarcely imposed on the Auditor-General. The Board
was appointed for two distinct purposes—one, to enquire into the charges
preferred by Mr. Nash, and the other as set forth in the Treasurer’s
minute ordering the investigation, which reads as follows :
Although this inquiry is instituted with a view to investigate the charges
preferred by Mr. Nash, yet I think it desirable the inquiry, having been concluded
under this head, should be prosecuted further, and I shall be glad if the gentlemen
named will direct their inquiry with a view to the general management of the
department, the system of tendering, the quantities of goods likely to be required,
the receipt and delivery of goods, and generally such matters as may seem to
suggest anything to the Board during the progress of the inquiry, with a view to
an improvement if found necessary.
The inquiry concerning Mr. Nash has been “ concluded,” The
Board has done with him ; and the fact that it may now he engaged in
a disti?ict investigation should not have prevented the Auditor-General
recording what he thinks of its labours and their results. It would
have been the more satisfactory to have had his opinion, inasmuch as
there are some peculiarities connected with the affair which it would
have been interesting to have had his opinion about. It is not our
purpose to refer more particularly to them at the present, but we
certainly think that it was incumbent on the Auditor-General to say
whether —from the report of the Board and the evidence taken before
it—he considers Mr. Nash deserves the severe condemnation he has
received.
MONDAY, SEPTEMBER 15, 1879.
THE Hon. Geoffrey Eagar has missed his way in the world. When
he retired into the comfortable obscurity of the Civil Service, the
light of a legal genius was hidden under an official bushel. Some time since
he was appointed Chairman of a Board of Inquiry, the duty of which
was to investigate certain charges preferred by Mr. J. F. Nash, respecting
the manner in which the Government stores were purchased and
distributed; and the able way in which he conducted the case for the
deparbtient proved that had he taken to the law, and practised as a
barrister, he would have taken high honours as a special pleader, and
would have had few superiors in the art of confusing, not to say
badgering, witnesses. In our issue of Friday last we referred to the
singular silence of the Auditor-General with respect to the report of
the Board over which Mr. Eagar presided; but it is, perhaps, not so
very remarkable that Mr. Rolleston should have determined to write
shy of the production. Though he deemed it prudent or politic to
hold his peace, now that his annual report has appeared without any


reference to a matter in which he figured so conspicuously, it is
essential that public attention should be called to the subject. This is
the more necessary as it appears that the report must have escaped the
notice of the Government and Members of Parliament, otherwise it is
impossible to conceive how such a remarkable production should have
been permitted to pass unchallenged. Two important considerations
are involved in the report, one being the business manner in which the
Stores Department is conducted, and the other the reputation and
livelihood of a Government officer. As regards the first, the report is
worse than worthless; and concerning the latter, it is something of a
slander. Mr. Nash is branded as a liar, in the following words—
“lt may not be improper for the Board incidentally to enquire what
motive could exist for the rearing up such a structure of falsehoods.”
It might not be improper for Parliament presently to inquire what
motives existed for the above condemnation of a Government official,
of whom the Auditor-General gave the Board the followiug character :
I think he is a little flighty. He was described to me (if I may be
allowed to say so) as a man to be thoroughly relied upon —as a hard-
working, industrious man, who, as it was put to me, had been rather
sat upon because he had endeavoured to correct irregularities.”
With that peculiar exercise of even-handed justice and inflexible fair
play which is to be traced in every page of the record of the Board’s
proceedings, a portion of this certificate of character is suppressed in
the report, the words “ a man to be thoroughly relied upon ” being
left out when Mr. Rolleston’s evidence is quoted, in order to make out
a case of improper motives against Mr, Nash. And concerning
“motives,’' it may be asked had Mr. Eager, the responsible head of the
department , no motive in adding the weight of his authority to that of
those who, in the significant words of the Auditor General, had
“ sat upon ” Mr. Nash because be interfered with their blunders ? If
he was “ sat upon ” before the Board held its inquiry, he has been
crushed right out by its report, and that by an investigation which was
conducted apparently to prove, if possible, that his charges were false,
rather than to ascertain if they were true. The evidence, as it is
reported, shows that his charges were exaggerated, but it proves just as
fully that they were not false. It is hard to say what Mr. Nash could
have proved had he been before another tribunal, or had he been
allowed the assistance of a barrister, which he asked for and was
refused. With the head, or one of the principal heads, of the depart-
ment as his chief judge, a host of witnesses who were nearly as much
compromised by his charges as Mr. Eagar himself, Mr. Nash established
his case sufficiently to have delivered him from the finding of the Board,
that he had raised “ a structure of falsehood,” and had from impure
motives concocted “ his elaborate fabrication.” If there is an elaborate
fabrication connected with the affair it is the Board’s report, and not
Mr. Nash’s evidence.
Touching the public side of the question, we have said the report
is worse than worthless, and we shall submit one proof of this out of


numbers contained in the document. The Board has whitewashed the
department from top to bottom, inside and outside. There were
“ irregularities ” some years since, but, according to the report, they
have all disappeared, and now the arrangements are perfection. There
is another authority, however, available in the person of the Auditor-
General ; and in order to show what reliance is to be placed on the
opinions of the Board we quote the following:—
THE BOARD’S OPINION.
The conclusion at which the Board
has arrived on the whole facts of the
case, as disclosed by the evidence taken
is that up to June, 1877, many irregu-
larities, consequent on an imperfect
system, existed in the business and
management of the Stores Department;
but that under the new and improved
system established by Mr. Thomson, in
July, 1877, such irregularities no longer
exist.
THE AUDITOR-GENERAL’S OPINION.
The Auditor-General to the Under-Secre-
ta-ry for Finance and Trade.
September 26, 1878.
Sir, —The evidences of carelessness,
irregularity, and overpayments with
which the accounts of the Store branch
of the Treasury abound render the ex-
amination of them a matter of serious
embarrassment to this department.
Numerous queries arise which under
ordinary care would be prevented, and I
have reason to be extremely dissatisfied
with many of the explanations afforded
to those queries.
To detail the individual cases of which
I complain would necessitate a reference
to numerous vouchers furnished by the
Superintendent of Stores during the last
two or three years, and would occupy
more space than can be given to the
matter in a letter.
Whether the system is at fault or the
officers concerned in carrying it out I
cannot say ; but I would strongly recom-
mend the Colonial Treasurer to appoint
a Board, to make a searching investi-
gation into the whole business of the
Stores Department, with a view to its
being placed on a more satisfactory foot-
ing.
When the Board is appointed, I shall
be prepared with the necessary papers
and vouchers to support this recom-
mendation.
I have, &c.,
C. Rolleston.
The report of the Board is dated June 10th, 1879; and how the
department has been carried on between the 26th September, 1878, and
that date is now being enquired into by the same Board which gave
such a reliable opinion respecting operations between July, 1877, and the
date of the Auditor-General’s minute. It will be seen that for one year
and two months after the time from which the Board stated there were
no irregularities in existence Mr. Rolleston found such evidence of
“ carelessness, irregularities and overpayments ” that he deemed if
imperative on him to call the special attention of Mr. Eagar, as head of
the department, to the state of affairs. It will naturally be asked why


such a plain-spoken minute was not acted upon and a Board appointed,
and the answer is another peculiar chapter in this strange eventful
history. The minute was passed on to the Treasurer of the day, and by
him it was remitted to Mr. Thomson, the gentleman who was more
immediately responsible for the irregularities complained of. He
furnished a long report, setting forth the details of the alterationss he
had made in 1877, as stated in the report of the Board, and wound up by
protesting against the Board of Inquiry being appointed, on the ground
that such Boards “ are not asked for, unless in cases where the
management of a department is so defective as to give general
dissatisfaction to the public, who suffer loss thereby.” Mr. Thomson
did not indicate how the public are to become aware of the necessity
for Boards if such strong demands for one by the officer specially
engaged to look after the accounts is to be ignored. Mr. Thomson was
not, however, altogether opposed to an inquiry; and he suggested that,
before a Board was appointed, “ all the cases referred to, or at least
those in which gross carelessness existed,” should be submitted to the
Treasurer, and if he supported the Auditor-General, then Mr. Thomson
would agree to the Board being appointed. To this Mr. Cohen, the
then Treasurer, replied, after reading Mr. Thomson’s explanations and
suggestion. “ I cannot now see the necessity for appointing a Board.”
We should think not. Mr, Cohen may have been an admirable
Minister, or indeed a devotee to the duties of his position, but he had
to draw a line somewhere, and he did at the point of official martyrdom.
It was asking rather too much to request him to wade through the cases
which had baffled the Auditor-General. The “carelessness, irregu-
larities, and overpayments ” of two or three years had to be investi-
gated, and no marvel that Mr. Cohen declined Mr. Thomson’s innocent
suggestion. As regards the explanations or answers to the complaint of
the Auditor-General, they were most unsatisfactory. Mr. Thomson
informed the Treasurer that he had appointed a special accountant to
keep “ the principal books—the ledger and journal,” and expressed the
opinion that the gentleman was doing his duty “ in a most creditable
manner.” It was all guesswork, however, for Mr. Thomson added,
“ not having made any detailed examination of his accounts since he
took charge of the accounts branch, I cannot positively affirm that they
are right as a whole, but I have every reason for believing that such
is the case.” For all Mr. Thomson knew when he wrote the
carelessness ” was as gross and the “ overpayments ” were as heavy
as they were when such “ irregularities ” startled Mr. Rolleston.
However, what the Auditor-General failed to accomplish in 1878 Mr.
Nash carried out in 1879, and the public will presently know the resut
of the investigation which he has forced on. What the Board’s report
on the general management of the Stores Department will be worth we
trow not, further than to think that if it in any way resembles the one
by the same three gentlemen on Mr. Nash’s case, the Government
waste paper-basket is far too good a place for it. It appears to us an


absurdity to appoint three heads of departments to sit in judgement on
brother officials, especially as one of the three is the man of all others
who is implicated. There is an old homely axiom respecting the folly
of asking a man if his brother is a fool, but it is outdone by the
absurdity of asking Mr. Eagar whether or not he neglects his duties.
Considering the way in which he managed the case against Mr. Nash,
he may be left to conduct his own defence with such ability as should
guarantee a supplementary acquittal of the department as full and free
as that given to it in the Nash report—an official production almost
every page of which is pregnant with the poison of palpable partiality.
TUESDAY, NOVEMBER n, 1879.
5 $ UILTY, with a recommendation to reform,” is the verdict of the
•yj Board appointed to inquire into the charges preferred by
Mr. Nash against the Government Stores Department. The report of
the three gentlemen entrusted with the duty of investigating the charges
was laid before Parliament last Wednesday week, and the chief dis-
tinction between the finding of the judges and the accusations is that
instead of being couched in incoherent and sometimes violent language,
such as Mr. Nash indulged in, the Board adopts the cautious and
measured phraseology of official formalities. Of the two indictments,
that of the Board is the more damaging and convincing, because it is
more deliberate; and, all things being considered, the conclusion may
fairly be come to that this final report puts the fairest face possible on
the management of the department. Some months ago the same
gentlemen issued their first report, in which they recorded the conclusion
that “ Mr. Nash has entirely failed to substantiate these charges,” and
that he had been guilty of “ rearing up a structure of falsehoods.”
This very emphatic decision was an awkward difficulty to get over when
the Board discovered that there were good grounds for many of the
charges preferred by Mr. Nash; and, therefore, there need be no
surprise felt at the milk-and-water opinions which are now expressed.
Taking the report for what it is worth, we find that the abuses of the
contracting system are admitted by the Board. The report says :
With respect to that part of the business (certainly a very large one) which
relates to the ordering of goods from contractors and their rapid distribution among
the various branches of the public service requiring the goods —the management
has been weak and ineffective. It may also be said that the contract business—that
is to say, the preparations of the statements of probable quantities for the year’s
supply—the detailed schedules furnished to contractors for the purpose of
tendering, and the modes of supply nnder these tenders—/ms not been generally
carried on with adequate care and judgement.
With this guarded finding of the Board as a standard whereby to
estimate the truth or falsehood of the charges, it will be the fairest way
to reproduce the corner-stone of the “ structure of falsehoods ” which
was said to have been raised up. It reads as follows
Perhaps the simplest way will be to follow clauses in my synopsis, and proceed
to show how far the terms of contracts have been acted up to—l should say,
rather, to what a shameful extent they have been disregarded. Prior to recon-


struction of system by Mr. Hemming, there existed really no mutuality between
the Government and contractors; the grand object being the effectual and
expeditious baling of money out of the Treasury into the hands of a favoured few,
the “ stores ” being a sort of funnel or sewer, flushed continually and persistently
by those whose duty it was to economise the funds provided by Parliament for
stationery, stores, &c., &c,
If reasonable allowance is made for the excited mental condition
of a man, who, as Mr. Rolleston said, he thought was “being sat
upon,” and the calm collectedness of the official mind, the distinction
between these two quotations amounts to very much of that difference
described as half-a-dozen of one and six of the other. It would never
do for a Board, each member of which is himself a Government
official, to say that there was anything “ shameful ” connected with the
management of any public department; but “ weak and ineffective ”
from Mr. Eagar and his colleagues is quite as strong language as
“ shameful” from Mr. Nash. Then there is the other smoothly-turned
sentence respecting the arrangements affecting “ probable quantities,”
and “ detailed schedules,” which were “ not generally carried out with
adequate care and judgement.” This is a much neater way of putting
the matter than talking about “baling money out of the Treasury” to
“ flush ” a financial “ funnel or sewer,” the contents of which flow
into favoured pockets; but, like the Hibernian’s plank, the statements
are as broad as they are narrow, the weight of official influence, if any-
thing, giving the more measured condemnation the advantage. Another
item in the “ structure of falsehoods ” was the following :
Goods in stock in large quantities put in contract at ridiculously low prices,
because not likely to be wanted ; those not in stock at high prices.
The Board’s version of this charge is very explicit as regards the low
and high prices ; but the report stops short of giving any explanation of
the figures. The report says
As regards the “ extra” supplies before alluded to, it is quite true, as shown in
the evidence of Mr. William Davies, M. P., that an anomalous state of things has
prevailed of this kind —that when the contracts for the Metropolitan district have
been in the hands of one person, the prices of certain articles tendered for have
varied in the case of each establishment. For example, dealing with the contracts
of 1878-1879, the same contractor supplies limejuice to Darlinghurst Gaol at
sixpence per gallon; to the Asylums at Callen Park and Gladesville at one shilling
per gallon ; and to the Industrial School at Biloela at one penny per gallon. He
supplies flour—first, second, and third quality—to Darlinghurst Gaol at one farthing
per lb. without distinction of quality ; to Biloela, the first quality at one penny
half-penny, and the second and third qualities at one penny per lb.; to Parramatta
Gaol the first quality at one penny per lb., the second and third qualities at
one half-penny.
This is a remarkable confirmation of the statement that Mr. Nash
had “ entirely failed to substantiate his charges.” The accusation about
“ ridiculously low ” and high prices is proved by the Board itself; and
as regards the mystery of limejuice at one shilling per gallon for the
asylum at Callen Park, and one penny per gallon for the Industrial
School at Biloela, the explanation of a large “ stock ” at the latter and
no “ stock ” at the former appears to be a remarkably reliable one, and
will hold good until a better one is submitted. The way in which the


contractor referred to and the department manipulated the flour
market is also prima facie evidence that “ stocks ” in that important
item were rather unequal. Passing from details to generalities, the
report deals with “ all descriptions of goods and merchandise, the con-
tract business in relation to which is managed at the Stores Depart-
ment,” with respect to which it is stated “ difficulties have arisen and
now exist which, in the opinion of the Board, requite to be remedied ’.”
Here, again, it may be seen how tenderly the report touches the subject.
“ Difficulties ” is a good word to substitute for “ carelessness,
irregularities, and overpayments”—the terms used by the Auditor-
General when he recommended an inquiry into the management of the
department. What the “ difficulties ” really are can only be approxi-
mately estimated from the delicate manner in which they are dealt
with ; but the public will be pretty safe in concluding that they involve
a system of “ carelessness and irregularities ” which calls for a com-
plete reformation of the department. This is the legitimate conclusion
to be come to from more than one portion of the report. For example,
it states: “ The chief defects in the present system are found to be
as follows:
“ Ist, Unreliable computation of ‘ probable quantities.’
“ 2nd. Imperfect schedules of articles to be tendered for.
* ‘ 3rd. The determination of tenders by computation of prices as a whole.
“4th. The introduction and use of fictitious or merely nominal prices, as a
means of unduly affecting such determination.”
This is a curious schedule of monstrous abuses to gloss over as
little “ difficulties.” The fact is, that the management of the depart-
ment appears to be rotten from top to bottom, tending only, as the
report says, “to encourage inequality of price and an inferior standard
of supply.” Having issued such a supplementary condemnation of the
system under which the department is mismanaged, the Board should
candidly acknowledge that in its previous report it did Mr. Nash a
grievous injustice.
(Suburban telegraph,
November 15.
fHE “exposition of the systematic misuse and malversation of
moneys ” in the Stores Department of the Government, supplied
by Mr. J. F. Nash some time back, and which led to a Board of
Inquiry being appointed to investigate these charges, and also resulted
in Mr. Nash being deprived of his means of livelihood —must have
attracted the attention of the reading public. The finding of the said
board was in direct opposition to the evidence given , and is an enigma
which can only be solved on the supposition that the members of that
board acted on the principle that, Whatever is, is right. In spite of the
glaring anomalies and reckless extravagance in public moneys, shown to
be rampant, Mr. Nash was summarily dismissed, for his efforts to curb


the expenditure; and he has suffered both mental anxiety and financial
loss by the treatment he has received. We purpose in our next issue
to traverse at as great a length as our space will permit the report of
Mr. Nash, and compare it with the board and their finding. The Sydney
Daily Telegraph has lately devoted some space to the subject and in its
leading columns has shown that the treatment Mr. Nash has received is
opposed to the evidence tendered at the investigation. Mr. Nash is in
indigent circumstances, and an effort should be made by the public to
reimburse him in some manner or other for the severe loss he has sus-
tained through endeavouring to conserve their interests.


