

Leaflet No. 2.
UNIVERSAL SERVICE LEAGUE
New South Wales Branch.
MR. J. ELLIS BARKER
ON
"AMERICA:
A NATION
IN ARMS"
("The Nineteenth Century and After”—
September, 1915).
Why Not Australia Too?
Published for
THE UNIVERSAL SERVICE LEAGUE
78 Elizabeth St., Sydney.


America: A Nation in Arms.
WHY NOT AUSTRALIA TOO?
Under the above title Mr. J. Ellis
Barker has a valuable article in the Sep-
tember number of the “Nineteenth Cen-
tury.” It contains an interesting’ parallel
to the present situation in the Britisn
Empire, and it plainly suggests the Em-
pire’s next duty. The Universal Service
League of Australia therefore places the
following account of its argument before
the Australian people.
Mr, Barker begins by reminding us that
‘‘the lact that the United States intro-
duced conscription during the Civil War
is scarcely known in England,” and we
may add that it is not much known in
Australia. Yet the American Act, passed
on March 3, 1863, to establish compulsory
military service and exempt certain citi-
zens, appears to have given the basis of
our own Australian law of compulsory
military service. Australia has actually,
in time of peace, made the same kind of
preparation for defence as the U'.S.A.
made while it was in the thick of its
fighting against a better organised enemy
that was threatening it with destruction.
And history shows further that if the
U.S.A. had had our present Australian
law at the outbreak of the war, the
struggle would very soon have ended. The
Northern States had much greater re-
sources than the rebellious South, and
only needed to organise them and bring
them to bear.
The American Civil War began in 1861
and ended in 1865. In those four years
the Northern States reckoned their loss in
men at nearly three hundred and sixty
thousand, but later authorities consider
that five hundred thousand would be
nearer the mark. The defeated Southern
States lost about the same number out of
a very much smaller population. Alto-
gether the American States lost between
seven hundred thousand and one million
lives. The most trustworthy estimate of
the economic losses has placed them at
two thousand million pounds. The South
was practically ruined. For example, be-
tween 1860 and 1870 the taxable wealth of
Virginia decreased from seven hundred


and ninety-three million dollars to three
hundred and twenty-seven million dollars,
and that of South Carolina shrank from five
hundred and forty-eight millions to one
hundred and sixty-six millions. These are
just typical figures. The loser, of course,
pays the heavier price.
But the Southern States, in spite of
their inferiority in numbers and resources,
nearly won, because they for long had the
better organisation. The President of the
United States was inexperienced in na-
tional as distinguished from local politics,
and had been in office only a month when
war broke out. His name was Abraham
Lincoln. His predecessor, one Buchanan,
had had many warnings of the threatened
revolt in the South, but he took no pre-
cautions at all against it. Lincoln was
left by him quite unprepared for the
trouble. The U.S. army consisted of less
than fifteen thousand available men, and
they were scattered all over the country
keeping the Indians in order. The navy
was not concentrated. The Federal
Capital was unprotected, and immediately
on the outbreak of war was isolated. De-
sertions from the army, navy, and civil
service to the Southern forces were fre-
quent, and included no less than 182
generals. All this was in the reckoning
of the Southern leaders. They expected,
indeed, that the unreadiness of the North,
the inexperience of the President, and
their own initial quickness of action
would make resistance impossible. If
war were nevertheless ventured, they be-
lieved that England and Prance, for the
sake of the cotton imported from the
Southern States, would prevent them from
being blockaded. So also they believed
that the industrial North had degenerated
and, for all its superiority in population,
would not be able to stand against the
agricultural South where every man could
ride and shoot.
But the South had made a mistake
about the new President of the United
States. Abraham Lincoln showed him-
self to be a man of action. And he used
the very great powers conferred upon him
by the American Constitution that de-
signedly leaves its President almost abso-
lute, if he dares to be so, in time of crisis.
The result was that the North put up a
willing fight at the commencement of the
war, and early in 1862 the South was
threatened with invasion by large armies.


Then the South acted again with fore-
sight and resolution. Its President,
Jefferson Davis, asked the Southern
States to concentrate all their forces and
fight like one man. They did so by pass-
ing a “Conscription Act” on April 16th,
1862—a memorable date. It called out all
the men between 18 and 35 years of age,
and strictly forbade all obtaining of sub-
stitutes or evasion of military service. In
September of the same year all the men
between 35 and 45 were also called up.
But the inferiority of population in the
South proved fatal in the end, just be-
cause, and only because, the North also
adopted “Conscription.”
Towards the end of 1862 the North
awoke to the fact that its overwhelming
superiority in numbers, in wealth, and re-
sources of every kind would not bring it
victory unless the numbers were put into
the field. But the voluntary system did
not bring out the numbers. The result
was continual loss of Northern lives and
money with no decisive effect. And
Northerners got tired of the interminable,
inglorious war. Volunteering diminished.
Reinforcements were begged by the men
at the front, but there were not enough
available. Recruiting speeches, and all
the other devices for attracting volunteers,
did not attract sufficient men. So the
Government came to the conclusion thus
expressed in one of its official documents:
“It was evident that the suppression of
the rebellion would fail, without resort to
the unpopular, but nevertheless truly re-
publican, measure of conscription.”
But Lincoln was not the man to be
frightened by unpopularity, so, early in
1863, a Bill introducing conscription was
placed before Congress at Washington.
There was a rather substantial minority
against it. But the American people was
in earnest, and the Bill was made law on
March 3rd, 1863 —another very important
date in the history of the modern world.
This was the turning point of the war.
Before the Act was passed nearly four
hundred thousand recruits were needed in
order that the inactivity which had suc-
ceeded disaster might be ended and the
offensive again taken. But nothing like so
large a number was obtainable by volun-
tary enlistment. Under compulsory ser-
vice the one million men already in the field
were immediately given a recruiting re-
serve of two million two hundred and fifty
thousand. Actually, before the war was


over, one million one hundred and twenty
thousand of that number were compulsory
recruited. And the recruiting cost to the
country, per man, dropped by no less than
70 per cent. Moreover the obligation of
military service was equitably divided
over the various parts of the country.
But the moral effect was wider still.
There grew in the people a new feeling
of security, confidence in the Government,
and assurance of its power. “'The ability
of the Government,” says an official re-
port, ‘‘to bring men into the field at its
call and the manner in which it has been
done ... in spite of innumerable and
apparently insuperable difficulties, has
best demonstrated its power.” In the
face of such comforting results the often
unscrupulous opposition was doomed to
failure. What the report calls “a few dis-
loyal political leaders and corrupt and
profligate newspapers” caused rioting,
especially in New York, Boston, and Troy.
That in New York cost more than a
thousand lives. It made timid people
suggest, practically, that the new Act
should be allowed to lapse. But Lincoln
knew what he wanted and what he must
have if the country was to be saved.
Opening with an angry reference to the
adoption of conscription by the enemy, he
replied:—•
“This produces an army which will soon
turn upon our now victorious soldiers al-
ready in the field, if they shall not be
sustained by recruits as they should be.
It produces an army with a rapidity not
to be matched on our side, if we first
waste time to re-experiment with the
voluntary system, already deemed by
Congress, and palpably in fact, so far ex-
hausted as to be inadequate; and then
more time to obtain a court decision as
to whether the law is constitutional whicn
requires a part of those not now in the
service to go to the aid of those who are
already in it; and still more time to de-
termine with absolute certainty that we
get those who are to go in the precisely
legal proportion to those who are not to
go. My purpose is to be in my ction just
and constitutional, and yet practical, in
performing the important duty with
which lam charged—of maintaining the
unity and the free principles of our com-
mon country.”
The people of the North accepted Lin-
coln’s leadership on these plain and
courageous arguments. And then the


North went on to be victorious. Already
in February, 1864, the Southern States
had to meet the new menace of the North
with a still more stringent military Act
which enrolled in the army all white men
from 17 to 50 years of age. But it was
unavailing. There were only five million
five hundred thousand white people, all
told, in the South, while the North had
over twenty-two million. As soon as the
nation in arms in the South was con-
fronted, not by Northern volunteer armies,
hut by a nation in arms in the North, the
issue was certain. On the 9th April,
1865, the war was over. The superior
numbers of the North had won.
Then people began to estimate the cost,
and found that they had had to
pay approximately one million lives
and two thousand million pounds for
not being ready with a large and
good national army at the be-
ginning. If they had had one the South
could not have stood against its mere force
of numbers and training. They also found
that they owed the preservation of the
Union to the courage and singleness of
purpose which made Abraham Lincoln
mobilise the whole country and raise the
huge army required. It is not as a man
of very great ability that Lincoln lives in
the history of the world, and the memory
of his countrymen. He is Just the man
whose simple strength of character en-
abled him to be the saviour of his coun-
try. The means of its salvation was the
so-called “Conscription Act,” whose pro-
per title is “An Act to provide further for
the Public Defence.”
The military efforts made by both the
North and the South were immense. It
is estimated that the North put 10 per
cent, of its population into its army. On
a similar basis England would furnish
four million five hundred thousand
(4.500.000) men, and Australia four hundred
and fifty thousand (450,000), the whole
Empire (counting only white people)
about six million five hundred thousand
(6.500.000) But the South had approxi-
mately 20 per cent, of its white population
on military service. A similar effort in
the British Empire would yield over
thirteen million (13,000,000) soldiers.
These are the sacrifices the United States
thought their Union to be worth. Is the
British Empire, including the independ-
ence and security of Australia, worth less?


The analogies of the situation for the
British Empire to-day and the supporters
of the American Union then are very
interesting, but too plain to dwell on.
The war in the U.S.A. was unnecessary,
and if Great Britain had had an army
proportionate to its population and re-
sponsibilities this war would probably not
have occurred, or would have ended soon
in victory for the Triple Entente. If
Britain will consent even now to become a
nation in arms the war must end in the
same way, for the British Empire alone
can put as many soldiers in the field as
Germany. The British of to-day are-
much the same as the Americans of 1863.
To raise 10 per cent, of the population by
the voluntary system was quite impossible
in America, and no doubt would be im-
possible anywhere else in the world, in-
cluding Britain. Yet all the signs now
point to the absolute necessity of Britain
becoming a military nation, a nation in
arms, until Germany is defeated. After
that Britain will be no more forced to
continue compulsory service than the
United States was forced to re-enact its
“Conscription Law.” Since the Civil War
there has been no more “Conscription” in
the United States.
Mr. Ellis Barker does not deal specific-
ally with Australia. But Australia has a
proper modification of the American law,
a fairer form of it, as a permanent part of
the Australian Federal Constitution. This
law needs only extension to permit of all
able-bodied Australians being sent to de-
fend their country by fighting in Europe
or wherever else that defence can best be
conducted. For such an extension the
Universal Service League is asking, so
that a fairly and regularly chosen number
of Australians, not the whole lot but only
a just proportion, may be sent, as re-
quired, to help destroy German militarism
and save Australia. Surely all Australian
men will join the League in asking the
Australian Parliament to extend the Aus-
tralian law of compulsory military service,
so that they may all perform their duty of
defending Australia according as their
age, their family responsibilities, and other
necessaries of the case will permit. The
League asks really that everyone shall
volunteer and then wait till the Govern-
ment calls for him under Act of Parlia-
ment,
The Worker Print, St. Andrew’s Place, Sydney
