

fern P<^n
9 |u-
MR. LANSING’S ADDRESS TO AMERICAN SOLDIERS.
HISTORICAL DELIVERANCE.
The following address delivered by Mr. Robert Lansing, Secretary
of State, United States of America, before a Reserve Officers’ Training
Corps, in New York, on the 29th July, 1917, should be carefully
considered. It is an honest and eloquent statement of the case against
Germany. As lovers of democracy and citizens of similar countries,
the American and the Australian can use the same spectacles to see
and understand Germany’s sin against mankind.
DONALD MACKINNON,
Director-General of Recruiting.
Victoria Barracks,
Melbourne, 30th November, 1917.
Gentlemen : It is an opportunity which I greatly appreciate to be here
this evening and to say a few words to you about the great enterprise
in which you are to be participants. There are so many things to be
said, so many viewpoints, that it is hard to know how to deal with the
subject in a way that will appeal to the greatest number.
Our Cause is the Cause of Justice, and of Right, and of Humanity.
First, we must all realize that we are living in the most momentous
time in all history, in a time when the lives and destinies of nations are
in the balance, when even the civilization, which has taken centuries to
build, may crumble before the terrible storm which is sweeping over
Europe. We are not only living in this critical period, but we, as a
nation have become a participant in the struggle. Having cast our lot
on the side of the Powers allied against the Imperial German Govern-
ment, we will put behind our decision the full power and the resources
of the Republic. We intend to win in this mighty conflict, and we
will win because our cause is the cause of justice and of right and
of humanity.
What the Outcome of this War means to Mankind.
I wonder how many of us comprehend what the outcome of this
war means to mankind, or, to bring it nearer to each one of us, what
it means to our country. I sometimes think that there prevail very
erroneous impressions as to the reasons why we entered the war, not-
the immediate reasons, but the deep underlying reasons which affect
the life and future of the United States and of all other liberty-loving
nations throughout the world.
0.16597.


Of course the immediate cause of our war against Germany was
the announced purpose of the German Government to break its promises
as to indiscriminate submarine warfare and the subsequent renewal
of that ruthless method of destruction with increased vigour and
brutality.
While this cause was in itself sufficient to force us to enter the war
if we would preserve our self-respect, the German Government’s
deliberate breach of faith and its utter disregard of right and life had
a far deeper meaning, a meaning which had been growing more evident
as the war had progressed, and which needed but this act of perfidy to
bring it home to all thinking Americans.
The Evil Character of the German Government is laid bare before
the World.
We know now that that Government is inspired with ambitions
which menace human liberty, and that to gain its end it does not
hesitate to break faith, to violate the most sacred rights, or
to perpetrate intolerable acts of inhumanity.
Submarine Campaign.
It needed but the words reported to have been uttered by the German
Chancellor to complete the picture of the character of his Government
when he announced that the only reason why the intensified submarine
campaign was delayed until February last was that sufficient submarines
could not be built before that time to make the attacks on commerce
effective. Do you realize that this means, if it means anything, that
the promises to refrain from brutal submarine warfare which Germany
had made to the United States were never intended to be kept, that they
were only made in order to gain time in which to build more submarines,
and that when the time came to act the German promises were
unhesitatingly torn to pieces like other “ scraps of paper ” ?
It is this disclosure of the character of the Imperial German
Government which is the underlying cause of our entry into the war.
Absorbing Ambition of the German Empire for World Dominion.
We had doubted, or at least many Americans had doubted, the evil
purposes of the rulers of Germany. Doubt remained no longer. In
the light of events we could read the past and see that for a quarter
of a century the absorbing ambition of the military oligarchy which
was the master of the German Empire was for world dominion. Every
agency in the fields of commerce, industry, science, and diplomacy had
been directed by the German Government to this supreme end.
Philosophers and preachers taught that the destiny of Germany was to
rule the world, thus preparing the mind of the German people for the
time when the mighty engine which the German Government had
constructed should crush all opposition and the German Emperor
should rule supreme.
For nearly three years we have watched the conduct of the Imperial
Government, and we have learned more and more of the character


of that Government and of its aims. We came very slowly to a realizing'
sense that not only was the freedom of the European nations at stake,
but that liberty throughout the world was threatened by the powerful
autocracy which was seeking to gratify its vast ambition.
American People’s Decision for National Safety.
Not impulsively, but with deliberation, the American people reached
the only decision which was possible from the standpoint of their own
national safety. Congress declared that a state of war existed between
the United States and the Imperial Government of Germany, and this
country united with the other Liberal nations of the earth to crush the
Power which sought to erect on the ruins of democracy a world Empire
greater than that of Greece or Rome or the Caliphs.
The President has said, with the wonderful ability which he has
to express aptly a great thought in a single phrase, that “ the world
must be made safe for democracy.” In that thought there is more than
the establishment of liberty and self-government for all nations, there
is in it the hope of an enduring peace.
German Autocracy.
I do not know in the annals of history an instance where a people
with truly democratic institutions permitted their Government to wage
a war of aggression, a war of conquest. Faithful to their treaties,
sympathetic with others seeking self-development, real democracies,
whether monarchical or republican in their forms of government, desire
peace with their neighbours and with all mankind.
Were every people on earth able to express their will there would
be no wars of aggression, and if there were no wars of aggression then
there would be no wars, and lasting peace would come to this earth.
The only way that a people can express their will is through democratic
institutions. Therefore, when the world is made safe for democracy,
when that great principle prevails, universal peace will be an accom-
plished fact.
No nation or people will benefit more than the United States when
that time comes. But it has not yet come. A great people,
ruled in thought and word, as well as in deed, by the most sinister
Government of modern times, is straining every nerve to supplant
democracy by the autocracy which they have been taught to worship.
When will the German people awaken to the truth? When will they
arise in their might and cast off the yoke and become their own masters?
I fear that it will not be until the physical might of the united demo-
cracies of the world has destroyed for ever the evil ambitions of the
military rulers of Germany, and liberty triumphs over its arch-enemy.
And yet in spite of these truths which have been brought to light
in these last three years, I wonder how many Americans feel that our
democracy is in peril, that our liberty needs protection, that the United
States is in real danger from the malignant forces which are seeking
to impose their will upon the world, as they have upon Germany and
her deceived Allies.


If Germany were Victor in Europe.
Let us understand once for all that this is no war. to establish an
abstract principle of right. It is a war in which the future of the
United States is at stake. If any among you have the idea that we are
fighting others’ battles and not our own, the sooner he gets away from
that idea the better it will be for him, the better it will be for all of us.
Imagine Germany victor in Europe because the United States
remained neutral. Who, then, think you, would be the next victim
of those who are seeking to be masters of the whole earth? Would
not this country, with its enormous wealth, arouse the cupidity of
an impoverished, though triumphant, Germany? Would not this
democracy be the only obstacle between the autocratic rulers of Germany
and their supreme ambition? Do you think that they would withhold
their hand from so rich a prize?
Let me then ask you, would it be easier or wiser for this country
single-handed to resist a German Empire, flushed with victory and with
great armies and navies at its command, than to unite with the brave
enemies of that Empire in ending now and for all time this menace to
our future?
Primarily, then, every man who crosses the ocean to fight on foreign
soil against the armies of the German Emperor goes forth to fight for
his country and for the preservation of those things for which our
forefathers were willing to die. To those who thus offer themselves we
owe the same debt that we owe to those men who in the past fought on
American soil in the cause of liberty. No, not the same debt, but a
greater one. It calls for more patriotism, more self-denial, and a truer
vision to wage war on distant shores than to repel an invader or defend
one’s home. I therefore congratulate you, young men, in your choice
of service. You have done a splendid thing. You have earned
already the gratitude of your countrymen and of generations of
Americans to come. Your battle flags will become the cherished
trophies of a nation which will never forget those who bore them in
the cause of liberty.
Germany would attack us, if she won this War.
I know that some among you may consider the idea that
Germany would attack us, if she won this war, to be improbable; but
let him who doubts remember that the improbable, yes, the impossible,
has been happening in this war from the beginning. If you had been
told prior to August, 1914, that the German Government would disregard
its solemn treaties and send its armies into Belgium, would wantonly
burn Louvain, would murder defenceless people, would extort ransoms
from conquered cities, would carry away men and women into slavery,
would, like Vandals of old, destroy some of history’s most cherished
monuments, and would with malicious purpose lay waste the fairest
fields of France and Belgium, you would have indignantly denied the
possibility. You would have exclaimed that Germans, lovers of art
and learning, would never permit such foul deeds. To-day you know
that the unbelievable has happened, that all these crimes
have been committed, not under the impulse of passion, but under
official orders.


Germany’s Inhumanity.
Again, if you had been told before the war that German submarine
commanders would sink peaceful vessels of commerce and send to sudden
death men, women, and little children, you would have declared such
scientific brutality to be impossible. Or if you had been told that
German aviators would fly over thickly populated cities, scattering-
missiles of death and destruction, with no other purpose than to terrorize
the innocent inhabitants, you would have denounced the very thought
as unworthy of belief and as a calumny upon German honour. Yet,
God help us, these things have come to pass, and iron crosses have
rewarded the perpetrators.
German Bribery, Spies, and Conspirators.
But there is more, far more, which might be added to this record
of unbelievable things which the German Government has done. I only
need to mention the attempt of the Foreign Office at Berlin to bribe
Mexico to make war upon us by promising her American territory.
It was only one of many intrigues which the German Government
was carrying on in many lands. Spies and conspirators were sent
throughout the world. Civil discord was encouraged to weaken the
potential strength of nations which might be obstacles to the lust of
Germany’s rulers for world mastery. Those of German blood who owed
allegiance to other countries were appealed to to support the Fatherland,
which beloved name masked the military clique at Berlin.
Some day I hope that the whole tale may be told. It will be an
astounding tale indeed. But enough has been told, so that there no
longer remains the shadow of a doubt as to the character of Germany’s
rulers, of their amazing ambition for world empire, and of their intense
hatred for democracy.
The day has gone by when we can measure possibilities by past
experiences, or when we believe that any physical obstacle is so great
or any moral influence is so potent as to cause the German autocracy
to abandon its mad purpose of world conquest.
It was the policy of those, who plotted and made ready for the
time to accomplish the desire of the German rulers, to lull into false
security the great nations which they intended to subdue, so that when
the storm broke they would be unprepared. How well they succeeded
you know.
Democracy no longer Sleeps.
But democracy no longer sleeps. It is fully awake to the
menace which threatens it. The American people, trustful and friendly,
were reluctant to believe that Imperialism again threatened the peace
and liberty of the world. Conviction came to them at last, and with it
prompt action. The American nation arrayed itself with the other
great democracies of the earth against the genius of evil which broods
over the destinies of Central Europe.
American Manhood risks all for the Right.
Ho thought of material gain and no thought of material loss impelled
this action. Inspired by the highest motives, American manhood


prepared to risk all for the right. lam proud of my country. lam
proud of my countrymen. lam proud of our national character. With
lofty purpose, with patriotic fervour, with intense earnestness, the
American democracy has drawn the sword, which it will not sheathe
until the baneful forces of absolutism go down defeated and broken.
Who can longer doubt —and there have been many who have doubted
in these critical days—the power of that eternal spirit of freedom which
lives in every true American heart?
Independence and liberty.
My friends, I am firmly convinced that the independence of no
nation is safe, that the liberty of no individual is sure, until the
military despotism which holds the German people in the hollow of its
hand has been made impotent and harmless for ever. Appeals to
justice, to moral obligation, to honour, no longer avail with such a
Power, There is but one way to restore peace to the world, and that is
by overcoming the physical might of German Imperialism by force
of arms.
Unprincipled Autocracy to be Defeated.
For its own safety as well as for the cause of human liberty this
great republic is marshalling its armies and preparing with all its
vigour to aid in ridding Germany, as well as the world, of the most
ambitious and most unprincipled autocracy which has arisen to stay
the wheels of progress and imperil Christian civilization.
It is to this great cause you, who are present here to-night, like
thousands of other loyal Americans, have dedicated yourselves. Upon
each one of you much depends. You are going forth into foreign
lands, not only as guardians of the flag of your country and of the
liberties of your countrymen, but as guardians of the national honour
of the United States. American character will be judged by your
conduct; American spirit by your deeds. As you maintain yourselves
courageously and honorably, so will you bring glory to the flag which
we all love as the emblem of our national unity and independence.
I know that it is unnecessary to emphasize the responsibilities
which will rest upon you as you lead the men under your command.
To their officers they will look for guidance and example, not only in
the battle line, but in the camp and on the march. Your responsibili-
ties are great. As you meet them so will your services be measured by
your country.
It is in the toil and danger of so great an adventure as you are soon
to experience that a man’s true character will become manifest. He
will be brought face to face with the realities. The little things which
once engrossed his thought and called forth his energies will be forgotten
in the stern events of his new life. The sternness of it all will not
deprive him of the satisfaction which comes from doing his best. As he
found gratification and joy in the peaceful pursuits of the old life, so
will he find a deeper gratification and greater joy in serving his country
loyally and doing his part in moulding the future aright.


Righteousness of our Cause.
And, when your task is completed, when the grim days of battle
are over and you return once more to the quiet life of your profession
or occupation, which you have so generously abandoned at your country’s
call, you will find in the gratitude of your, countrymen an ample reward
for the great sacrifice which you have made.
If enthusiasm and ardour can make success sure, then we Americans
have no cause for anxiety, no reason to doubt the'outcome of the conflict.
But enthusiasm and ardour are not all. They must be founded on a
profound conviction of the righteousness of our cause and on an implicit
faith that the God of Battles will strengthen the arm of him who fights
for the right. In the time of stress and peril, when a man stands face
to face with death in its most terrible forms, God will not desert him
who puts his trust in Him. It is at such a time that the eternal verities
will be disclosed. It is then, when you realize that existence is more
than this life and that over our destinies watches an all-powerful and
compassionate God, you will stand amidst the storm of battle unflinching
and unafraid.
Soldier of the Republic.
There is no higher praise that can be bestowed upon a soldier of
the Republic than to say that he served his country faithfully and
trusted in his God. Such I earnestly hope will be the praise to which
each one of you will be entitled when peace returns to this suffering
earth, and mankind rejoices that the world is made safe for democracy.
By Authority: Albert J. Mullbtt, Government Printer, Melbourne,


