

'2~t -v« ni
Mr, R. B, SMITH'S ADDR
There is another matter on which I must speak with no un-
certain sound. Although unwilling to incur the risk of disturbing
our fiscal policy in dealing with the trade of the world, so far as
it affects our ports. lam determined to protect our agriculturists
so far as I possibly can, from their present partial and demon-
strably unjust intercolonial fiscal relations. This is no new theory
of mine. On the 30th of October, 1883, in supporting a motion
of the Hon. Member for the Hastings and Manning (Mr. Young),
I made the following amongst many other remarks :
“ issue before the House is narrowed down to this
namely, that either the other colonies should remove the duties
imposed on agricultural produce, or else that this colony should
impose duties so as to compel the other colonies to remove those
duties. That is the meaning of the resolutions, although my honor-
able friend does not expressly go so far as that, heseeks to induce our
Government to confer with the Governments of the other colonies
before such an extreme step is taken. I sincerely hope that the
resolutions may be carried. I tliink it is unfair and ungenerous
that a burden should be placed upon the farmers— that class
which is the bone and sinew of the colony, which has to bear all
kinds of privations and vicissitudes of climate, and is hampered'
by innumerable difficulties over which they have no control/ 7 I
said much more to the same effect on that occasion, and have
always held that there should be intercolonial free-trade, or its
correlative, the imposition of duties on the imports of agricultural
products from the neighbouring colonies. Previously, in 1872 J
ennunciated similar opinions, and now do so again in the strong
hope of being able, with the assistance of others, to give them
full legislative effect. I went further even than that. On a
subsequent date I presented a petition from the New South
Wales Farmers’ Union, in which the action of the Victorian
Government in doubling the port duties was emphatically con-
demned, as injuriously affecting the prospects and prosperity of
Australian agriculturalists, and in which the forming of a recipro-
city treaty between the several colonies of Australasia, and
the establishment of a system of intercolonial free-trade was
prayed for. In the event of any colony of the group
refusing to enter into such treaty, the petition prayed the Govern-
ment to impose a duty on all agricultural products imported into
this colony f, from any colony which refused to join in any such
system of intercolonial free trade. I could hardly have made my
opinion clearer than in the remarks I made in urging the prayer
of that petition, which was signed by over five hundred influential
persons at a Conference of delegates from the Farmers’ Union,
held at Bathurst a few days previously. I have not changed or
modified my opinions on this important subject since, but promise
to give them the fullest possible effect when Parliament meets, if
I should have the honour of representing you in the legislative
Assembly. In addition to this absolute conclusion, I beg to state
that I am in favour of maintaining the ad valorem duties (for re venue
purposes) as they at present exist. I will also advocate the Im-
position of a tax on all foreign timbers brought to our
ports. On all other items of a Liberal programme and good
administration of public affairs you may absolutely rely on my
devotedness to your interests—my sincere desire to promote the
progress of the whole district without regard to the peculiar modes
of thought which certain opponents manifest towards me. I ask
you to elect me on the principles I now announce, and which I
have conscientiously held for years.
Of course, while attending to the general legislation of the
country, and supporting the course of good and economical
Government, I shall not neglect or overlook your local affairs
particularly those of paramount importance. The Breakwater at
Trial Bay should be finished with as littte delay as possible •
also the formation of the south-west channel, a work indispensable
to promote the easy and certain navigation of the river. Add the
importance of the entrances of the Bellinger and Nanbucca rivers
the erection of the Jetty at Goff’s Harbour, as well as the
construction of a high-level bridge to connect the Kempseys.
No panic caused by the deficit should stay your agitation for
these important works. A bridge over the Belmore river is also
needed, as is also is the opening of several roads in the electorate.
The question of niigation and wate-rsupply is one you must
consider simultaneously with other districts of the colony, and not
be late in making your fair demands known in Parliament and
from public platforms. Your prompt action in making those
demands will strengthen my position in the House, assuming 1
retain your confidence, which I have had for 17 years, and which
I have never abused. I shall dilate on the several points, just
referred to, when I address you, as I shall have pleasure of doing
at every centre of population in the Electorate before the day of
nomination. I have not forgotten my previous efforts to obtain
for you and the neighbouring districts, the construction of the
North Coast railway. Ido not intend to let any efforts in this
direction be paralyzed by the debt of the colony.
And, nov, it only remains for me to appeal to your confi-
dence in the past as a guarantee of my fidelity in the future. In
fact, that confidence should be more strongly expressed at the
present crisis than it has been heretofore, if only to enable me to
effect certain reforms to which I am pledged in the general affairs
of the colony, but also to win for yon, as expeditiously as I can
those concessions to which you are fairly entitled. The colony
must he taken as a whole, and no district overlooked in respect to
its fair share of the public expenditure; but this latter truism
does not mean that particular districts should be sacrificed even
for a single year, for the benefit of others. The Macleay will kttain
all she is entitled to, if she only remain true to herself and loyal *o
her traditions in the past.
To the Electors of the Macleay,
Gentlemen—
Xn announcing myself as a Candidate to again represent you
in Parliament, I have a few matters to premise, before occupying
your attention with purely political considerations, which I deem
of great importance at the present time. I informed you (sub-
stantially) in my address of the 22nd March, 1886, that I had
been appointed one of the first Sydney Commissioners of the
Colonial and Indian Exhibition, most successfully held last year
in London. Subsequently 1 was appointed a Commissioner to
act in London. I became convinced that it was my duty to you,
as my constitutents, in the first place, and to the colony generally*
in the second, to accept the position. The development of the
original commission became so large in their proportions, that I
felt convinced that to do any good, in a wide sense of -the term,
I must visit London, and there co-operate with the distinguished
gentlemen, who were appointed to represent the* character and
industrial resources of Australasia as well as of India at that
magnificent display.
Ido not regret the course I then resolved to adopt. Apart
from the high public service with which I was entrusted, several
incidents of an extremely painful character had arisen out of the
General Election, which preceded the one now occupying the
attention of the country. I felt that I was being cruelly per-
secuted by a small faction of my opponents; but on this point I
will dilate when I shall have the pleasure of addressing you
This fact so affected my health, that I felt I wanted temporary
rebcf iiom public and professional duties. That I did not neglect
the best interests of the colony, during my absence, I have
the honour of receiving assurances from the gentlemen who acted *
for me that no neglect of any consequence occurred. I have
further had the pleasure of receiving, since my return, a letter
from the Honorable Joseph Bosisto, C.M.G., M.P., President of
the Commission for Victoria at the London Exhibition who
writes as follows :
Melbourne, 31st January, 1887.
My Dear Sir,
1 notice in the papers that a dissolution of your Assembly
lias just taken pla.ee. I hope absence of yourself from your
constituents, during the past nine months, arising frorti the duties
as Commissioner for New South Wales in London, will in no way
interfere with your being returned once more to Parliament
by them. I am quite sure of this, that if your electors of
the _ Macleay should become fully aware, before the day of
polling, of the onerous work you, with two or three of
your brother-commissioners undertook and carried through so
successfully on behalf of N.S.W. at the Exhibition, and through-
out England, you will receive from them a triumphant return.
At several of the cities, towns, and factories of England, I had
the pleasure of hearing your stirring speeches on behalf of your
colony ; and Australia in general, I do sincerely hope that I shall
have the pleasure of hearing shortly that you have been returned
by your old constituents.
I am sincerely yours,
Joseph Bosisto
These are the words—this is the opinion—of a gentleman of dis
languished position and whose veracity is as unequivocal as his
honor is refined. But his remarks do not adequately convey the
result of my visit to the British Isles. A few words will explain
this point. r
I visited, during my sojourn in the parent countries, all their
most important Breakwaters and Harbour-works, and collected
many important facts. I did not confine my inspection to the
Uni tea Kingdom, but extended it to great national works of the
kind m continental Europe, Egypt, and Ceylon. The in-
formation thus collected will be very beneficial to you in
the immediate future, more particularly the mode of dredmne-t
in vers BY HAND LABOUR adopted by Holland, and North
and South Germany, by means of which obstructions are
cleverly and inexpensively removed. This system could be
most effectively applied to the upper parts of the Bellem
ger and the Nambucca Rivers, and also to the tributary creeks in
the Electorate. This theory of hand-labour—fully realised prac-
tically in the countries before mentioned—will do away with the
necessity of having recourse to costly dredges, which could not
he easily obtained even before the country was overshadowed by
the huge deficit of the preceding Governments. I had several -«-
interviews with Sir John Goode, the eminent engineer. I need
only mention that lie received me with great cordiality, and pro- '
mised to give the subjects I brought under his notice his best
consideration, as soon as he receives the latest reports Whv
those documents had not reached him before the day of my de-
parture from London, when I again had an interview with him
have been unable to ascertain - but I am determined that no
delay shall occur in eliciting the information and fixino the re-
«r»nr>sn m nf.xr onrl Troo-lnnl i i &
sponsibility and neglect on somebody.
• m y g political principles, you are so well acqu-
ainted with them, that I need hardly review them at any length
You know how fearlessly I fought the battle of the free-selector
when the present Land Act was under discussion. I never lost
an opportunity of supporting those amendments, which I deemed
well calculated to promote settlement on the lands of the colony
and benefit the Free-Selector in every way possible. That Act
still requires amendment in several particulars; and I will
elected, co-operate with others in the alienation of the public
lands under fairer and more equitable conditions.
I am, Gentlemen,
Yours faithfully,
R. BURDETT-SMITH.
Sydney, sth February , ISB7.
