

Extracts from the “ Prahran Telegraph January 12, and. June 1, 1895,
and June 30th, 1900.
A PROMINENT LOCAL MAN.
Mr. Sizar Elliott, J.P
Iprabian:
OSMENT AND SONS, PRINTERS, ‘ TELEGRAPH " OFFICE, CHAPEL STREET.
19 0 0.




Extracts from the “ Prahran Telegraph,” January 12, and June 1, 1895,
and June 30th, 1900.
A PROMINENT LOCAL MAN.
Mr. Sizar Elliott, J.P
OSMENT AND SONS, PRINTERS, “TELEGRAPH” OEFICK, CHAPEL STREET.




MR. SIZAR ELIjIOTT, J.P.
On his 80th Birthday .




MR. SIZAR ELLIOTT, J.P
Our gallery of portraits to-day contains tlie likeness of Mr. Sizar
Elliott, J.P., of Prahran, a gentleman who has had the good
fortune to pass over fourscore years of life and to be still in the pos-
session of robust health —being, in fact, the living personification of
long-ev ity and upright- ness in the double sense of those terms. Our
engraving, which is life-like, is from a portrait taken on Mr. Elliott’s
80th birthday. A more than usually lengthy and interesting sketch
of that gentleman’s career is given, forming quite a chapter in
Australian history and its industrial development. Mr. Elliott was
an early colonist of Tasmania and New South \Vales, was the first to
introduce colonial wine and preserved meats to the market, and was
one of the very earliest gold diggers. He has been identified with
Melbourne since 1852, he practically founded the Melbourne baths,, and
has the honor of being the initiator of the Hospital Sunday movement
by which means over £170,000 has been raised during the past 21
years in aid of the various charities of Melbourne, There is so
much of local colour in the biography of our subject that we only
regret having to condense our sketch into the limits of two columns
—an ordeal which has proved a perplexing one to our biographist in
view of the many eventful occurrences in the life of our popular
octogenarian citizen.
One of the most interesting tasks of a journalist’s career is to
measure history by the span of a man’s life—-to reach back through
the personal biography of a living person to periods of history which
now appear remote and dim. It is such a task which falls to us now.
The gentleman of whose career we are about to give a short sketch
came to Australia when New Zealand was uncivilized and Victoria
was not. He was in Tasmania when Eawkner’s historic expedition
to Port Phillip Bay started ; he was a colonist of New South \\ ales
in convict days ; he witnessed the discovery of gold ; and was in
Victoria throughout the great gold fever. Moreover he was the
pioneer in opening the wine-producing and meat preserving industries,
and finally initiated the Hospital Sunday movement. Lives such as
that of Mr. Sizar Elliott are crammed with interesting facts which
to the future historian will be invaluable.


On the 13th May next Mr. Sizar Elliott will be 81 years of age.
His tall, athletic, well-preserved figure is well-known in Prahran and
on the police court bench. He is hale and hearty, his laugh is
explosively and contagiously hearty ; he reads without spectacles
and proves himself on the bowling green more than a match for the
young “ boys ” of sixty, in proof whereof he has carried off two
prize medals. Yet he has almost touched both ends of the nine-
teenth century. Born in 1814, nearly six years before the death of
George 111., he has witnessed the reigns of George IV., William
IV., and Victoria on the English throne. The year which ushered
him into the world saw the first abdication and exile of the great
Napoleon, the publication of the first edition of Walter Scott’s
Waverley, and the trial trip of Geordie Stephenson’s first railway
engine.
Mr. Elliott was a native of Essex, England, but was taken at four
years of age to St. John’s, New Brunswick, now Canada. He arrived
at Sydney on the 2/th March, 1835, in the ship Oriental, which
likewise carried the Right Rev. Hr. Folding, the first Catholic
Bishop of that colony, and a number of priests. The memory of a
very pleasant voyage spent in company with the bishop was recently
revived on Mr. Elliott’s part by an autograph letter received by him
from Cardinal Moran, of New South Wales, thanking him warmly
for some interesting facts regarding the prelate which will be incor-
porated in the Cardinal’s forthcoming history of the church in
Australia.
Van Dieman’s Land (now Tasmania) was reached in August of
the same year, and there Mr. Elliott married and settled down for
the time. He was there when Fawkner left on his expedition to
Port Phillip and helped to put some of the goods on board the little
schooner. About this time Mr. Elliott tells a good joke about
Falkner. A ship had arrived at Hobart with a full load of convict
women, a gentleman from Launceston was on his way to Hobart,
when Mr. Falkner gave him a concession to get out of the ship the
plainest woman he couid find among them, as he wanted a wife.
The duty was fulfilled, and the lady brought over was the plainest of
her kind, face deeply pock marked and one eye disfigured. Mr.
Elliott had occasion to see her when calling upon P’alkner, and
being a young man, he says he got such a shock which he did not
easily get over. Subsequently Mr. Elliott removed to Sydney where he
entered into business as a storekeeper. The curse of convictism was


then on the land ; the people were lethargic, and with scanty population
and slow and irregular communication with the old world there was
not much scope for enterprise. But the subject of our sketch had
plenty of English grit in him. His first attempt at introducing a
new industry was in 184-4. After Waterloo many officers »f tlie
English Army received land grants in the colonies and their
Peninsular experience taught them that Australia was a suitable
country for wine growing. Vines were plante I, wine was made, and
finally Mr. Elliott was successful in placing on the market the very
first Australian wine. From 1844 New South W ales uas wallowing
in the mire of depression ; there was a terrible drought, there was no
grass, and sheep were dying by the thousand. As a consequence
their value fell from 30s. to Is. per head ; the squatters weie being
ruined, and the banks failed. And then, just as we are doing on a
larger scale 50 years after, men began to tifrn their mind to develop-
ing other resources. Mr. Elliott came forward to show the way by
preparing lamb skins for export to China, where they could le
utilized for Tartar hats, and the lining of Chinese clothing. A
very beautiful article they are,” said the Sydney Morning Herald of
the 30th September, 1845, “the short, fine downy wool of the young
lamb is set fast and the skin itself is as white and soft as a French
kid.” And it prefaces these remarks with the complimentary
observation that “Mr. Sizar Elliott is really deserving of great
praise for the manner in which, while carrying on his own business,
he endeavours to assist in the development of the resources of the
colony.”
With sheep selling at a shilling a head it was not long before
someone discovered that it would pay to boil them down for their
fat, which realised ss. per head. Mr. Elliott thereupon reasoned
that it might be possible to likewise utilize the lean. 4he slaps
which called at Port Jackson were principally whalers, rnen-of-war,
and ships of exploration, all of which had to keep themselves
supplied with preserved meats. Why should not Australian meat
purchased ? Mutton in England cost eight-pence per lb.—in
Sydney one farthing. Here then was a good margin upon which to
WO rk, and Mr. Elliott’s first attempts were entirely successful. At
the Sydney Exhibition in 184 G he was awarded second prize tor
preserved meats, fish and vegetables, the exhibit eliciting favorable
notes from the press, especially in view of the fact that the preserves
had been put up 22 days previously. He followed this up by the


introduction of preserved soups and boulli for shipping purposes, and
seven masters of ships lying in the harbour certified that haring
opened an I tried tins of his beef and vegetable, mutton and
vegetable, lamb and green peas, and ox tail soup, they found them
equal to any article of the kind which had come under their notice
and recommended them to shipping masters. A tin of beef suet was
also opened and found to be fresh and sweet. At the exhibition in
the following year (1847) Mr. Elliott carried off the first medal for
his exhibits, Mr. Charles Cowper, M.C., of the West Cumberland
Agricultural Society, remarking regarding these that “the judges
had given a most favorable opinion, and a very old voyager and one
who h id considerable experience in testing the quality of the article
pronounced it most excellent.” The masters of another cluster of
ships in the harbour likewise added their testimony. Twenty years
afterwards one of these tins was opened at the Melbourne Exhibition
of 18G7 when the jurors reported—“ The question of preserving
fresh meat cannot be correctly termed a new industry in these
colonies for as early as 184(5 prizes were awarded in Sydney to an
enterprising colonist. Ihe jurors had an opportunity of opening a
tin of preserved meat manufactured by this gentleman in 1846 and
were highly gratified to be able to testify to its perfect sweetness and
freshness after 20 years’ quietude, and the jurors think it is only just
to this gentleman, the pioneer of this art in the colonies, to mention
his name —Mr. Sizar Elliott, now of Melbourne.”
Among other industries to which he devoted attention as articles
of possible trade were the export of bleached wax from wild honey
comb, and of the indigenous gum arabic for use in the calico printing
trade, and he likewise introduced the Kauri gum from New Zealand
for varnish making, that article being then valueless, but now worth
£IOO or more per ton. As the bricks with which buildings
were constructed with were porous he likewise made a proposal for
glazing them which, however, was not taken up, though vitrified
bricks are common enough now. In 1850 he was elected on a
committee for arranging a Colonial Exhibition. A press article of
this date deploring the prejudice against colonial articles went on to
say that Mr. Elliott had distinguished himself on various occasions
bv leaving the beaten track and marking out new channels for his
enterprise, and cited an instance where he had buoyed up an initial
attempt to manufacture groats until it was a success. “We do not
hesitate to sav.” continued the journal, “that at the forthcoming


exhibition Mr. Elliott is more likely to be round in the van those
who are receiving hundreds and thousands of the public money.”
It was in 1851 that gold was discovered in New South Wales.
For years a shepherd had been in the habit of bringing down small
quantities of the precious metal, but not much notice was taken of
it. By and bye came a ship from California wanting stores and
paying in gold dust from the newly-discovered mines there, and Mr,
Elliott, under contract to the American Consul, supplied it with
stores and large quantities of bottled porter, which had to be
repacked for the Californian market. This visit was interesting, but
when a second and third vessel called on the same errand there was
a rush to New California. Among those who went was Mr. E. H.
Hargreaves, who saw the country, compared it with Australia, and
came back “to find gold.” He found Jt at Bathurst, the Turon
River being next exploited, and thither Mr. Elliott with a party,
taking a dray, two horses, and provisions, went in June, 1851.
They got gold and adventure. Once in a sudden rise of the river
trying to save his cradle and gold he was swept away and nearly lost
his life. He returned on foot over the Blue Mountains, doing 40
miles a day, wearing a belt of gold round his waist, in terribly hot
weather, with water at ten mile stages only. Altogether he made
three trips to the Turon River.
Simultaneously gold was discovered in Victoria, and the rush
which had flowed to the Blue Mountains ebbed and set towards
Australia Felix. Thither in 1852 Mr. Elliott went, taking a
quantity or merchandise in a schooner. The young city was
intensely overcrowded, the excitement great, the distress consider-
able. On the night of his arrival he put up at the Bull and Mouth
Hotel, in Bourke-street, but at midnight was roughly refused
accommodation, as beds, sofas, tables, and floors were all full.
Being a cold night he failed to find shelter, and applied to be allowed
to sit by the watch-house fire. This was refused unless he consented
to be locked up, but he subsequently found shelter for the remainder
of the night.
His first step was to lease a piece of land at the corner of Bourke
and Russel streets, where White’s boot shop now stands, from a
Mrs. Hordern, of Sydney, for 15s. a week, and built a wooden store
at a cost of £l3O, where he retailed miner’s stores and did a
prosperous business. The lady at the end of 12 months refused to


renew his lease at the expiry and he let his building for the
remainder of the term at £ls per week and ultimately sold the
house for £GO. Meanwhile he leased the opposite corner from Mr.
James Graham at £6OO a year for 21 years under agreement to
erect two two-storied brick buildings, and temporarily erected a
wooden house, minus a chimney—as bricks were so dear—at a cost
of £915, which five years later he sold for only £SO. Bringing
Mrs. Elliott over he commenced to import largely from Sydney, and
in 1854 obtained a large Government contract for tent and sail
making, of which he knew nothing in particular. The engagement
of a number of sailmakers and sometimes of runaway sailors, to
whom he paid the rate of threepence per inch of about four stitches,
enabled him to successfully carry out a profitable contract, the
Government paying him handsome compensation when they
despatched the Soldiers to put down the Eureka riots in such a
hurry that they were compelled to purchase, tents at Ballarat.
That year also as W.M. of the Lodge of Hiram he assisted at the
laying of the foundation stone of the Melbourne gas works by
Mr. John Thomas Smith, the mayor of the city. In 1855 he was
elected a director of the company and was present when the
Governor, Sir Charles Hotham, lit the first fires, and, tiie day being
very wet, that gentleman caught a cold from which lie subsequently
died. Gas was first turned on to the city on New Year’s Day,
1856, and Mr. Elliott subsequently suggested the use of Australian
coal instead of that imported from England, and being opposed by
the engineer (Mr. A. K. Smith) he made a trip to Sydney and
successfully demonstrated by the experience of the local company
that colonial coal was in every respect suitable for the purpose. In
time the directors broke down the prejudice of the engineer against
New South Wales coal, the result being a great lowering of the
citizens’ gas bills ; and yet, strange to say, the engineer stated at a
large meeting of shareholders 14 years after that “ the success of the
company was due to his introduction of colonial coal.”
Though an energetic business man ho had time to apply to other
pursuits, arid having made a magnificent conchological collection,
valued at £2OO, presented it to the Philosophical Society, of which
he and his son were elected life members, and before which lie read
papers on various questions, and was appointed in 1857 a member of
the committee to arrange for the exploration of Central Australia


under Burke and Landells. Just now when an endeavour is being
made to establish a market in India for Australian butter, it may be
noted that the camel drivers of the expedition refused to eat butter,
and Mr. Elliott was successful in making ghee sufficient for their
wants. He acted until the finish of the labors of that committee
and was among those who were present to receive the last remains of
the unfortunate travellers, Burke and Wills.
He had by this time embarked in the ironmongery business. In
1857 he was elected an assessor in the city for the Latrobe Ward
and the next year a councillor of that ward. As such he initiated
the erection of improved awnings in place of the canvas ones, which
made Melbourne look like a city of rags after a high wind, laying on
of street fountains, the establishment of public urinals, and above all
the building of the public baths and wash-houses in Swanston-street
east, a boon to the public, the value of which may be estimated from
the fact that 82,046 people paid for the privilege of washing them-
selves there during the first year. He was appointed the first
chairman of the manging committee. In 185!) he was gazetted to
the commission of the peace, which he has now held for 36 years, on
the nomination of the Mayor of Melbourne, and the same year was
pressed to stand for Parliament for both Ararat and Northcote but
declined. In 1860 he resigned his position as a city councillor. He
finally purchased property at Brighton and settled down to wine
making and kindred hobbies, his wines carrying off several prizes,
one being a silver medal for wine 18 years in bottle.
The whirligig of Time went round, and suffering the loss of most
of bis property Mr. Elliott was elected collector to the Alfred
Hospital, in which capacity he collected about £2,000 during the
first year. In 1873 he laid the foundation of the Hospital Sunday
movement in Australia, his first letter to the management committee
uf the Hospital being dated March 14th, the Melbourne Argus
under date March 21st reporting that “A letter from the collector
was read suggesting that the committee might endeavour to
introduce the custom now being carried on in England of an
Hospital Sunday, which meant that in every church and chapel
collections should be made on behalf of the hospitals. A fortnight
Liter he urged that the iron should be struck while it was hot, and
on the 27th April received the following letter : —“ Sir, I have the
h nor to acknowledge your letter of the 24th inst., and to inform


you that the committee authorise you to take steps for initiating the
Hospital Sunday movement. I have, etc., Julius M. Wilkinson.”
The press reports of the proceedings at once set other institutions in
motion ; but it was in this way that the great movement was
initiated, and Mr. Elliott subsequently received election as a life
governor as a mark of-appreciation. Latterly some question having
arisen regarding its origin Mr. R. L. J. Ellery, as president of the
board of management of the Alfred Hospital, wrote to Mi. Elliott
date of 26th November, 189 J, as follows “ The board fully admit
your claim and consider it should be endorsed by them in some
permanent manner. It appears the board gave you a life oon-
tributorship in virtue of your offices in this direction and they now
agree to issue a new certificate bearing on the face of it that it was
given for your services in first introducing the Hospital Sunday
movement in this colony. The resolution passed to this effect will
appear in the minutes. I hope this course will be satisfactory to you
and that you will live many years as a monument of what straight
energy will accomplish in the way of public good to a community.”
So many charities have benefited by this great movement by which
£150,000 has been raised, that it is surprising they have not paid
the author of it some public compliment, especially as Mr. Elliott
was considerably out of pocket by its initiation. The Melbourne
Hospital might certainly set this good example..
We must not omit to mention that owing to his warm interest in
the dairying world he was awarded in. 1853, by the Port Phillip
Farmers’ Society, three medals for dairy utensils.
For some years past Mr. Elliott has lived quietly in retirement,
attending with great regularity the police court, the bowling green,
and other resorts where duty or pleasure calls him. He has a long,
useful, prosperous career to look back upon and is therewith content,
and our sincere wish is that he may still long be spared to enjoy the
fruits of a life well spent—a green old age.


Extract from the “ Prahran Telegraph ,” June 1, 18‘95.
In pursuance of a resolution passed at the Prahran Council at its
meeting held on the 13th inst., Mr. John Hinde, the Town-clerk,
forwarded the following graceful letter to Mr. Sizar Elliott, J.P. .
[Copy.]
Town-hall, Prahran, May 16, 1895.
Sizar Elliott, Esq., J.P., Porter-street, Prahran,
Dear Sir,—The City Council of Prahran at its meeting on
Monday last, the 13th inst., instructed me to convey to you its
congratulations on your attainment of the 81st anniversary of
your birthday.
The Council wishes you a continuation of health and strength,
and trust that a life which has been spent so usefully and honorably,
may long be spared to the community.
1 am, dear Sir,
Your obedient servant,
John Hinde, Town Clerk.
At the meeting of the Council held last Monday the following
is a copy of the' letter read, which was received in reply to the
congratulations of the Council ;
[Copy.]
20 Porter-street, Prahran,
May 17, 1895.
The Town-clerk of the City of Prahran.
P ear gi r? I have the honour to acknowledge receipt of your
favour of the 16th inst., conveying to me your Council’s congratula-
tions on my completing the 81st year of my age.
[ beg you will express to the Council my deep sense of the
kindness of their expression of good wishes from which I trust
] may infer approval of my conduct as “ a citizen of no mean city,


and as a magistrate sitting on the Prahran Bench for a number
of years.
I may perhaps be permitted on this occasion to say that through
a long and not uneventful life, identified with many of the leading
movements which must help to shape the future of our country,
I have endeavoured to recognise and honourably discharge my
duties as a member of the community, and this reflection affords me
no little satisfaction in my later years.
Trusting that all the interests of our city may continue to
progress under the fostering care of the Council, whose good
wishes I heartily reciprocate,
Believe me, my dear Sir,
Your.' very faithfully,
S. Elliott.
The letter was received with satisfaction by the councillors.


Extract from the Prahran Telegraph," June 30, 1900.
We have been favored by our old friend, Mr. Sizar Elliott, J.P.,
with a perusal of the diaries, containing the history of his life,
They are interesting and highly instructive, and date from January,
1835, up to the present time. Such a methodical reliable record is
indeed an object lesson to the youth of the present days, whose
habits are not always on the side of sustained effort. The advan-
tages of keeping a diary such as this one, must during Mr. Elliott’s
extended life, he is now in his 87th year, have been very great. The
early days of the colony are within pages pictured, and set out
with eloquent precision. The picturesque adventures of Mr. Elliott
in the days when the land was young appear to live, and he must
often on perusal of these notes renew his youth, and his ’scapes by
sea and land. It is a pleasure to think that Mr. Elliott is still hale
and hearty amongst us, and in spite of the weight of his years- as
upright with his six feet odd, as his conduct in fortune and out has
been straight and honorable. It is something, too, to be proud of,
to think that he is still discharging the duties of good citizenship,
and that he still takes his seat with unvarying regularity as a justice
at the Prahran Court. Mr. Elliott has led a very active life, he has
been mentally alert, and his numerous lectures and his scientific
hobbies have afforded him a good share of happiness. Through
Mr. Elliott’s spectacles the world has not been a bad place for the
sojourner for 87 years, and it is’something at the end to find he has
honor and troops of friends. We perused the diary with keen
interest, and we can only hope it will be many days before the last
entry is made. Be that as it may, Mr. Elliott has the record of a
well-spent life that has been full of usefulness to his fellow men, and
the lustre of the close even outshines the glorious promise of his
youth. His services as a Justice of the Peace for 41 years is a
record. To the venerable pioneer we make our salaam !






C>9isM 1
