

ll
Collecti
||[ Rational Library |11






MR. THEODORE F. SEVAN’S
FIFTH EXPEDITION
BRITISH NEW GUINEA.
PRELIMINARY PRESENTATION PAMPHLET (ILLUSTRATED).
(LIMITED TO 100 COPIES.)
,®i) Jlnthoritj):
CHARLES POTTER, GOVERNMENT PRINTER, PHILLIP-STREET.
12a 25—88


*w %jiWr *• **■**
Si£»'« r * • ' AJiWMMiiBBWiMaMMMMBMMiMMM
__
vSBBjBtti's / 1- , :


PREFACE.
Extract from Speech of the Premier of New South Wales (Sir
Henry Parkes, G.C.M.G.) after Mr. Sevan's return from his
fourth Expedition.
“It was clear,” he said, “that more practical results would
follow Mr. Sevan’s expedition than any that had before been
carried out in New Guinea, and it was of great importance that
the knowledge gained should be followed up with further research.”
—(Sydney Daily Telegraph, 14 July, 1887.)
Report on a small Collection of Plants from the Aird River
System, obtained by Mr. Theodore Sevan during his recent
(fourth) Expedition, submitted by Baron von Mueller,
K.C.M.G., M.D., Ph.D., F.R.S., Ac.
I most gladly connect with this beautiful and probably fragrant
plant (Mussaenda Bevani ) the name of the explorer, through whose
bravery and skill the regions of the Aird River system have now
become opened up to civilization and commerce, with the additional
hopeful prospect of ready access to high and likely salubrious main
ranges for mining and rural enterprises. —From Vol. II (Series 2nd)
of the “Proceedings of the Linnean Society of New South Wales,”
27 July, 1887.
Letter from Baron Sir Ferd. von Mueller, President Royal
Geographical Society of Australasia, to Mr. Theodore
Bevan, F.R.G.S., Sec., after the latter's return from his fifth
Expedition (dated Melbourne, 10 February, 1888).
“ I am not altogether sure, dear Mr. Bevan, whether I expressed
my admiration of your heroic conduct in bringing—in the face of so
much peril and almost superhuman toil of yourself and your brave
little band—your telling enterprise to so successful and safe a
conclusion.”
“ The best reward is its accomplishment, and that will ever
remain an historic fact!”


Exj racts condensed from letter of the Vice-President of Royal
Geographical Society of Australasia (Sir Edward Strickland,
K.C.8., &c.) to the Government of New South Wales, dated
Sydney, 7 January, 1888.
“ I may be permitted to remind you that the work of that dashing
and successful explorer —Air. Bevan- —is of high importance not
only to the science of geography, but also to commerce.”
“ Mr. Bevan has largely contributed to the unfolding of the
hidden secrets of New Guinea to an extent "which never has been
equalled.”
“ Working with the slenderest means, he has boldly pursued his
discoveries far into the interior of the country, navigating most
tortuous and difficult rivers, with the result that he has unfolded
to the world a system of waterways of inestimable value —equal in
grandeur and practical utility to anything similar known in other
countries for purposes of commerce.”
“ His work too has been characterized b} r a conspicuous regard
for humanity. He has throughout never injured a native nor lost
one of his own men.”
“ Air. Bevan deserves to be received with distinguished
honor; and well rewarded for his rich contributions to the pros-
pective wealth of the State by his marvellous and all-important
discoveries!”
Sydney Chamber of Commerce.
Ax the quarterly meeting of members, held at the Chamber of
Commerce on Monday, 19th March, 1888, the Chairman (Hon.
S. A. Joseph, M.L.C.) stated:—
With reference to the discoveries made in New Guinea by Air.
Bevan, he hoped that gentleman -would be able to obtain from the
British Government some sort of concession by which he would be
enabled to initiate a large commercial company for the purpose of
promoting commerce with that new country. There was no doubt


that the country contained a large number of products, such as
timber, bark, gutta-percha, sago, hemp, tobacco, resins, beeswax,
and spices, to develop a trade in which it only required a certain
amount of perseverance and a sufficient amount of capital. He
thought that it would be possible, by creating a trade with New
Guinea, for the Government to obtain a revenue which might be
applied to the reduction of the cost of government of those
islands. — Sydney Morning Herald, March 20, 1888.
Sydney Chamber of Commerce.
The Chairman stated :
With reference to the Neiv Guinea exploration question, it was
known that subscriptions towards the carrying out of Mr. Bevan’s
exploration had been raised by the Chambers of Commerce in
Sydney and Townsville, and the result of Mr. Bevan s latest trip
had been eminently satisfactory. The New South Wales Govern-
ment had also assisted by the loan of a steam launch; whilst the
Queensland Government had sent one of their own surveyors to
accompany the party. The result had been that all the previous
surveys had been confirmed; and in addition much new work had
been done by Mr. Bevan. The advantages accruing to science
through this expedition had been acknowledged by the Royal
Geographical Societies of London and Australia. They (the
Sydney Chamber of Commerce) considered also that the expedition
had been of great advantage to commerce, and hoped that Mr. Bevan
would get further concessions from the British Government to enable
him still further to promote the cause of commerce. There were, as
was well-known to them all, numerous articles indigenous to the
islands of New Guinea, which only required preseverance and
capital to make them useful articles of trade, such as timber,
bark, gutta-percha, sago, hemp, tobacco, resins, beeswax, and
spices, all of which merely wanted developing to make them
articles of commerce. It would be to the interests both of science
and commerce to assist Mr. Bevan in his work of exploration,
as he had no doubt that ere long they would derive a revenue
from these sources which would more than repay them for their
expenditure.*—Sydney Daily Telegraph, March 20, 1888.
* N.B.—See correspondence at the end of pamphlet (Letter to the Right Hon. the Secretary
of State for the Colonies).




PREFACE.
Extract from Letter dated Thursday'.Eland, 17lh -March, icy
from H.M. Commissioner for British Now Guinea lion. J‘-n
Dougl as ) to Mr. Bewail
2. AVilh regard to your second expedition Tilth Expedition :
though second to the Papuan Gulf;, I can only say that I was not
informed of your intentions with reference to it,* and if any specie
sanction had been required from me I think 1 should proDablyluue
n-fused to give it, on the grounds that it was a most hazardous
il,in ato navigate the waters and rivers of the Papuan Gulf in such
a ‘-team launch as the “ Mabel.” Nevertheless you. Just Ned the risks
incurred, and returned to Thursday Island after a second successful
expedition in which your previous discoveries were verified.
congratulate you, and those who accompanied you, on having
survived the perils of a most hazardous voyage. You deserve all Inc
credit due io those No run such risks in the cause of geographical
discovery. I congratulate you further on the peaceful relations
which, throughout, you maintained with the native inhabitants o
the country you explored.
* . T ,1, Hr n lohn Douglas was no doubt temporarily oblivious of the tact
* In writing the above the llt.n. Jonn u » u 6 , expressing his acknovv-
that under date Granville, New Gumea, 14th , Octobero 88 he w o wp - 8 Fiftst
lodgments and thanks for mlormation supp.icd h> Mi. Btu... m
Expedition. {Sic Correspondence, page 480
12a 36 —88 (a)




TABLE OF CONTENTS.
Map (at end of pamphlet).
Preface iii-v
Short Narrative of Mr. Bcvan’s Fifth Expedition ... ... ... 1-28
Official Report of Mr. H. J. Hemmy, L.S. (commissioned by
Queensland Government to accompany Mr. Bevan’s Fifth
Expedition) ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 29-32
Correspondence between Rev. W. G. Lawcs and Sir Edward Strick-
land, K.C.B. (President Royal Geographical Society, N.S.W.
Branch), “ Wickham v. Queen’s Jubilee River” ... ... ... 33-35
Correspondence between Mr. Sevan and the Right Hon. the
Secretary of State for the Colonies ... ... ... ... 36-41
Comparative statement of Progress in German New Guinea, and
Retrogression in British New Guinea under the Protectorate ... 42
A few words concerning the true character of the Papuans ... ... 42-43
Correspondence between H.M. Special Commissioner for British
New Guinea (Hon. John Douglas) and Mr. Bevan .. .. +s _ 54




Published in Sydney “Daily Telegraph.”
MR. SEVAN’S FIFTH EXPEDITION.
No. 1.
ITS OEIGIN.
Wiikx Mr. Bevan returned to Sydney in May, 1887, with plana and reports
of the discovery of two great rivers in British New Guinea (see “ Proceedings
of the Eoyal Geographical Society,” published in Loudon, October, 1887) as
the result of an inexpensive private expedition, it might have been expected
that public support would at once have been rendered towards a continuance
of the work so successfully begun. New Guinea, however, has been such a
drain on colonial patience and pockets, and there have been so much mis-
management and so many failures in connection with it, that Mr. Bevan had
to sutler for the sins and shortcomings of others. In short, the response to
his appeal was most limited and discouraging.
The Government of this Colony, as also that of Queensland, would render
nothing but indirect assistance ; and the Commissioner for New Guinea
(Hon. John Douglas), who had been the first to express a “ hope that Mr.
Bevan would be able to continue his explorations,” gave nothing to aid him
in so doing.
As the fruits of an energetic lecturing campaign some £lOO only were
forthcoming to meet the very heavy expenses that are inseparable from Now
Guinea exploration. This amount was made up by donations from Messrs.
Burns, Philp, & Co., the Chambers of Commerce of Sydney, N.S.W., and
Townsville (Q.), Lord Brassey, E, C. Merewether, Esq., Hon. Wm. Macleay,
Eichard "Wynne, Esq., and from members of the N.S.W. branch of the
E.G.S., and a few others.
Mr. Bevan left Sydney early in September, prepared to start at once for
New Guinea. Fresh difficulties, however, awaited him. The China steamer
“Tsinan,” by which it had been arranged to ship the launch, was quarantined
at the last moment, and the managers of another line of steamers broke a
similar promise.
Ultimately the British India Company came to the rescue and had the
“Mabel” hoisted on board the E.M.S. “ Chyebassa,” in Brisbane, and that
flue steamer discharged launch and machinery safely at Thursday Island at
the end of October. This service, it is only due to mention, the B. I. Com-
pany rendered free in the interests of exploration and colonial expansion.


Owing to these unavoidable delays the rainy season was due in New
Guinea before a start could be made, and many of Mr. Bevan’s well-wishers
consequently advised him to defer the expedition. This, however, it was
impossible, under the circumstances, to do, for much of the small sum sub-
scribed had already been laid out in stores and outfit and a delay would have
meant the absorption of the balance, if only in payment of men already
engaged. Tet another incentive to immediate action existed, viz., that the
authenticity of Mr. Be van s discoveries had boon questioned in certain
quarters ; and he himself—like all other explorers from time immemorial—
had not escaped the shafts of cowardly attack. Thus, though wearied and
unvested from the fatigues of former expeditions and the hard work and
anxiety attendant upon promoting the one now described, he set out again
with the primary object of resurveying and authenticating his previous
surveys and doing what new work he could with the means available.
GETTING THE LAUNCH ACKOSS TO NEW GUINEA.
The steam launch “ Mabel” left Thursday Island, November 1, 1887, at :j
p.m., in tow of the Queensland Government steamer “Albatross.” Some fore-
told that she would never reach the New Guinea shore safely ; but this was
accomplished on Saturday, November 5, on which day the two vessels
anchored In Bell Sound, Deception Bay (between the Aird and Jubilee
Elvers). The launch could never have got across by herself, laden with stores
and fuel, and Mr. Sevan consequently feels grateful to Sir Samuel Griffith
for the assistance rendered. As the “Mabel” held his fortunes, and for
its safety he was personally responsible to the New South Wales Govern-
ment and people, Mr. Sevan remained on hoard her at the wheel when
under weigh, though invited to share the comfort and comparative safety
of the “ Albatross. The night of Friday, November 4, was a peculiarly
trying one. Bramble Cay, in Torres Straits, was left in the evening, and
110 miles of open sea had to be crossed ere the New Guinea coast could he
reached.
A starlit evening set in fair and serene, but before midnight clouds of inky
blackness gathered overhead, under the ragged edges of which an arch of
pale yellowish nimbus drooped to the horizon. Massive rollers that
had washed the base of palm-clad islands far off in the South Pacific swept
by iu serried ranks like troops of “wiki white horses with flowing manes,”
little dreaming that their power would be broken and their squadrons
shattered on the reefs and sandbanks fringing the shores of the Coral Sea on
the near Papuan Coast.




M W
:^m
-;• .y4y£*-* '|l{^^^^^^^^^^^^^HH&«ja|B||Ml^H|i|[BtiiiH^H
1-1
g-waife^-V ■:■
The Launch between Parkes and Griffiths Islands.


Through it all the launch bobbed up ami down like a cork, now on the
lofty crest and the next minute deep down in the trough, as she followed in
the phosphorescent trail —sparkling like diamonds—of the Albatross.”
The steamer’s speed varied from 6 to 9 knots, so, as the strain on the tow-
rope earns not always at the right time, the “ Mabel” would occasionally be
forcefully dragged at a fearful speed sheer through the comb of a wave.
The rail of the little craft was but 3 feet out of the sea, and ns she was
undecked some heavy seas were shipped. Steam was kept up, and by its
instrumentality the bilge water was forced out of the ejector pipe almost as
fast ns it came in, and thus she was kept afloat.
"When at last the gray dawn broke the yellowish hue of the sea and the
soundings denoted the proximity of land. What was taken to be Cape
Blackwood was sighted at 7 a m., hut as the morning was dull and hazy and
the laud low-lying a stoppage was made to allow Mr. Bovau’s boarding the
■■ Albatross” to assist in picking up the landmarks. While about to cftcet this
transition the launch gave a frightful pitch in the broken sea and Mr. Bevan
was thrown bodily overboard. A little Manilla man immediately dived in to
the rescue, and though his services were not required yet his ready action
afforded a pleasant earnest of pluck and devotion.
MOBITUBI SALUTAMLbS !
After having transhipped all the expedition’s stores and gear into the
overladen 11 Mabel,” at 2 p.m. on Monday, November 7, a British ebeer rang
out. startling the numerous natives on the nearest bank, as the ‘’Albatross”
steamed away on a south-westerly course, with Thursday Island for her
destination. The hearty response from the ‘’Mabel” must have sounded
like the old Bo man gladiatorial erv of Morituri sahitamus to some of the
departing ones as they considered the perils of the way. Here was a handful
of men, with an open boat that could be put into a decqnt-sizcd drawing-room
(4S feet long by 8 feet beam and drawing 6 feet of water) voluntarily left in
a country from which Captain Blackwood, of H.M.S. surveying ship “Fly,”
after penetrating 30 miles inland up the Aird Kiver in 1845, had to turn
downstream after much bloodshed, owing to the savage hordes of natives
threatening his rear. Since then no white men had ventured inland in these
parts save Mr. Bevan and his former party, who, on March 19, 1887, were
unprovokedly attacked in open daylight by nude and hirsute Papuans, who
tired numerous volleys of formidable arrows from C-fect hows of bamboo.
The native inhabitants of the countries bordering on Deception Bay have
long been described by other coast tribes as cannibals of huge stature,
armed with bows and poisoned arrows, dwelling in big temples and
worshipping wooden or wickerwork gods.


Even on the coasts of the semi-civilized parts of New Guinea Commis-
sioners have oftimes deemed themselves unsafe unless environed by body
guards, Gatling guns, and medical advisers ; but in the bight of the Great
Papuan Gulf, the most formidable and least known part of New Guinea
(and for that reason selected by Mr. Bevan as the field of his later labours),
no Commissioner or administrator has ever yet ventured. This is the country
in which the small party were left with a great inland journey to perform, and
without any chance of succour in case of a breakdown, or a single white face
to see within hundreds of miles in any direction. Granted even the explora-
tions were successfully accomplished, there would then be, before a European
settlement could be reached, a stretch of 300 miles of unsurveyed coast, and
often tempestuous open sea to be crossed in a boat that was intended solely
for harbour work, and for which wood fuel had to be cut day by day. Those
who signed ship’s articles under Mr. Sevan as master, at the Shipping Office
in Thursday Island, for this expedition were four whites, viz. ;—Mr. Id. J.
Hemtny, licensed surveyor (whose services were provided free by the
Queensland Government) ; Martin Langdon, engineer ; Eichard Sadleir ; and
H. 0. Fastre, seamen, and four coloured men. This comprised the whole
party. Under these circumstances, therefore, it is not surprising that the
news of the safe return of the expedition the other day occasioned a feeling
of widespread relief.
BELL SOUND.
Simultaneously with the departure of the “ Albatross” the Mabel” got
underweigh and steamed up the opening 2 miles wide. The character of the
country passed through, as it invariably is on the south-western slope of the
Papuan Gulf, was alluvial and swampy. A network of saltwater creeks,
forming an archipelago of islands, intersects the land in all directions, while
the river banks, partially submerged at top of flood tide, arc densely clothed
with giant Nipa palms. Four miles up the previously unexplored Bell Sound,
a creek was found branching oft’ to the westward into Langford Sound. A
few miles further north, at a large junction, other arms turned off eastward
into Port Eomilly and westward into Langford Sound. At this point a
middle or northerly arm was taken, Mr. Bovan’s object being not to leave a
single main channel in all this vast area unexpdoited. Twenty miles from
the coast a change came over the character of the country, the river banks
becoming firmer and forest trees alternating with the usual swampy growths.
Evening now came on, so an anchorage was effected abreast of a few small,
gabled, and apparently deserted huts, built on piles on the banks of the
river, which had hero narrowed down from two miles to 50 yards.




m
m
I
1
|p
1
Aird Hills.


Heavy rain fell till morning, and a first trial was made of the patience of
the men in bearing the discomforts of having to find sleeping room in an
open boat of small dimensions, packed up to the rail with food supplies and
stores for a three months’ expedition. The canvas awning spread afforded
but little shelter from the torrential storm.
At 7 a.m. (November 8, 1887), the “Mabel” got uuderweigh, but after
2 miles of northing had been made the creek narrowed so that further
progress was stopped. In swinging the launch it was necessary to back into
the bank, and in doing this the gig’s painter fouled the propeller, thereby
bringing the engines to a standstill. Simultaneously some eanoesful of
natives, who must have been dodging the party, were sighted creeping up
under the shadows of trees on the opposite bank. By working the engine’s
lever quickly backwards and forwards the rope was unwound, and the
“ Mabel” was soon ploughing her way through the brackish waters down
stream. The “ binghis,” who had the advantage of position, followed suit,
but finding that they were being quickly overhauled took to the bush. So
great was their excitement at seeing such an unexpected apparition that their
hands became unnerved, and the few arrows which they fired at the passing
launch fell short.
THE AIED EIYEE SYSTEM.
With the previous night’s forewarning of the imminence of the rainy
season, it became advisable to commence the resurvey work without loss of
time. A course was accordingly steered across Deception Bay up Port
Bevan and an anchorage come to at G p.m. right under Aird-hills. Up to
this point it is deep enough to permit the passage of the s.s. “ Great
Eastern,” and the water there is quite fresh. The rain again fell heavily
that night and glad enough all were to stretch their cramped limbs and air
their damp rugs on the following morning. Then the spears of the sun
dispersed the fogs and mists, the miseries of the night were forgotten and
all nature rejoiced in the freshness and warmth of the day. Lakelike
expanses of water wdnding through noble forest scenery scintillated under a
clean-washed sky; while, like the shotty green and gold of its own riflebirds
(Graspedophora intercedens) shimmered the feathery palms and tropical
foliage growing to the very summits of the neighbouring pinnacles.
On Wednesday, November 9, 1887, after four hours’ steaming since
morning, the “Mabel ” anchored under the lee of a little island at Barnett
Junction, the head of the delta of the Aird Eiver system. Here the first
test was made of the suitability of New Guinea timbers and the capacity of
the launch for steaming on wood fuel. With the exception of six bags of


veritable “ black diamonds ” needed for the return trip tlie supply of coals
was exhausted. While the wooding party was at work a few natives were
noticed under the low picturesque hills on the opposite bank. These children
of the forest were, doubtless, attracted by the unwonted sound of the rever-
berating echoes that rapidly followed each crash as tree after tree fell before
the sturdy strokes of the axemen. The afternoon was dull and showery,
followed by rain at night. The river was here a good half-mile broad of
pure, fresh water, running steadily seawards at the rate of two knots, so an
anchorage for the “ Mabel ” had been picked well out of the force of the
current. Nevertheless, shortly after midnight all hands were brought to
their feet by a sudden shock that made the “ Mabel ” tremble in every timber.
On running forward with a lantern it was found that a big snag, fully her
own length, had drifted broadside on to her bows, but the full force of the
blow had providentially been broken by the anchor chain. Some ascribed
this little episode to the handiwork of the natives seen a few hours earlier.
It was noon of the next day (November 10, ISS7) before steam could be
raised to 40 lb. pressure, the wood being both soft and wet, burning, as the
engineer said, like “ cabbage stalks.” On getting under weigh, steam fell
down to nothing and anchor had to be again dropped. Late in the after-
noon, as the “ Mabel ” steamed past the village of Tumu, numerous natives
sprang up from either bank shouting Narmo ! a word of good omen, previ-
ously taught them by Mr. Bevan. Half-a-mile bade from the western bank
stands a volcanic cone, 300 ft. in height. Perched on its very summit is as
extraordinary an erection as the hand of man ever built. From its ridge
pole to the ground is a drop of 100 ft. In shape it resembles a whale's jaw
upended, open in front and overlooking the river. This structure is sup-
ported—2o ft. above the dome of the hill —by massive upright piles, 6 ft.
apart, driven firmly into the bed rock. As seen on this particular afternoon,
house, hill and palms were silhouetted against the skyline; while visible
through the interstices of the piles, between the crown of the hill and the
house proper, the red ball of the westering sun appeared to bathe the sur-
rounding scenery in liquid fire. One envied the Tutnuans the view of un-
surpassable beauty to be obtained from the aerial perch of their “ Castle
Lookout.” Down in the valley beneath, the ever-flowing stream—more like
a lake than a river in its noble breadth —coursing steadily, ever seaward,
though low-lying forest lands. Away towards the interior, the country rising
in wrinkles and folds, and tier above tier of serrated forest-clad peaks.
Then a hiatus —say a great valley or depression, though no one exactly
knows what, because the mystery of this vast gap alluded to has never yet
been solved. But beyond it again, athwart the horizon, is the crowning
beauty—for there are visible the pale blue heaven-scaling peaks of the


18,000 ft. mountains of the Bismarck Eaugc. There was no time now to he
lost, so the “ Mabel,” heading towards the interior, steamed away from
Tunra, catching sight en route of such another house as the one described on
such another hill, only some mile or so to the south. Seen at a different
angle, those native buildings prove to be several hundred feet in length, and
would appear to serve the purpose of watch-towers, fortresses, and, perhaps
dwellings, though, semi-detached from them and dwarfed by comparison,
were a few small huts.
On arrival at Bowden Junction, the eastern tributary or Philp Hirer was
taken, and for the whole of the next day and till noon of the day following
the “ Mabel” sped on with undiminished vigour, winding round the base of
palm-clad ridges, or through fertile valleys, and so on, and on, till the
highest point reached by the “ Victory ” was left miles astern ; and then
when neardr a hundred miles inland, a catastrophe befel.
No. 11.
AGEOUNI).
In the first paper wo hare seen how, after making at last a highly favourable
start and penetrating in the steam-launch Mabel higher up the Aird Eiver
system than the “Victory” had been able to do in March, 1887, the expedi-
tion —when not far short of a hundred miles inland —met with a sudden
check.
On the morning of Saturday (November 12), at II a.m., at a point where
the river entered a ravine, soundings suddenly shallowed. The course was
at once altered towards deeper-looking water. But although “ full speed
ahead” was the order, yet steam was allowed to fail. As a result, the three
to four knot current caught the unfortunate launch and swept her on to a
bank of smooth, round, waterworn pebbles of hard, dense basalt mid-stream.
After grounding, the “ Mabel’s” head swung round, pointing down stream
and she heeled over on to her port bilge at an angle of 45 degrees hard and
fast aground in a rapidly falling river.
Although this accident took hut a few minutes to come about, and but a
few lines to relate, yet no simile or comparison can aptly illustrate the full
force or meaning of its crushing blow ! One remembered how the “ Bonito”
party, with a large staff of men, several months’ stores and manifold gear
and appliances, were forcibly detained from a similar cause for three weeks
at a stretch up the Strickland Eiver in 1885. One knew that high up the
Murray and other Australian rivers vessels have been detained from years’


end to years’ end. But in tire case of a “ forlorn hope” expedition, like that
of the “ Mabel’s,” what in other instances might not bo so serious a matter
meant positive disaster and threatened loss of property if not of life. How-
ever, the leader of the party and most of his men had been in similar or
worse “ pinches” before, and instead of giving way to melancholy “ girded
up their loins” with a cheerful intention of leaving no stone unturned
towards finding a remedy.
All hands immediately set to work to lighten the launch. An ex tempore
camp was formed 150 yards down stream ; and thither stores, provisions,
loose machinery were removed in the gig. Even the funnel was discon-
nected, and the awning, together with its iron stauueheons, unshipped. That
afternoon preparations for a strenuous effort to shift the launch were made.
No blocks or tackle were aboard, so gear for hauling her off the bank had to
be improvised. Abreast of the “ Mabel” and 40 yards distant on the nearest
bank —studded with small timber —rose a little bluff, under the precipitous
banks of which, in a five fathom channel, the water coursed as through a
sluicegate. On this knoll two fairly upright trees, growing 5 ft. apart were
selected. Across these at a height of about 4 ft. from the ground, a 7-feet
barrel was laid horizontally in slots cut for the purpose. Next four short
levers were cut from stout saplings. All that was then wanted was
a hawser connecting the launch with the barrel, and the “ Spanish
windlass ” would bo complete. A return was then made to the
“ Mabel,” the anchor disconnected, and its chain—a 30-fathom piece—■
got on board the gig and a start again made for the shore. Battle 1
rattle! went the chain as it paid out, ever faster and faster with its
own increasing weight, till its last link flew overboard, and the boat was
swept far away down stream in the whirling eddies. The next attempt with
light ratlin line proved more successful, and by its instrumentality the
hawser was hauled hand-over-hand up the slippery bank, transferred to the
barrel of the windlass and the levers brought into action. Inch by inch the
cable came home, until it was as taut as cat-gut; and then, hurrah ! just
before darkness came on, a perceptible displacement of the launch was self-
evident, and before the order to “ knock off ” was given her bows were hauled
round to the direction of the “ windlass,” and a clear “ lead ” obtained.
So much accomplished, a return was made to the camp, and after an im-
promptu meal all hands housed in as well as they could for the night, and
doubtless ruminated over the trying events of the day.
Probably but few believers in presentiment are left. Coincidence, how-
ever, is even stranger. Among the hands was a superstitious and misan-
thropical-looking, though by no means bad-hearted Irishman. On the


Iw
_CD
rQ
_Q
d 7
«*-h y
0 £
r; ~
Co .=
CQ
*o -
r =
2 =
0 M
c_. -
o 7
C-J r~
_ r~* -
C
c
£
J




evening prior to the accident, when tlie “ Mabel ” swung to her anchor with
30 ft. of water under her, the lad in question, for the first and last time
during the voyage, essayed to tell the fortune of some of his mates with the
cards. Shuffled and reshuffled were the pack, but up came the nine of
spades and the ten of clubs time after time. This turn-up the Hibernian
designated as a very bad cross, signifying “ misfortune on a water journey.”
The inevitable “ silver-lining,” however, was not wanting, and other cards
denoted that the victim of misfortune would eventually “ put his trouble
behind his back.”
I urther efforts were made on the following morning, though the river level
was lower by at least 2 ft. Owing to increased strain one of the links of the
chain snapped, and the work had to be begun all over again. By this time
a new barrel was wanted, and when felling for that purpose a tree of about
30 ft. in height, and with a smooth, round butt, about 3 ft. in circumference,
an agreeable spicy odour excited the attention of the explorers*
On Monday, November 11, the river bed was so denuded that banks of
pebbles showed up mid-stream, and as it was impracticable to shift the
launch now that she was high and dry, a boat excursion for a further river
ascent was projected. Neither on the “ Victory” trip nor on the present one
had natives been seen above Tumu; nor was there any permanent village
known above that point. Consequently, in leaving the launch with two or
three men in charge, there seemed but little fear of intrusion from natives.
Providentially, however, before a start had been made, distant sounds, not
unlike the calls of [birds, were heard that finally grow into a well-defined
“ Narmo ! ”
VISITED BV NATIVES.
_ en ™i nutes later a small body of natives was seen approaching from the
direction of Tumu, whence they had doubtless been attracted by drift cap-
sized from the launch at the time she grounded. Cautiously and slowly the
Papuans approached ; now paddling up a few yards at a time against the
strong current, and then every few minutes climbing trees ashore to recon-
noitre the camp of the strangers. As they were partly concealed behind the
bend, Mr. Sevan put off with a crew in the gig and crossed to the opposite
bank, whence a better view of the numbers and comportment of the aborigi-
nals could be obtained. The idea occurred to the leader to avail of their
services in tearing down great cables of “lawyer” vines, extending from the
ground to the tops of trees 100 ft. to 150 ft. above— whence additional and
* This tree is the Massoi aromatica, largely used in the Malay Archipelago as a medicine.


much-needed hawsers could he made. .So much confidence gained, they
might go further and aid in a combined effort to right the launch and place
her on an even keel. The work of tearing down the vines was commenced,
and by semaphore signs, or, more strictly speaking, terpsichorean movements
of the legs and arms, after their own fashion, also by encouraging shouts,
those natives were coaxed nearer and nearer and a present was floated down
to them when within 30 yards distance. But, mark you : an order was now
shouted across the river to the cook to boil some potatoes for the probably
hungry visitors. That functionary, however, a stiff-necked deaf little
Manilla man, did not understand, so the order had to be repeated more
peremptorily, and the Papuans fled in abject terror I (at the expense of their
stomachs, if they had only known it). They came up again by and by, and
in half an hour’s time one canoe was within a few feet of the launch, and
the whites, who were more careful in modulating their voices, explained
what was wanted by chimb show. A more romantic spot for so dramatic a
scene could not have been chosen. Deep down under a lofty range, picture
the river winding through a fertile and well-wooded valley. Glistening in
the sun are hanks of polished pebbles, round which steely blue sheets of
smooth deep water alternate with eddies and rapids. High and dry mid-
stream lies exposed to view the fine lines and coppered hull of the “ Mabel.”
Looking to the south, or downstream, the river-banks are composed of
hunks of the richest black alluvium to he found anywhere in the world, and
fringed by lofty forest trees and giant palmate growths. Enlivening the
greenness of the vegetation are many-hued plants and shrubs, conspicuous
amongst which may he noticed the salmon-pink floral leaves of the beautiful
Manilloa grandijlora of Scheffer. Partly hidden by intervening vegetation,
the white folds of the tent arc visible in this direction, while a scarlet rug
and a coloured shirt hung out to dry on the hushes, also the thin spiral column
of smoke rising from the camp fire, around which one or two men are
moving, lend colouring and animation to the scene. With their shoulders
under the “Mabel’s” port bilge arc the rest of the party, while not 15
paces distant, paddles in hand, in their frail canoe, stand fifteen naked
Papuans. Though they roll their eyes over launch, hawser, foreigners,
windlass, and all, and their well-oiled mahogany visages fairly beam with
intelligence as to what it all means, yet they will not stir hand nor foot to
assist in righting the launch.
After landing abreast of the camp and thereby disturbing the equanimity
of the cook, whose teeth rattled like castanets, the Tumuans paddled oft’ to
their homes 30 miles down stream to report these strange goings-on to their
fellow-indigenes.


HARD TIAIES
The trials tliat were now made on the patience and fortitude of the
party were immense. Here In the ostensible rainy season was a week of
blue skies, hot sun, and almost rainless weather at the very time wet was
most needed. The heavy labour attaching to efforts to move the launch told,
too, on the strong constitutions of the men working under the glare of the
sun, with the glass registering as high as 90 degrees and within 400 miles
south of the Equator. To make up for this loss of strength and vitality
there was merely a love diet of preserved provisions and such stores as could
be carried from the colonies, together with an occasional parrot or pigeon,
though the woods were not well stocked with game at that season of the
year. The übiquitous little red insect called scrubitch irritated the men ;
while the swarms of flies that visited the camp disputed the right to every
morsel of food and were swept away and destroyed in hundreds. At night
mosquitoes (not previously found up this river) and midges drove away
sleep, and there was often just sufficient of a shower to soak through the
thin awnings, though not enough to cause a longed-for freshet in the
river. Little wonder, then, that fever medicine began to bo inquired for,
The suspense, too, was great because there was no certainty as to when the
river would rise, or that the launch ever could be got off safely, or when, or
in what force, or for what purpose, the Tumuans might again visit the camp.
Still the main anxiety was about the launch. Although the host and indeed
only boat available was selected, the “ Mabel,” was —to use a nautical term —
“too long in tbe heel,” and drawing 6 ft. of water her depth exceeded her
beam. Her lee rail was therefore little more than 4 ft. above the bank on
which she rested, and being undecked there was every reason to fear that
the water when it did rise would come in over the rail before she righted
herself, in which case she might never be got off. Machinery, hull and
fixtures made a combined deadweight of at least 15 tons and resisted the
efforts of half-a-dozen men to place the launch on an even keel. So, after
scooping away the pebbles and inserting a dozen rollers under her, the
dubious fate of the “ Mabel” had to be left in the hands of Jupiter Pluvius.
EXCELSIOR.
On "Wednesday, November 16, as the result of several hours’ hard rowing
in the gig, less than 2 miles of progress was made. Early on the
following morning the leader made another attempt, and although the boat
was often swept away in rapids, yet by returning to the charge, and by
determined efforts —rowing, poling, warping, as opportunity offered—
several miles were added. First tbe island where the “Victory's” boat party
obtained a few faint colours of scaly gold in April, 1887, was reached,


and some hours later an island —never before visited —several miles higher
up stream was attained. At this point, except for the tropical vegetation
and the numerous alligator tracts on the river banks, one was reminded of
such rivers as the "Waimakariri, of Canterbury Plains, New Zealand, the
bed of the stream still 100 yards wide, being a waste of shingle, sand and
pebbles, save where under either bank was a deep channel of cold, steely-
hued fresh water. Here, so many miles nearer to its source, one might
have expected the auriferous indications to improve. Disappointment,
awaited the party, and though several prospects were panned out nothing
better than a few 11 float ” colours were obtained. This island, too, is the
“ Ultima Thule ” of navigation. Human muscles could drag the boat no
further against the five or six knot current. Neither was there any utility
in prospecting the adjoining river banks, where the rock formation of hard,
dense basalt precluded the possibility of a successful quest.
Late that afternoon a very heavy thunderstorm came down, as the precur-
sor of torrential rain, and a return was decided upon. Like an arrow shot
from a bow flew the boat on its downward course in the now muddy-coloured
channels of the rapidly rising river, that had changed from a sober stream
into a mountain torrent in the short space of half-an-hour. The way rapids
were shot was exhilarating indeed ; all that was wanted was a firm hand at
the tiller and quick discernment of sunken rocks, snags, and other hidden
dangers indicated by broken water, ripples and signs that made the
reading of it like an open book to a quick and experienced eye.
By the time the launch was reached, however, the heavy downpour had
ceased and the sky overhead had momentarily cleared. As though with an
expiring effort, the fiery arrows of the dying sun drove back the legions of the
Storm God to the caps of the neighbouring mountains and then behind the
western ridge, in a departing blaze of glory, sank the great orb of day.
A few hours after dark the heavens again became overcast ; thunder
rumbled in the ranges; vivid lightning threw its “search-lights” over the
scene of the “ Mabel’s” disaster ; and as the night wore on the preliminary
deluge settled into steady soaking rain.
THE RESCUE.
Inch by inch rose the river, covering first the pebbly bank, then creeping
up to the level of the belting of the launch, threatening if it rose another
foot or so to come in over the “ Mabel’s” rail. The little craft, still heeling
over on to her port bilge, began somehow to feel more buoyant; so the
leader, who had camped aboard her waiting for this to happen, hailed the


camp, and the poor fellows, who had been getting what rest they could after
the toils and exhaustion of the day, had to turn out into the wet dark night
for another precarious struggle with the elements.
Owing to a sudden rise and fall on a previous night a similar chance had
been lost through the men not turning out smartly enough, and they had in
consequence been threatened with having to sleep alongside in the open gig
should similar negligence be shown in the future.
Accordingly the hands rolled-up to time, brought the gig smartly up to
the launch against the sluicing current, and were immediately sent ashore.
In a few minutes the rays of the lantern gleaming through the forest trees
showed that the knoll had been safely attained. Twice was the light extin-
guished by the jiutfs and gusts of the tempest that again stormed up the
canon and drowned the creaking and groaning of the windlass and the “ To,
heave ho !” of the men. Presently the launch gave a tremor as the hawser
tautened. Shortly thereafter, in response to a call for increased exertion
on the part of the levermen, a grating sound was heard, and perceptible
movement felt by those on board —Messrs, llevan and Hcmmy. Hurrah ! The
“Mabel” was actually travelling! There yet remained, however, a stretch
of shoal water equal to her own length ; and only a few inches of progress
could be made at a time, as levers snapped and fresh ones had to be con-
tinually cut in the dark. Then the chain jammed on the barrel, and worse
accidents, such as the parting of the hawser, might at any moment occur,
leaving the now anchorless launch, with its two solitary passengers, to be
hurried away by the torrent towards the open sea. Without a moment’s
hesitation or relaxation of stem dogged effort each man stood at his post,
though the thunder crashed overhead in deafening outbursts, and the vivid
lightning stabbed through and through the blackness of the middle watches
of this terrible night. Hour followed hour while the chain, dragging the
launch with it, was hauled home inch by inch, until between 3 and 4 on the
morning of Friday the emancipated “Mabel” gave not even a violent plunge
as her stern took to the deep water; and as the first intimation that the
launch was afloat, the leader of the party received a scratch across the face
from a spray of “ lawyer” vines as she swung into a smooth basin and was
brought up by her chain, well out of the force of the current and right
alongside the nearest bank.
After a short congratulatory address of thanks and a good stiff nip of
“ medicine” all round to ward off the effects of recent exhaustion and over
exposure, the men were sent back to the camp, while the leader and his


engineer kept a solitary anelior watch for the remainder of the night. When
day dawned a diver was sent under and reported that the launch had sus-
tained scarcely a scratch, while even the copper sheathing was intact. Now,
indeed, was the load ot the last six days alleviated, and mountains of crush-
ing care and anxiety removed 1 For, instead of lying like a rock or huge log
midstream, the ‘ Mabel once again rode to her anchor on an even keel on
the broad bosom of the Philp Fiver. It would take hours, however, to get
up steam and start Ino engines again, so in the meantime a descent of the
ritcr v, as made in the boat, and the deepest channels discovered with lead
and line.
On Saturday, November 19, the camp having been disbanded and all
goods shifted into the launch, a start was made down stream with the gig
out puotiug ahead. In tins way devious reaches and treacherous stony
channels hidden by the freshet in the river on the previous Saturday were
safely threaded, until at last the leadsman reported “ mud bottom.'’ Then
all anxiety ceased and “ full speed ahead” was again the order of the dav.
The Mabel, too, seemed to rejoice at her emancipation and fairly excelled
herself as she glided at 10-knot speed over fathomless depths beneath the
lo,t\ taiiges, Lnder white walls of limestone rock, painted with green
mosses, pirnt petalio I begonias and graceful tree-ferns, past the entrances of
eaves thickly inerusted with stalactites and stalagmites (in and out of which
b ollocalia nuhjlca, Dtcu-um lurundiiuiccnm and other lovely little birds con-
tinually flitted) beneath overhanging crags —poised hundreds of feet in the
ail on which palms, ferns and orchids had taken root, here had the river
carved out for itself a channel deep down under the eternal hills. Then,
indeed, could the rainbow that overarched the stream be taken as an emblem
of better times, and the toil and travail in the interior wilds of Papua of the
past sis days bo forgotten in the rapid passage of the launch through
romantic glens and ravines such as the one above described.
An anchorage was found that evening under a projecting bank that broke
the force of the current, and here the party rested till the following
Monday morning (November 21). Then soon after daybreak the launch got
under way and presently steamed past the extinct but tenanted craters of
Tumu. ITalf-a-milc beyond this village, drawn up in Indian file, with their
forces equally divided under either hank, and as though in readiness fer-
tile “Mabel’s” approach, the launch—almost before natives had been sighted
—ran into a largo flotilla of war canoes !




/jw^kWM^U
LMW.MI
L -■ Mims
' laKBB^B
The Chief of Omai Queen’s Jubilee River,


No. 11l
For whatever purpose that formidable flotilla of cauoes, maimed by
hundreds of natives, was drawn up south of Tumn. the “ Mabel” did not
stop to inquire. A rapid descent was made of the Aird River system.
Deception Bay crossed, Fort Eomilly entered at Bald Head, and the Jubilee
River ascended for a distance of 20 miles.
QUEEN'S JUBILEE 111 VEIL
In Mr. Bevan’s previous expedition in the “Victory” (March-April, 1887).
when the westerly main stream was discovered, although a few deserted
huts or “ miamias” were occasionally met with, no natives were seen much
above Evorra, the only permanent village, 1G miles inland from Bald Head.
This day, however (Wednesday, November 23), new huts were being erected
and dwelt in, canoes were passed, and the presence of man in many ways
made manifest.
After daybreak (Thursday, November 21) a canoe appeared round the
bend, and the occupants, after some little persuasion, were coaxed alongside.
In it were thirteen males, who came respectively from the following
villages : —A rckeo, Omni. Q.wibcc,Birrika,Evorra, Quibee, Orbi, Evorra, Arrea,
Arvi, Orbi, Kiveela, and Manna. The Chief of Omai was a short, plump,
little black man, with twinkling black eyes, and regular, pleasant features.
In a few minutes mutual confidence was established, and a sight of a
photographic album, containing pictures of river and mountain scenery and
New Guinea natives, elicited loud expressions of astonishment and delight.
On getting under weigh, at his own desire ho remained on board, while his
followers, paddling never so hard, could not keep pace with the “ Mabel,”
greatly to their chief’s amusement.
On arriving at his village, Mr. Sevan landed and took a few- photos, of
the temporary domiciles and their inhabitants. En route to the main river
similar little riverside colonies were passed, and it became evident that the
object of the natives was the procuring of commodities of one kind or
other to take back to their homes, either on the coast or in the bush, prior
to the setting in of the wet season. Thus one community would bo pre-
paring food supplies from the sago palm, another obtaining cloth from the
fibrous bark of a sterculiaceous tree, while under the banks of a third
encampment the huge logs floating alongside were being shaped into canoes.
Over the painful history of the next three days it would be better to draw
a veil, for it was one continuous record of stoppages. At last it became so
bad that to make 4 or 5 miles headway required five or six hours’ wooding.


The exertion required was more than flesh or blood could stand, while
the inability to regulate the steam at this particular juncture became a
source of downright danger, as the river current ran seaward at a rate of
over 4 knots, and the stony bottom rendered safe anchorages few and far
between. At this, the highest point attainable by the launch up the Jubilee
(over SO miles inland), the river was still 400 yards wide, while in many
spots bottom could not be reached with a 10-fathom line, giving, in other
words, a depth of over 60 feet of fresh water.
When returning down stream on the afternoon of November 27 it must
have been blowing very freshly out in the gulf; for, at a distance of 60 miles
inland, in a broad reach where the river was half a mile wide —as the launch
steamed through a choppy freshwater sea, spray was splashed right over the
man at the wheel. An anchorage w r as come to at 6 p.m., just inside the first
affluent at Woodhouse Junction, the head of the delta.
The following day was eventful in more ways than one. To begin with,
when the party w r ere ashore wooding, a falling tree toppled over the high
bank on to where, in the gig, sat a solitary occupant examining a new plant;
and had he not been forewarned by the crackling of intervening branches,
and thus permitted to save himself by jumping into the river, the leader of
the party would have been crushed into a jelly. The fruit of this unwelcome
tree, when examined, proved to belong to the Myristacw family, and the
oblong wild nutmegs (contained in its plum-shaped pods) have —when of
mature size—some small commercial value. Shortly thereafter one of the
men who had been wading through ooze and pandanus scrub on the opposite
bank returned somewhat scared and reported that he had almost jumped
astride of a 20-feet alligator. He did not know which was the more
surprised at the contretemps, as both the saurian and himself made off with
equal despatch in opposite directions.
In the character of the country on this river there is but little change.
After the swampy jungle-clad coast is left behind —say 20 miles in from the
sea —the banks rise higher and higher, excepting breaks here and there,
until the mountains are reached. No variation occurs either in the quality
of the soil. Everywhere is the same rich, bottomless black or chocolate loam,
studded by fine timber in all directions. As illustrating the ingenuity and
patience of the natives, it may bo mentioned that one occasionally finds still
standing in the scrubs the stump of a tree surrounded —to a height of from
10 ft. to 20 ft. from the ground —by a scaffolding. Working on this platform
(to avoid the huge flanges) the aboriginals have, with their frail stone adzes,
cut sheer through butts of trees 4 ft. or 5 ft. in thickness. And the w r ork, too,
has been done almost as neatly as if a crosscut saw had been used. Then
along a track, sometimes extending quite a mile from the river banks, the
massive log has been skidded lengthwise on rollers to the nearest water.


__
4
«
1
mm
■
H : l>
■ -
ibs
•
Queen’s Jubilee River,
About <10 niilrs inl:\iul--L(euch, i l , luilos wide Water, fresh.


9^l
■
jsr § ■*>!■.•'* - WM
- *| . i .£■
j,* r 1 y^M > *BpB|pp jy jf ■ ij^^M
Aivei Natives on counter of Launch,


THE AUEAEMAE OH AIYEI.
At AYoodhouse Junction the Jubilee Hirer bifurcates, and on Tuesday,
November 29, the Mabel commenced the descent of this previously unex-
plored and therefore especially interesting affluent. As a freshwater current
of two knots ran steadily seaward down this channel, the launch would
have been- carried high and dry on to any hidden shoal it might happen
to strike. The gig, therefore, was sent ahead piloting, soundings with lead
and line being taken at intervals of every two minutes from her bows. The
Aurarmar (as natives seen at AYoodhouss Junction called it) follows in the
main a south-south-easterly course—skirting the westerly slope of a range of
low limestone hills—and with an average breadth of 300 yards gave soundings
of up to 7, but nothing under' 3 fathoms of water.
About midday what appeared to be human remains were sighted. On
closer inspection this proved to be the partially decomposed body of a young
male Papuan suspended over a snag some little distance out in the river,
hands and feet trailing in the flood. Strangely enough, the three Manila
boys, who—though on more than one occasion in imminent peril of their
own lives —never showed the white feather, were yet upset for hours after
the near inspection of this embodiment of death. Perhaps the awful loneli-
ness of this seemingly uninhabited river had something to do with their
emotion. The next day, however (AYednesday, November 30), the spell was
broken, as the “ Mabel’s” party again came into community with their
fellowmen and were accorded a friendly reception at Mipoor, picturesquely
situated on the river bank. The village of some 15 houses, is built in two
wings, bisected by a creek that is crossed by means of a skeleton bridge of
rattan and bamboo. The fenced-in gardens of the natives, in which taro,
yams, sugar-cane and bananas arc cultivated, are some little distance from
the huts. Under the latter a few domesticated pigs and half-bred dingoes
sleep on the soft sand. Two or three miles below Mipoor the river again
bifurcated and widened very materially, islands appearing midstream.
Shortly thereafter at an abrupt bend, the sea unexpectedly came into view.
This opening was called the Aivei Movi by the crowds of natives who now
gathered round the “Mabel” in their canoes from all points of the compass
and deadened the cry of the leadsman with their jabbering. A more easterly
channel —the Aivei-lulu—was taken and the sea sighted again, while a creek
leading still in an easterly direction was called Kalayli (P Alele of the
Admiralty chart). It was now necessary to return by the inland route
instead of by the coast, in order to check the traverse and take further
astronomical observations with theodolite and sextant. En route a stoppage
was made at the friendly village of Mipoor, which, for general neatness and
cleanliness, cannot be excelled.


On Eriday, December 2, the descent of the extreme westerly affluent of
the Jubilee Elver, from Woodhouse Junction to Port Eomilly, was made.
En route some of the “ mia-mias ” inhabited a week previously were now
found to be deserted. At several others still occupied a strict watch was
kept. Long before the “ Mabel’s” approach a canoe, manned in each case
by one full-grown adult, accompanied by a lad, darted out from cover, and
taking the most conspicuous bank, its occupants would splash fountains of
water high into the air with their paddles. This mirror-like sign was passed
on by the village sentry, and the timid inhabitants, over on the alert and
fearful of attack from more powerful tribes, would suspend their busy
avocations and rush for weapons of defence. They could not make up their
minds in every case how to act until the little launch had passed at full
speed. Then the women and children executed an exalted dance of relief,
and the men paddled after the “ Mabel,” yelling out for “ kyri (hoop-iron)
oh!” Others carried their fears and subsequent revulsion of feeling to a
still absurder pitch. The occupants of some canoes, on sighting the launch,
cleared in abject terror into the bush, but after she had passed —such was
their regret at losing a chance of obtaining hoop-iron that might never recur
again—that all together sprang into one canoe, which immediately capsized
under their combined weight. Nothing daunted and still bawling out
“Kyri-oh! kyri-oh!” they then swam after the “Mabel,” regardless of
alligators. Although time was an object such entreaties could not be entirely
ignored, and several stoppages wore made to allow G in. by 3 in. lengths of
hoop-iron, on which an edge had been well bevelled by means of a file, being-
distributed to these harmless aborigines. As for the bark waistbelts and
other curios eagerly offered in exchange —such things could not be carried —■
even if of any value, as the “Mabel” was still lumbered up in a way that
precluded all comfort whatsoever. With the hoop-iron good stout adzes
might be made, and the work of clearing the scrub and hollowing out logs
for canoes would be greatly facilitated. All the remaining potatoes, which
had commenced to sprout, were distributed amongst these people. The
natives above alluded to are of a much lighter build and complexion than
the hirsute prognathous-visaged inhabitants at the mouth of the Aivci and
elsewhere in this district; and, living in constant fear of attack, would pro-
bably he glad of the protection that the ichite man can afford, and in exchange
for which they would be ready to help him with their labour.
Taking advantage of the deep water channels to be found in Port Eomilly,
the “Mabel” continued full-speed ahead till long after dark, and anchored
near Bald Head with a record of over 40 miles for the day in spite of
stoppages, and some hours spent in cutting wood for fuel.


Queen’s Jubilee River—temporary dwelling.




LANGPOED SOUND.
On the coast line "between the Jubilee and Aird Eivcr system there still
remained unexplored several large estuaries. Of these Langford Sound was
next ascended, and found to rim northerly, wide and deep, for several miles,
when it took a westerly bend towards Lennon Sound. Here a perfect maze
of waterways intersects the land in all directions in which the ebb and flow
of 2 to 3 knot tides, and tidal rise and fall of 10 feet to 12 feet, necessitates
groat caution in navigation. In many places the boat had to first go on
ahead sounding. About I p.m. (Saturday, December 3) the “Mabel”
entered a half-mile wide river coming down from a northerly direction.
Short!v afterwards the lofty brown peak of a native house was seen
peeping out through a grove of cocoauut palms about a mile ahead and close
to a westerly bend. Along both banks stretched avenues of nipa palms
in unbroken lines, save whore, near to the village, a broad road had been
cut in from the river bank. As the bend was rounded it became evident
that an unusually large settlement of natives inhabited this region. As tar
as the eye could reach the river banks were lined with houses, many of which
were of the hugest dimensions —300 feet to 409 feet in length —built on
piles, and towering to a height over 100 feet from the ground. Then, as the
“ Mabel” steamed on was there a scene of excitement enacted that baffles
all description, and into the spirit of which even the very jugs and dogs
seemed to enter. "Women, children, and reserves lined the high banks and
indulged in the maddest of terpsiehorean exercises, while the men —who iu
the space of a few minutes had decorated their persons with feathers, paints,
shell ornaments, ami grotesque masks—rushed about almost tumbling over
one another in their haste, and getting bows and arrows, spears and paddles
between their legs, preparatory to launching big war canoes. Wherever
the eye rested, either before or behind, canoes —holding twenty to thirty men
apiece—were soon seen emerging from every creek and roach till the river,
which had hero narrowed to little over 300 yards, was black with one immense
flotilla !
In more than one case the bow paddler was painted a whitey grey all over,
hair included, and all, being of splendid physique, with rare muscular develop-
ment, presented a most grotesque appearance, as though robed iu skin
tights. All that pigment could do had been done to make them hideous,
and never before has any tribe been seen in such diversity or numbers. Some
were marked like skeletons, and all more resembled fiends incarnate than
human beings.
In their overwhelming force they held the “ Mabel” and its handful of
men in derision and commenced to mob the party, even getting into the gig


and passing oars, rowlocks and rudder into their canoe. This was noticed
just in time and steam put on the whistle. The shriek that followed how-
ever, was all hut deadened by the delirious clamour of thousands of natives !
Two miles of continuous villages had now been passed, evening was
approaching, and but a few slides of firewood remained. To have proposed
to land with axes among those savages to cut fresh fuel would have been
downright madness and have caused a mutiny amongst the crew. Ahead
the narrowing creek was a veritable cul-de-sac. But now an incident occurred
that brought matters to a crisis. The natives, whom the steamer’s whistle
and one or two shots fired straight up into the air had caused to sheer off a
few yards, returned to the charge. While one load of 40 stalwart Papuans
made as though they would board the launch on her starboard rail—thereby
capsizing her for a certainty —others crowded into the gig that was being
towed astern, and one native already had the unshipped rudder in Ids hand.
To the leader at the wheel Sadleir sang out from aft that he would have to
fire, as the natives were preparing for a rush. Wishing above all things to
avoid bloodshed, Mr. Bevauthen gave the order ‘’Full speed astern.” The
effect was instantaneous. While neither whistle nor the roar of guns —of
whose destroying properties they were entirely ignorant —had any terror for
these aboriginals, yet the magic by which thus little paddleless boat, smaller
than one of their own canoes, was moved backwards and forwards at will
caused their retirement to a respectful distance. And before they had
recovered from their surprise the “ Mabel ” bad completed her evolution and
was ploughing her way down stream in the gathering dusk at a speed of 10
knots.
THE CENTEXAEY EIVEE.
On the following morning (December 4, 1887) the “ Mabel” steamed in-
land again up a northerly arm, navigating in the course of the clay a similar
labyrinth of salt water creeks to that previously described, and passed another
native village.
A line of hills crossed from west to east, and in all the country south of it
no main river running northerly was to be found. About midday, after
steaming down several creeks in a southerly direction, the “ Mabel”
emerged on to a sheet of water fully half-a-mile broad. This arm turned
north-westerly, until about 4 p.m., overlying the land at a distance of four
to five miles, Aird Hills wore seen bearing due west.
On Monday (December 5) this channel was followed up till it bifurcated ;
the northerly branch then taken shallowing out in two or three miles, while
the westerly one was found to lead into a freshwater river 400 yards wide.


This was steamed up for 20 miles into limestone ridges until progress was
stopped by a rocky bar, giving shallow soundings at a point where the river
too had narrowed materially.
On Tuesday (December 6) a start was made for Aird Hills, where the
leader intended to give the hands a day or two’s spell. (N.B. —Owing to
the absence of fresh water and the inhospitable nature of the country, it had
been impracticable to rest on the preceding Sunday.) The cones of these
hills afforded a good mark to steer for, and it was with no small satisfaction
an anabranch was found that brought the launch right out into the lake-like
sheets of water environing Aird Hills, at half-past 10 a.m. Now, in
addition to the ascent of two rivers, for distances respectively of nearly
100 miles each inland, the borders of Mr. Sevan’s discoveries had been
extended east and west over a similar area, not the least interesting feature,
nor the least valuable discovery, being that of the inland navigation route
from Orokolo on the east to Aird Hills on the west. (See map).
AIED HILLS.
At this point Mr. Hemmy, the surveyor, whose health had been gradually
failing, succumbed completely, and one or two other members of the small
party were laid on their backs by fever. During the stay here an ascent
was made of one or two peaks of these hills. On Wednesday, December 7,
a cone 1,000 ft. above river level was climbed, the last 50 yards, being very pre-
cipitous. Ample reward, how r ever, was made by the view from the summit,
where, owing to a landslip, one or two gigantic cedars had been dislodged.
Twenty miles to the south, over the lowlands, the open water of the Gulf
of Papua was visible. In the valley beneath the river lay like a white ribbon
till it was lost to sight where the country rose in tier above tier of serrated
forest-clad peaks towards the north-east. Then followed a great valley or
possibly a lake from the far side of -which towered skyward the great
mountains of the main range.
‘ ‘ There alone can we attain
To those turrets where the eye
Sees the world as one vast plain,
And one boundless reach of sky.”
The general formation of these trachyte hills is a volcanic tuff. The
summit of this particular cone, however, is covered with a deposit of semi-
fossilized lluviatile shells contained in an earthy mould or silty mud. Among
specimens of these shells Mr. Etheridge, of the Australian Museum, has
identified Melania clavws, Neritina gagates, and a species of Ggrena.
Mr. Etheridge appends a note that it would be hazardous to suggest any
theory of upheaval from the position of these shells as above described.


The term Aird Hills describes an island of probably moderately recent
upheaval, on which a cluster of volcanic cones, some 10 in number, and
covering an area of about five square miles, are surrounded by deep
navigable channels of fresh water. The country for 30 miles io the south
and for some 10 miles to the north is chiefly of low-lying alluvial formation,
and the geographic and strategic importance of this position is so great that
a few of its salient features deserve categorical enumeration.
1. Eor a distance of between 200 and 300 miles of coast lino—from Saibai
on the west to Orokolo on the east—Aird Hills, os seen over-lying the
projection of Cape Blackwood, are the only sure and unmistakable landmarks
to navigators.
2. It is approachable from the Gulf of Papua to ships of the greatest
burthen, which could berth alongside high and firm hanks in over -10 ft. of
perennially fresh water.
3. While the prevailing character of the shores of the Gulf is low-lying
and swampy, this cluster of cones of romantic beauty presents the range of
temperature and salubrity that can he attained at various altitudes, ranging
to over 1,000 ft. in gentle undulations and level ridges, as well as in precipitous
inclines.
4. The services of the small and mild-tompered tribe in its vicinity could
be utilized by whites, both in exchange for their protection from fiercer
tribes and for useful articles of barter ; while their dialect, if learnt, would
serve as a key to communication with the tribes over all this great and newly-
explored district, representing an area of over 20,000 square miles.
No. IV.
Aftee two day’s stoppage, a fresh start was made at 10.30 a.m. Thursday,
December 8, when, by means of a channel skirting the base of their northerly
slopes, Aird Hills were circumnavigated.
NEWBEEY SOUND.
A descent was then made of the previously unexplored main westerly arm
in the delta of the Aird River system, and the sea again sighted on Saturday,
December 10, Cape Blackwood bearing south-east at a distance of about 15
miles. All this coast country, where the hulk of the native population dwells,
is one vast hay of islands.


9pL. ■m^-
jP**
Mg*. ■ jHpBBMal.
ipv.:.. -•* '
I ’3'
c*J
3
o
£
CO
3
a
co
CL
03
+^>
o
(/)
0)
>
CO
£
0
0
0
r
CO
u
C 5
C


¥ ■ - aifea...V-SS£»'~’A-J
• V ♦, , •
i^ g ' ii^BBy
11 * i liH
KSy)S??3 «/■■
• -j. * ~ ri^'d^S- JI SyaSSKRlBL«fliLUiBS^B
- jh> „ 1 ■ * jl \nr^SA
1
Model Dwellings of Great Papuan Gulf.


When the “Mabel” emerged into this estuary huge pile-built brown houses
were noticed underlying groves of eocoanut palms in a dozen different direc-
tions, while the mirror-like flashes from all points of the compass indicated
the swift approach of numerous canoes. The launch after trying unsuccess-
fully for an inshore passage put out to sea, and after rounding Bates’ Island
—named by Mr. Beran after the secretary, Eoyal Geographical Society,
London—entered Mitchell Sound (after the secretary Chamber of Commerce,
Sydney), to replenish firewood.
MITCHELL SOUND.
Purposely avoiding a large village on the eastern bank a stoppage was
ma.de abreast of a creek on the opposite shore. Not until anchor was dropped
was the immediate proximity of another large native community discovered.
The launch was soon again mobbed by hundreds of excited natives who came
flocking in hot haste from every creek and inlet, rendering the wooding
problem very difficult to solve. Three out of the party were on the sick list,
leaving only two effective hands to guard the launch and four to land in the
boat to cut fuel in the thick mangrove scrub which lined the banks. Nor
was it possible to bide the axes from the covetous glances of these inquisitive
aboriginals, who quickly guessed as to the instrumentality by which tree
after tree fell in rapid succession. On December 11 a native of Oroi (the
village 300 yards from the launch) came off and sold some plantains for a
piece of red cloth. While too weak to submit to being mobbed by large
bodies of aboriginals, yet any iona-Jide attempts on the part of a few natives
at a time to barter food products were sedulously encouraged. Two of the
largest villages in this neighbourhood were ascertained to be Hippoora and
Orpoito respectively. About 7 a.m. the “Mabel” got under weigh,but en-
countering a fearfully choppy sea outside put back again past Oroi, having
had a narrow escape from foundering.
The position was now a serious one. So far the fates had been lenient, for
in spite of all that human care could do it was almost a miracle that the
launch—driven by the strong tides—had not grounded on hidden banks in
these discoloured waters. With wet ammunition and food supplies lost, the
worn out crew would have been entirely at the mercy of savages. There yet
remained 150 miles of unsurveyed coast and then 100 miles of open sea to
be crossed before the one or two invalids now in a half moribund condition
could he conveyed to the nearest white settlement. In the hope of finding
an inland route to the westward whereby the open sea might he partly
avoided the launch now continued on its way up Mitchell Sound.


MEREWETHER RITER.
Leaving behind several villages on either bank a mile-wide opening leading
in a north-westerly direction was taken. About two miles up another and
last village was passed, the aboriginals coming off in canoes to sell cocoanuts.
"While a five-fathom channel was found near the coast —the river 20 miles
inland—shallowed mid-channel to “and a half one” (9 ft.). A thick smoky
fog overhung the river on the following morning, while the closeness of the
atmosphere and sunless weather seemed to indicate the near approach of heavy
and continuous rain. Instead of emerging, as expected, into homeward-
bound or westerly affluents the river now took an easterly trend. For three
days past Mr. Hemmy had neither slept nor scarcely tasted food. His painful
illness was probably due to a “ touch of the sun,” he having very impru-
dently taken off his helmet on several occasions when using theodolite or
sextant. If his illness had eventuated fatally a third expedition to the same
localities might have been necessary in order to verify and authenticate
these discoveries to the satisfaction of an incredulous world. And that, in
view of public apathy and indifference, would not have been at all easy of
promotion. Under all these circumstances it would not have been prudent
to have continued further inland especially as the three-knot tide ebbing and
flowing at the highest point reached indicated a very distant watershed.
This entirely new and promising river system was named after Mr. E. C.
Merewether, of Sydney, a munificent patron of the expedition.
On returning to Oroi at 4 p.m., an old man came off, bringing a few prawns
and wdiitebait (nardi), bananas (dubi) and water (opor) —the latter in a long
bamboo tube—to exchange for cloth and hoop-iron. Another came off with
a sucking pig of a pound or so in weight, for which he would take nothing
less than a scrub-knife in exchange. Returning again later on accompanied
by two wives, he produced another Papuan table luxury in the shape of a
half-bred dingo, and seemed not a little surprised that the whites did not
include such an article of diet in their regimen. A feature peculiar to these
natives was the evenness and pearly whiteness of their teeth, probably due
to their not chewdng betel nut, like the aboriginals of the south-east coast.
Tuesday, December 13, was spent in cutting fuel, after it had been decided
that it would be better to risk putting out to sea in preference to the alter-
native of skirting a coastline along which the launch would be exposed te
the perils inseparable from shoalwaters and swarms of natives. The wood-
man’s axes, of which there was no spare set on board, were found too alluring
altogether, and to the extreme vigilance displayed alone immunity from
casualties was due. Twice on this one day were determined efforts made by
natives lurking in the scrub to cut off the wooding party.




* '« * j^|
Kf •.' £'J


HOMEWARD BOUND.
The morning of Wednesday (December 14) dawned stormy and gusty,
but nevertheless a start had to me made. The “ Mabel ’’—very low in the
water by reason of the day’s fuel on board —made dirty weather of it; and
the bilge ejector pipe getting foul at one time threatened to founder. As the
day wore on the stiff breeze from the north-west died away and good weather
was made across George and Prince’s Inlets. About 3 pm. the “Mabel”
steamed over a place marked breakers on the chart, getting nothing less than
3 fathoms. An hour later the stock of fuel had run very low, and considerable
anxiety was felt, as dead reckoning placed the “ Mabel’s” position close to
Midge Islands. Never were chart or horizon more anxiously conned. About
4 p.m. land was sighted to the south-west distant some 10 or 12 miles. The
wind had veered round to the south-east, and the big sea running served to
retard the “ Mabel’s” progress, while the glare of the sun dead on the land
almost blinded the helmsman in his efforts to steer a direct course. At last
the storm that had been long overhanging the mainland in the north-west
broke, and by obliterating the rays of the sun served to disclose a line of
trees at but a few miles distance. The tide too turned, and —soon after the
few remaining logs had been used —the “Mabel” anchored under the
welcome lee of a little island after a capital day’s run of 55 miles.
MIDGE ISLANDS.
Thursday, December 15. —Owing to the heavy sea that was running tho
boat was all but swamped in the surf, and fuel had to be brought out in the
arms of the men through the breakers. About midday the “Mabel” steamed
round to tho more sheltered south-west side of the island and anchored at
4 p.m. for wooding. Laud closed in on three parts of the horizon, and on
one or two neighbouring islands were several great houses. A considerable
area on this part of the coast near the Ply River is marked with dotted lines,
indicating that it has not been surveyed. The following day was too sunless to
take a meridian altitude, although it appeared—so much out was the chart—
that by some curious freak of nature the geography of the country had under-
gone a complete change. A large and very wide estuary was now followed
up in a westerly direction for several miles, but no outlet appearing a return
was made seaward. About 3 p.m., when a mile distant from the nearest
land, a Manilla man was at the lead. Soundings for half-an-hour past had
not lessened on three fathoms. Getting over-confident, Martin relaxed his
vigilance for a minute or tw r o, with the result that the “Mabel” ran on to
a hidden shoal. In twn hours’ time tho launch was high and dry on a
mudflat that extended over an area of several acres. Many very large
houses indicated the proximity of natives, who however, strangely enough.


did not come off. About two hours after dark the tide crept up to the
bank and at 10.30 p.m. the launch had 4 ft. of water around her. But
the cushion of mud which the ebb tide had thrown up under the lee rail was
now by the flood tide washed under her other quarter. Independently of
the darkness of night the position was eminently hazardous; for a fresh
breeze came in w-ith the tide, causing a heavy break on this mudflat, and
wave after wave made a clean breach over the hapless launch, which was
throwm violently first on one side and then on the other. Many of the hands
seemed almost paralysed at this rough treatment, and Sadleir gave it as his
opinion that “ this time it was all up with her, sir !” The leader, however,
infused fresh courage into his men, and, himself setting the example, all
hands w-ere kept vigorously employed in baling out the w r ater-logged launch.
The engineer, Martin Langdon, nobly seconded his chief’s efforts. For a
time the contest was a doubtful one. All the while, however, the tide was
rising; and, to cut a long story short, steam wars raised, a w r ay churned out
through the yielding mud, not without many a bump, and midnight found
the launch anchored half a mile off in IS ft. of water.
On the following morning natives informed the wooding party that the
name of their island was Ogara and that of the village Epissca. Later on
the “Mabel” put out to sea —rounded a point of land —and presently a great
12-milc-wide opening came into view'. This proved to be the main entrance
of the
ELY EIYEE
The natives of the little village of Sarguan, at its north head proved
very shy. Upon inquiry, their nervousness appeared to he due to the
remembrance of the punishment inflicted upon them by the “ Pearl” some
nine years ago for the murder of the crew- of a full-rigged ship that had lost
its reckoning—been driven in shore and grounded on the large sandbank to
windward. These natives w-ere interested to hear of our visit to the country
in the north-east, a land which they called Messedcnj. They had no inter-
course, however, with the people of that district, being ignorant of their
language and apprehensive of the sea journey.
Sunday and Monday (December 18 and 19) were spent at Kiwai, a largo
village about eight miles up the Fly Elver. Here yams, bananas, sweet
potatoes, and tobacco wore obtained, also a 60-lb. pig, bought for an axe.
A native woman, smeared all over w-itb mud, w-as observed embarking
in a small sailing canoe. On inquiry it transpired that her husband had
died over night, and she, in this mourning attire (e.g. the mud') w r as going off
to inform her relations in the neighbouring villages.


- * \ ‘ *™ r a3 y
...■


I
>• ' ■ ’
A.*
Family Group—Kiwai.


When these Kiwai natives want a little amusement they indulge in the
pleasures of the chase — i.e., of wild pigs, or of inland tribes. For the former
purpose thev have a well-trained breed of dogs, which they value so highly that
they do not eat them, as a rule, until after they have died a natural death. In
the latter event they put on their shell ornaments (groin and breast plates),
paint themselves red, yellowy and black, 1 and tie on feather head-dresses.
Then thev depart in their canoes, and when their destination is reached
take to the bush and hunt wild natives. From tree-tops they eagerly scan
the horizon for signs of smoke. Their human prey is in this way betrayed
by his own camp fire, hunted dowm, and decapitated. Jubilantly the
Kiwaians return to their district, and after cooking and eating the heads,
hang up the skulls as a trophy. At these cannibal feasts a kind of kava is
drunk. This is prepared from an indigenous root chewed by virgins of about
13 years of age. While it does not exactly intoxicate, its effect is not unlike
that of opium.
On Tuesday, December 20, the ‘‘Mabel’ ’ crossed the mouth of the 1 ly, and,
passing inside Mibu and Bampton Islands, arrived, after much buffeting
about from bad weather, at Darru, near Bristow Island on December 22.
The natives on the neighbouring Tait River make enclosures of stakes, into
which they decoy alligators by means of a bait, and then at low water
destroy them by means of their formidable arrows. On Friday, December
23, a start was made for Mangrove Island of the chart (some 10 miles
distant), under the expectation that good fuel would he obtainable there.
Nothing, however, was found save a few stunted hushes, 4 ft. high, of man-
grove ash. These scattered clumps were submerged at high water and
worse than useless for fuel. The Katau River had accordingly to be visited
for supplies.
The passage of 100 miles across Torres Straits was commenced on
Christmas Day, and proved uneventful, save for one fierce squall from the
north-west, which caught the launch 12 miles from shelter. The “ Mabel”
had to run before it, and found a refuge under the lee of Tama or Turtle-
hack Island.
Mr. Sevan had raised 3 feet on the “ Mabel’s” rail with sheets of galva-
nized iron for the passage across. Without this precaution, and the fact of
her being, so to speak, flying light, owing to provisions having been con-
sumed and stores nearly expended, the launch would likely have foundered
in the open sea.
On the following day this hazardous expedition w-as brought to a close,
Thursday Island being safely reached by the party intact without a single
fatalitv.


Thus in two months, in addition to the considerable time spent on land,
some 1,200 miles had been steamed over new, and for the most part pre-
viously unsurveyed, waterways in the least known regions of New Guinea.
This had been accomplished solely with wood fuel, which had to be cut as
required—-often several times a day —through a country infested with savage
native races, as regards its littoral, whore murder waited on almost every
footstep of the explorers.
This great undertaking had been carried through in a little launch whose
previous operations had been confined to Sydney Harbour.
Her great relative draft (6 feet) necessitated the utmost caution in navi-
gation ; and it may be truly said that Mr. Bevan, the certificated master,
was almost chained to the wheel the whole time she was under w r eigh.
A brief but comprehensive report was immediately published in the local
paper, in reference to which the following significant declaration written on
the ship’s articles was endorsed by the hands ;
“ We hereby certify that the results of the above voyage are as described
in the Torres Straits Pilot of January 2, 1888, and that throughout, in spite
of great provocation on more than one occasion, no collisions ivith natives
nor bloodshed have occurred.”
Mr. Bevan wired at once to the Colonial Governments that he w r as
willing to ship a new crew and return at once to explore the remaining
unknown waterways in New Guinea; but, beyond a conditional offer of
£lOO from H.M. Special Commissioner (Hon. Jno. Douglas) towards
further exploration, no other aid was immediately forthcoming.


AN OFFICIAL EFFORT.
The following is the official report, dated Thursday Island, January 12,
1883, of Mr. H. J. Heminy, L.S., commissioned by Queensland Government
to accompany Mr. Sevan’s fifth expedition :
“ Ecport on the rivers and country traversed on my trip with Mr. Theodore
Sevan’s exploring expedition in New Guinea during November and
December, 1887.”
“ On November 6, wo parted company with the Q.G.S.S. “ Albatross” at
the mouth of Bell Sound, and made, in the launch “Mabel” up that river,
which keeps a northerly direction, passing through low, swampy country,
covered with mangroves and nipa palms, large channels coming from the
east and west into the river, the country along which remained the same for
about 12 miles up, when, the banks being higher, it gradually changed to
loamy soil, covered with dense undergrowth scrub, with patches of sago and
coco-nut palms growing near the banks of the river. The river narrowed
very much as we advanced, until when we turned back at a distance of about
18 miles up it was less than 50 yards wide, the banks being about 4 ft. above
tidal marks. The water was quite salt and useless for cooking, &c. The
channel was deep all the way, 3 fathoms being the last sounding. Eetnrniug
to the mouth wo shaped our course for the Douglas Elver, entering through
Port Sevan.
“ Port Sevan is a large wide inlet of about 3 to 4 miles in width,
having a deep channel passing between sandbanks dry at low water all
the way up to the mouth of the Douglas. A short distance up the Douglas
we passed Aird Hills, about 30 miles from Cape Blackwood. These hills,
which rise abruptly from the surrounding country, have a channel of water
all round them ; the highest peak is about 1,300 ft. high ; they are covered
with dense scrub, the soil is a rich, black loam. Both at and after passing
Aird Hills the water of the river was quite fresh. There is a good deep
channel up this river, but there are numerous mud banks that make the
navigation of it difficult to a stranger. The river widens out as soon as the
hills are passed and there arc a great number of small islands in it; it also
hears to the west for about 6 miles, where it diverges. One channel runs
south, called by Mr. Sevan the Newbery Elver; it is the most direct outlet.
The Douglas continues wide for about 6 miles further, when it passes some
low hills and narrows down to about COO yards. Continuing up some distance
the hills come in on both sides and are of a peculiar formation, being a
succession of peaks. About 15 miles from the Newbery there is a scattered
village called Tumu, with the houses built on the peaks of the hills, and looks
very remarkable wffien seen from a distance. A few miles farther on there


is a branch called the Plnlp, entering which we went up. It is a deep,
narrow river running between high-peaked hills, in some places the sides
coining down perpendicular to the river.
“ There is some very pretty scenery to be seen here, looking up the river
through the gorges in the range and just catching a glimpse of the distant
ranges.
“ The ridges are of a limestone formation, the soil is of a light brown colour
The scrub on the ridges is not quite so dense as in the lower country, there
being less undergrowth. After proceeding up about 20 miles farther we
came to a succession of rapids. Passing one safely in the launch, wc
grounded on the second ; the current catching the launch swept her into
shallow water; the river was falling fast, so wo were unable to pull her off.
During the time wo were aground wo went for one day up the river in a
boat; after a deal of trouble wc managed to get above four or five more
rapids. The country was all of tlie same formation with ridges on both sides
a short distance from the river. On trying a few dishes of gravel from the
bed of the river a few colours of gold were found but very light, probably
washed down from the ridges at the head of the river; high ranges could be
seen about 15 miles off. Wo had uow travelled by the river from Cape
Blackwood a distance of S7 miles.
“ After a delay of a week through the launch grounding, the river rose
sufficient for us to pull the launch off; wc then returned to Port Bo van,
from thence to Port Eomlllv, which is also a nice large inlet, well sheltered,
with a good, deep channel into it. The Stanhope, and also the Queen's
Jubilee Elvers make their exit into this inlet. We went up the latter
(which may justly bo called a splendid river), winding through rich alluvial
country. About 15 miles up there is a large native village called Evorra,
where the natives cultivate gardens and fence them in. Tobacco, bananas,
and sugar-cane were most noticeable grown. Bread-fruit and coco-mit-
tress grew in abundance all about. The red hvbiscus and variegated crotons
were planted before the houses. Proceeding up the river we passed numerous
small villages, evidently only temporary ones, erected for the purpose of
getting timber for making canoes with, as there were numbers of logs in
front of most of them. The banks of tbc river are from 12 ft. to 15 ft.
above high water, and are of a rich chocolate soil. There are native gardens
cleared and planted at different places along the hanks which they appear
to leave for future use.
“ Five large channels diverge from this river, each having a direct channel
to the sea, the junction of the most easterly called Woodhouse by Mr.
Bevan. Xorth of the head of the delta the river, confined to a single
channel, widens to over half-a-milc in'places.


“AVhcn about 10 miles above Woodbouse junction one morning, the
weather clearing for an hour, we got a good view of the mountain ranges,
one peak, estimated by me to be GO miles distant, I found by theodolite to
be 13,200 feet high. There arc a succession of ranges, one behind the other,
to be seen to the north and north-cast. We ran this river up into the
ridges for 80 miles from the coast. The country on this river can be very
favourably compared with the Johnstone country in Queensland, both in soil
and scrub; there being a greater quantity of land available in New Guinea
between the sea and the ranges. The Johnstone Kiver timbers arc larger
and more plentiful than on the Jubilee, from what one could judge from
the river. This country should grow sugar-cane or other farm products well.
“ The cost of clearing the scrub would probably bo cheaper than in
Queensland, viz., £5 to £lO per acre, if native labour were used.
“ Returning as far as Woodliouse junction, wc ran down the previously
unexplored eastern channel to within sight of the sea, passing through good
country for about 10 miles, when we got into low, swampy country and—near
the coast —thick mangroves and uipa palms. The river near the mouth forms
into two channels, the one to the east, called Aivei Movi, has another largo
channel entering it from the north called Khalayle ; the water in channels is
very shallow’, but deep passages may be found by survejn Following the river
back and out through Port Romilly wm entered Langford Sound, formed
by numerous salt-water channels, which, by following, brought us out again
at Aird Hills. 'Em route we ran three large branches up towards the hills
which we could see no great distance away. The first channel taken, a large,
wide one, led by some very large villages, with big, long houses, the natives
being very numerous. These villages continue for over two miles. The only
high country seen w~as what the villages wmre on, and a view of hills about five
miles distant, and that seemed to extend no distance inland. The w’ater was
too salt to drink. The second branch followed also took us among native
villages, but they wmre not so numerous as in the first —all in low uipa palm
country. The third channel followed boro westerly, passing between low
ranges of hills. There wore some rooky bars across it, making it very shallow’
at times ; the banks were high and covered with dense scrub, mangroves
growing all the way along the edge of the w’ater near the coast. After
arriving at Aird Hills, we took the northern channel and came, out into the
Douglas, which we followed up to the Hewbery, running that river down to
its mouth. The country passed through for the first six miles w r as high, in
places ridges coming from the west. After that we passed through low
swampy country, meeting high banks occasionally where the natives had
planted coco-nuts. There are a great number of channels at the mouth,
making a lot of large islands, on which there are a number of large villages.


-I have noticed during the whole trip that the aatxves are mostly on the
coast, only one permanent village having been found on the fresh-wte* bj*-
tems—namely, Tumu. on the Douglas Diver. The intenor rangeg country
appears to he quite uninhabited.
„ , . fallowed the coast round to another large
“ After leaving the IS ewbery we toilo v eu
, , . ~ , -.1 ;„t n a wide river, a channel from
inlet, which being followed up led into a uu 0 >
~ i_ T Tliore are a lot of large -villages at
which connects it with the lSev\beij.
-\rr if nil for about 20 miles. There was a
the mouth of this river. Wo ran it up for aoou
, _ . . i . fhis channel, about three knots, it
very strong tide running in and out of tins euau ,
• y ° 1 , ~ • doTith from one to three fathoms. It
is very wide and shallow, varjingind p .„ , ~ ,
J . . _ nr . i .-L. , v ofer bein" of uniform depth at oui
narrowed down to about 300 yards, the water 0
turning point.
, , . ,i n TsTnvpmher was very mild, the temper-
“ The weather during the month of iNovemoei u.u y, i
, t, 1 ond below 78 . The sky ivas clouded
ature not being above 90 Fahrenheit a ~ ,
, , , , el eared off for some time. We had
over nearly every day, hut geneially ~ T
t ,i i aednrm« poiniii tT on mostly during the night. In
some very heavy thundcr&toiins, cornu 0
J ISTovembcr, the rain coming down
December it was much the same as n ~
n . -ui f rom 29*75 to 30*10. Sometimes the
more steadilv. The barometer varied
" ’ , , , -ipnllv eradnal. Eeturning to the mouth
fall and rise were sudden, but genet all) gwu °
of the river in December, we followed the coast of Dew G-umea _ a
far as the Katau Elver, when we made direct for Thursday Island, reaching
there on December 24, 1887.
“The rivers traversed over are navigable for vessels drawing up to 12 t.
of water for great dustances inland , the only difficulty being the finding the
right channel at the months, as there are sandbanks in Afferent Erections
Good channels for deeper draught vessels will probably be found mto most
of these rivers by making a survey at their mouths.
.‘Tl.o rising and MU, court.-, to the oast of the Amu run. to
.vithiu a distance of probably only 10 mil« f b "‘ to * “ "“'l
ward, o, between the Airci and H.erge Ever. (CO «nlo. along the o art
te the w-ost), the ranges are at a greater distance ...land, say abort 40 ml™.
The ranges run in a north-west and south-east direction.
.. . j7 ~ , , p neorae Fiver on the loest navigable
11 From the Aivei on the Fast to the worge ui a
channels lead from one opening and river into anotner over am area of 100
miles, by means of which necessity for going to the open sea ts avoided.
« Ido not consider there is any more danger from fever in New Gmnea than
in the north of Queensland.” H HBMMT> L g


COEEESPOXDENCE.
THE JUBILEE RIVER. NEW GUINEA,
To the Editor of the Daily Telegraph.
Sir, —The name of a river in New Guinea is not likely to interest many
of your readers, but it is undesirable that any should have two names, and
it is a universally accepted law that new discoveries should bear the name
given by the discoverer.
The river which Mr. Sevan has named the “ Queen’s Jubilee” was named
in 1883 the “Wickham.” I reported the discovery of it by my colleague to
the Eoyal Geographical Society at the time, and my letter was duly published
in the proceedings of that Society.
The report of Mr. Bevan’s last voyage settles the identity of the river
beyond the possibility of question. The Aivei is one mouth of the Wickham
and it was by it that Mi-. Chalmers entered the large river. Mr. Bevan
describes the Aivei as an affluent of the Jubilee, and by it he came down
from the river to the sea.
Mr. Sevan is wrong in supposing the Aivei to have been previously'
unexplored. Mr. Chalmers was on it on the above occasion, and in your
contemporary, the Sydney Morning Herald, of December 21 last, is an
account of a voyage to that delta region in which the Aivei, Alele and
Panaroa Eivers were revisited.
I do not -wish to detract from the value of dir. Devan's discoveries, but it
will be found that the above river and some mountains renamed by Mr,
Bevan were long ago recorded by the Eoyal and other Geographical Societies
of Europe.
Tours, &c.,
81, Queen-street, Woollahra, February 11, 1888. W. G. LAWES.
To the Editor of the Daily Telegraph.
Sir, —Under the above heading the Eev. W. G. Lawes, in a letter published
in your columns on Saturday last, says : “ The river which Mr. Bevan has
named the Queen’s Jubilee was named in 1883 the ‘ Wickham’” (by Mr.
Chalmers).
In proceedings Eoyal Geographical Society', published London, February,
1887, will be found a paper by' Mr. Chalmers descriptive of his travels
in New Guinea, illustrated by a map. Delineated on this map are several
large river openings, one of which thus named —“Alele” (Wickham) —is
shown extending inland for something less than ten miles.
Neither do the rivers described and charted by Mr. Bevan (and now
authenticated by Government survey') appear in the map attached to Mr.
Chalmer’s work, “ Pioneering in New Guinea,” published London, 1887, nor
on the Admiralty charts, (See map in Daily Telegraph, February 1, 1888.)
The characteristic of the Jubilee Eiver, as ascertained by Mr. Bevan, is
that, coming down in a single noble flood of fresh water from the mountains,
it first bifurcates at Woodhouso Junction — e.r/., at the head of the delta, a
point some thirty miles as the crow flies from the coast. Thence it eventually
disembogues itself by means of at least seven large main rivers—viz,, the


openin' l ' at Bald Head, the Mawau, Aral, TJnta, Panaroa, Aivei, Aide; also
by halfia-huudred minor channels into several estuaries or sounds on the
littoral of the groat Papuan Gulf.
It is the Aide, followed up for, at the very outside, a distance of 10 or a
dozen miles, that Mr. Chalmers named the “ Wickham according to hi kton
maps above referred to, while it is the mam westerly arm and the grem
parent river from the head of its delta northwards into Cm mountains that
Mr Sevan, the discoverer, has named the “ Queen s Jubilee liner.
As well might Captain Blackwood, of H.M.S. “Ply,” who ascended the Aird
River for some 20 miles in 1815, claim to have discovered the Jubilee Ener
on the ground that Mr. Sevan has now linked one river with another bv
means of deltaic channels or in virtue of the nomenclature of Bald Head.
Now, let us see what position is taken up in the matter by those very
lloval and other Geographical Societies of Europe to which Mi. Lanes so
Confidently refers, In “ Proceedings E.G.S.published London, October,
1887 the place of honor is assigned to an account of the Discovery of Tw
New’liivers in British New Guinea by Theodore P. Sevan accompanied }
a map showiim at a glance the respective positions occupied by the Queen s
wXKivor'»d life Alele (•• Wiekl.am”), mile the
for nearly 100 miles of its course running m a genera,! noitn-vve.ter y
direction from Bald Head, the latter is shown as a comparatively insignificant
creek situated on the coast 30 miles distant from the nearest point.
Yet another illustration One of the chiefcst continental geographers,
Herr H. Wichmann, co-editor of Peterman's Mitteihingen— writing olieialh
from Gotha, under date September 6, 1887, alludes to Mr _ B «™ 8 “j 5 "
coveries as in his opinion the most important since the discover} ot the lly
Eivor, “ as they cover a great portion of New Guinea until now a tv ait e place
on the map.”
It follows as an indisputable corollary that Mr. Chalmers either suppressed
information on the geography of New Guinea of great importance to the
scientific world or that Mr. Lawes now claims for his colleague discoveries
never made hy him, and which appear in no reliable map or repoit pub-
lished before the discoveries made by Mr. Bevan.
Mr. Lawes presumes to make assertions regarding the discoveries of Mr.
Bevan which are regrettable as being utterly incorrect and which evince a
spirit little in keeping with charity or fairplay.
Mr Lawes is further evidently in melancholy ignorance of the geograp y
of the country which he ventures to discuss, hopelessly mixing up the Aivei
Aide and wfekham ; and then states that Mr. Bevan is “ wrong,” as if it
were possible that he (Mr. Lawes), who has never been on the spot coud
know better than the gallant explorer, Mr. Bevan, the only geographer who
has ever reached the river in question.
Maps and plans can be seen at the society’s rooms in Phillip-street.
As president of the Eoyal Geographical Society Sydney, the parent
society Pat home not unnaturally looks to me, not only to furnish correct
information on matters geographical, but,also to settle as far as lam ah
any differences that may arise locally between competitive explores.
Yours, &c.,
SIR EDWARD STRICKLAND,
President Royal Geographical Society
February 20, 18S8. CNew South Wales Branch).


The Rev. W. G-. Lawes, in reply, wrote a long letter published in the
Sydney Dai!;/ Telegraph, of lOth March, 1888, in which he refers to “a map
published in 1885, on which the supposed position and course of the
‘Wickham’ is marked.”
Mr. Lawes continued : —“ Let it bo the Jubilee, the Centenary, the
Wickham, or anything else, but that it is a very large river discovered in
18S3 and explored by Mr. Bovan in 1887 no one who reads the published
accounts will for a moment doubt.”
To which the following was an answer ;
QUEEN’S JUBILEE v. WICKHAM ELVER, NEW GUINEA.
To the Editor of the Daily Telegraph.
Sir, —Tour issue of the 10th hist, contains a long, rambling rejoinder to
my reply to Rev. W. G. Lawes’ first letter.
Mr. Lawes, in support of his absurd contention, refers to Mr. Chalmers’
account of explorations in South-eastern New Guinea, published in “ E.G.S.
Proceedings, London, February, 1887.” That work is in my possession, and
I am also quite acquainted with all that cither of them have at any time
written.
Air. Chalmers’ accounts of his travels are characterised by a vagueness
that greatly detracts from their geographic value —traverses, astronomical
observations, and even estimated distances being conspicuous by their absence.
This very deplorable looseness is now made the very peg upon which they
stoop to hang their claims.
All that Mr. Chalmers claims to have done in his account read before the
R.G.S., also in his other voluminous writings, is “to have started from
Orokolo after breakfast, paddled up various crocks, seen where the Alele
branched off, and then to have turned hack, not having gone prepared to
make a further ascent.”
Careful survey has since shown that where the Alele (“Wickham”) does
branch off is some six miles only from the coast. In “ Work and Adventure
in New Guinea, 1877 to 1885,” by James Chalmers and W. W. Gill, five
river openings are mentioned as being reported by natives as separate
mouths of one river, and on an accompanying sketch plan imaginary
connecting lines show the way in which they were reported to join.
If any evidence were needed that native reports possess no scientific value,
all that is needed is to compare the fictitious map based merely on native
reports referred to with the reliable surveys since made by the explorer,
Mr. Bovan, authenticated by a licensed surveyor holding the commission of
the Queensland Government.
In further proof that native reports do not constitute discovery, and of
their utter unreliability and misleading character, I have only to quote the
following from Air. Chalmers’ “Work and Adventure” above referred to,
page 147: —“ At Bald Head is the Alaivau. They (the natives) say it is a
distinct river. All the w r ay up the Alaivau River is deep and wide. The
people are black cannibals, build large temples, &c.”
The absurdity of this is shown by the fact that the Alaivau has since been
proved to be but an insignificant creek, some 10 miles only in length, in the
delta of the same river system as the Alele.
Yours, &c.,
SIR EDWARD STRICKLAND,
President Royal Geographical Society
Sydney, Alarch 15, 1888. (New' South Wales Branch).


To the EiaLt Hon. the Secretary of State for the Colonies,
Downing-street, London.
Sydney, 16 February, 1888.
I first visited New Guinea in November, 1881. In the spring of 1885,
I returned to New Guinea and made an exhaustive investigation into the
resources of the south-east peninsula {vide reports published in the English
and Colonial press).*
In the same year (1885) the late Special Commissioner, Sir Peter
Scratchley, induced me to embark in trading operations in British New
Guinea by the provisional promise of concessions that would assist me in
forming a company to bring more capital into the undertaking than I was
personally able to command.
I accordingly spent considerable private means in commercially exploiting
the south-east coast with very favourable results, but owm<* to the death of
Sir Peter Scratchley negotiations were never completed, and the undertaking
fell through, owing to the uncertain tenure of sites allotted to and occupied
by —me, and the unsettled state of the country.
Enclosure Ais a copy of my application to Sir Peter Scratchley, under
date 7th December, 1885.
My case is referred to in the following terms in “ Ecport on British New
Guinea, from data and notes by the late Sir Peter Scratchley, by Mr. G.
Seymour Fort (Private Secretary),” published Melbourne, 1886,
Page 9. “ The following applications for concessions of laud were recorded ;
Pa»e 10. (3.) “From a New Guinea trader, in order to enable him to start
° a company for the development of native industries. The correspondence
in reference to this application was never completed. ’
Page 10, however, also states: “ Permission was granted to Mr. 11. O.
Forbes, who has a station at Sogere, about 50 miles inland from Port
Moresby, to luy land from the natives in that district.”
Although my claim ranked foremost, and Sir Peter Scratchley wrote
under date 19th September, 1885 “As Mr. Sevan is aware lam anxious
to assist him in his enterprise " yet his death upset all my arrangements,
and his promise was never fulfilled.
********
The negotiations were (after nearly a year’s delay, due to the non-arrival
in New Guinea of the new Commissioner) continued with Sir Peter
Scratchley’s successor, the Hon. John Douglas. Mr. Douglas’ Private
Secretary (Mr. Hely) then wrote, by direction of His Excellency the Special
Commissioner, as follows :
Extract from letter to Mr. Sevan, dated Ist July, 1886 ;
2. “He” (the Special Commissioner) “does not anticipate that there
will be any difficulty in authorizing such a Company when the
proper time comes.”
* H M Special Commissioner (the late Sir Peter Scratchley) granted Mr. Sevan a license to explore and
trade in British New Guinea, aider date 12 August, 1885, which was ratified and renewed hj Hon, John
Douglas, 4 February, ISB7.


3. “ He will, in the meantime, issue either a general or a special permit
to the agent or manager of such company, ns such agent or
manager resident in the Protected Territory' if such a company is
incorporated.”
I could not of course consider so indefinite a reply as sufficient warranty
for inviting the co-operation of capitalists; and was again after two years of
unremitting labour and considerable expenditure—solely of my own private
means—baffled in my efforts to develop the legitimate natural resources
of the country.
* #
# # * *
It had been a desire of the late Sir Peter Scratchley that the unknown
territory in the bight of the great Papuan Gulf should be explored. Bearing
this in mind, I started in the spring of 188G to explore that country, with
the result that discoveries were made to which Sir Henry Parkes (Premier
of New South Wales) publicly alluded in the following terms :—“ It was
clear,” he said, “that more practical results would follow Mr. Bevan’s
expedition than any that had before been carried out in New Guinea, and
it was of great importance that the knowledge gained should be followed
up with further research.”— (Sydney Daily Telegraph, 14th July, 1887.)
Two great rivers discovered—and named by mo the Douglas and Queen’s
Jubilee respectively—l traced up in each case for a distance of nearly 100
miles inland.
The native inhabitants (confined almost exclusively in this vast area to the
coast regions where their principal food products,' fish and coco-nuts, arc
abundant) were found to be amenable to humane influences ; while the rich
tropical flats through which these two magnificent rivers flow in their middle
courses, also the mountains forming their watershed, appeared to be unin-
habited. The fertility of the soil, suitability of climate, and facilities for
navigation arc such that —given a tenure —I could command the investment
of capital both for purposes of tropical agriculture and exportation of
indigenous sago, nutmegs, and spices.*
Enclosure B— (Report published by The Royal Geographical Society in
their Proceedings, London, October, 1887) gives in a condensed form some
results of my, at present, unrequited labours.
* #
Receiving the loan of a steam launch from the New South Wales Govern-
ment, through the Premier (Sir Henry Parkes), and the use of the services
of a competent surveyor from the Queensland Government, through the
Premier (Sir Samuel Griffith), I returned to New Guinea, for th & fifth time,
in November, 1887.
Enclosure C contains map and account showing results of this my last
expedition, now being published in the Sydney “ Daily Telegraph.
[A large scale map is in course of preparation, and a further paper
recording my latest discoveries is being prepared by me for the Royal
Geographical Society, London.]
* In this way whole tribes at present addicted to head-hunting and such-like savag'c practices may he
won over to agricultural and other peaceful pursuits, as in British North Borneo.


To briefly sum up :
(1) I have now explored and accurately surveyed the mam features of
a territory equal in area to about one-sixth of the whole of New Guinea.
(2) have proved the existence of deep channels into these now rivers from
the Papuan Gulf.
(3) that the interior is for the most part—possibly entirely— unin-
habited.
(4) and have throughout not spilt—nor allowed to be spilt—o??e drop
of native blood-, but, on the contrary, have proved that the aboriginals
of the coast regions are amenable to humane influences, and can be raised
to a higher standard of civilization and comfort ; while the few timorous
tribes dwelling back from the sea are glad of protection from the skull-
hunting raids of their more powerful coast neighbours. These latter would
readily assist in the cultivation of products such as : —Rice, maize, sago,
arrowroot, high-class tobacco, vanilla, and spices, both for their own con-
sumption and profit as well as for export. They could also be trained to
collect and barter such indigenous commodities as caoutchouc, gutta-percha,
massoi-bark, edible birds’ nests, camphor, beeswax, copal, rosin, (rambler
nutmegs, pepper, hemp, and ratans.
Although my work has been done in accordance with the wishes _of the
late Sir Peter Seratchley, and has received the warmest expressions ot
approval from the Hon. John Douglas, yet no assistance, direct or indirect,
nor pecuniary aid of any hind have been rendered me by the
Administration. Apart from the disinterested aid of a iew friends, my
explorations have been conducted at my own expense.
The time, I think, has therefore come for me to revive—in an altered
form—my former application for concessions to enable ms to revert to
industrial pursuits for the development of the new territoiy.
The following views, as published in the Townsville Herald under date
21 Jan., 1888, will explain my wishes :
“ With reference to future exploration, Mr. Revan says that ho believes
all that steam can do has been done, and he would establish a depot at Aird
Hills with outlying stations at one or two pacific villages where the
dialects might be learnt. Having won the further confidence of the
natives, he would use their canoes for reaching the interior far above
navigable limits, as he has already had experience of what they can do m
the way of paddling against strong currents and in making portages at
rapids. This could only be done by operating on a large scale, over a large
area, and with a large outlay.*
“ Mr. Sevan considers that having spent five years in pioneering and
exploration in New Guinea with unprecedented results, against all the
rigours of the climate and attendant risks, and also at a great dram upon his
personal means, he is entitled to substantial recognition from the Imperial
Government.
* Unless conducted on a large scale the cost of communications and transport ot produce would eat up
all the profits.


“ This recognition ho would like in the form of a grant of uninhabited
land on the rivers which he has discovered. With this as security he ivoulcl
offer inducements to capitalists to start planting operations and exploitation of
the interior on an extensive scale on the lines before mentioned.’ ’t
* * #
* m * *
I have now therefore the honor to apply for a grant on conditions of use,
of the uninhabited blocks (aggregating 254,080 acres) as marked on map
and schedule, forming enclosure D. My claim being based on the equity of
the plea of the early assurances of Her Majesty’s Special Commissioners for
British New Guinea, in addition to long and great services since rendered
by me—free of all cost to the State —by the success of my original explora-
tions and the extent and value of my discoveries.
* *
* *
* * * #
I may add in conclusion that I have received overtures to explore the
German New Guinea Territory, and have also been offered land on favour-
able terms in the German portion of the island, where settlement is now
invited.
As a British subject, I sincerely trust that such a course will be unnecessary,
seeing that what I ask is to be allowed to establish my plantations in the
heart of my discoveries as some small reward for the perils, toils, and personal
expenditure connected with their original exploration.
Such an undertaking will go to prove how the country can be made self-
supporting. And, if as successful as my late explorations, will tend to reduce
the period during which the cost of administration of British New Guinea
will remain an annual charge upon the Imperial and Colonial revenues.
*####*******
Permit me, in conclusion, to point out the very grave disability from
which I have suffered, viz,, of having had to deal— not with one permanent
officer throughout, but with three or four Administrators (succeeding each
other, sometimes at long intervals, and but seldom resident in British New
Guinea).
In this way, the undertakings of one Commissioner may be entirely
overlooked by his eventual successor, who perhaps fails to thoroughly
acquaint himself with the transactions of his predecessors, thereby in-
calculable injury may be, and has been, wrought, not only to private
individuals but also to the public service.
I have, &c.,
THEODORE BEYAN.
t The practical operations of such an association would provide the essentials of work, and prepare the
way for future colonization of the high and likely salubrious main ranges refen’ed to by the premier
Australian scientist, Baron Sir Ford. Yon Mueller. {See Preface.)


Yield now
in store at
Estimated quantity
Village.
when established.
Port Moresby.
on station at date.
1885.
12 November
13
bags
Ivaile
13
10
»}
Kapakapa
TTnlo
18
28
7
”
•1 bags
30
j
6 »
1o
!
bags
10 lags
or a return of 2
tons Beche-de-mer for the
month
from grounds that have
been fished over
for years.*
Enclosure A referred to in foregoing letter of application.
Port Moresby, New Guinea, 7 Deceniber, 3885.
Your Excellency,
I now have the honor to give returns from my following (native-
managed) Beche-de-mer stations for the month
Proposed British Mew Guinea Land Produce and Mercantile Agency
Company.
I had the honor of writing your Excellency on the above subject under
date Hula, I6th November) 1885, and now beg to add the following par-
ticulars.
The proposed Association, if floated, would he sufficiently strong to operate
anywhere and everywhere, and, as hitherto disaffected natives would thus be
brought into mutually beneficial relationship with the Company, it would
become, under your Excellency’s sway, one of the most powerful civilizing
agencies ever brought into play in British New Guinea.
My ambition would be that not a single spot whence payable returns could
be secured should he neglected, and I have no hesitation in saying that the
volume of its trade would soon become enormous. Eor many years to come
I am (humanly speaking) certain that the export of valuable Beche-de-mer
alone would exceed LOO tons per annum.
All mercantile and mercantile agency business would also come within the
scope of the Company’s operations, and I venture to express the opinion that
a powerful Association, of the kind intended, devoting itself to the develop-
ment and promotion of trade in New Guinea would be a public boon.
This Company being the pioneer and premier association of the kind, with
attendant difficulties to overcome, and being likely to contribute largely to
the revenue, would consequently ask for specially liberal treatment at your
Excellency’s bands in the matter of land grant. Also for certain exclusive
rio-hts and privileges, such for instance, as exemption from import dues on
tobacco, trade, stores, &c., and that only a moderate impost might be placed
on the Company’s export (say) 5 per cent, on beche-de-mer, copra, &c.
* The schedule of returns of bcchc-de-raer, printed above, is also quoted in report on British New
Guinea, from data and notes by the late Sir Peter Scratchier, published Melbourne, 1886.


As your Excellency is aware, trading prospects in New Guinea are not
thought highly of in Colonial commercial circles, reasons in part probably
being—
1. That owing to several causes, nearly all who have heretofore traded
in New Guinea have failed pecuniarily, none indeed having made
a marked success.
2. The impossibility of getting marine insurance cover, except perhaps
to one or two well-known points only, and then at high premiums.
3. Liability to loss of life and property at the hands of the natives.
4. The bad name attaching to the climate and country, and alleged
poverty of resources.
The above and other causes have no doubt operated in the past against
the formation of an association similar to the one now proposed which,
in addition, will now have a further drain on its resources in having to
contribute its quota towards cost of government.
Under all these circumstances, though I am sanguine of the ultimate suc-
cess of the Company, if worked upon the lines which I should wish to see
followed, I am not so certain of success in getting the necessary capital
subscribed unless, in addition to the rights and privileges before mentioned
in this and in my former letter (dated Hula, 16th October last), shareholders
were given the security of landed property: (say) of a grant of 100 square
miles of pastoral country (for breeding cattle, mules, horses, &c.), and pre-
ferably bordering on Beagle and Hood Bays and district; also of 16,000
acres for plantation purposes cut up into four lots of 4,000 acres apiece,
and either on different river frontages or in part contiguous as might be
arranged. I would also ask for the Company a small grant of land at each
place where it established a station which yielded a satisfactory contribution
towards the revenue of the country.
The idea which recommends itself for putting such a Company on a
broad colonial basis would be to apportion shares for simultaneous
subscription in Melbourne, Sydney, and Brisbane, Townsville and Cooktown,
reserving one-half at least of the nominal share capital with the option of
placing same at a future date on the London market if deemed advisable
and rendered necessary by the magnitude of the Company’s operations.
Failing your Excellency’s approval to all or any of the above proposals,
the writer solicits information as to the most favourable terms on which
an association of the kind could acquire Real Estate for the purposes
intended, and the concessions that would be granted.
I have, &c.,
THEODOBE BEY AN.
To His Excellency Sir Peter Scratchley,
H.M. Special Commissioner for British New Guinea.


COMP NATIVE STATEMENT OE PROGRESS IN GERMAN NEW
GUINEA, AND RETROGRESSION IN BRITISH NEW
GUINEA UNDER THE PROTECTORATE.
Germans in New Guinea. —Tlic German New Guinea Company has spent
already about £250,000 in starting the colonization of New Guinea and
adjacent islands. They have erected a great many stations along the coast,
started a local government, and surveyed all the harbours ; besides, the}
have been having trials in agriculture, and now, after this experience have
started large plantations in New Guinea. This scheme, we believe, will be
the success of the country, owing to the cheapness and abundance ot native
labour. Already they have 500 natives from the adjacent islands and -00
Malays. They are employed in growing cotton, coffee, and tobacco, the
company has forbidden home emigration, and has thrown the country open
now, wishing the emigration to come from Australia. Sydney JJaili /
Telegraph, March 17, 1888.
************
Please compare the above extract-relating to the progress of German
New Guinea—with the following, culled from among hundreds of similar
animadversions in the Australian press, on the stagnation, and even
retrogression, in British New Guinea under the protectorate :
************
« The Government has already subscribed large sums towards the expenses
of a Protectorate, which, to use the words of the Commissioner—freely
quoted—has caused the trade which existed m New Guinea at the
time of his taking office to dwindle to nil.”— Melbourne Daily Telegraph,
July 22, 1887. „ „ *
********* * * *
“All that the Rev. Mr. Chalmers gave the Administration of British
New Guinea credit for possessing, as the result of an expenditure o._
£50,000, was a gaol and a bungalow at Port Moresby.” Sydney Morning
Herald, September 6, 1887.
% % # % %
“ British New Guinea is the rankest commercial failure south of the line.
The steamers that now run there from Thursday Island are to ho dis-
continued, as it is utterly useless catering for a place where trading is
practically prohibited.” —Sydney paper, March 10, 1888.
A FEW WORDS IN REFERENCE TO THE TRITE CHARACTER
OE THE INTRUSIVE MALAYS, POLYNESIANS, AND
PAPUANS COMPOSING THE NATIVE POPULATIONS Oh
BRITISH NEW GUINEA.
While there can be but little doubt that the mixed native population can be raised m
course of time to a higher standard of civilization and comfort, there is oi erwhennuig
evidence to prove that the Papuans are by nature both treacherous and ilooy nr y .
Their character will be best ameliorated by the operations of associations on uhe lines ot
the British North Borneo Company, or German Now Guinea Company, in,° f " 8
territories whole tribes once addicted to head-hunting and such like sai V-, 1
now been won over to agricultural and other peaceful pursuits.
* * ******


The coast tribes of the Gulf of Papua, New Guinea.—Extracts from paper by Rev. J.
Chalmers, published in Proceedings Royal Geographical Society, London, February, 1887.
“The flooring of the aisle received its high polish from the blood of victims dragged along
to the end where the most sacred place was
. A feast would soon be on, and the heaps ofshuUs would disappear, because all
would find their places on the skullery pins
That headgear once belonged to inland natives who were killed, brought into
the dubu, presented to the gods, then cooked and eaten. ”
British New Guinea.—Reports on native affairs by A. Musgrave, junior, Assistant
Deputy-Commissioner, published by Government Printer, Brisbane, 1887.
Mr. Musgrave appends to this report an “ Approximate return of outrages and massacres
by natives within the protectorate of British New Guinea” (from dates of first visit of
H.M. ships to June 30, 1886*).
Eighty-one distinct outrages and massacres of whites and others are recorded —many
unprovoked—resulting in the destruction of hundreds of lives and thousands of pounds
worth of property.
The Assistant Deputy-Commissioner states : —“ When a foreigner settles in a village
the murderous propensities of the natives at once receive a check. He discourages
murder on the part of the villagers with whom he dwells, and outsiders have a whole-
some fear of his firearms, which they naturally expect him to use on behalf of his friends. *'
Mr. Musgrave In the same report quotes the following atrocity :
16 October 4.—lt was reported to me by Mr. Geo. Hunter, that the brother of the native
destroyed by an alligator last month had murdered one of the widows of the latter. This
most revolting crime was perpetrated under circumstances of peculiar atrocity. The
native taken by the alligator was named Odomobonner, and belonged to the village or
district of Merkara, on the Goldie River. He and his brother Vabouri, however, had
been dwelling with the natives of a small village, called Kurimune, on the bank of the
Laloki River, some 10 miles from Port Moresby. The former had two wives, one from
the village of Barond, about 2 miles north of Granville ; and the second, named Merbatta,
from the village of Badili, about 3 miles to the south of the settlement. The natives of
Kurimune village, knowing that some of their lives would be demanded by Merkara for
the loss of Odemobonner, fled from the village, and scattered in the adjoining bush.
Vabouri, equally impressed with the necessity for taking a life for his dead brother,
decided to kill one of his sisters-in-law.
“ By this course he avoided wounding the feelings of the Kurimune people, with whom
he was on friendly terms. He probably also reflected that the villages to which the
women belonged were less likely to retaliate, as they are under the influence of the
mission teachers. The villagers of Kurimune used formerly to live higher up the course
of the river, and I believe a teacher once resided amongst them. Their nomadic habits,
however, made it necessary to withdraw him. The Merkara native was seized by the
alligator on the 6th of September ; on the 25th the murderer, Vabouri, enticed a little
boy, the son of Merbatta, to go with him to the Laloki River. The wretched mother,
apparently unable to control her anxiety, followed after the boy. On reaching the river
Vabouri seized an opportunity and speared her, and from the accounts I received, he
then deliberately hacked her to pieces while still living. He cut off her hands at the
wrists and threw them into the river, doing the same with the arms above the elbows.
He severed her feet at the ankles, and the legs above the knees. The breasts and
head were treated similarly. The body was rippedop cn and the viscera thrown separately
into the river. Finally the trunk was cast to the alligators—less sanguinary monsters
than this incarnate devil. I should not have described this case so circumstantially, but
H is desirable to realize the characters of these savages as revealed by their conduct to
each other. After some experience of South African natives and North American
Indians, Ido not remember ever hearing of any such act of barbarity. Is it to In-
supposed, in the case of white men—where Hew Guinea natives can gratify this S'pirit of
superstition and bloodfhirst, gaining fame and plunder besides —they will stay their hands
if they can hill with impunity ? Certainly Ido not entertain confident views on the point.”
[One map. ]
Sydnej 7 : Charles Potter, Government Printer.- -ISSS.




[N.B.—This letter is in reply to one couched in very similar terms to that addressed to the Rt. Hon. The
Secretary of State for the Colonies, sec p.p, 36-39, save that Mr. Bevan added
“ Your Excellency, in response to my application for aid for my Fifth Expedition, refusing- on the ground
of the slowness of incoming contributions, although Mr. H, O. Forbes (who came to New Guinea after me),
a recipient of many favours, and of considerable moneys for many years, from the New Guinea Adminis-
tration, was State-aided about the same time that my application was refused.”
Sir, Thursday Island, 17th March, 188 S.
I have the honor to acknowledge receipt of your letter of the 18th
February with enclosures, namely,—■
(a) Copy of your letter to Sir Peter Scratchier, of the 7th December,
1885.
(h) Eeport published in the Proceedings of the Eoval Ideographical
Society of London for October, 1887.
(c) Map, and account setting forth result of your last Expedition,
GO Schedule and plan of lands applied for by you.
In reference to these papers, and to your accompanying letters, I hare to
remark—
1. That in the expedition (Mr, Eovan’s fourth expedition) which was
fitted out hy Messrs. Hums, Pliilp, & Co., under your leadership, and which
left 1 hnrsday Island on the 17th of March of last year, a large amount of
information appears to have been obtained in reference to the rivers running
into the Papuan Gulf, between the Aird and Paid Head.—A great deal of
ered/t is due, I think, to nil who were concerned in this expedition.—To your-
self as the original or of it, to Messrs. Burns, Philp, & Co., who so generously
enabled you to carry it into effect, to Captain Boore, who navigated the
“ Victory,” and to the various scientific gentlemen who assisted you as
photographers and collectors.
I was myself cognizant of this expedition, and the only regret 1 have in
connection with it is that you did not direct your attention to that portion
of the coast between the mouth of the Ply and the Aird, which has never
been explored, and which is still entirely unknown to us. You will doubt-
less remember that I directed your attention to this portion of the coast
line, which I was most anxious should be examined, and I have frequently
adverted to it as a most interesting area of undiscovered territory. On
your return from your second expedition, I observe that, after descending
the Newbery, which is one of the mouths of the Aird, you appear to have
touched on the verge of this undescribed portion of the coast. This in no
way detracts from your merits as the or ig in at d iseorerer of the upper waters
of the Aird and the Wickham, together with the extensive deltaic regions
which you have explored and described. °
2. With regard to your second expedition, I can only say that I was not
informed of your intentions in reference to it, and if “any"' special sanction
had been required from me I think 1 should probably have refused to give
it, on the grounds that it rvas a most hazardous thing to navigate the w r ators
and rivers of the Papuan Gulf in such a steam launch as" the -‘Mabel.”
Nevertheless yon justified the risks incurred, and returned to Thursday
Island after a second successful expedition in which your previous discoveries
M ere verified. I congratulate you, and those who accompanied you, on bavin**
survived the perils of a most hazardous voyage. You deserve all the credit
t2a 30—88 (b)


duo to those who run such risks in the cause of geographical discovery. I
congratulate you further on the peaceful relations -which, throughout, you
maintained with the native inhabitants of the country you explored.
3. On referring to your charts, namely, to those* published in the pro-
ceedings of the Geographical Society and in the Daily Tclcff raph newspaper,
I observe that you have availed yourself largely of the privileges which
attach to a discoverer of naming the prominent natural features of the
country you describe. There was, no doubt, ample scope for the exercise
of your discretion in this respect, and I observe that you propose to honor
me by designating one of the principal rivers the Douglas. I think, how-
ever, that the main branch of the river which you thus refer to, from its
source to its mouth, should still be called the Aird. Captain Blackwood
entered one of the mouths of this river. It has been known to geographers
as the Aird for the last forty years. It is perfectly true that you made
much more extensive discoveries than he did in connection with the inland
course of the river. It will in no way detract from the merits of your
investigations that this river should still be known as the Aird. You might
as well rechristen the Fly, and call it the D’Albertis or the MTarlane.*
There are scores of explorers _who have had much more to do with the navi-
gation of the Fly than the original discoverers, but that is no reason why
they should claim the right to rechristeii it. It is the same with the Aird.
1 hope that the Aird will remain the Aird, just as Cape Blackwood should
remain Cape Blackwood, though I observe that this designation is entirely
omitted in your chart published in the proceedings of the Geographical
Society. “ Lord Salisbury Island” is all very well, but Capo Blackwood is
the right thing and the old thing, and I hope that in your next chart such a
well known land mark will not be suppressed in favour of a new-faugled
designation which nobody recognizes. Then, ns regards the Arthur Gordon
TitiugCj I obser\ e tliat you lia/vG rGolinstcucd ifc tbo JVTiLSgrtivG Hungo. X
behe\e it is, at least, ten years ago since the Arthur Gordon Bange was seen
and named by Mr. Chalmers and Captain Dubbins. Why should it not
iemam the Arthur Gordon Eaugc. AYliat is the use of confusnm onr mails
with a lot of rival names ?
With regard to the river which you call the Queen’s Jubilee, I think also
that there can be very little doubt that it is identical with the Wickham.
On this I feel a little less confident, hut if it is not, wo are bound, I think,
to find out where the Wickham is. This in no way detracts from the merits
ofjour discoveries. Ton were the first to navigate the inland waters of the
Wickham, and you ascertained that it was a noble, navigable river, of which
we had known very little. Still, if I am not much mistaken, the Queen’s
Jubilee Eiver is identical with the river which had been previously known
as the Wickham, and, until it is proved to the contrary, it should* I think,
remain the TV ickham. I hope you will quite understand that I have no
wish to question your privileges of nomenclature whore there can he no
doubt that natural features have not been named before, though much may
he said for the retention of the native names. I observe, for instance, that
the Arthur Gordon Eange, or, as yon term it, the Mnsgrave Eango, is known
to the natives as Waehaeageeee, If this range is to have a new name,
why should it not receive the name under which it is known to the natives P
4. I now come to that portion of your letter in which von ask for some
recognition of your services as an explorer, and for certain grants of land
which you propose to occupy for industrial purposes. You°ask for these
on two groundslst, on account of the assurances of the late Special
i* l ivsn not f adl t l i'. t r th f between the Aird and the Fly Elvers. The original discoverers of the Flv.
also D Albertis, IFiarlano, and Evenll, all entered and left by one and the same main channel,— T. 11, ‘


Commissioner, Sir Peter Scratchley; 2nd, on account of the value of your
discoveries. On these grounds you ask me to grant you four blocks of land on
the Aird and the Queen’s Jubilee Rivers, estimated to contain 254,080 acres.*
I have no authority to make any such grants.
I cannot recommend that any such grants should be made.
No land policy has yet been decided on.
Until it is, and until the new Administration, which is about to be formed,
has decided upon the principles to be recognized, I cannot undertake to say
that your application will be seriously considered.
If, however, the claims of the numerous benefactors and discoverers of
New Guinea are to be recognized on a scale commensurate with their merits,
and on an estimate approaching to that which you lay down, there will be
very little of New Guinea left for the natives or for the general public, who
doubtless, long to share in the distribution of its unappropriated lands.
I observe that you put forward as an alternative that you should bo
allowed to buy land from the natives, and you quote as a precedent, some
authority given by Sir Peter Scratchley to Mr. 11. O. Forbes to buy laud
from the natives. I know nothing of such authority having been given.
Mr. Forbes was employed by me, but he has left for England, and I have not
the means of referring to him. I think it highly improbable that he was
authorized to buy any land except for the Government.f All purchases not
made on account of the Government have been disallowed, and I cannot
concede to you what I have refused to others.
I have, <tc,,
JOHN DOUGLAS
Special Commissioner for Uritish New Guinea.
Theodore Bevau, Esq., E.R.G.S.
Sir, Dinner Island, 29 November, 1883.
lu reference to your letter to his Excellency Sir Peter Scratchley, on
the subject of forming a company in New Guinea, I am directed to state that
his Excellency is unable at present to give you a final answer, but that ho
does not think he will be able to grant any concessions for the formation of
a company such as you describe. I am, &c.,
G. SEYMOUR PORT,
T. Sevan, Esq., Private Secretary.
Hula, New Guinea.
Care of Monteliore, Joseph, & Co.,
4, O’Council-street, Sydney, 7th April, 1888.
Tour Excellency,
I received to-day your reply dated Thursday Island, 17th March, 1888,
to my letter covering application for grants of land, dated Sydney, 18th
February, 1888.
You now express a regret that I did not turn my attention to that portion
of the coast lying between the mouth of the Ely and the Aird Rivers,
To this I can only reply that I have never seen as vet any reason to con-
demn my original judgment, so far as selecting the site for my explorations
was concerned.
Eor, with an economical outlay, and no assistance from your Administra-
tion, results have been obtained by me which have elicited world-wide
astonishment and approval.
enclose 1 mUSt b ° s ' uided by tho to ™ 3 of W* ta* letter to you, a copy of which 1
f Nevertheless that authority was actually jfiven to Mr. Forbes. (See p. 30.)—1MJ.


To quote one encomium amongst many, the President of this branch of the
Royal Geographical Society, in a letter to the New South Wales Government
recently said:—-
“Mr. Sevan has largely contributed to the unfolding of the hidden secrets
of JS'ew Guinea to an extent which never has been equalled —See Preface.
You yourself remarked in a letter to me dated Sydney, 4th February,
ISB7, as follows :
‘'The portion of the coast you propose to explore is one about which very
little is known, audit is full of danger both from the natives and from the
shoals which abound, as yon are doubtless well aware, in that vicinity.”
You further stated that you regarded the objects I had in view with great
interest and hoped that I would bo able to carry out my explorations to a
successful issue, and have since, on mere than one occasion, congratulated
me on having done so.
: X : -X' 'A 5
You state in the letter under reply that you were not informed of mv
intentions in reference to my fifth expedition (second expedition to the
Papuan Gulf).
Further, in a letter to me, dated Cooktown, 12th March, 188S, you also
say that you were not supplied by me with any information with reference
to it, and knew nothing about if.
All this fills me with surprise. For I not only went to trouble and expense
to keep you duly informed and posted up in reference to it, and to ask your
assistance for it, but I received a letter from you dated Granville (Port
Moresby), 14th October, 1887, acknowledging and thanking me for having
informed you of my intended second expedition to the Papuan Gulf, as
follows :
“ I have to thank you for your letter of 4th instant, from Cooktown, and
for the maps, newspaper reports, &c., &c., which at various times you have
sent me. This may reach you before you leave Thursday Island for the
Papuan Gulf. If it does, let me assure you that I shall look with great
interest to your further explorations in confirmation of those already made.
“It is a great advantage for you that you have secured the services of a
surveyor, so much depends upon the accurate definition of the leading
landmarks.
“ I cannot promise you any material assistance from the funds of the
Protectorate at the present time. The contributions are so uncertain and
irregular that I never know what I may have to operate on. Indeed, at any
time, if the Queensland New Guinea Bill passes, I may have to transfer
everything to the future designated Commissioner, Dr. M‘Gregor, of Fiji.”
“ (Sgd.) John Douglas.”
Nomenclature of Discoveries. —ln reference to your criticisms under this
head, I may say that I made the distinctions, to some of which you take
exception, solely with the view to geographical succinctness.
4he complicated structure of these great deltaic rivers of the Papuan
Gulf —discovered by me —is not only liable to puzzle clear-headed men, but
also to embarrass intelligent geographers.
Air (I Hirer.
The estuary to the west of Cape Blackwood ascended by Captain
Blackwood, of H.M.S. “ Fly,” for a distance of 20 miles in 1845, retains its
name and place on all my maps as the Aird Hirer. Blackwood’s Aird River
is more properly a small sound of the sea. It is not even a main subdivision


MH. UEVAs's FIFTH EXPEDITION TO BIUTISII NEW GUINEA.
11l the delta of the fine river named by me the Douglas as a compliment ,o
Her Maiestv’s then Special Commissioner, and to the higo othco whum
you held "The Dour/las I have both entered and left many ame* oaf"
ｒ and deeper channels both east and west of the Aird. it would be
to call the larger river the Aird, although 1 have myselt alluded to
it as the Aird-river-systcm.
Gape Blackwood
bears, as a matter of course, a most prominent place on all mg ™»l»
published and supplied to you. I. was surprised to hud loa, 1 ‘ J _ u "’
doubtless inadvertently, omitted on the E.(x_b. map ) ou uo to 1
state most emphatically that it was my wish Cape Dlackwood sh. jo ld
in its proper place on that map ; and was so placed in the maternal supplied
by me and from which that map was compiled.
Arthur Gordon lianc/e.
At the time I named the Musgrave range I was unaware that the ranges
at the bach of the Papuan Gulf, and forming part of too backbone of
mountains running for 1,500 miles from the far north-west to the extreme
south-east of New Guinea, had in that portion of the country—and as seen
from the sea-been named the Arthur Gordon Eange.
It is true that from the sea on a clear day—off (say) Capo Idac.vwoo loi
Bald Head—one can see, at distances varying from 60 miles to more Jmn
100 miles inland, a wall of massive mountains.
I named the range when my foot was on its lower spurs. It has, how-
ever, been loft unnamed on the map enclosed herewith ; and published
before your letter was received.
Queen's Jubilee liiver.
“With re<mrd to the Queen’s Jubilee Elver being identical wij.n the
Wickham vou observe vou “ feel a little less confident. Although in one
place you" call it by 'the latter name, against which misuse or terms X
formally protest. w n , ,
Tlie correspondence enclosed herewith between the lw\. W. *•
and the President of the N.S.W. Branch of the Koval Geographical Society
(Sir Edward Strickland, K.C.8.), unanswerably proves that “ native reports
do not constitute discovery.” (See pp. 33-5.)
* * *
In reference to my application in recognition of mg services as an explorer
for a grant of 254,000 acres on the Aird-river-systcm and the Queens
Jubilee Eivcrs, you state as follow s :
1. “ I cannot recommend that any such grants be made.
2. “No land policy has yet been'decided on. .
3. “ Until it is, and until the new Administration, which is about to be
formed, has decided upon the principles to recognized, I.
cannot undertake to say that your application will be seriously
considered.”
You also state that I apply for this recognition on two grounds, Ist.
On account of the assurances of the late Special Commissioner, Sir
Peter Scratchlev; and that in reference to it, you (Hon. John Douglas)
must be guided'by the terms of his last letter to mo (Mr Sevan) dated
Dinner Island, Now Gruinea, 29th November, 1885. In that letter Grenerai
iSeratchley stated that he was unable at present to gbe a final answer, but
did not think he would be able to grant the concessions required.


That letter was written at a time when General Scratchley was ill with
fever, and, as you know, within hut a very few days of his death.
On the other hand it docs not alter the verbal assurances made by him to
me before reliable witnesses in the Colonial Secretary’s office, Sydney, on the
12th August, 1885, that he would grant me valuable concessions ; neither
does it do away with his memorandum to Mr. Assistant Deputy-Commissioner
Musgrave, dated 19rh September, 1885 (copy of which was sent to me by
Mr. Musgrave), which, among other things, stated as follows:— “As Mr.
Sevan is aware , lam anxious io assist him in his enterprise."
General Seratchley’s forecast that he would be unable to grant such con-
cessions proved prophetic, for a few days thereafter, early in December,
1885, he expired.
It should also, in common fairness, be remembered that General
Scratchley’s letter, which you quote, was written in 1885, and not in 1888 ;
years before the President of the Royal Geographical Society of-this Colony
could write to the Government and say; —Mr. Derail has unfolded the
hidden secrets of New Guinea to an extent which never has been equalled.
Can I feel sure that, had General Scratchley lived—even though envi-
roned by influences inimical to me, as he undoubtedly ivas, and as you
since have been- —that ’ere this he would not have accorded to my work both
a manly recognition and a generous recommendation for reward ?
* #
* * # * #
* #
But there are other important matters in connection with this issue. If
you will be so good as to refer to my letter of 18th February, 1888, you will
find that you have overlooked part of what I really did say, viz., that “I
based my claim on the equity of the plea of the early assurances of Her
Majesty’s Special Commissioners (not Special Commissioner) for British
New r Guinea, In addition to long and great services since rendered by me
to the State—free of all cost —by the success of my original explorations
and the extent and value of my discoveries.”
You must excuse me for reminding you that I included your own
assurances in your letter to me, dated Port Moresby, Ist July, 1886, wherein
you w-erc good enough to remark :
“ I do not anticipate that there will be any difficulty in authorizing such a
company when the proper time comes.”
#*##**##
You also omit to notice that I do not apply for lands which belong to the
natives, or are in use by them ; or on terms which will permit of absenteeism
or of their lying idle; but the rather for uninhabited and unoccupied lands,
and —w'hat is of no less importance— on conditions of use.
***#*####
You observe that “If the claims of the numerous benefactors and dis-
coverers of New Guinea are to be recognized on a scale commensurate with
their merits, and on an estimate approaching to that which you lay down,
there will be very little of New Guinea left for the natives or for the general
public.”
So confident am I that such a generalization will not bear the test of
analytical examination that could it be proved to be correct, 1 should be
prepared to withdraw my claim.


Although not wishing to trespass too much on your time, I venture to
submit to you that the "practical work of explorers in British New Guinea
may justly be classified as follows, viz. . that effected by
1. The various officers of Her Majesty’s ships who from time to time
have explored the coasts in the ordinary or special course of their
professional duties.
2. The Missionaries who have travelled in New Guinea as the paid
emissaries of the London Missionary Society; also, in a recent and
lesser degree, the Fathers of the Roman Catholic Mission at Yule
Island.
3. Mr. Goldie, who explored in his own interests as a collector, and
whose work has not altogether, I believe, been without practical
recognition from your Administration.
4. D’Albertis, who ascended the Fly River for a great distance as a
naturalist and made collections (nearly everything from New
Guinea then being new), the sales of which benefited himself to
the extent of many thousands of pounds. (The same applies to
Mr. Goldie.)
5. Myself, who have alone worked without any reward.
The map enclosed herewith, if you will be good enough to put it alongside
a map of the whole of Now Guinea, will speak for itself as to what my
■work as an explorer and discoverer has been.
In the right-hand bottom corner of my map you will see there is a reduc-
tion from the present Admiralty chart illustrating what was known of this
part of New Guinea prior to my discoveries.
To be scrupulously exact three addenda should be made ;
(a) The outline of a range of mountains shown far inland as previously
seen from the sea.
(If) Aird Hill, seen and named by Captain Blackwood in 1845. Accord-
ing to his naturalist’s (Mr. Jukes) account, Captain Blackwood
approached to within 8 miles of it only, and then turned back.
(c) A note that five of the seven main river openings—from Bald Head
to Orokolo —were reported by natives to Mr. Chalmers and Captain
Dubbins as leading into one very large inland river.
That statement I have since proved correct; and that very large inland
river I have been the first to discover.
The mere fact of hearing the native report did not constitute discovery.
Indeed Mr. Chalmers shows us that native reports are scientifically valueless,
for in the same work he adds: —“ They (the natives) say that the Maivau,
near Bald Head, is a distinct river, very wide and deep, flowing through a
great extent of country, &e.”
Now I have since proved, beyond the reach of controversy, by explora-
tions, which you grant have been “ verified ,” that the Maivau, instead of
being a distinct river, is an insignificant creek in the delta of the same river-
svstem, to which indeed all the seven openings above referred to belong.
Both Captain Blackwood and Mr. Chalmers lost their opportunities by
turning back when nearly upon the threshold of important discovery. They
both deserve the credit of unintentionally pointing out to mo a possible field
of discovery. In the case of the last named gentleman, such an unconscious
and unwilling reparation was not undue to me, and affords a singular
instance of the irony of fate.


One thing is certain, viz., that my inland explorations and discoveries far
outweigh individually—and there are not wanting some who add vie with
those of other explorers collectively —in extent, verification, and practical
utility.
It is none the less sure that the two great fresh-water river-systems
discovered and cxnlored by myself are at the present time the only known
rivers in British New Guinea, navigable and navigated right info the
mountains of the far interior, or indeed for the matter of that into the
ranges at all. Until you have seen these rivers I cannot expect you to do
either them or their discoverer full credit; but an Associate of the Koval
Geographical Society wrote me lately that my work was considered of so
important a character that it was not impossible that the gold medal of the
parent society might be awarded me.
# # & & # «« # -x=
In addition to those explorers to whom individually or collectively I have
referred there have of course also been many minor lights. Uor the most
part these hitter have made —with varying success or the reverse —short
journeys in special directions as the paid emissaries of science, of the
Adminstration, or otherwise. To one and all I give full credit, being well
aware of the dangers they have encountered and the risk they have run.
In humble opinion, the records of the work of all such explorers will
form in the aggregate one of the noblest pages of contemporary history.
********
Enclosure C gives in a condensed form a few, among many', unsolicited
opinions from eminent personages as to the value of my work in particular.
(See preface).
Ton are well aware that I have throughout followed a consistent policy,
and must be also not unacquainted with many of the difficulties with which
I have had to contend, difficutics that perhaps would have daunted ami
defeated many' abler and stronger men.
You arc not unaware that I have been above using the opportunities of
these exploratory expeditions for purposes of immediate aggrandisement,
and will believe me when I say that I have lost, and have been contented to
lose, money by them.
Wh en —in addition to my actual outlay at the time—cost of maintenance
meanwhile, and loss of time and opportunities, is taken into account, it will
he seen that my pecuniary loss during the last few years amounts to a very
large total.
******
I went to New Guinea four years ago as a practical business man. My
permits were to trade and explore. I left tbe trading to take to exploration
with a view—distinctly on courage:! both by the late Sir Peter Scratchier
and yourself—of eventually opening up large commercial relations, and witli
results that have elicited world-wide attention and approval.
You give me credit for having, though contrary to your own expectations,
“ justified the risks incurred” : for the “ verification of my discoveries,” and
also for that which is far more important to me. for maintaining peaceful
relations with the native races. In recognition, therefore, of these services
rendered to the State at great risk and personal expense, I apply for a large
area of uninhabited and at present useless land on condition that I turn it
to practical use and productiveness.


Tet you say that you “cannot recommend that any such grants ’ (of
uninhabited land on conditions of use as applied for by me) s icu t _>e
made.”
My application cannot he considered as emanating from either an
adventurer or land grabber.
I apply for a large area because operations in this new part of the
country must necessarily be conducted on a large scale, otherwise—as you
can well understand from what you have seen at Port Moresby and else-
where —the expenses of keeping up communication and cost oj transport would
eat up all the profits.
To bo brief, I claim these concessions for the following among other cogent
reasons; —
1. Because the result of granting such concessions would benefit the
Protectorate, or, as it is about to become, the Sovereignty. .
i.e. (a) Such trading operations would have the effect of bunging in
revenue to the Adminstration. ,
(I) Bender adjacent State lands at present uninhabited and valueless
both occupied and of value. ,
(c) Tend or help to reduce the period during wluen the cost ot ttie
maintenance of tlio Administration remains an annual charge on
the Imperial and Colonial revenues.
2. On behalf of the native inhabitants (steeped to the core in degrading
superstitions and revolting savagery). , , , ,
(a) Bv diverting the energies of tribes at present addicted to Head-
hunting and other inhuman practices to agricultural and other
peaceful pursuits, as in German A T cw Guinea and in British -North
Borneo. . . ,
(I) By raising the native races both in the scale of civilization and
comfort: subject of course to the wise regulations in vogue uuuer
the “Western Pacific Orders in Council.
3. On behalf of my fellow men. .
(a) Because the conditions appertaining to British hew Guinea
vail prevent it from becoming what is known as a working-man s
country,” at all events for some little time to come.
(h) Owing to the severe restrict ions imposed by nature, the initial^ work
of clearing the scrubs and turning over the soil must be effected
by coloured labour necessarily iiCthc employ of capitalists.
0) Bv HIT initiative and operations, the essentials of work and
communication will bo provided which will eventually facilitate
colonization, should such at a future date bo deemed advisable by
the Imperial or Colonial Governments.
4. On behalf of myself for the reasons mentioned in the preceding
pages ; also because
(a) I have the assurance that the large capital required will bo torth-
coming from my friends who arc prepared to undertake the great
risks incidental to all pioneering associations, with a view to the
furtherance of exploration on a sound and solid basis, combined
with the elevation of the native races by the only true means, and
in the hope of receiving fair interest for their money.
###*****
To your Excellency, as interested in the amelioration of the condition of
the native races, I may submit that commerce has ever been the forerunner
of civilization.
12a 3G—BB (e)


Having commenced my adventurous work in the interests of science and
commerce, and at my own risk and expense, I should be very willing
to have continued my explorations had I received the slightest encourage-
ment from the State, but I am constrained to think that my services have
not met with even ordinary appreciation, and certainly with no tangible
recognition. “ °
Although I find that I can now' easily obtain the necessary support to
enable me to continue my explorations'in British New Guinea lam
unwilling looking at the unfairness and neglect with which I have through-
out been largely treated—to do another stroke in that direction until 1
receive the assurance of a just measure of recognition and reward.
. J 3l the meantime I prefer that novices should bear the incidental expenses,
iisks, and hardships in order that they may take the chances of speedy
death or ignominy if unsuccessful; or on the other hand—if it can be said
ot them by responsible and disinterested persons that “ they have unfolded
the hidden secrets of Kew Guinea to an extent which never has been
equalled —in lieu of receiennj tangible recoaniiion —become the butt of
hostile criticism, jealousy, and attack.
I have, <fcc.,
~ T . ~ , THEODORE SEVAN.
Hon. John Douglas,
Special Commissioner for British JSTcw Guinea,
Thursday Island, Queensland.
Sydney ; Charles Potter, Government Printer.—-18S8.


