

MR. THOMAS WALKER’S LETTER
TO THE PEOPLE OF THIS COLONY,
ON THE CASE OF
t m mm.
AN APPEAL AGAINST STATE MURDER
To the People,
The law demands the death of Frank Johns, the unfortunate
young man, who, whilst a mere boy, was led from his home at
Ballarat by the notorious Captain Moonlight. Bushranging was
then at its fever height and the exploits of the Kelly gang were
firing the imaginations of romantic youths. When we consider
that impulsive, daring, and dreaming boys may become either
very good or bad members of society according to their surround-
ings, we may find it possible to feel a little sympathy for a lad
brought in contact with a talented criminal possessed with a
mania for bushranging. Under other circumstances, I feel con-
vinced Johns could have been a useful member of the community.
But with specious promises he is beguiled to the bush, there
informed that the trade of a robber was to be his lot, and from
that hour to attempt to escape was to risk his life. This, there is
evidence to show that he did, but his attempt was unsuccessful.
There was nothing left for him, then, but to make the best of his
misfortune. Scarcely, however, had the gang been formed when
they encountered the police. Two men were shot in the fray—a
member of the gang and a policemen. Who s'iot the policeman is
not certain, but there is no sufficient proof that Johns was the guilty
man. At the trial the men were condemned to death, but Johns
and another, because of their youth and previous good character,
had their sentences commuted to imprisonment for life.
Since that time Johns has been in gaol, where his conduct was
all that could be desired up to the period of his last terrible
misfortune. There were hopes that he would be shortly released,
but as is everywhere known, he is again the occupant of a
condemned cell, under the sentence of death for the second time.
“He must be a monster !” I have heard people say ; and yet I
venture to think otherwise. 1 have seen him since his troubles,
and have had long talks with him, and feel positive that there is
far more good in him than harm. We must remember that law
is not always justice, that history affords numerous examples of
h % 8 <s*l


;uen cruelly treated and wrongfully execu+H in u ae very name of
justice. We rbould always hesitate before we take away the
liberties of another, but we should hesitate still more, before we
take away a human life.
What is this young man’s story 1 Whilst secluded from the
world and surrounded with prisoners, a woman came oftentimes
to see him and treated him with motherly kindness. I have seen
letters which the mother of Johns put in evidence before the
Executive, wherein the prisoner is addressed as “ My dear, dear
Erank,” “My loved one,” “My darling,” ho. I have seen a look
of grey hairs the boy was cherishing, and a box of pocket hand-
kerchiefs bearing the Christian name of the lady visitor, an aged
Bible-reader. He says at last he grew to love this woman, that
he avowed his love, that she returned it, that she promised to
exert herself to the utmost to procure his release ; that her affec-
tions cooled and he upbraided her ; that her visits ceased and he
grew melancholy, so much so that he was placed in the Observa-
tion Ward for supposed insanity ; that the prisoners who knew of
his blighted hopes taunted him ; that he resolv -d to take his life
and secured a knife for that end; that whilst bitterly despondent
some prisoners made merry at his heart sickness, and in a fit of
jealousy, wounded pride and love, in an insane moment, struck
his friend. Wanting to show what led up to the deed he
defended himself at the trial where fate was against him ; he was
found “ guilty ” and condemned to death.
The Executive say that this story is a fabrication. It may be,
though for myself I can scarcely conceive it possible, but I will
point out that the man he wounded is now a free man ; his life is
spared. Now, does it not seem strange that in this colony we
should possess a society to prevent cruelty to the very dogs—to
the dumb cattle, and that yet at the same time we should possess
a law more severe than that of old, “ life for life,” “ an eye for an
eye?” In England, Johns’ life would be spared. In all the
most civilised countries of the world his life would be spared, and,
my kindly readers, do you not feel a tinge of disgrace that the
colony of New South Wales should be less humane than the older
lands. Ido not ask you to believe his story, but I ask you to
think that he has been unfortunate, that he is young, and that he
has wanted those softer influences of home, and good and refining
associations, which keep most of us from sinking. He is an
unfortunate, but he is yet a brother, and will you not say a word
to save his life 1
lam reminded that this is his second offence. Let that not
influence you. Weigh the last offence on its own merits, or, if
you prefer, its demerits. If you would not have him hanged
providing you knew nothing about him previously, it is an
admission that his offence does not deserve the extreme penalty of


the law. And this is what I maintain. The offence he has
committed, severe as it is, does not demand his execution, and for
no other offence, on this issue, ought he now to be hanged.
Be kind enough, too, to reflect that had the discipline of the
gaol been more strict it would have been impossible for Johns to
have obtained the knife, the instrument of his offence. Possibly
his mind would never have been worked upon in the same way,
and you would not have been shocked at his deed. How much of
his crime may others be responsible for ? Will you make him the
sole victim for what others may have contributed the means and
the impulse ? If his story should happen to be true, most
certainly he deserves pity as well as blame. And even Executive
Councils have made mistakes in weighing evidence, despite every
care and the most irreproachable honesty.
What 1 think we should know is upon what evidence is Johns’
story declared to be a fabrication 1 It is the public’s due that this
question should be answered. The question is not so much, I
submit, was Johns sane 1 but were the conditions of the gaol
discipline such as possibly to lead up to his crime 1 Has any fear
of exposure led to the seeming severity of the Council 1 Is the
recommendation of the jury that Johns should be shown mercy to
be ignored ?
o ,
The objection is raised “ But we must protect society. If he
were to be shown mercy he would probably repeat the wrong.”
To this I reply, that when petty larcenies were punishable with
death, theft was more prevalent than ever it has been since, and
whilst witches were burned and drowned, they were on the
increase everywhere; but as soon as the accused were shown
mercy, witchcraft disappeared. And have you made no mis-steps
in your lifetime 1 What then, must you necessarily grow worse
and worse 1 Must society shun you for ever, hurl you ever lower
and lower, give you no scope, no sympathy, no helping hand, no
kindly word 1 I tell you the criminal ranks are swelled for
want of love, for want of human charity. Virtue decays as
flowers wither for want of a little sunshine and a healthy
atmosphere.
Dear reader, I feel you are with me, that your heart is pleading
for mercy. Do not stand then silently by whilst this unfortunate
is rushed to his fate. You are one of the great public whose
compassion may yet save him. Let your voice be heard and add
the sweet flower of mercy to the bouquet of your conduct, by
bending to lift a fallen brother, and to save a human life.
Humanity in the future will thank you, and your own heart will
be ennobled.
Pleading for this unfortunate, and seeking your sympathy,
I remain, yours truly,
THOS. WALKER.


PETETION ON BEHALF
THE CONDEMNED MAN,
To His Excellency |the Right Honorable Lord Augustas William Frederick
Spencer Loftus, Knight Commander of the Most Honorable Order
of the Bath, a Member of her Majesty’s Most Honorable Privy
Council, Governor of the Colony of New South Wales and its
Dependencies.
Your Excellency,
We, the undersigned, do most earnestly pray that you will
exercise such power as your exalted position giveth you, and such humanity
as ever becometh the Chief of Government, to spare the life of the
condemned man, Frank Johns.
We are of opinion that his peculiar case merits compassion with punish-
ment, and that the strong recommendation to mercy made by the jury at
his trial would be unfeelingly ignored were the death sentence to be
carried out.
We further aver that the law that now claims him as a victim is
barbarous and dangerous, and a reflection on the humanity and justice of
this colony
Should you decline the responsibility of sparing Johns’ life, we humbly
petition you to delay the date of execution, in order that an appeal may be
made to Her Majesty the Queen.
Your petitioners, therefore, pray you will exercise your clemency, and
that Johns’ sentence may be commuted to such punishment as the case may
demand.
And your p titioners will ever pray, Ac.
To enable those who are interested in this case to help us, we
have printed the Petition, so that it may he cut out, and
pasted on a sheet of Foolscap Faper, letting the signatures
follow.
lilifll liliisilillil
Domain, Sunday Afternoon, July 12, at 3 p.m.
ALL A.TTJEISLD.
Published by the
NEW SOUTH WALES BRANCH
OP THE
MifIMAiMH SUOMI
Offices—2oi OXFORD STREET.
Thomas Walker, President.
W. Keep, General Secretary.
Members’ Subscription —Ladies, Is. 6d. ; Gentlemen, 2s. 6d.: Families, sa,
per Quarter, paid in advance.
