

Aitken's Brewery, Victoria Parade, Melbourne, Established 1854.


srom tJi& “ Carlton SddvertisPyr and grades
£ddvocate/ ; dipril 8 and, 75, 7882.
Mr. THOS. AITKEN'S
VICTORIA PARADE BREWERY
EAST MELBOURNE.
The position of prominence which Victoria occupies amongst
the Australian colonies must be attributed to the energetic and
enterprising men who arrived in Port Phillip in its earliest days.
The majority of these were men possessed of more than ordinary
pluck; men who were not to be frightened by trifles, or
deterred from pushing their ways forward in the face of more
than ordinary difficulties; men who had left their native land
with its comforts and associations to endure the privations, and
brave the perils incidental to the pioneers of a new colony.
Having such a class of men for its early colonists, the subsequent
progress of Victoria is not to be wondered at, and therefore we
find that although it is the smallest of the Australian group,
yet its wealth and enterprise' stand pre-eminent.
Amongst the early colonists we find the name of Mr. Thomas
Aitken, who arrived in Melbourne in the year 1842. He was
then a youth of nineteen years of age, intelligent, full of energy
of a speculative turn of mind, and not afraid of hard work—just
the stamp of man to develope into a successful colonist. At
an early age he had acquired a knowledge of brewing in Scotland,
but for several years after his arrival in Melbourne he was en-
gaged in other pursuits, which proved remunerative. The
impetus given to trade by the gold discoveries in 1851, caused
quite a revolution in business, and in that year Mr. Aitken
started the Corio Brewery in Geelong, but finding better scope
for enterprise in the metropolis, he removed to Melbourne in


1852 and commenced business in the Union Brewery, Lonsdale-
street, from which he finally shifted in 1854 to the site which he
now occupies at the corner of Victoria Parade and Powlett-
street, East Melbourne. The business at starting was upon a small
scale, but gradually developed into its present extensive propor-
tions. The secret of success is not difficult to find. First-class
appliances, pure ingredients, a thorough knowledge of the
business, and a determination to produce only a superior
article, had the anticipated result, and a large and rapidly in-
creasing trade was firmly established. The premises have been
largely extended and now cover an area of over three acres
of land, having a frontage of 400 feet to the Victoria Parade,
150 feet to Powlett-street, and 200 feet to Albert-street. The
frontage to the Parade is strikingly handsome, and conveys a good
idea of the interior of the premises. The lengthy fascade is
finished in cement, with cornices, mouldings, and other or-
namentation. A handsome clock tower, 60 feet in height, rises
over the offices, alongside the main entrance, and a row of elm
tress planted close to the kerbing on the path in front, gives the
place a cool and refreshing appearance. The business of
malting has since been added to the brewing, and over 50,000
bushels of Victorian barley are treated every season, all of
which is used in the brewery together with large shipments from
England,
Having visited the brewery on a recent occasion, the proprie-
tor kindly showed us right through the premises, and explained
the modus operandi of malting and brewing, as carried on in his
establishment. Through a door at the north-east corner of the
block we enter a spacious building three-story high 70 x 120 ft.,
the ground and second floors of which are used for germinating
the barley. The drying kiln 30ft. square, is situated in the south
end of the building, and the heat is generated by % three furnaces
fired with coke. The floor of the kiln consists of perforated cast
metal plates fixed on wrought iron frame work, and forming a
level surface, about 3ffc. above the floor of the third story.
The malting operations are carried out as follows : —The barley is
raised to the top story by means of hoisting gear, driven by a
4-horse-power horizontal engine on the same floor, and emptied
into three lead-lined tanks capable of holding 25 bags each.
Having remained the necessary time “ in steep,” the grain is
passed through a shoot to the lower stories where the floors are
laid of the best cement, the grain is spread in a thick layer on
the floors where germination bakes place, and at the proper time
is hoisted in baskets up to the kiln and spread upon the floor,
in a layer of about 12 inches in thickness. The heat
varies from 90° to 160°. In course of time it is thoroughly dried,
after which it is shovelled into a large sheet capable of holding
four bags of grain, and hauled by machinery off the kiln on


the third floor, where it is put through a cleaning machine
(driven by the engine afore mentioned) and the malt is ready
for crushing. It is then stored in 15 malt bins, situated on the
top floor, each capable of holding 2000 bushels of grain. Pro-
ceeding west- ward, we enter a two-story building 120 ft. x
50ft., the top floor of which is used for barley storage, the
lower floor being occupied as a beer cellar, and immediately
alongside two stores, each measuring 120 x 27ft. are used for
the same purposes. A 4 horse power horizontal engine is fixed on
the second floor, and is used for hoisting the barley from the
lorries on the street. At the rear of the receiving room
another drying kiln, is situated 27 ft. square, heated by two
furnaces on the ground floor. Another malt house 140 ft. x
27ft. extends back from the kiln to Albert-street The barley is
hoisted to the second floor by a windlass worked with an endless
rope, and after going through the steeping process is passed
down to the ground floor for germination, after which it is again
hoisted on to the kiln, and treated as described already. The
gas and water-metres are fixed on the floor near the entrance
from Albert-street.
A right-of-way 15 feet wide runs through the premises here
from the Parade to Albert-street, and crossing it on a viaduct at
the second floor level we enter the brewery proper, a four story
building 150 ft. x 30 ft. with a tower 102 ft. in height and
30 ft. square, at the south end. The malt crushing mill is
fixed on this floor, and to ensure perfect freedom from foreign
matter the grain is passed over an oscillating screen before
going into the mill, where the crushing operation is performed
by two chilled steel rollers, at the rate of 100 bushels per
hour. From the crushing mill the malt is raised to a bin
capable of holding 400 bushels, on the top floor of the tower, by
means of belt elevators, and is now ready for use. The second
and third floors of this building are used as store-rooms for
malt, hops, sugar, etc. The hops used in the brewery are
principally grown in Victoria, but a considerable quantity is
imported from Tasmania, New Zealand and England.
Access to the top of the tower is gained either by the stair-
case, or by means of a powerful hydraulic lift, the cage being
fitted with patent safety catches to prevent accident in the
event of the chain breaking. The tower is a substantial yet
handsome structure of brick, built in the medieval style,
relieved with white facing, and surmounted by an ornamen-
tal parapet, the moulding and cornices of which are picked out
with parti-colored brick work, and the massive balustrading is
formed of specially made bricks, and shows to great advantage at
such a height. A magnificent view of the surrounding country
is obtained from the top of the tower; looking southward,
Hobson’s Bay with its shipping is plainly discernible; Mount


Macedon bounds the horizon on the north-west, whilst a grand
panorama bounded by the Plenty and Dandenong Ranges, includ-
ing Brunswick, Northcote, Kew, Hawthorn, South Yarra, St.
Kilda, Prahran, and Brighton, stretches away from the north to
the south-east, with a bird’s eye view of Fitzroy, Collingwood,
and Richmond in the immediate vicinity. A large lead lined
tank 21 ft. x2O ft. x 4 ft. is fixed on the top of the tower, and
is constantly kept full of water, to be used for brewing, which
has been forced through a patent filtering apparatus on the third
floor of the building. Descending from the roof to the top floor
of the tower we find there a large iron boiler capable of
holding sixty hogsheads of liquor. This is filled with water
from the tank overhead, and boiled by steam. The boiling is
effected by what is known as a “ spinning jenny,” or steam
distributor, an apparatus with two hollow arras about 3 ft.
in length perforated with small holes on one side. This is fixed
on the steam pipe which descends to the centre of the vat,
and when steam is turned on, causes it to revolve at a rapid
rate, and the water is soon brought to a boiling heat, A
number of steam and water jets are also introduced through the
floor of the vat for cleansing purposes, so that it is kept scrup-
ulously clean. An indicator on the wall registers the amount of
liquor in the vessel.
The mash-tun is situated on the next floor. This is a lar<m
wooden vessel about 15 ft. in diameter and Bft. high, fitted with°a
false bottom formed of perforated cast iron plates. By an ingen-
ious contrivance called Willison’s Patent Self-acting Mashin»
Machine, the malt from the bin and the water from the hot-liquor
tank overhead are introduced into the mash-tun together, and
thoroughly mixed to the consistency of porridge. The mixture
is then allowed to remain in “steep” sufficiently long to convert
the farinaceous substance contained in the malt into sugar, and
should the temperature of the “ mash ” be too low, it can be
raised by the introduction of steam jets through the bottom
of the tun. The “ sparging ” process is here introduced, which
is effected by a machine similar to the steam distributor, with
the difference that it has three arms instead of two, and is fixed
about 5 ft. above the floor of the mash-tun, on a socket at the
end of a pipe which conveys the hot liquor from the tank
overhead. The revolving motion is imparted by the escape of
the hot liquor, and the whole mass is evenly saturated. The
liquor, now known as “ sweet wort,” is drawn off and conveyed
through copper piping to the boiling copper on the next floor.
The grains remaining in the mash-tun are passed through a man-
hole into a shoot which conveys them to the ground floor
from whence they are carted away for cattle feed. The mash-tun
is then thoroughly cleansed by the introduction of steam and
water, and is ready for the next brew. The sugar used in the


manufacture of beer is dissolved in a tank on this floor and con-
veyed through a pipe to the boiling copper, and the hops are
introduced in a similar manner through a shoot. The third
floor from the top contains the boiling copper, capable of
holding 120 hogsheads, into which the sweet wort runs from
the mash-tun overhead. The boiling is effected by steam
introduced by a “ steam distributor ” about 2 ft. in length,
which revolves in the centre of the boiler close to the floor. The
distributor is covered with a perforated copper dome about 3 ft.
in diameter, from the centre of which a 6 inch tube rises about
9 ft., and terminates in a cap si.nilar to that of a common
fountain used in boiling clothes. Wncn the steam is turned on,
the revolving arms force the liquor through the tube, from which
it radiates, and falling on the boiling mass in the vessel, keeps
the hops down, aud prevents the possibility of boiling over. This
apparatus was invented by Mr. Aitken, and has proved a grand
success. The steam is also introduced by a coil of copper piping
running parallel with, and within a few inches of the circum-
ference of the vessel, so that the liquor is evenly heated
all over at once. The boiling copper is fitted with a guage
to indicate the steam exhaust, and also a guage glass which
shows the quantity of liquor in the boiler, as well as a ther-
mometer to register the temperature. This immense vessel,
which stands about 12ft. high, and 16ft. in diameter, is cased all
round with a wood coating, which acts as a non-conductor for the
conservation of heat.
From the boiling copper the beer now passes to the “refriger-
ators,” two of which stand on the next floor. These refrigerators
are in the shape of a screen, about 12ft. feet square, made
of two-inch copper pipes, which communicate at the ends,
and thus form a continuous length of over 700 feet, through
which the cold water, pumped from a well on the premises,
is forced, entering in the bottom pipe and discharging at the top.
The boiling liquor is conveyed in a copper pipe into two troughs
over the refrigerators, and falls over the pipes in a thin veil-
gradually cooling, so that when it reaches the lowest pipe it is
reduced to the temperature of the water as it enters the refrigera-
tors, many degrees below that of the Yan Yean. From the re-
frigerators the beer is conducted in a covered flume to the
fermenting tuns, or gyles, on the second floor of the first building,
east of the brewery proper. In this fermenting room there are six
large gyles, each holding seventy hogsheads, and each is fitted
with an attemporator,” a circular coil of copper piping suspended
in the tuns and through which a stream of water is forced,
when the temperature of the liquor requires to be lowered.
These attemporators can be raised or lowered as required with
the greatest, ease. The floor of the fermenting room is laid with
battens, so that cleanliness and ventilation are ensured. After


fermentation the beer is conveyed to the cleansing casks, in the
cellars previously mentioned, through canvas hose; the final
fermentation there takes place, when it is “ racked ” off into the
trade casks, ready for the market. Two large cellars are situated
at the rear, seventeen feet under ground, capable of containing
2000 hogsheads. These cellars are used for storing a strong
beer brewed in winter for summer use.
The motive power for hoisting, pumping and other work
required in the brewery is supplied by a 25-horse-power vertical
engine built by Way wood of the South Newington Iron Works,
London, from patterns supplied by Mr. Aitken. It is a model of
compactness, and equal to all requirements The steam required
for driving the engines, boiling the liquor, and other uses
throughout the establishment, is generated in two Cornish boilers
of 45 horse-power each. They are each 27 feet in length by 7
feet in diameter, and fitted with patent self-acting safety whistles,
which raise an alarm in case of the water becoming too low, or
when the steam is raised above a certain pressure.
The bottling department 75ft. x 30ft., is situated on the ground
floor of the brewery facing the Parade. It is supplied with the
best machinery, and the weekly out-put averages about 1000 dozen
of ale and porter. At the rear of the bottling department is
the cooperage where five artisans are constantly employed in
making and repairing casks. The old staves are cut up and turned
into “ shives” by an ingenious machine similar to a lathe, which
works with great rapidity, and turns out the articles at the rate
of four gross per hour. The main entrance from the Parade
18ft. wide, runs alongside of the brewery, and on the opposite
side the offices occupy the front part, behind which the fer-
menting room is situated, and at the extreme rear the cask-
washing is carried on. This is performed by a machine called
Pontifex’s Patent, having a receiver which holds abqut 9 gallons
of water. The bung hole of the cask is placed over a steam
pipe, with a perforated head, and when the steam is turned on, the
boiling water is projected into the interior of the cask with great
force, and the steam following cleanses the vessel effectually.
In order to ensure perfect cleanliness, an ingenious contrivance
has been invented by Mr. Aitken, whereby the interior of the
cask can be minutely examined. It consists of a piece of brass
gas pipe about three feet in length, having a burner fitted in
one end, the other being connected with the supply pipes by
rubber tubing. The brass pipe is fixed in a small block of
wood to keep it steady and when examining a cask the burner
is introduced through the “ tap” hole in the head of the vessel,
and lights up the interior in such a manner that any fault in
washing, or the presence of corks or other substances in the
cask is instantly detected and removed. At the rear of the cellars
the blacksmith’s shop is situated, and also a large apartment for


housing the travellers’ buggies. The drays, horses and waggons
are kept in another portion of the premises. There is stabling
accommodation for 20 horses in a building 50ft. x 40ft, well
lighted and ventilated, with a spacious gallery for storage of
fodder, &c.
The offices are situated on the left of the main entrance from
the Victoria Parade, and consist of a counting room 30ft. x 20ft.,
a strong room and private sitting room. These are fitted up in
a style worthy of the establishment with every modern improve-
ment for convenience, and comfort. Telephonic communication
has been established with the Exchange in the city, and also
with Mr Aitken’s distillery in Collingwood. The value of this con-
venience to such an extensive business can hardly be estimated.
Besides there is communication with all parts of the establish-
ment by electric bells. Gas is also laid on throughout the
premises. A weighbridge by Pooley <k Son is fixed in the
principal entrance, and every other convenience that can reduce
labor is introduced. Over 40 hands are employed in the
establishment, and everything is carried on in a systematic manner
under the personal supervision of the proprietor.
The quality of the beer and porter produced at the Parade
Brewery may be gathered from the fact that Mr. Aitken received
First Prize for Ale and Porter at the late Melbourne Inter-
national Exhibition, besides number of prizes at previous com-
petions. The monthly output of liquor is over 1700 hogs-
heads but the premises and plant are built for increasing
trade. The value of the plant and property, at a moderate
calculation, is estimated at something over £lOO,OOO.
At the west side of the brewery Mr, Aitken has erected a
splendid mansion, luxuriously and tastefully furnished, where
he resides with his family.
VICTORIA DISTILLERY, NORTHUMBERLAND STREET,
COLLINGWOOD.
The Victoria Parade Brewery formed the subject of an article
on Colonial Industries in our last issue, and as a fitting sequel,
we now proceed to deal similarly with the Victorian Distillery,
another enterprise, established and carried on by Mr. Thomas
Aitken.
The Victorian Distillery is situated in Northumberland street,
Collingwood, about a quarter of a mile due north of the
Brewery, on a block of land having a frontage of 76 feet to
Northumberland-street, by a depth of 170 feet. It was the
first distillery established under the new Distillation Act of
1861, and was started on a small scale, but keeping pace


with the general progress of the colony, it gradually but surely
developed into a large business, requiring increased accommo-
dation, and more extensive plant and premises. Due provision
was made for those requirements in 1876, when the commodious
buildings, now in use, were erected and fitted up with the
best modern appliances and machinery procurable, a description
of which will prove interesting, as shewing the progress made
by colonial distillers in that branch of industry.
The whole frontage to Northumberland-street, is occupied by
a substantial two-story brick building, 76 feet x 30 feet, from the
south end of which a massive tower, 30 feet square rises to a
height of 90 feet. It contains six storys, each of which is
lighted by eight large, circular headed windows—two in each
side, —and ornate string courses of white bricks, mark the different
floors. The tower is surmounted by an elegant cornice and parapet,
the 'vhole presenting a handsome and substantial structure. The
spirit stores, bonded stores, malt house, boiler shed, cooperage,
and spirits of wine distillery, form the remaining sides of a quad-
rangle 110 ft. x 40 ft., the entrance to which is through an
arched passage 12 feet wide, from Northumberland-street.
The leading line in this establishment is the distillation of
whisky, but rum, spirits of wine, and methylated spirits are
also produced in large quantities. The distillery—like the
brewery—is worked on the gravitating principle ; the operations
commence at the top of the tower, and finish on the ground
floor, so that the use of pumping machinery is entirely obviated.
Ascending to the top of the tower by means of a stair-case, we
find a lead-lined tank, 22 feet square, containing 5000 gallons
of water. This water has been already utilised in passing
through the refrigerators, for cooling purposes, and instead of
being allowed to run waste, is used as required from the reservoir
in any part of the building. The opentions comrflence on the
top floor of the tower, where the malt is delivered by a steam
hoist, and passed through a crushing machine at the rate of 60
bushels per hour. The hot liquor tank, capable of holding 1600
gallons, is situated on this floor, and boiled by steam jets. The
mash-tun is situated on the next floor, immediately underneath
the hot liquor tank. It is 6 feet high, by 9 feet 6 inches in
diameter, built of wood, and provided with a false bottom, similar
to that in the brewery. The process of mashing is performed
by a peculiar machine, called a “ mashing rake,” which consists
of two frames of wrought iron grating, about 2 feet 6 inches
square, set at right angles to each other on a horizontally re-
volving shaft, thereby forming a fan similar to that of an ordinary
winnowing machine. The revolving motion is imparted to the
“rake” by bevelled gearing from a perpendicular shaft working in
the centre of the tun, and the machine is made to circulate
round the vessel by a spur wheel, operating on pinion gearing,


fixed on the top edge of it. The malt is delivered into the mash
tun through a shoot from the floor above, and the boiling liquo,
is simultaneously introduced through the bottom of the vesser
and both are thoroughly mixed by the action of the mashinl
rake, thereby saving the labor of three men. The mash remains
in steep sufficiently long to allow of all the saccharine matter
contained in the malt to be extracted from it, when the liquor
or “ sweet wort ” is drawn off, and passing over a refrigerator,
containing 370 feet of copper tubing, on the next floor underneath,
the temperature is reduced to that of the Yan Yean. The
“ grains ” remaining in the mash-tun are passed through a
shoot leading from the bottom of the vessels to the front of the
building, and carted away for cattle fodder.
From the refrigerator the liquor is conveyed in copper pipes to
the next floor, where four large <l fermenting backs ” are sit-
uated, each capable of containing 1700 gallons. After undergoing
the process of fermentation, the liquor descends through rubber
hose to the “ wash charger,” a vessel capable of containing 2,000
gallons, situated on the second floor of the building, from whence
it is drawn off to the “ stills ” as required.
We may here state that the whole process of distillation is
superintended by an Inspector of Distilleries, appointed by
Government, and from the time the liquor leaves the mash tun it
is entirely under his control until it passes through the Custom
House, duty paid. The officer in charge of the distillery has
an exclusive department on the second floor, and every tap on the
distillery apparatus is secured by a lock, the keys of which are
in his sole possession, so that no person, not even the distiller,
can in any way interfere with the liquor during the course
of distillation. The liquor is tested at every stage, from the
mash-tun to the spirit room and its strength registered with the
greatest accuracy in proper books kept for the purpose, so that
every ounce of spirit produced from a certain quantity of malt
is accurately acertained and accounted for.
The process of distillation may be said to commence from this
point. The stills—three in number—are erected on the ground
floor, and the boiling is effected by steam. The heads of the
stills are carried through the second floor about eight feet, and
out into a large wooden tank, called the “ worm tub,” which is
fixed on a strong framing, outside of the building about four feet
above the second floor. The “ worms” are made of copper
tubing, about 150 feet in length, tapering from a diameter
of five inches at the larger end, to two inches at the other, and
three of these—one from each still—are placed in the cistern
aforesaid, through which a continual stream of cold water is
forced, entering at the bottom and discharging through a
waste pipe at the top. The stills on the ground floor are num-
bered respectively 1,2, and 3. The liquor from the wash charger


is admitted to No. 1 still through a copper pipe and boiled by a
steam distributor. The alcoholic vapor rises through the “ head
of the still, and thence passes through the “ worm,” where it
becomes condensed, and is conveyed into the “ low wine receivers
on the second floor. On the way from the “ worm tub” to the
“ receivers” the “ low wines”—as the liquor is now termed •
passes through a “ testing safe,” a small copper box, with glass
lid, secured with lock and key. It is here tested by the hy-
drometer, and its strength registered by the officer aforesaid.
From the wine receivers, the liquor is admitted to No. 2 still, on
the ground floor, where it is boiled by the “ dry coil” process.
The steam passes through a spiral coil of copper piping inside
of the vessel, and the alcoholic vapor rises as before and
issues from the “ worm” in what is known as “ feints.”
It is conveyed through a second test safe, the strength again
registered, and runs through copper tubing into the “ feints
receivers.” There are two of those vessels capable of holding
500 gallons each, in which the liquor is stored before undergoing
the final process. This is effected by the liquor passing into
No. 3 still, known as the “ spirit still,” and being again
boiled by the dry coil process, the alcohol is condensed, and
leaves the worm for the third time as pure spirit. It again goes
through “ the test safe,” when it is filtered through flannel and
fine linen, and conveyed by copper tubing to the “spirit receiver,”
capable of holding 400 gallons, on the same floor, from whence
it passes through a rubber hose to the “spirit room 14 x 26ft.,
on the ground floor to the east of the tower, where it is stored in
what are known as No. 1 and 2 spirit vats, containing 1750
gallons each. Another vessel of smaller capacity is used for
the storage of rum, and a fourth vat utilised for coloring rum,
is fixed in the same apartment. From the spirit vats the liquor
is drawn off into trade casks, which are numbered, registered
and removed to the bonded stores in the adjoining building.
The distiller’s room and the inspector’s office open off the second
floor of the tower, immediately over the spirit room, and both
are fitted up with every convenience for carrying on the extensive
business of the distillery.
The motive power required for hoisting and grinding is
supplied by a six-horse power vertical engine, built at the Canal
Basin Foundry, Glasgow, on the same model as the engine at the
brewery, and the steam required for it, and the different purposes
in the distillery is generated in a Cornish boiler 18ft. x sft.
6in. in diameter, made by Robinson Bros., Melbourne, and
situated in a shed immediately at the rear of the tower.
The bonded stores are located at the right of the entrance, and
consist of two apartments ; one on the ground floor 60 x 24 feet,
the other on the second story facing the street and extending over
the entrance, 40 feet x 30 feet. These stores are capable of


holding over 1,400 quarter casks. A small apartment, for
storing spirits out of bond, is situated at the rear of the bonded
stores, and the cooperage extends to the end of the malt house,
a two story building, 90 x 24 feet. The malt kiln, 24 xl2 feet
is situated at the south end of the malt house.
The original distillery is located at the south end of the allot-
ment in a lofty building 30 x 25 feet. This is known as the No.
1 distillery, and is now used for the manufacture of spirits
of wine for chemical purposes. The liquor for the manufacture
of spirits of wine, is conveyed from the tower in a pipe to a wash
charger capable of holding 1,200 gallons, situated on a raised
platform inside the building, from whence it is passed through
in a pipe to No, 1 still on the ground floor. This is a wooden
vessel 10 feet 6 inches in diameter, by 6 feet high, and the liquor
is boiled by a steam distributor. The spirit is conveyed through
the still-head and through the “ worm ” which is fixed in a large
vat on the east side of the building, from whence it returns to
the still-room, passing the test safe as “ feints,” and into the
feints receiver on the platform aforesaid. The liquor from
the receiver passes into a large copper still, No. 2, which
holds 1000 gallons, where it is again boiled by the “dry coil”
process, and the spirit ascends through a French “head,” and
descends through a cylindrical apparatus, fitted with a worm,
where the final condensation takes place, and the liquor after
passing through another test safe, is conveyed to the “ spirit
receiver” at the other end of the building. No, 1 spirit-
room, 30 x 12 feet, lies on the western boundary of the allotment,
and the continuation of the building. 60 x 12 feet is used as
bonded store. The spirit is drawn off from the receiver in the
still-room by a rubber hose into No. 1 spirit-room, where it is
stored in four large vats, having a capacity of 2,200 gallons,
and finally it is filled into casks and placed in the bonded store
afore mentioned for the convenience of customers. This store
holds 700 casks. The steam required for the working of No. 1
still-room is supplied from a boiler similar to that already described,
and set at the east end of the building.
The quantity of spirits distilled weekly amounts to 1000
gallons and as only the best material is used in its manufacture
a superior article is produced which commands a ready market.
The excellence of the whisky may be gathered from the fact
that at the late Melbourne International Exhibition, Mr. Aitken
was awarded first prize and a silver medal, competing against the
celebrated Dunville and other well-known brands of Irish
Whiskies, besides honorable mention at the Sydney Exhibition,
and numerous prize medals from the Intercolonial and other com-
petitions in various parts of the colonies. The value of the pro-
perty and plant is estimated at close on ,£30,000. Six men are
constantly employed in the distillery, and the whole management


is in the hands of Mr. Dempster, a gentleman who appears to
thoroughly understand the business, and to whose courtesy we
are indepted for showing us through the premises and explainind
the process of distillation Mr Aitken has to be congratulateg
on having firmly established another colonial industry, and it is
gratifying to record that success has so far crowned his enterprise.
There are few men in the colony carrying on such large con-
cerns on their own account, which speaks volumes for his pluck
and enterprise.


\
Ly*
Vo^.V
(i-<4Jkj***~ *s


GOLD, SILVER, & BRONZE MEDALS
AWARDED AT
English, Colonial, and American International
EXHIBITIONS.
