

I.W.W. COMMISSION, 1918.
Mr. WINDEYER’S
GREAT
INDICTMENT
The Worker Prin, St. Andrew’s Place, Sydney.
Issued by Release and Defence Committee,
285 C Elizabeth Street, Sydney.
BEN LEWIS, Secretary


ISSUED FOR FREE DISTRIBUTION
BY
RELEASE AND DEFENCE COMMITTEE.
Secretary:
BEN LEWIS.
Assistant Secretary:
GEORGE J. WASHINGTON.
Executive:
SAM JEFFRIES.
J. CARSON.
We demand the immediate release of the 12 I.W.W.
men, victims of a vile capitalist conspiracy.
When you read this, pass it on to another worker.




THE I.W.W. INQUIRY.
Mr. Windeyer's Great Indictment.
FORTY-FIRST DAY.
WEDNESDAY, OCTOBER 23.
The No. 2 Jury Court was crowded as
Mr. Windeyer, K.C., rose to deliver his
address.
He said that although the Commission
had been instituted primarily to investi-
gate the conduct of the police in connec-
tion with the I.W.W. trials, he claimed at
the outset that it could be regarded as
throwing some light on the question as to
whether the men in jail should have a
new trial. Abundant matter had been
elicited during the hearing of the inquiry
which, had it been available to the jury
at the time the men were tried, might pos-
sibly have produced different results. If
the present inquiry only showed that cer-
tain matter now known was not before
the jury at that time, that in itself was
sufficient to show that the degree of cer-
tainty required by justice was not arrived
at at the trial of the I.W.W. men.
There were many facts in the evidence
which were both curious and question-
able: and infinitely more so in view of the
facts which the present inquiry had
elicited —evidence which should not have
been allowed to stand in this country of
law and order as a basis for holding the
men in jail.
LIST OF CHARGES.
Mr. Windeyer said he had endeavored to
formulate the charges made in Parliament
against the police, and which the Commis-
sion was called upon to investigate. Those
charges were as follows:
(1) That the police arranged to de-
port Scully to prevent his divulging the
circumstances of the case.
(2) That Scully was promised £2OOO
to procure sufficient evidence to secure
a conviction.
(3) That Pauling and Turbet asked
another witness to place dope in the
pockets of the I.W.W. men.
(4) That the police supplied dope for
purposes of making evidence.
(5) That the police put the towel and
cotton waste in Teen’s pocket.
(6) That statements were prepared by
the police of evidence concocted by them
to be given by Scully.
(7) That Detective Leary suggested
that Scully should manufacture evidence
against Grant.
(8) That the whole case was in great
part made up of fictitious evidence con-
cocted at the instance of or with the
knowledge of the police, and McAlister
in particular.
(9) That members of the police force
procured Scully’s loss of employment.
While he could admit that some of the
charges had not been sheeted right home
to the police, he submitted that some at
least had been proven beyond all doubt.
SOME REMARKABLE FEATURES.
Mr. Windeyer commenced a close re-
view of the evidence given at the trials
two years ago, pointing out that there
were some exceedingly remarkable fea-
tures about it. He instanced the remark-
able confessions made by McAlister, the
two Goldsteins, and Scully, and the ob-
servations made by certain of the police.
Nobody could read the evidence at the
trials without being struck with the extra-
ordinary boldness of the narrative. He
instanced the fact that McAlister had
joined the I.W.W. deliberately at the in-
stance of the police, although that point
had not been placed before the jury. That
was a matter that should have been
placed before the jury in its true light.
One of the most remarkable features of
a most remarkable case was when the
police, early in the proceedings, secured a
new body of admissions which were all
made by criminals of the worst type to
persons whom they scarcely knew.
There was the case of McPherson making
admissions to McAlister, whom he hardly
knew. The whole thing seemed im-
probable. Could one imagine a body of
wicked men being so foolish as to impart
information to the first stranger who
chanced to come along? Yet that theory
had been accepted by a jury. It was hard
to believe, even now, that McAlister gave
a true presentation of the facts.
AN IMPOSSIBLE STORY.
There was the evidence of September
7. McAlister appeared to have been prac-
tically a stranger at the I.W.W. rooms,
yet he was called upon to draw discs for
a fire. He had only joined the I.W.W.
some two days previously. If it were true


it seemed incredible. If ever there wa
a ridiculous travesty it was presented b
the picture produced by that bit of ev
dence. Three men meet casually, an
immediately go through a solemn fare
as to who should burn down Way’s shop
There was Mahony, who was looke
upon in the evidence as the high priest
the ceremonies superintending the draw
ing of the discs, yet nothing was know
about him. It seemed ridiculous. Scull
had said that the disc business was
joke amongst the police, and one felt in
dined to believe that it was.
Then there was the conversation whic
Leary overheard behind a post outsid
Mark Foy’s. McAlister had sworn at th
lower Court that the conversation abou
“Miss Joey” took place in Goulburn-stree
If that was true, it showed Leary to b
a perjured conspirator and McAlister i
his later evidence a coached witness.
“I HAVE A PAINFUL DUTY TO
PERFORM.”
Coming to the evidence given by th
Goldsteins, Mr. Windeyer pointed out tha
during the trial the police invariably
addressed either of them as Mr. Goldstein
But they did not address them as such
during the present inquiry. Why wa
that? “Right here,” continued Mr. Win
deyer, “I have a painful duty to perform
and I need only add that I wish to get i
over as quickly as possible. We know
now that the leading counsel defending
the men was not in a position to cross-
examine those men. We know now that
the gentleman who undertook the defence
of various of the accused men was in such
a position that it was impossible for him
to bring out in cross-examination the true
character of the two Goldsteins—Louis
and Davis.”
His Honor: The facts have not escaped
my attention.
Mr. Windeyer: It is a very grave and
significant fact, so much so that I prefer
not to say any more about it. The Gold-
steins were not exposed in their true char-
acters. Why were they treated as if they
were high-minded patriots? Did they give
evidence from a sense of duty only? Could
it be doubted, after all that was now
known, that had the facts been placed be-
fore the jury at the time it would have
given them cause to pause before accept-
ing such evidence?
WAS LOUIS GOLDSTEIN’S EVIDENCE
CONCOCTED?
Mr. Windeyer said that although Louis
Goldstein had alleged that Teen told him
the I.W.W. would cease using fire dope
and resort to explosives, no evidence was
adduced to indicate that such explosives
existed. As with others, there were the
same confessions by members of the
I.W.W. to almost absolute strangers. It
was difficult to believe how Louis Gold-
stein’s evidence could be readily accepted
by a jury. The new light thrown on it
by Cohen’s evidence was that it was a
concoction.
Mr. Windeyer referred to question 17,176
in Cohen’s evidence, wherein Cohen had
said that Louis Goldstein had told him ora
September 14 that Teen had confessed
about Stedman’s fire. That could not have
been an error of recollection on the part
of Cohen. On the other hand, Cohen had
no doubt as to that having been the be-
ginning of his knowledge of the I.W.W.
fires. It was clearly in his mind, and It
was the manner in which the matter had
been introduced to . Mr. Gannon. That
alone proved that the statement prepared
by the police was a tissue of fabrication.
If what Cohen said was true, there was
no escape. Pauling, with or without the
assistance of Turbet, manufactured the
evidence he gave before the Court, and
had used influence over the two Gold-
steins to make them speak the words dic-
tated by him.
DAVIS GOLDSTEIN AND THE
FORGERY CASES.
Passing on to Davis Goldstein, it is
significant that the fact was deliberately
kept from the jury that he had been a
member of the 1.W.W., and was even at
one time the secretary of the organisation.
In some of his statements he was abso-
lutely certain of September 15 as the date
of giving information to the police, yet In
the trial that certainty was departed from
and “about the 15th” adhered to. That
was not frank evidence from a person
claiming to know what he was talking
about. It was a most remarkable thing
that two of the prisoners should inde-
pendently state that he was connected
with the note forgery cases. It would ap-
pear that he did know of them, if indeed
he was not a party to them. If Goldstein
was on the friendly terms he alleged with
Hamilton, the conversation between them
re the note case would never have taken
place. The evidence given by Davis Gold-
stein regarding the conversation with
Hamilton was almost incredible.
It was inconceivable that the very things
the police wished to discover they heard
from the Goldsteins. It was strange that
there was no evidence against Mahony,
although it must have been highly ser-
viceable. Androvitch was named in the
warrant, yet not a single word was said
about him, or even that he existed at all.
The police seemed to have pursued the
case with but one object in view—that of
proving the guilt of the twelve men they
had in the dock. Although it was part of
the Ci’own case to give evidence against
Androvitch, not a single line of it ap-
peared in evidence. Davis Goldstein had
sworn that he went to the I.W.W. men as
a sympathiser of them, and that they re-
posed confidence in him. It could be said
now that that was a lie.
SCULLY’S EVIDENCE.
The general character of Scully’s evi-
dence was of the same nature. After
reading Scully’s statement to the police
on September 30, 1916, it was hard to come
to any other conclusion than that from
that date he was a paid agent of the
police. But that fact was never disclosed
to the jury. Scully’s evidence was, of
course, not open to the same criticism as


that of McAlister or the Goldsteins —there
being an introductory narrative which
gave an explanation of his connection with
the I.W.W. The police were fortunate
enough to arrive at proof that all the fire's
were caused by the I.W.W. As a matter
of fact, it was never suggested at the in-
quests that the fires had been caused by
the 1.W.W.; but as regards three out of
four, the police were fortunate enough to
procure admissions that they were.
"WHOSE COURAGE FAILED?”
Then there was the evidence of the
police. Take Leary’s remarkable evi-
dence as to what he heard behind a tele-
graph post. Why Fergusson and Lynch
should have been present to corroborate
Leary’s presence behind the post was hard
to say. They were also fortunate enough
in that they were able to corroborate that
Leary went into Foy’s shop to call Mr.
Foy’s attention to the men talking on the
other side of the post. Foy made a state-
ment to the police, but for some reason it
was never used, although Foy himself was
in the witness-box. Whose courage
failed? Unfortunately, Mr. Lamb had no
memory. Mr. Windeyer suggested that
the police went to great pains to establish
that story, and one’s mind was irresistibly
driven to suspicion by a story of that sort.
Why wasn’t Foy’s statement put in at the
time? Was it that Leary considered the
story was too tall, and might not be be-
lieved by the jury?
LEARY’S EVIDENCE REGARDING
REEVE.
Coming to the secretion of the police in
the empty shop opposite the I.W.W. rooms,
there was again room for suspicion.
Leary’s evidence at the Court was that he
had seen some of the I.W.W. men in the
forenoon of September 14, 1916. Yet ib
was established now that Leary was not
there then. Other detectives had sworn
that Leary did not come to the empty shop
until the afternoon. That information
was not available to the defence at the
trial, and it had the appearance of having
been concocted and manufactured to cor-
roborate the Crown case. It should also
be remembered that Leary’s evidence re-
garding Reeve had been altered between
what he had said at the Police Court and
what he said at the trial. At the Police
Court, Leary had sworn he saw Reeve
early in the afternoon, yet it was known
now that Reeve was not liberated from
jail then. At the higher Court Leary
altered his evidence to read that he saw
him between 4 and 5 o’clock. Taking that
in conjunction with his evidence regard-
ing what he had seen in the morning, it
was highly unsatisfactory. If the jury
knew the facts as they were known now,
could they have accepted Leary’s evi-
dence?
Then they swore they saw Hamilton
hand something to Goldstein. If it were
true, it was the most important thing 3f
that day, and they must have known the
importance of it. Yet no note of it ap-
peared in their report, or even that they
had seen Goldstein or Hamilton about the
place. This was a fact of great signifi-
cance, and one which was vital to have.
It should have been known when the men
were on trial, but unfortunately it was
not known to the defence.
"OBLIGING CONSPIRATORS.”
Mr. Windeyer characterised the state-
ments about demonstrating in front of the
I.W.W. rooms as something which could
not and did not take place. „ "Believe me,”
said Mr. Windeyer, "I was not wasting the
time of the Court when I made the police
demonstrate the matter in this witness-
box. It -throws grave doubt on the re-
liability of these witnesses in the empty
shop across the road.” It was highly im-
probable that such wicked conspirators
would come outside their own rooms on
to the open street and give exhibitions
which could be seen by the police.
Resuming after lunch, Mr. Windeyer
said it was most remarkable that all the
pantomimic admissions of guilt took place
on the pavement outside the I.W.W.
rooms. Whenever any member of the
I.W.W. had occasion to do anything that
would incriminate him, he did it outside
where the police could see it. Of course
it would be said that they might have
also done these things where they could
not be seen, but even if it was claimed
that one such demonstration took place
outside in the open there was great reason
for doubt. The fact, too, that a manager
of a great establishment like Foy’s should
be right on the spot near the door where
Leary could locate him instantly was like-
wise remarkable.
If the evidence given by Cohen that
Louis Goldstein told him of Teen’s con-
fession was correct, then Leary must have
known that his evidence was false when
he swore that he saw Teen speaking to
Goldstein on September 22. It was most
remarkable that the police were always
able to corroborate various incidents.
"A CLEVER PIECE OF ACTING.”
Although the Goldsteins were in con-
stant touch with the police, for Leary and
Dynch not to have known their Christian
names in November, when they gave evi-
dence, seemed to be nothing more or less
than a clever piece of acting on their part
to make the evidence look real. "I sug-
gest,” added Mr. Windeyer, "that these
men are skilled for the purpose of making
their cases good, and skilled in the con-
coction and manufacture of cases for
prosecution. I submit that that is a piece
of cleverness which we could expect from
these men if they are guilty as I suggest.
The same piece of humbug was used by
Lynch as was used by Leary.”
Referring to the statements by Gold-
stein and Scully which led to the initia-
tion of the Commission, Mr. Windeyer said
the statutory declaration made by Davis
Goldstein stood on the same footing as
the evidence given by him at the Com-
mission. After making a sworn declara-
tion to Judd, Davis Goldstein came to the
Commission and said that all he had said
in the declaration was untrue. As to what
weight should be -given to that statement


was a matter for grave consideration by
his Honor.
What was the motive in his mind in
going to Judd? In the statement he made
on the Sunday before the start of the
Commission he gave as his reason that
he had been ruined financially, and would
have to go back to his trade as a tailor,
and had been persecuted and didn’t care
what happened so long as he cleared him-
self. But could one believe that he would
make the attacks on the police for the
motive he suggested? It must be admitted
that Davis Goldstein had shown himself
as a man without the slightest regard for
truth, honor, or honesty; had proven him-
self to be as unreliable, - dangerous, and
shifty a criminal as had ever appeared
before a Court.
“Isn’t that a matter which should be
taken into account in connection with the
accused men now in jail?” added Mr.
Windeyer. “If what is known about him
now was known about him then, wouldn’t
it have been natural for the jury to ask
what manner of man he was? But the
position was never placed before the jury
as it should have been. Unfortunate it
is that the jury was not apprised of the
true facts, or of what pressure had been
brought to bear upon the Goldsteins be-
fore they would give any evidence.
DID DAVIS GOLDSTEIN’S CON-
SCIENCE SPEAK?
“What was the motive? I suggest that
the reason for Davis Goldstein’s declara-
tion to Judd was that at the bottom of his
heart he was ashamed that his care for
himself had resulted in sending men to
jail for long terms of imprisonment, and
that he had helped to put them there, but
that he did not realise what it meant at
the time. We have the evidence of Scully
that he was almost in tears when he of-
fered to give information to Judd, and
realised that he had done a wrong by hav-
ing manufactured this evidence. Strange
as it may seem, we knew that this motive
may attack a man and reveal the one
spark of manhood left in him. Isn’t it
reasonable to believe that that was the
real motive of Goldstein’s declaration to
Judd?”
But to Pauling, Goldstein had suggested
that his reason was to get even with the
Government. Could that motive be put
forward seriously? As to his position In
the world, it had to be remembered that
when he first gave the information to
Judd his financial position was not the
same as it was when he made the declara-
tion. He was not ruined and bankrupt
then —he had motor cars, and was in-
terested in a hotel business at Mudgee.
“So when he told me on the Sunday prior
to the opening of this Commission that
that was the reason, he made a lying
statement,” added Mr. Windeyer. Com-
pared with the evidence he gave at the
first trial, and the evidence he gave be-
fore the Commission, one must prefer to
believe the statements he made in the
declaration to Judd.
WAS PRESSURE BROUGHT TO BEAR?
The facts leading up to the retraction
of his statements were too strong to be
concealed, although he had done his best
to do so. Why was it put forward that
he had seen Pauling casually in the street
on the Saturday night before the opening
of the Commission, except to conceal that
he had an appointment with Pauling, and
that the police had a part in bringing
about the position of the Goldsteins at
the inquiry?
On the Saturday he had been told that
Mr. Windeyer wished to see him in view
of the serious charges against the police,
and he made an appointment for the next
day. But his brother had seen Pauling on
three occasions during last week, and
had seen Walker once. It was known
now that Davis Goldstein had seen Paul-
ing on the Saturday night, but he lied as
to how he had seen him.
“On the Sunday he made his retrac-
tion. Why? I think I have established a
reason why his retraction should not be
accepted, and why his statutory declara-
tion should be accepted as the true facts
of the matter,” said Mr. Windeyer.
PAULING AND THE GOLDSTEINS.
It was remarkable that he should sup-
ply the police with a copy of his retrac-
tion —and a carbon copy at that. It
looked as if the police wished to be very
sure of every word of it. Was it possible
to believe that the police had no lot or
share in the existence of that document, or
in the attitude he assumed on the Sunday
when he went to see Mr. Windeyer? It
was hard to believe that in those visits of
Louis Goldstein to Pauling not one word
was asked concerning Davis Goldstein and
what he had been saying about the police.
Something must have taken place of
which the Commission had no knowledge.
Davis Goldstein had sworn on August
22 that he met Pauling in the street out-
side the police station. On August 3d he
denied seeing him in the street, but that
it was just inside the police station.
Pauling’s and Jones’s evidence was that
Pauling did not come downstairs at all.
Thus, if the evidence given by these two
police officers was true, then the evidence
given by Goldstein was invention.
Mr. Windeyer said it seemed that a
common understanding had been estab-
lished between Pauling and Louis Gold-
stein that the latter was to use his in-
fluence with his brother —and the evidence
showed that Louis Goldstein was a go-
between between Pauling and Davis Gold-
stein for a whole week, but that it wasn’t
until the Saturday night that Davis Gold-
stein was overcome and was prepared to
make a retraction. Thus the retraction
was in part the work of the police.
Referring to the evidence given by Mr.
Cohen, Mr. Windeyer said it was a re-
markable thing that although Cohen was
their solicitor, the Goldsteins went direct
to the police with information without first
consulting their solicitor as to how they
stood. In Scully’s case he went to get
advice from his solicitor before he did


anything. Why did the Goldsteins go to
the police first?
Mr. Windeyer had not finished his ad-
dress when the Commission adjourned
until the following day.
FORTY-SECOND DAY.
THURSDAY, OCTOBER 24.
Mr. Windeyer continued his address.
He read passages from McAlister’s evi-
dence to show that he knew McPherson
by that name prior to September 25, which
w'ould indicate that McPherson was not
identical with Andrew, and that the tale
about Andrew had been fastened on to
the unfortunate man McPherson when it
was never intended for him at all. Mr.
Windeyer also commented on the fact that
while at one time it was sworn Goldstein
came out of the I.W.W. rooms with
Hamilton, Goldstein himself had sworn
that he met Hamilton outside the rooms
in the street.
In coming to the facts which had arisen
since the Commission started, there was
the case where two important witnesses
had stated that a lot of the original evi-
dence was not true. It was true that
Goldstein had gone back on his statement,
while Scully had in part qualified his.
But it had to be remembered that in re-
tracting his evidence Goldstein lied as to
the reason. The story about wanting a
Union ticket could not be accepted—it
would be probably the last thing Gold-
stein would think about. At the trial
there was no suggestion to the jury that
Goldstein was under any pressure.
WHAT COHEN WAS BUSY ABOUT.
“Then, again,” said Mr. Windeyer, “what
was the professional business Cohen was
busy about? It must be obvious to all
that Cohen was anxious to secure the re-
lease of his client from the note forgery
case. At the first interview on Septem-
ber 14 the matter was discussed. There
may have been patriotic motives in view,
but was it not also to try and secure
their release from the forged note cases?
On the next day we have in Cohen’s diary-
entries about attending detectives, the
Crown Law Department, and Gannon. It
should be remembered that prior to this
the Goldsteins had been in touch with the
police. What was the purpose of the in-
terview with Turbet? It could only be
for the purpose of securing the services
of the Goldsteins in the I.W.W. cases with
the object of securing their release from
the note cases.
“The Goldsteins had one tremendous
motive in view—that of making them-
selves as useful to the police as possible.
Why? If what Cohen had said regarding
Teen’s confession is true —that Teen’s con-
fession was already known to the police
on September 14 —then it seems that the
police were prepared to use the Goldsteins
to manufacture a case quite irrespective of
its truth. I must say, in passing, that
in fairness to Mr. Cohen the subsequent
movements of the Goldsteins showed that
any arrangement between them and the
police to concoct evidence was not with
his knowledge.”
NOTHING FOR NOTHING!
At that stage Goldstein’s attitude was:
What will be the effect of the evidence I
can give to the police? Will it succeed in
securing a nolle prosequi or not? The
fact that Goldstein would not sign a state-
ment until his solicitor had seen it, and
until Gohen had seen the detectives,
showed some remarkable anomaly be-
tween them, their attorney, and the
police, and suggested that the Goldsteins
were then baulking in the matter. That
in itself would justify the reopening of
the matter.
Regarding the suggestion that Gannon
should see Mr. Hall (Attorney-General),
the only possible reason to suggest was
that he was trying to secure the filing
of a nolle prosequi. It could not be that
he was going to give information—the
police already had that. Plainly, all the
business was done with one en(l in view,
that of securing a nolle prosequi.
His Honor pointed out that Cohen had
stated definitely that the reason he was
professionally engaged was to get his
clients out of the note forgery case.
Mr. Windeyer went on to say that it was
obvious that the story as to how the Gold-
steins became concerned in the I.W.W.
case was a concoction, and that Pauling
had lent himself to it. The Goldsteins
had made it clear that September 15 was
a definite date in the matter until it was
shown that a different version would be
given by the police. Then they began to
shift and hesitate. Goldstein had defiled
in evidence that he got the dope from
Hamilton at the instigation of the police
or that he had a conversation with Paul-
ing and Turbet prior to September 15.
“We know from the police reports that
this is not so,” added Mr. Windeyer.
GOLDSTEIN'S STATEMENT TO JUDD.
In making his statement to Judd, Gold-
stein never made a frank disclosure as
to the frame of mind he and his brother
were in when they became witnesses. He
wanted to tell the truth sufficiently to
discredit the police and get an inquiry,
but never proposed disclosing in full all
that passed between him and the police.
During the inquiry much had been dis-
covered which discredited him more than
his statement could. It must be clear
that at no time was Davis Goldstein
frank. The difference of dates of Teen’s
confession threw doubt on the reliability of
any of Goldstein’s evidence —it could well
be a reason for not accepting it. It was
quite Consistent with his attitude through-
out that the story of Hamilton and the
dope was an invention. “We may be
quite sure,” said Mr. Windeyer, “that if
it did take place it did not take place in
the open street. This inquiry has dis-
closed that Goldstein cannot be relied
upon as to anything at all.”
WHAT THE JURY DID NOT KNOW.
There seemed to be very good reason
why some of Scully’s statements should


be accepted. It was given at a time
when the matter had not developed to any
great extent. There was fair reason to
argue that some of it was honest. Davis
Goldstein had said that the reason he
first gave evidence to the police was for
patriotic motives, and not that there was
any arrangement regarding their position
in the note forgery cases. The police
must have known the course the evidence
■would take at the trial, yet they stood
by and allowed the Goldsteins to give a
false version. That established the fact
that the police were a party to it, and
Mr. Windeyer claimed to have 'estab-
lished that the story of the Goldsteins
was invented. Why was the truth not
told?
“Had the jury known that the Gold-
steins were in the I.W.W. case to save
their own skins wouldn’t that fact have
weighed with them? Had the real con-
nection of Davis Goldstein with the I.W.W.
men been disclosed it would also have
been disclosed that anxiety was to
escape prosecution. Thus the conduct of
the police in the note case became woven
up with their conduct in the I.W.W. case.”
DAVIS GOLDSTEIN A TOOL OF THE
POLICE.
The charge had been openly made that
Pauling, Turbet, and possibly Mitchell
neglected their duty to sheet home the
guilt of the Goldsteins because of their
improper relationship with them. If it
was true that the police had accepted
bribes from the Goldsteins or had used
their control over the Goldsteins to make
them give presents, it threw a light on
the fact that even early after their arrest
the’ Goldsteins were willing to give evi-
dence.
It was important to discover that, from
a statement left with Cohen by Goldstein
re Besant; a week prior to September 15,
the police were using Davis Goldstein as
a tool to secure information about the
note case. That was a matter never dis-
closed until the present inquiry.
That, said Mr. Windeyer, brought up a
serious and unfortunate part of the in-
quiry—that the money was alleged to have
been conveyed to the police. The case
that had been made out was that the
money went to Lazarus but no further.
It was quite possible that people got
money under the pretence of giving it to
the police, but that the police never got
it. It was possible that Lazarus got the
money, and it went no further. But it had
been established that it did reach Lazarus.
THE PAYMENTS TO LAZARUS.
It had to be considered if the police had
any guilty relationship with the Gold-
steins, taken in conjunction with the suits,
etc. The evidence of Green, Lazarus, the
Karpenskys, and Lazarus’s bank-book
must be considered. It was clear that
Lazarus had not explained why he should
get £6OO as security for a £4OO bond. His
statement was that later it was returned
in two payments of £250 and in other cash.
But it was remarkable that one payment
was made on the same day as it was paid
into Lazarus’s banking account. The story
that it was paid for law expenses was not
true —a cheque butt showed that the Gold-
steins paid Cohen by cheque direct. Nor
did the payments fit in with the racing
transactions referred to.
THE KARPENSKYS WERE TELLING
THE TRUTH.
There was also Davis Goldstein’s posi-
tive statement in his declaration to Judd.
That he should disclose that for the pur-
pose of making a case against the police
because he did not get liis £4OO back in
Morgan’s case was unthinkable —there was
no connection in the two matters. Gold-
stein’s statement was that it was paid for
the police, and it was known that it did
reach Lazarus.
Mr. Windeyer suggested that the Kar-
penskys were telling the truth; that they
were simple, child-like people anxious to
tell all they knew. If that was so then it
carried the matter further, for they said
that Davis Goldstein admitted to them
that the money was for the purpose of
bribing the police. It must also be re-
membered that September, 1916, was a
lucrative month for some of the detectives.
Of course the money in their banking ac-
counts for that month was insignificant
when compared with the money alleged
to have been received by them as their
share out of the money paid to Lazarus.
But would it be probable that men en-
gaged in a wicked transaction would place
the whole of the money in their banking
accounts? On the other hand, it would
hardly be likely that they would use their
banking accounts for the purpose of stor-
ing their illgotten gains, though they may
.have felt disposed to place a little of it
there.
THE SUITS FROM PURA.
As to the suits of clothes, one could
not believe for a moment that Pura’s
books dishonest. The evidence was
overwhelming. If Pura’s evidence was
true then it showed that the police ver-
sion of how they got the suits was a per-
jured one. If the police were guilty of
getting the suits for nothing were
likewise guilty of appearing before the
Commission and endeavoring to cover up
what they had done. It might be that
the Goldsteins were men of the servile,
crawling class, and that they “smoodged”
to the police to take the suits; or it might
be that if the whole truth were known
the police were more innocent than they
appeared.
Mr. Windeyer said he would suggest
that the police did not pay for the suits
at all. Davis Goldstein had said that the
police put it on them for the suits. Mr,
Windeyer thought the most probable ex-
planation was that the Goldsteins had
made the police presents of the suits, and
that the police had not the courage to
admit that. Because they did not, it
made the case worse against them.
“CUNNING, READY LIARS.”
“They have all shown themselves to be
cunning, ready liars when they wanted to
make up a case. We have only to take


the case of Surridge in the witness-box
regarding the newspaper cutting. They
have shown themselves to be entirely
without regard to the sanctity of an oath
as regards telling the truth,” added Mr.
Windeyer.
Mr. Windeyer went on to contrast the
various statements of the police as to
how they came to get the suits. If what
they said was true, then what Goldstein
had said was false —one was driven to the
conclusion that both were false. If the
suit business, as suggested, was true, what
light did it throw on the reliability of the
police in giving evidence? Was it reason-
able to assume that none of them remem-
bered exactly under what circumstances
they came to get the suits?
“PURA’S EVIDENCE STANDS
UNIMPEACHED.”
Regarding the receipts, the detectives
said that the suits cost them £5/5/- each.
In Pura’s books the prices varied from
£6/5/- to £6/10/-, and in all cases a re-
ceipt was given for a higher amount.
Perhaps that looked suspicious. But
Pura had said that he had been asked to
make the receipts higher than the cost of
the suits, and that was borne out by
Goldstein. One could readily understand,
then, how a higher price came to appear
on the receipts. But that did not get over
the price of the suits in Pura’s books, and
there could be no doubt that Pura’s books
were honest. Then the two payments for
£l9 each fitted exactly with the cost of
the suits made up to the date of payment.
In the main Pura's story was shown to be
true. Thus the whole of the police version
was a concocted piece of perjury for the
purpose of deceiving the Commission.
Save for the denial of the police, Pura’s
evidence stood unimpeached, and his de-
meanor was that of a man trying to tell
the truth.
It was remarkable, too, that if the suits
only cost £5/5/- the receipts for the higher
amounts were kept, while no receipts
were obtained from the Goldsteins. One
could not think otherwise than that the
story put forward by the police regarding
the suits was untrue.
THT LATER VISITS TO PURA.
There was also the fact that two of the
detectives went to. Pura prior to the com-
mencement of the Commission. It re-
mained to be seen whether Pura’s evi-
dence regarding that matter was accepted.
If so, then further perjury was committed
by Turbet as te what happened when he
went to see Pura. If Pura’s evidence
could not be set aside, then the guilt of
Turbet was very serious indeed. The fact
that the police did not put forward a
definite story as to how they came to get
the suits suggested that they made the
story up hurriedly to meet the awkward
facts as best they could. Nor could it be
forgotten that Judd had the first infor-
mation of the suits from the Goldsteins,
while the fact that only the detectives en-
gaged in the note forgery cases got suits
could not be lost sight of. Mr. Boote had
said in his evidence that Davis Goldstein
had told him that the police put it on them
for the suits, and that they took care to
get separate receipts from Pura, but that
they (the Goldsteins) had paid for the
suits. Would Davis Goldstein have
thought out the significance of all the
details to Boote unless his story was true?
Could he have thought it out if the de-
tectives’ version that they had paid for
the suits was true?
MONEY LOST “AT THE RACES.”
Regarding the cheques drawn for “cash,”
it was a striking fact that the detectives
at the time did not conduct any extensive
investigations regarding them. At the
close of the Commission Davis Goldstein
explained that they were drawn for wages.
That explanation was never made
nor was it made at the time of the note
cases. The police had said that when
they conducted the inquiry into these
cheques the Goldsteins had said they were
to pay wages, and the police were, satis-
fied with that. But a regular wages
cheque appeared every fortnight in the
Goldsteins’ banking account. It was thujs
impossible to believe that those cash
cheques had been drawn for that purpose.
The evidence of Davis Goldstein that they
were for horse bets was obviously dis-
honest, and if it had been told to the
police at the time they would have re-
membered it.
A LITTLE OVERSIGHT REGARDING
A DATE.
Mr. Windeyer drew attention to the
statement that a cash cheque drawn for
£7O odd on July 6, 1916, was for the pur-
pose of betting on a horse named North
Star, which ran that day. As a matter of
fact, that horse ran on the day previously
and before the cheque w«s drawn. He
suggested that in trying to build up that
story the date of the paper had been
taken, and no notice was taken of the fact
that the race took place the day pre-
viously.
Regarding the financial transactions ox
the Goldsteins, Turbet had said that the
reason the matter of their bank account
was not pursued was because of instruc-
tions from Mr. Bathgate, while Mr. Bath-
gate’s recollection of the matter was that
the matter had not been brought to him
at all. There was also the fact that
Allen, the bank manager, had stated that
he had no recollection of Turbet approach-
ing him regarding the banking business of
the Goldsteins. In this direction the dis-
crepancy between the evidence of Turbet
and Mitchell should be noted. Turbet
said he discussed the matter with Mitchell
prior to giving evidence in the Commis-
sion, but Mitchell blankly denied the con-
versation taking place. That was not a
matter which took place long ago, or a
couple of years ago—it was something that
happened days previously.
“JUDD’S STATEMENT CARRIES
CONVICTION."
As regards Scully’s statement, there
appeared to be no reason why Scully
should invent the conversations he said:
he had had with Goldstein. At one stage


both Goldstein and Scully had stated that
the evidence was dishonest. But that was
not all. There was the incident about
Surridge. It was not denied that he saw
Judd, nor that Scully said he could speak
freely to Judd. “I submit,” said Mr. Win-
deyer, “that Judd is scrupulously a wit-
ness of truth, and that your Honor will re-
gard him as such. He is a man who has,
perhaps, unusual views, but that is no rea-
son why he should be disbelieved. His
account of the conversation with Surridge
is important and carries conviction. Con-
trast Judd’s evidence with that of Sur-
ridge, particularly regarding the news-
paper cutting on the previous Friday
morning. That alone was enough to show
what manner of man Surridge was. Who,
then, could we believe—Judd or Surridge?”
“WHY DID THE GOVERNMENT
COMPROMISE WITH SCULLY?”
Mr. Windeyer went on to remark that
it appeared strange that McAlister should
get the greater reward, although he did
not give as important evidence as either
Scully or Goldstein, and then referred to
the plan on the part of McAlister and
Scully to sue the Government for large
sums of money. He suggested that they
were of the opinion that the Government
would not be game to fight them in the
courts and there was the fact that the
Government did compromise with Scully. It
was pressed upon the authorities that he
should be paid, but no explanation was
given. It was quite obvious that the
Attorney-General knew nothing about it.
When it was found that Scully had been
in touch with Judd, money was found, and
a condition was made that he should leave
the country. It was now known that no
money was to be paid to him unless he did
leave the country. Why?
Mr. Windeyer had not concluded his ad-
dress when the Court adjourned.
FORTY-THIRD DAY.
FRIDAY, OCTOBER 25.
On taking his seat his Honor stated
that he had heard of the death of Detec-
tive-Sergeant Robertson, and expressed
regret and extended his sympathy to his
relatives. Mr. Shand, K.C., and Mr. Win-
deyer, K.C., concurred.
Mr. Windeyer, continuing his address,
said it was a strange thing that while
Inspector-General Mitchell knew of the
introduction of Scully and McAlister in the
I. case, he did not appear to know
anything of the Goldsteins’ introduction
into the matter. The same was instanced
in the case of the Crown Solicitor, who had
no recollection of the Goldsteins’ coming
into the case till some time afterwards.
It was remarkable, too, that the Godlsteins
were continually in touch with Pauling.
Although it was known that Pauling was
in touch with the Goldsteins on September
11, 1916, and received the fire dope from
them on September 15, there was no re-
port till September 16. As to how they
first approached Pauling there was no
definite information, Pauling’s mind being
quite vague on the matter.
Mr. Windeyer suggested that Pauling’s
conduct was largely governed by the fact
that the reward was advertised on Sep-
tember 15. Although it was not known
when the Goldsteins first approached
Pauling owing t© the failure of everybody’s
memory. Exhibit 86 (re Besant) showed
Goldstein to be an informer about a week
prior to September 15.
Not only did they go to Pauling in the
beginning, but it was to him they went
when wishing to retract, while Louis Gold-
stein selected Pauling as the officer to get
into touch with prior to his brother’s re-
traction. All that was very significant.
GOLDSTEIN'S FORMER INTENTIONS.
Goldstein evidently intended to expose
the conduct of the police long before he
approached Judd. The latter’s evidence
showed that some time previously Davis
Goldstein had written a statement, but
had destroyed it because he did not wish
to antagonise the police. That fact could
not be lost sight of. There was also the
admissions to Judd and Boote by Gold-
stein of his terror of the police when he
asked for an escort to accompany him
back to Mudgee. If it was established
that Goldstein proposed making a state-
ment prior to seeing Judd, that disposed
of the assertion that he only made the
declaration to Judd to curry favor with
the Labor Party and get a union ticket.
Referring to King’s account of a con-
versation with Surridge at Victoria Park
Racecourse, it had to be remembered
that King became aware where Scully
was. From whom? And why should
Surridge say that if a Royal Commission
was granted he would tell the truth, but
that he couldn’t risk his position? Could
he have thought otherwise than that
everything was not right? There was the
corroboration of conversations with Scully
and Judd before the declaration was made,
and that tended to show the matter was
not entirely a wicked invention on Gold-
stein’s part.
TURBET AND GOLDSTEIN.
The evidence of Turbet (in detailing a
conversation with the Goldsteins at
Lazarus’s Hotel) in remembering that on
September 15 he heard of Teen from Gold-
stein, coming after Cohen’s evidence about
the confession of Teen, looked suspicious,
and bore the impression of having been
arrived at after Cohen had given his evi-
dence.
Mr. Windeyer pointed out that from
beginning to end of the inquiry there was
no definite story of the initiation of the
relationship between the police and the
Goldsteins when they first came under
the influence of the police, and suggested
that the reason for that was that there
was something which could not be re-
lated. He read several passages from the
evidence of Mr. Cohen to show that there
was a deliberate intention to conceal all
that was going on between Cohen, Gan-
non, and the Crown Solicitor.
Mr. Tillet had said that consideration
should be shown to Goldstein, because it


was through him that the police first got
into touch with Scully, yet there was no
record anywhere of what the Goldsteins
had said about Scully. What had become
of them?
There was something not altogether
right in the relationship between Turbet
and Goldstein when the latter was trying
to get a return of his £4OO from the
police. In Scully’s evidence there was
also a statement that Goldstein had told
him something about Turbet helping him
in a matter, but that it did not come to
anything. The fact that Turbet went to
Cohen’s office to type a statement for
Goldstein showed an extraordinary friend-
ship between Turbet and Goldstein. Why
should he leave his office to go to a
solicitor’s office to help Goldstein? Why
did he want to have a statement made
according to the coloring that Goldstein
desired, when he knew all about Morgan’s
bail himself? The whole matter was sus-
picious.
ANDREW AND ANDROVITCH A
FANTASTIC STORY.
Mr. Windeyer then went on to detail
A'arious discrepancies and inaccuracies in
McAlister’s evidence at the trial, which
he contended would occur in an untrue
statement but which would not occur in a
true one. He also referred to Fergusson’s
denial at the trial that McAlister was re-
lated to him, also that the jury had no
knowledge of McAlister’s continued visits
to Fergusson’s home, or that at that time
was actually living there. “Counsel for
the defence and the jury would have been
in ah entirely different position if these
matters were known at the trial,” said
Mr. Windeyer.
An attempt had been made to establish
that Andrew and Androvitch were two
different persons. Mr. Windeyer claimed
that this had never been established, nor
were they ever spoken of as two different
persons. If the police knew where Andrew
was (and they said they could put their
hands on him at any time they liked),
would they not have arrested him? That
alone discredited the fantastic story of
the existence of a man named Andrew.
Here was a man who was said to be dis-
tributing fire dope, and the police knew T
that he had an appointment with McAlis-
ter on September 14, 1916, yet no member
of the police force took the trouble to
be present to arrest him or even take a
description of him. It was only after the
inquiry had been in progress some time
that Andrew and Androvitch became two
different persons. Having judged McPher-
son to be Andrew, and the fact that only
the name of Androvitch appeared on the
warrant, the police were unable to recon-
cile a Scotsman with a Hussion. Then
came the story that they were two dif-
ferent persons.
A SECOND STATEMENT—WHY?
The police for some reason or other
wished to make it appear that McAlister
could not have seen McPherson on Sep-
tember 25, 1916, and fixed the date as
the 28th. But when McAlister made his
statement on October 2 he definitely men-
tioned September 25 as the date. It was
hardly likely he would make a mistake
about a date only a week previously.
There was something peculiar in the state-
ment of McAlister on October 2, inasmuch
as in that statement McAlister was made
to speak as if he did not know what
Andrew’s real name was, and professed
not to know him by any other name.
Could that be genuine in view of the meet-
ing on September 25 previously when
McAlister addressed the man as “Mac”?
The statement was intended to be a clever
piece of evidence rather than a statemnt
of truth.
From the diaries of Lynch and Leary it
was seen that on September 20 they were
engaged preparing a proof of McAlister’s
evidence. He had given no information
after that date. Yet they set to work to
make another proof on October 2. The
first proof had disappeared, and in its
place the second was substituted and made
to appear as the original one. For what
reason, if only that the first did not fit
the case?
WAS THE CONSCIENCE DICTATING?
Mr. Windeyer said it appeared plain at
one stage that Scully, McAlister, and
Goldstein were worried in their minds and
consciences, but did not have the pluck to
stand up to the truth. It was remarkable
that Scully all through had never admitted
committing perjury, yet he had stated that
he did not intend saying anything which
•would lay him open to a charge of per-
jury. If the latter words were really
spoken to Judd and Boote (and there is
the evidence of Judd consulting Abigail
as to the liability of perjury), then it ap-
peared that there was something he could
say but that he was considering his posi-
tion. There is no escaping the conclusion
that at least Scully and Judd discussed the
possibility of putting forward evidence in-
consistent with that given at the trials.
Mr. Windeyer read many passages from
Scully’s evidence of the latter’s conversa-
tion with McAlister, in which McAlister
referred to the police evidence as being
false, to show how far McAlister could be
regarded as an honest witness at the trials.
WAS SCULLY AFRAID OF THE
POLICE?
As regards Scully, it was never made
clear at the trials that he only gave evi-
dence because he was afraid, and while
each of them—Scully, McAlister, and Gold-
stein —on the one hand w T ere undoubtedly
anxious to undo the great wrong that had
been done, at the same time they were
anxious to save their own faces in the
matter. From Scully’s own evidence it
was apparent that he had to be pressed
very hard before he would tell the truth.
It was also apparent that he only gave
evidence at the trial to save his own skin.
“Would a man who did that be likely
to be a truthful witness?” asked Mr. Win-
deyer. “We know now that he made that
statement to the police largely because of
fear. He had every motive in the world
to placate the police. He is a man with
a subtle, glib tongue, and tried to get out
under a cloud of words, as he has often


done before this Commission. Where his
own conduct was at stake he became un-
reliable, but where that was not concerned
he appeared genuinely anxious to undo a
wrong that he had done and tell the truth.”
Both Robertson and Surridge in their
statements spoke of assisting Scully. They
realised at this inquiry that it would cause
comment, and gave what must be classed
as ridiculous explanations. There is not
the shadow <?f a doubt that something
more was done than handing Scully pen
and paper, and giving him drinks of
water.
SCULLY’S UNFORTUNATE POSITION.
What, then, was the frame of mind in
which Scully became a witness? He had
been told that he had been watched for
a week, that he would either be prosecuted
or turned into a Crown witness. Isn’t it
apparent, then, that he came into the case
to save his own skin? What would the
jury at the trial have done if they had
known all these circumstances ? What
would they have done if they had known
that Scully went) there trembling and
frightened in fear of being prosecuted?
Nobody knows what his true connection
with the conspiracy case really was. It
is not conceivable that he supplied the
•chemicals without knowing what they
were for. That I frankly admit. That is,
by the way, an instance where he lied for
quite insufficient reasons—simply to save
his face in the eyes of his friends. Scully
would have felt a certain amount of shame
in having to admit that he was a party
to the conspiracy.
“THE BETTER PART OF HIS
MANHOOD.”
Had the true facts been known at the
time of the trial, the jury would have
realised that he was an accomplice and
giving evidence to please the police. Con-
trast that with his motive in making the
statement to Judd and Boote, and it
becomes evident that the better part of
his manhood manifested itself when he
approached them than when he was un-
dergoing a mild form of third degree at
the Detective Office. If all the facts
were known at the time, then it would
have been a very different issue which the
jury would have had to try. The evidence
against some of the men was very
shadowy—a fact which even the Judge
commented upon. Take the case of
Beatty. If the jury knew that Scully gave
his evidence against Beatty because of
his fear, would they have come to the
conclusion they did? One cannot imagine
a jury convicting that man, save that their
minds were overwhelmed by the state-
ments of Scully and the others. The fact
that Scully "was thus pressed by the police
is a matter which alone justifies the time
spent on this Commission to elicit it.
“I maintain that where Scully now goes
into the witness-box and swears positive
statements, some importance will be at-
tached to them. Although shifty and
tricky, one cannot help thinking that in
his nature there is yet a streak of good.
His manner during the inquiry evinced a
desire to assist the Commission to bring
out the truth. The production of the
newspaper cutting is a test of truthful-
ness.”
SOME SIGNIFICANT FEATURES.
Mr. Windeyer went on to comment on
the fact that the Goldsteins always dealt
with Pauling, McAlister with Fergusson,
and Scully with Surridge. McAlister took
confessions to Fergusson from men who
were almost strangers to him but who,
strange to say, made a confidant of him.
Goldstein was no longer a member of the
1.W.W., yet Hamilton put him au fait
with the whole conspiracy.
Mr. Windeyer had not concluded his
address when the Commission adjourned
till Monday (October 28).
FORTY-FOURTH DAY.
MONDAY, OCTOBER 28.
•
Mr. Windeyer, continuing his address,
pointed out that Scully in his statement
to the police on September 30, 1918 made
no mention of Beatty in connection with
the interview with Fagin and others in
the latter’s room, although he mentioned
the name of Beatty when giving evidence.
This was very significant, and suggested
an instance of where Scully knew his evi-
dence had been concocted and that
Beatty’s name had been inserted.
He commented on the change in Leary’s
evidence regarding the time he saw Reeve
on September 14. The same change also
took place in Matthews’ evidence. It was
something more than coincidence that at
the trial both these men were positive that
what they swore at the lower Court was
a mistake.
Referring again to the money alleged to
have been paid to the police through
Lazarus, it had to be remembered that
Goldstein was daily in touch with the
police and on very intimate terms with
them. If the money had reached Lazarus
—and Mr. Windeyer claimed that that had
been established —and it had not reached
the police, Goldstein woqld have dis-
covered that fact. The fact that Gold-
stein told Judd that £l5O had been kept
by Laearus was important, because it
inferred that Goldstein had knowledge
that the money, less this amount, had
reached the destination it had been in-
tended for.
MARVELLOUS CORROBORATION.
Scully and Goldstein must have known
a great deal more of the I.W.W. matter
than they divulged, and from this it would
seem that they were actuated by very
good reasons in stating that certain men
were innocent. The fact that, having the
knowledge they did, they should pick out
certain men and declare them to be in-
nocent was a matter to which his Honor
would have to give close consideration.
Mr. Windeyer characterised it as re-
markable that the detectives were able to
corroborate one another in the way they
did. There was the matter of Surridge,
who had sworn to seeing Judd talking to
Scully in King-street. Surridge said he


decided to drop Scully, because he was in
touch with Judd. Then Robertson came
along and swore that he, too, saw Scully
and Judd in King-street, and that he ad-
vised Surridge to drop Scully. Again,
when it was necessary to try and discredit
thq evidence of King, regarding the con-
versation at the Victoria Park Racecourse,
Robertson again came to his friend’s as-
sistance by showing how it would have
been impossible for Surridge to have had
the conversation with King.
WAS THERE A CONSPIRACY?
Mr. Windeyer, in closing his address,
said the Commission was unique. If any-
thing in the nature of a conspiracy had
taken place, no legal task was more im-
portant than that which set out to estab-
lish that a mistake had been made. He
submitted that the evidence given at the
trial of the men contained so many dis-
crepancies and bore such a remarkable
similarity in the relation to the evidence
in the different departments of the case
that it became impossible to believe thafc
the I.W.W. trial was the calm, dispassion-
ate administration of justice which all of
them believed was essential for the con-
tinuity of the forms of civilisation, and
which they also believed was necessary
for the evolution of humanity. Pie asked
his Honor to say that the conduct of those
instructing him and the earnest belief
which they had displayed in the cause of
justice required further efforts in the in-
terests of the men in jail.
Mr. Windeyer closed his address at
11.15 a.m., it having occupied 141 hours
in delivering.
CASE NOW STANDS IN A DIFFERENT
LIGHT.
Mr, Windeyer, in reply, went on to point
out how in certain cases police officers
had succumbed to temptation and lent
themselves to criminals. Although Mr.
Shand said it was impossible to think that
police officers would place themselves at
the mercy of criminals, the fact still re-
mained that there were cases where it
was known they had. He said if it was
proved that the police were foolish and
corrupt enough to accept presents of suits
from the Goldsteins, Mr. Shand’s conten-
tion failed.
If the evidence of Scully and the Gold-
steins was wiped out, Mr. Windeyer main-
tained that the I.W.W. matter stood where
it did on September 12, 1916, when there
was no evidence on which to effect ar-
rests. He did not suggest that there
should be a report for the immediate re-
lease of the men in jail, but he did con-
tend that the evidence against the men
stood in a different light now to what it
did prior to the opening of the Commis-
sion.
Dealing with Mr. Shand’s deductions as
to the value of the evidence given by
Pura and the Karpenskys, Mr. Windeyer
said he thought it unworthy of Mr. Shand
to say that because they were foreigners
their evidence was not of the same value
as evidence given by people of our own
race. “Why,” said Mr. Windeyer, “at thi»
very moment our future destiny and that
of our children lay in the hands of a
foreigner. Fagin was a Russian, and even
if he did live in a dosshouse with other
foreigners, was that any reason why it
should be said that the Karpenskys and
Pura came before the Commission and told
lies? These people, being foreigners, are
strangers in a strange land, and if their
statements contained verbal inconsist-
encies because of their lack of the Eng-
lish language, that is no reason why their
evidence should be discarded.”
GOLDSTEIN’S FEAR—OF WHOM?
Mr. Windeyer said that in spite of all
the ready wit, intellectual activity, and
business ability displayed by Davis Gold-
stein, he still possessed the characteristics
of the downtrodden race—that of servility
and grovelling to the authorities. The one
motive which actuated him from begin-
ning to end of the Commission was fear—
fear of the authorities. It had been asked
what motive could the*Goldsteins have in
going to the police after they were clear
of the note cases. The reason was that
they were frightened of the police and
those in authority. It had been suggested
that they were afraid of the 1.W.W., but
if this was so, then it was remarkable
that after the close of the trials, two years
ago, they had never once asked for police
protection. Yet once he turned and went
to Judd, Davis Goldstein was terrified lest
anything should happen to him.
Louis Goldstein was a dull, stupid man,
which accounted for his having the con-
versation he did with the Karpenskys at
the hospital in the early days of the Com-
mission. It had to be remembered, too,,
that occasionally people talked in a fool-
ish manner. That interview proved that
he was going to run with the police be-
cause of his fear of what the police might
do to those who ran counter to them.
Mr. Windeyer contended that the Com-
mission did not know one-half of what
either Scully or Davis Goldstein could tell,
but it had been established that they
were neither frank nor honest. If they
knew more of the case than anybody else
there was nothing remarkable in the fact
that they should agree as to the names of
the men who were innocent and who were
guilty. He considered it was established
that Davis Goldstein came into the I.W.W.
case to save his own skin. McAlister, too,
was a proved liar; his daughter’s evidence
showed that. She could not have got the
story about Mr. Fuller at Moss Vale from
anybody else but her father.
A FANTASTIC STORY ABOUT THE
SUITS.
It was remarkable that the police should
not have clear memories as to the- suits.
Turbet’s conversation with Pura prior to
the Commission showed that he antici-
pated the matter being called up. The
dates in Pura’s books, if true, were very
ugly, and there was no reason to suppose
that Pura would have concocted the dates.
One could not escape the fact that, what-
ever Pura might have said, his books at
least were honest. Nor did it look nice


for the police to be having receipts from
Pura. As a matter of fact, it has been
proved before the Commission that Turbet
got his receipt before he said he paid the
money to Goldstein.
A fantastic story had been woven
around the suit transactions. It was sug-
gested that Louis Goldstein was of a deli-
cate nature, and a man who would do
good by stealth and blush to find it
known, and that he had told the police he
was getting the suits cheap, when, as a
matter of fact, he was paying a higher
price for them. Mr. Windeyer said he was
not prepared to accept any such sugges-
tion; Louis Goldstein was not the man to
do such a thing without informing some-
body. If he had paid any difference in
the suits to Pura the police would have
known.
Leary’s notes were remarkable, inas-
much as they did not tally with his diary,
and the explanation he gave as to that
lacked confidence. Then there was the
fact that Foy’s statement was excellent
corroboration of Leary’s statement, yet for
some reason it had not been submitted at
the trial. Mr. Shand had suggested that
Pepper was a reliable witness, and that
his evidence was true. But opium smug-
gling wasn’t the only thing which dis-
credited him. There was the matter of
his claim to being the inventor of “Pep-
perite.” As far as his evidence was con-
cerned it could be wiped out. His going
to the police was remarkable, and he
seemed a queer, shady, and mysterious
character. Who could believe a man of
Scully’s tact saying the things alleged by
Pepper to have been told to him by
Scully?
FORTY-EIGHTH DAY.
FRIDAY, NOVEMBER 1.
Mr. Windeyer, continuing his address-
in-reply said that in view of an opinion
that seemed to have gained ground—that
he had received information improperly
from the Police Department—he desired
to state that never at any time before or
during the inquiry had any information
been disclosed to him, other than through
the proper channels. As regards the
suggestion made by Mr. Shand that pos-
sibly Mr. Bathgate might have been
negligent in his duty as regards the names
on the warrant, Mr. Windeyer said that no
charge could be laid against Mr. Bathgate,
since he could only act on whatever infor-
mation was placed before him.
After referring to one or two minor mat-
ters concerning the evidence, Mr. Win-
deyer said that at least a new fact had
been established as regards Besant that
Pauling, on whose evidence he had been
convicted, had not proved himself a re-
liable or honest witness. As Besant’s
guilt or innocence depended on Pauling,
the establishing of that fact showed that
the evidence against Besant was doubtful,
MR. WINDEYER SUMS UP.
Summing up, Mr. Windeyer claimed that
a good deal of the evidence given by the
police had the appearance of having been
concocted. McAlister had been shown te
be a man with a desire for easy money,
and in all probabilities a liar; the Gold-
steins had been shown to have given im-
proper evidence, and proved ready liars;
while Scully had come into the case be-
cause he was afraid, and being under com-
pulsion his evidence in parts at least was
exceedingly unreliable.
The prestige which naturally attached
to the police force had been woefully
shaken. He claimed that their explana-
tion as to why the Goldsteins came into*
the case was untrue, while it had been
proved that some of them were corrupt.
Mr. Windeyer closed his address by re-
ferring to the arduous task of the short-
hand writers. Over seven hundred pages
of closely printed report had been faith-
fully reported by them. The work done
by them in the inquiry was a matter which
deserved recognition.
His Honor said he was very pleased to-
hear what Mr. Windeyer had to say re-
garding the shorthand writers. After
thanking the legal gentlemen, especially
Mr. Windeyer and Mr. Shand, for the as-
sistance given in the Commission, his
Honor said he would adjourn the Court tn
consider his report. There would be no
more public sittings unless some unusual
circumstance demanded it.
Thus, after a sitting extending over ten-
weeks, was concluded one of the most re-
markable Commissions that has ever sat
in Australia.
The Worker Print, St. Andrew’s Place, Sydney.
