

Mrs. W.T.Clindening
1826 - 1925
South _Australia


A Worthy Pioneer
Incidents of Early Days
Y the death of Mrs. Clindening, which
Igo occurred, at the age of 99 years, at
. , North Adelaide, on August 10, 1925,
South Australia lost another of its intrepid and
worthy pioneers.
—Colonist of Seventy-two Years.—
The late Mrs. Clindening. who was the widow
of the late Dr. William Talbot Clindening,
Deputy Surgeon-General of the South Australian
Military Forces, was married on the 19th of
February, 1852, and had been resident in the
State for 72 years, and not only did she and her
husband bravely face the extreme hardships
and inconveniences which fell to the lot of settlers
of those early days, but also reared a large family.
She was born at the Vicarage, Prescot, Lancashire
(England), on the 23rd July, 1826, and was the
second daughter of the Rev. C. G. Townshend
Driffield. Her remarkable longevity was a
striking illustration of the value of a strict
upbringing and a life of strenuous activity. It
is recorded that she and the other members of the
family were allowed to have ample fun, hut the
parental discipline would not permit their
indulgence in dancing or card-playing. Study
and physical exercise were part of the inescapable
daily routine. The following interesting particu-
lars of her career were secured in an interview


Late Dr. W. T. Clindening.


and published in The Register on the 23rd of
October, 1914: —
Missus Doeketer ’ was tbe native name for
Mrs. Clindening in the days when she braved the
terrors of pioneering. Fresh from the serenity
and comfort of an English city home, she followed
her husband into the comparative savagery of
the Australian country in the early ’fifties; and
the simple story of her adventures which follows
throws some new light on primitive methods of
housekeeping. Malcontent wives will profit by the
picture of what it meant to be the wife of a
pioneer doctor. Mrs. Clindening, although now
in her eighty-ninth year, and despite her modest
protestations to the contrary, possesses an extra-
ordinarily vivid and certain memory; and the
hardships she underwent in the early days of the
colony seem to have endowed her with a
constitution which defies the onslaught of time to
an amazing degree. And yet her character is
one of such serene kindliness still that one listens
with all the more astonishment to her stories of
the long ago.
—The Calk—
“ Mrs. Clindening and her husband spent the
first year or so of their wedded life in Liverpool,
in an environment of civilized comfort which was
the very height of luxury compared with the
conditions under which the family circle of which
they were the centre was fated to commence its
growth. Mr. Clindening was a medical student,
and at the time of his marriage was not fully
qualified; but that fact did not enter into his
calculations r; to any great extent when shortly
after his marriage he heard the mysterious call


of Australia. It was insistent and urgent. The
wide spaces of a new land appealed to his
imagination. The summons could not be
disregarded. And so he told his young wife
that they were going to this new country. She
entered into the scheme without question, as
wives did until a few years ago; but she admits
now that, had she known a little more of what
was in store for her, even her wifely duty might
not have been a sufficiently potent influence to
bring about her compliance. But her brother,
Mr. Driffield, had gone to Australia four years
before, and, after all, it could not be so had.
And so when the good ship ‘ Gypsy ’ sailed from
Southampton on May 15, 1853, her passengers
included Mr, and Mrs. Clindening, cheerful
emigrants to an almost unknown land. It was
a three-months’ voyage to the day. and, for the
young wife, three months of sea-sickness.
—Adelaide.—
“ The relief with which she landed at Port
Adelaide on August 15 may be readily imagined.
But what a desolate place it was—how painfully
in contrast with the glowing picture fancy had
painted! Some fresh apples in a shop-window
seemed the most desirable things in view after
three months of ship’s fare. The shopman was
quite prepared to sell, but at the altogether
immodest price of 2s. a pound. This was Mrs.
Clindening’s first attempt at shopping in
Australia. She looked at the salesman, and.
impelled by astonishment, left his establishment
more hurriedly than she entered it even under the
impetus of hunger. The next thing to do was
to attain the metropolis, and as an aid to this


essential there was an extraordinary horse-drawn
vehicle locally know as ‘ The Port cart.’ In
contrast with the Port and the discomfort of the
Part cart, Adelaide might have been expected to
appear very welcome, if not almost impressive.
Put, alas, Mrs. Clindening decided it was nothing
better than a ‘ wretched place.’ In any case it
sheltered her brother, and the most obvious thing
to do was to find him quickly. After numerous
inquiries she ran him to earth at his lodgings,
and, with his assistance, procured accommodation
at £4 a week for her husband and herself at a
house formerly occupied by Dr, Nash, in
Grenfell Street. There they lived for about six
weeks, and in the meantime Mr. Clindening
made careful inquiries with a view to setting up
as a medical practitioner.
—Brokenshire and PI is Bullocks.—
“ Eventually he decided that Port Elliot offered
a promising field of operations; but the initial
problem was to get there with a wife and seven
bulky boxes of belongings. A Mr. Brokenshire
was announced equal to the business of transport,
and he and his wagon and six bullocks were
accordingly summoned from Port Elliot. Mr.
Brokenshire faithfully responded to the call, and
the work of loading the bullock-dray began.
The seven boxes were first, and then a box of
drugs from Paulding’s and some necessary stores
from the ironmonger’s shop in Handley Street
kept by Mr. (afterwards Sir Arthur) Blyth.
The shopkeeper came out into the road in his big
white apron and helped to complete the loading
of the dray; and then Mrs. Clindening was
invited to crown the achievement in a physical


sense by sitting on top of the l>oxes. She
clambered up, and away* they went under the
noonday sun along Hindley Street ’and King
W illiam Street. ‘ Away they went ’is possibly
not used very aptly here. It seems to suggest
a degree bf speed which is hardly looked for in
a bullock team. The journey to Port Elliot took
two days and a half, and as they crossed Hungry
Swamp the little lady who sat so patiently on top
of the luggage was about to give herself up for
lost. 1 he wagon sank to the axles, and the
faithful Brokenshire to the knees. But notwith-
standing this and one or two other minor
misadventures, they reached Port Elliot at last
late on Saturday night. Mr. Brokenshire said
it was so late they would have to stop with him
at least until the morning.' A sumptuous supper
was served, and all went merrily until bedtime,
when the ingenuous immigrants discovered with
some alarm that they were to sleep in the same
room with Mr. and Mrs. Brokenshire and
numerous juveniles of the Brokenshire line. ‘ln
for a penny in for a pound ’ soon became their
motto, however, and for two nights they shared
the Brokenshire bedroom, and slept very soundlv,
too.
—Housekeeping in a Barn.—
“ This was comparative luxury to what thev
were about to undergo. In 1853 the beginnings
of Port Elliot were unquestionably crude. The
township consisted of two complete houses and
an unfinished one, and Mrs. Clindening declares
that you had to stand on a hill to see even as
much civilization as that. All the public
functions of the township were entrusted to one


of the invaluable poo-bahs of pioneering. Mr,
B. F. Laurie was harbourmaster, postmaster,
perhaps even schoolmaster, and certainly
physician, surgeon, and chemist, it was of these
last-named responsibilities that Mr. Clindening
was to relieve him. But where was the new
doctor to'live? A barn, about two miles away
from the township was the only accommodation
which offered at the moment. So to the barn
they went; and then Mrs. Clindening’s troubles
began in earnest. Brought up in uneventful
serenity in Liverpool, she was not altogether
fitted for a fight against Nature under conditions
which, so far as difficulty and discomfort went,
approached to within hailing distance of the
absolutely prehistoric. But she had the useful
British quality of indomitable pluck, with wifely
devotion added, and as for the rest, experience
soon equipped her very completely. This barn
in which she set up housekeeping under the
Southern Cross was not so much a barn as part
of a barn. In short, she shared it with a quantity
of cornsacks. In her outdoor kitchen, at the far
end of an adjoining stockyard, she had bullocks
for company. She judged it was dinner-time
when the sun was high; but there was no clock
to time the boiling of an egg. The door was
locked when a log of wood was rolled against
it, and the diiiing-hall-bedroom was fully
illuminated when one candle was lit and placed
on a box,
—The Guardian Angel.'—
“Who shall say what the plucky wife of Port
Elliot’s first doctor endured in those first few
weeks? She was necessarily left alone a great
deal while her husband went about his business,


Late Mrs. Clindening.


and her first terrors arose from the fact that the
district was liberally supplied with aborigines.
Night after night the doctor was called away,
and she was left alone in the darkness of the
barn, with just that log of wood rolled against
the door. She learned with immeasurable relief
later on that the natives were afraid, to venture
abroad in the darkness, lest they should.be caught
by the evil spirit which they imagined concerned
itself exclusively with their comings and goings,
and which answered to the name of Muldoppie.
This mysterious devil was in truth her, guardian
angel. After she made the welcome discovery
that the natives were not as bloodthirsty as they
looked, she employed them in numerous ways,
and recompensed them with food and clothing.
They used to go away laden with flour, tobacco,
and ‘ cbugger,’ which is the aboriginial diminutive
for sugar. To these sons of Nature the doctor’s
wife was by an obvious process of logic ‘ Missus
Docketer.’ ”
Further information was gleaned, at a
subsequent interview a few days later as
follows: —
“it is not often that biography may be
extended for newspaper purposes into two
articles. The life story of Mrs. Clindening is
an exception to the rule. Her adventures may
not be condensed into a paragraph; her memory
is such they might very easily be extended into
a volume. What was sauce for the goose was
sauce for the gander, even in those early days,
if one may so so without disrespect. If the
doctor’s wife had a hard time, so had the doctor.
For the first three months funds would not


permit of the luxury of a horse; and, although
the district was a wide one, the new medico went
from patient to patient, patiently on foot. In
one direction the nearest doctor was at Willunga
Jay, 25 miles away; and in the other
direction there was no medical man nearer than
Yankalilla. So some 30 miles a day on foot was
one of the initial trials of Port Elliot’s first
doctor. After seven weeks’ residence at the
barn, he decided to move into. slightly more
stylish quarters —a room, in fact, in a real house
on the road from Port Elliot to Middleton, where
a man and his wife and several children lived.
The rent of the barn had been five shillings a
week; the rent of the new room was seven
shillings a week, an advance in price indicative of
increased luxury.
—A Triumph in Furnishing.—
“ In this one room Mrs, Clindening attained
the very height of economy and completeness in
furnishing. It was nearly all done with the
seven boxes which contained the belongings of
this adventurous couple when they left England
Four boxes made a bed; two boxes, one on top
of another, formed the table; and the seventh
box was just long enough to make a seat for
two. When a visitor arrived he was accom-
modated on the teachest. The doctor’s box of
drugs, was placed on trestles in a corner, and
here he dispensed his own prescriptions. So
that as a matter of strict accuracy nine boxes
completely furnished the dining-room, bedroom,
reception-room, waiting-room, consulting-room,
surgery, and kitchen. In this apartment of
multiple uses Mrs. Clindening’s first child was


burn. Here Mrs. Gilbert, of Pewsey Vale, first
saw the light of day, and for a time the room
accommodated a nurse as well as the now
enlarged family. As if after a diligent search
for an inconvenient moment, the owner of the
house announced at this time that he had other
uses for that part of the roof which sheltered
father, mother, nurse, and baby. Father very
wisely refused to go until mother had fully
recovered; and, in fact, there was such a dearth
of accommodation in the district that it seemed
almost as if he would have to transfer his atten-
tions to another part of the State. Eventually
Mr. Chibnall came to the rescue with an offer
of a miniature hut on his property. This
building was about the same size as the room the
family was compelled to vacate, bur it was
welcome enough, and housed them for some time.
—The Bush Doctor.—
“ About this time the first Christmas dinner
was spread upon an upturned box. There were
the inevitable damper and tea, with the addition
of baked onions, cooked like the damper, in the
ashes. Small houses were inconvenient, for
when a patient arrived the doctor’s wife and
the domestic had to go outside. When the wife
was too ill to oblige in this way the doctor and
patient had to retire into the open air. The next
move, therefore, was into a house whose com-
parative size was enormous. True, it was of
‘ wattle-and-daub,’ like the hut in the paddock,
but it contained no fewer than 10 rooms.
Unfortunately, the windows were merely gaps
in walls which displayed an unnerving tendency
towards falling down. One did, in fact, fall on


one of the two horses which the doctor had by
this time been able to purchase. A great deal
of calico had to be cut up and used to cover the
windows. Then, before long bugs revealed
themselves in alarming numbers in the walls, and
the preliminary to retiring for the night was an
excursion with a candle to either burn the
invaders or compel them to retreat. The living
room of this strange house was of enormous size,
and in fact there was space for two beds in the
ingle nook. A piece of glass about a foot square
was procured for the principal bedroom window,
and because of the calico in the other windows,
this became the only room out of which one
could see anything at all.
—A Promise Fulfilled.—
“ The uncertain stability of ‘ wattle-and-daub '
and the dim religious light of calico windows
were not altogether desirable, even when
associated with the spaciousness of 10 rooms.
One stone room offered ‘ away up the road
beyond Middleton,’ and the addition of two more
stone rooms and a stable converted this into the
most luxurious place in which Mrs. Clindening
had yet been called upon to keep house. It was
quite near the temporary town of canvas which
had come into being to shelter the navvies who
were at work upon the Middleton to Port Elliot
tramline. They were relatively comfortable in
ibis stone house, and the practice was profitable;
but the doctor had in his mind a promise that he
would take his ; young wife back to England
within eight years of their immigration, so that
she might see her mother again. Moreover, he
wished to fully qualify himself in his profession.


In December, 1860, he sailed with his wife and
four children in the ‘ Irene,’ bound for the home-
land. After paying all expenses, he took with
him a clear £1,000; and the next two years he
devoted to study. Having fully qualified at one
of the leading London hospitals, Dr. Clindening
resolved to return to the land of his adoption, and
this voyage was accomplished in the ‘ Istanboul ’
to Melbourne. A coasting steamer brought the
family back to Adelaide. These voyages were
very trying experiences to Mrs. Clindening.
Her tendency to sea-sickness never left her, and
the care of four children did not add to her
enjoyment of travel on the rolling highways of
the ocean.
—More Recent History.—
“ They reached South Australia again in May.
1863; and, instead of returning to Port Elliot,
went to Mount Gambier, where Dr. Clindening
practised for two years. On one occasion he
was thrown from his horse and broke an arm.
which Mrs. Clindening set until he could journey
to Adelaide for expert attention.
—The Eccentric Poet. —
“ Among Mrs. Clindening’s memories, not the
least interesting are those which concern the
far-famed Adam Lindsay Gordon. This
notable poet was one of Dr. Clindening’s patients
at Mount Gambier, and the doctor’s wife
remembers him as ‘ a most peculiar man.’ He
never thought of coming along the road to see
his medical adviser, but road over the fences in
true Dick Turpin fashion. He was not quite a
social success, it appears. Occasionally Mrs.


Clindening would find him reading her husband’s
books in the library, and if she ventured to make
a casual observation he strode uncere-
moniously out. ‘He was doubtless a very nice
man,’ she said the other day, ‘ and obviously fond
of children ; but 1 never had an opportunity of
talking to him. One day. I remember, when 1
found him in the library, I said as politely as I
could. “ Won’t you sit down?” It was like firing
a gun at him, for off he went without further
ado.’
—At Kapunda.—
“ In response to his wife’s appeal, the doctor
made inquiries while in town about a new
practice, and was recommended to go to
Kapunda. For the next four years, then. Kapunda
was the scene of his activities. In 1869 Dr.
Haver, a well-known Adelaide practitioner, joined
the great majority, and there seemed room in
the city for another medical man. This was
Dr. Clindening’s opportunity, and he took a house
on North Terrace, which was previously occupied
by Dr. Geyer. After that they took a four-
roomed cottage which stood on the site of the
Commercial Travellers’ Club. Three years later
the next move transported the doctor and his
wife and their family of six to a house near
Trinity Church, which boasted of a balcony and
10 rooms. They moved finally to Hoianic
Terrace, where Dr. Clindening died, practically
in harness, in 1899.
—The Family.—
Of the family of the late Mrs. Clindening four
are now living —Mrs. W illiam Gilbert, formerly
of Pewsey Vale and now of Medindie; Dr.


Fred Clindening, who is at present in London;
Mrs. Walter Reed, formerly of The Grange, and
now of Unley; and Mrs. Popham, widow of Dr.
Popham, Gawler, with whom “ Missus Docketer ”
resided at 61 Buxton Street, North Adelaide,
until her death. Her eldest son, Mr, W.
C lindening, who was in the Surveyor-General’s
Department for about 40 years, died seven years
ago. Mrs. Clindening had 22 grandchildren and
nine great-grandchildren.
—Late Mr. Henry Bryan.' —
The late Mrs. Clindening was related to Mr.
Henry Bryan, another pioneer who came to
South Australia with Colonel Gawler, a former
Governor of South Australia. Mr. Bryan was
lost in the Gawler exploration party, and neither
he nor his horse were ever heard of again.
Colonel Gawler named Mt. Bryan after him. It
is a strange coincidence that Mr. William Gilbert,
of Pewsey Vale, a son-in-law of Mrs. Clindening,
at one time owned the Mt. Bryan Estate.
—Personal Tributes.'—
The following letters of appreciation were sent
lo “The Register” by old colonists:—
From F. Caldwell: —“ As an old colonist I
have read with deep interest the life story of
Mrs. Clindening and her late husband, and have
followed with pleasure their experiences. 1
knew the late Dr. Clindening for many years, and
would like to add what his widow was evidently
too modest to say —that dear old Dr. Clindening
was beloved by every poor person with whom he
came in contact as surgeon of the destitute poor,
which position he filled for a number of years.
He did wonderful work for the sick and needy,


and also as principal medical officer of the
military forces for many years. This typical
Irishman was loved by officers and men alike.
As an old colonist and a patient of Dr, Clindening
I must add this tribute to a man whose life
was given to the poor right up to the time of
his death.”
From “An Old Friend —“ Reading of Mrs.
Clindening’s death in The Register a few days
ago recalled to my mind the old days of Trinity
Church, when we attended service there. This
wonderfully active little woman often either
presided over a table at a tea meeting (as it was
then called) or worked at a sewing meeting,
keeping everyone in good heart. She also sang
in the choir for years. When she completed
her ninty-ninth birthday not a month ago the
appreciations of her were numerous and cordial.
As a long-time friend I wish to join in her praise.
Her mental and moral attributes were so remark-
able that one is almost tempted to describe them
as unprecedented—the faculties and emotions
having been so vividly preserved in extreme old
age. In saying farewell to a lady so calm and
beautiful there can be no bitterness of regret.”
Printed at The Register Office, Adelaide.
