

v~ p
Bio
Mrs. ELLIS ROWAN
AND HER
CONTRIBUTIONS TO AUSTRALIAN
ART AND SCIENCE
HENRY A, TARDENT




Mrs. ELLIS ROWAN
AND HER
CONTRIBUTIONS TO AUSTRALIAN
ART AND SCIENCE
HENRY A. TARDENT
COPYRIGHT
(5/-)
BRISBANE :
WATSON, FERGUSON & CO. LTD.
1927




PREFACE
Mr. H. A. Tardent, whose long residence in Aus-
tralia, has followed a varied and useful training in several
European countries, has made it his business to reveal
to Australians something of the wealth they possess in
the art and literature that is theirs.
We are far too apt, and this is perhaps a national and
inherited characteristic, to undervalue the efforts of those
in our midst, and to seek for literary and artistic re-
creation and instruction from every country but our own.
To Mr. Tardent, who weighs his appreciation in the
balance of his experience, this tendency is one distinctly
harmful to the welfare of the country and to be counter-
acted vigorously and repeatedly. Hence his pen has
given us, among other works, a vivid appreciation of
two artists: George Essex Evans, the Queensland poet,
and R. J. Randall, the Queensland painter. In the fol-
lowing pages Mr. Tardent deals with another Australian
artist, Mrs. Ellis Rowan, whose work should be before the
public far more prominently than it is, and in approach-
ing this subject he finds himself in most congenial sur-
roundings,, for did not Mrs. Ellis Rowan devote her art
mainly to the task of revealing to Australians a wealth
of beauty they are apt to overlook: The Beauty of the
Australian Wild Flower?
J. J. STABLE,
President, Queensland Authors
and Artists’ Association.
10/10/1926.




Mrs. ELLIS ROWAN




Mrs. ELLIS ROWAN
AND HER CONTRIBUTIONS TO
AUSTRALIAN ART AND
SCIENCE
HENRY A. TARDENT
(A Lecture read before the Queensland Authors and
Artists’ Association, 16th March, 1926)
INTRODUCTORY
T\ THEN viewing the admirable collection of paintings of
** Australian wild flowers, acquired by the Queensland
Government and displayed in the Brisbane Museum, I felt
an unbounded admiration for Mrs. Ellis Rowan, the painter
of genius, who had combined in herself the gifts of a
superior artist with the science of an accomplished botanist.
I then and there resolved to write something about her
and to do my utmost to make her unique work known to
the world. Unfortunately I had great difficulty in pro-
curing the data I required about her life and work. But
recently my perseverance was at last rewarded. Through
the kind medium of a cultured and esteemed lady friend,
Miss Alice Thomas, of Melbourne, I came in touch with
one of Mrs. Rowan’s sisters, Miss Blanche Adelaide Ryan
of Upper Macedon (Vic.), and with one of her brothers,
Sir Charles Ryan, who both very obligingly answered my
innumerable questions and kindly supplied me with much
valuable information.
About the scientific value of Mrs. Rowan’s paintings
I secured the expert opinion of such authorities in Botany
as my friends, Mr. C. T. White, the Government Botanist
of Queensland, and his uncle, Mr. John F. Bailey, the


Curator of the Adelaide Botanic Gardens. I got also much
valuable information from Sir Josiah and Lady Symon, of
Adelaide, who both take the keenest interest in the develop'
ment of Australian literature, art and music. I owe, also,
much to the obligingness of Mr. H. A. Longman, Director
of the Queensland Museum, and to the late Mr. W. Soutter
and Mrs. Pattie Soutter, who were both great personal
friends of Mrs. Rowan. I have also received valuable
information from another intimate friend of the great
artist, Mrs. Maude Wordsworth James, the distinguished
author and composer of “Coo-ee Call,” and other patriotic
publications.
I feel that I can now speak of Mrs. Rowan as one who
has spared no efforts to get all the information available
about her life and work.
THE ARTISTS FAMILY.
Upper Macedon is a hilly and picturesque district,
about 40 odd miles from Melbourne and endowed with
such a salubrious climate that it has become one of the
favourite health resorts of Victoria.
Attracted by the charm of the scenery, Mr. Charles
Ryan and his good wife, Marian, decided to settle down
there definitely on the land. The holding was at first rather
small, consisting of only 40 acres, 18 acres of which were
under a garden, well known throughout Victoria for its
rare and beautiful trees and plants. The young settlers
were both stout-hearted and industrious pioneers. In the
midst of the ups and downs of pioneering life they pros-
pered and attained even a certain competency and
affluence. But they never allowed themselves to be entirely
absorbed by material pursuits; culture of both the mind
and the heart was one of the family’s traditions. Thus it
was that the sturdy pioneers were enabled to give their
children a better education than they had themselves re-
ceived. Their union had been blessed with seven children,
three boys and four girls. All these children were well


EUGENIA HISLOPII, Bail.
Queensland Rose Apple.
A native of the rich rain forests (“vine scrubs") of North Queensland;
the large fruits borne on the trunk are greedily eaten by cassowaries!




gifted and did in various ways credit to their parents and
country.
Some followed in their parents 1 footsteps, including
Miss Blanche Ryan, who is still keeping the home fires
burning in a cosy little cottage about a mile from the old
home in Upper Macedon. Others, following the example
of the honey bees, left the parent hive to go in search of
pastures new. One of the sisters became the wife of Lord
Charles Scott, and shone for a time in the life of London
society. The son, Charles, felt a longing for higher educa"
tion. His studies, begun at the Melbourne Grammar
School, were continued at the Universities of Melbourne
and Edinburgh where he obtained his degrees and diplomas
of surgeon and doctor of medicine.
Being fond of adventures and desirous of seeing as
much as possible of the world, he visited the greater part
of Europe and, when only 22, he took part in the Serbo'
Turkish campaign of 1876 as a surgeon attached to the
Red Crescent.
In the same capacity he took part in the Russo'
Turkish campaign of 1877'78, being in action for 42|
months with the famous Turkish General, Osman Pasha, in
the besieged fortress of Plevna, being probably the only
European, and certainly the only Britisher there. In con'
sequence of a severe gmrshot wound he had to leave only a
few days before the final storming of the fortress by the
Russians.
As soon as he recovered he left the Balkans to go to
Asia Minor, being in Emerum at the time when that
fortress was taken possession of by the troops of the Grand
Duke Nicholas, under the command of Loris Melikoff.
For a few months he was practically a prisoner of the
Russians, who treated him well, as is customary in all
armies with the people attached to the Red Cross, or, as
in this case, to the Red Crescent.
Under the title of “Under the Red Crescent, 11 the
heroic young Australian Surgeon has published a very
interesting book in which he graphically relates some of his


observations and experiences during those memorable
military campaigns.
It may be here mentioned that that young Australian
doctor had won such a high opinion and esteem of his
entourage that the Turkish Government subsequently ap"
pointed him Consul-General for Turkey in Australia, a
position which he filled with credit and distinction till the
entry of Turkey into the Great War on the side of the
Teutonic Empires.
Doctor Charles Ryan has also done his bit in the
Great War, being attached as Head Medical Officer to the
First Australian Division. He was one of those who
landed at Ansae (Gallipoli) at 8 o’clock in the morning
of 25th April, 1916. As a result of a severe attack of
dysentry he was invalided and not allowed to return to the
Peninsula. But, he was, later on, made Consulting Sur-
geon to the A.1.F., and served in that capacity till the end
of the War. Doctor Ryan is the holder of many high"
class British and foreign orders and, at the termination of
the world war, he was knighted by the King, more espech
ally for the great and valuable services he had rendered in
the A.I.F.
Since those lines were written it has been reported in
the press that Sir Charles died at sea, nearing Adelaide, on
28th October, 1926, on his return journey from a visit to
his children in England.
HEREDITY AND SURROUNDING.
But of all that remarkable Ryan family, the daughter,
Ellis, was incontestably the best gifted and the one destined
to attain the greatest celebrity and fame.
When genius and talent appear and develop in a
human being, they are either inherited from some dis-
tinguished ancestry or are due to some congenial surround"
ing—what the French call “le milieu ambiant” or more
simply Tambiance” at some period of life, usually in youth.
Both factors operated in the case of Mrs. Ellis Rowan.


WORMIA ALATA, R. Br.
A handsome flowering tree of coastal North Queensland




She had evidently inherited both literary and artistic talent
from her grandfather, on the mother’s side, Mr. John
Cotton, who was a literary man and painted many of our
multi-coloured Australian birds, when he came out to this
country in 1843. As a young man he had spent much of
his time on the Continent, copying in black and white the
paintings, which took his fancy while visiting the principal
Art Galleries of Europe, each of his sketches being accom-
panied by a picturesque description of considerable literary
merit. One of her uncles on the mother’s side, Sir . . .
Eastlake, was a painter of sufficient merit to be knighted and
made a Royal Academician, and her own father was also
good at etching.
So much for heredity. And now a word about en
vironment.
The young Ellis was born at Killam (V.), one of her
father’s stations, nearly 80 years ago, or to be more precise,
in 1847. She was a rather delicate child. Fortunately, she
was brought up in the free and healthy surrounding of
country life.
From early childhood she gave proofs of a singularly
keen gift of observation, being especially fond of flowers,
birds, butterflies, and of all of God’s “Belle Nature.”
At school age she was put to regular studies at the
High School for Girls of Miss Murphy, which had the
reputation of being the best educational institution for
girls in Melbourne. Although remarkably intelligent, the
young Ellis was never a great success at routine work, but
developed in her own original ways. She was very fond
of reading, and her taste being rather eclectic, she, in that
way, acquired an extensive and varied culture.
Although incontestably possessed of both literary and
artistic talents, these remained for a long time in a latent
or dormant state. She was like an undiscovered and un-
developed gold mine. The gold was there, but unknown
to the world and to itself. It was reserved to Captain
Frederic Charles Rowan to be the prospector and discoverer
of that mine and to make it yield the precious metal it


contained. He was an Englishman who had been sent
with his regiment to New Zealand where he served with
distinction in the Maori War. It was on his way back
to England that he met Miss Ellis Ryan.
The brilliant young officer and the charming Mel'
bourne maid grew rapidly fond of each other, and got
married on his return from England and went to live in
New Zealand.
Captain Rowan was fond of nature, and had become
a very fair botanist. Like all wise husbands, he initiated
and associated his clever young wife to all his works and
preoccupations. She proved a most attentive and receptive
pupil. At his suggestion she tried to reproduce in water
colours some of the beautiful flowers which they were cob
lecting for their herbariums in the picturesque mountains
and dales of New Zealand. The results surpassed their
most sanguine expectations. Strange to say, that young
woman, who was destined to become one of the great
painters of the world, had never had a single lesson in
drawing. She never used a pencil to outline the contours
of the flowers she was about to paint, but contented her'
self with simultaneously reproducing, with the brush alone,
both the forms and the colours of the flower she was
painting.
Having heard that no one can become a great painter
without first learning to draw, she went to London with
the special purpose of taking lessons in drawing. But
here the great masters, whom she consulted, were perspic'
acious and honest enough to dissuade her from taking any
lessons, which would be only a hindrance to the develop'
ment of her so original inate genius.
TRAVELS AND ACHIEVEMENTS.
At the premature death of her beloved husband, who
passed away at an early age, and having previously lost her
only child —a little boy—the young widow and bereaved
mother looked for consolation and solace to hard work and
travels.


ARCHIDENDRON VAILLANTII. F. v. M
of the rich rain forests (“vine scrubs”) of North Queensland;
)wers are borne in clusters on the trunk and are afterwards
Jed by bright red pods which, when ripe, split open, displaying
a number of shining black seeds.




Those who have known her personally, describe her
as a charming little woman, of rather frail and slender
frame and delicate health. But, if the sheath was of a
rather indifferent material, the blade it contained was of the
highesf quality steel. Her’s was a soul of fire, sparking
from her singularly piercing hasel eyes. Heffs was an
eminently magnetic nature. She exercised an irresistible
attraction and charm on all —be they human beings or
dumb animals—who came in contact with her. Her strong
will power and indomitable courage enabled her to make
of that rather delicate body one of the greatest workers
and of the most travelled human beings of all times and
climes.
In pursuit of her artistic studies and of subjects for her
paintings, she visited the picturesque sites and all the prnv
cipal Art Galleries of Great Britain and of the whole of
Europe, including the Scandinavian countries. She visited
India and intervening islands, the West Indies and North
America where she resided for twelve years. She knew
New Zealand and her native continent of Australia to
their remotest corners. The parlous state of her health,
having compelled her to spend winters in a warmer and
more genial climate, she came to Queensland and penetrated
into our tropical scrubs and jungles right up to Cape York
Peninsula, and still further north, into British and German
New Guinea, being rewarded by the discovery of many
of the most beautiful flowers of her collections.
In her travels she never relinquished the female attire
and would utilise all possible means of locomotion, from
steam and sailing boats, to railways, coaches, bullock drays,
horse and camel backs, and last, but not least, long marches
on foot. Her early acquaintance with bush life and bush
craft made her extraordinarily resourceful in all possible
emergencies. No obstacle could prevent her from reaching
and painting in their native habitat and surrounding her
beloved wild flowers. If they grew in the interstices of
some craggy cliffs, she would get someone to let her down
to them, attached to the end of a rope, and if they grew
on a tree, she would climb up to them. In New Guinea,


in places where no white man had ever penetrated, she
lived for weeks at a time on the scantiest of food, sharing
with wild cannibals their very primitive huts and accom'
modation, braving tropical heat, torrential rains, obnoxious
insects and snakes.
It is an intellectual treat to read of her adventures and
impressions in that admirably written and most fascinating
book of her’s, dedicated to “Her dear sisters,” and entitled
“Adventures of a Flower Hunter in Queensland and New
Zealand.”
In a very interesting and informative paper, read be'
fore the Queensland Authors’ and Artists’ Association,
Mrs. Cumbrae Stewart, who had the privilege of knowing
personally Mrs. Rowan, expresses the opinion—which I
share, too —that not sufficient justice has been done to her
literary talent. All who read her various publications must
admit that they are all possessed of considerable literary
merit and bear evidence of rare gifts of observation, concept
tion and expression, her style being always clear, concise,
rapid, and to the point.
Although enjoying solitude, she was sociable and at all
times a most pleasant and enjoyable companion, her bright
conversation being strewn with original views, picturesque
expressions and “bons mots.”
A very fine trait of her character was the total absence
of envy or jealousy of the merits of other artists. She took
an evident pleasure in praising the great masters whose
works she had admired in the course of her visits to all the
principal Art Galleries of the world. She keenly apprech
ated the talents of her friend. Miss North, another great
painter of Australian wild flowers, and for a time her
travelling companion. When visiting one day in Brisbane
the Randall Art Gallery, she stood in ecstacy before the
perfection and magnitude of the work of the great Queens'
land artist, and exclaimed: “This is the work of an absolute
genius!”
And the .same may be said about her own work as a
painter of flowers, which attains such a perfection that it


PHAIUS GRANDIFOLIUS, Lour., VAR. ROWANAE, Bail.
Mrs. Rowan’s Phaius
us grandifolius is a large around orchid common in the swamps of
al Queensland and Northern New South Wales. It has a wide
e, extending to the Malayan Archipelago. It is distinguished by the
yellow spots on the inner face of the sepals and petals.




will send her name down to the remotest posterity. She
had won a fame such as it is given to very few artists to
enjoy during their lifetime. That fame had burst upon her
with the suddenness of an unexpected volcanic eruption.
Wishing to put, at least part of her work, under the
eyes of some of the best art critics of the Old World, she
opened in 1905, in London, a private exhibition of about
one hundred canvasses, representing mostly Australian wild
flowers. The success was sudden and phenomenal. She
positively took by storm London and Great Britain, from
royalties down to the humblest commoner. All the art
critics of that period insist not only on the unsurpassed
artistic beauty of that unique collection, but also on its
great scientific value, for every flower was painted true to
nature and was accompanied by a brief botanical descrip'
tion, sometimes supplied by the painter herself, at other
times by some famous Australian botanist, such as Baron
Ferdinand von Mueller, of Melbourne, or Mr. F. Manson
Bailey, of Brisbane.
CRITICISMS.
As in Australia we are—l don’t know why—inclined
to undervalue and disparage our own geniuses in comparison
with the foreign born ones, I will refrain from expressing
my own appreciation of Mrs. Rowan’s work, so as to avoid
being—as was the case on some other similar occasions—
accused of allowing myself to be carried away by my en'
thusiasm. But I will, instead, quote a few extracts, selected
from some forty qualified critics, whose opinions I have
before me at the time of writing these lines.
'The Westminster Gazette.”—"Mrs. Rowan shows
herself to be a very conscientious expert tenderer of these
strange and beautiful flowers, and they impress you as being
eminently accurate and true to nature.”
The Queen. —"Those paintings are the delight of
learned botanists. But Mrs. Rowan has brought quite as
much artistic skill to her work as is necessary to make her
astonishingly beautiful drawings completely successful.


Bold as well as elegant, graceful forms and the most delicate
tracery, gorgeous colours as in the Verticordia grandia, and
sweetly tender tints like that of the Australian gardenia.”
The gorgeous and bright colours of the Australian
wild flowers seem to be too much for the eyes of the
critic of “The Daily Chronicle,” accustomed to the attem
uated light of the usually grey English skies, for he says;—
“No doubt the drawings are immensely valuable as correct
records, but their colour, if true to nature, makes us turn
with more pleasure to the more subdued buds and blossoms
of the English woodlands, meadows and gardens.”
“The Globe.” —“The Australian wild flowers are in'
teresting as much on account of their value as botanical
studies as for their artistic merit.”
“The Sketch.” —“Mrs. Rowan is a very elegant
draughtswoman, with an extraordinary appreciation of fine
and beautiful details. Nearly all her drawings are most
graceful in composition, line falling into line, leaf springing
from stalk, blossom and bud, are lying in admired and well
ordered confusion, which after all is the ideal method of
flower painting.”
“The Chelmham Examiner.” —“No words can do jus'
tice to the beauty of the collection of splendid flora and
also to the exquisite workmanship that was presented for
European eyes. One of England’s very greatest painters
wrote to say that he had never seen more beautiful and
perfect work.”
“Lloyd’s Weekly.”—“Many of the exhibited paint'
ings fascinate by exceptionally soft and brilliant colour.”
“The Western Morning News.” —“Mrs. Rowan,
while suffering much from weakness set to work to paint as
they grew in their native haunts, the gorgeous flora of these
comparatively unknown regions. She worked enthusiastic'
ally and with patience and skill, and the results are hundreds
of paintings which are valuable to both artists and botanists,
and a wondrous monument to a weak woman’s activity.”
“The Atlanta.” —“As a flower painter Mrs. Rowan
shows rare skill and judgment. She gives the most exquisite


STERCULIA TRICHOSIPHON, Benth.
Broad Leaved Bottle Tree.
A native of Central Queensland.




delicacy and purity of tone, without feebleness, and the
most brilliant colouring without hardness, etc.”
“The Devon and Exeter Gazette.” —There are a hum
dred pictures, each more beautiful than the other, and the
whole constituting a veritable dream of gorgeous colouring.
The original of the sketches have been obtained with great
difficulty by the artist, who is an intrepid explorer, and
has braved many dangers and suffered much inconvenience
during her expeditions in search of those natural floral gems
of Australasia. The result is a unique collection of the
flora of this richly endowed continent, many of the flowers
having never before been painted, and some being unknown
even to botanists. To us the beautiful blue and pink
water-lilies of Queensland seem almost impossible, so ex'
quisite is their colouring, where here in England there is no
flower of so gorgeous a tint as the flame tree, etc.”
“Hearth and Home.”—“To give any idea of the beauty
and variety of those lovely flowers is hardly possible. To
be appreciated they must be seen. The colouring and ex-
quisite finish of the drawings are delightful. The most
gorgeous specimens were found in North Queensland and
Oceania, but from all parts of the country specimens are
shown as ablaze with colours of rare delicacy.”
“The Lady.”—“Congratulations were showered upon
Mrs. Rowan on the extreme beauty of her work, which is
quite unique in the subject of colouring and originality.”
“The Observer.”—Those flower paintings are not only
valuable from a botanical point of view, but their beauty
and variety of forms and colours are surprising. They cer-
tainly give one quite a new idea of the Marvels of the Aus-
tralian Flora.”
“The Architect ” —“The energetic little floral artist
seems to have scoured every nook and corner of the Land of
the Southern Cross, and to have scorned every form of risk
and danger in order to acquire her splendid specimens
which with true love of nature in her heart she has repro-
duced in a series of paintings of unsurpassed beauty.”


London "Truth.”—"Mrs. Rowan’s Australian flowers:
such dreams of glowing colours with never a jarring note.
Think what a country walk must mean with flowers like the
Scarlet Cactus, large crimson and yellow Gladioli; orchids
in richest mauve and palest peach tints, brilliant yellow and
warm cream colour; blue flowers like our Nemophila and
Forget-Me-Not, but ten times their size, growing on trees
and bushes, in interstices of cliffs and waterfalls. Mrs.
Rowan paints the texture of the petals with marvellous
fidelity, rendering the satin sheen, the powdery softness and
the waxlike polish with equally good effect. Her colours are
often like light itself, so Light and yet so true.”
I could go on quoting many more equally eulogistic
opinions, including that of the critic of the "Exchange and
Mart,” who states that Mrs. Rowan was equally successful
when exhibiting her work in the principal European capitals,
having at different times been awarded ten gold medals. Her
sister informs me that Mrs. Rowan had got gold medals in
the following cities: —Chicago, St. Petersburg, Antwerp,
Amsterdam, Vienna, London, Paris, Sydney, Melbourne
and Calcutta, which tends to prove that her work was ap-
preciated wherever she showed it in all parts of the world.
Miss Ryan could not lay her hand on the press extracts
from foreign countries which, however, are all in various
ways extolling both the artistic and the scientific value of
the artist’s unique paintings.
If Mrs. Rowan could elicit such a unanimous encomium
of her talent and work with, one might say, only a few
specimens of her productions, what would have been the
amazement and admiration of the critics could they have
seen, not only the beauty and accuracy, but also the extent
and magnitude of the whole of her life’s work, for she was
possessed in a high degree of what has been rightly des-
cribed as the supreme attribute of genius: fecundity.
There are 652 paintings of Australian flowers alone,
which the late Lord Leighton, a good judge and connoisseur
of art, valued at £25,000. She also painted 255 American
and 93 West Indian groups of flowers. She also painted


Three Forms of MELALEUCA LEUCADENDRON L nn.
Tea Trees.
The common "Paper'barked” or “Broaddeaved Tea Tree” is abundant
in swampy forests throughout Coastal Queensland and Northern New
bouth Wales. The flower is normally a greenish white, but as one
approaches North Queensland various colour variations of the flower
are noticed.




over 40 Birds of Paradise, her s being the only specimens
painted direct from nature.
She brushed, also, with an equal maestria, many other
birds of rich and multicoloured plumage and an infinite
variety of butterflies and other insects, mostly in connection
with the flowers attracting them. She also painted, from
nature, the illustrations for three huge botanical books on
the American flowers and trees. There are, in addition
from her brush, many land and seascapes of great artistic
merit.
Many of her best works have not yet been disposed of,
and are still stored in Sydney, while in the cradle of the
family at Upper Macedon, there are many valuable
souvenirs of the great lady painter, including her rich cob
lection of over 3,000 butterflies and moths, and her cob
lection of innumerable fungi.
In my humble opinion those valuable collections should
be acquired by the Commonwealth Government to make
of them the nuclei of the National Museums and Art Gab
leries bound to be established some day in our new capital
city of Canberra.
® ® 0 (D
“This is the hidden secret of the strife—
To find your life and live it —This is Life!
said George Essex Evans.
Mrs. Ellis Rowan was evidently one of those privib
eged mortals, who have found "'the hidden secret of the
strife” and have lived up to the ideal they have set up to
their life. She has devoted her talent and genius to Art
and Science, and to the glorification of the great natural
beauties of her dear native land of Australia, a task in
which she was so successful that she might have truly
said with Horatius:
“Exegi monumentum!”
In fact she not only devoted but also sacrificed her life
to Art and Country, for it was while she was engaged for


six months at a time for two years in succession in hunting
for wild flowers in New Guinea, that she contracted the
malarial fever which so undermined her constitution that
she had not sufficient stamina left, to withstand the attack
of the insidious pleuresy, which carried her away on the
4th October, 1922, aged 75.
RECOGNITION (?)
And in return, what has Australia done to honour and
commemorate the name of one who has done so much for
her? *
Up to now, very little.
True, the Commonwealth Government and the Gov'
ernments of Queensland and South Australia have each
bought a certain quantity of her paintings at prices com
siderably below the market value of those unique collem
tions. And that is all, and that is not enough. At best,
and even if these paintings were suitably displayed, they
could be viewed and enjoyed by only a privileged few,
living in the capital cities where they happen to be located.
Even that restricted privilege is accessible to only a very
few people for, up to now those unique collections are
only poorly housed.
It is pleasant to notice that, if the location of the
Queensland collection is not perfect, it is by a long way the
best of the lot. Every care has been taken to exhibit those
paintings in the best available space in our rather crowded
National Museum. They are neatly framed, and shown in
two superposed rows, in the best available light. The
great drawback is here the lack of the space necessary to
view the paintings in a proper perspective.
Things are not so satisfactory with the South Aus'
tralian collection.
According to a memo supplied by Mr. H. D. Marshall,
General Secretary of the Adelaide Public Library, Museum
and Art Gallery, and kindly forwarded to me by Lady J.
Symon, there are in Adelaide


HARDENBERGIA RETUSA. Benth.
Northern Sarsaparilla
A beautiful climber of coastal North Queensland —a larger plant than
the better known Southern “Sarsaparilla"’ (H. monophylla).




(I). Two paintings, "‘White Acacia,” and “Yellow
Laburnum,” presented by the Right Hon. Sir S. J. Way,
and now hung at Parliament House;
(II.) Eighty paintings of wild flowers (I believe
mostly from the South Australian Flora), purchased in
1907 by the South Australian Government, direct from
Mrs. Rowan, and now “deposited” with the Board of
Management of the abovenamed institutions;
(III.) Twenty paintings of wild flowers, purchased in
1907 by the late Sir George Downer who subsequently
bequeathed them to the South Australian Government, who
had them similarly “deposited” as above;
(IV.) There is also one painted screen of Wild
Flowers, presented by the late Mr. Henry Scott.
Towards defraying the cost of the above collections
only £5OO was contributed by the South Australian Gov'
emment.
It will be noticed that Mr. Marshall says that those
valuable paintings are simply “deposited” with his Board of
Management, the natural inference being that they are not
“exhibited” for the benefit of the public.
I learned from another source that those paintings
had been duly hung in the reading room of the Public
Library. But someone, evidently more patriotic than cub
tured—although by right the both qualifications should go
hand in hand, had them removed and replaced by . . .
war photographs!
And to think that matters are still worse in connection
with the much larger collection (about 600 odd paintings)
bought by the Commonwealth Government. Under the
plea that those paintings will be some day exhibited in the
new capital city of Canberra, they are still unpacked and
unframed and inaccessible to the present generation of art'
lovers.
It is a great pity that such valuable collections should
be thus withheld from the present generation.


But, what is worse about all those fine collections, is
that they are exposed to the danger of being destroyed by
a possible fire, which would be a national calamity and an
absolutely irreparable loss to both art and science.
SUGGESTIONS.
With a view to prevent, or at least minimise the con-
sequences of such an ominous eventuality, and to make
at the same time Mrs. Rowan’s unique works available to
the mass of our people, and to the world at large, I beg to
suggest that the Queensland Authors’ and Artists’ Associ-
ation, which has been founded for the express purpose of
encouraging Australian literature and art, take the initi-
ative of asking the Australian Universities, scientific and
artistic societies, the Federal Bureau of Science and Industry
and last, but not least, the patriotic body, known as the
A.N.A. (“Australian Natives’ Association”) to conjointly
send to the Commonwealth and State Governments of
Australia a petition approximately worded as follows:
“We, the undersigned, representing the following educational,
scientific, artistic, and patriotic bodies of Australia, do hereby request
you—
(1) To take at the earliest opportunity steps to have the invaluable
collections of Australian wild flowers paintings by Mrs. Ellis
Rowan properly housed and exhibited for the benefit and
enjoyment of our people.
(2) To arrange for an interchange of those collections between
the various States, and have them exhibited at least in the
great annual shows held in our capital cities.
(3) To take joint steps for publishing a chromodithographic
“Edition de Luxe” of those absolutely unique paintings, the
size being as near as possible that of the original paintings.
To properly utilise both the artistic and the scientific value
of those paintings, each of the chromodithographic repro*
ductions should be accompanied by the botanic name, classify
cation and scientific description, and, whenever possible, the
vernacular name should also be given, together with a pic*
turesque description of the flower, adding such particulars as
may be available about its habitat, periods of efflorescence and
fruition, etc., and when occasion demands it, also some appro*
priate quotations from the works of Australian poets.”
If this were done, whatever may happen to those col-
lections, Mrs. Rowan’s Life Work would be preserved to


PIMELEA F. v. M.
Native Poppy
A pretty flowering plant of the inland parts of Central and North
Queensland. It is reputed to be poisonous to stock.




both Art and Science. Such a publication would be, in
addition, an imperishable monument to the printing art of
Australia, which has already reached such a high degree of
perfection. If such a work were sent to the Universities,
Art Galleries, Scientific and Artistic bodies of the world, it
would be for our country an advertisement of unsurpassed
value.
Should such an edition cost even <£soo0 —which it will
not —it would pan out at only less than a farthing per head
of population, a mere trifle compared with the innumer'
able moral and material advantages it would confer upon
our people.
If, at least a few of those coloured plates were ex'
hibited in every school with a portrait and a brief biography
of that great artist and patriot, how it would awaken and
strengthen an Australian sentiment, a love for and a pride
in our country, while at the same time developing the
aesthetic taste of the growing generations of young Aus'
tralians.
And that is not all that can, and should be done to
honour and perpetuate the memory of the truly great Aus'
tralian that was Mrs. Ellis Rowan.
In a rich country like this, where millions of pounds
sterling are being spent annually in smoke, in drink, and all
kinds of pleasures and dissipations, could not a few thousand
pounds be found and spared to have painted portraits,
marble or bronze busts of our great writers and artists,
including Mrs. Ellis Rowan, placed in our public libraries,
art galleries and educational institutions? Australia is not
lacking in capable painters and sculptors, for talent is as
abundant among our welbgifted Australian natives, as was
heroism during the Great World War.
Why should our wealthy citizens not follow the
example of those of the medieval Italian, Swiss and Dutch
Republics, who were vying with municipal authorities in
patronising the artists and in enriching the artistic collec'
tions of their respective countries. What has been done


elsewhere can be done here in this favoured land of the
Southern Cross.
Oh! If I could only see before I die, recognised and
utilised for the building up of our young nation the noble
work accomplished by the sublime artist and ardent patriot
that was Mrs. Ellis Rowan, I would feel that I have not
lived and striven in vain, and I would then die, singing with
Simeon—“ Lettest now thy servant depart in peace for
mine eyes have seen Thy salvation!”—Dixi!
“Ormonts,”
Wynnum, Near Brisbane, Queensland,
March, 1926.
P.S. —The above lecture was read at a meeting of
the Queensland Authors' and Artists' Association and was
well received by the audience, and favourably commented
upon by the President, Professor J. J. Stable of the Queens'
land University, the Secretary, Mr. E. Colclough, Mr.
Stark, two distinguished artists, and by several literary men.
The lecturer’s suggestions were approved of, and it was
unanimously resolved to try and enrol the support of the
Congress for the Advancement of Science tp be held at
Perth in August, it being hoped that such a representative
body would carry a great weight with the petitioned
Governments and others interested.


O.PINIA ARCTIFLORA. F. v. M
A “Wild Ginger”




I i
Miss Marion Wilson, Mme Bolhova, Miss Liuboff Bolhova, Mr. Pares Mr. H. A. Tardcnt
a most promising Soprano, of the of the Russian Ballet Chairman,
pupil violinist. Pctrograd School.
Conscrvatorium.


Charming Ceilings
ADD beauty to your rooms and you con'
tribute happiness to the Home. Such is
the experience of those discriminating
Homebuilders who have installed Wunderlich
Art Metal Ceilings, choosing freely from the
charming array of inexpensive designs.
Why not have these Ceilings in your Home?
Prices are extremely moderate, and the cost of
transporting and erecting the material is
unusually low, as the designs nest compactly and
can be fixed by your local tradesman.
Write tO'day for free Catalogue M 27.
WUNDERLICH LIMITED
Head Office: Baptist Street, Redfern, Sydney
Postal Address: Box 474 a.a., G.P.0., Sydney
Branch at Amelia Street, Valley, Brisbane
WUNDERLICH
Metal 0 V Wall
Ceilings ((^Linings
44


STERCULIA QUADRIFIDA, R. Br.
A common tree in the rain forests (“vine scrubs") of coastal
Queensland and Northern New South Wales. The seeds have a
pleasant filbertdike flavour.


■


When you Build
Plan to make use of DURABESTOS
(asbestos'cement) SHEETS when you build,
repair or remodel. These tough, rockdike
Sheets make ideal Exterior and Interior Walls,
because, unlike weatherboards, they cannot
rot, burn, or be destroyed by insect pests.
You obtain Durabestos Building Sheets in
big, broad sizes. Simply nail them to the
wall studs, then fix wooden cover battens
over the joints and the work is complete.
Painting is not necessary, unless extra decora'
tion is desired. Prices are very moderate—
somewhat cheaper than timber.
Write tO'day and ask us to send you samples,
also our free descriptive booklet D 4.
WUNDERLICH LIMITED
Head Office: Baptist Street, Redfern, Sydney
Postal Address: Box 474 a.a., G.P.0., Sydney
Branch at Amelia Street, Valley, Brisbane
DURABESTOS
Building Sheets
47


A word with you about
QUEENSLAND
Artistic Impressions of Australia are Incomplete without
Memories of the Wonderful North
GORGEOUS TROPICAL FORESTS
CHOICE FLOWERS AND SHRUBS
Home of Huge Palms and Ferns and Rare Orchids. Visit
Cairns Ranges, Blackall Ranges and Mt. Tambourine.
LAND OF INSPIRATION, UNIQUE
PLANT LIFE AND NEW SCENES
Brilliant Colours and Tropical Light and Shade. Here
the WHOLE TREES ARE FLOWERS, so thick are the
Masses of Bloom, as the heavenly-blue Jacaranda and
flame-coloured Poinciana. See the Bougainvillea Creeper
at its Purple Best.
Booklets and all information from: —
GOVERNMENT INTELLIGENCE AND TOURIST
BUREAU
Corner Ann 8C Edward Sts., BRISBANE
THE AGENT-GENERAL FOR QUEENSLAND
409-410 Strand, LONDON, W.C.2
48


HERNANDIA PELTATA, Meissn.
A beach tree common in North Queensland, extending over the
whole of the Polynesian region through Papua to Asia and Africa.




Unsurpassed Coastal Railway Run
BRISBANE TO CAIRNS, 1043
Miles
TOURISTS’
WINTER
NORTH
QUEENSLAND
PARADISE
Highest Peaks, Thrilling Mountain
Gorges, Biggest Waterfalls.
Tour in Comfort through Extensive Sugar and Cotton
Plantations, Orange, Pineapple, Banana, Papaw, Mango
and Other Tropical Production Farms.
See Barron Gorge and Falls, Atherton Tableland’s Giant
Timbers and Crater Lakes, and Chillagoe Caves.
Entrancing Voyages in Calm Summer Seas sheltered by
World’s Longest Coral Barrier.
IN ALL SEASONS
QUEENSLAND
Has Many Calls to Those Seeking Health and Pleasure
SOUTH QUEENSLAND has a large
Range of Oceanside Resorts and Mountain Retreats
NOOSA to COOLANGATTA, BLACKALL RANGES and
TAMBOURINE
Descriptive Literature and all Particulars from
GOVERNMENT INTELLIGENCE AND TOURIST
BUREAU
Ann and Edward Streets, BRISBANE
T. C. Troedson, Director.
51


Prompt Se
Financial Stability
State Government
Insurance Office
Life Insurance in force
,£6,000,000
Life Department opened
Ist January, 1918
ALL PROFITS BELONG TO
POLICY HOLDERS
Our Agent will be pleased
to furnish all Information
Head Office: Brisbane. Prhidpalf Towns
JOHN. A. WATSON,
Commissioner
52


PIPER MESTONI, Bail.
Meston’s Pepper-vine.
A climber of the North Queensland rain forests or “vine scrubs.”




What a pleasure--
It is to have a real
portrait of your
mother, father, or that
darling baby, when it
is made under the
right conditions and
beautifully finished,
such as those bearing
bearing the signature
“Regent Studios Ltd.”
iiiiiiiimiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiimiiiii
Visitors—Give ten minutes of your
time for a portrait by
Regent Studios Ltd.
THOS. MATHEWSON & CO.
184 QUEEN ST. (Next Finneys)
55




THANKS
The Author expresses his heartfelt thanks to all
those who have in various ways helped him in the con'
genial task of writing and publishing this book, more
especially to Professor J. J. Stable, of the Queensland
University, for kindly prefacing it; to the Queensland
Department of Agriculture for the loan of the very ex'
pensive blocks, used in printing the beautiful coloured
plates, which give a fair idea of the great artistic and
scientific value of Mrs. Rowan’s life work; and to the
Government Botanist, Mr. C. T. White, to whom are due
the notices which so greatly enhances the scientific value
of the coloured plates.


Publications by tbe same Author
The Life and Works of Richard John Randall, Aus-
tralia’s greatest Artist.
“The Life and Poetry of George Essex Evans.”
“Reflections on an Australian Literature,” a propos of
J. H. Nicholson’s “Haleck and Almoni.”
“Influence of Poetry on Modern Life.”
“Art and its Value as a National Asset.”
“Functions of the State in Relation to its Commercial Life.’
“Arbitration v. War for the Settlement of International
Disputes.”
“The Teaching of Agriculture in the Public Schools of
Australasia”
“The Future Development of Western Queensland.”
“Science as Applied to Agriculture”
“Forestry in Queensland,” etc.
IN FRENCH.
“Le Role de I’Australie dans la grande guerre”
“La Mission en Australie
“L’Australie Calomniee”
“Le Queensland, un pays prospere”
“La Representation proportioned en Australie,” etc.
“Reformes Constitutionnelles en Australie.”
“La Science en Australie,” etc.




