

Mrs. Watson,
A
Cooktown Heroine.
One of the Saddest of all the Sad Tales
of the Sea.
ALL RIGHTS RESERVED.




INTRODUCTORY NOTE.
The particulars given herein touching the sad fate
of a hrave and heroic woman have been collated partly
to meet the oft repeated enquiries of tourists to Cook-
t°wn as to the purpose of the Watson Memorial erected
m its principal street in 1886, the inscriptions on which
aie so vague as to merely arouse curiosity without
affording information. But primarily that the patient
cnduiance, devotion to duty, maternal love and heroism
shown by Mrs Watson should be more widely known
and realised, and that such realisation may implant, in
e\ety manly heart a higher, purer and more tender
leveience for Woman. W hile assuredly many a gentle
mother, wife or sister reading that diary written (amid
ocean’s loneliness and partly in the frailest barque that
e\et hia\ed its waves) and between the simple faithful
lines will with innate sympathy sanctify the writer’s
memory with pitying tears, and make resolve that the
loved little ones at home shall hear the tale, this sad
tale of the sea, to prompt the steadfast, love and
courage that adorn it.


PARTICUKARS OF MRS. WATSON'S LIFE.
Miss Mary Beatrice Phillips, afterwards Mrs.
Watson, was born at Truro, Cornwall, England, and
up to a certain time received a liberal education in
private schools, but financial trouble overtaking her
Father (a large cattle dealer), she left the land of her
birth with the other members cf her family and arrived
in Queensland late in the seventies. Prior to her advent
to Cooktown, Mary Phillips conducted a private school
in Maryborough (Queensland), but having relinquished
that occupation she accepted in Brisbane an engage-
ment to teach the children of Mr. C. Bowel at Cook-
town, and while in that capacity she made the acquaint-
ance of Mr hi. F. Watson, a beche-de mer hsiier, to
whom she was married at the age of hi years on the
30th May, IbbO, at Cooktown. Mary Phillips, or as
she was frequently called Mary Oxenam, tne latter
being the name of her step-iainer (Her lather having-
died and her mother re-marned) kept a private school
in Cooktown from the time of her engagement to Wat-
son until her marriage, when they leit for Lizard
Island. For some months after their arrival there,
Mrs Watson had the company of a younger sister, who
returned to her parents in Rockhampton about a year-
prior to the tragedy.
2


PHOTO OF MRS WATSON THE HEROINE OF L IZARD ISLAND.


SAD TIDINGS.
(Extract Cooktown “Courier,” October 1881.)
Some six weeks ago, Mr. P. C. Fuller and Captain R.
F. Watson, both well-known in Cooktown, who had
been residing for some months on one of the Lizard
Islands, left for Knight Island, a little over 200 miles
distance north, with the view of forming a fishing
station, leaving Mrs Watson and her baby and two
Chinamen in charge of the station. Captain Frier
reported after his arrival at Cooktown on Wednesday,
the 19th October, 1881, that when he passed the Lizard
Island on Monday evening, the 17th October, 1881,
bush fires were numerous, and on nearing the land he
made signals, but received no answer, and observing
that the door of the hut was open, with two black-
fellows about the place, he concluded the station had
been broken up, and sailed on his course for Cooktown.
On Thursday, the 20th October, 1881, the Neptune,
cutter, in charge of some Chinamen, who returned from
searching for their vessel in that locality, saw eight or
ten natives canoes hauled up on the beach, and about
forty blacks on the Lizard Island, where a bush fire
was raging. They reported the case to Mr. Fahey,
Sub-Collector of Customs, Cooktown, who, with his
usual promptitude, communicated at once with Inspec-
tor Fitzgerald, who consented to allow a police officer
with five troopers to accompany him to the Lizard
Island. Arrangements were made to leave, but Lieut.
Izatt, of H.M.S. Conflict, hearing of the affair, offered
to convey the party, which left on the 21st October,
1881, in the Conflict. Mr. Fahey takes with him one of
the Customs boatmen, as well as the police, and expects
to return on Sunday, the 28rd October, 1881. In the
meantime further intelligence is awaited in Cooktown
with much anxiety.


POEM WRITTEN ON RECEIPT OF FIRST
TIDINGS.
A tale from the tropical Northern sea
Of danger and death and black treachery—
A too true tale that stirs the land
From Otway’s Cape to Port Darwin strand,
Out on the Lizards, with two Chinese,
Waiting and watching the friendly breeze,
Which would bring back him whom she loved to please—
One love coming an i one oh her knees.
Every passing sail was a mark in the life
Of the lonely lond mother, the longing wife;
And the murmuring wind and the dashing spray
Whispered hopeful tales of a happier day.
Out in the dusk on the “ brown ribbed ” strand
Came craw.ing and stealing the murderous band ;
One after another her servants fell,
And who can the thoughts of that woman tell ?
Surrounded, cut off from hope or relief,
Yet never sinking in womanly grief;
Easing bold and true—like a Spartan mother ;
Fears and tears brave hearts should smother.
Sleep, little babe 1 let your mother fight
Through the sunny day and the lowering night
Holding at bay that demon score
Too often recruited from mainland shore.
Hold the fort indeed ! her fort was here ;
It held a mother her jewel most dear.
With a firm hand ana a steady eye,
She sent a few devils to curse and die ;
But nature must always claim its share,
And she sank at last in unanswered prayer.
Draw the veil! wrap it close o’er the closing scene—
The spear, the waddy, the tomahawk keen 1
Womd to God their work had been short and Hi up,
But her last lew hours were devilish and dark.
Where was the guardian angel, then,
Who rescues women and saves brave men ?
Why not strike with his flaming sword
The whole of that black and bloody horde !
Let us hope she is deaf and her soul at rest;
God knoweth and judgeth, aye, for the best,
But His judgments sometimes are hard to bear,
And I wish He had managed that woman to spare—
A mother of heroes lor our new home,
Historic to us as her sisters to Eome.
Not to be ! but her life and end shall not die ;
Bards with better pens, lift her memory high


THE LIZARD ISLAND TRAGEDY CLEARED UP.
The mystery which surrounded the Lizard Island
tragedy has at length been cleared up.
Mrs Watson was left on Lizard Island by her hus-
band, a beche-de-mer trader, with a baby aid two
Chinese servants. On the 27th September, the
blacks came, and next day speared one Chinaman, and on
the 30th speared the other in seven places, but the
dauntless woman defended herself so resolutely with
firearms as to drive them temporarily away. I3ut to
remain was certain death, and on the 3rd October she
escaped in an iron tank, with her child, the wounded
Chinaman, and a supply of provisions. They floated
all night, and next day landed on a bare reef, where she
remained till the 6th October. Water gave out, and
the poor hunted woman pulled the tank and its con-
tents over to No. 1 Island of the Howick Group.
Search for water there was in vain, but natives were
there, so she again started, and reached No. 5 Island,
40 miles away, on the Bth. There, surrounded with
water—but all salt; with plenty of provisions, which
her parched and swollen throat could not swallow;
with her child, only a few months old, dying before her
eyes, while she herself suffered the tortures of Tantalus ;
she died of thirst.
DISCOVERY OF THE REMAINS OF MRS
WATSON, HER CHILD AND SERVANT.
On Sunday morning, January 22nd, 1882, the beche-
de-mer schooner Kate Kearney arrived from the North-
ern fisheries, when Captain Bremner reporte I having
discovered on No. 5 Island of the Howick Group the
remains of poor Mrs. Watson, her baby, and her Chinese
servant Ah Sam, On Thursday afternoon (19th instant
1382) Captain Bremner was endeavouring to beat south


to No. 4 Howick but was unable to fetch it and brought
up, for the night at No. 5, where his black boys caught
some seasonable fish and were allowed to land for the
purpose of cooking them. One of the boys who had
wandered inland in search of eggs returned with a
scared face, and a rather indistinct story of having seen
“um white dead fellow,” and under his guidance the
party discovered, on the south-east beach, the partially
decomposed remains of Ah Sam, Mrs. Watson’s servant.
Continuing their search they found, not far distant
from the corpse, in a small lagoon close to the Man-
giove scrub, the tank, or rather three-quarter tank
(used as a beche-de-mer boiler) missed from the Lizard,
half filled with water by recent rains, which, when
emptied, disclosed tbe remains of the missing lady and
hei little child, together with a chest containing a few
articles of clothing for the baby, jewellery, trinkets,
and money, tins of preserved milk, tins of sardines and
of preserved meats, a small bag of rice, some groats,
and close to her side a cup, and a revolver loaded and
at full cock, together with a number of cartridges. She
was lying on her back with her poor baby resting on
her decomposed arm, and the diary which the brave
lady had managed to write to the last, and which is
given below, tells how she, in order to escape from her
savage loes, had boldly trusted herself to the elements
and the mercy of God in one of the frailest barks which
ever bore a living freight, and had drifted 40 miles over
the torrid sea to die from thirst on an arid and unin-
habited coral isle within 10 miles of the mainland. It
tells of wonderful presence of mind under trying cir-
cumstances, to find that she had even taken a, pillow for
her babe s beau to rest on and an umbrella with which
to shield it from the tropical sun. The last entry in
the diary found at the Lizards mentioned that A a Ham
had been speared, but he was probably nursed by his
mistress and was reserved for a more lingering death.
The following is a copy of the melancholy di try
which was written with a lead pencil on a few sheets of
note-paper :


DIARY.
No. 1 Found at Lizard Island ;
September 27, 1881.—Blowing gale of wind S.E. Ah Sam saw
smoke in S. direction, supposed to be from native camp.
Steamer bound North very close about (3 p.m. ; Corea I
think.
September 28.—Blowing strong S.E. breeze.
September 29. —Blowing strong breeze S.E,, although not so hard
as yesterday. No eggs. Ah Leong killed by the blacks
over at the farm (a quarter of a mile from her cottage).
Ah Sara found his hat, which is the only proof.
September 90. —Natives down on the beach at 7 p.m. Fired off
rifle and revolver and they went away.
October 1. —Natives (four) speared Ah Sam ; four places in the
right side, and three on the shoulder. Got three spears
from the natives. Saw ten men altogether
DIARY.
No. 2 Found in the Tank near her body at No. 5 Howick :
Left Lizard Island October 2nd, 1881, (Sunday afternoon) in tank
(or the pot in which beche-de-mer is boiled). Got about
three miles or four from the Lizards.
October 4.—Made for the sand bank off the Lizards, but could
not reach it. Got on a reef.
October 5. —Remained on the reef all day on the look-out for a
boat, but saw none.
October 6.—Very calm morning. Able to puli the tank up to an
island with three small mountains o.i it. Ah Sam went
ashore to try and get water, as oars was done. There
were natives camped there, so we were afraid to go far
away. We had to wait return of tide. Anchored under
the mangroves; got on the reef. Very calm.
October 7. —Made for another Island four or five miles from the
one spoken of yesterday. Ashore, but could not find
any water. Cooked some rice and clam-fish. Moderate
S.E. breeze. Stayed here all night. Saw a steamer
bound north. Hoisted Ferrier’s (her baby boy) white
and pink wrap but did not answer us.
##tober B.—Changed anchorage of boat as the wind was freshen-
ing. Went down to a kind of little lake o i the same
island (this done last night). Remained here all day
looking out for a boat; did not see any. Very cold
night ; blowing very hard. No water.


October 9. —Brought the tank ashore as far as possible with this
morning’s tide. Made camp all day under the trees.
Blowing very hard. No water. Gave Ferrier a dip in
the sea ; he is showing symptoms of thirst, and I look
a dip myself. Ah Sam and self very parched with
thirst. Ferrier is showing symptoms.
October 10.—Ferrier very bad with inflammation ; very much
alarmed. No fresh water, and no more milk, but con-
densed. Self very weak ; really thought I would have
died last night (Sunday).
October 11. —Still all alive. Ferrier very much better this morn-
ing. Self feeling very weak. I think it will rain to-
day ; c’ouds very heavy; wind not quite so hard.
No rain. Morning fine weather. Ah Sam preparing to die.
Have not seen him since 9. Ferrier more cheerfuli
Self not feeling at all well. Have not seen any boat of
any description. No water. “ Nearly dead with thirst.”
THE HALF TRON TANK IN WHICH MRS. WATSON LEFT
THE LIZARD ISLAND.


DEAD WITH THIRST.
The drama’s over, and vve know the end,
The bitter worst:
In droughty agony, with none to tend,
13at with a fortitude that scorned to bend,
She died of thirst!
For ever menaced by the savage spears,
By night and day,
With nameless horrors threatened nameless fears,
No tune for grieving, fainting, or for tears,
But aye at bay.
She kept them off the black and devilish band,
The fiends accurst;
And in her iron craft escaped the land —
Alas ! upon the cruel, parching sand
To die of thirst!
At death’s worst anguish she could firmly look,
And never quail:
Though wan and weak, her fingers never shook
As day by day she entered in the book
Her piteous tale.
From first to last, there is net one complaint;
No useless cry ;
No sign of heroine’s heart-strength waxing faint,
The while she watched—with pains no pen can paint—
Her baby die.
Five fearful days, beneath the scorching glare,
Her babe she nursed.
God knows the pangs that woman had to bear,
Whose last sad entry showed a mother’s care,
Then —“Nearly dead with thirst!”
10


Never a word of reproach for the living or of fear
for the Angel of death who was hovering near. She
kept her confidences and her prayers for her Maker,
but the wail of “ no water ” tells of the terrible suffer-
ings which are felt by those who die from thirst, while
the reticence about herself and the anxiety about her
child proves her to have been a brave woman and true
mother. There is something very touching and sug-
gestive in the entry about Ah Sam preparing to die,
and it is evident from the position of his body that
when he felt his end approaching he crawled away to
the meagre shelter of a dwarf tree that he might neither
intrude on the privacy of his mistress, nor pain her
with the sight of his sufferings. - Whatever his colour
or< his kindred, he had some inkling of the instinctive
chivalry which belongs to one of nature’s gentlemen.
The clouds which the poor woman saw thickening as if
betokening rain, may have been but the dimning vision
of the eternal night stealing over her! At any rate
they never opened to wet her living lips, and if we
were, by our poor human judgments, to attempt an
estimate of what is controlled by a power whose laws
are mysterious, we might he inclined to murmur at the
mercy which refused to send the few drops which were
wanted to preserve the living, but soon afterwards
deluged the dead with the glorious rain which falls
alike on the just and the unjust.
The agonies which the unfortunate fugitives suffered
during the five or six days which elapsed between their
arrival on the desert island and their death must have
been terrible, and yet not a complaint or a murmur is
to be found in the diary of the noble woman, whose
indomitable courage, resources, and presence of mind
must command the admiration of all who read the
simple and pathetic tale. All her care and concern
appear to have been for her baby and she is rejoiced to
find, on the day when the entries ceased —which is
believed to have been that of her death—that her child,
who has been kept with condensed milk, is “ much
better ” and “ more cheerful,” Her own sufferings are
alluded to in four short words, “ Nearly dead with
thirst,” and tuere the melancholy record ends. The
11


courage and endurance shown by Mrs. Wats in through-
out the frightful ordeal could scarcely be surpassed.
The departure from Lizard Island was well planned,
and, but for the unfortunate circumstance that No. 5
Howick Island contains no water, the fugitives would
no doubt have been saved ; for notwithstanding the
terrible danger which menaced them, there was no
panic or flurry about their departure, and the tank was
well stored with provisions, while Mrs. Watson even
took with her a box containing her spare clothing and
account-books. If the lives of the party could have
been prolonged for a few days they would certainly have
been rescued, for the island upon which they had taken
refuge lies right in the track of steamers, and small
sailing vessels frequently cruise about near the group.
Mrs. Watson says in her diaty that she saw one' steamer
pass, and that signals were made, but that they failed
to attract attention. This might very easily be the
case, for as the island is uninhabited no special atten-
tion would be paid to it in passing, and as the land
lies very low, signals unless hoisted on a flag-pole or in
some such way, would be very likely to escape the
notice of the unobservant. That this particular vessel
did not keep a sharper look-out is much to be deplored.
Life and death were in the balance, and death turned
the scale. The melancholy fate of so brave and devoted
a woman will be widely lamented, and throughout
Australia the memory of Mrs. Watson will long be
preserved as that of a true and noble heroine.


MRS. WATSON’S CHILD “FERRIER.”
13


THE LATE MRS. WATSON.
PUBLIC FUNERAL.
On Sunday, January 29th, 1882, the people of Cook-
town honoured themselves in honouring the memory of
a lady whose name will always be associated with the
nobility of her sex and with the history of the “ far
North.” On Saturday evening, Messrs. Clunn and Sons
removed the coffin containing the bodies of Mrs. Wat-
son and her baby, and of her faithful servant Ah Sam
to the Town Hall ; and on Sunday at half-past 2 p.m.
the Rev. Mi. Hosken read the first part of the beautiful
service of the Church of England in the hall to a large
and sympathy audienco. Toe Sunday school children
to the number of sixty-seven occupied the stage, and on
each side of the room were ranged the bandsmen and
fire brigadiers, the body of the hall being occupied by
the Good Templars and the public generally. Ladies
and gentlemen representing all classes and*every part
of the district were there, and several of them were
visibly affected. On the coffin of Mrs. Watson was a
beautiful wreath with the Cornish motto —“ One for
all,” and a fine floral cross, the latter artistically pre-
pared by Mr. J. L. Street. On the coffin of the poor
Chinaman was a very neat wreath placed there by some
unknown but thoughtful lady. The original programme
was altered, and the lady’s remains were first conveyed
to the cemetery, and this arrangement was probably an
improvement, as the barbarous music of the Chinese
band would have tried the nerves of horses and horse-
men. The procession fell in as follows ;—Band, Fire-
men, Hearse, Mourners, Municipal Council, Good
Templars, School Children (Christ Church), Convent
School Children, pedestrians, vehicles, and horsemen.
From the Mayor, the Police Magistrate, and the Sub-
collector of Customs to the humble Chinese and abori-
ginal fishermen, every class was represented. The
police were omitted from the programme—not as an
intentional slight, but by pure accident, but they mus-
tered well in private clothes. The band played the


«• Dead March in Saul,” PleyelTs “ German Hymn,”
and The Portuguese Hymn,” and their drums were
muffled and covered with crape. Many ladies and
children accompanied the procession—one who had
known the deceased intimately following close to the
hearse trying to bide her honourable grief behind the
shade of a beautiful wreath, which she afterwards de-
posited in the grave. It was difficult to ascertain the
exact number in the procession, but they may be rea-
sonably computed at 650. The day was beautiful, and
the scene in the church-yard was something which
might well imptcss the minds and memories of all
present
After the conclusion of the service the Fire Brigade,
headed by the Band, marched back to the Town Hall
and headed the Chinese procession which accompanied
the remains of Ah Sam. The Chinese Band made
desperate efforts to drown all sounds, and volleys of
crackers were fired at very short intervals along the
whole route. At the grave candles and charm papers
were burned, and the usual propitiatory libations were
poured around the grave, then came another fusilade of
crackers, and the procession reformed and marched
back. Messrs. Fuller, Emanuel, and Hartley, arranged
the general procession, while Messrs. Ti Chack and
Kum Ching marshalled their countrymen, and dispen-
sed refreshments to a thirsty crowd near the church-
yard gate. Both coffins were carried by the Brigadiers
who, as well as the Bandsmen, were warmly thanked by
the Chinese merchants for the honor conferred on the
memory ot their countryman. Before dismissing the
Brigade, Assistant Superintendent Emanuel thanked
the members lor their attendance, and a Brigadier, by
permission, stepped to the front and saiel “ Comrades
let us beloie separating uncover in honour of the
memoiy ct a biave weman.” Every head was at onee
uncoveied and revetently bent. The incident was
simple, ai d had nothing theatrical about it, on the
contrary we were struck with its appropriateness and
good taste.
15


MRS. WATSON’S MONUMENT ERECTED IN COOKTOWN.
16




I have to thank the Manager of the Port
Douglas and Mossman Record” Company
for being allowed the use of their plant to
print the enclosed.
H. TROTTER.
