

Mums
RECIPE
BOOK
NINTH EDITION—GRAND TOTAL 43


Guarantee
Euery package? of
tfrtums; Pure/ Food
Products is Guarante-
ed to be/ satisfactory
in euery
The/ consumer shatl
be the/ sole/ judge/
of its inert hr-- J
If any article/ bear-
ing Brand
does not satisfy
in any inay 7 rue 7
id ill refund full
purchase/ price! and
cost of postage!
V V V
V <
LothianManufacturirig
Company Limited
Sydney
Australia


RECIPE BOOK
(NINTH EDITION)
CONTAINING FULL DIRECTIONS
FOR THE PREPARATION OF
APPETISING DISHES FOR
ALL OCCASIONS
First Edition - 30,000 Copies
Second ~ - 50,000
Third .. - 60.000 ~
Fourth - 77.000
Fifth .. 78.000 ..
Sixth - 55.000
Seventh .. - 25,000
Eighth ~ - 25.000
Ninth „ - 30,000 ..
Grand Total - 430,000
Lothian Manufacturing Co. Ltd.
Sydney, Australia


INDEX
CAKES
Page
Affra Cake 5
Birthday Cake 5
Biscuit Sandwich 6
Bishop’s Bread 6
British Cake - 6
Butter Sandwich ..... 6
Brown Fruit Cake 7
Cherry Cake - 7
Card Gingerbread ..... 7
Cheap Cup Cake 7
Chocolate Cake 8
Chocolate Sandwich Cake ... 8
Cocoa Cake - 8
Cocoanut Sponge 9
Christmas Cake 9
Cocoanut Rock Cakes .... 9
Cream Cake - 9
Cornflour Cake 10
Cinnamon Sponge Sandwich - 10
Cream Cakes - 10
Currant Cake 11
Coffee Cake (1) 11
Coffee Cake (2) - - - - - - II
Cream Sandwich Cake . -- - 11
Custard Cake - - - - k - - II
Date and Nut Ring Cake - - - 12
Date and Walnut Loaf Cake - - 12
Delicious Mahogany Cake - - 12
Dark Christmas Cake - - - - 13
Delicate Cocoanut Cake ... 13
Dolly Varden Cake ..... 13
Devil's Food ....... 14
Fruit Cake - 14
Golden Sponge Cake - - - - 14
Good Sponge Cake ..... 15
Gold Cake ( 1) 15
Gold Cake (2) 15
Gingerbread Men 17
Money Cake 17
Hurry-up Cake 17
Jack’s Favourite Cake - - - - 18
Jelly Cake - 18
Leo’s Cake - 18
Lady Fingers - - - - - - - 19
Lady Diana Cake ..... 19
Marble Cake .......19
Milk Sponge • - - ..... 20
Mirrali Tea-Cake ..... 20
Page
Mums Custard Cake .... 20
Milk Loaf ....... 21
Mock Angel Food ..... 21
Nut Bread ..... 21
One Egg Chocolate Cake - 21
Orange Cake ..... -22
Orange Layer Cake .... 22
One Two Three Four Cake 23
Orange Cake .... - - 23
Plain Cake 23
Peach Blossom Cake 24
Plain Cake 24
Peter’s Cake 24
Passion Fruit Sandwich 24
Pineapple Cake 25
Pineapple Wheel Cake - 25
Prune Cake - 25
Pound Cake - 26
Plain Cakes - 26
Rainbow Cake - 26
Railway Cake 27
Raisin Loaf 27
Rainbow Cake (A) 27
Rainbow Cake (B) 27
Rox Cake - - 28
Ribbon Cake . 28
Sandwich Cake - 28
Seed Cake 29
Silver Cake - - 29
Sour Cream Chocolate Cake - 29
Spice Cake 29
Soft Icing - 30
Spiced Loaf - 30
Sponge Roll - 3C
Sponge Sandwich (1) - - - -3(
Sponge Sandwich (2) - - - • 30
Sponge Cake with Water (1) - > 55
Sponge Cake with Water (2) 3 r
Sponge Cake (3) 3 5
Sultana Cream Cake - - - - 35
Snow Cake 36
Sultana Cake 36
Syrup Cake 36
Swiss Roll - . . - - - . - 36
Upside Down Cake/ « - - - - 3 7
Virginia Sandwich ... - . 37
White Cake - 3 7
Walnut Cake -...---38
White Sandwich ------ 38
Winter Cake 3.8


PASTRY, SCONES, Etc.
Page
Apple Sandwich - - - - - 39
Apricot Roly Poly 39
Baking Powder Biscuits - - - 40
Butter Scotch Cookies - - - - 40
Canberra House Rolls - - - - 40
Cheese Biscuits ------ 41
Chocolate Roll ------ 41
Coffee Rolls -------41
Christmas Cookies 42
Cocoanut Drop Cookies - - - 42
Cream Scones ------ 42
Devil’s Food Cake ----- 42
Date Dainties ------ 43
Doughnuts -------43
Doughnut Drops ----- 43
French Pastry 44
Fritter Batter ------ 44
Fruit Devil’s Food ----- 44
Ginger Sandwich ----- 44
Gingerbread ------ 45
Gem Scones -...---45
Good Scones - 45
Page
Jelly Cookies 45
Kisses 46
Little Apple Cakes 46
Mother’s Tea Cake 46
Mums Fruit Pie 46
Mums Muffins 47
Nice Biscuits 47
Orange Marmalade Cookies - - 4 7
Pancakes 4 7
Pastel Cake - 47
Peanut Butter Bread - - - - 48
Peanut Drop Cakes 48
Plain Pastry or Pie Dough - - 48
Pumpkin Scones ------ 4 8
Prune Bars ------- 50
Prune, Date or Raisin Bread - - 50
Short or Flaky Pastry - - - - 50
Small Cakes -------51
Sponge Buns - -- -- -- 51
Strawberry Shortcake - - - - 51
Sour Milk or Soda Biscuits - - 52
Waffles 52
White Nut Bread 52
PUDDINGS
Page
Baking Powder Dumplings - - 53
Boiled Jam Pudding ... - 53
Chocolate Pudding 53
Cottage Pudding 54
Date Pudding - 54
Dark Date Pudding - - - - 54
Dutch Apple CaKe - - • - 54
F ruit Pie ------- - 5 5
Fruit Pudding 55
Hunter Pudding 55
Marguerite Pudding - - - - 55
Page
Mystery Pudding 55
Pear Pudding - - ■' • - - 56
Rict Pudding (without eggs) - 56
Roll Pudding -..---56
Roly Poly Pudding ----- 57
Steamed Raisin Puff - - - - 57
Steamed Fruit Pudding - - - 5 7
Strawberry Shortcake - - - - 57
Sponge Pudding 58
Wahroonga Pie 58
Wiseman’s Pudding - - • - 58
COLD PUDDINGS, JELLIES, Etc.
Page
Apricot Whip ..-••• 59
Cherry Monticello 59
Fruit Whip 60
Ginger Layer Jelly -
Glorified Rice 60
Jellied Apple Snow ; °
Jellied Cream Coffee ... - 61
Jelly with Fruits - - - “ * 61
Page
Jellied Custard - - ... 62
Jellied Pineapples .... - 62
Mums Trifle - - 62
Pineapple Bavarian Cream - - 63
Mint Sauce Jelly ..... 63
Orange Flip -63
Pineapple Orange Charlotte * * 64
Strawberry Pineapple Whip - - 64


Gror alljetfive occasions
serve
with the
PURE FRUIT
ALL the luscious fruits of the
Orchards give up their sweet juices
for “ MUMS ” Fruit Jelly Crystals.
Every packet is guaranteed to be flavoured
with Pure Fruit Juices only, no artificial
flavours of any kind being used. “ MUMS "
Fruit Jellies are so easy to prepare. Just add
hot water, allow to cool, and this delightful
dessert is ready to serve.
mm%wm
M</
cMalie surt~ c NQimS) the word!


CAKES
AFFRA CAKE
Ingredients: Method:
Eggs Beat eggs and sugar for i hour; sift flour
14 lb. Sugar and Baking Powder in, add 3 or 4 table-
Sl MUMS Ve ßaki a ng° on spoons boiling water. Bake in sandwich
Powder tins in a quick oven.
3 or 4 Tablespoons boiling
water
Lemon Cheese Filling
Ingredients: Method:
14 lb. Butter Beat eggs thoroughly; put butter and
Vt lb. Sugar . 00 i t t
3 Eggs sugar in an enamel pan, and place over a
1 Ta cus S tard n Powder S very gentle heat till the consistency of
Litue water honey; then add lemon juice, carefully stir,
then add the eggs, well beaten, very care-
fully, and see that it doesn’t boil. Add the
dissolved custard powder and water, and
cook just long enough for the mixture to
thicken.
BIRTHDAY CAKE
Ingredients: Method:
! !b si°ar Cream butter and sugar, add eggs well-
-1 ib'. Bulter beaten, then dry ingredients which have
i ib SS Suitanas previously been mixed and allowed to
], j£- Currants stand some hours. Then add brandy.
1 Egg-cup brandy Bake for about 2 hours. Ice and decorate.
Pkt. mixed spice
1 Teaspoon MUMS Baking
Powder
1 Pinch salt


BUTTER SANDWICH
Ingredients:
4 Eggs
Their weight in sugar, butter
and flour
1 Teaspoon MUMS Baking
Powder
Methoa:
Cream butter and sugar,
add eggs, well beaten,
then the flour and Bak-
ing Powder. Bake 20
minutes in buttered tins.
BISHOP’S BREAD
Ingredients: Method:
i cup sugar Beat eggs well with sugar. Sift one cup of
i . 4 Cups flour flour with Baking Powder and a little salt,
1 Cup seeded raisins beat unt fl fight an d fl ne grained, stir in
1 Cup almonds, cut .. . ..
2 Teaspeons mums lightly raisins and nuts cut in halves,
Baking Powder having first sprinkled them with the rest
of the flour. Bake in thin layers in two
shallow square pans, and cut in oblong
pieces before quite cold. Sprinkle with
sugar and walnuts chopped fine.
BRITISH CAKE
Ingredients: Method:
u ib’ butter Cream together sugar and butter. Add
2 Eggs eggs and flour sifted with Baking Pcw-
i ib. flour der. p ut half the mixture, very stiff, in a
1 leaspoons MUMS
Baking Powder flat dish, press down and spread over with
jam. Add the other half, sprinkle with
nuts, and bake.


BROWN FRUIT CAKE
v J
Ingredients: Method:
i/o ib. Butter Beat butter and sugar to a cream, add
1 g™” 8 " beaten eggs. Then add honey, brandy,
! I‘ b &.Ta" SrS caramel, fruit and almonds. Add milk,
’/a ib! Sultanas and lastly sifted flour, Baking Powder
2 TC Bak?ng S Ptnvdcr' and spice. Smooth top over with a little
h 8? mixed spice cold milk, after putting mixture into cake
1 Teaspoon brandy tins lined with grease paper. r?ake in
H Pb UP Lemon peel moderate oven for about 6 hours.
% oz. Shelled almonds
2 Teaspoons caramel
CHERRY CAKE
Ingredients: Method:
5 oz. Butter Beat butter and sugar to a cream. Add
?o oz SgS Fiour well-beaten eggs, then cherries, and finely-
f TeaspoonTaniiia chopped walnuts, then milk, essence, and
g oz. Sugar dry ingredients.
U 2 Cup milk . ; &
1 Teaspoon MUMS Baking
Powder
3 oz. Crystallised cherries
1 Pinch salt
CARD GINGERBREAD
Ingredients: Method:
% Cup butter Cream the butter, add sugar; then eggs,
i Egg sugar well beaten. Mix dry ingredients and com-
i_ Teaspoon salt bine the two mixtures with the milk.
3 B Tea P poonT r MUMS Spread out thin on buttered pan. Bake 1 5
1 Teaspoon gPnger' minutes in moderate oven. Sprinkle with
tVi Cups milk sugar, cut in squares before removing from
pan.
CHEAP CUP CAKE
Ingredients: Method:
2 Tablespoons butter Cream the butter, add the sugar gradually,
1 Cup sugar t hen and wel J Add water
% water alternately with the flour and Baking Pow-
-3 Teaspoon's' mums der, sifted 3 times. Beat all together
Vj Teaspoon vanilla or thoroughly and bake in a moderate oven.
Grated rind of y 2 lemon used a J oa f or as a l a y er
cake with any preferred filling.


CHOCOLATE CAKE
ingredients: Method:
i A Cup I sugar Put rst three ingredients in double boiler,
F cup miik cook until melted. Cool, add egg yolk
4 oz. (squares) chocolate 1 -tt « PP. 7
1 Egg-yoik and vanilla, then add to part 2 as follows:
1 Teaspoon vanilla Cream butter and sugar, add eggs, one at
a time, flour sifted with Baking Powder
1 Cup sugar and milk alternately. Mix well, add wal-
\ Cup le mfik gs nuts desired, and bake in two layers in
f cups flour fnoderate oven. Frost and fill with choco-
Baking Powder late butter icing.
CHOCOLATE SANDWICH CAKE
Ingredients: Method:
1* Cup sugar" Cream butter with sugar; add well-beaten
\ g« milk egg and milk, mix well. Sift flour, salt,
174 Cups flour and Baking Powder together, and add.
2 T Bak“g S pSr S Mix in a teaspoon of vanilla, and bake
1 rSSoo’fvanma in 3 B« ased sandwich tins in a moderate
oven. Put together with chocolate filling
h and icing.
Chocolate Filling
Ingredients: Method:
3 Bomng ic sfter Usar enough boiling water to icing sugar
1 Teaspoon vanilla to make a smooth paste; add vanilla, un-
-2 oz. unsweetened chocolate . ■ , , , a . ,
14 Teaspoon grated orange sweetened chocolate, and grated orange
peel peel.
COCOA CAKE
Ingredients: Method:
2 Tablespoons butter Cream butter and sugar with the cocoa, add
i tablespoons cocoa the egg and add flour mixed with Baking
1 Cup sour milk ** Powder, alternately, with the milk mixed
i/ 2 Teaspoon mums Baking w ith the soda. Bake in 2 layers in a
2 Cups W flour ' hii moderate oven, and fill with chocolate
butter filling. Or use sweet milk and three
' teaspoons MUMS Baking Powder in place
of sour milk and soda and double the
amount of cocoa.


COCOANUT SPONGE
Ingredients:
4 Eggs
1 Cup sugar
X Cup flour
1 Teaspoon MUMS Baking
Powder
V\ Cup desiccated cocoanut
1 Dessertspoon butter dis-
solved in
2 Tablespoons hot water
Method:
Beat sugar and yolks of
eggs thoroughly. Then
add flour, cocoanut, and
Baking Powder, then
the butter dissolved in
hot water. Lastly, the
whites of eggs beaten
thoroughly. Pour into greased dish, and
bake 20 minutes.
Ingredients: CHRISTMAS CAKE
1 Teaspoon MUMS Baking Method:
i ib. P flour r Cream together the butter and sugar, then
1 ib s b u ut ar r the y°^ s of eggs, and beat again. Then
12 Eggs the flour with cinnamon, mace, allspice.
x Teaspoon* aScT” and ground cloves. Now add lemon juice,
% Teaspoon mace and grape juice (or wine). Next fold in
2~ lbs. sultanas the stiffly-beaten whites. Then the floured
i' ib ab ; e urrants s juice fruit, turn into well-greased and papered
1 ib. lemon peel dishes, and allow i hour for each pound
V 2 lb. chopped almonds r i d 1 • , •
y 2 ib. shredded figs of cake. Bake in a moderate oven. This
% C»P "rape juice or wine y: [\l ma^g a 9lb. cake.
Ground cloves
COCOANUT ROCK CAKES
4 oz.' butter Put t]de dour i nto a basin and add the
4 oz. sugar Baking Powder. Then rub the butter
2 coco.„„t thorough , y ; nto the flour and m ; x the
i large teaspoon mums sugar and cocoanut with it, whisk two
small eggs or one large egg, and a little
milk, and moisten the dry ingredients. Beat
the mixture well for five minutes, then
take up a small portion at a time with two
forks, and place it in rough little heaps on
a buttered baking tin, and bake at once in
a quick oven for about IS minutes.


CINNAMON SPONGE SANDWICH
Ingredients:
4 Eggs
1 Cup sugar
1 . Cup flour
1 Teaspoon MUMS Baking
Powder
G Tablespoons of boiling
milk
2 07.. butter
2 Teaspoons rinnamon
2 Teaspoons cocoa
Method:
Beat eggs and sugar -j hour, sift in flour and Baking
Powder, cinnamon and cocoa, and lastly add boiling milk, in
which butter has been melted. See that it is boiling fast and
frothy. Mix very lightly, pour into sandwich tins and bake
eight minutes. Fill and ice.
Filling
Ingredients: Method:
1 Cup brown sugar Boil 7 minutes. Take up and stir in van-
-2 Teaspoons milk 1
i Tablespoon butter ilia to taste; beat till proper consistency.
CREAM CAKES
Ingredients: Method:
5 e U "s butter Beat su g ar an d butter well, add 3 whites
Ms Cup milk and 5 yolks of eggs beaten well together.
2 if cups flour r Then milk, flour, and Baking Powder.
1 Dessertspoon mums Bake in well-heated oven (in Patty Tins)
for i hour. When cold cut lid off top.
Take a teaspoon and cut out a piece to
leave hollow for cream filling. When filled
replace lid and sprinkle with icing sugar.
Filling
Ingredients: Method:
1 Cup icing sugar Beat i c { n g sugar, butter and vanilla to a
2 Tablespoons butter ° , . , , . .
i Tablespoon vanilla cream, then add stiffly whipped whites cf
Whites of 2 eggs C gg S


CURRANT CAKE
Ingredients: Method:
4 Eggs ßutter Beat su § ar butter to a cream, beat in
1 cup sugar eggs one at a time, sift in flour and Baking
1 Smaii c piec n e ts lemon peel Powder with spice in it, add fruit. Bake in
i Teaspoon spice moderate oven.
8 02. Flour
1 Teaspoon MUMS Baking
Powder
COFFEE CAKE (1)
1 £"P s b s u U g" Cream butter and sugar; add well beaten
4 Yolks yolks and chocolate, add coffee alternately
X 1 Cup c s h ra[e P d ed chocLiatt with half of flour sifted with Baking
2 Cups flour Powder and spices. Fold in well beaten
2 I easpoons mixed spices . . r * . . . , - a
3 Teaspoons mums whites of eggs, add remainder of flour with
1 Cup a slro g ng P coid er coffee nuts and mix lightly. Pour into greased
4 whites of eggs layer cake tins, and bake in moderate oven
45 to 50 minutes. Spread layers and cover
top with Coffee Icing.
COFFEE CAKE (2)
6 o2 SSS ßutier Beat butter and sugar to cream, add eggs
1 Cup sugar and flavouring of coffee. Stir in flour,
IVcuVK C ° f 6 Baking Powder and ground almonds. Bake
2 “oz. sweet ground almonds f or r hour moderate oven.
Vanilla and essence of ’
almond
1 Teaspoon MUMS Baking
Powder
CREAM SANDWICH CAKE
i Cup S sugar Beat eggs and sugar 20 minutes, add flour
1 Cup flour and Baking Powder, and lastly hot water
1 MUMS Baking and butter. Bake $ hour in fairly quick
l Dessertspoon butter oven. Use whipped cream for filling.
% Cup boiling water r °
Whipped cream
CUSTARD CAKE
i cu P flour 1 heat butter and sugar to cream, add eggs,
% ib UP Butter beat well. Sift flour and baking powder.
1 Te po PO d°e n r MUMS Bak!ng Bake in two sandwich tins.
i pfnch salt When cooked make a thick custard with
Essence of vanilla MUMS Custard Powder, and put between
layers.


DATE AND NUT RING CAKE
Ingredients: Method:
i lb Nut^ d dates Weigh dates after stoning. Use any kind of
1 cup flour nuts, walnuts preferred. Leave dates and
1 cu| s sugar nuts whole, sift over them the flour, salt
2 Te ßak?ng S Powdef and Baking Powder. Mix thoroughly.
% Teaspoon salt Add sugar and mix again. Add well-beaten
egg-yolks, then fold in stiffly beaten
whites. Turn into two large cake rings,
well oiled, and bake for one hour in a
moderate oven.
DATE AND WALNUT LOAF CAKE
Ingredients: Method:
i lb Walnuts dates Stone dates, then weigh. Leave dates and
i Cup flour nuts whole, place in mixing bowl, sift
l 2 Teasp°ons S MUMS over them, each separately, the flour, salt
i cupf granuk ted d sugar and Baking Powder, sifted three times.
4 Eggs Mix carefully, add sugar and mix again.
i Teaspoon vam la Beat y o jk s unt {i light and thick, add
vanilla and stir evenly through the cake
mixture. Add the stiffly beaten whites.
Fold over and over until all is well
blended. Bake in a shallow pan, lined
with buttered paper in a moderately slow
oven 1 hour.
DELICIOUS MAHOGANY CAKE
Ingredients: Method:
1 Te po\\°d« MUMS Bak!ng Cook chocolate and milk in a double
2 Cups flour boiler until smooth, then cool. Cream
\ c’up mflk olate butter and sugar. Then add egg-yolks.
Mix well and add half a cup of sour milk
3 Well-beaten egg-yolks alternately with flour with which Baking
i" Teaspoon lemon extract Powder has been sifted. Add chocolate
3 Egg-whites V stlffiy beaten mixture and lemon extract and vanilla.
Beat well, then fold in the stiffly beaten
whites of eggs. Bake in layers for 20
minutes. This can be put together with
seafoam, chocolate or white icing.


DARK CHRISTMAS CAKE
Ingredients: Method:
114 S ib! all E utter br °" n s " Ear ® eat su gar an d butter to a cream. Add
J d ®*- Eggs eggs one at a time. When well beaten add
1 lb. Raisins flour into which Baking Powder has been
1 lb! currants mixed. Add spice, then fruit gradually.
Vo ib. Mixed peel Mix well. Bake in two well-greased dishes,
1 I easpoon mixed spice , •
2 Teaspoons MUMS and ice.
Baking Powder
DELICATE COCOANUT CAKE
Ingredients: Method:
\i cup butter Cream together the sugar and butter and
k Teaspoon^ almond add favouring. Sift together the dry
flavouring ingredients and add them alternately with
flavouring the milk to the first mixture. Fold in the
g Tea P snoo!i k salt egg-whites beaten stiff; add the cocoanut.
f Cups flour Stir well. Place in a well-oiled pan,
Baking Powder sprinkle with shredded cocoanut and a
14 Cup cocoanut f ew chopped almonds, if convenient, and
bake for 45 minutes in a moderate oven.
DOLLY VARDEN CAKE
Ingredients: Method:
1 Cream butter. Add sugar and cream to-
- 3s Egg!vvh°Ues almond extract aether until light and soft. Sift dry in-
-3 Te ß'lk < ing S Powder gredients and add alternately with milk.
*4 Cup butter Add extract, beat mixture thoroughly and
8 Cups flour last fold in stiffly beaten egg-whites. Turn
into well-greased Angel Cake pan and
bake in moderate oven for one hour.
Remove from oven. Let stand 10 minutes,
then turn upside down on cake board—
the cake will drop out whole. When cool
ice.
Icing
Add two tablespoons cream to three egg-
yolks. Stir in enough icing sugar to make
it thick enough to spread easily. Flavour
with almond and a pinch of salt. Cover
entire outside of cake.


DEVIL'S FOOD
Ingredients: Method:
part i. , Cook all together, stirring until smooth.
3 Tablespoons sugar Set aside tO COOI.
\ Cu P muk Cream butter and sugar, adding a little
3 up “* of the milk, the beaten yolks; remainder
Gutter of milk and flour sifted with Baking
1 Cup granulated sugar Powder; then the cooked chocolate mix-
•t ture and teaspoon vanilla. Lastly fold
2 Te ßa P k r g s Powder in whites of eggs, beaten very stiff. Bake
2 Eggs separated i a y ers a nd put layers together with
plain boiled frosting.
FRUIT CAKE
Ingredients: Method:
i ib. Sugar (brown) Beat sugar and butter to a cream, add eggs
10 E g gs ßutter one by one, and when well beaten add
2 mums flour into which Baking Powder has been
Baking Powder mixed, then brandy, spice, nutmeg and
i ginger. Then add gradually raisins, sul-
i lll'*™ ginger nutmeS tanas, currants, candied peel, crushed
i ib. Sultanas almonds. Line a cake tin with brown
i/. lb. currants paper, then again with greaseproof paper.
% lb. clndied peel Pour in the mixture, which must be thor-
oughly mixed to ensure equal distribution
of the fruit throughout the cake. Decorate
with blanched almonds, and bake 5 hours,
or divide in two, and bake three hours
in moderate oven.
GOLDEN SPONGE CAKE
Ingredients: Method: _
fi Egg-ydks Sift flour and sugar several times. Add
l 4 RpTug n ar Salt salt to egg yolks. Beat until very light
iLcTps b flour 8 watcr Gradually add sugar to yolks, beating all
i Teaspoon lemon extract rhe time. Add flavouring. Stir in hot
Powder water. Sift in flour and Baking Powder
mixed. Stir well, and at once turn into
2 greased layer cake pans. Bake slowly
for | hour.


GOOD SPONGE CAKE
Ingredients: Method:
6 Eggs Beat eggs unseparated briskly for five
2 4 cup S s P °suga S r alt minutes, add the sugar slowly, beating the
1 Tea P poon U MUMS Baking mixture until thick. Add flour, salt and
Powder Baking Powder, sifted together, and mix
i' 5 thoroughly. Scald the milk and add it
very slowly to the mixture. Add vanilla
- . last of all. Turn into two large ring-
pans, unoiled, and bake in slow oven.
The batter is quite thin as it is poured
into the cake pans, and so the cake must
be baked very slowly and for a longer
' time than is customary for this size cake.
It has besides excellent flavour-keeping
qualities, so that it may be served two or
three days subsequent to baking—if it
lasts that long.
GOLD CAKE (1)
Method:
V/j Cups sugar Mix the sugar and butter to a cream. Add
y. cup milk the yolks of the eggs, then the milk, sift
3 Cups 5 flour egss in the flour in which the Baking Powder
3 Teaspoons MUMS has been well mixed, and beat well. Bake
Essence of vanilla ill cl Wcll-llCdtcd OVCtI 1 hoilf tCII UlinUtCS*
GOLD CAKE (2)
Ingredients: Method:
1 j Cup shortening Cream butter well, add sugar, continue
e beating, add yolks beaten until light, add
3 Te !saking S Powder flavouring, mix thoroughly, then add milk
4 Yolks o£ eggs alternately with the flour and Baking
\ Powder mixed. Beat, place in greased
and floured pan, bake oven
35 to 45 minutes. Bake in sheet or layers.


women
wrote thi /
advertisement/
Head what good cooks sag about
Cftfums/ Cream of Tartar Baking Powder.
At an afternoon party a few weeks ago a lady present advised us all to use
MUMS Baking Powder for sponge sandwiches, saying ‘ You cannot possibly
nave a failure.’ Since then I have used MUMS with excellent results.”
Mrs. . LISMORE
** l am very pleased with your Baking Powder. 1 think it is the best I have
ever used and I always recommend MUMS to my friends.”
Mrs. , BULLI
" I have two daughters who are taking up housekeeping and would be pleased
if you would send me two copies of your splendid cookery book. We have
used your Baking Powder for years with very great success.”
“ Having made a cake with MUMS Baking
Powder I found it much nicer and lighter.
Your Baking Powder is easily the best I
have used.”
Mrs —. MANGROVE MT.
"I have recommended your Baking Powder
to dozens of friends and they are all pleased
with MUMS.”
Mrs. . HOMEBUSH
" We never use any other Baking Powder
but MUMS. We think it far superior
to any other on the market.”
Mrs. . WINGHAM
“ I must also state that your Baking Powder
is the best I have used and I have recom-
mended it to a great many people who all
use MUMS now.”
Mrs. . RURRI KURRI
Mrs.—PYMBLB
mt
ce* 1
OtA?
,i,CHANGE TO JtflUlHS] TO-DAY!


GINGERBREAD MEN
Ingredients: Method:
2% Cups flour Sift flour, Baking Powder, salt and ginger
Baling Powder together. Mix molasses, sugar, egg and
\ Teaspoon ginger melted butter together. Add the dry in-
-1 cup brownlugar gradients to make soft dough. Shape in
% clp butter form ° f Httle men> animal . B ° r P lain
cookies; bake on greased pan in moderate
oven 10 to 12 minutes.
The men can be made by forcing the
dough through a pastry bag or cornucopia
made with plain letter paper. Use tops
of cloves, currants or rice for making faces
and buttons. This recipe makes 18 small
men (about 4 inches high). Coloured
coats can be made with icing.
HONEY CAKE
Ingredients: Method:
% Cup sugar Beat butter and sugar together, add beaten
y 2 Cup butter eggs and honey, then flour and Baking
1 Teaspoon MUMS Baking Powder. Bake 35 to 40 minutes in a
2 E S s wder moderate oven, being very careful not to
burn.
HURRY-UP CAKE
Ingredients: Method:
% Cup sugar Sift dry ingredients. Drop egg into short-
Teaspoon^sait our ening, add milk and flavouring. Combine
2 Te ßaiing S . the two mixtures. Stir very well, pour
i 4 Eg! betten shortemns into greased and floured layer cake tins,
i 4 Teaspoon 1 flavouring bake in moderate oven about 20 minutes.
Or bake in shallow tin, frost, mark into
squares and place half a walnut on each
square.


JACK’S FAVOURITE CAKE
Ingredients: Method:
1 cup sugar Beat butter and sugar to light cream about
2 cu S s flour 10 minutes. Add eggs one by one, beating
1 Large teaspoon MUMS well. Sift flour, Baking Powder and a
1 Ta B bie k spo g on P Zfk r little salt into mixture. < Add fruit, peel
i Cup sultanas, raisins or and essence, and lastly milk. Bake 1 hour
i Piece r of candied lemon or little more, in one tin,
peel
*4 Teaspoon essence of •
lemon
JELLY CAKE
Ingredients: Method:
1 cup k sug°r 9 butter Beat tbe butter a nd sugar to a cream, add
3 Tablespoons milk the eggs, then the milk, then add vanilla,
2 Essence vaniiia flour and Baking Powder. Bake in a
! Te U a P spoo f n d MUMS Baking me3t disb ; and when C ° ld in Squares,
Powder rounds, diamonds, etc. Make a MUMS
jelly crystals Bruit Jelly, following instructions on jelly
packet. When almost set dip top of each
little cake into the jelly and sprinkle with
cocoanut.
LEO’S CAKE
Ingredients: Method:
% /a i C b up U Beat sugar and butter to a cream, add eggs
Z Cups flou? S ° ne ° ne ’ 3nd beat eacb Wed Sift
iy 2 Teaspoons mums in flour, Baking Powder and salt, and add
Pbi a ch in s B aiF° wder milk. Bake about i hour in a greased
% cup milk meat dish. Ice with boiled icing.
Essence of vanilla °
Icing
Ingredients: Method:
? /a cu ps mii| ar Boil 7 minutes, take off fire, beat till thick
C E Y® S nm°a n essence of and white, and put on cake quickly before
it hardens. Cover at once with chopped
almonds, and dust over with ground
cinnamon.


LADY FINGERS
Ingredients: 'Method:
3 Eggs Beat white of egg until stiff and dry; add
1 Speck salt sugar gradually and continue beating; add
\ TefspoZ Vanilla yolk of egg beaten until thick; then
3 Tablespoons hot water flavouring and hot water. Fold in flour
Powder which has been sifted with the salt and
the Baking Powder. Put into lady finger
tins, sprinkle with powdered sugar and
bake 8 minutes in moderate oven, remove
from tins while hot. Brush over the flat
surface of 1 cake with white of egg and
press the underside of a second cake upon
the first.
LADY DIANA CAKE
Ingredients: Method:
% cup butter Cream butter, add sugar and orange rind.
Grated rind of % Add beaten egg yolk, Sift together flour,
2 Eggs" 86 Baking Powder and salt, and add alter-
-24/2TeTspoo°nUrsait4 /2 TeTspoo°n Ur sait nately with the milk; lastly fold in one
iy 2 Teaspoons mums beaten egg white. Divide batter into two
i Cup milk ° wder parts. To one part add the chocolate.
VA o chocoi S aTe ee me n ited Put by tablespoonfuls alternating dark
and light batter into three greased layer
cake pans. Bake in moderate oven 20
minutes.
MARBLE CAKE
Ingredients: Method:
% Cup butter Cream butter, add sugar and stir well, add
4 Eggs eggs one at a time, beating all the time,
3 then add the flour mixed with the Baking
4 Teaspoons mums Powder, and the milk alternately and stir
y 2 Teaspoon each cloves until smooth. Place one-third or the
14 ib an ch<xoFati: a grated dough in another bowl, add to this the
1 Teaspoon cinnamon grated chocolate and the spices and flavour-
ing; mix well. Into a well-buttered deep
cake pan place alternate layers of white
and dark dough. Bake 45 minutes in
moderate oven.


MILK SPONGE
Ingredients: Method:
s Eggs Beat eggs 10 minutes, add sugar, beat
% cup flour susar another 10 minutes. Add . flour and
I 4 Tea S p a o r o r n W MUMS Baking arrowroot sifted together with Baking
Powder Powder, then essence, lastly butter melted
4 Tablespoons boiled milk in boiled milk. Bake about 10 minutes
r ” vanllla in sandwich tins.
Filling and Icing
Ingredients: Method:
y 3 Cup king sugar Mix icing sugar with warmed lemon juice
2 Tabfespoons^buttrr 1011 in which the butter has been melted. Beat
Desiccated cocoanut we H ( anc j p U t between and on top of cake.
Sprinkle with cocoanut.
MIRRALI TEA-CAKE
Ingredients: Method:
i Tablespoon butter Beat butter and sugar to a cream. Add
i 2 Egg susar egg, and beat well. Sift in flour and
i Teaspoo” mums Baking Baking Powder. Add a little milk till
Mflk wder the consistency of a sandwich. Bake in a
moderate oven. Split open and butter
well while hot.
MUMS CUSTARD CAKE
Ingredients: Method:
i l/a cup S sugar Beat butter and sugar to cream, add eggs
1 Dessertspoon mums one at a time, beat thoroughly till light
(TMs S^ d es P one d egg, and and fluffy, add milk, then flour to which
much les3 has been added Baking Powder and Cus-
v/j TwwgxmSpMUMS tard Powder, beat again and put in sand-
-2 wich tins. Bake in a moderate oven about
i cS? milk 15 minutes.
Filling
i l/a & s bitter Thicken l-§ cups milk, a lump butter,
1 Pindi salt r pinch salt, with 2 tablespoonfuls Mums
2 T cST r powder AlS Custard Powder, add 2 tablespoonfuls
2 Tablespoons sugar sugar. Allow to cool and put between
cakes, sprinkle top of cake with icing
sugar.


MILK LOAF
Ingredients: Method:
3 cups flour Sift flour, Baking Powder and salt into a
Baking Powder basin; rub in butter. Form into stilt
Little sa'it k dough with milk. Knead into long-
Littie butter shaped loaf. Bake in fairly hot., oven
about an hour.
MOCK ANGEL FOOD
Ingredients: Method:
% sugar Sift flour once, measure, then sift flour,
2 /2 Tefspoons r mums sugar, salt and Baking Powder together
cS k iofim?d d totter 4 times. Place in mixing bowl. Break
'& cSp E c“d wl'to or milk e Sf s in measuring cup, fill to i full with
i Teaspoon vaniiia softened (not melted) butter; nil to top
white of 2 eggs Q f cup with cold water. Add vanilla.
Pour this into the flour mixture and beat
hard until very smooth—turn into small
ungreased angel cake pan; place in slow
oven and bake until firm. Invert pan,
when cool cut out. Double recipe for
larger cake.
NUT BREAD
Ingredients: Method:
}>:t Teaspoons’ - mums Rub butter into flour and Baking Powder.
Baking Powder Add other ingredients and enough milk
i doz. cut-up dates to make a thick batter. Pour into greased
1 Tea P spo r o°n ke cinlamon S nut loaf tins, not more than half full.
Little 1 butter milk Bake in moderate oven about f hour.
ONE EGG CHOCOLATE CAKE
Ingredients: Method:
1 Cup^sugar 13 butter Cream butter and sugar, add egg yolk and
2 Cups flour melted chocolate. Mix and sift together
I Tablespoons melted the flour, spices and Baking Powder and
"i Cu C p°sweet milk add R alternately with the milk. Fold in
3 Teaspoons mums beaten egg-white and turn into an oiled
i Teaspoon cinnfmon ring pan. Bake in a moderate oven for
I! Teaspoon cio^ 8 one bou r. While the cake is still warm
spread it with thin white icing.


ORANGE CAKE
Ingredients: Method:
8 oz gB Fiour Cream butter and half sugar, and add the
8 o z. Sugar other half of sugar ill eggs. Beat eggs and
7 Juic? u and rind of 2 sugar till quite spongy (about i hour).
_ ?R nges then add to butter. Mix very lightly, add
i Teaspoon mums Baking juice and rinds. but in flour with baking
Powder, and add milk; mix well and bake
in moderate oven 1 hour. Ice with icing
sugar mixed with juice of orange and
rind.
ORANGE LAYER CAKE
Ingredients: Method:
l fabiespoons of orange Beat first four ingredients together until
juice thick. Add sugar slowly, beating with
Gr o a range nnd ° f 1 egg beater; fold in egg whites beaten stiff;
y 2 Tablespoon lemon f o ld in lightly, flour, Baking Powder and
% Cup sugar salt, which have been sifted together four
1 cup'flour 8 times. Put into greased round pan; bake
2 Te ßaldng S Powder S 30 minutes in a moderate oven. Split;
% Teaspoon salt put cream filling between layers; cover
with orange frosting.
Filling
Ingredients: Method:
2 Tablespoons butter Melt butter; add cornflour, orange rind,
Grated rind of i juice and sugar. Bring to boiling point,
i Cup a °ra e n ge juice stirring continually. Cook 15 minutes
\ Cup sugar over boiling water. Add salt and lemon
4 Tab S ies°poon a lemon juice. Cool and fold in whipped cream.
juice
y 3 Cup cream (whipped)
Orange Layer Cake (Frosting)
Ingredients: Method:
l , Cup sugar goil SU gar and water without stirring
1 Egg-white until syrup threads. Pour slowly into egg
1 offng°e lk rind white beaten stiff. Beat constantly with
% Tablespoon of orange e nrg beater until mixture holds its shape,
oran £e flavouring fold in gradually egg yolk, orange rind
and juice, and spread on cake.


ONE TWO THREE FOUR CAKE
Ingredients: Method:
2 clips sugar Beat Gutter and sugar to a cream, then
4 Eggs add well-beaten eggs, then a little flour,
1 S S n£T next milk, and rest of flour, and pinch of
2 H Ta e k lnrr n o°wX MUMS salt. Then essence, and lastly MUMS
Essence 411 Baking Powder. Bake 1 hour in moderate
oven.
ORANGE CAKE
Ingredients: Method:
iy 2 cup*s y sugar Beat y° lk s light, add sugar, beat again,
juice of i orange Then add water, orange juice and part of
Grated rind of 1 orange . . , . . n .. . - . ..
2 cups flour the rind and the flour, sifted 3 times, with
2 T< Baking S the Baking Powder. Lastly fold in the
whites of 3 eggs beaten whites of three eggs. Bake in 3
layers in a moderate oven. Spread orange
filling between layers and cover with
orange butter filling, made as follows:
ll cups icing sugar, 2 tablespoons orange
juice, 1 teaspoon egg yolk, 1 teaspoon
lemon juice, grated rind of orange. Add
yolk to sugar, mix well, add orange juice
and rind, and enough more sugar to
spread.
PLAIN CAKE
Ingredients: Method:
% cup butter Mix anc j gift flour, Baking Powder and
2 Eggs, separated spices 3 times. Cream butter and sugar,
Teaspoons 1 mums add the beaten yolks, then the flour mix-
Baking powder ture anc } m ilk alternately, the flavouring
% Teaspoon flavouring and beaten whites last. beat well and
Vi cup milk bake 20 or 30 minutes. Two ounces of
melted chocolate may be used, added after
the yolks, or two tablespoons of cocoa
mixed with the flour. Raisins quartered
and seeded, and sprinkled with flour, may
be added just before egg whites.


PEACH BLOSSOM CAKE
Ingredients: Method:
% cup mnk er Beat t^ie butter and sugar to a cream, add
1 Teaspoon mums Baking the well-beaten whites of eggs, then milk
% Cup eornflour and flour, etc. Divide the mixture into two
1 cup sifted flour portions. Colour half with cochineal, and
Whites of 4 eggs place in tins like Marble Cake, ice with
Cochineal white icing, and sprinkle cocoanut or
coarse sugar, coloured pink on top.
PLAIN CAKE
Ingredients: Method:
i% cups sugar flour heat sugar and butter to a cream, adding
y 2 ib. butter about a tablespoon boiling water if the
1 Small cup milk butter is very hard. Beat in the eggs one
1 La Baking as powdei^ UMS at a then put in some of the flour,
i Cup sultanas then the milk and fruit, then the rest of
, the flour. Mix thoroughly, but stop as
soon as all the flour is mixed in. Bake
in a baking dish about half an hour.
PETER’S CAKE
Ingredients: Method:
i cup butter Cream sugar and butter; beat in eggs one
4 Eggs at a time. Sift in flour and Baking
1 TeTspoon MUMS Baking Powder, add fruit, and lastly pour in boil-
% Cup°'currants ing w . ater and mix quickly. Bake in patty
% cup sultanas pans in a quick oven.
% Cup candied peel
2 Tablespoons of boiling
water
PASSION FRUIT SANDWICH
Ingredients: Method:
% '!£• letter B ea t butter and sugar for 20 minutes.
1 Cup flour Then beat in eggs, and beat well -J hour,
1 T Baking Powder then add flour and Baking Powder. Add
3 Eggs milk. Bake * hour in sandwich tin.
/2 ma cup nn When cold, ice and fill with passion fruit
and icing sugar.


PINEAPPLE CAKE
Ingredients: Method:
V* to- Butter Beat sugar and butter to a cream, add eggs,
3 Eggs u one at a time, beating in well. Sift in
\ cup F milk flour and Baking Powder. Add milk, and
1 Teaspoon mums Baking- lastly pineapple. Bake in a moderate oven
Powder r i , i
6 oz. Pineapple cho,pped ,tOt abOUt 1 DOUT.
small
PINEAPPLE WHEEL CAKE
Ingredients: Method:
1 La appie t!n sHced pine " Melt butter, place in bottom of iron sauce-
% cup butter pan, cover with brown sugar, spreading it
4 Eggs br ° wn susar evenly. Place 1 slice of the cored pine-
-1 Cup flou a / apple in centre on top of sugar; cut rest
1 Teaspoon mums Baking of the slices in half crosswise, arrange
l Cup° whipped cream these in a circle around the centre slice like
the spokes of a wheel, rounded edges facing
one way. If desired, fill space with halves
' of walnuts and candied cherries.
Make sponge cake batter, using 4 eggs, 1
cup sugar, 1 cup flour and 1 teaspoon
Baking Powder, pour over the pineapple
wheel, place in moderate oven and bake
until firm. Turn out on cake plate upside
down and serve cold with whipped cream.
PRUNE CAKE
Ingredients: Method:
i 2 cup sugar Cream together butter and sugar, add
i% cups flour beaten egg-yolks and mix well. Mix and
1 Cu? cooked prunes sift together the flour, Baking Powder,
1 1 Powder"* soda, salt and spices and add to the egg-
-4 Tablespoons sour milk mixture alternately with the buttermilk
1 . Teaspoon chfnamon and cooked prunes. Turn into well-oiled
Y? teaspoon nutmeg cake r j n g S 0 f medium size and bake slowly
J/2 easpoon allspice ® p
% Teaspoon salt for one hour, oerve with a sort sauce
made by adding beaten egg white to a
plain hard sauce.


Ingredients: POUND CAKE
2 lbs. flour xr . ,
2 lbs. sugar Method:
2 lbs' currants Beat well the butter and sugar, then add
li/oibs’ butter ' eggs one at a time, then flour, brandy,
2 Nutmegs d ped nutmeg and fruit; lastly add Baking
y a ib. almonds Powder. Bake in a slow oven 5 hours.
18 Eggs
2 Teaspoons MUMS
Baking Powder
1 Gill brandy
Ingredients: PLAIN CAKES
The weight of 3 eggs in Method:
life weight of 3 eggs in Bake in o uick OVen in P att Y tins,
flour
The weight of 3 eggs in
butter
A few currants or sul-
tanas
1 Teaspoon MUMS Baking
Powder
RAINBOW CAKE
Ingredients:
2 Cups flour
% lb. butter
% Pint milk
8 oz. sugar
G Eggs
2 Teaspoons MUMS
Baking Powder
Method:
Beat butter and sugar to
a light cream, add eggs
one at a time and beat
well. Then the milk,
and add the flour and
Baking Powder before
mixing in the milk.
Now divide the mixture, put
one-third straight into a large,
well-buttered sandwich tin, put
a second one-third into another basin, add
carmine and flavouring (rose water or
lemon). Then put the coloured mixture
into a tin. Into the other third put two
large teaspoons of good cocoa dissolved in
about 2 tablespoons of boiling water. Flavour with vanilla
and to this last mixture add about a level dessertspoon of extra
flour. Put mixture into the third sandwich tin and bake about
10 minutes. This last cake sticks easily: buttered paper in the
tin prevents this. When cooked and cool, spread with filling,
and ice.


RAILWAY CAKE
Ingredients: Method:
2 Tablespoons butter Beat sugar and butter to a cream, add
2 Eggs susar eggs and milk, next flour and Baking
2 Teaspo P on 0 s nS MUMS Powder. Bake in a moderate oven in a
Bafcing Powder square tin. When baked, cut in half and
spread with soft cocoanut icing and
double over.
RAISIN LOAF
Ingredients: Method:
2 Tablespoons butter Cream butter and sugar, beat in egg, and
i 4, E™g cup susar add slowly milk. Sift in flour with Bak-
ing Powder. Lastly add raisins or nuts.
2 Teaspoons mums Grease well two Cerebos Salt tins, or any
i Cup raisins or finely other tins that shape and size, and halt
chopped nuts fill w > t j 1 m i x t U re. Put lids on and bake
slowly about \ hour.
RAINBOW CAKE
(A)
Ingredients: Method:
cup sugar Beat butter and sugar to a cream, then
1% cups flour add the milk, next flour into which
f Teaspoons mums Baking Powder and pinch of salt have
been added, and lastly the whites of eggs
Essence of lemon which have been beaten to a stiff froth,
Add essence of lemon and cover half with
cochineal. Bake in sandwich tins.
(B)
Ingredients: Method:
\ cup sugar Beat butter and sugar to a cream, then
Va cup miiiT add milk, next flour in which Baking
vi Teaspoons I "mums Powder and pinch of salt have been added,
Baking Powder a ] so essence of lemon. Colour one half
Yolks of 3 eggs . i i 1 .
white of i egg with cocoa, bake in two sandwich tins.
Pinch ce of of sait mon When cooked take the pink and white
Cocoa layers (A mixture). Put layers on top
of each other, with icing—Brown, white,
pink, yellow.


ROX CAKE
Ingredients: Method:
i 2 Cup suglr r Beat butter to a cream, add gradually
3 Eggs sugar, beat together well, add eggs one
iy 2 Cups flour at a time, and again beat well; now add
2 Sl ß a akin e g as pow n d S er MUMS and water, flour gradually, and lastly
Baking Powder. Bake immediately.
RIBBON CAKE
Ingredients: Method:
6 oz sugar Cream together butter and sugar, add eggs
4 Eggs well beaten, then add flour, Baking
% Cup mok Powder and milk. Divide into three equal
2 "^Baking 3 powder parts. To one part add currants, sultanas,
2 oz Currants candied peel and mixed spice. Colour
2 oz. Candied peel second part pink with cochineal, flavour
1/2 Ess a e S nc°e° n of m kmon Spice with essence of lemon. Simply flavour
Essence of vaniiia remaining part with vanilla. Bake each
part separately; when cooked and cool
join together with icing, having fruit cake
in centre.
SANDWICH CAKE
Ingredients: Method:
1 Cup sugar Beat e S2 S anci SU 2 ar . tiJl q uite S P° n gy
i Cup flour (about i hour), sift in flour and Baking
1 T PowX- MUMS Bakmg Powder, add boiling milk and butter,
l oz ab butter ns m ' lk Bake 8 minutes in sandwich tins. For
filling, make a jelly meringue. This sand-
wich mixture can be flavoured with pas-
sion fruit or orange juice.
Filling
Ingredients: Method:
% Wh P e M dPl S egg Uit ' reUy Beat w^ite e gg HltO j e Uy tmtil Stiff.
Icing
Ingredients: Method:
“fcf or Mix icing sugar and fruit juice until stiff,
fruit then melt in a basin over boiling water
till it will pour.


SEED CAKE
Ingredients: Method :
1 ib SS Buttcr Beat butter su S ar to a cream, add eggs
1 ib'. Sugar one at a time and beat in well. Sift in
1 Te-Poon MUMS Baking p owder? add se « ds and
11/4 s b eeds lo to r suit taste bake in moderate oven.
SILVER CAKE
Ingredients: Method:
1 cup sugar Beat butter to a cream, and gradually beat
% Cup butter in the sugar, and add the flavouring. Mix
iti Cups C flour° ur the flour and Baking Powder together.
2 T Baking S Powder Dissolve the cornflour in the milk, and add
° f 3 esss to tbe sugar and butter. The well-beaten
Sait whites and flour must be lightly stirred in.
Bake about \ hour.
SOUR CREAM CHOCOLATE CAKE
Ingredients: Method:
2 Eggs Beat eggs well, add sugar and beat again.
1 Teaspoon soda Stir soda into sour cream, and beat into
sour cream the eggs and sugar. Sift together flour,
1 T Baki£g Powder Baking Powder and salt, and fold gradu-
lA Teaspoon salt ally j nto ca k e . Add me lted chocolate and
1 Teaspoon vanilla vanilla. Bake as a loaf for minutes or
in layers for 20 minutes.
SPICE CAKE
Ingredients: Method:
2 Cups sugar Cream the butter and sugar, add the eggs
s 2 Eggs butter one at a time. Mix 2 cups flour, Baking
2 Cups*" flour Powder and spices, adding the cream and
3 T Bak°ng S pSfr S the flour mixture alternately and raisins
% Teaspoon each cloves, and rolled in rest of flour. Bake in
% cujTcurrants or raisins moderate oven in well-greased shallow
Vo Cup walnuts
pan.


SOFT ICING
Ingredients: Method:
1 Small pie g ce butter Doil ?S ht minutes. Take off fire, and
Va cup milk and water pour into a basin, beat well until nearly
3 Large tablespoons desic- t t .1 i i . i t , i i r
cated cocoanut cold, then add three large tablespoons of
desiccated cocoanut.
SPICED LOAF
Ingredients: Method:
1 cup S brawn sugar Mix i nto l° a ves with milk, and bake
1 Cup currants about an hour in slow oven.
3 Tablespoons butter
3 Teaspoons MUMS
Baking Powder
1 Dessertspoon spice
1 Dessertspoon cinnamon
Milk
SPONGE ROLL
Ingredients: Method:
i cup sugar Beat e §B s an d su S ar 20 minutes, add flour
i Cup flour and Baking Powder mixed, and lastly
1 Te pow°der MUMS Bakmg butter and milk. Bake in a roll tin 20
1 Teaspoonbutterdissoived m i nu tes. Turn out on damp cloth, spread
ing milk with jam, and roll again.
SPONGE SANDWICH (1)
Ingredients: Method:
9 o Z eBS Sugar Beat the eggs and sugar for f hour, then
5 oz. Flour add flour with Baking Powder, then boil-
-2 Tab S ies°p°o n ons b boding ing water with butter melted. Put in very
y 3 Teaspoon mums Baking sandwich dishes or cake dishes and
Powder bake in moderate oven for i hour. Don t
have dishes too wide.
SPONGE SANDWICH (2)
Ingredients: Method:
2 cups flour Beat eggs, sugar, honey, and essence to-
Cups sugar gether for 15 minutes. Sift flour and
1 Tablespoon butter Baking Powder into mixture. Put butter
A essenc^ r ° ps lemon nto i CU P °f ot water - Beat altogether
2 Teaspoons mums well, pour into well-greased sandwich
Baking Powder * 1 i t i r •
tins, and bake 15 minutes.


Household Hints by “MOTHER
REMOVING STAINS
When possible, remove all stains while they are fresh.
If a stain has been overlooked and washed in, it is difficult to remove
and should be bleached on the grass.
Blood Stains. —Wash in cold water until the stain turns brown, then rub
with naphtha soap and soak in warm water. A paste of cold raw
starch applied several times will remove stain from thick goods.
Brass Stains. —Rub either lard or olive oil on the stain, then wash with
warm water and soap.
Fruit and Coffee Stains. —Stretch the stained part over a bowl and pour
boiling water through it from a height until the stain disappears. If
stain remains, hang material in sun to dry.
Tea and Chocolate Stains. —Soak in cold water and borax and then apply
the boiling water as for coffee stains.
Mil\ Stains. —Wash them out while fresh in cold water.
Glue Stains. —Apply vinegar with a cloth.
Grease Stains. —Place a blotter or unglazed brown paper under and over
the stain and iron with a warm iron.
Grass Stains. —Apply ammonia and water at once, or wash with naphtha
soap and water.
ln\ Stains. —Soak in sweet or sour milk, or wet stains in oxalic acid
and rinse.
Mildew Stains. —If the stain is not too old it may be removed by applying
soft soap and powdered chalk, keeping it moist and laying it in the sun.
Rust. —Soak spot with lemon juice, then cover with salt. Let stand in the
sun for several hours, or until stain disappears. Rinse thoroughly.
Should be used on white material only.
Old Tea and Coffee Stains. —Wet spot with cold water; cover with
glycerine, let stand two or three hours. Then wash with cold water and
hard soap. Repeat if necessary.
Cleaning Old Carpets.—Sprinkle with pieces of newspaper, wrung out
of water. Sweep thoroughly, wipe over with a cloth wrung out of water
to which a few spoonsful of ammonia have been added.
To Remove White Spots from Furniture. —Dip a cloth in hot water
nearly to the boiling point. Place over spot, remove quickly and rub
over spot with dry cloth. Repeat if spot is not removed.


Questions answered by “MOTHER ”
Question : Dear Mother, In your recipes in “Mums” Recipe
Boo\, do you mean to use plain flour or self-raising
flour.
Answer: I always mean plain flour.
Question: Is there any reason for recommending plain flour
against self-raising flours?
Answer: There are many reasons. In the first place all my
recipes are carefully tried and tested, using plain flour
and “Mums” Cream of Tartar Baking Powder, and
I would not care to guarantee sure and certain results
if ordinary self-raising flours were used. You see,
when you use “Mums” Baking Powder with a good
brand of plain flour you can make certain that the
quantity of leavener used is exactly the amount
required. Then there is the saving of money, which
is always important to thrifty housekeepers. With
plain flour and a small amount of “Mums” Baking
Powder, the actual cash saving means a tidy sum in
the average household.
Question: Do self-leavening flours vary very much, then?
Answer: Most certainly. You have only to see the different
prices charged for various brands to realise the dif-
ference there must be in quality.


Questions answered by "MOTHER"
Question: / am glad you have cleared up this point for me.
This explains the reason why I have never been
really sure of my cakes and scones being successful
and also why my hopes have so often been dashed to
the ground. But why is Cream of Tartar used in
“Mums” Baling Powder?
Answer: Pure Cream of Tartar, although one of the oldest
leaveners known, is still the best and most healthful,
besides being economical because of its wonderful
strength. “Mums” Baking Powder is made from
99/100 per cent. Pure Cream of Tartar and is as near
to perfection as it has been found possible to make.
Question:// it better to use more Baling Powder than the
average recipe calls for?
Answer: Not with “Mums” Baking Powder. As a matter of
fact, I always advise you to use a little less of
“Mums” than any other brand you may have been
using.
Question: Is “Mums” any dearer than other makes?
Answer: Very little, if any.
Question: Then the saving that using a little less makes, and
being sure of results, would easily compensate me if
I did pay a penny or so more for “Mums”?
Answer: Exactly.


duiouooO
unoaDjj
i -*■* fi
*«
m
?A*3
sm n cL


SPONGE CAKE WITH WATER (1)
Ingredients: Method:
Yolks of 2 eggs B eat; yolks until thick and lemon-coloured,
% Cup hot a mifk a or water add half the sugar gradually and beat; add
whites o of 1 2 m eggs JUILe milk, remaining sugar, lemon, whites of
114 Teaspoons MUMS e SS S be3ten Stiff 3nd fl ° Ur mixed 3nd
- Baking Powder sifted with Baking Powder and salt. Bake
H i easpoon salt j n a moderate oven 35 minutes.
SPONGE CAKE WITH WATER (2)
Ingredients: Method:
i cup S ugar ra lifted Sift Baking Powder with i cup of the
Cup water flour. Beat yolks until light and thick,
3 2 TeT s S pwn U s r mums add sugar gradually and continue beating.
1 Tel™™ Add flavouring, the water and the cup of
flour alternately, then the Baking Powder
mixture and lastly fold in the stiffly
beaten whites of eggs. Place in ungreased
pan in a moderate oven and bake from
30 to 40 minutes. When done invert
pan. When cool, cut out.
SPONGE CAKE (3)
Ingredients: Method:
i cupflouT Take sugar and eggs, beat for i hour, then
b Eggs add flour and Baking Powder well sifted.
1 Iea Baking PovMer Add lemon juice. Bake in a well-heated
juice of y a lemon oven f hour.
1 Pinch salt *
SULTANA CREAM CAKE
Ingredients: Method:
12 oz. Butter Beat butter and sugar, then add well-
-4 oz. Cream beaten eggs; beat for 10 minutes, then
1° Cup chopped sultanas add flour in which Powder is well mixed,
iy 2 TeTspoons^MUMS 11 tben sultanas. Bake 1| hours in a mod-
Baking Powder erate OVen.
8 Eggs
2 Pieces of lemon peel
1 Teaspoon essence lemon


SWISS ROLL
Ingredients:
5 Eggs
1 Cup sugar
1 Cup flour
1 Teaspoon MUMS
Baking Powder
1 Tablespoon warm
water
X A Teaspoon salt
Beat white of eggs very stiff, adding sugar and flavouring while
beating; fold in well-beaten yolks, beat all to a creamy fluff. Sift
flour before measuring it, add salt and Baking Powder, and sift
again. Fold into the eggs. Pour into greased dish and bake 10
minutes. Place on towel, roll towel and cake together while hot.
When nearly cool unroll, spread with jam. Re-roll before quite
cold.
SNOW CAKE
Ingredients: Method:
i Cup fine sugar Beat butter and sugar to a cream, then add
3/2 whfie r s ro ofTegg S well-sifted arrowroot, then whites of egg,
% Teaspoon mums Baking beaten to a stiff froth; add Baking Powder
Essence of lemon to taste essence lemon. Bake in deep sand-
wich tin in moderate oven i hour. Ice
thinly with chocolate icing.
SULTANA CAKE
Ingredients: Method:
Weight of 3 eggs in Cream butter and sugar, add eggs one by
wS'oTf.Srin one, and beat well. Sift in flour and
flour Baking Powder, add fruit. Bake in
1 Small teaspoon MUMS moderafP nvon
Baking Powder moderate oven
1 Cup sultanas


UPSIDE DOWN CAKE
Ingredients: Method: . M
i Egg Beat egg until light, add sugar; beat until
¥ S flow 6 sugar creamy. Sift together twice, flour and
1 T pw°de n r MUMS Bakmg Baking Powder; add to egg mixture alter-
% Teaspoon vanilla nately with milk. Beat well, add 2 tablc-
-4 Tablespoons 6 united spoons melted butter and vanilla. Melt
% cup Utt br r own sugar rest of butter in iron frying pan; spread
A Cup chopped nuts brown sugar and nuts evenly over pan;
cover with drained and pitted prunes.
Pour on cake batter and bake in a mod-
erate oven.
VIRGINIA SANDWICH
Ingredients: Method:
1 cup flour Beat eggs and sugar together till light,
4 Eggs sugar then add flour and Baking Powder well
\ ?,T£'po P o“° ST . sifted. Boil butter and milk, and lastly
1 Teaspoon mums Baking add essence of vanilla. Bake lor lo or
Powder , -
15 minutes.
WHITE CAKE
Ingredients: Method:
y 2 cup butter Cream butter, add sugar and continue
2 Cups s flour beating. Sift flour with Baking Powder
3 Te ß S S s pSer S three times, add alternately to the butter
3 of eggs mixture with the milk, beat thoroughly
y! Teaspoon almond extract until smooth. Fold in very carefully the
~ Grated rind of lemon Qjf beatgn light and fl u ff y with
a wire whip (not dry). Butter and flour
a pan 12 x 8 inches or fit a piece of
wrapping paper to the width of the Bak-
ing Pan, and let the paper hang over at
the short ends. Grease thoroughly. When
baked, the cake can be lifted from the pan
by the ends of the paper. Put the batter
into the pan and let bake about 35
minutes. Have the heat moderate until
the cake has risen, then have strong heat
until f of baking time, then gradually
reduce the heat.


WALNUT CAKE
Ingredients: Method:
i Teaspoon muais°Baking Cream together two tablespoons butter,
« Teaspooli coco* S H? ar > ? hen add , e j?S S Well beaten '
i Teacup chopped walnuts Ada milk and essence. Mix together flour,
\ Cup le sug°r S butter Baking Powder, cocoa and chopped wal-
Vi cup milk nuts ’ and add to mixture . Bake in a slow
Vanilla essence oven for to f hour. Ice with chocolate
icing and sprinkle with walnuts.
WHITE SANDWICH
Ingredients: Method:
i Cup flo?r Seat butter and sugar to a cream, add the
\ Cup miik fl ° ur whites of eggs beaten to a stiff froth, then
s Butte f q „ milk, and lastly flour, cornflour and
IVi Teaspoons Muffs Baking Powder sifted together. Bake 20
Baking Powder minutes in a moderate oven, in sandwich
tins.
Icing
icing sugar Take the yolks of eggs, beat well, and
lemon add enough icing sugar to make a con-
sistency that will spread easily, decorate
with almonds. Spread between for filling,
flavour with essence of lemon.
WINTER CAKE
Ingredients: Method:
l !b! Butter Beat the butter and sugar to a cream, beat
i h> SS Fiour r * 0 minutes. Beat the whites and yolks
i ib. Currants separately, and add them to butter and
h ib! Mixed a peei sugar, putting in the yolks first, and then
f Tablespoon brandy "‘‘"’"f. >” Slft ‘ n th<!
i Teaspoon essence vanilla flour lightly, add fruit and peel, and
p a ow o d°er SMUMSßaking brandy.


PASTRY, SCONES, &.c.
APPLE SANDWICH
Ingredients: Method:
y 2 lb. Butter Rub butter into flour, then add Baking
Br (sifted) cups Powder, make into a firm dough with
2 T 'SCr“™ water. Roll out to required thickness;
l °c r „iX" currants mince all other ingredients together, and
i piece of peel : n e2 cr last. Place mince between
1 Teaspoon ground cmna- A * &&
mon pastry and bake.
1 Lemon x
1 Egg
2 Tablespoons rugar
APRICOT ROLY POLY
Ingredients: Method:
2 Cups flour Mix as scones, sift dry ingredients, rubbing
Baking Powder in dripping, adding egg slightly beaten
% Tatbiespoons^s ugar with milk. Roll to one inch thick in an
4 Tablespoons dripping O blong. Spread with cooked apricots.
% Cup milk Sprinkle with sugar, dot with butter, roll
Syrup crosswise to make a long roll, place in
¥ Cup sugar 01 JU ’ ce well-greased bread pan. Bake in hot oven
about ten minutes, reduce heat, baste with
syrup made by boiling apricot juice and
sugar two minutes. Serve with cream.
Serves 6.


BAKING POWDER BISCUITS
Ingredients: Method:
5 tSpooT moms S , !ft , the dr r ingredients together. Work
Baking Powder the butter into the flour with a fork or
2* Tabies C p U oon™ ll but°e r r water tips of fingers. Mix the milk into the
1 Teaspoon salt flour, adding the milk gradually until as
soft as can be handled easily. Put it on
a floured board and roll until \ inch thick.
Cut into rounds and bake in very hot oven
10 to 15 minutes. Use as little flour as
possible on the board when shaping the
dough.
BUTTER SCOTCH COOKIES
Ingredients: Method:
1 Cup S b b u r r r n sugar Cream together sugar and butter. Add
2 Well-beaten eggs eggs and milk, sift together flour, Baking
1' cups m flour 0r s ° ur cream Powder and salt. Add this and vanilla to
1 Te pw°der MUMS Baking the first mixture, and mix well. Raisins
Ya Teaspoon salt and chopped nuts may be added if desired.
i Teaspoon vamiia Drop from a teaspoon on a greased baking
sheet and bake for 12 minutes.
CANBERRA HOUSE ROLLS
Ingredients: Method:
4 Cups flour fl our sa lt and Baking Powder to-
-1 leaspoon salt ' 111 ° •it t
6 Teaspoons mums gether. Add melted butter to milk and
2 Ta® a e k spoonf o butt r er add slowly to dry ingredients, stirring
iy 2 cups milk until smooth. Knead lightly on floured
board and roll out one-half inch thick.
Cut with biscuit cutter. Grease each circle
with back of knife one side of centre.
Butter the small section and fold larger
part well over the small. Place one inch
apart in greased pan. Allow to stand 10
minutes in warm place. Brush each with
melted butter and bake in very hot oven
15 to 20 minutes.


CHEESE BISCUITS
Ingredients: Method:
2 Cups flour Sift dry ingredients together. Rub butter
Baking Powder into flour with fork, stir in the milk
2 Tablespoons butter gradually and add the cheese. Place on
% to i cup milk floured board, roll gently about \ inch
thick. Cut into rounds and place m a
greased pan and bake in hot oven 10 to 15
minutes.
CHOCOLATE ROLL
Ingredients: Method:
i cup S sugar Beat e BS yolks; add sugar slowly, and
4 Tablespoons cold water then water. Sift together flour, salt and
i Teaspoon' mums Baking Baking Powder, and add alternately with
Powder well-beaten egg whites. Spread very
thinly on long greased dish. Bake in
moderate oven. Turn out on damp cloth
sprinkled with icing sugar, trim off hard
edges; spread with filling and roll in cloth
while warm. When cool, remove to plate
and spread with icing sugar.
Filling
Ingredients: Method:
k\ Cup milk Scald half of milk with 1 i squares melted
sweetened chocolate unsweetened chocolate; thicken with flour
f Tablespoon butter mixed with other half of cold milk. Add
¥ rgg susar butter. Beat sugar, egg and pinch of salt
Pinch salt together, and add. Cook over hot water
y s Teaspoon vaniik until smoo th and thick. Add | teaspoon
vanilla, and spread.
COFFEE ROLLS
Ingredients: Method:
3 oz. Sugar g ea t butter and sugar to a cream, add egg
i Egg BuUei and milk, then flour, Baking Powder, and
1 n> up Flour a pinch of salt. Mix well together, roll
2 Small teaspoons mums j i thick, cut out and double, and bake
■Baking Powder * . ,
10 minutes in a hot oven.


CHRISTMAS COOKIES
Ingredients: Method:
>/ a cSp'.SVSey Add su g ac to sy™p and cook until sugar
? Teaspoon 6 cinnamon 15 d >f olved Add butter, COol. Add SpicCS
Vj Teaspoon cloves to flour. Mix all ingredients together,
2 oz. Citron, ground very and, if necessary, just enough more flour
214 cups 6 flour to handle. Roll -J inch thick and shape.
1 Tablespoon mums Bake in greased pans in moderate oven 8
1 Egg to 1 0 minutes.
2 Tablespoons milk
Juice and rind y 2 lemon
COCOANUT DROP COOKIES
Ingredients: Method:
4 Esr/"” 3 ” Bar Beat eggs until light, add sugar and beat
t tcSSTmums ag . ain j ad ? and Baking Powdel
Baking Powder mixed, and stir m the grated or shredded
1 2 ups flour cocoanut. Drop small portions with tea-
spoon on well buttered pans, rather far
apart, as they spread. Bake in a moderate
oven, from 10 to 15 minutes. Keep in
covered jar.
CREAM SCONES
Ingredients: Method:
2 Teaspoons' mums Mix flour ’ Baking Powder and sugar to-
Baking Powder gether; beat the egg and add; mix all with
i / Egg milk and cream to a stiff batter. Drop
4 cup mdk 1 ? n greased tin in egg-sized pieces. Bake
in hot oven.
DEVIL’S FOOD CAKE
Ingredients: Method:
X \ Cup sugar' Cream butter; add sugar, melted chocolate
2, /a oz - ch uusweeiened and mashed potatoes; mix well; add egg
% Cup mashed potatoes yolk, milk and flour and Baking Powder
% cup milk which have been sifted together; beat well;
i l/4 Tea P spo fl o°n Ur MUMS ad . d ™ ts ’ vanilla and t> eaten egg white;
Baking Powder mix thoroughly. Bake in greased shallow
4 teaspoon P vaniiia, u extract moderate oven 5 to 35 minutes.


DATE DAINTIES
Ingredients: Method:
1 Large handful dates Stone dates and boil with sugar and water
Cup water and juice of lemon. Simmer till thick,
' Jui “ of % lcmon and set aside to cool.
Pastry
Ingredients: Method:
1 oz. Butter Beat butter and sugar to a cream. Add
1 Egg Sugar egg and beat again. Add flour and Baking
i Va Tea P spoon U MUMS Powder and mix to a firm dough. Roll
Baking Powder out ver y t hin. Spread one-half with date
mixture and cover with other half, press-
ing them together. Cut in small squares,
prick all over with a fork, and cook about
hour in a fairly hot oven.
DOUGHNUTS
Ingredients: Method:
2 Cups flour Sift dry ingredients. Add the milk to the
1 TeaspoonAait beaten egg, and combine the mixtures,
4 Te Baktag S P™r S knead lightly. Roll on well-floured board
Teaspoon g dnnamon meg with doughnut CUtter, Or
2 Ta b b^ t s e p r oonsmelted roll into small balls, and fry in deep hot
% Cup milk fat, and dust with powdered sugar when
1 SS cooked.
DOUGHNUT DROPS
Ingredients: Method:
2 Eggs Beat eggs until light, add sugar, salt and
1 Tea S poon r salt butter. Mix flour and Baking Powder
2 Ta butte P r oons melted and combine the two mixtures. Drop by
4 mums tablespoons into deep hot fat, and fry
% Powder unt il browned. Drain on brown paper
and sprinkle with powdered sugar. Add 1
oz. melted chocolate to mixture for
variety.


FRENCH PASTRY
Ingredients: Method:
f KbiSgSS kT Sift Baking Powder, add sugar.
l/a Te p^w°der MUMS Bakin s Rub in butter. Mix with yolks of eggs.
2 Tablespoons sugar Bake in moderate oven fifteen minutes
Y °"“ „ t a , ats When cold, spread apple, strawberries or
jam on tart. Beat up the white of eggs to
stiff froth. Spread on mixture and put in
oven to brown. Serve with MUMS
Custard.
FRITTER BATTER
Ingredients: Method:
2 /J Teaspoons f mums Mix and sift the dry ingredients, add
% Teaspoon S'" 1 " milk Squally and egg well beaten.
% Cup milk
1 Egg
FRUIT DEVIL’S FOOD
Ingredients: Method:
i Cup white sugar Cream together butter, white sugar and
% S> P s P S w Ld“ £ “ bp ° wn su 2 ar - Add soda to treacle and
? Be"a c tei" a £ f dd to the butter and su ?‘ lr - Then add
Vj Cup chocolate beaten eggs and chocolate melted in boil-
3ka Cups b flour S water wat:er - Sift together flour, nutmeg,
I 2 Teaspoon a.ispicf S ls P* ce ' cij ]namon, cloves and Baking
i Teaspoon cinnamon t owder,’ add this to the first mixture
i Teaspoon mums alternately with milk. Then add raisins
1 cup m"fk Powd£r l nd citron ? nd nutmeats. Bake for two
2 cups raisins hours. This cake will keep fresh for some
1 Cup citron timo
1 Cup nutmeats time.
GINGER SANDWICH
Ingredients: Method:
it& Cups S flour Beat butter and sugar to a cream. Add
1 T Cin P na o Ln eaC a h nd Gl c n a g r e b’ and beat well - Then add syrup and
1 Teaspoon MUMS S ° d * THen
Baking Powder add tne flour and Baking Powder. Mix
i 2 S m “ k well. Pour into sandwich tins and bake
% Cup golden syrup in slow OVen.
1 Tablespoon butter


GINGERBREAD
Ingredients'. Method:
1 Cup treacle Put treacle, butter and milk into a sauce-
I 4 cVmifk pan, heat but do not let boil. Put the
1 Tablespoon ginger flour, ginger, carb. soda, salt and Baking
1 pfnch°sait carb ' soda Powder into a basin. Pour the milk,
U 4 Teaspoons mums treacle and butter into dry ingredients, and
Ba mg o« er put into a well-buttered tin. Bake slowly
for f hour.
GEM SCONES
Ingredients: Method:
i cup flour . Mix and cook in hot gem holders.
1 Teaspoon MUMS Baking "
Powder
2 Tablespoons sugar
1 Tablespoon butter
1 Egg
Enough milk, added to
beaten-up egg, to fill
a small cup
GOOD SCONES
Ingredients: Method:
i ib. Flour Mix with sweet milk, into a soft dough,
nut roll out, cut into shapes and bake in a
1 Small saltspoon salt ■t,
1 Go®d teaspoon MUMS CJUICk OVen,
Baking Powder
JELLY COOKIES
Ingredients: Method:
514 Tablespoons butter Cream butter, add sugar, egg well beaten,
1 Egg susai and milk. Mix and sift dry ingredients
li cup s mflk r and add to the first mixture. Add vanilla.
2 T bE s p 2 Toss on floured board. Cut half of them
i' s V aT illa with cookie cutter and place in the centre
mums Fruit jelly (set) G f gach cookie a teaspoon of MUMS Fruit
Jelly. Cut out covers with doughnut
cutter with hole in centre, and place on
top of cookies. Bake in a moderate oven
until done.


KISSES
Ingredients: Method:
w Sr rf 3 cgß Beat butter and sugar to a cream, add
W suSr ° f 3 eggs in eggs well beaten » and then flour and corn-
Weight of 3 eggs in flour, and lastly Baking Powder. Put in
Weight of 3 eggs in spoonfuls on a greased tin, and bake in a
1 Teaspoon* MUMS Baking . Ulltil btOWn. When Cold,
Powder spread with jam, and put together.
LITTLE APPLE CAKES
Ingredients: Method:
\ Heaped** teaspoon mums flour, MUMS Baking Powder, sugar,
1 Large **eg g Povvder and butter together, add beaten egg, and
lb Buffer miX Ut on board and roll to | inch.
Stewed apples Cut with round cutter, and place in patty-
tins. Half fill with stewed apples, and
place another round of mixture on top.
Bake in moderate oven until a nice brown.
When cold, sift icing sugar over them.
MOTHER’S TEA CAKE
Ingredients: Method:
z Eg£ '(beaten) Cream together butter and sugar. Beat
f tSpS mums u u ntil HgHt and soft. Add eggs, mixing
Baking Powder thoroughly. Sift flour and Baking Pow-
-1 Cup sugar der and add alternately with milk. Add
11/a Cups flour vanilla. Beat well and turn into well-
greased, shallow baking pan. Bake in hot
oven half an hour. When partly cool,
dust with powdered sugar, cut in squares
and serve while warm.
MUMS FRUIT PIE
Ingredients: Method:
J % Tablespoons butter Cream butter, add egg, a little salt, mix
1 Teaspoon mums with rest of ingredients. Pat and press
Yolks of 2 eggs the dough 4 inch thick, into pie tin or
2 Tablespoons s tenon juke spr i n g form with hands. Fill with any
water desired fruit mixture, and bake.


MUMS MUFFINS
Ingredients: Method:
2 Cups sifted flour Mix together, and drop on hot buttered
1 Tablespoon butter , , t 1 • ■ 1 „
2 Tablespoons sugar tins, and bake in quick oven.
1 Egg
2 Teaspoons MUMS
Baking Powder
y Cup milk
U> Teaspoon fine salt
NICE BISCUITS
Ingredients: Method:
3 ib. Flour Mix into a nice soft dough, with sweet
3 F b gg S ßutter milk, cut into shapes and bake in a quick
1 lb. Sugar
3 Teaspoons MUMS Oven,
Baking Powder
ORANGE MARMALADE COOKIES
Ingredients: Method:
% cup butter Cream together butter and sugar and add
2 Weii-beaten eggs eggs. Sift together flour, salt, Baking
1 Te£spoon Ur sait Powder. Add this to the first mixture
y a Teaspoon mums Baking w ith marmalade. Drop by teaspoons on a
% Cup marmalade greased baking sheet, and bake for 10 to
12 minutes. Remove these cookies from
the baking sheet immediately when taken
from the oven.
PANCAKES
Ingredients: Method:
1 Egp t Beat eggs well with salt. Mix in flour,
4 ib. m Fiour then milk, very gradually. Let it stand
% Teaspoon MUMS Baking j before frying> add Baking
pinch of salt Powder. Fry with very little butter
rubbed on hot pan. Roll and serve hot.
PASTEL CAKE
Ingredients: Method:
yl fb" Sugar" Grease deep sandwich tin well with butter.
3 4 Eggs Sprinkle with a little of the cocoanut.
2 oz. Cocamut Beat eggs and sugar well together, add
y 2 Teaspocm mums Baking eno ugh cochineal to make mixture a nice
i Pinch salt apricot colour. Then add cocoanut, flour,
and Baking Powder. Bake i hour in good
oven—not too hot.


PEANUT BUTTER BREAD
Ingredients: Method:
\ ?ea P spoons r MUMs Sift flour ' Baking Powder, salt and sugar
Baking Powder together. Add milk to peanut butter,
54 Cup sugar blend well, and add to dry ingredients;
lfi cups miik Ut butter beat thoroughly. The dough must be soft
enough to take the shape of the pan. Bake
in greased loaf pan in moderate oven 45
to 50 minutes. Best when a day old.
PEANUT DROP CAKES
Ingredients: Method:
14 cup le sugar S butter Cream the butter, add sugar and eggs, well
Vo cup flour beaten. Sift and mix flour, salt and
1 Teaspoon MUMS Baking Baking Powder, and add to first mixture;
14 Teaspoon salt then add milk, peanuts and lemon juice.
2 Tablespoons milk Drop from a teaspoon on an unbuttered
nuts sheet 1 inch apart. Bake in moderate
% Teaspoon lemon juice oven j 2to 15 minutes. Makes 24 cookies.
PLAIN PASTRY OR PIE DOUGH
Ingredients: Method:
5| /4 TeT P oon Ur MUMS Sift flour > salt and Baking Powder to-
faking s P° t wder gether; work shortening into the flour
4 to a % o< cupShortening with a fork or rub in very lightly with
y 3 to ( y2 tte c r u P or COM water of fingers (the less it is handled the
better). Add cold water very slowly,
enough to hold dough together (do not
work or knead dough). Divide in halves;
roll out one part thin on floured board,
and use for bottom crust. After pie is
filled roll out other part for top.
PUMPKIN SCONES
Ingredients: Method:
3 Teaspoons mums Beat butter and sugar to a cream, add
Baking Powder pumpkin, then milk, lastly flour and Bak-
I I ablespoon butter * \ r i • r *
% lb. sugar mg Powder, with a pinch of salt sifted
I I Cup “old mashed through it. Bake in hot oven.
pumpkin
Pinch salt


916
916
EVERY DAY
WE RECEIVE
LETTERS
PRAISING
urns,
it THE
TELL U/
THAT
Tims,
BAKING
POWDER
BEST
THEY HAVE
U/EO
Read what this lady says of this
wonderful leavener.
Hely Street, ■
Wyong,
Lothian Manufacturing Co. Ltd.,
G.P.O. Box 1764 K,
Sydney.
Dear Sirs:
Just a note of appreciation to
your MUMS Baking Powder. I have won
First Prizes in local cooking competi-
tions around this district. Also last week
1 entered your Cinnamon Sponge with
MUMS Baking Powder and won First
Prize at Singleton Show. There were a
great number of competitors so I felt it my
duty to drop a note to you on my success
with your Baking Powder. Wishing you
every success in the near future,
i am 4
Yours sincerely,
(SGND.) Mrs. RAY WALKER
S.—Please note I cooked the cSke In Wyong
and travelled to Singleton with it, »o it waa
a day old when judged.
xl;
3
PS
/ v v
nine
tsr
m
THE
PTAt*
m
CHANGE TO “ MUMS ’
TO-DAY 1
“ The Claim of a Manufacturer (justly or other-
wise) becomes a suspicious boast, but the
Testimony of a buyer becomes merited praise.’ ’


PRUNE BARS
Ingredients : Method:
1 cu| s sugar Wash and soak prunes two or three hours,
1 cup flour dry, cut in small pieces. Beat yolks of
1 Teaspoon MUMS Baking t t 1 -n 1 •
Powder eggs and add sugar. Beat whites until
l Cup choppeTnuts stiff and add alternately with dry ingredi-
Vs Teaspoon salt ents. Add nuts and prunes and bake in
a shallow pan in a moderate oven about
30 minutes. Remove from pan, cut in
bars l inch by 3 inches and roll in pow-
dered sugar or frost with chocolate frost-
ing. Will make about 20 bars.
PRUNE , DATE , or RAISIN BREAD
Ingredients: Method:
1 Cu raisms Unes ’ dates ° r Wash fruit, soak several hours, drain,
2% Cups flour stone, chop. Mix dry ingredients, add
1 Teaspoon salt milk, beat well; add prunes, dates or
4 4C jßak?ng S raisins, chopped, and melted butter. Put
i Cup milk in greased pan; let stand 25 minutes in
1 lablespooii butter i *r> i • i
warm place. Bake in moderate oven one
hour.
SHORT OR FLAKY PASTRY
Ingredients: Method: ■
y/ A cups flour Have all the material ice cold. Sift to-
Baking Powder gether riour, salt and Baking Powder.
>4 cup P i°ani sa!t Chop the shortening in the flour till the
ice P water r size P eas and beans. Toss lightly with
a knife, adding enough ice water very
slowly, to hold dough together. Turn
out on a smooth, cold board. Gather with
the knife into a square pile. Then pound
lightly with rolling pin till well flattened.
Roll in an oblong piece 4 inch thick; fold
in thirds and roll again; repeat, and after
the third rolling it will usually be suf-
ficiently compact to roll thin enough to
line a plate. Let stand half an hour or
more on the ice before rolling. Sufficient
for one pie.


SMALL CAKES
Ingredients: Method.
4 oz. Butter Beat butter and sugar together, then add
' “ IS,'" 23 ' well-beaten eggs. Add flour, cornflour,
2 oz. Cornflour Baking Powder, and salt well silted.
! t«>?S"mums Batins Bake in a fairly hot oven about 10
3 EgS wd “ minutes.
A little milk
A pinch salt . ~ _ _
SPONGE BUNS
u lb. Butter Beat butter, sugar to a cream. Add eggs
%£• susar one by one, then milk. Then the flour,
ij oz. mums Baking lastly Baking Powder. Mix until creamy,
6 E g gs' vdci , Put little mixture in well-greased patty-
a little milk t i ns> Bake in quick oven.
STRAWBERRY SHORTCAKE
1 Quart strawberries Sift flour, measure and sift again with
* GlanufatKS Baking Powder, salt and one tablespoon
2 Egg-whites sugar, then chop in the butter and lard,
3" Teaspoons mums using two knives, and when the mixture
, T,wSlo„ P °.”S r r resembles coarse oatmeal moisten with the
1 KffiSS butter milk. Turn out on a flou b ° a^'
q cup milk out half an inch thick, and bake in two
2 Cups fiour pie tins in a hot oven fifteen minutes.
Pick over the berries, cut into small pieces,
cover with granulated sugar, and set in a
warm place. Butter the cakes when baked
and put together, spreading the berries
between and over top.
Then whip the whites of two eggs, add
two tablespoons granulated sugar, and
beat until the mixture will hold its shape
when the beater is lifted from it. Add
two more tablespoons of icing sugar and
beat again for two or three minutes.
Finally beat in two additional tablespoons
of icing sugar, and when the meringue is
light and very stiff, fold in the marsh-
mallows cut in quarters. Pile lightly on
the shortcake and serve.


SOUR MILK OR SODA BISCUITS
Ingredients: Method:
Vi Teaspoon soda Mix and sift dry ingredients. Work in
4 Teaspoons MUMS the butter with a fork, add liquid gradu-
y Teaspoon to make 3 S ° ft d °Ugh. Drop into
Cup thick sour cream or well-greased muffin pan. Pat, roll out and
cut into biscuits. Bake in a moderately
hot oven or drop by spoonfuls on greased
pan or in muffin pan.
WAFFLES
Ingredients: Method:
3 Teaspoons MUMS Mix and sift the dry ingredients. Add
% Teaspoon f ilk gradually, yolks well-beaten, melted
2 Va Eggs 8 milk * at and whltes °f eggs beaten stiff. Cook
l Tablespoon melted fat on greased hot waffle iron. The iron
should fit closely over fire. Heat well on
one side, turn and heat on the other, grease
thoroughly with oiled brush. Place a
tablespoon of the batter, near the centre,
m each section of the iron, turn down
cover, then turn iron on other side. If
iron is well heated, the waffles are baked
almost as fast as the iron can be turned
and covered. An aluminium waffle iron
does not need oiling.
WHITE NUT BREAD
Ingredients: Method:
¥ Eg! Mix dry ingredients, add egg to milk and
combine the mixtures. Place in greased
4 Te B S k ?ons MUMS bread tin, let stand 20 minutes, then place
% Cup a broken 0 nuts in moderate oven and bake i hour, or until
1 cup milk we p done. Better day after it is made.


PUDDINGS
BAKING POWDER DUMPLINGS
Ingredients: Method:
1 Cup flour Sift dry ingredients, stir in the milk or
Baking Powder water and mix to smooth batter. Drop
y 2 cup P mTk orwater, scant by teaspoons into boiling soup, cover
kettle, let boil 5 minutes and serve at once.
BOILED JAM PUDDING
Ingredients: Method:
1 cup flour Sift flour, Baking Powder and salt into
Powder a basin. Rub in dripping, mix into a stilr
2 pfnch SP o°f 0n sait drippmB dough with cold water, and divide into
Cold water about a dozen pieces. Roll one piece out,
spread with jam, and lay in a greased
basin; then another piece, and so on till
all are done. Put them in roughly; they
will swell to the size of the basin. Tie
down with cloth or greased paper. Boil
1 i hours.
CHOCOLATE PUDDING
Ingredients: Method:
1 Mix ingredients and steam 1 hour. Serve
% cup miik r with MUMS Vanilla Custard.
1 Square chocolate melted
or 3 tablespoons cocoa
2 Teaspoons melted butter
1 Cup flour
2 Teaspoons MUMS
Baking Powder


COTTAGE PUDDING
Ingredients: Method:
i Cup s sugar Cream butter and sugar, beat in eggs, add
% Cup mlik* ° r dripping m ilk, then flour, Baking Powder and salt.
1 Heaped teaspoon mums Put in a greased pie-dish and bake about
2 Eggs kmg Powder an hour, or else in a greased basin and
Pinch of salt steam hours. Serve with custard made
with MUMS Custard Powder.
DATE PUDDING
Ingredients: Method:
3 of: Sugaf 1 " Beat su gar and butter to a cream, add eggs,
c oz. Flour , rTTATC then milk, gradually, then flour and Bak-
-1 Small teaspoon MUMS - -n i t t ,
Baking Powder mg Fowder, nutmeg, dates and lemon
ib Ui s e toned 'dales juice. Steam 2 hours.
y 3 Gill milk
2 Eggs
Little grated nutmeg
DARK DATE PUDDING
Ingredients: Method:
2~ Eggs ßutter Mix butter and sugar, add eggs and little
1 Cup brown sugar water. Mix all dry ingredients and dates
2 Teaspoons mums separately, then mix all together. Boil in
i ib B DMe S s ?owder damped cloth or pudding basin, 3 hours.
1 Te s a p s ice on and ac !larb ut^d g a Serve witb MUMS Pure Vanilla Custard.
"14 Teaspoon salt
Water to moisten
DUTCH APPLE CAKE
Ingredients: Method:
t Tea P spoons r mums Mix and sift the dry ingredients, work in
y, Teafpdon SiT der shortening with tips of fingers, or cut in
3 Tablespoons butter with knives; add milk with the well-
-1 out % cup milk beaten e §g- gradually mixing with a knife.
4 Sour apples Dough must be soft enough to spread in
2 I ablespoons sugar lit i 1 • T T ° « ~
a little cinnamon a shallow baking pan. Have ready, pared,
cored and cut in quarters, the apples, and
when dough has been spread in pan, press
apples into dough in parallel rows.
Sprinkle the apples with the sugar ar.d
cinnamon. Bake in hot oven about a
hour. Serve hot with MUMS Custard.


FRUIT PIE
Ingredients: Method:
i Egg Beat butter and sugar to a cream, beat egg
1 Tablespoon butter and add, then beat in boiling water; lastly,
I Teaspoon ""mums Bakins sift in flour. Baking Powder and salt.
4 TabE&ns of boiling Have ready some boiling fruit, with very
water little juice (apricots are especially nice),
BdUng^fruu 1 put in pie-dish, cover over with batter and
bake about f hour in a moderate oven.
FRUIT PUDDING
Ingredients: Method:
1 Small cup sugar Beat butter and sugar to a cream, add eggs
1 O “t s er CUPS fl ° ur (beaten) and milk. Mix flour and Baking
2 Small teaspoonfuls of Powder together, and add to mixture.
mums Baking Powder Grease two small dishes, fill half full of
' 4 Fr u esh™ruit (or m ° re) fresh fruit, pour the batter over; bake 1
hour.
HUNTER PUDDING
Ingredients: Method:
3 Cups flour Mix well, and make into light, firm paste
Baking Powder with lukewarm water. Tie in a pudding
i' lb. cu n rra y nts Chopped >uct cloth or mould, and boil or steam 3 hours.
4 oz. Brown sugar
2 Cups lukewarm water
Pinch salt
MARGUERITE PUDDING
Ingredients: Method:
2 oz. Butter Cream butter and sugar, then add eggs,
2 Eggs gar milk and flour with Baking Powder sifted
? Tablespoons milk with it. Line a basin thickly with jam,
i small teaspoon mums pour in mixture and steam for 1 hours.
Baking Powder r
Jam MYSTERY PUDDING
Ingredients: Method:
Sliced bananas Line a glass dish with sliced bananas, then
Pack Cryst I a l i’s MS Fruit Jelly fill with broken~up stale sponge cake. Dis-
Two cups nB of hot 6 water solve a packet of MUMS Jelly Crystals
in two cups of hot water, pour over fruit
and cake, and leave to set.


PEAR PUDDING
Ingredients: Method:
it K„‘e, a, 'ch b o r p e sfd e ed R°H Mixture in a ball and place on plate
% Cnp bro™ .U t „ m a saucepan. Take lib. dried pears
Y 2 Teaspoon cinnamon which have been soaked over night, then
H. Tablespoon flour w i f h sugar and cinnamon until tender
2 T ?3£?r"3“ s Pu ; with the juice, around pudding
and boil 3 hours, covered. Serve hot.
RICE PUDDING (Without E SS s)
Ingredients: Method:
i Dessertspoon sugar Stir sufficient tics in boiling water, let boil
Nutmeg quarter of an hour, then drain water off,
stirring into the boiled rice a cupful of
milk and dessertspoon of sugar. Make a
custard, put the rice into a dish, mix
thoroughly with the custard while hot,
Grate nutmeg on top, bake as usual.
Custard
Ingredients: Method:
1 Large dessertspoon of Take enough milk to mix smooth the
AbouYT dS" cu ?* ard powder, sweeten the remainder of
spoon sugar milk to taste, and, when milk is boiling,
pour the mixed custard into it, and stir.
ROLL PUDDING
Ingredients: Method:
i 4 Egg sugar Beat sugar and egg well, add flour and
1 Teaspoon I "mums Baking P ° wc J er ’ then water. Pour into a
flat dish lined with buttered paper. Bake
jam p " a ei in a very hot oven about 5 minutes. Turn
out on a damp cloth, remove buttered
paper, spread with jam and roll. When
cold, place in a glass dish. Stick with
blanched almonds, and pour round it a
custard made with MUMS Custard Pow-
der.


ROLY POLY PUDDING
Ingredients: Method:
J l 1 °" r Mix flour, chopped suet, Baking Powder
1_ MUMS Bakins an d salt together, add a little cold water,
r.ig pinch salt roll dough into a long piece about \ inch
jam (to taste) thick. Spread jam on, moisten edges and
roll up lightly. Wet edges and seal up
ends, wrap the pudding in a scalded cloth
and secure ends with string. Boil 1| to
2 hours.
STEAMED RAISIN PUFF
Ingredients: ■ Method:
\ Cup 3 sugar 11 Mix in the order given. Drop into small
a" Tablespoons melted greased cups and let steam 35 minutes.
V 2 cup U milk Serve with MUMS Vanilla Custard.
1 Cup flour
2 Teaspoons MUMS
Baking Powder
Vi Cup chopped raisins
STEAMED FRUIT PUDDING
Ingredients: Method:
3 Teaspoons 1 mums Mix dr Y ingredients together and add suet,
Baking Powder mixing thoroughly; lastly, add the liquid.
y 2 Teaspoon fine p u t j n mQ ulds and steam 3 hours. Serve
1 Cup molasses with Vanilla Custard.
1 soda
Vi Cup raisins
Vi Cup currents
1 Teaspoon mixed spices
STRAWBERRY SHORTCAKE
Ingredients: Method:
4 Tea P spoons r mums Mix d *Y ingredients, work in butter with
Baking Powder tips of fingers, and add milk gradually.
1 2 Tab S ies°poon Sa sugar Toss on floured board, divide in two
'4 C to % n cu P butter parts. Pat, roll out, and bake 12 minutes
1 to iy 3 qts. strawberries in hot oven in layer cake tins. Sweeten
strawberries to taste. Crush slightly and
put between and on top of short cake.
Allow from 1 to 1-| boxes of berries to
each short cake. Serve with cream, plain
or whipped.


SPONGE PUDDING
Ingredients: Method:
% Cup sugar" buttcl Cream butter and sugar, add eggs, well-
i cupfiour beaten, then flour and Baking Powder, and
1 TeaspoonMUMS enough milk to make a batter. Steam 1
Little milk hour or a little longer.
WAHROONGA PIE
Ingredients: Method:
1 Cup sugar Beat eggs well, add sugar and melted
1 Ta butte P r° on melted butter and beat again. Add milk, mix
2 a Small "teaspoons mums B ? k ! ng P ° wder and flour together and
iv Cup^’flour° wder stir into mixture * Flavour with essence .of
Essence of lemon lemon. Beat well and bake in two round,
shallow tins in a hot oven. Spread with
jam and place one on top of the other.
Serve hot with cream.
WISEMAN’S PUDDING
Ingredients: Method:
2 Teaspoons r mums Mix in a basin, flour, Baking Power, salt,
if. Teaspoon sa7 der suet > curra nts and sugar, and make into a
ii lb. Finely chopped suet firm, light paste with water. Tie in a
1 Heaped cup currants , , , , , ,
4 07.. Brown sugar pudding cloth or mould and boil or steam
3 Cups lukewarm water hours


Cold Puddings, Jellies, &c.
APRICOT WHIP
Ingredients: Method:
1 Package mums lemon Dissolve MUMS Lemon or Orange Jelly
°c r ,yS" 8e Fru “ J '“ y Crystals in hot water; add salt, apricot
L?Sp h oS»I,T pulp “d juice and chill by setting in
% Cup apricot pulp cracked ice or very cold water. When
y a Cup apricot juice a l mos t set, beat with egg beater to very
stiff froth, until stiff enough to hold its
shape. Pile lightly in sherbet glasses lined
with three or four lady fingers, or in small
moulds, and chill until ready to serve.
Sweetened fresh, stewed, or canned apricots
may be used. Serves 6.
CHERRY MONTICELLO
Ingredients: Method:
2 Packets mums Fruit Dissolve one package in one cup of boiling
pinch y sait >stas my water and one cup of cold water. Chill
% Cup whipped'eream until firm. Dissolve other package and
l Pint cold water the sa Jt similarly. Chill until it thickens,
but not set; whip to a stiff froth and fold
in cream. Chill in ring mould until very
firm. To serve, turn cream mixture on
serving plate and heap centre with spoon-
fuls of the plain cherry jelly. Serves 10
to 1 2.


FRUIT WHIP
Ingredients: Method:
Jeiiy Crystals Dissolve cherry jelly in boiling water.
1 Cup canned cherry juice Add cherry juice. Cool. When almost
1 C “= P hm,“' d s ,„"“',nd set ’ beat t 0 vcr y stiff both. Fold in fruit
m and mar A m A',°^ s - Pile in glasses and
pieces serve with MUMS Custard. Chill. Serves
12.
GINGER LAYER JELLY
Ingredients: Method:
i Packet n mums Fruit Dissolve the calvesfoot jelly in a cup of
(CalveSooO ls dot: water > a dd the liquid from preserved
™w e ;„fj„ 2 r 'Unused ginger V and. when cooling, stir in a few
1 PactrSuMS Fruit * ° f 3nd " S ‘ X «
jelly Crystals (lemon) sliced nuts. Stand to set in flat vessel.
Dissolve the lemon jelly in one pint of hot
water, and, when thickening, fold in the
stiffly beaten whites of eggs. Whip to a
light sponge, and pour on other jelly when
it is set. Before pouring on, draw a hot
knife across the surface of ginger jelly, cut
in squares and serve with cream or MUMS
Custard. Serves 12.
GLORIFIED RICE
Ingredients: Method:
.Fruit Je.ly Crystals Dissolve jelly crystals in half pint of hot
% pint canned^pineapple water - Add canned pineapple juice or any
2 C&W&ffS, fruit J uice * When 3 Cold Hquid,
4 Tabier p h oons ed su C gar m Whip t 0 lhe consiste ncy of heavy whipped
Sait to taste ° cream. Have cold boiled rice cooked dry.
Fold the rice into the whipped jelly. Add
one cup whipped cream, then sugar, and
salt to taste. Set in a cold place to harden.


JELLIED APPLE SNOW
Ingredients: Method:
x jelly p ee l ( slice an d core apples, and stew gently
3 cooking apples with cloves in sufficient water to cover
Few te cioves 2 eggs fruit until quite soft. Rub apples through
sieve on to lemon jelly crystals. Stir until
crystals are thoroughly dissolved, whip
the whites of eggs and fold into jelly.
When cool and thickening, whip and
stand to set.
JELLIED CREAM COFFEE
Ingredients: Method:
1 Pa ? k .® t mums F , r , uit . Make one pint black coffee and pour over
Jelly Crystals (lemon) . c
i Pint water fruit jelly crystals through muslin or very
3 e ground° coffee ure fine strainer, stirring until crystals are
y 2 Pint whipped cream thoroughly dissolved. Cool. When thick-
ening, whip in cream. Turn into mould
to set, and serve with MUMS Custard.
JELLY WITH FRUITS
Ingredients: Method:
1 Pi ] l e t mon Ck Fru : it U jJi!y Prepare the jelly with | pint of hot water,
Crystals and, when dissolved, pour a very little
1 ° z i n E haff cherries ’ cut into a mould, which has been
1 oz. French plums, Stoned, r { nsec J { n cold water; it will SOOn Set.
cut in small pieces tt ri • 1 1 - . c ,
white of i egg Whisk the white of egg to a stiff froth,
% pfn^'hot 1 4ater C ° lounne and stir into the remaining jelly. When
* cool, but not setting, divide in half and
colour one half pink with cochineal. Into
the pink half stir and whisk the pieces of
French plums, into the white half the
cherries. Place one half in the mould and
allow to set; then the other half, which
must be kept warm, so as not to stiffen.
When quite set, turn out, and there will
be a very pretty effect. In case it should
break in turning out, it will be nearly as
pretty arranged in jelly glasses, or in a
rocky heap on a glass dish.


JELLIED CUSTARD
Ingredients: Method:
1 Pa Fruft e Jelly A crys l tais 0n Make a soft custard of the last four in-
-1 Cup hot water gredients, as follows: Beat egg slightly:
y A Cup sugar add sugar and salt; mix well. Pour on
74 Teaspoon salt - t1 , i • 1 , 1 1 . .
2 Cups milk milk, and cook in double boiler, stirring
until it thickens sufficiently to coat the
spoon. Cool.
Dissolve MUMS Lemon Jelly Crystals in
hot water. Cool; when it begins to
thicken, add the custard; pour into
moulds. Chill until firm.
For variation add half a cup of any pre-
served fruit with the custard, using the
syrup drained from the fruit as a sauce.
JELLIED PINEAPPLES
Ingredients: Method:
4 cup e s ap wlter Pee l anc * core one small pineapple, and cut
2 Pa e cke r t t s SP MUMs ug Fruit into cubes * Put into saucepan with water
Jelly Crystals (Calves- and sugar. Boil for about 15 minutes and
pour syrup over jelly crytals; stir till dis-
solved and add pineapple cubes. Put in
a cool place to set. Serves 12.
MUMS TRIFLE
Ingredients: Method:
C Smaif spongecakes Split the cakes and spread thickly with
f pint Ra creani J am * Arrange them in the bottom of a
1 wine- g ias^herr ,stard fill up all spaces with maca-
strawberry conserve roons and ratafias. Soak with wine as you
proceed. Make a custard, as directed, with
MUMS Custard Powder, and pour over
ingredients in dish. Let it stand till cold.
Add jelly made from MUMS strawberry
or raspberry jelly crystals, and just before
serving pour over whipped cream.


PINEAPPLE BAVARIAN CREAM
Ingredients: Method:
i Packet mums lemon Dissolve lemon fruit jelly in a half pint
y 2 Pint hot water of hot water and add a half pint of juice
Can of pineapple from a can of pineapple. When cold and
still liquid, whip to consistency of
whipped cream. Add a cup of shredded
pineapple. Pour into moulds, and set in
a cold place to harden. Turn from the
mould and garnish with sliced pineapple
and cherries or grapes. Whipped cream
adds to richness of the dessert, but it is not
necessary.
MINT SAUCE JELLY
Extra Special Prize Recipe
Ingredients: Method:
Bor 10 stalks of mint Wash and strip mint and chop up fine,
1 Cup vinegar . r , 1 i m j
i pinch salt bring water nearly to the boil and pour
1 Pac c k r e y t stais U TcaivL U fo t o J t) l!y on calvesfoot jelly crystals, stir in mint
i cup water when crystals are thoroughly dissolved,
add warmed vinegar to which has been
added salt. Stand in shallow vessel and
set.
ORANGE FLIP
Ingredients: Method:
1 S!“ creai ? Dissolve l’elly crystals in a pint of very
Rind of % orange hot water and stand to set. Whip cream
1 Pa c k o'stais L Yora F ng U eV e!ly and whites of eggs separately and fold
into jelly when it is thickening. Grate
rind of orange into mixture, then whip
the whole into a light sponge. Pile in
custard glasses and serve with MUMS
Custard.


PINEAPPLE ORANGE CHARLOTTE
Ingredients: Method:
Fruit Jelly Crystals Dissolve fruit jelly crystals in the hot
1 cup coid W water water; add cold water. Set dish in pan
1 Ir s ft'ed h pineapple of very. cold water. When almost set,
whip with egg-beater to very stiff froth.
Add stiffly beaten egg white, and beat
until mixture will hold its shape. Put
two tablespoons of grated pineapple in
bottom of each glass, and pile orange
charlotte lightly and very high on the
pineapple.
STRAWBERRY PINEAPPLE WHIP
Ingredients: Method:
1 PaC berry M Frui S t je?iy' Dissolve fruit jelly crystals in the hot
1 Cup r hot a water water; add pineapple juice (fresh pine-
i Cup pineapple juice apple must first be heated and sweetened).
Cool. When almost set, place in a pan
of very cold water, and whip with egg-
beater to very stiff froth. Pile lightly in
glasses and serve at once.
Wholly Set Up and Printed in Australia by William Homer, 31 Cunningham Street, Sydney.


MexicanVanilla
ailS comes the
twitching Flavour
Pure wnilla
r
There is in all nature no other flavouring with
such delicacy, such elusive charm, such
refined sweetness, as the true essence of well
cured first quality Mexican Vanilla Beans.
Nature is a wonderful chemist, but while she allows us an
insight into some of her simpler formulas, she has so far
jealously guarded the secret of the most wonderful flavour
she has yet produced.
While some flavours can be perfectly imitated, little progress
has been made in imitating the exquisite flavour derived
from the Mexican Vanilla Bean.
In keeping wiih our high standard of
Purity, we are proud to say that in SKCums
Pure Vanilla Custard Powder you get
the true flavour of the Mexican Vanilla
flfean.
Custard Potuder
is mith
c thetfinest
essence gf Vanilla
urns.
Flavoured wlh the fin'd Van.Ha
n ? ar,«fac ?; .. ; p9 »
SYDNEY
NSW
Net l6v0z/Wit0HT


Dont
take
isky
<z
s
u
EST
WtTH
THE
er'cent
ENom
99/100
CREAfJk OF TA'P-TAR
make
sure
with
urns.
BARI NG POWDER,
MADE FROM
c PURE CREAM OF TARTAR -
