

c&-
MUNICIPAL TAXATION
Historically, Economically, and Locally Considered
Bv PERCY R. MEGGY
Leaflet No. i, issued by the SINGLE TAX LEAGUE OF IV.A., Office /4 Stems Chambers , 120
Barrack Street , Perth , where Single Tax Literature , including all Henry George’s Works, may be obtained
on application to the Secretary.
I.—INTRODUCTORY AND GENERAL, purposes, is levied from its natural source— that the luxuries in question were largely
vhtu ,1 1• . ,• . 1.. the site value of land created solely by the left off, the trades which supplied them
When the history of taxation, whether f th entire community, and, —especially the clock and watchmakers—
for Sta eor municipal purposes, comes to bel ing by rig ht solely to the were ruined, and the tax, instead of bring-
be finally written, it will be seen that it , whole-then, Ind not till then, ing in £10,000,000 as Pitt expected,
represents the progress of the species from P m P the human race b ’ ve foughfc itB way scarcely brought in half. The great
slavery to freedom. In the eai best stages thr b tbe j ungle Q f slavery to the lapd of Minister had, in fact, achieved what
of civilisation the slavery was com- . . ' Dowell characterises as “ a fiscal fiasco un-
plete, as for instance, was that of the equalled in the history of our taxation.”
Israelites under the Egyptians, or of the , WhpronTinn t.lie astonished Minister re-
helots in the so-called Grecian republics, and From the earliest times there seems to ~ L Triple Assessment as it was
even down to our own times in the case of have been a difference 111 the methods of P' , imnosed'a property and income
the African blacks, in each of which cases collecting revenues for the State and for the ‘ ’ c ' . . stead That was
not a portion of their time only, but the municipality, although the guiding pnn- tax of In whth Gillray, The
whole of their lives was taken in taxation ciple in both has generally been the same f caricaturist depicted John" Bull,
by the ruling classes. History has been to squeeze the very utmost possible out of & rueful cou ; iten ance, answering a
simply a continuous record of the attempts, those who had no power of icdress. In the , i n a wlrole
more or less successful to escape from taxa- “ good old times,” to which some of us look knock at the door, and letting a vno e
moie or less successiui, 10 escape iioni iaxa , ... group of monstrosities in the shape of the
f ridc onu:,^'tioT ,rC9S,Ve " ° r «««} X„Twa”
its mode of impositio: &
British history almost starts with the trial slaveiy a rich man, esp c j Australian statesman, Robert Lowe, who,
revolt of the Britons against the Romans, had made himself persona y 0111 - in bis budget scheme for that year, trans-
not so much on account of the taxation, the Grown, stood a chance thrown mufced the axes
on horses ami carriages,
which was generally a tenth of the produce, mto prison on some trivia pre , < servants, and armorial bearyigs into
as on account of the far heavier condition whole possessions confiscated But the ’ been done in
involved by having to convey the tribute generally accepted moral principle uuderly- ' « >
forking instances over wretchedly bad ing taxation was that laid down by Adam nog
roads to the fiscal barn. It was the terrible &™th as the first of his famous four canons ....
slavery of the French peasantry, who were °' taxation namely, t lat ic su jec s j-s u t j n the smaller area of municipalities
compelled to give large portions of their every State should contribute to the sup- the evidence of a man > s ability to contri-
time to labor for the municipality and the port of the Government as near yas po. bute to the municipal expenditure has been
State, not to mention the neighboring land- proportion to their respective abilities. d for severa f centu ries, at any rate iu
owners, and who were taxed in almost to ascertain this was the problem J En | land) . the sort of house in which he
every conceivable way, that led to the most which puzzled am sti l puzz es * anc lives. In England and Scotland, although
convulsive outbreak of modern times ; but I*, 16 Exchequer a-n o onia leasui j n I re l ari ti, municipal revenues are
whether the service is rendered directly, in jn all parts of the British, an , are y, ra j ged a i mo st entirely in this way. The
which case the bondage is self-apparent, or 111 other dominions as we . taxation is not meant as a duty on a par-
indirectly by means of taxation, makes no .... ticular form of expenditure, but it is as-
difference in the result, which is that those A hundred years ago every article of sumed that taxes levied in this way are pro-
who are thus forced to contribute of their luxury worn or used by the rich was re- portionate to a man’s means of paying,
labor or of its products to pay for the ex- garded as an evidence of wealth which The supposition is a shrewd one, it has the
penses of State or municipal government should be taxed for the purpose of carrying additional merit of being ingenious, and as
are virtually slaves to that extent so long as G n the great war. Horses and carriages, a general rule may be taken to be pretty
the forced contribution lasts. men and women servants, plate-chests, nea r the mark. Whether house property is
. . . . racing establishments, dogs, armorial bear- t be proper source from whence taxation
At present we are in the era of partial ings, the hair-powder used by the rich on should come, whether a rate levied thereon
slavery so far as the forced contribution of their gorgeous pig-tails (whence the tax de- (g not a very serious duty on a particular
unjustly levied taxes is concerned, and of rived its name of the guinea-pig tax), form of expenditure and likely to be as
complete slavery so far as land monopoly clocks, and last, but not least, watches detrimental to the trades involved as the
is concerned, since, as the Brahmins said which in those days were attached to the duty on watches was in the time of Pitt,
ages ago —“ To whomsoever the soil at any seals that dangled from the fobs of the and whether taxes based on this source do
time belongs to him belong the fruits of it. beaus, or depended gracefully from the not necessarily interfere with and hamper
Parasols and elephants mad with pride are girdles of the fair—were all taxed, with the local industry, are quite other and different
the flowers of a grant of land.” When result which a political ecenomist, if not a questions with which I will endeavor to
taxation, whether for state or municipal political Minister, might have foreseen, deal later on.


II —HISTORICAL AND ECONOMICAL, light and air, helped in no small measure to characteristic of our great leader, which has
’ . , , • ..... deteriorate the national physique. made his works known and loved wherever
The generally accepted basis of taxa-
tion in Great Britain, and, as a conse-
quence, in the British colonies, is house
property. Of the total amount of property
and income and personal taxes levied in
the United Kingdom in 1889, the year given
by Mulhall, amounting to a little over
millions sterling, millions was levied on
houses, 24 millions out of the 44 millions,
by the way, being levied under the Income
Tax. That is to say, about one-third of this
form of taxation was derived from that
particular source. The house tax seems to
be specially characteristic of Great Britain,
inasmuch as five European countries —Rus-
sia, Spain, Sweden, Holland, and Belgium
—have no house tax, and of the total Euro-
pean revenue derived from property and
income and personal taxes, namely, 95£ mil-
lions sterling, in the year named, only
14 millions sterling, or about a seventh,
came from houses.
House taxes, or hearth money, as they
were originally called, date from very
ancient times, and were well-known in the
Anglo-Saxon period, a tax being imposed
for every hearth in all houses except those
of the poor. But this method of taxation
fell into disuse after the Norman conquest,
at any rate in England, but re-appeared at
the Restoration, when the first tax known
as hearth money or chimney money was
imposed in hopes of making up the de-
ficiency in the revenue granted to Charles
11. The occupier and not the landlord
was the person charged. The tax,
as Dowell tells us, was specially
disliked as an importation from France,
ever considered to be the habitat
of taxes oppressive to the poor,
because it reached a class of persons pre-
viously out of the range of direct taxation,
because it was farmed, but principally
because it led to the inquisitorial visits of
the chimney-men, as the collectors of the
tax were called, who invaded the English-
man's castle with impunity, and destroyed
that sacred privacy which the Englishman
has ever reckoned among his immemorial
and inalienable rights. For these reasons
the tax was repealed by William 111., in
order, as the Act states, “ to erect a lasting
monument of their Majesties’ goodness in
every hearth in the Kingdom.”
As a result of the large expenditure in-
volved by the recoinage, rendered neces-
sary owing to the miserable state to which
the coinage had been reduced by clipping,
which involved the payment of a consider-
able sum to the non-fraudulent owners of
the clipped coin, another house tax was
imposed shortly afterwards —that on win-
dows—which was really a tax on light and
air, with the result that houses were built
without proper provision of windows, and
in Edinburgh a whole row of villas was
erected without a single window in the
bedrooms, and similar results obtained else-
where. This always unpopular and ex-
tremely unsuccessful experiment in taxation
was ultimately repealed in 1851, but not
before it had nearly ruined the glaziers,
and, by depriving the people of proper
deteriorate the national physique.
In the meantime the American War of
Independence had been the innocent cause
of the third and last tax of the same kind,
the house tax, more or less as we know it
to day in Perth, having been introduced
into our fiscal system by Lord North. This
now famous tax was imposed on the annual
value of houses, a principle said to have
been suggested by Adam Smith in “The
Wealth of Nations,” the occupier and not
the landlord to be charged, and houses
under the annual value of £5 not to be
taxed. In 1834 there happened to be a
surplus in the Imperial Exchequer, and it
was a toss up whether the house or the
window tax should be abolished. The
house tax won the day, and temporarily
disappeared, but in 1851 the policy was re-
versed, the house tax was recalled, and the
window tax disappeared from our fiscal
system for ever, to be followed, it is to be
hoped, at no distant date, by the tax on
houses. In introducing the Bill for its re-
imposition in 1851, the late Lord Halifax,
then Sir Charles Wood, characterised his
house tax as “ low in amount, unexceptional
in the manner of levy, wide in its exemp-
tions as regards the people, affecting only
property and income,” and, in his opinion,
“one of the fairest and best that could be
levied.”
So much for the history of taxation in
general, and of this special form of muni-
cipal taxation in particular. Judged by
the light of political economy is a house tax
“one of the fairest and best that can be
levied ?” Is it not, like all the other taxes
to which reference has been made, including
the famous assesed taxes of Pitt, a tax on
production, and has not the invariable ex-
perience been, as shown by the effect of the
taxes named, to diminish production, and
consequently to lessen the demand for em-
ployment ? Adam Smith’s first canon of
taxation —that each subject should con-
tribute towards the expenses of Govern-
ment according to his abilities —has been
already given. It was the tersest,
clearest, and best expression of the
philosophy of the old, the pioneer school
of political economy, the school which laid
the foundations for that which will eventu-
ally replace it, for that great school of the
future whose basic principle is the great
central fact, so long overlooked, that land
values are created by the people, belong by
right to the people, and should be appro-
priated by the people and spent on behalf
of the people.
The first canon by which Henry George
judges of the merit of a tax is “ that
it bear as lightly as possible upon produc-
tion —so as least to check the increase of
the general fund from which taxes must be
paid and the community maintained,” and
in dealing with this part of his subject he
gives his famous illustration of the tax on
date trees imposed by Mohammed Ali,
which caused the Egyptian fellahs to cut
down their trees, whereas a tax of twice
the amount on the land produced no such
result. In that brilliant and incisive style,
the English language has spread, he thus
summarises the effects of taxation on in-
dustry and exchange;—“Tax manufac-
tures, and the effect is to check manufac-
ture ; tax improvements, and the effect is
to lessen improvement; tax commerce, and
the effect is to prevent exchange ; tax
capital and the effect is to drive it away ;
but the whole value of land may be taken
in taxation, and the only effect will be to
stimulate industry, to open new oppor-
tunities to capital, and to increase the pro-
duction of wealth.” I have dealt with the
question so far in this general way in order
that, in my next article, when I propose to
deal with the subject from a local point of
view, we shall be the better able to judge
of the merits or demerits of the particular
methods of raising municipal revenue as ap-
plied in Perth.
lII.—LOCAL AND PARTICULAR.
The Act for establishing municipalities in
this colony was passed in 1871, and in 1876
the royal assent was given to the first
Municipal Institutions Act, which has been
since amended no less than eight times,
after the usual manner of legislators in
W.A., who seem to make laws for no other
object than to give themselves something
to worry over in the following session.
During the quarter of a century which has
elapsed since the first of these Municipal
Acts was passed the value of the land
and improvements in the city of Perth
has risen from a mere bagatelle to
£4,200,000. Roughly speaking, for there
are no figures easily obtainable from which
an accurate statement can be made, half of
this value may be assigned to the land and
half to the improvements on the land. The
site value of the land has, therefore, in-
creased during that period from certainly a
very small amount to over two millions
sterling. The same law of increase in land
value with the growth of population is in ope-
ration in every growing town. The site value
of London, to give the biggest instance on
record, has risen from £3,000,000 in 1830 to
£15,000,000 per annum, every penny of
which goes into the pockets, not of the
people who created the value, but of the
fortunate Portman - Westminster - Bedford
trio, et al., whom a stupid British public al-
low to monopolise the whole of the London
soil.
The value attaching to the buildings and
other improvements in the City of Perth is,
of course, directlv due to the application of
labor and capital, and should belong to
private individuals without any deduction
for any purpose whatever, on the principle
that the producer is entitled to the full
amount of his product; but the value at-
taching to the land apart from the im-
provements, the site value, is evidently
given to it by the presence and
needs of the people, and, unlike the value
of the improvements, would entirely disap-
pear if the people went away. If we admit,


what every worker will surely hold as the the case that the Council in many instances The Act provides that the rate shall be
very first axiom of his political faith, that subsequently raised the assessment to £lO levied on ‘ the full fair average estimated
the product should belong to him who per foot, which was then in probably every amount of rent less the amount of all
creates it, then the value of the land should case a long way short of the real capital rates and taxes, and a deduction of 10 per
> . , . , , i t a. - i : i- f imnairo incnranop M.nn nnrtroincrs.
belong to the community which has created
it, just as the improvement value should
belong to the creators of that. Any system
of taxation based on justice should assured-
ly make its first call on a source of revenue
which is so clearly marked out as the social
fund whence all municipal expenses can be
easily met without taking a penny from the
legitimate earnings of labor and capital.
Let us see how the present system deals
with this natural source of taxation, this
rock in the desert which only awaits the
striking of the rod to flow freely over a dry
and thirsty land.
The Municipal Institutions Act of 1895,
which is the one now in force, makes two
distinct provisions with respect to taxation :
—(1) That “unimproved and unoccupied”
land shall be rated at per cent, of its
capital value, which it defines as “ the pro-
bable and reasonable price at which such
land in fee simple, exclusive of improve-
ments, might be expected to sell at the
time when valued for the purposes of this
Act,” and (2) that improved or occupied
land shall be rated on “ the full fair average
estimated amount of rent at which such
land might reasonably be expected to let
from year to year, less the amount of all
rates and taxes, and a deduction of 10 per
cent for repairs, insurance and other out-
goings,” but in no case shall such assess-
ment be on less than 4 per cent, of the fair
capital value. Now, the question is—how
does this operate in practice? because an
Act may be very good in theory but may be
perfectly spoiled by the way in which it is
carried out.
Taking the “ unimproved and unoccu-
pied ” land first, I find on enquiry that such
land in Hay Street West ranges in value
from £l5 to £2O a foot, while for land in
the central part of Hay Street no less than
£BOO a foot has been paid. There is a con-
siderable amount of this “unimproved and
unoccupied” land in Hay Street West, to
which the increasing pressure and growing
needs of the residents in and around Perth
have been steadily adding value every year.
If a tax of Ik per cent, on the capital value
of this land were really imposed a good
effect would undoubtedly be produced, since
a rate of 3s. in the £—which is what the
combined general, sanitary and water
rates amount to—on per cent, of the
capital value would be equal to a tax of
£l 2s. 6d. per £lOO, or nearly 3d. in the £
on the full capital value. That would be
little enough, to be sure, seeing that the
owners of these vacant lots are reaping all
the benefit from the improvements going on
around them, and from the increasing
pressure of the population, without doing
anything in return. Still, it would be
something. But, as a general rule, the
assessors appear to have assessed the “ un-
improved and unoccupied ” land at its
lowest possible value—at £7 10s. per foot
in Hay Street West, for example, instead
of at £l5 or £2O. So generally was this
value. In one particular instance, referred
to in an interview with Mr. Courthope, one
of the valuators, a vacant lot was valued at
£2,500, which was so much below its real
value that, when the owner appealed against
the assessment on the ground that it was
too high, the Council immediately raised it to
£3,000. The annual value of this, reckoned
under the Act at per cent., would be
£225, on which a combined rate of 3s would
bring £33.15, not a very large amount con-
sidering the additional value accruing every
year from the increasing pressure of popu-
lation. But this £3,000 is probably a long
way below the real site value of the land
measured by the price which adjacent
land is fetching per foot at the present
time.
The Town Clerk complains that, although
the capital value of the land and improve-
ments in Perth is about £4,201,000, the
amount of the assessment for 1898 only
amounts to £269,207, on which a general
rate of Is 6d in the £ would only bring in a
revenue of £20,000, even if it could be
collected, which is not the case, there
being always a considerable item for arrears.
The total amount of estimated revenue for
the current year for this municipality is
£68,000, of which £20,000 is a Government
advance for surface drainage, and is there-
fore an extra that would not occur in ordi-
nary times, about £5,000 comes from
licenses, building permits, jetty dues, mar-
ket and Town Hall rents, and £20,000
comes from the general rate already men-
tioned, and there is a similar amount of
Government subsidy. In addition to this
about £20,00) has to be found for water
and sanitary purposes, so that about £40,000
is the total amount for the present year
which the combined rates are expected to
bring in. Taking half the capital value of
the land and improvements to represent the
site value, apart from the improvements,
which is the generally accepted basis for
rough calculations of this sort, gives
£2,100,000 for the site value alone, on
which a rate of in the £ would bring
£39,375, or about as much as the general,
sanitary, and water rates will bring in
together, and it is safe to assert that there
would be no arrears, since, even if the land-
lord ran away, the land and its site value
would always remain. Putting it another
way, a rate of 2 per cent, on £2,100,000
would bring in £42,000, while a tax of 5d in
the £ would realise £43,750.
In my concluding article I will deal with
the manner in which the improvement tax
is levied, and contrast its effects with those
of a tax on land values alone.
IV.—“ FAIREST AND BEST.”
Having dealt with the manner in which
the rate on “unimproved and unoccupied ”
land is levied in this city, I now pass on
to deal with the rate on improved land.
cent for repairs, insurance, and outgoings.”
That seems tolerably clear. A great deal
depends on how an Act is carried out. Mr.
B. C. Wood, M.L.A., one of the valuators,
informed an interviewer that they “ made a
house to house canvas, and having ascer-
tained the rents actually paid, they made
what they considered to be a fair deduction
for outgoings and let the remainder stand
as the ratable value.” As an illustration
of their method, Mr. Wood stated that a
house bringing in a rent of £7O would be
assessed at £45, on which a combined
general, sanitary and water rate of 3s. in
the £ would bring in £6 155., if the authori-
ties were fortunate enough to get it paid.
I was informed by another equally good
authority that a house bringing in a rent of
£lOO would, as a general rule, be assessed
at £65, on which a combined rate of 3s. in
the £ would bring in £9 15s. Whether the
assessment is levied in strict accordance
with the terms of the Act I leave others to
judge, but if I were arguing in favor of a
tax on improvements, which I am not, I
should say that the proportion taken by the
valuators for the assessment was consider-
ably under instead of over the proportion
laid down by the Act.
The objection to a tax on improvements
is that it falls on the improver, and is in
the nature of a direct fine on him for
putting the land to the best possible use.
Just as the tax on hearths had a tendency
to lessen the number of hearths or chimneys
in the houses and consequently to deprive
the people of heat, which was very much
wanted in England in the long winter
nights ; and just as the tax on windows had
a tendency to deprive them of air and light,
so a tax on houses has a tendency to de-
prive them of space, of domestic elbow
room, which is very nearly as important as
heat, air or light. And just as a tax on
hearths lessened the employment of the
chimney makers, and the tax on windows
narrowed that of the glaziers, and the tax
on clocks and watches, or on any other
articles produced by labor, injured the par-
ticular trade by which the article was pro-
duced, so a tax on improvements has a ten-
dency to diminish the employment in a
large number of allied professions and
trades, such as those of the architect, the
builder, the chimney maker, the glazier,
the furnisher and decorator, and others too
numerous to mention.
The two methods of taxation —that on
land values, apart from improvements,
and that on improvements—may be
briefly contrasted as follows: —A tax
levied on the site value of the land (1)
would come from the social fund created
solely by the presence of the people, which
under normal conditions would increase in
value every year with the increase in the
population, and which, therefore, forms the
natural source whence all necessary social
expenses should be raised; (2) it would
have a tendency to force the owners of


“ unimproved and unoccupied” land to im- arrears. The site value of the land in At the meeting of the Single Tax
prove and use the same, or, sooner than the municipality could be ascertained League held March 16, at which the above
E the tax, to part with a portion of the with comparative ease, and a rate paper was read,thefollowingresolutionswere
Ito those who would improve it, which of, say, 4d. in the £ on the capi- unanimously adopted: —1. “This league
tendency, by increasing the supply of land tal value, roughly reckoned at £2,100,000, considers the present system of municipal
in the market, would lessen its speculative would amount to £65,000 odd and would taxation unjust, because under it (a) he
value and lower rent; (3) it would conse- fill the coffers of the municipality who improves his land is fined for so doing
quently open up avenues for employment wihout touching one penny of the j n proportion to the value of the improve-
and generally stimulate industry and trade ; individual earnings of any member of n ient, while (b) he who does not improve
and (4) it would be easy to assess, economi- the community. This is the policy bis land is allowed to benefit by the im-
cal to'collect, and there need be no arrears, which has long been advocated by provements going on around him, and to
On the other hand, a tax on improvements the Municipal Association of N.S.W., the appropriate the yearly increment of value
(1) would come from the individual fund of principle of which has been admitted by the accruing from any increase of population,
capital or labor, and, by lessening the return Legislature of that colony for the raising of without being called upon to contribute as
to either, would tend to drive away both ; State revenue, which the London County muc h as he ought towards the municipal
(2) it would fall on the improver in pro- Council have endorsed by 55 votes to 47, expenditure necessary for the protection of
portion to the value of his improvement, which is favored by several of our sister his person and his property.” 2. “ This
and its tendency w'ould necessarily, there- colonies, and which it is high time the league is further of opinion that the proper
fore, be to check improvement; (3) it would municipal authorities of W. A. should adopt, basis for municipal taxation is the site value
consequently lessen the avenues for em- It is really what the house tax imposed by G f the land, apart from the improvements,
ployment and have a generally reactionary Sir Charles Wood was not, namely, - the BUC b site value having been given to the
effect on industry and trade; and (4) it “fairest and best” that the ingenuity of l an (J by the presence of the people, and
would be very difficult to assess, very man could possibly devise. W hen this great forming, therefore, the natural source
expensive to collect, and there would and far-reaching change in the method of whence all expenditure on behalf of the
always be a considerable proportion of taxation has been universally carried out, people should be met.” 3. “This league
arrears. both for State and municipal purposes, and therefore recommends that the Municipal
It is safe to assert that if the basis of our the revenue requisite for social expenses is Institutions Act of 1895 should be so
municipal taxation were land values, irre- derived, not from the individual earnings of amended as to provide that all land within
spective of improvements, instead of as labor and capital, but from the social fund the municipality, whether used or not,
now improvements more or less irrespec- created solely by the presence of the people, should be assessed for municipal and other
tive of land values, the town clerk w'ould then and not till then w'ill the era of Indus- ra tes on its full capital value, irrespective
have no further cause to complain that out trial slavery have disappeared and that of G f improvements, and that to facilitate this
of a total value of £4,200,' 00 for land and industrial freehom have dawned upon the a periodical valuation of all land within the
improvements only £269,207 was assessed, human race. municipality should be made, apart from
and that a large portion of the rate was in the improvements thereon.”
Reprinted from Clare‘s Weekly , at the City Print Works, Station street, Perth.
