

MUNICIPAL
GAS WORKS.
PUBLISHED BY THE MUNICIPAL
ASSOCIATION OF N. S. W.




MUNICIPAL
GAS WORKS
NO SHAREHOLDER’S DIVIDENDS !
NO BONUSES!
NO EXTRA OFFICES!
NO DIRECTOR’S FEES 1
GAS AT THE NET COST OF PRODUCTION.
CHEAP HOUSE LIGHTING !
CHEAP STREET LIGHTING!
CHEAP HEATING!
SgfrlUjr:
F. W. WHITE, PKINTEE, 39 MAEKET STREET, WEST.
1886
PUBLISHED BY THE MUNICIPAL ASSOCIATION
OF NEW SOUTH WALES.
FOE THE USE OF
jCoRPOF^ATioNS.


The information contained in this pamphlet has
been kindly supplied by M. J. Hammond, Esq,
M.L.A., at the request of the Executive Committee
of the Municipal Association, who decided in the
interest of the various Municipalities to have the same
published and a copy forwarded to each Council as a
permanent reference, should the question of the con-
struction of Municipal Gasworks arise at any time in
any of them.


PROPOSED MUNICIPAL GAS WORKS.
A meeting of the Ratepayers of Ashfield was held
in the local School of Arts on January 23, 1885,
to consider the question of erecting Municipal
Gasworks. There were about 400 persons present,
and the Mayor (Mr. J. W. Watkin) occupied the
chair. Among the gentlemen on the platform were
the Hons. A. H. Jacob and S. H. Terry, Ms.L.C.,
Mr. M. Hammond, M.L.A., the Mayor of Canter-
bury (Mr. B. Taylor), and Aldermen J. Pope, A.
Brown, J. Whyte, J. Mortley, T. Ireland, J. Shilling,
and others.
The Chairman briefly explained the object of the.
meeting, and remarked that Mr. Hammond would
explain the whole proposals of the Council in detail.
Mr. Hammond, who on rising was received with
applause, said the first proposal to construct
Municipal Gasworks in New South Wales was made
on the 9th of October, 1883, in a minute submitted
to the Ashfield Council by himself, as Mayor, which
had been, as they knew, printed in pamphlets and
circulated. This was done after having failed to
arrange with the Australian Gaslight Company for
the lighting of the streets. The Council at that
time had decided on having 250 lamps, the largest
number of any suburb around Sydney. In
writing to the Company, believing it to be
their rule to reduce the price per lamp with
increased consumption, he had asked them in
writing to submit a price for 100, 150, 200, amLB6&


lamps respectively. The answer to this was that
the Company would supply 150 or less at £7 15s.
each per annum, under a contract for five years.
At the same time, they were then supplying Peter-
sham, an adjoining borough, at only £6 15s. for
126 lights, and 6s. 6d. per 1000 feet to private
consumers, as against 9s. to consumers in Ashfield.
Of course they might have had business reasons for
that. However, Ashfield required the light, and
thought they should command their supply as
cheaply as their neighbours. Through that he had
turned his attention towards the construction of
Municipal Gasworks.
He at once entered into communication with
Home and other authorities, from which he trusted
to be able to convince the most sceptical that gas-
making was a Municipal work, and that the proposal
from the first was a sound one. As to the question
of economy, he would come to that further on.
They had now put their hands to the plough, and
he trusted the ratepayers would back them up until
they had successfully established the first Municipal
gasworks in New South Wales. (Applause.) In
coming before the ratepayers, he did so with a keen
and lively sense of the responsibilities of his
position, and that of his brother Aldermen, com-
bined with a high appreciation of the compliment
paid them by the ratepayers for their exhibition of
confidence in so long and patiently submitting to
remain in darkness in order to allow the Council
time to overcome the many difficulties that beset
them. During that delay he had prepared the
Municipal Gas Bill
(applause)—which was required in order to proceed
with the proposed works. At the request of the
Municipal Association, through which he had sub-
mitted the Bill to the Premier, Mr. Stuart kindly


undertook to present it to Parliament. (Applause.)
That gentleman deserved the thanks of the whole
community for his action—(applause) ; and as for
Mr. Dailey, who had charge of the measure in the
Upper House, he could find no words good enough
to thank him, but felt that action was needed as
well as words. (Applause.) The Act now enabled
any Municipality in the colony to construct its
gasworks irrespective of whether works were already
supplying or not, and to borrow money for that
purpose. (Applause.) Having that power conferred
upon them they held in their hands
A Whip
that would in future prevent any gas company from
treating the gas consumers with impunity. (Ap-
plause.) It might be as well to explain that this
Act has nothing whatever to do with the Bill that
was presented to Parliament by Mr. W. T. Poole, in
1881, which was simply a supervising measure, and
which Mr. Stuart had promised to re-introduce at an
early date. Now, in coming to the question before
the meeting, he said the Council promised the rate-
payers 14 months ago that, before finally committing
themselves to this undertaking, a public meeting
would be called, with a competent gas engineer’s
report before them. That promise had been wisely
made, and had been as faithfully kept. They had
estimates now not only from one engineer, but, for
fear of any possible mistake, they had appointed
Two Gas Engineers
out of twelve that had applied in reply to advertise-
ment. One of these gentlemen was selected from
Victoria, the other from Tamworth, in this colony.
They never met each other, nor did either of them
see any of the Aldermen until they had finished their
work, so that these reports had upon them the stamp of
independence. He now invited the keenest scrutiny.


If the Council could in any way be shown to have
acted wrongly in the step they proposed taking, he
would accept it as a friendly act if anyone would
honestly come forward and point it out. Now was
the time to speak, or never. The meeting had been
notified for over twelve months ; they were, there-
fore, not taken by surprise. One of the
Estimates
referred to was for works capable of supplying 24
million cubic feet of gas per annum, with 20 miles of
pipes, weighing 663 tons, and 250 lamps complete ;
this, exclusive of the cost of a site, was £16,000.
The other estimate includes a manufacturing plant
capable of supplying in the future 40 million feet
per annum, with 20 miles of pipes, weighing 861
tons, with 250 lamps ; and this, everything complete,
manager’s residence included, was 4222,000. Mr.
B. estimates there will be (to commence with) 12
million feet consumption ; the other (Mr. W.)
estimates 18 million feet for private consumption,
and about four million for public lamps. With the
latter estimate of consumption they could, with a 4d.
lighting rate in the £, supply gas at about Bs. 6d. per
1000 feet, and then have a large profit. In making
these estimates for the cost of works there should
be but little left to chance. The exact size of pipes
required for a certain supply, the weight accord-
ing to size, and the cost of laying was laid down by
trustworthy authorities to certain scales, and so with
almost all the work in connection with gas works.
There were many simple ways of r 'riving at the
approximate cost of any works which answered as a
general check upon estimates. He then read the
following extract from
A Prominent Gas Engineer
in England as to the cost of gas works, dated April
18, 1884 : —“ The cost of the plant varies, of course,
with the size of the works, and this again is regulated


by the consumption of gas, but generally it may be
stated that the cost of a moderate sized works at
present prices of material and labour, including all
building apparatus and gas holders, amounts in
England to about £4OO per million cubic feet of
gas produced per annum. The distributing ap-
paratus, which includes all main and serving pipes
throughout the district, costs about £2OO per
million more ; so that it may be said that b‘6oo per
million cubic feet of gas produced per annum will,
on the average, cover the cost of building apparatus
and distributing plant of a gas undertaking. The
Parliamentary and legal expenses have to be added
to the above, but that is an uncertain sum which
cannot well be assessed until the whole circum-
stances are known. The above arc English prices,
as I have explained, and an addition has to be made
for freight in dispatching the apparatus to the
colonies, and for the enhanced price of labour there.
As a matter of fact, I find that the capital expendi-
ture in Melbourne is about £llOO per million.
Assuming, however, that there is already a gas
works established in the place to which your friend
refers, and it was proposed by the local authority of
such place to treat with the gas company for the
purchase of the works, the company would not be
willing to accept the mere structure value of the
works, but would want a price for the works as a
going concern — i.c., they would expect and ask a
price equivalent to the commercial value of the
.undertaking. , This price would range between 15
and 25 years . mrchase of the maximum dividends,
according as the company possessed statutory
powers, and therefore a monopoly of the gas supply,
or were liable to competition either by another com-
pany or by the local authority.” Mr. Hammond
said it was only right to explain that the cost of gas-
works in Victoria, through the heavy duty on iron


and other materials, would be considerably greater
than in New South Wales. In the old country the
cost per head of population ranged from 255. to 355.
In this colony they would be safe to reckon the cost
to be from £2 to £8 per head. Thus for Ashfield, with
a scattered population of between 7000 and 8000,
efficient works to meet increased consumption
in the future safely, would cost over £20,000. The
plan that had been prepared for the Borough
some time ago, showing all streets and properties,
greatly facilitated the preparation of estimates by
the engineers. Being arranged to scale, the Aider-
men had fixed the situation of the lamps throughout
the Borough. The length of the pipes were therefore
obtained by simply scaling the distance between the
position of the lamp posts. Compared with the cost
of other works throughout the colony the engineer’s
estimate of £22,000 for Ashfield, he thought, was a
liberal one. He mentioned that of the many gas
works erected throughout the colony, with the
exception of Sydney, none, he believed, had com-
menced with a capital exceeding £IO,OOO. For
instance, the capitals of the following Limited
Liability Companies, were — Parramatta, <£9ooo ;
Tamworth, £7000; Wollongong, £6000: Albury,
£6OOO ; Dubbo, £6OOO ; and Orange, £5000; while
he knew several other works in the hands of private
persons that had cost similar amounts to establish.
The lighting rate for the first year would have to be
relied upon to a great extent, which would probably
be 6d. in the <£, but as private consumption increased,
the lighting rate would be reduced, until possibly,
like many places in the old country, the lighting-
rate would be done away with, and the surplus
profits beyond this point handed over in relief of the
general rates. In any case, using the words of Mr.
Silverthone, in his work on the “ Purchase of Gras
Works,” page 12,


“The Gas Consumer
receives a substanial reduction in the price of gas,
which disposes of the fanciful assertion that he is
being taxed in any form.” He further says : “ The
application of profits arising out of Municipal
management of gas undertakings is, however, a
question that may be well left to the discretion of
the corporations themselves, for whatever their
immediate application may be, they may be reckoned
in the end always to benefit the community in a more
or less direct manner.” Mr. W., one of the engineers
estimates the manufacturing cost of 22 million feet
of gas, including all expenses, at 4s. Ifd. per 1000
feet, but reduces it to Bs. l|d. on the sale of 1250
tons of coke at 12s. per ton, 24,000 gallons of tar at
2d. per gal., and Tl2O profit on the sulphate of
ammonia. This provides for 6 per cent, on
T 22,000, and 17s. 6d. per ton for coal. Fourteen
months ago when the company was charging them
9s. per 1000, he had himself laid before the Council
an estimate showing that they could with their
own works supply gas at ss. per 1000, and liquidate
the debt in a few years ; of course, he was not an
expert, but if the profits on the ’ above consumption
were included with the lighting rate, although,
according to Mr. W.’s estimate, he might have
been a little over sanguine, still he thought, by
strictly economising expenditure, it would be found
that he was not far wide of the mark. In borrowing
the money to construct the works he would suggest
that it be taken for at least 30 years on
Debentures,
so that the Council could, as opportunity offered,
liquidate their debt by re-purchasmg their own stock
from time to time as it might be offered in the
market, the interest to be paid yearly. In
England the debt extended over most purchases
from 80 to 80 years. With respect to the situation


of the works both engineers agreed that
A Railway Site
for Ashfield was better than a water site, partly on
account of the extra cost of construction. It had been
pointed out that there were no nuisances arising from
a properly managed gas works, and from their own
knowledge they never heard of a complaint against
them on that score, although they were always close
to the centres of population. As to the manufacture
and supply of gas being
A Municipal Work
he thought he could prove it was. It would be
admitted that businesses of all kinds ultimately fell
into the hands of those best adapted to manage
them, hence he asserted the business of gas-making
was fast falling into the hands of the Municipal
Corporations in Great Britain and elsewdiere. (Ap-
plause.) In the mother country at the present time
there were no less than 148 gas works in the hands
of these authorities. (Applause.) Out of that
number over 80 had been bought from private
companies during the last twenty years. The fact
that it was now between 80 and 90 years since
the first gas works were built in England, and that
now, out of 148 works in the hands of Municipal
Corporations, 80 for certain had been purchased
from companies within 20 years, plainly proved
the tendency to be in the direction he advo-
cated. (Applause.) If the supply of gas was not
a Municipal work, why all this change ? If the
first purchase had failed under Municipal manage-
ment would there have been, during the last
ten years, over 44 companies bought out ? The fact
was that the supply of gas to the inhabitants was as
much a Municipal work as the supply of water, which
was precisely on the same conditions. (Applause.)
There were three things essentially Municipal—viz.,


water, lighting, and drainage. The management of
all these interfered with the construction of the
streets. Whenever they were under other manage-
ment than the local bodies they had and would ever
be in conflict. Mir. Silverthorne, in his admirable
work previously referred to, page 9, says ;
“Yet the event has since proved that nothing
could be more felicitous than the way in which our
Municipal authorities have managed even the largest
gas undertakings confided to their care, and I
fearlessly assert that the unpaid bodies have achieved
far superior results to those obtained under the
directorate of public companies.” It was the study of
Municipal Corporations to make their roads as perfect
as possible, and for that purpose they employed ex-
perienced men; whereas the gas companies em-
ployed men to suit their own business. Thus, on
laying, repairing, or altering the pipes, the streets
were broken into and repaired by men who knew
nothing about the work. He had seen them himself
sink a number of holes in a well-rolled macadamized
road in search of a pipe or a syphon, then, in filling
up, he saw them bundle the materials indiscriminately
back again which, of course, in a little time, became
a puddle. Again, they ever came into conflict with
the companies whenever they altered the levels of
the streets through the pipes having to be moved..
This led to dissatisfaction, annoyance, and expense.
He then quoted from his speech in Parlia-
ment on the second reading of the Gas Bill:
“ I have here a letter from Mr. Newbiggings,
a prominent gas engineer in England, and who
is the author of some of the best works of
reference on this question. He says in one para-
graph : —‘ There can be no doubt that it is a
great advantage for a community, especially a young
and growing one, to have the gas works in their own
hands, because when well managed the consumers


reap the penefits which would otherwise be secured
by disinterested and sometimes unscrupulous share-
holders and speculators.’ This letter coincides with
our own experience in this colony, and plainly
indicates the feeling that exists between the
Municipal authorities in all parts of the world on
this question. Some persons will say, especially
those whose interest it is to do so, that Councils
should not be allowed to enter into competition with
private enterprise. If this is a Municipal work,
and I hope I have satisfactorily proved that it is
one, why should the Councils be debarred from
doing this work with the sanction of the ratepayers ?
Why should they be prevented doing that which a
company would be permitted to do ? To prevent
them from competing for the public good is surely
the very narrowest kind of proteciion. Talk of
protecting the few for the sake of the many, this
would be it with a vengeance. I trust this Parlia-
ment will be no party towards protecting any such
monopoly.” By these works being the property of
the ratepayers they could have gas supplied them at
the
Net Cost of Production.
There were no shareholders’ dividends to provide for
which averaged from ien per cent, up to twenty per
cent, upon the capital employed, which, of course,
was squeezed out of the consumers’ pockets. With
a Council, all they required was the bare interest on
the capital borrowed. If they paid off the debt so
much cheaper would be the gas, for there would be
no charge for interest against it. With a company
or a private individual, no matter if the profits had
been paid off 50 times over they still looked for
their 10 or 20 per cent, on the capital employed.
Again, with a Council there were no half-yearly
bonuses paid to shareholders, which was another
means of transferring the money out of the con


[?]
sumer’s pocket into that of a company that would
be prevented by Municipal gas works ; nor
would there be directors’ fees to provide for,
which again come out of the consumer’s pocket.
These fees amounted to a large sum every year.
Instead of separate offices the whole business
could be managed in the Town Hall, with but little
additional expense and with greater convenience to
the ratepayers. Besides, the refuse from the works
and other materials for the footpaths would be
obtained at the lowest rate, the cartage of which at
the present time costs a considerable sum every
year that, to a great extent, would be saved ; but the
Hardest Nut to Crack
was that, although there were 1599 gas works
in the old country, still the cheapest gas
supplied was by the local authorities. (Applause.)
Everything he said pointed to one conclusion,
and that was that every Council, as soon as
possible, should become possessed of its own gas
works. If they did not do so early it would be much
more difficult to obtain them in after years; for
instance, the Corporation of Salford, near Man-
chester, bought their works for £6OOO, they are now
worth £600,000. It would, therefore, be a very
serious thing for them to purchase now; but, besides
reducing the price of gas, these works have become
the property of the ratepayers by gradual increase.
From the North British Daily Mail, of September 29,
1884, he found that
The Glasgow Corporation Gas Works
were purchased from a company in 1869. In
1880, they had a mortgage owing of £567,339.
Since then the quantity of gas made and sold h£d
increased nearly 33 per cent., and the profits derived
from the sale of gas had been so great that it not
only enabled the Corporation to pay for all extensions
of mains, meters, and works which had been required
13
MUNICIPAL GAS ‘WORKS.


to manufacture and distribute an extra supply ol
nearly 500,000 thousands of cubic feet of gas per
annum, but also to pay off £260,130 of the debt
owing on the works. It was a gas property alone
which was capable of accomplishing such magnificent
results as those. Last year’s profits alone amounted
to <£73,984. All that was done, and the price of gas
reduced during the past four years from 3s. lOd. to
3s. 6d per 1000 feet, so that it would require but a
comparatively short period to pay off the whole of the
capital and leave the City of Glasgow in possession
of its very valuable and extensive gasworks free from
liability. The ratepayers, in view of such large profits,
were now asking for a further reduction in the price
of gas. In a speech delivered in
The Birmingham Council
by Alderman Chamberlain, M.P., (at present a
Member of the Gladstone Ministry), upon whose
exertions in 1875 the gas works became the property
of the corporation, said on moving the adoption of
the gas committee’s report in 1879, four years after
the purchase, “It is with a feeling of very great
gratification and with some not unjustifiable pride
that I have to lay before the Council the facts and
figures upon which these satisfactory recommenda-
tions are based. In the course of the last four years
during which we have had experience of the control
of this vast undertaking, I have had the pleasure of
seeing my most sanguine anticipations confirmed,
and more than confirmed, surpassed by the actual
results achieved. I hope to-day to be able to prove
to the Council that great and substantial advantages
have been derived by the town, and by the gas con-
sumers, from the Corporation control of the gas un-
dertaking, that there is every reason to believe that
still greater benefits will flow in the future from the
same causes, and that the courage of the Council in
undertaking as it did this new and vast responsibility


and the incessant care and assiduity of the Gas Com-
mittee in its supervision have been followed by a
full, a sufficient, and an assured reward * * * *
I have shown that the profits which we take to our-
selves are clearly due to the results of Corporate
Control ard Corporate Management * * * * In
these years we have carried £BO,OOO to the rates,
£50,000 to the reserve fund, nearly £40,000 to the
sinking fund, and in the same time we shall have
made two reductions in the price of gas at a cost
together represented by <£oo,ooo per annum.”
The present price of gas in Birmingham ranges
according to consumption, from 3s. 6d per 1000 ft.,
down to 2s. Id.
The Manchester Corporation Gasworks
were estimated to be worth upwards of T 1,400,000.
They owed upon their works about £700,000, and
had paid away for improvement purposes in relief of
rates during the last 22 years no less a sum than
£787,322 19s. 4d., and had reduced the price of gas
from 4s. per 1000 ft. to 2s. Bd. He held in his hand
a letter from the Mayor of Manchester stating that
after lighting the city free during the year 1883 out
of the profits on private consumption at 2s. Bd. per
1000 ft. they were enabled to grant towards public
improvements no less than T 52,000, besides ,£23,000
towards lighting the city. In other words their
profits amounted to <£75,000 for the year, besides
lighting 9000 lamps free.
He had, through the Municipal Association,
received a large number of letters from the
Mayors of different corporations in England and
elsewhere. The following statement he had com-
piled from the latest and the most reliable sources,
showing the prices charged formerly by the com-
panies as against the prices charged by the corpor-
ations after purchase, showing also the magnitude of
the works by the quantity of gas they supplied and


Alloa,
Newry,
Arbroath,
Wigan,
Belfast,
Aberdeen,
Glasgow,
«
3
3
rf
Stratford on Avon,
g
o’
d*
S
o
3
pi
o
K
s
Bolton,
Stockton onTees,
Dundee,
Nottingham, ...
Leeds, ...
Birmingham,
1
as
3
o
cc
o
to
l—l
I
t-k
h->
h-k
H-*
M
1—*
t—»
I— 1
to
o
o
o
O
n
o
a
Q
o
o
o
o
o
o
O
a
g
3
p
§
3
1
i
g
g
3
I
3
c
3
►d
>d
►d
►d
►d
►d
►d
•d
>d
♦d
( (
M
w
00
00
00
00
CD
00
CD
00
VI
00
VI
"
VI
©
v|
VI
Purchase.
VI
CD
4-
•"*
©
Vi
Cn
Ox
Cn
00
4*
Or
4-
Or
4^
VI
00
4-
Cn
©
02
CO
Price per 1000 feet
o
4^
o
o
05
o
v|
o
©
©
4k-
©
4^
4^
©
©p-
Company,
4“
4-
rfk.
CO
CO
4^
CO
CO
CO
to
to
CO
to
v-
to“
Price per 1000 feet
vr
“1
4*.
05
4*
©
©
to
©
©
00
©
©
©
O
h-kp«
Corporation.
_
:
5
00
CO
to
00
00
4“
00
CD
to
00
LO
5
:
-
:
00
4^
Date.
o
Discount, per.
to
o
o
o
Ox
Ox
to
to
Cn
to
Cn
tent
to
M
to
>
rn
4*.
to
©
to
4^
co
J-k
Cn
to
©
8
to
©
a
o g
00
CO
4^
•o
**
to
00
00
00
o
o
o
o
O
8
Cn
CO
V|
o
o
o
o
8
to
©
©
o
©
8
O
o
8
CO
to
V|
O
O
o
o
o
o
8
©
o
o
o
to
CD
O o
M 3
"or
o
o
©
o
o
O
O
o
LO
8
o
o
o
8
o
©
o
©
©
o
o
o
o
o
o
©
o
o
o
o
o
©
o
o
o
O
o
o
o
o
©
©
O
o
“ p
3
©
•*-1
1 CO
1119
753
6876
25043
1136
73000
917
s
CO
to
Vf
©
VJ
©
©
VI
©
3200
23000
10839
50947
Annual Net
pTi Profit.
the profits they made, together with the discounts
which were usually allowed if the accounts were paid
within fourteen days. In the first two instances two
companies were competing with each other, so that
it might be reasonably supposed that gas was sold at
the lowest remunerative rate. Still the Corporation
further reduced the price under their management.
The Mayor of Doncaster states that they purchased
from a company in 1858, but does not say what the
price of gas was previous to the purchase ; they now
charge 2s. lid. per 1000 ft. to private consumers,
making no charge on the ratepayers for lighting the
streets.
In a letter from the Mayor of the Borough of
Newcastle Under Lyne, he found they purchased


their works from a company in 1881 at a high price;
the price of gas was still the same as when under the
Company, viz, 3s. lid. per 1000 ft., but the Mayor
strongly advises the Borough Councils of this Colony
by all means to get the gas works into their own
hands, stating that their works cleared a profit last
year, after paying all expenses, of £1954. The
Mayor of Rochdale, in a letter dated July 9th, 1884,
states that for the year ending March 1884 the Gas
Committee only charged the Borough a nominal sum
for lighting the streets, viz, £IOOO, whereas the
actual cost had been <£2700, giving in effect £I7OO
out of the profits on private consumption towards
lighting the streets, thereby reducing the lighting
rate by about 60 per cent. The Mayor was not asked
to state the amount paid in relief of rates, but from
a Parliamentary return he found in 1888 they paid
£12,268, besides £6425 for interest, and £658 to the
sinking fund. The present price of gas per 1000 ft.
was from Bs. 3d. down to Bs., according to consump-
tion. From the
New Zealand
correspondence he found that the Dunedin Gasworks
formerly belonged to a company, the price of gas
then was 12s. 6d. per 1000 ft. Under the Corpor-
ation it is at present 10s. Under the Company the
charge for public lights was £l2 10s. per annum,
now the charge against the gas account is £8 Bs.
Coal then was 325. 6d. per ton. The Gasworks of
Nelson was also the property of the Corporation;
formerly the charges were 14s. 2d. per 1000 ft., the
Council now charged 10s. per 1000 ft. for lighting,
and 7s. 6d. for heating, while the public lights stood
them in £5 each per annum.
The Echuca Corporation Gasworks in
Victoria
were formerly the property of a private company,
the transfer of the works had resulted in a reduction


of ss. per 1000 ft. Warrnambool, Portland, Belfast,
and Sale had also their own gasworks. He had
further correspondence and volumes of evidence m
support of this movement, but had not up to the
present time received a single line adverse to it.
These results no doubt seemed almost fabulous, but
there could be no doubting them. It was true that in
many places in England the cost of coal was less
than here, but in many places it was higher than m
Sydney while the difference in the cost of labour
between this and the old country set against the
value of the product, or in other words, the extra tor
labour added to a simple 1000 ft. of gas in proportion
would be so small that no coin could be named to
describe it. With regard to the power of small
works to compete with large ones, Weale said m his
well known series at page 82 on gasworks, that the
Beckton Gasworks in England for magnitude and
efficiency must be pronounced the most complete m
the world. They employed no less than 2000 men
daily, having 2100 retorts and 4200 mouth pieces in
full action, producing 24 million cubic feet of gas per
diem ; and he further says that works of the smallest
description are as capable of producing the same
quantity of gas from a ton of coal as the largest, and
in some cases medium sized works, by reason of their
limited capital for a given quantity of gas Produced
were placed in more favorable conditions than the
large works in question. There were no less than
60 gasworks in Great Britain with a supply not ex-
ceeding one million feet of gas per annum each, and
some of these very small works were supplying gas
at as low a price as ss. 6d. per 1000 feet, but it must
be admitted others were charging as high as 10s. lo
give an idea of how small some of them were, it
would take 4 such works to supply the public lamps
of Ashfield. There was a saying that “an ounce of
custom outweighed a ton of reason, therefoie be


cause it had not hitherto been the custom in this
colony to have Municipal Gasworks it might still be
insisted on by some that it was not a Municipal work.
He trusted that he had satisfactorily proved that m
England and elswhere it was, and that figuratively,
the machinery and the power to direct it in those
places were complete. The question was whether the
Aldeimen in this colony were less able to manage
than those in other places. It might be said they
had not the experience ot older countries, but surely
they could profit by the tediously gained experience
of such places as well as New Zealand and Victoria
were doing. Here a company elected their Directors,
so they did in England, and he noticed they were
oidinary business men. It was surely as competent
for the ratepayers to elect Aldermen as it was for a
company to elect Directors to manage their business.
In either case
the Manager was the Mainstay.
With increased responsibilities they would find that
additional importance would be given to the office
of Alderman, thereby inducing the best men to come
forward.
Mr. Silverthorne
said as follows : —“ I believe that the labours of our
Municipal authorities are beginning to receive a far
greater share of attention than has hitherto been the
case, and it is satisfactory to note that their active
share in gas and sanitary schemes has greatly con-
tributed to such recognition in several prominent
instances.” Again, he quoted
Mr. Gladstone,
who said in a speech delivered at Perth in 1879,
“ I always am glad to have the opportunity of assur-
ing Municipal authorities with what regard, I might
even say with what devotion, 1 look on the institu-
tions of local government of this country. Without
these institutions of local government this country


would not be what it is. These institutions not only
provide for the best transaction of affairs, but they
likewise constitute ties ot attachment between the
community and its most eminent, trusted, and dis-
tinguished members. They open the channel
through which the citizens ol particular communities
come forward from a provincial to an imperial posi-
tion. They train in those important, though more
contracted “ spheres, those qualities of _ manhood,
discretion, intelligence, and general ability which
enable many, in virtue of that training, when called
upon as it may be from time to time, and I
hope it will often be ol representing those com-
munities in the Imperial Assembly, and qualify
them, there and then to discharge admirably
well whatever duties may be required. He
wondered at the Municipal institutions ol
this colony being as well managed as they
were. They were tied down by defective and
inefficient laws. If they were to improve they
would have to be treated by the central Government,
with the respect their positions entitled them to. It
was their duty to encourage these institutions in
every reasonable way, and not ignore them as some
Governments appeared to do. There was one
important thing he would point out in connection
with this proposed undertaking, and that was the
probability of
the Electric Light
superseding gas lighting. He candidly confessed he
thought it would at no distant date. It was simply
in the natural order of things to be so, but he
thought just as electricity superseded_ gas for light-
ing, gas would take the place of ordinary fuels lor
heating purposes. He quoted from the i amihj
Herald of 2nd of February, 1884 The Electric
Light on the Victoria Embankment. 'When, in
1878, the Jablochkoff Electric Light Company


commenced lighting a portion of the Victoria
Embankment, the charge for each lamp was scl.
per hour. At the end of three months the price
was reduced to Bd. Six months later it was reduced
to 2jd., and since June, 1881, 40 lights on the
Embankment and 10 on Waterloo Bridge have
continued to be lighted at the rate of l|d. per light
per hour. Each of the electric lamps on the Em-
bankment gives an illuminating power of 265
candles, so that, at the charge of per hour per
lamp, the cost per 1000-candle power is 5'66d. per
hour; while gas, at 3s. per 1000 cubic feet, and
consuming 5 cubic feet per hour, for every 16
candles costs per 1000-candle power 11-25 d. per
hour. In other words, twice the illuminating power
is at present obtained on the Embankment by
electric lighting for the same money that would have
to be expended on gas.” He said they had now one
of three things to do—either take the light from the
Company at the lowest rate that could be arranged
for, build their own works, or purchase the Com-
pany s works within the borough if they were willing
to sell. The two latter propositions required careful
consideration at the hands of the ratepayers.
Naturally they desired to know whether they were
quite safe in entering into competition with a
company already in the field. He admitted, as a
matter of course, that it would have been better for
all parties if the field had been clear, but in order to
satisfy them that they were quite safe, he would
assume that they had to compete with a powerful
company for private supply. No small company
would dare do that, but a Municipal Corporation
could not be crushed, because they were their own
consumers in the matter of street lighting, and upon
that they could always levy a rate to keep the works
going. He thought the cost of the works could be
reduced to <£21,000. On that amount they would


require per annum, at 5 per cent., <£loso for
interest; for labour, about £BOO ; for fuel, wear and
tear, say £500; simply to light the streets. By striking
a rate on the present valuation of property at 6d. in
the £ would give them about £2500. They could,
therefore, without selling a single foot of gas, hold
their own until their opponents came to their senses.
They had also to bear in mind that the rates of the
borough were rapidly increasing; besides,after having
paid the above items of expense, for the same outlay
they could sell gas to the private consumers at the
bare cost of the fuel, and then make a profit on the
residuals. If anyone chose to give gas away for
nothing they would be supplying the gas, and the
Council would through their rates be taking the
money for it. In order to illustrate this plainly
the annual charge for 250 lamps at present
prices would be £ISOO ; to meet that they
would require a 4d. lighting rate. Take a
house worth £IOO a year, a fourpenny lighting
rate on that property would be £1 IBs. 4d. per
annum. This house would consume 15,000 feet of
gas, but to make quite sure, say 10,000 feet, which
at 6s. per 1000 feet would be £3, total charge for the
year £4 IBs. 4d. Now, assuming that under com-
petition the price of gas fell to 2s.* per 1000 feet, in
that case 10,000 feet of gas for the year would be
£1 ; the Council then, in order to pay expenses,
would raise the lighting rate from 4d. to 6d. in the £.
The lighting rate on that house would then be £2
10s., total gas charges for the year from the same
property £B 10s., as against £4 IBs. 4d. under
present charges. That was the worst phase
that could be placed on the possession of Corpora-
* Of course tliis was an event that was not likely to take place unless by severe
pressure, which in its operation would affect both competing- parties if the reduction
could be commanded without the Council having to supply gas at less than cost,and they,
or rather the consumers, could obtain gas at that rate, then the lower the price by
the company the better for the ratepayers ; but, of course, the Council would have
had to lose through the lighting rate to keep the price down. The question would be
whether the lighting rate could stand the strain of selling gas to supplj' customers
at less than cost.


tion gas works. Then, again, imagine a com-
pany in competition with a Municipal Corpora-
tion reducing the price of gas to say 2s. per 1000
feet, and at the same time charging surrounding
Municipalities ss. or 6s. For an outside body to
be found giving the Corporate body of Ashfield gas
for nothing would be the highest point of success for
a Municipal works, providing they supplied all.
Mr. Silverthorne,
at page 12 says :
Corporations seeking to acquire gas undertakings in
this country have invariably had to contend against
has been the exorbitant prices asked for them, and
previous to 1872 the Corporations had availed
themselves of Competing Bids, in which they
threatened the virtual extinction of the companies
through introducing a competing and cheaper
supply. In this manner the cities of Glasgow,
Leeds, Rotherham, and Aberdeen, during the years
1869, 1870, 1871 applied to Parliament not only for
Bills empowering them to acquire the undertakings
of the gas companies, but also for powers to erect
new works and introduce an independent supply of
gas. In each of these instances the gas companies,
although presenting a strenuous opposition, were
nevertheless ultimately compelled to accept the
terms offered by the Corporations.”
As to Purchasing Works Already Built
that, of course was the most natural thing to do. It
would not only save the re-opening of the streets
for pipe-laying, but they would have the light
at once to begin with; whereas if they built
it would take 18 months to complete the
works. Mr. W. (the Council’s Engineer) says 12
months, but in addition to that they had to obtain
permission from the Governor to borrow the money,
which in going through the legal form created


a tedious delay, and after that they would have
to have plans and specifications prepared. They
would also, by purchasing, have the satisfaction of
knowing that they were not clashing with other
interests. By purchasing, the motto of “so use your
own as not to injure another” would apply, besides
they would have the whole business to commence
with, which was a very important matter. If the
works were suitable, on certain conditions, he would
much prefer purchasing, providing the price was
fair and the terms acceptable. On this point Mr.
Silverthorne, at page 15, says ; —“ No purchase
ought ever to be completed without the undertaking
has been very carefully
Surveyed and Valued
by an experienced expert, who should make it his
chief business to determine accurately the capabilities
of the plant to meet the anticipated increase in
supply, as sound gas undertakings never remain
stationary except under very unusual circumstances.”
“ Weale ” offered similar advice, which any Council
would be wise in accepting. As to the value of any
given works much depended on circumstances.
There were various ways of arriving at the value,
but he did not think it necessary to enter on this
question. A sum, the interest of which would be
an equivalent to a charge on the gas supplied from
lOd, up to Is. 3d., was thought in England to be
about a fair basis for the purchase of a works. The
same figures he thought would stand good here, as
the extra cost of works in this colony would act as
a set off against the price in the old country, which
were often the fruits of monopoly. It was fair,
however, as already pointed out, to give a company
something more than the structural value.
In Conclusion
he had deemed it a duty to place all the information
he had before them, so that they might be in as


good a position to judge as he was. He declared he
would neither thank or differ with any man as to his
vote. He trusted no influence would be used on
either side. The vote on the question had been
arranged by the Mayor to take place at the same
time with the annual Municipal Election by ballot.
The object was to make the ratepayers themselyes
responsible for whatever course was adopted. He
nor any of the xlldermen had any personal interest
in the matter more than any other ratepayer, and
not so much as many of them. He admitted
that the population of Ashfield for mileage of pipes
was not equal to the lowest averages in the old
country, but in a fast growing community like this
they had to make ample provision for the future,
which largely increased the first cost in proportion
to the population, as against more settled places.
Another thing, when this agitation first began the
price of gas in Ashfield was 9s. per 1000 feet; since
then it had been reduced to 6s. per 1000 feet. The
price first asked the Council for public lamps was
<£9, which had been since reduced to T 6. Some
persons he knew thought with these concessions
they ought to be satisfied, but it was not with the
Council to say what they would do. It was with the
ratepayers themselves to say whether it was worth
while moving further or not. Whatever might be
the result of the vote the Council would rest perfectly
satisfied, and should the decision be adverse it would
not be taken as a vote of censure. He had now placed
the whole question before them, and he thanked
them for their long and patient hearing. (Cheers.)


MINUTE FROM CHAIRMAN OF LIGHTING
SUB-COMMITTEE.
18th June, 1885.
In respect to the construction of Corporation Gas
Works for the borough of Ashfield, this paper is
meant to show the present position, under altered
circumstances, since 188/, by dealing with all the
available information to hand.
The Engineer, in estimating the cost of twenty-
two million feet of gas at 4s. l|d. per 1000, has done
so, I think, under the following conditions : — i.e., by
allowing twenty-two million feet of consumption per
annum for about 7000 people, with gas sold at ss.
per 1000 feet. The consumption in one town that
I have visited within the colony, with a population
of about 4000 people, is only 3J million feet, with
gas at 11s. per 1000; while in another town, with a
population of 9000 consumers, about 8 millions at
10s. per 1000. Both are inland towns, which have
a much larger proportion of business premises than
Ashfield, and therefore the consumption, except for
the high price, ought to be greater in proportion
than with a similar number of private houses. No
doubt the high price of gas induces people to resort
to other means of lighting. To produce 22 million
feet of gas at 4s. l|d. the Engineer has not, I
understand, included anything for wear and tear.
The Leeds Corporation, with the cheapest gas sold
in Great Britain, allows 2 per cent, on their capital
for wear and tear. How this affects the price of gas
per 1000 feet is shewn in the figures below. Then,
again, I find he has made no allowance for interest
and capital during the process of construction, which


would raise the first cost by another £IOOO at least,
making the capital <£23,000; and further, there is
no allowance for bad debts or printing, which, how-
ever, may not amount to much. I believe that he
has also reckoned ten hours labour for some of the
workmen (this would not be allowed), but the
difference in that respect, perhaps, would be im-
material. The Engineer agrees with me that the
estimated cost of works at £28,000 could be reduced
to £21,000, hut did not advise it. First, by leaving
out the ammonia plant, £500; manager’s residence,
£550 ; a number of meters, £SOO ; a number of
retorts and sundries, £250 ; and a quantity of service
pipes, £2OO : total reduction, £2OOO, leaving the
cost of works at £21,000. Then, in view of contend-
ing with water in the construction of the gas-holder,
which would cost in that event over the estimate, he
points out that a reduction in the size of the holder
from 100 feet diameter to 80 feet could be made, thus
saving about £6OO, but does not advise it, as the
sacrifice of holding capacity would be great for the
small saving that it would effect. However, leaving
the cost at £21,000, in proportion to the present
population is still large. My previous estimate was
only for a working plant capable of supplying about
20 million feet per annum. This estimate is for a
manufacturing plant capable of supplying 40 million
feet, which, no doubt, is necessary for the fast
increasing population. Taking the probable con-
sumption for the first few years as against the cost
of works, management, &c., the manufacturing price
or cost of gas to the Council, of course, must appear
high ; but, like any other business at the beginning,
the expenses have to be paid whether there is busi-
ness done or not, so with this. The cost will be
reduced only with increased consumption and good
management. The following statement, I think, will
give a fair idea of our position as far as at present


Anticipated Income,
Anticipated Expenditure,
-
1st Year.
1st Year.
250 Lamps at 6d. rate.. .<£2125 0
0
Interest on Capital,
3,250,000 ft. Gas sold at
£21,000 £1050 0
0
5s 812 10
0
Fuel 600 0
0
Sale of Eesidnals ,, 250 0
0
Stokers , , 305 0
0
Manager and Secretary 400 0
0
Lighters, 3 . , 234 0
0
Wear and tear . 420 0
0
Profit,., US 0
0
£3187 10
0 J
£3187 10
0
Anticipated Income,
Anticipated Expenditure,
2nd Year.
2nd Year.
250 Lamps at 4d. Eate £1437 10
0
Interest on Capital... £1050 0
0
6,250,000 ft. Gas sold
Fuel 851 0
0
at 5s. 1562 10
0
Stokers 365 0
0
Eesidnals 357 10
0 1
Manager and Secretary 400 0
0
1
Lighters, &c. ... 234 0
0
Wear and tear . 420 0
0
Pl, ofit .. 37 10
0
£3357 10
0
£3357 10
0
can be seen, and is intended to show the probable
effects of increased business during the first two or
three years’ work:—Taking the consumption in face
of competition at seven millions of feet, with that
small make we should have to levy a lighting rate of
6d. in the £ to meet expenses the first year, which
in all probability could be reduced to a 4d. rate the
second year, providing only that we obtain a certain
increased consumption, and ss. per 1000 feet for gas
from private consumers ; but, in the event of
purchasing the Company’s mains, and taking their
business over within the borough, we might in that
case commence at once with only a 4d. rate. Assum-
ing that we build entirely new works, then the
following may, I think, be expected to be about the
result for the first two years, based on the Engineers’
estimates and items of cost as to expenditure, and
on this year’s assessment for income :


It will be seen that the only expense extra to
produce an increased quantity oi gas lies principally
in the actual cost of fuel, which would be about Is.
Bd. per 1000 feet. This principle will hold good, I
believe, up to a supply of about 20 million feet per
annum. The apparent high cost for the first year at
per 1000 for seven million feet is in consequence of
having to provide the wherewith to supply 20
million (and as regards the plant, 40 million)
feet; charged against at the same interest on
capital, the same management, the same labour,
and the same allowance, or nearly so, for wear
and tear, will produce 20 million feet as well as
one million or thereabouts. The importance of
increased production and consumption is obvious,
and is shewn by the reduction in the tables above of
the lighting rate from 6d. in the £ for the first year
to 4d. the second year, through the increase of the
three million feet of gas only. I propose showing
directly, at the very same ratio, the effect of a
further increase of four million feet, making the
total up to 14 million annual supply, which, accord-
ing to a canvas made of the borough, would be about
the actual consumption of Ashfield, including public
lights at the present time, and exactly according to
my original minute. The reason why Ido not now
anticipate the same consumption the first year from
our own works is easily explained. When I made
that estimate the company’s price of gas was 9s. per
1000 feet, while I proposed to sell it for 55., and
thereby reckoned the whole business in the hands of
the Council at that price. Since then the Company
has reduced the price to ss. 6d., and may in all
probability make further reductions. And, further,
I pointed out in my minute of October, 1883, that,
in the event of competition, we could, by raising the
rate from 4d. in the £ to 6d., reduce the price of
gas to 4s. per 1000 with a beneficial effect. I illus


trated this by taking a house under the then circum-
stances worth £IOO a year, which would have had to
pay a 6d. rate, or £2 10s. a year if we had taken 250
lamps from the Gas Company. I assumed this
house would have consumed 16,000 feet of gas in
the year at 9s. per 1000, £7 45., making a total of
£9 14s. With the same rate I proposed with
Corporation Works to sell gas at 4s. per 1000;
16,000 feet would therefore be £8 45., together with
£2 10s. equals £5 145., therefore a saving of £4.
Now let us see how this same house is affected at
the present time, under altered circumstances. A
Bd. rate, with the reductions since then made, will
command the same number of public lights, or
instead of the lighting being £2 10s., it would be
now only 255. upon this same house; 16,000 feet of
gas reduced from 9s. per 1000 to ss. 6d., or from £7
4s. to £4 Bs., making a total charge now on the
same property of £5 13s. Actually a greater reduc-
tion than anticipated two years ago by the erection
of the works. The proposal itself has achieved
what I then intended the works themselves should
accomplish; therefore the building of works now
cannot be accredited with what has already been
done, and must, in all fairness now start upon
another basis altogether. lam now, I think, rightly
reckoning on a division of the supply between the
Company and the Council, so to be on the sure side
I have put down seven million feet for the first
year’s consumption, while, further, I have taken the
Engineer’s cost of works, &c., as against a reduced
supply. I think it would be quite safe to rely, even
in the face of any competition, to bring the supply
up to 14 million feet on or about the fourth year,
but without competition much sooner. With 14
million feet supply, the cost would be reduced to
about ss. 2d. per 1000, which by the sale of residuals
would further reduce the cost to 4s. sd. per 1000


Items of Cost to produce 7,000,000 feet of Gas at per 1000 feet.
Interest on Capital at per 1000 feet ...
S. U.
... 3 0
Labour and salaries
... 2 10
Wear and tear at 2 per cent, on capital
... 1 2f
Fuel at 10s. per ton
... 1 84
Total at per 1000 feet
... 8 8$
Items of Cost to produce 10,000,000 feet of G,s
at per 1000 feet.
s. d.
... 2 H
Interest on Capital at per 1000 feet ...
Labour and salaries
... 1 11H
Fuel
... 1 84
Wear and tear at 2 per cent ...
... 0 10./, f
Total at per 1000 feet
... 6 7
Items oj Cost to produce 14,000,000 feet of Gas
at per 1000 feet.
s. d.
Interest on Capital at per 1000 feet ...
... 1 6
Labour and salaries
... 1 54
feet. Considering that I am making deductions
from the Engineer’s estimate in arriving at these
figures, I am pleased to find how near my own
estimate (which was for 1885) is to this, as submitted
to the Council on 9th October, 1883, reference to
which will show that I estimated the cost for 14
million feet the first year at a little under 4s. 7d. per
1000 feet. At the end of four years the rates of the
borough will, for a certainty, have far exceeded
46000 at Is. in the 4. With a fourteen million feet
make and the sale of lOj million of gas at ss. per
1000 we should be able to reduce the lighting rate
to 2d. or 3d. in the 4, and have a large profit. Of
course it will matter but little whether it is the rate
that is reduced, or whether it is the price of gas for
private consumption ; if we get into competition the
Council, no doubt, will reduce both.
The following tabulated statement will show at a
glance the effects of increased consumption on the
cost to produce gas with the plant proposed.


s.
d.
Fuel
... 1
8-r
Wear and tear at 2 per cent. ...
... 0
H
■Total at per 1000 feet
... 5
The sale of residuals ought to reduce the cost in each
case respectively by about 9d. per 1000 feet, leaving
the latter at say 4s. sd. per 1000.
The Engineer’s estimated cost at per 1000 feet
for 22 million feet reduced by the sale of residuals is
3s. Ifd., this would be increased to about 3s. Bd. by
adding for wear and tear. I have to add that lam
of opinion that the proportion of 3-inch pipes is
much too great — i.e., about 17 miles, out of a total
of 20 or a little over. I expressed this fear to the
Engineer, but he was of opinion, from the situation
of the site for the works, that they were large
enough. With all respect, lam still rather doubtful
on this point, and would advise the Council to make
close enquiry, as the extra cost at first would not be
much. I would much prefer the extra cost now, if
necessary, than commit what might be almost an
irreparable blunder in the future. In conclusion,
I have given this matter a deep, careful, and anxious
consideration, in order that our position should be
made as clear and as far on the safe side as possible.
I have thus committed it to paper to prove hereafter
that we had not overlooked difficulties in the estab-
lishment of Corporation Gas Works, showing that we
know our position, and have an idea of what may be
expected in the future. Therefore, in justice to the
Council, I leave this paper as a record. Although I
have no intention of again seeking re-election as an
Alderman, I shall be pleased to see Ashfield
judiciously establish its own works, which with good
management ought to ultimately reduce even the
present price of gas.
MARK J. HAMMOND,
Chairman.


Months prior to the above minute being written,
an application from the Council was made to the
Government under the 190th section of the Munici-
palities Act, of 1867, for permission to borrow
a sum not exceeding £25,000 for the construction of
gas works secured on the general rates. This applica-
tion was refused, which caused the Council to
reluctantly reconsider their position, especially under
the altered circumstances of the past two or three
years. It was, after due consideration, proposed in the
Council that the borough should be at once lit up
from the Company, leaving the construction of
Municipal works still an open question. Before this
course was dscided upon the ratepayers took the
matter up by giving notice to convene a meeting to
consider the question .of lighting the streets at once ;
before, however, the meeting took place, the Council
had decided to light up from the Company as
the easiest way out of the difficulty. The meet-
ing, an account of which appears further on,
decided, by an overwhelming majority, in favour
of lighting the streets at once, thus confirming
the action of the Council. Consequently, the
borough was lit up with 170 lights on the Ist of
January, 1886, which then placed them in the
position to proceed with Municipal works at any
time by raising the money on the lighting rate,
which by law could not be levied until the Council
had supplied the streets with light, as explained at
the meeting referred to.
It may be as well here to mention that not only
does the Australian Gaslight Company light and
supply the city of Sydney with gas, but also the most
of its suburbs without competition Until after the
agitation for Municipal Gasworks in Ashfield they had
been in the habit of charging differential rates at
various places, which, to a large degree, originated
the dissatisfaction which exactly constitutes a parallel


with what took place in London between the Corpora-
tion and the Companies In the ten years ending
the Companies expended £BO,OOO in the
defence of their monopolies before Parliamentary
Committees, in that year the Corporation Com-
peting Bill was defeated. In 1868 another Bill was
introduced, which succeeded to a limited extent. In
1875 further liberal legislation took place in favour
of the consumer. (See Firth’s London Government ,
1882.;
The Company here have at last wisely seen fit not
only to make their charges uniform throughout, but
also to reduce the price, even below their former
minimum. Although the reductions made in some
places from 9s. per 1000 feet to ss. 6d, and in
others from 6s. 6d. to ss. 6d.. together with the
reduced charges for public lamps, must have
amounted to an enormous sum, still they will be
doubtless amply compensated by increased consump-
tion, besides establishing a better feeling throughout
the community. Had these concessions been made
earlier, in all probability there would have been no
proposal for the construction of Municipal works in
opposition to them.
ASHFIELD GAS SUPPLY— THE FINAL
DECISION.
A public meeting of ratepayers of Ashfield was
held on the 17th of August, 1885, at the local School
of Arts, for the purpose of discussing the question of
immediately lighting the borough with gas. About
500 gentlemen attended, and the Mayor of Ashfield,
Mr, John Pope, who convened the meeting in com-
pliance with a requisition signed by Messrs. J. S.
Jamieson, C. C. Skarratt, Seaward, Lawrence and
others, occupied the chair.


The Chairman, in opening the meeting, read
apologies for non-attendance from the Rev. %)r,
Corlette, Mr. H. Halloran, and Mr. R. H. T>. White,
M.L.A., each of whom expressed his approval of the
idea of at once accepting the proposal of the Gas
Company to light the borough. As the signature to
each letter was read, hearty applause from the
meeting followed. Mr. Pope continued, and con-
gratulated the meeting as residents of their justly-
denominated model borough of Ashfield on their
having attended in such large numbers. They had
•always been able to conduct their business in a
satisfactory manner, and he asked them to deal with
the matter in their usual business-like fashion, giving
•due consideration to the ideas of those who might
differ from them as to the system of lighting they
should adopt.
Mr. H. S. Badgery, M.L.A., rose, amid hearty
applause, to move the first resolution, —“ That this
meeting is of opinion that the borough of Ashfield
should be lighted with gas from the Australian Gas-
light Company without further delay.” He said he
had no wish to stand in the way of the erection of
municipal gas works, when the time arrived for that
to be done with general benefit to the ratepayers at
the lowest possible cost. (Hear, hear.) No persons
in their common senses would admit that there
should be any longer delay in lighting up the
borough, and they had to decide how to get the
greatest amount of light at the smallest cost.
(Applause.) They should deal with the matter in a
common-sense manner, and those who were opposed
to the view expressed in the resolution could go into
the elaboration of figures. A deal of capital would
doubtless be made of the fact that one of the
members of the Borough Council agitated success-
fully for the passing of the Bill providing for the
municipality proceeding with the erection of its own


gas works. The Company was then charging
9s. per thousand, and per annum per
lamp. Taking this as a basis of calculation, it
appeared that the Municipal Gas Works would have
supplied gas at a reduced rate. When an agitation
took place, and the Bill was passed, the Company
reduced their prices to ss. 6d. per thousand feet,
and £5 15s. per lamp. Then the position was this,
that if they proceeded with their gas works they
would have to charge a higher rate, because it would
be impossible to obtain the whole consumption. A
small consumption meant a high price per thousand.
(Applause.) The people would get their gas where
they could get it cheapest, and their costly gas
works would be built for nothing. It was better to
do with the supply from the Company for the
present, knowing that the Company would undersell
them when the works were erected. They would
require the gas in the borough before they could
strike a gas rate, and they would have to remain in
darkness until their works were built. They would
have to pay a 6d. rate for the gas of their own works,
whereas the gas from the Company would entail
only a Bd. rate, and they would be in a better position
to proceed with their own works. As to a circular
containing extracts from a speech by Mr. Hammond,
which had been distributed at the door. At the time
those calculations were made, there was a probability
of a high rate ; but since the Company had reduced the
rate, with their power to reduce further, it would be
unwise to go into the erection of gas works withou.
being certain of obtaining the entire consumptiont
They had no guarantee that the whole of the
consumers would buy gas from the borough in
preference to the Company where they could get it
as cheap, and they would have to wait in darkness till
the works were erected. Nothing could prevent
them going on with’ their own gas works, while they


took gas from the Company. . They could not allow
the Council to squander the people’s money on gas
works at a high rate, when they could get it so much
less. (Loud applause.) This was the business-like
view of the matter, and he hoped it would be
regarded in that light.
Mr. R. Barbour, M.L.A., seconded the motion.
He held that there could be no two opinions as to
the immediate lighting of the borough with gas.
(Hear, hear.) Nothing but gas, or something equal
to it, should be permitted. He thanked the Council
and the late Mayor (Mr. Hammond) for their
exertions in fighting out this question. Mr,
Hammond had worked night and day, and he was
sure the meeting would thank him and the Council
for having so well opposed the monopoly of the Gas
Company. But now that they had succeeded in
getting the rate reduced to a reasonable figure there
was no reason why the borough should longer remain
in darkness, especially as gas works erected by the
borough would raise the price of lighting far above
that charged by the Gas Company. Again, it was
probable enough that in a very few years electricity
or some other power would be the light of the future,
and so it would be absurd to incur the heavy
expense of erecting gas works. The Borough
Council had done right to break down monopoly,
and get the price reduced from 9s. to ss.
6d., but as they had done their work it would
be wrong to saddle the ratepayers with the
cost of works. They should accept the com-
promise offered them, have the town lighted
up at once, and leave to a future time the
question of erecting gas works. If the Gas
Company should ever attempt to raise the price
again, or if the Borough Council found that they
could manufacture gas for themselves at a cheaper


rate than that fixed by the Company, the ratepayers
should at once proceed to make their own gas.
Mr. William Marshall said that on behalf of the
business people of Ashfield he protested against the
delay in lighting the Borough of Ashfield. The
place was kept back, and its progress was a by-word.
It was known all over the colony as “the dark
borough,” and he quoted several instances of the
inconvenience residents of and visitors to Ashfield
were put to by the imperfect lighting of it. He felt
that the Borough Council should be supported in
their desire to close with the offer of the Gas
Company. He cordially supported the resolution.
Mr. Wm. Cornwall proposed the following
amendment“ That, in the opinion of this
meeting, to accept the proposal to light up
the streets of the borough from the Aus-
tralian Gaslight Company is to abandon the
proposal to erect our own Municipal gas works,
sanctioned by the ballot of the ratepayers of
February last, and that only a ballot can reverse the
decision of a ballot.” He was there to contradict
the statements of those who were fighting not
or the borough but for the Australian Gaslight
Company, and proposed to read the correspondence
which had taken place with reference to this question.
(Laughter, cries of “ No, no,” and confusion.) They
looked upon Mr. Hammond as the father of the
Municipal Gas Works that were to be. The circula-
tion of Mr. Hammond’s first pamphlet was rendered
necessary in the interests of the people. The
Municipal Gasworks Bill was the weapon used to
cause a reduction of the price of gas, and as
reasonable men they would not give it up when the
point had been achieved. If the Municipal Gas-
works Bill had been the means of reducing the cost
of gas to Ashfield, and to the whole colony, all
honour to Mr. Hammond for his action. (Cheers.)


Bat something still remained to be done, and they
were not to give in because of the feint that had
been made on the part of one of the largest
monopolies in N.S.W., perhaps in Australia.
(Cheers.) As soon as they did this their death-
warrant would be sealed. The Company would
know that they had intimidated the Council, and
it would take the Municipal Council all their
time to revive public feeling. They would not
have been present that evening but for the action of
some 40 or 50 gentlemen, who held a private meeting
on the previous Monday night to arrange for a public
meeting. He went on to refer to that meeting as a
hole-and-corner meeting, which did not represent the
ratepayers. The meeting passed a resolution that a
petition should be presented to the Aldermen, asking
that the offer of the Gas Company to light up the borough
be accepted at once, and that in the event of the
request being refused, to call a public meeting
for that evening. A committee was formed to
give effect to the objects of the meeting. He
again condemned the character of the meeting and
the intentions of those who attended it, alleging that
these 40 or 50 gentlemen had assumed the represen-
tation of 2000 ratepayers for the purpose of dictating
to them and keeping them in the dark as to what
was going on. (Interruption.) He took it that his
amendment was plain English, and that the question
at issue could more fairly be decided by ballot than
by a public meeting to which each party could bring
its own supporters.
Alderman J. W. Watkin said he had much
pleasure in seconding the amendment— ( applause) —
and trusted the meeting would hear what he had to
say. Neither Mr. Badgery nor Mr. Barbour had
given them facts. Their statements regarding the
tax were fiction, and he thought that the
result of the ballot of the ratepayers should not


be reversed at the dictate of a hole-and-corner
meeting of 50 gentlemen who only heard one side of
the question. Mr. Hammond’s figures were borne
out by the best authority—(applause) and this
meeting had no power to reverse the decision of a
ballot. The fair thing was to relegate the question
to the ratepayers, and for the Council to act on the
decision thus arrived at. He did not think the
ratepayers would change their mind ; or that the
reduction made by the Gas Company was sufficient
to justify such a thing. If they were so fickle, he
for one should have much pleasure in saying good-
bye to the Municipal Council. Ashfield should be
proud of the opportunity of fighting that big
monopoly—the Australian Gaslight Company—and
Mr. Hammond had proved conclusively that the
Company could not compete with the Municipal
Council. Mr. Hammond made this speech when
gas was down to 6s. per 1000. He would
not take up their time further, for the amend-
ment was very plain, and he had pleasure in seconding
it, thinking that the decision of a ballot should only
be reversed by a ballot. (Applause.)
Mr. Mark Hammond, M.L.A., at this point entered
the hall, amid tumultuous cheering.
Mr. J. H. Goodlet said that he thought there was
some truth in that —that the decision of a ballot
should only be reversed by a ballot, but the resolu-
tion said nothing about that. It would be left to
the Council to see if the taxpayers were prepared to
rescind their former decision, and he thought they
would. (Applause.) The meeting that had been
complained of was not called to dictate to the other
ratepayers, but to prepare for calling this meeting
to-night. (Applause.) He thought the Council
should l;e left to submit the matter to the taxpayers
to say yea or nay. He was very much opposed to
the Municipal Gasworks, thinking that they could


not produce gas to compete with the large works of
the Gas Company. As to the estimates spoken of,
he had seen many works the estimates for which
could not be realised. The borough would object to
see money spent on gas works, absorbing the rates
in payment of interest on borrowed capital. These
gas works would be a heavy mill-stone for years to
come on the necks of the ratepayers. (Applause.)
Mr. M. J. Hammond, M.L.A., ascended the platform,
and was received with very loud applause. He said
the question before the meeting had nothing what-
ever to do with estimates for the gas works; but was
simply that the borough at once be lit with gas,
which he heartily supported. (Cheers.) In February
last they had taken a vote of the ratepayers favourable
to the construction of gas works. The motion now
before them, if carried, would in no way rescind that
vote, but would facilitate the carrying of it out
whenever required. To build gas works they must
have money, which could only be raised in the
present case on the security of a lighting rate.
Before they could establish that rate the law
provided they would have to give the light.
Therefore, the lighting of the borough was
but a sequence to the building of the works.
(Hear, hear.) They had men who had voted to
resort to kerosene, with gas streaming through the
streets obtainable at a reasonable price. To light
the place in the best way possible ought to please all
parties, both for and against the construction of gas
works. All agreed that the place should be lit up.
If they did not carry the motion to light up, they
could not move in any way. Notwithstanding what
had been said to the contrary, there was no other
legal course open to them, and if they took any
other they would soon find themselves in trouble,
he was sorry to find opposition to lighting, which
-could only result in injury to the ratepayers. He


was bound to some extent to explain to them their
altered position, consequent on the reductions made
in the price of gas. These reductions had been
gradually undermining the whole basis of his original
proposal. It could be easily seen that the same
inducement did not now exist for the hasty construc-
tions of works that did two years ago, with gas at
9s. per 1000 feet. With increased population, unless
the Company lowered their prices, the time would
come again to go on with their own gas works, for
after lighting they would he at liberty at any time to
proceed. He had moved in the Council more than a
month ago to the effect that the streets should be at
once lit up prior to and during the construction of
works. This was opposed by some of the
Aldermen who thought if they lit up there
would be an end to their own gas works.
Well, he thought, as the proposer pf the whole
scheme, that if he could get of his hobby horse
in the interest of the ratepayers others might
do the same. (Cheers.) If it was the will of the
ratepayers not to proceed with their gas works,
he was quite content to abide their decision.
(Loud applause.) The Company was in a very
peculiar position; if they refused to grant the light
they refused to extend their business. If, on the
other hand, they granted it, they facilitated the
construction of works in opposition to them ; that in
itself would always protect the consumer. Under such
circumstances, what objection could there be to
lighting at once-r-(hear, hear) —especially with the
reductions made. Two years ago it would have
taken a sixpenny lighting rate - (cheers) —to
have lit up the borough. Next year, with
present prices, it would only take about 3d. in the £.
(Uproarious applause.) He had illustrated the effect
on a house worth TIOO a year. Two or three years ago
that house would have paid £2 10s. per annum or a


lighting rate. Assuming the same house to consume
16,000 feet of gas at 9s. per 1000, would have
been £7 45.: total, <£9 14s. By maintaining
the same 6d. rate, he had proposed by build-
ing' works to reduce the price of gas for private
consumption to 4s. under competition. The
effect of this on that house would be to reduce
the £9 14s. to £5 145., saving £4 in the year.
(Cheers.) Now, what was the present position of the
same house if they lit up ? It would be subject to
only a 3d. rate, equal to £1 ss. a year; 16,000 feet
of gas reduced from 9s. per 1000 feet to ss. 6d., £4
Bs. : total, £5 13s.—a greater reduction than he had
estimated to get by the expenditure of £IB,OOO or
£20,000. (Loud applause.) The whole basis of his
former proposal for the time being had been taken
away. He had estimated to reduce the selling price
of gas by 4s. per 1000 feet cheaper than the Company
was selling for at the time in Ashfield, and Is. and
6d. less than in Sydney ; and that their Corporation
works would have had all the business. (Hear, hear.)
Thus he had estimated 14 million feet consumption,
by which he would have been able to sell at the
prices named. The Company, having made
enormous reductions, were practically down to his
price, and through that he could not now safely reckon
to obtain one half the business which he formally did
applause —while the same expenditure stood
against them which doubled the cost of gas ; he
explained the effects of increased consumption by
showing that seven million feet of gas, with the same
works, would cost about Bs. 6d. per 1000 feet;
10 million, 6s. 6d.; 14 million feet, ss. ; 22
million feet, 3s. lOd.; providing they obtained ready
sale for the residuals ; if not, the price would respec-
tively be higher. (Hear, hear.) There was the same, or
nearly the same, expense against producing seven
million feet as there would be against 20 millions.


with the exception of the fuel. The price, therefore,
reduced with increased consumption, and vice
versa. (Applause.) It had been said that he
had altered his estimates, but he was not to
blame for that. If the Company lowered their
prices he would have to alter again. Would he
have done right to let them proceed with the
construction of gas works under the proposition of
two or three years ago ? (Loud cheers.) When every-
thing had changed it was his duty to point it out before
they were committed. (Hearty cheering.) If they
were then content to go on, his conscience was
satisfied. (Cheers.) He had pointed out on a
previous occasion that a corporation backed up by a
lighting rate could not be crushed out by any
company, and stated that they could sell gas, under
obstinate opposition, down to *2s. per 1000, aided
by a sixpenny rate ; that did not give the cost. The
sixpenny rate meant £2500 a year, which, on 250
lamps, was equal to <£lo a lamp ; or, in other words,
it was fully 12s. 6d. per 1000 for the gas consumed
by the street lamps. He had not allowed, in
reckoning on such an extreme, anything for liqui-
dating the debt, and also the item of 2 per cent, for
wear and tear, knowing that such inveterate opposi-
tion would not last long. He had pointed out at the
same time that, with a given consumption, his selling
price would have been ss. per 1000 feet to have
carried on soundly. (Hear.) Since then the price
had again fallen, so that if they built now they
would, besides having to form a basis for the loan,
have to pay 6d. lighting rate, fixed for 20 or 30
years. He desired to point this out through the extra-
ordinary construction put upon his figures by persons
who did not, or would not, try to understand them.
(Cheers). He did not claim .absolute accuracy, which
he had admitted in his pamphlet. It was rather
strange to see those who had adopted his conclusions


years ago now the first to find fault with him
because he had been compelled to yield to altered
circumstances. (Tremendous applause.) There were
three parties: one was consistent, because it had
refused to take the light at T 9 per lamp and still
refused to take it at To 155.; another party was
consistent, because it would have given the Company
what they asked, and would of course now give £5
15s. ; the third party, of which he was one, was
thought inconsistent because they refused T 9 per
lamp, and was now willing to take it when the
price suited. So much for consistency and
some people’s estimate of it. He had but one
thing in view, and that was to do at all risks what he
thought best for the ratepayers. (Loud cheers.) He
had been told by some who differed from him that
he should lose hundreds of' votes for Canterbury
through his action. His reply was that if he stood
alone in Canterbury he would do what he thought
right —(great cheering) —and that was to assist to
light Ashfield at once with gas. (Renewed cheers.)
They had been asked what change had taken place
since last February. First, there had been further
reductions in the price of gas, and besides that the
will of the people had changed, for they were tired of
the darkness. (Cheers.) But he was quite prepared to
obey the wishes of the ratepayers, in whose interest
he had acted. (Long, continued and tumultuous
applause.)
Mr. Badgery spoke briefly in reply to the state-
ments and remarks of preceding speakers. The
question came to a division.
The amendment was lost, and the resolution was
carried by an overwhelming majority, less than 20
hands being shown against it.
Mr. Badgery moved, and Alderman Watkin
seconded a vote of thanks to the Chairman, which
was carried unanimously by acclamation.


Mr. Pope, in acknowledging the compliment, road
the following letter which he had just received from
the Australian Gaslight Company:—“ The Mayor,
Borough of Ashfield, Dear Sir, —The Australian Gas-
light Company are willing to supply the Borough of
Ashfield with any number of public lights not
exceeding two hundred, on the existing lines of
main at five pounds fifteen shillings (£5 155.) per
lamp per annum, the lamps to burn every night in
the year except five in each moon. This price
includes the gas, hire, and repair of the lamp and
pillar, lighting and extinguishing the lamps, cleaning
and painting, the term to be for five years certain
under the Company's usual municipal contract. A
portion of the lamps could be erected and lighted
within three months from this date. Yours truly,
W. J. Johnson, Secretary.” (Loud and prolonged
applause.)
Cheers for the Queen were then given* and the
proceedings terminated.
ADDENDA.
Eeferring again to the letter from a
Prominent Gas Engineer,
dated 1884, it should be explained that since then
the price of iron work in Kngland has been much
reduced, consequently the cost of gas works would be
much less now than then.
Persons requiring further information on this
question will do well to obtain Silverthorne on the
‘‘Purchase of Gas and Waterworks;” also ') hos
Kewbegging’s “Gas Manager’s Handbook;” and for
further statistical information they should obtain the
Parliamentary return secured on the motion of Mr,
Holmes, M P., in the British House of Commons in


18 3, which affords very full information on all gas
undertakings in the United Kingdom, upwards of
1600 in number.
The Acts Shortening Act of 1858, section 6,
reads:—“Every Act amending an Act shall he
construed with the amended Act, and as part thereof,
unless the contrary be declared in the Amending
Act.”
Sections 165, 103, and 191 of the Municipalities
Act of 1367 are important in connection with the
Oas Act of 1884.


MUNICIPAL GAS ACT, 1884.
An Act to amend the Municipal Law in relation to
the supply of Gas by Municipal Corporations,
and for other purposes in connection therewith.
[Assented to, 31st October, 1884.]
WHEREAS doubts have arisen as to the power
of Municipal Councils to borrow money for
the purchase or construction of gas works for the
purpose of supplying gas for lighting and it is
expedient to remove such doubts and to empower
such Councils to provide such gas works and to
enforce charges for the supply thereof to sell and
dispose of every product and refuse obtained from
the manufacture of gas and to acquire lands and
erect buildings for or in connection with such works
and to make other provision as hereinafter mentioned
Be it therefore enacted by the Queen’s Most
Excellent Majesty by and with the advice and
consent of the Legislative Council and Legislative
Assembly of New South Wales in Parliament
assembled and by the authority of the same as
follows: —
1. This Act may be cited as the “ Municipal Gas
Act of 1884 ” and in its construction the expression
“ Principal Act ” means the “ Municipalities Act of
1867 ” and “ Council” means the Council of any
Borough or Municipal District.
2. Any Council may use the ordinary corporate
funds for the purpose of obtaining plans estimates
or reports as to the cost of purchasing establishing
or constructing gas works Provided that in the
event of such works being proceeded with the
preliminary expenditure shall be charged to the gas
account.


3. For the purpose of constructing gas works any
Council may borrow moneys by way of special loan
notwithstanding the limitation contained in the one
hundred and ninetieth clause of the Principal Act in
manner provided by the Principal Act —
A separate account shall be kept of all moneys
received and expended on account of such
loan and it shall not be lawful to expend any
such moneys in the maintenance or repair of
or for current expenses connected with the
gas works or for any purpose other than
the construction thereof not being 'a purpose
mentioned in the seventeenth section of
of this Act Provided always that such loan
may be lawfully charged with the payment of
interest due thereon during the course of
construction of such works.
The gas works may be a security or part security
for any such loan in which case such loan
shall be a first charge upon such gas works.
All such gas works shall be vested in the Council
4. Any Council may do all things necessary to
light the streets and public places of a Municipality
with gas and to supply gas to the inhabitants thereof
and in connection with such purposes—
(l.) May acquire land construct works or erect
buildings within or without the Munici-
pality.
(II.) May procure and construct all machinery and
plant necessary for gas works.
(III.) May lay pipes under the streets and public
places of the Municipality.
(IY.) May alter any drains or water-pipes there-
under in such manner as may be necessary
but so as not to injuriously affect the. same
or to foul any water conveyed thereby.


(Y.) May erect lamp-posts with all requisite
fittings thereto in the streets And in case
the supply of gas is at any time insufficient
may use kerosene or any material whatever
for lighting purposes.
(YI.) May do all things necessary to keep the gas
works and everything appertaining to the
supply of gas in good repair.
5. A Municipality may exercise any of the
powers contained in the preceding clause within
another Municipality through which it may be
requisite to run the main from the gas works to the
Municipality but in such case the Municipality
exercising those powers shall replace the streets and
public places through which such main runs in the
same condition in which they were previously.
6. Upon the written application of the owner or
occupier of any building within one hundred yards
of any main gas-pipe the Council shall lay on such
service-pipes and gas-meter as are requisite to
supply such building with gas and to measure the
quantity consumed and the Council shall have power
to charge a rent for the use of the meter which shall
be placed where the applicant desires.
7. Every private consumer of gas shall provide
such gas-fittings and appliances for the proper
combustion and for preventing the escape of gas as
the Council may approve of and shall keep the same
in good repair and if any person neglects to provide or
to repair such fittings and appliances when required
to do so by the Council the Council may cut off the
supply of gas from the premises of such person.
8. Any person acting under the authority of the
Council may between the hours of eight in the
forenoon and six in the afternoon on any day except
Sunday enter any premises supplied with gas under
this Act in order to examine the gas-meter therein


and if such person is refused admittance or
obstructed in such examination the Council may cut
off the supply of gas from such building.
9. Any person who alters the index of or in any
other manner tampers with a gas-meter with intent
to defraud the Council shall be liable to a penalty
of not more than fifty pounds for every such offence.
10. No private consumer of gas shall alter the
position of any gas-meter without giving the Council
three days’ notice in writing of his intention and
any person making such alteration without such
notice shall be liable to a penalty of not more than
twenty pounds for every such offence.
11. Any person who wilfully destroys injures or
displaces any gas-pipe or fitting or other thing'
connected with the gas works shall be liable to a
penalty of not more than fifty pounds and shall also
be liable to pay to the Council the cost of repairing
any such injury.
12. The Council may supply persons resident or <
owning property outside the Municipality and not*
within the boundaries of another Municipality with 1
gas upon such terms and conditions and at such
rates as may be agreed on with such persons and for
such purpose shall have the same powers outside as
it has within the Municipality.
13. Any Council which has constructed or acquired i
gas works under the authority of this Act may*
contract with any other Council (and such last-*
mentioned Council is hereby declared to be com-
petent to enter into any such contract and bind its
corporate revenues by the terms thereof) for the
supply of gas only to such Council at such rates and
upon such terms as may be mutually agreed And
the Council so to be supplied shall within the limits
of such Municipality have all the powers and be
subject to all the obligations and liabilities conferred


or imposed by this Act on Councils constructing
gas works under its provisions so far as such powers-
obligations and liabilities can be respectively exer-
cised and incurred.
14. The Council shall not construct any works or
lay any pipes or anything connected therewith on or
under any private property without the consent of
the owner and occupier thereof but may enter upon
any such property where gas-pipes or fittings have
been lawfully laid under this Act and may alter repair
or replace the same as it thinks fit.
15. Any two or more Councils may join together
in the purchase or erection of gas works and may
conjointly exercise the powers herein conferred on
them separately.
16. The Council may fix the prices at which gas-
shall be supplied to all private consumers and the
times when the same shall be payable and may from
time to time alter the same And in case any person
who shall contract with the Council or agree to take
or shall take or use the gas of the Council in any
building tenement or place shall refuse or neglect
to pay to the Council the sum or sums due in respect
thereof it shall be lawful for the Council without
prejudice to any other remedy to take proceedings
in respect of such refusal or neglect before any
Justice of the Peace who may issue a summons to
tjie party so refusing or neglecting calling on him to
show cause before the Court of Petty Sessions in the
police district in which such building tenement or
place is situated or such user took place why he
refuses to pay such sum or sums and the said Court
shall hear and determine the matter and may enforce
payment of any order (together with costs if ordered)
by distress and sale of the goods and chattels of the
defendant.
17. The Council may sell or otherwise dispose of
all products refuse or residuum obtained from their


gas works and may sue for and recover payment for
the same in manner provided by the last preceding
section.
18. The Council may make and levy an annual
rate as provided for in the one hundred and sixty-
fifth section of the Principal Act upon all ratepayers
in the Municipality for the purpose of lighting the
streets and public buildings in the Municipality but
such rate shall not exceed sixpence in the pound in
any one year.
19. If any person fails to pay any money due on
account of gas or on account of any such gas-rate as
aforesaid the Council may without prejudice to .any
other remedy cut off the supply of gas from the
premises of such person.
20. A separate account to be called the “ gas
account ” shall be kept of all moneys received from
gas-rates and for the supply of gas and for the sale
of any products therefrom all which moneys shall
be charged as follows:
(i.) With such sums (to be transferred to an
Interest and Sinking Fund Account) as shall
be sufficient to satisfy the interest and
principal sums payable on any loan raised
under the authority of this Act.
(n.) With the cost of maintaining the gas works
in good repair and all the expenses con-
nected with making and supplying gas as
herein provided.
(m.) With any surplus remaining thereafter which
surplus the Council is hereby empowered to
transfer to the credit of the General Muni-
cipal Fund.
21. The Council may out of any moneys which
are applicable to the construction of gas works under I
this Act purchase any gas works mains and lamp-
posts which when so purchased shall be deemed to


have been constructed and established under this
Act.
22. It shall be lawful for the directors of any gas
company in pursuance of a special resolution passed
by a majority of three-fourths in number and value
of the shareholders present either personally or by
proxy at a meeting specially convened with notice of
the business to be transacted to sell and transfer to
any Council on such terms as may be agreed upon
all the rights powers and privileges and all or any of
the lands premises works and other property of the
Company but subject to all liabilities attaching to
the same at the time of purchase.
23. No pipe burner lamp meter or other apparatus of
the Council set up in any building tenement or place
shall be subject to distress for rent or shall be taken
in execution under any process or proceeding of any
Court of law or equity or under any proceedings in
bankruptcy or insolvency unless under process against
such Council.
24. The gas supplied by every Council shall be
absolutely free from sulphuretted hydrogen and shall
be of such minimum quality as to produce from an
Aigand burner having fifteen holes and a seven-inch
chimney consuming five cubic feet of gas per hour a
light equal in intensity to the light produced by
fifteen sperm candles of six in the pound burning
one hundred and twenty grains per hour.
25. Every Council shall within twelve months
after the erection of any gas works authorised by this
Act put up at some testing place to be provided by
the said Council within the Municipality suitable
apparatus for the purposes following :
(i.) For testing the illuminating power of the gas
supplied
(n.) For testing the presence of sulphuretted
hydrogen in the gas supplied


The said apparatus shall be in accordance with the
Schedule hereto and shall at all times be kept and
maintained in good repair and working order by the
said Council.
26. Every Council shall from time to time appoint
a proper person as gas examiner who shall at the
proper testing place test the illuminating power and
purity of the gas supplied on any or every day and
such Council may be represented at the testing if it
shall think fit but shall not in any way directly or
indirectly interfere in the testing.
27. The gas examiner shall on the day immediately
following that on which the testing was made by him
deliver to the Council a report of such testing signed
by him which report shall be receivable in evidence
in any Court.
28. No meter shall be used for ascertaining the
quantity of gas sold by any Council unless the same
shall have its measuring capacity at one revolution
or complete action of the meter and also the quantity
per hour it is intended to measure in cubic feet or
multiples or decimal parts of a cubic foot denomin-
ated or marked on the outside thereof in legible letters
or figures and shall have been tested and stamped as
correct by the English Warden of Standards or by
some authority declared by the Governor in Council
by notification in the Gazette to be a lawful authority
for the purpose of this section.
29. An inspector of meters shall from time to time,
be appointed by the Council and such inspector shall;
at all times when authorised by the Council on the
application and at the expense of any consumer of
gas supplied by the Council be entitled to inspect
and test the meters erected by the Council in the
premises of the person making such request after
giving forty-eight hours notice of such intended
inspection to the Council and before such inspection
the person requiring the same shall deposit in the


hands of the inspector all money due or appearing to
be due by such person to the Council on account
delivered and in case such deposit shall be in excess
of the sum found to be due to the Council such
excess shall be returned to the consumer.
30. No meter fixed by any Council for use before
the expiration of one year after the commencement
of this Act shall be allowed to remain in use after
the expiration of five years from that time unless it
shall have been tested and stamped as by this Act
directed and no meter once tested and stamped under
the provisions of this Act shall be allowed to remain in
use for more than five years from the time when it
shall have been last so stamped unless and until it
shall have been re-tested and re-stamped in manner
aforesaid and if such Council shall knowingly allow
any meter to be used in contravention of this section
it shall be liable to a penalty not exceeding forty
shillings for every such offence.
31. After the expiration of one year from the
commencement of this Act the legal standard or unit
of measure for the sale of any Councils’ gas by meter
shall be the cubic foot containing sixty-two pounds
three hundred and twenty-one thousands of a pound
(62-321) avoirdupois weight of distilled or rain water
weighed in air at the temperature of sixty-two degrees
Fahrenheit’s thermometer the barometer being at
thirty inches.
32. If any person shall forge or counterfeit or
cause or procure to be forged or counterfeited or
knowingly act or assist in the forging or counter-
feiting any stamp which may hereafter be used for
the stamping of any meter under this Act such
person shall for every such offence be liable to a
penalty not exceeding fifty pounds nor less than
ten pounds and if any person shall knowingly sell
utter or dispose of let lend or expose for sale any
meter with such forged stamp thereon such person
shall for every such offence be liable to a penalty no


exceeding ten pounds nor less than forty shillings
and all meters having forged or counterfeited stamps
thereon shall be forfeited and destroyed.
33. Every Council supplying gas shall except in
case of accident supply the same at such pressure as
to balance from midnight to sunset a column of
water not less than six-tenths of an inch in height,
and from sunset to midnight a column of water not
less than one inch in height.
34. Whenever any Council shall have determined
%/ m i
to construct gas works under this Act such Council;
shall have power to purchase any existing gas works
within the Municipality owned by any Company
or individual at a price to be fixed by arbitrators
mutually appointed such price to be ascertained by
reference to the average dividend or profits for the
then last three years or if the works have not been
in existence three years then at a price not exceeding
ten per cent, advance on the cost of such works.
35. Nothing contained in this Act shall prevent (
the Council being brought under the provisions of 1
any general Act which may be passed by the
Parliament of New South Wales applying equally to
Councils engaged in the manufacture of gas in the
Colony with reference to the manufacture and sale
of gas nor entitle the said Council to compensation
from the public revenue by reason of the provisions
of such general Act for the purpose aforesaid being
made applicable to and binding upon the Council.
36. All sums of money penalties and fines payable
or recoverable by any Council under this Act shall
be recovered in manner provided by the one hundred
and ninety-third section of the Principal Act and
when so recovered shall be paid into and form part
of the gas account of such Council.


SCHEDULE.
Part I.
Regulations in respect of testing apparatus.
The apparatus for testing the illuminating power of the gas
shall consist of an approved form of photometer together with a
proper meter minute clock governor pressure gauge and balance
The burner to be used for testing the gas shall be an
Argand burner having fifteen holes and a seven-inch chimney
The candles used for testing the gas shall be sperm
candles of six to the pound and two candles shall be used
together.
2. The apparatus.
For testing the presence in the gas of sulphuretted hydrogen
a glass vessel containing a strip of bibulous paper moistened
with a solution of acetate of lead containing sixty grains
of crystallized acetate of lead dissolved in one fluid ounce of
water.
Part 11.
Rules as to mode of testing gas.
1. Mode qf testing for illuminating power The gas in the
photometer is to be lighted at least fifteen minutes before the
testings begin and it is to be kept continually burning from the
beginning to the end of the tests Each testing shall include
ten observations of the photometer made at intervals of a minute
The consumption of gas is to be carefully adjusted to five cubic
feet per hour The candles are to be lighted at least ten minutes
before beginning each testing so as to arrive at their normal rate
of burning which is shown when the wick is slightly bent and the
tip glowing The standard rate of consumption for the candles
shall be one hundred and twenty grains each per hour Before
and after making each set of ten observations of the photometer
the gas examiner shall weigh the candles and if combustion shall
have been more or less per candle than one hundred and twenty
grains per hour he shall make and record the calculations
requisite to neutralize the effects of this difference The average
of each set of ten observations is to be taken as representing the
illuminating power of that testing.
2. Mode of testing for sulphuretted hydrogen The gas shall be
passed through the glass vessel containing the strip of bibulous
paper moistened with the solution of acetate of lead for a period
of three minutes or snch longer period as may be prescribed and
if any discolouration of the test paper is found to have taken
place this is held to be conclusive as to the presence of
sulphuretted hydrogen in the gas.


APPENDIX.
MUNICIPAL GAS ACT.
THE MUNICIPAL ASSOCIATION OF NEW SOUTH
WALES.
Pursuant to the objects contemplated by the Association, the
following legal opinions have been obtained :
BATHURST.
On February 19th the Bathurst Council wrote asking for a
legal opinion as to what powers that Council had under the
Municipal Gas Act of 1884, and whether it was necessary that
the Bathurst Gas Act should be repealed before the Council could
erect gas works “to supply the Council lamps and the public
with gas." The Committee of the Association having considered
the matter, replied that they thought it unnecessary to take legal
opinion, as they were clearly convinced that the Bathurst Council
had full power under either the Bathurst Gas Act (sec. 8), or the
Municipal Gas Act to purchase existing works or to erect works
that might enter into competition with them. The Bathurst
Council not feeling satisfied with this advice, again asked that the
best legal opinion should be obtained, and enclosed the following
copy of their solicitor’s opinion in reference to the question :
mr Thomson’s opinion.
The Municipal Council of the Borough of Bathurst having
submitted to me the following question for my opinion, viz. :
“ What powers have the Bathurst Borough Council under the
Municipal Gas Act of 1884 as to erection of gas works, or for
purchase of those already established 1” I have to advise that the
benefits to be derived by Municipal Councils under the fourth
section of the Act of 1884 cannot be attained by the Bathurst
Municipal Council until the Act 36 Victoria (the “ Bathurst Gas
Act ”) has been repealed. The preamble to the latter Act
contains the following recital:—“ And whereas the Municipal
Council of the said city have, at the request of the said John
Newlands Wark, and in consideration of the benefits to arise


from the establishment and carrying out of such works, consented
to the vesting in the said John Newlands Wark of all necessary
powers and authorities so far as the rights and interests of the
said Municipal Council are concerned.”
The Bathurst Gas Act is still in force and unrepealed, and in
my opinion unaffected by the Act of 1884.
If, therefore, the Council has no power under the fourth section,
it is further my opinion that the thirty-fourth section confers no
power upon the Council, inasmuch as the Council has no legal
power to “ determine to construct gas works ” (see the section)
for the reasons above given. The Council has the right to make
and supply gas for its own purposes, but not for supply to the
inhabitants of the Borough, unless empowered in manner pointed
out by section 8 of the Bathurst Gas Act.
I know that it is quite incomprehensible to some members of
the Council that the action of the Council in 1871 should have
so continuously evil an effect as to (so far as the Council is
concerned) confer a monopoly upon one individual which nothing
but special legislation can remove ; but such is in my opinion the
case.
In view of the whole question I have to advise that the
Bathurst Municipal Council has acquired no powers whatever
under the “ Municipal Gas Act of 1884.”
(Signed) A. G. THOMPSON.
The Committee submitted the matter to their solicitor for
■Counsel’s opinion, and in reply received the following:—
mb. Wallace’s opinion.
I have carefully considered the case submitted by the Borough
-of Bathurst, and have also perused the opinion obtained by the
Council in reference to the matter contained in the case, and in
reply to the questions asked am clearly of opinion :
1. That the Borough of Bathurst has full power and authority
to purchase under the provisions of the Municipal Gas
Act of 1884, any existing gas works within the Borough,
or may, if they so think fit, erect other works in competi-
tion with any existing ones.
2. That there is no necessity whatever for a repeal of the
Bathurst Gas Act of 1872, in order to enable the Borough
of Bathurst to avail itself of the provisions of the Municipal
Gas Act of 1884, empowering the purchase of existing
works or erection of others.
The grounds on which I base my opinion are that the preamble
•of an Act of Parliament is not an enacting part of the statute,


but is only a key to the true understanding of the provisions*
which follow. It is only brought into operation in interpreting
the intention of the Legislature when the enacting parts of the
Act are open to doubt.
The enacting parts of the Bathurst Gas Act of 1872 cannot be
said to be open to doubt as to whether the intention of the
Legislature was to restrict the rights of the Borough, as section 8
clearly provides that nothing in the Act shall limit, restrict, or in
any manner affect the rights of any Municipality, or of any other
person or company hereafter empowered by the Legislature to
supply gas to the said city of Bathurst or suburbs or other place,
or to exercise any power which it may be deemed expedient or
necessary to grant for that purpose. The Municipal Gas Act of
1884, by its provisions, thereafter empowered Municipalities to
purchase existing gas works or to erect new ones. It is quite
clear, therefore, to my mind that all rights necessary to enable
the Borough of Bathurst to avail themselves of the provisions of
the Municipal Gas Act of 1884 were reserved to them by section
Bof the Bathurst Gas Act of 1872. The preamble of an Act
cannot either restrict or extend the enacting part when the
language of the latter is plain and not open to doubt, either as to
its meaning or scope. (Maxwell on the Interpretation of
Statutes, page 56).
I am further of opinion that the clause in the preamble would
never be held to express the view that there was an expression of
intention to vest in Mr. Wark any rights to the exclusion of the
rights of the Borough. It only recites that the Council had
consented to the vesting in the said Mr. Wark all necessary
powers and authorities, so far as the rights and interests of the
Municipal Council were concerned.
Necessary powers and authorities for what 1 The various
clauses of the Act itself show for what—to erect gasometers,
break up streets, roads, etc.; to make contracts for supply, and
carry out works for that purpose. The preamble does not recite
any agreement with or consent of the Council to relinquish any
legal rights they then had, or which might thereafter be con]
ferred ujon them to erect gas works. It only says that the
consent of the Council, so far as they had control, or the rights or
interests in the road and streets were concerned, had been
obtained to the exercise of all necessary powers and authorities
for the carrying out of what Mr. Wark was, by the provisions of
the Act, empowered to do. This cannot, in my opinion, in any way
be construed into the granting of a monopoly to Mr. Wark for the
erection of gas works and the supply of gas in the Borough of
Bathurst.
GEO. WALLACE.


A copy of this opinion was forwarded to Bathurst, but the
Council considered that the matter was still unsettled, it being
but one Solicitor’s opinion against another, whereupon Mr.
Wallace submitted the whole matter to Mr. Parley, Q. 0., and
"the case and opinion are appended :
o
CASE FOB OPINION OF COUNSEL.
In the year of 1872 a private Act was passed through Parlia-
ment to enable John Newlands Wark to construct gas works
within the City of Bathurst and suburbs.
In the preamble it sets out that it is expedient that the City of
Bathurst and suburbs should be supplied and lighted with gas,
-and that John Newlands Wark is desirous of establishing and
carrying out work for such purposes and for other purposes
incidental thereto. The preamble then goes on to say, “ And
whereas the Municipal Council of the said city have, at the
request of the said John Newlands Wark, and in consideration of
the benefits to arise from the establishment and carrying out of
such works, consented to the vesting in the said John Newlands
Wark of all necessary powers and authorities so far as the rights
-and interests of the said Municipal Council are concerned.”
The Act contains nine sections, and is annexed hereto, and
Counsel will see from its perusal what powers have been conferred
-on Mr. Wark. The attention of Counsel is particularly drawn to
section 8 of the Act. Mr. Wark had, in pursuance of the powers in
the said Act conferred on him, erected gas works, and has for
some years been supplying the inhabitants of Bathurst and
suburbs and the Municipal Council with gas.
By the Municipal Gas Act of 1884 (48 Yict. No. 2) / Section 4,
any Municipal Council in the colony is empowered to acquire
land, construct works, or erect buildings within or without the
Municipality, procure and construct all machinery and plant;
may lay pipes under the streets and public places of the Munici-
pality ; may alter drains, «kc., «kc.
By section 6 the Council may supply private persons. By
section 12 they may supply persons outside the Municipality.
By section 21 they may purchase gas works, mains, and lamp-
posts. By section 22 existing gas companies may sell their works
to the Council, and by section 32 the Council is empowered to
purchase existing gas works. The Bathurst Municipal Council
! are desirous of erecting gas works, and supplying the city with
gas; but a question has arisen as to the power to legally take
.steps in this direction, by reason of the recital in the preamble to
the Bathurst Gas Act of 1872, before set out. It is contended
that the recital in the preamble of the Act mentioned created an


absolute monopoly in Mr. Wark of the right to supply Bathurst
with gas until this part of the Act is repealed, and that by the
recital the Council are barred for all time from interfering with
Mr. Wark in his enterprise.
The Council of Bathurst have not signed any deed vesting in
Mr. Wark any such monopoly, and Mr. Wark rests his claim on
the recital in the preamble to the private Act mentioned.
Council will please advise :
1. Does the recital in the preamble to the Bathurst Gas Act of
1872 absolutely vest in Mr. Wark the right as against the
Borough Council to a monopoly of the erection of gaa
works in the Borough of Bathurst and suburbs, or do the
provisions of section 8 preserve the right of the Council
thereafter to erect works 1
2. Can the Borough Council of Bathurst legally proceed with
the erection of gas works, &c., under the provisions of the
Municipal Gas Act of 1884 1
GEO. WALLACE,
Solicitor.
OPINION.
I am of opinion that the preamble in question vests no such
monopoly in Mr. Wark as he contends for. It shows, like the
preamble to all private Acts, that the Legislature had taken the
then interests of all persons who could be affected into considera-
tion, and the Municipality of Bathurst having the care and
management of the streets of that city their consent to the
breaking up of such streets was obtained before the Act was
passed. This is the meaning of the preamble and nothing more.
The claim, therefore, put forward by Mr. Wark cannot be
entertained for one moment.
The Bth clause (even were there a doubt in the matter, which
Ido not admit) is decisive ; that clause was really unnecessary,
but was, no doubt, introduced into the Act to satisfy some
member of the Legislature who might have foreseen that some
such preposterous claim as this would be put forward.
I am of opinion, therefore, that the Municipality can legally
proceed with the erection of gas works under the provisions of
the Municipal Gas Act of 1884.
FREDK. M. BARLEY.
Wentworth Court, 15 th June, 1885,
o
EX PARTE BOROUGH OF BATHURST.
1. My opinion is that the Bathurst Gas Act did not confer
upon the promoter any such monopoly. If there were otherwise


any doubt about the matter, it appears to me that the concluding
portion of section 8, fully indicates that the Legislature had no
such intention.
2. The Municipal Gas Act of 1884, in my opinion, applies
as fully to the Bathurst Municipality as to any other, and it has
power to avail itself of all that Act’s provisions. Ido not see
how the Act of 1872 in any way affects this power.
3. Section 34 is curiously worded, as it seems that a Council
must determine to construct gas works under the Act before it
has power to purchase any existing gas works. It appears to
me, however, that the legislature must mean that the Munici-
pality has the option to do either one or the other.
4. I think that the 34th section imperatively requires an
arbitration.
(Signed) M. H. STEPHEN.
Chamber, 4 th December, 1885.
o
THE GAS ACT—BORROWING POWERS OF COUNCIL-
CASE.
By Section 190 of the Municipalities Act (31 Yic. No. 12) the
Council of any Municipality may borrow money by debentures or
mortgage or otherwise on the credit of any land, personal estate,
or annual revenues, actual or prospective belonging to the body
corporate of such Municipality for or towards or incidental to the
making, carrying on or completing of any permanent improve-
ments within the Municipality any moneys not exceeding in the
whole the estimated revenues thereof for five years. This
borrowing power is subject to certain conditions set forth in the
section, and attention is particularly directed to the last two
provisoes to the section, the first of which provides that when
money is borrowed on security of general rate the Council shall
assess and collect such general rate to the full extent of one
shilling in the pound till debt is paid off. The second of these
two provisoes provides that when money is borrowed on the
security.of any special rate such special rate shall not be reduced
until debt is paid off. This section evidently anticipates two
distinct classes of debt, one on the security of general rate, the
other on security of a special rate, which under the Act can only
be struck in respect of some special purpose provided for by
section 165, one of such purposes being “ lighting with gas.”
Doubts having arisen as to the power of Municipalities to
borrow money for purchase or construction of gasworks, the
Municipal Gas Act (48 Yic. No. 20) was passed, and by section 3
of that Act any Municipal Council is, for the purpose of con-
structing Gas Works, empowered to borrow moneys by way of


special loan notwithstanding the limitation contained in the
190th section of the Act, 31 Vic. No. 14, which it is presumed
refers to the limitation of amount to five years revenue actual or
piospective. A question has now arisen as to whether under the
Act 48 Vic. No. 20, the Council can give security upon the general
rates of the Borough for a loan contracted under the provisons
of section 3of that Act. Counsel will please advise :
1. Does the Act 48 Vic. No. 20, give power to a Municipal
Council to borrow money for the purpose of constructing
Gas Works or purchase of existing Gas Works (see section
21) upon the security of the whole rates (general and
special) of the borough (see section 182 of 31 Vic. No. 12),
or is such power confined to security upon the lighting rate
only 1
2. Could the person lending money for such purpose and
holding security therefor under section 191, exercise the
remedies provided by that section against any Council
making default in payment of the sum so borrowed 1
3. Would all persons holding property within the Borough
be said “to derive benefit and advantage from the
construction of such Works,” so as to render their
respective properties liable to the special rate for lighting
purposes 1
OPINION.
I am of opinion that the 48 Vic. No. 20, does not give a
Municipality power to mortgage the general rates for the
special purpose of lighting the Municipality with gas. The
Council may pledge the special rate, and may also pledge the
Gas Works. So careful has the Legislature been about this, that
although it authorises the use of the ordinary corporate funds
(general rates) for the purpose of obtaining plans, estimates and
reports, this preliminary expenditure is to be charged to the gas
account in the event of the works being proceeded with (see
section 2of Act), The loan is also to be a special loan.
I see no reason to doubt that a person lending money upon
the security of the special rate and upon the security of the
Gas Works, may exercise all the remedies provided for by the
191st section of the 31 Vic. No. 12. I take it that the 3rd
clause of the 48 Vic. No. 20 merely amplifies the provisions of
the 190th section of the 31 Vic. No. 12 and may be read as a
proviso to that section.
The words “ deriving any benefit or advantage from such
works ” in the 165th section of the 31 Vic. No. 12 have not yet,
so far as I know, received any judicial interpretation. They


point out however, that there may be some persons in the
Municipality who may not derive any benefit from the Works
mentioned in the section, such as lighting with gas, and I think
that each case of dispute must. be determined by evidence as to
the convenience—the improvement of the value of the property —
and so forth ■ and I can quite understand a case of a Borough
being so lit by gas as that some of the properties in outlying
situations may not derive any benefit therefrom. Each case
must be governed by its own circumstances. No fixed rule can
be laid down.
FRED. M. BARLEY.
25th May, 1886.
The above opinion is in accord with the remarks of the author
of the Gas Act expressed at the public meeting referred to at
page 41. A Bill is now before Parliament for the purpose of
enabling Municipal Councils to legally mortgage both General
and Special rates for the purchase or construction of gas works.
THANKS.
Mr. Hammond, in respect to the Gas Act of
1884, desires ns to specially thank the Hon. A. H.
Jacob, M.L.C., not only for his valuable help in
assisting to revise the Bill from its original rough
draft, but also for his services in the Legislative
Council, which were most valuable.


This Act represents the Bill referred to in the preceding page.
An Act to amend the “ Municipal Gas Act of 1884.”
[Assented to, 13th August, 1886.]
WHEREAS doubts have arisen as to the power
of Municipal Councils under the provisions
of the “ Municipalities Act of 1867 ” and the
“ Municipal Gas Act of 1884 ” to charge the lands
general and special rates of the Municipality with
the security for the repayment of any loan made to
such Council for the purpose of constructing gas works
And whereas it is expedient to remove such doubts
and to extend the power aforesaid Be it therefore
enacted by the Queen’s Most Excellent Majesty by
and with the advice and consent of the Legislative
Council and Legislative Assembly of New South
Wales in Parliament assembled and by the authority
of the same as follows ;
1. The powers conferred upon the Council of any
Municipality under section three of the “ Municipal
Gas &ct of 1884 ” shall be so extended as to authorize
and empower such Council to borrow money for the
purpose of constructing or purchasing gas works upon
the credit of all or any general or special rates or rate
which such Council is authorized to levy and upon
the security of the lands of such Councils.
2. This Act may be cited as the “ Municipal Gas
Act Amendment Act of 1886.”
Preamble
Extension of
powers of
Councils of
Municipalities
to borrow
money for
gas works
Short title


