

MUNICIPAL EXTENSION,
AND OTHER ESSAYS.
BY T. GEO. ELLERY
Town Clork of Adelaide.




'DAjWCgoxA, 11 1 0 k
MUNICIPAL APATHY.
The absence of keen competition for j
mnriicipal honors and dignities, and of
any marked degree of interest in the
ensuing elections, may be interpreted
as an indication that the rate-
payers have little complaint to make as to
the manner in which the councils have
administered their affairs. From that point
of view it i.s possible to draw a satisfac-
tory conclusion. There is, however,
another rational explanation of pre-
vailing apathy that affords less ground
for gratification. Just as, in- the
words of Coventry I’atmore, “a woman,
like the Kohiuoor, mounts to the
price that s set on her,” so the popular
estimate of the importance of local govern-
ment may rise—or fall—according to the
standards made by those who undertake
its responsibilities. If municipalism is
permeated by a spirit of pettiness—it those
directly connected with it prove unable to
reach beyond parochial ideals—the public
will not hold it in very high esteem, nor
will it present very great attractions as a
field of public service to men unwilling to
be bound down to a low and commonplace
routine. That it requires practical good
sense to discharge with thrift and efficiency
the elementary functions of local govern-
ment —the making and maintenance of
streets, the removal of rubbish, &c.—will
not be disputed. Hut if towns and cities
are to show substantial progress there must,
be higher aims. Yor is it reasonably to be
concluded, as some conclude who dread any
departure .from parish council practice, that
a forward municipal policy implies unsound
or extravagant finance. most progres-
sive corporations of tnc mother-country
have demonstrated that enterprises are not
necessarily unthrifty because large and
ambitious; on the contrary, relief to the
jrates has frequently followed the extension
of public services which' a bold and wise
intelligence has embarked upon. It is in-
credible that anyone who is able to take
a just and sane view of the useful part that
may bo played by municipalism in the
advancement of genera] public interests can
rest content,with the present position of
local government within the metropolitan
Urea. The multiplication of the local
bodies is not even economical. There is
far more machinery than is needed, and I
nevertheless it exists in such unrelated,
fragments as to bo incapable of any con- ‘
siderable work. Except to a limited extent:
in sanitary administration there is no co-
operative action in respect of matters !
which are of common concern to the resi- j
dents of the whole area. The result is |
that great resources are not called U)ton I
or else arc frittered away, and civic enter-
prises on more than a limited local scale !
are found to be lt is almost
universally agreed that the possession and
management of the means of inter-urban
communication are .properly within the
sphere of municipal activity. Yet, because i
there is no Greater Adelaide, no authority
equal to the undertaking, no municipal
spirit which has been developed to the
point of demanding it, our corporations arc
humiliated by the spectacle of a Parliamen-
tary enactment which proposes to give
away their street rights for an indefinite
term of years to speculative outsiders, and
to make a private monopoly of the electric
tramways for which the capital has waited
: so long. This is only one instance, though
The most striking, of what is lost to the
public through the system of excessive de-
centralisation. In New Zealand, in New
| South Wales, in Victoria —even in Western
—the Greater City movement
! gains ground as experience accumulates of
its necessity for the purposes of the higher
municipalism. Only in Adelaide is it
apparently at a standstill; and those who
have satisfied themselves that inaction
spells safety, and that movement involves
danger, pronounce the existing dead-and-
alive condition to be “very good.’’ Recent
Parliamentary enactments have consider-
ably enlarged the powers of local bodies.
The local bodies can, of course, decline to
use them. They may prefer to go along
in the commonplace, unexcited old way, in-
,different to the unemployed possibilities of
a wider public service. Their ordinary
duties may be discharged with a humdrum
fidelity to prosaic details that leaves little
scope for controversy- or contention. But
if this is accepted as the alpha and
omega of city government 'it will
be idle to rail against the general public
for not taking municipal affairs more seri-
ously, or to complain of indisposition to
comjiete for offices which make such limited
demands on capacity and afford such small
opportunities for distinction.


The Register.
ADELAIDE: MONDAY, NOVEMBER 28, 190*.
MUNICIPAL, NOMINATIONS.
Among the diminishing channels of j
public life in which disinterested and
patriotic service remains unaffected by
the reproach incidental to payment of
legislators probably the moat notable,
as It is the largest, concerns local go-
vernment. It is true that an allowance i
Is usuaMy granted* to the JSDayor to be
expended upon civic hospitality and
charity, and generally that amount is
exceeded In maintaining the dignity of
the office, and the difference is paid
out of the private purse of the occu- 1
pant. In some district councils the
practice prevails of defraying the
travelling expenses of rural Council-
lors, but so far as can be observed the
special privilege attaching to the posi-
tion of a town Councillor is that of hav- |
ing access to the Mayor’s parlour, ■
which frequently serves the purpose of
a municipal club. The old British cus-
tom of preserving the civic spirit by l-
passing a loving cup around the'fes-
tive board has undergone considerable;
modification In recent years, and no- :
where more so than in the colonies. An
attenuated remnant of the tradition in
the mother country which ajssociates
aldermanic proportions with turtle,
soup may be found in connection with
the modest quarterly luncheons of The
Lord Mayors of Melbourne and Sydney,
but in a general way Australian muni-
cipalism, like Australian Freemasonry,
offers little attraction to the cultured
palate or the athletic appetite. Ade-
laide has even abandoned the annual
civic banquet as a boresome formality,
and adopted the more appropriately.
Australian and pleasant mode of pro-
moting the social instincts in the
Mayor’s annual picnic. English guilds
which maintain the merry tables for
favoured guests represent wealthy and
historic corporations, which have no.
counterparts in the Commonwealth,
whose sunny clime lends scant encour-
agement to high feeding as a condition:
of generous sentiment. The strenuous
colonial life has no leisure for ancient
revelry, the practical colonial mind
doubts the utility of ostentatious feast-
ing. Virtually the only link between
the gourmand guild of “the good old
times” and the municipal corporation
of these detached lands and iconoclas-
tic days is the simple affair of the
Mayor’s cupboard; and some people
doubt whether this mysterious innova-
tion will survive criticism. Still, as co- 1
operation is the essential aim of en- i
lightened government the most austere j
ascetics must allow within moderation !
those methods for fusing parties which I
are indicated in the mellowing moods— |
the psychological moments of autumn |
tints and fruit gathering—when men,
are ripe in suggestion and free in com-j
promise. Soclablencss is the measure
of civilization as individuality of na- 1
tional character. If the mild convi- 1
vlality reputed to flow from a Mayor’s '
cuphoflrd releases the co-ordinating
force, the greatest of all powers, the
institution is not indefensible on strict-
ly utilitarian grounds.
j As the parent of municipalism under I
;the Southern Cross South Australia hip
I worthily developed local government,
particularly in its adaptation to rural
i requirements, and the recently enacted
(District Councils Bill promises to sup-
ply a judicious extension of the sys- <
tern. The noteworthy feature of South
Australian municipalism has been the
soundness of its finance. It has lived
within its income. The Parliament
has discreetly,, discouraged ■ reckless i
municipal spending, and the ratepayers
have much to be thankful for in that
respect. In Victoria the total assets of
municipalities in 1903 amounted to
£3,932,002, and the liabilities to
£4,527,229, showing a deficiency of
£595,107. When, therefore, some cri-
tics complain relative to the current
municipal elections that the absence of
a programme of debtmaking is a sign
of civic stagnation, they altogether
misrepresent the situation. The vast
enterprises of such bodies as. the Lon-
don County Council and the Glasgow
Corporation, which may be magnificent
undertakings in their, circumstances,
are not examples for colonial imita-
tion, simply because colonists have not
Londons or Glasgows to deal with. We
have to build up, not reconstruct, cities;
our State Governments perform many
tasks cast upon British local govern-
ment; and as our conditions are quite
distinctive, the appropriation of the
doctrine of the sedulous ape to muni-
cipalism is absurd and ridiculous. The
forward policy in the United Kingdom
is in the experimental stage, and is
fraught with much risk, because at the
best the success of collective trading
depends not solely upon the calibre of
public men, but additionally in the dis-
position of voting power upon whether
those who spend, also pay. Judging by
the nominations received on Saturday
the ratepayers have taken the sensible
view that what the present occasions
call for is not “a pyrotechnic policy of
boom, borrow, and burst,” but a con-
tinuance of sound and prudent adminis-
tration. The need is for patient im-
provement in sanitation, street toilette,,
roadways and footpaths, traffic regu-
lation, and town beautification—in a
word, if one may he permitted to find
it in the analogy of housewifery—the,
need is for useful, practical, city
“wifery.” Probably the date is much
nearer at hand than many imagine
when the State Governments, for eco-
nomic reasons, must increase the func-
tions of the local authorities, and when
a larger portion of the public revenue
will be collected from the ratepayers.
In the past 12 years the Government
subsidy to Victorian municipalities has
been gradually reduced from £450,000
to £50,000 a year. The New Zealand:
Parliament has decentralized the edu-i
cation system, and made the district
powers responsible for the maintenance
of school buildings. Apart from the’
question of relief thus given to the tax-
payer, the change is justified by the
gain to education through the stimulus
imparted to popular interest in the sub-
ject. South Australian educationists
are considering whether in some such'
way the corporations and district coun-
cils might not he constituted Boards of
Advice to take over the school build-
ings and maintain them by means of ;
a light education rate.
umilng to the personal aspect of the
current corporation elections, the un-
opposed return of Aid. Bruce to the
Mayoralty of Adelaide is an honour
which that past master in municipalism
has well earned by long and faithful
service to the ratepayers of both the
City of Adelaide and the coming City
of Unley. Of Mr. Bruce’s capacity to
discharge the formal and social duties
of the high office to which he has
been called there can be no doubt.
Those familiar with His Worship’s
business and platform ability and the
tact and success which, with the as-
sistance of Mrs. Bruce, characterized
his Unley Mayoralty predict for him
in the larger sphere a bright and
happy term. Good records have
been established by several gentlemen
who have passed through the civic
chairs. The regime of Mr. J. 11. Chin-
ner at Unley has been rendered not-
able by the growth of the population
to 20,000, the number at which the
town may be the third in South Aus-
tralia to be raised to the dignity of a
city. Should the new Tramways Act
lead to tlie electrification of the lines
the distribution of settlement may be
affected with especial benefit to those
suburbs which unite with natural ad-
vantages the picturesque attractions of
wide and well-formed tree-ltnod streets.
The Park Lands League is an institu-
tion which should have analogues in
committees of ratepayers in every
municipality to assist local government,
and to fan In a man the first spark of
patriotism in an affection and pride for
the district which is so supremely in-
teresting as to be that in which he.
lives.


A
GREATER MELBOURNE.
The separate government of contiguous
areas carrying large populations, though
it may foster the spirit of a petty loca.
patriotism, has been found everywhere to
be weighted with grave disadvantages. Its
tendency is to increase the burdens upon
the ratepayers, to augment expenditure,
and to set up a number of liitie armies of
officials where one force, smaller in the
aggregate and more efficient, might do the
work. Kot only is the policy of decen-
tralisation in thickly-populated areas be-
tween which there- are none but imaginary
boundaries, and not even the separation of
distance tj create « div son of interests,
antagonistic to economy, but it also ra ses
obstacles to great collective undertakings
for the lack of which a community
lags in the march of progress. The centrali-
sation movement is, however, btgiani: g to
make headway. The London County Coun-
cil is a standing example of what -o.al
government upon a large, scale may accom-
plish. There are other centics in Great
Britain where powerful muuic.pa bodies,
such as the Glasgow Goiporation, have
exercised a beneficial iiitlutiice upon toe
material and soc.ai weliaae of tueir citizens.
The "Greater City” movement has maue
considerable progress in New Zea.and, and
tfie most recent Australian example .8
g.ve-n in Me.buurne, wnere a pioposal has
matured for the amaig-.mat.ou of the cty'
of Melbourne witn the town of North
Me.bourne and tfie borough of Fiemingtou
and Kensington. One ot the qotst.ons
wmch always arise when, such projects are
first considered is tuat of the toim Oi
government wmch snail constitute the
union. There is, of course, generally a
"local' rights” party, which advocates
rederatiou in the benef that by unihcatLn
the smaller constituents of the new
body will receive less attention than they
deserve. On the otner hand, the interests
of economy, efficiency, and .advancement
all 1 point in the direction of. unification.
The retention of separate staffs ot officers
is under such a system rendered unneces-
sary, all boundaries are wiped out, and
the greatest obstacles in the way of col-
lective action are swept away; Tnis view
of the case seems to have appealed to
the committee representing the thiea
councils concerned which formulated the
scheme for the extension of Mel-
bourne, and it decided in favor
of unification. Its recommendations have
already been adopted by the City Council
of Melbourne, but they await the approval
of the other two bodies concerned. It is
not, however, expected that any serious
difficulty will be - encountered in securing
the complete and final ratification of the
scheme. The effect of it will be to add
considerably to the area and population
under the control of the City Council of
I Melbourne. At present Melbourne proper
consists of 6,000 acres, peopled by 68,648
persons, of whom 18,523 are ratepayers, and
the annual ratable value of the property
is £1,377,935. The town of North Mel-
bourne comprises 565 acres, inhabited by
18,015 persons, of whom 4,459 are rate-
payers, while the annual value of the
property is £108,201. The borough, of
Remington and Kensington has a popula-
tion of 10,047 persons, of whom 2,182 are ■
ratepayers, and the annual value of the
property is £64,955. It will thus be seen
that although the amalgamation is only a
step towards the creation of a Greater Mel-
bourne, it is a substantial beginning. The
town and borough to be merged in the City
of Melbourne are to constitute together a
new ward of the metropolitan municipality,
and their present scales of rating are to be
retained for five years. At tn e end of that
period the whole of the' wards administered
by the Melbourne City Council are to be
rated alike at 1/4, or the present metro-
politan rate, which will mean a reduction
in the case of Remington and Kensington
of Bd. in the pound, and a saving of fid. in
'the pound to the ratepayers of North Mel-
bourne. An appreciable lightening of the
burdens of a large section of the community
will thus almost immediately follow as a
direct consequence of the amalgamation,
which furnishes another instance of the
savings that could be effected and the ad-
vantages gained by a similar movement in
Adelaide.


step towards the creation of a Greater Mel-
bourne, it is a substantial beginning- The
town and borough to be merged in the City
of Melbourne are to constitute together a
new ward of the metropolitan municipality,
and their present scales of rating are to be
retained for five years. At me end of that
period the whole of the' wards administered
by the Melbourne City Council are to be
rated alike at 1/4, or the present metro-
politan rate, which will mean a reduction
in the case of Flemington and Kensington
of Bd. in the pound, and a saving of fid. in
the pound to the ratepayers of North Mel-
bourne. An appreciable lightening of the
burdens of a large section of the community
will thus almost immediately follow as a
direct consequence of the amalgamation,
which furnishes another instance of the
savings that could be effected and the ad-
vantages gained by a similar movement in
Adelaide.




"MUNICIPAL EXTENSION”
AND OTHER ESSAYS.
BY
T. GEO. ELLERY
Town Clerk of Adelaide.
Secretary of the Local Board of Health, Adelaide :
Secretary of the Institute of Hygiene and Bacteriology :
Correspondent of the South Australian Branch of the Boyal
Humane Society of Australasia i
Secretary of the Municipal Association
Adelaide :
W. K. Thomas & Co., Printers, Grenfell Street.
1899.


NOTE.
I am indebted to the courtesy of Sir Langdon?
Bonython, Kt, Editor of “ The Advertiser,” and
W. J. Sowden, Esq., Editor of “ The Register,” for
permission to re-publlsh these Articles, which (with,
the exception of the Foreword on Civic Government),
originally appeared In the columns of the S.A. dailies
(the first four in “ The Advertiser,” the remainder
In “ The Register ”). Some additions have now
been made, but no subject is more than outlined,
the aim of the writer being to stimulate interest
that may lead to the Intelligent study of " Modem
Municipalism ” by those who, like himself, are
interested in the work of Local Government.
T. GEO. ELLERY.
Town Hall, Adelaide,
July, 1899.




CONTENTS.
I. Foreword—On Civic Government 5
11. Municipal Extension in relation to Greater
Adelaide 7
111. Adelaide’s Heal Estate, &c 14
IT. Municipal Parks and Open Spaces 18
V. The Importance of the Sanitary Inspector .. 26
VI. Public Health in New York 31
VII. Public Health Matters in Continental Europe 34
VIII. Tuberculosis 38
IX. The Belief of Kates—Municipal Endowments
and Municipal Property 44


FOREWORD.
ON CIVIC GOVERNMENT.
/icy* 'r
v Speaking on Givie Government y the Right Hon. Joseph
Chamberlain, M.P., hats said that the leading idea of the
system may be likened to “ a joint-stock or co-operative
• 1 enterprise in which every citizen is a shareholder, and
Bf which the dividends are receivable in the Improved
health and the increase in the comfort and happiness
of the community. The members of the Councils are the
directors of this great business, and their fees consist
of the confidence, the consideration, and the gratitude of
those amongst whom they live. In no other undertaking,
whether philanthropic or commercial, are the returns more
speedy, more manifest, or more ln Birmingham,
for example, the Initiative of the unpaid members of the
Council, and their supervision of the loyal and assiduous
labours of the paid officials, have been the means of saving
the lives of more than 3,000 persons in a single year; and,
inasmuch as for a single death many cases of illness not
actually fatal may be reckoned, it is easy to see what a
mass of human suffering has been lightened, and how much
misery has been prevented. Under these circumstances the
primary object of all concerned is not so much to lessen
expenditure as to spend most wisely, and to invest the
money of the community in such a way as to secure con-
tinuously equally satisfactory results in the condition of
the people. _
'""This is the ideal at the present time; but of one thing
we may be certain. If ever the principles of action should
change—if the best men should be so occupied with their own fortunes
that they should leave the care of the commonwealth to those who mil
see in this duty only an opportunity for plunder—if office is sought,
not for the good which can be done, but for the political patronage it
may afford—if paid officials lose their pride in their work and their
loyalty to the public that employs them—if incapacity is overlooked
and corruption is condoned—then if those things happen—the dignity,
the efficiency, and the economy of the public service will all disappear,
and the institution of local government will be discredited in the eyes
of the people, and will become a by-word and a reproach.”
'A- Every thoughtful municipal student is forced to the con-
cluslonarnved at by O’Meara in his masteriy survey of
Municipal Finance, that people who cavil at the growing
expenditure of local-governing bodies forget that it Is
5


the nature of well-governed areas to improve, and that
improvement in a government, like the improvement of an
estate, is of necessity a costly process in its Initiation. It
is possible to govern cheaply by the simple expedient of
governing badly; but efficient government implies an effi-
ciency of machinery,, which must be pald_for. f*To anticipate
any Immediate reduction in the cost 6'f local government in
this province is fallacious if local autonomy is to be in any
way progressive. The reduction of direct taxation will come
only when revenue-earning undertakings are freed from
interest and sinking funds. Meanwhile as the colony In-
creases in population and activity “it can no more safely
forego an increased expenditure upon its local government
than a railway can Increase its traffic capacity without a
rise in working expenses.”
As a community grows in numbers, in education, and in
riches, new demands must of necessity be made upon civic
government, for the principles of common property under
public management are continually extending to new ob-
jects, and embracing new purposes for the common welfare
of the people.


MUNICIPAL EXTENSION IN RELATION TO
GREATER ADELAIDE.
ln his valuable and Interesting volumes on municipal work
Dr." Albert Shaw lays stress upon the broadening and bet-
tering of municipal government. Enlargement of area and
unification are everywhere the dominant notes In the gamut
•of progress. In Europe, he tells us, the struggle Is fairly
■entered upon, and great undertakings are bravely instituted.
With the war-cloud continually hovering over the nations,
and vast armaments draining the resources of the people,
while emigration transfers to the New World so much of
the accumulated capital and expensively-trained working
energy of the old countries, it is astonishing to note the
costliness and magnificence of the municipal Improvements
of recent years, and to observe the effort they are univer-
sally making to Improve the social and sanitary conditions
of town life; and no peculiar discernment on the part of the
traveller is required to discover that large towns are be-
coming alike the world over. Quaintness and distinctive
flavour are being swept away In the great wave of modern
improvement, tangles and twistings being replaced by right
angles, and areas of density are clamouring not In vain
for open spaces. Convenience and welfare are supplanting
mediaeval picturesqueness In order to accommodate the
hundredfold' greater business of the present day city.
“Rome, Naples and many another historic area are being
made fit abiding places for hopeful communities whose
gaze Is forward rather than backward. The public-spirited
and humane observer will be delighted with the resurrec-
tion and outblossoming of Hungary’s aspiring twentieth
century capital, Budapest. He will be impressed and grati-
fied as he notes the renovation and development, on the
scientific lines of modern city-making, of Athens and Bucha-
rest, Belgrade, and Sofia. And he will find food for
optimistic reflection rather than for disappointment in the
discovery that even Constantinople, Alexandria, Cairo,
Jerusalem, and Damascus are beginning to take on the
municipal forms and appointments of the Western European
nations.” Paris Is five times as extensive as at the begin-
ning of the present century, and Lyons and Marseilles have
each quadrupled in size. Berlin Is eight times as large as
the Berlin of 1831, and other German cities have Increased
proportionately, y
Before touching on Loudon, the much-governed, and the


big municipalities of Great Britain, let us glance for a
moment at Australia. Already the subject of economic local
government has awakened interest, and the problems of
“ A Greater Sydney ” and “ A Greater Melbourne ” are
continually being dealt with In the Press of the sister
colonies, the writers mostly advocating the central gov-
ernment, as in Glasgow and Manchester—absorbing the
surrounding small corporations. In Sydney there are 41
municipalities within the metropolitan area, and it has been
suggested to merge them into one central authority, the
consolidation of whose bonded debt it is estimated would
result in a saving of li per cent, interest, equalling £33,000
a year, and with the credit of “A Greater Sydney” behind
as guarantee. These 41 corporations with 41 councils, con-
tain a population of only 420,000, while in England such
cities as Birmingham (with a population of over 500,000),
Leeds (400,000), Liverpool (630,000), and Manchester (530,000)
are each locally governed by one council, and are object
lessons of economic municipalism to the wide world. Pro-
posals for “ Greater Melbourne ” have arisen primarily
through dissatisfaction with the policy of the Metropolitan
Board of Works, and thoughtful munlclpalists have pointed
to the fact that the cost of local government could be enor-
mously reduced by centralization, and the expenditure re-
quired to maintain a host of small corporations could be
devoted to the promotion and support of institutions for the
material comfort and intellectual advancement of the people.
A recent writer in the “ Age ” asks, “ What are the things
which ‘A Greater Melbourne’ may accomplish with equal
advantage to the citizens of every municipality?” There
would, he says, be uniform action in all health matters,
particularly in the examination of meat, food, and milk,
and the public parks would be better attended to. Public
and private lighting would be improved, and uniformity in
quality and price ensured. The market arrangements of
Melbourne are far from satisfactory, and the regulation
of the hours for the closing of shops would be uniform.
Municipal artisans’ dwellings would replace the “wretched,
ill-ventilated, insanitary hovels that now exist.” Mayor
McEacharn speaks of the slums of Melbourne as a grevious
blot on the city, where whole blocks must be wiped out
entirely in the interests of public health and morality.
Greater Melbourne would also deal with the important
question of technical education, the control of telephone,
telegraph, and electric lighting wires, beautifying of pub-
lic thoroughfares, providing of bands of music, and
the management of cemeteries and crematoria. In a
few years the municipalities will be called on to take-
over the tramway system and manage it, and this can best


be done under a united Melbourne council. The munici-
palization of the public services of Melbourne and suburbs
—lighting, trams, water, &c.—under “A Greater Melbourne,”
it is contended, should be able (following the footsteps of
the cities of Great Britain) to ultimately abolish rates, a no
insiglflcant feature to the reflecting ratepayer who is heavily
mulcted for favoured business frontages.
How shall we deal with Adelaide? Is there a need for
“A Greater Adelaide?” The answers must be In the affirma-
tive in the interests of economy and health. In the metro-
politan area there are no less than 20 local governing bodies,
comprising the corporations of Adelaide, Brighton, Glenelg,
Hindmarsh, Kensington and Norwood, Semaphore, St.
Peters, Thebarton, Port Adelaide, and Unley, and the dis-
trict councils of Burnside, Campbelltown, Marion, Mitcham,
Payneham, Prospect, Walkerville, and Yatala South, each
with a diversity of methods, rating, and kindred disabilities
according to the temper of its council; each local governing
yet without unanimity of action, all, however, having much
in common, as Instance the Municipal Association of Cor-
porations for the discussion of affairs of mutual interest,
and the conferences of the Local Government Association
of delegates from both municipal corporations and district
councils. The details of “A Greater Adelaide” could not
be worked out within the limits of this article; it is suffi-
cient to point out the need in the near future for unification,
and leave details to the chosen representatives of the rate-
payers. It is well though to note in passing that simplifica-
tion must go hand in hand with unification. The appoint-
ments of metropolitan boards, transit boards, trusts and
county boards are but halfway houses in the solution of
such pressing problems as floodwaters, and control of light-
ing, trams, and food supplies, and the multiplication of
authorities is bewildering. The experience of London and
Melbourne should be object lessons of what to avoid In
defining a scheme to give concrete shape to the inevitable
problems of higher municipal life, problems that are growing
greater in the eyes of urban and suburban dwellers every
year. In the swaddling clothes period of our existence
legislators did well in marking off sharply-defined districts
for local government, and upholding the policy of decen-
tralization. Now, however, we are approaching adolescence,
the elementary matters of footpaths and watertables are
attended to, the city man lives in the suburbs—he is a rate-
payer common to both, consequently for the larger pro-
blems of municipalism the absurdity of maintaining 2d
different sets of machinery where two or three would
more effectively and economically carry out the work Is
manifest.


The question of the difference in rating has often been put
forward as an insuperable bar to unification, but the ob-
jection vanishes in the application of differential rating
over given areas for given terms, as in the notable cases
of the extension of Liverpool and Manchester. As the result
of unification the rateable value of Manchester was in-
creased from £670,000 to nearly three millions, the acreage
from 4,293 to 12,911 (over 20 square miles), and the popu-
lation from 220,000 to 529,000. Suburbs were first annexed
in 1885, and again in 1890. Manchester’s City Council now
consists of 104 members, under whose control are gas.
electric light, water, sewers, and tramways, the most im-
portant matters which will in greater or lesser degree have
to be considered in the schemes for Greater Adelaide. Sal-
ford, the adjoining borough, buys its water and light from
Manchester, and its absorption en bloc is already fore-
shadowed. In 1835 the area of the City or Liverpool was
5,210 acres. In 1895 Greater Liverpool came Into existence
by the absorption of West Derby, Toxteth, Wavertree, and
Walton-on-the-Hlll with a population of 150,000 and an area
«f 9,800 acres. The City of Birmingham extended its bounda-
ries in 1891 by annexing the suburbs of Balsall Heath, Har-
borne, Saltley, and Little Bromwich, adding 3,285 acres to its
.area, and about 63,000 to its population. Within the last few
years the splendid policy of unification and extension has
also been followed by Bolton, Bristol, Burnley, Derby, Not-
tingham, Swansea, Devouport, Great Grimsby, Hastings,
St. Helen’s, and Southampton, in England ; also by Glasgow
and Edinburgh in Scotland, and Belfast in Ireland. Glas-
gow, the world’s model municipality, made a big extension
to its boundaries at the end of 1891 by adding 5,750 acres,
making its area 11,861 acres, and increasing its population
from 565,700 to 656,000. There appear to be no bounds to
the energies displayed by the Lords Provost and their Coun-
cils, for they have municipally-owned gas and waterworks,
tramways, baths, washhouses, laundries, model lodging-
houses, workmen’s houses, a people’s palace for free
musical entertainments, municipal bands, golfing grounds,
and churches. Schemes for municipal banks are being
considered, and free libraries are on the eve of intro-
duction, besides those now open received by legacies ; the
public-houses are to be owned by the local authorities, all
profits being applied to the extinction of rates; in addition,
there are homes for the aged, municipal telephones, hos-
pitals, schools, markets, parks, and exclusive municipal
abattoirs.
In 1890 the unification movement first touched New York,
TJ.S.A., and in 1895 a definite scheme was first submitted
fo the taxpayers. “New York now stands pre-eminent as


the largest single municipality in the world, with an area of
359 square miles, and a population of over three millions.”
Only a twelvemonth has elapsed since the actual work of
■consolidation was effected, so judgment on the work of the
colossal body must remain suspended. It is unique as a
stupendous example of what can be done when the tax-
payers and their representatives are in earnest in their en-
deavours to unify, to concentrate, and consolidate all those
divers functions with which the higher municipalism is
concerned.
London has grown so extensively of late years that its
local government is necessarily seething and unsettled con-
sequent upon the fact that there is no systematic division
•of functions between the different authorities. Within the
city proper there are 27 tiny wards comprising the wealthy
unreformed Corporation of the City of London, presided over
by the Lord Mayor; outside there is the ten-year-old child of
progressive municipalism—the London County Council ; and
again there are numerous boards and vestries with peculiar
franchises to befog the much-governed Londoner. The
•County Council’s advent marked the commencement of con-
solidated municipal administration by attending to all mat-
ters of common import outside the city proper and leaving
entirely local minutiae to the vestries. Despite the enormous
works wrought by the County Council and the improvement
of public health, the multiplication of authorities greatly
militated against the best type of local government, at once
expeditious and lasting, and in 1894 a Royal Commission
drew up a report for the unification of the City and County
of London under one body, consisting of mayor and com-
monalty and citizens of London, to succeed the present City
Corporation and County Council, leaving small administra-
tive details still to be dealt with by popularly-elected local
authorities. But there the matter stopped for a while. Now
party feeling is again running high, and from the clash of
opinions definite lines of policy have emerged. According
to an authority, writing in October, 1898, “ there are many
signs that the London water question, the question of
the division of powers between central and local authorities,
and the problem of the rivalry between the City Corporation
and the County Council will shortly receive the attention of
Parliament.” As an alternative to the unification scheme
detailed by the Royal Commission some 20 “concurring
parishes” are now anxious to be proclaimed councils with
the privilege of an elected mayor and council as a governing
body. In furtherance of their wishes a draft Bill was pre-
pared in 1898 transferring all the duties of the vestries and
boards to the proposed municipal councils, and providing
that all the mayors should be ex-offleio members of the


London 'County Council, the County Council’s powers over
streets and bridges, &c., to cease, and only to extend to
water, sewerage, transit, and the like. Advocates of County
Council government (acting In conjunction with separate
municipalities) must remember, however, that London has
no analogy here in these colonies. (“County Council' is
a pet phrase with many, but its significance is very imper-
fectly understood). The petition of the “Concurring
parishes” set forth “that owing to its enormous area, popu-
lation, and rateable value, the metropolis has long ceased
to be an ordinary town capable of being governed by one
corporation, but has become an administrative county con-
taining a congeries of large towns, each of which is entitled
to a dignified form of municipal government.” Thus, there
is a consensus of opinion clamouring for comprehensive and
economic local government, with the alternatives of inde-
pendent corporations or absolute unification, and the matter
is still sub judice pending the coming into force of the new
Local Government Bill. London’s unified bulk may possibly
be too unwieldy for its administrative faculty, even as New
York’s may prove to be, and Gomme, in his jubilee mono-
graph on London, touches briefly on the discussion of ways
and means for the transfer from one central authority to
local authorities. “If,” he writes, “this is done upon some
recognised principle, so that political expediency does not
command the whole matter, then good results will follow;”
and the extraordinary increase of interest taken by Lon-
doners of late years in their municipal affairs leads to the
reasonable hope that the long continued chaos will soon give
place to dignified order, when London will take Its proper
place in the vanguard of forward local government.
Whatever details are ultimately adopted for Greater
Adelaide, the most superficial observer must admit that
the time will soon arrive for considering the steps that
must be taken towards consolidation and the stoppage
of all needless waste and duplication of duties. Under
unification with the control of such prosperous concerns
as well-managed transit and lighting systems, in con-
junction with a vigorous policy of property owning, the
new municipality will in the course of a very few years be
on the golden high road to the extinction of rates—the ultima
thule of the municipal reformer. In Ireland at the present
day the ancient boroughs of Carrlckfergus, Cashel, Drogheda,
Kells, Clonakilty, Tuam, Belturbet, Callan, Fethard, and
Kilkenny are free from rates chiefly owing to the possession
of valuable real estate. Waterford and Wicklow are rated
only for water supply, while the policies of Glasgow,
Birmingham, and many other cities and towns in Great
Britain will ultimately bring them into the same blissful


regions. Melbourne and Sydney own valuable properties,
and the New Zealand municipalities are in many Instances
blessed with rent-rolls from “Endowment lands” which have
become metamorphozed through the natural growth of popu-
lation Into business frontages with the accompanying added
increment.
The City of Adelaide, too, has made a good start as a
corporate landlord by its valuable possessions In North and
South Adelaide, a fact which should render amalgamation
especially attractive to the larger minded In the near subur-
ban areas.


ADELAIDE’S REAL ESTATE, &c.
The talented London County Councillor, Mr. Sidney Webb,
draws an amusing pi ctu ra c tl •
cal,” “self-made” individualistmemtier or a mtmiclpal coun
cil, who, willy nilly, must walk along the municipal pave*
ment, lit by municipal gas, and cleansed by municipal
brooms, with municipal water, and seeing by the municipal
clock in the municipal market that he is too early to meet
his children coming from the municipal school, hard by the
county lunatic asylum and municipal hospital, will use the
national telegraph to tell them not to walk through the
municipal park, but to come by the municipal tramway,
to meet him in the municipal reading-room, by the muni-
cipal art gallery, museum, and library, where he Intends
to consult some of the national publications in order to pre-
pare his next speech for delivery in the municipal town
hall. . . . “ Socialism, sir,” he will say, “ don’t waste
the time of a practical man by your fantistic absurdities.
Self-help, sir, individual self-help, that’s what’s made our
city what it isJtfQ?he Government in the colonies control
many umßT'rtmetlons that are left to the wealthy central-
amalgamated local governing bodies in Great Britain, but
gas and tramways excepted, the sum total outside the
sphere of private enterprise remains the same. The trend
of modern social development is to bring everything that
is in the nature of a monopoly, or that will conduce to
the health and happiness of the people, under the control of
the government of the municipality, and it is surely a Dame
Partington effort of fruitlessness to endeavour to stem the
tide which has set in so strongly by reason of the cen-
tralizing tendencies and the manifold complexities of
modem civilization. In the front rank of modern local
government, we find the names of such men of intellect as
Lord Carrington, Lord Onslow, Earl Dudley, and Lord
Rosebery bearing the brunt of radical reform in the London
County Council; and the family names of Buxton, Fowler,
and Lubbock are familiar as workers in the same body
in the common causes of health and humanity.
The City of Adelaide Is moving slowly, but surely, along
collectivist lines. The cry of the unemployed within its
bounds is continually met by work being provided in the
wards in the shape of stonebreaking, and the citizens’
Town Hall must be placed in the list of competitors for


concert companies and starring celebrities. The Central
market competes with the privately-owned East-End Mar-
ket, the corporation property having proved sufficiently
enticing of late to completely change the locale of the re
tallers, in its development as a prosperous and well-managed
concern. The cattle markets, the saleyards, and the
slaughterhouse for large cattle are municipal monopolies
(and rightly), which pay handsomely. In O’Connell Street.
North Adelaide, Acre No. 820 belongs to the citizens, being
recently purchased; the shops erected there by the Corpora-
tion are all well let, and returning 8 per cent, on the total
outlay for lands and buildings. The City Valuator estimates
£179,600 as representing the capital value of the various
freeholds, buildings, &c., belonging to the Corporation, made
up as follows:—Town Hall, land and buildings, £100,500;
Central Market, land and buildings (including shops and
Fish Market), £34,200: North Adelaide Market Acre, land
and buildings, £8,750; City Baths, £9,500; Sheep, Dairy
Cow, and Pig Market, buildings, &c., £9,000; Cattle Sale
Yards, buildings, &c., £8,000; Slaughterhouse and Hide and
Skin Market, £5,500; three cottages, £750; vacant land.
Carrington street, £750; Olive Plantations, £2,500; and
Police Station, Torrens Lake, £l5O. The Corporation’s
properties held by leaseholders are valued at £50,900.
comprising Eagle Chambers in King William and Plrie
Streets ; Queen’s Chambers and Gladstone Chambers
in Pirle Street; the Prince Alfred Hotel and the Lang,
ham Hotel ; the Adelaide Racing Club’s grand stands,
buildings, and fixtures ; and the buildings, &c., on the
Adelaide Oval. Much larger rents will accrue as the
leases of the various properties terminate in the course of
a few more years.
The actuality of property-owning opens up a wide vista
of ways and means to the thoughtful munlcipallst, and
potentialities loom large in the mind’s eye of the municipal
financier, whose millennium is a landlord city, freed from
the burden of rates.
In Birmingham (England) one of the greatest enterprises
ever taken “was the acquisition in 1876 of an overcrowded
and unhealthy area, in the centre of the town, of 90 acres,
with 3,744 houses and 16,596 inhabitants, at a cost of
£1,700,000. Under this scheme the centre of the city has
been completely transformed. Where slums were the best
business streets now are. To carry out the work a special
rate was necessary; but a valuable asset has been obtained.
The sites are let on leases of 75 years, and contain the best
buildings in the city. In the meantime the Corporation
receives a ground rent, and at the end of 75 years will be-
come the owner of the houses, and thus more than recoup


itself for the outlay.” Last year £58,500 was received from
rents, and £IB,OOO from rates. The present value of this
municipal estate is estimated at 2i millions.
The city of Hull boasts a rent-roll from municipal pro-
perties of upwards of £16,500 per annum. Nottingham City
estate contributes £30,000 a year in relief of rates. The City
estate of Liverpool (England) is a magnificent asset. In
1898 the income from sales and renewals of leases amounted
to £50,000; rents, £19,000; special “estate” rents, £12,800.
In Manchester £50,700 was paid over in 1898 from profits
on gas undertakings in aid of rates, and the electric light
contributed £IO,OOO surplus profits to the city fund.
The abolition of all fees and licences for boating on the
Torrens Lake, and the inauguration of a series of free organ
recitals were two distinctly modern municipal planks mark-
ing the regime of Mayor Tucker. It is, however, a matter
for regret that the elegant bandstand on the banks of the
lake (the gift of the late Mr Thomas Elder) is not put to
such good use in providing music for the citizens in
the summer evenings as in years gone by. The paddocking
of cows and horses in the park lauds competes with private
landowners, but long custom has deadened the economic
vision of keen-sighted individualists in this direction, and
accordingly the lungs of the city are turned to profitable
account; while the Issuing of permits to youths and adults
to play cricket, football, and lawn tennis in the open spaces
commends itself as a wise and spirited policy, and one that
has lately been emulated by the London County Council in
connection with the ground plots under its care and control.
Looking prudently ahead, as safeguarding the welfare of
the ratepayers, in the last Annual Report of Mayor Tucker
it is written, p. 75: —“ In the near future this city and the
other cities and large towns of Australia will have forced
upon them the duty, in the interests of public health, of
abolishing private slaughterhouses for small cattle, and for-
bidding under heavy penalties the introduction of meat
within municipal bounds which has not been killed at the
municipal abattoirs.” The question of municipal abattoirs
for small cattle, and the extinction of private slaughter-
houses, is not new to the city, for as far back as 1882 the then
Health Officer warmly advocated this reform. Private
slaughterhouses attached to butchers’ shops are not per-
mitted within the municipal bounds of Melbourne, Sydney,
Brisbane, Dunedin, or Hobart. Municipal abattoirs for large
and small cattle have been called into existence by the de-
mands of health and sanitation in the cities of the Conti-
nent of Europe, and in Glasgow, Birmingham, Manchester,
Leeds, Belfast, Bradford, Salford, Leicester, Cardiff, Black-
burn, and elsewhere in Great Britain.


The policies of power to purchase slum properties, the
erection of workmen’s dwellings, and the housing of the
poor have already dimmed the horizon in the council’s de-
liberations in determination not to lag too far behind the
great modern municipalities of England and Scotland, but
thus far the discussions have remained subjective only.
The agreement lately entered into for lighting a portion of
the city with electricity will enable the corporation to pur-
chase the contracting company’s works and plant within
10 years. The matter of lighting, the municipalization of
the tramway service, and the establishment of abattoirs
for the slaughter of large and small cattle are the salient
features needed to place Adelaide well in the van-
guard of modern municipalism, which is wise of ne-
cessity in its concern for the welfare and happiness
of the people and its ratepayers who find the where-
withal for the work. And it must be conceded that
thus far Adelaide has done wonderfully well with Its
limited income obtained chiefly from its very moderate rate
of eighteenpence in the f, which, together with Government
rates and taxes, totals only about three shillings in the f,
as against say Leeds, 7s. 2d. in the f; Liverpool, 6s. 3Jd.
in the £; Sheffield, 7s. 10|d. in the £; and Manchester.
7s. 3d. in the f, whose municipal functions embrace all
things such as waters, sewers, and the like that are here
undertaken by the Government.


MUNICIPAL PARKS AND OPEN SPACES.
We have it from competent authorities that the habitable
portions of the earth will support no more than 6,000 millions
of human beings; notwithstanding the fact that the popu-
lation of France Is almost stationary, this limit will be
reached in a couple of centuries hence. And in view of the
utilitarianism which is omnipresent it is encouraging to
students to observe the efforts being made everywhere
by the governing powers of the city to provide health-
giving “lungs” for their closely-packed populations.
“Open spaces” is the rallying cry in municipal centres
in the old world, and “Open spaces” must not be thought
lightly of in juxtaposition to the growing cities in the
new. Recreation parks and beauty spots have passed
out of the mystical ether of fancy into the practical regions
of modern municipalism, and posterity may well look for-
ward to seeing a realization in Adelaide of Washing-
ton Irving’s description of what a park may be made, with
“vast lawns, extending like sheets of vivid green, with here
and there clumps of gigantic trees heaping up rich piles of
foliage. The solemn pomp of groves and woodland glades;
the brook taught to wind in the most natural meanderings.
or to expand into a glassy lake; the sequestered pool, re-
flecting the quivering trees, and the yellow leaf sleeping on
its bosom; while some rustic temple or sylvan statue, grown
green and dank with age, gives an air of classic sanctity
to the seclusion.” This, too, in Great Britain, even con-
tiguous to the work in the mine and at the furnace, which
Ruskin so much deplores; and close by the busy factory
which Robert Blatchford so trenchantly denounces for
making the land grimy and hideous. In the far back time
prior to the advent of machinery, and the rise of modern
capitalism (so admirably told by Hobson), we learn that in
England the scanty populations, when cities were unknown,
had their common fields or lands in common, for pasture
and tillage. In addition there were forests and woodlands,
which belonged to the lords of the manor, who owned the
timber, and wherein the tenants had various rights in
regard to fuel, &c. But with the decay of the yeomanry, and
after the revolution of 1688, the rise of the landed gentry,
and the difference in the methods of agriculture, the en-
closure of lands was systematically carried on. Between
1710 and 1760 334,974 acres were enclosed; between 1760
and 1843 the number rose to 7,000,000, and the coming of


the industrial revolution of the eighteenth century gave rise
to the merchant and the factory, and started the growth
of the city, at the time when Defoe made the amazing
discovery “that a man engaged in commerce might be a
gentleman.” The city gave rise to the slums, the slums to
vice, disease, and death, and death has called to the living
in the old world for the open spaces of to-day.
We will, however, deal with the newer world first. Ade
laide, thanks to the foresight of its founder, Colonel Light,
is for its size, perhaps, the most favoured city in the world
ia respect to its park lands, which surround it on all sides,
about a third of a mile wide, and which cover an area of
2,300 acres, including the Botanic and Zoological Gardens,
the Botanic Park, and lands taken under- various statutes
by the Government at different times for Government pur-
poses. In addition there are 59 acres of open spaces, or
squares, in North and South Adelaide, which must necessarily
conduce largely to the health of the inhabitants. The park
lands are vested by Act of Parliament in the City Corpora-
tion, though in Worsnop’s “History of Adelaide” it is stated
“that by a dispatch from the Colonization Commissioners,
dated Ist September, 1838, the Governor was authorized
to purchase the park lands which now surround and divide
the city, without specifying any sum for his guidance. Full
information on this subject is not available. It is known
that one of Colonel Gawler’s bills drawn during 1839,
amounting to £2,300, was appropriated to the purchase of
the park lands, but there is nothing to show that this was
for the fee-simple of the whole. Probably the purchase
of that part of the park lands not included in the Govern-
ment reserves was completed by the payment of that sum.”
The late Sir George Kingston, writing to “The Advertiser”
in 1877 said—“ Colonel Light’s original plan of the city,
exhibited at the selection and sale of the town acres in
March, 1837, showed the city divided into two blocks —that
to the south of the Torrens comprising 700 acres, while that
to the north comprised 342 acres—surrounded on all sides
by a large area of vacant land, which Colonel Light, in
pursuance of his instructions and with the sanction of the
Resident Commissioner, the late Sir James Hurtle Fisher,
described as parks, to be reserved from sale, and dedicated
as park lands, for the use and recreation of the citizens,
with the exception of nine blocks of land thereon delineated,
and which were stated to be reserved out of the park lands
for various Government buildings or other purposes.” Sir
George was well competent to speak with authority on the
laying out of the city, being next in official position to
Colonel Light on the survey staff. No title is possessed
by the citizens of Adelaide to their park lands, which are


dedicated simply from time to time by enactment, and there-
fore it behoves everyone to watch with a jealous eye the
action of the Legislature should a fresh encroachment on
the “ lungs ” be at any time mooted. A Bill was prepared
about ten years ago having for Its object the granting in
fee-simple for all time of the park lands area at present
vested in the City Corporation, and, from a municipal point
of view, it is a pity it was not made law, and it should be a
duty of the citizens to agitate continually through their
representatives for this very necessary measure. Adelaide’s
parks for Adelaide proper are out of all proportion to its
area, but having in view the fact that some day there
will be “ A Greater Adelaide ” it will be well to see that
they are kept intact, notwithstanding the cost of road and
path repairs and general maintenance.
The transformation of the “lungs” into sylvan beauty spots
is merely a question of time and finance. Money is the
crux of the whole matter, and until ways and means are
forthcoming a policy of betterment of Adelaide’s open spaces
cannot be attempted. The possibilities in the direction of
betterment are practically unlimited —the plans and draw-
ings prepared for the City Council some 19 years ago by
J. Ednle Brown, then Government Conservator of Forests,
amply prove this. Some day they will, perhaps, be utilized.
The suburban burgesses must make common cause with
the city, for the park lands belong essentially to Greater
Adelaide as recreation spots for its nascent population.
Thanks to the efforts of a far-seeing few, National Park,
at Belair, with its 2,000 acres of valley and upland, is now
secured to the people for all time, and its popularity in-
creases year by year.
Melbourne, the seventh city of the Empire, is well
favoured with open spaces. It boasts Royal Park, 444 acres;
Yarra, 157 acres; Prince’s, 97 acres; Fawkner’s, 102 acres;
Fllnder’s, 44 acres; Model Farm, 81 acres; Botanic Gar-
dens and Domain, 235 acres; Zoo Gardens, 55 acres; and
Carlton, Fitzroy, Spring, and Flagstaff Gardens, covering
166 acres; and various squares enclosing another 123 acres.
Its suburbs are not behindhand, for grounds, parks, and
recreation reserves are set apart in North Melbourne,
Fitzroy, Colllngwood, Richmond, Northcote, South Mel-
bourne, Port Melbourne, Prahran, St. Kllda, Brighton,
Essendon, Flemington, Hawthorn, Kew, Footseray, and
Wllliamstown. The city and suburban proclaimed parks
within 20 miles of Sydney reach the mammoth total of
73,000 acres, including Centennial Park, 640 acres; Cook
Park, Botany, 105 acres; The Domain, 90 acres; Hyde Park,
40 acres; Moore Park, 400 acres; Parramatta Park, 252
acres; Kuring-gal Chase, 35,300 acres, and the National


Park—a famous beauty spot— of 35,000 acres. Brisbane
and Perth have not overlooked the importance of open
spaces, and the cities of New Zealand also possess their
parks and domains of varying dimensions. Indeed the anti-
podean municipalities have been able to profit by the
mistakes of the cities of Great Britain in subordinating
everything to the claims of commerce and manufactures;
furthermore climatic conditions here are such as demand
recreation grounds for the people next to food and clothing.
In the cities of the United States of America park areas
are continually being increased to keep pace with the ever-
expanding tide of humans. The parks and parkways of
New York City have an area of 7,000 acres, including Cen-
tral and Riverside Parks on Manhattan Island, Bronx,
Pelham Bay, and Van Cortlandt Parks north of Harlem
River, and Prospect Park in Brooklyn. New York is justly
proud of its beautiful “Central Park,” which contains nine
sheets of water, 50 bridges, and its walls enclose an area
of 840 acres.
The following facts and figures are taken from recent
compilations by Warren H. Manning and Milo R. Maltble —
Baltimore —Original acreage of Baltimore parks, 555
1877 600 acres
1887 840 acres
1897 1,116 acres
All vacant lands abutting the parks have greatly increased
in value, they being formerly sold by the acre, and now by
the front foot. The Increase of land values attributable
to the establishment of parks is estimated to be at least
fourfold.
Chicago—Lincoln Park—Dedicated 1865.
1865 60 acres
1869 160 acres
1877 216 acres
1887 266 acres
1897 310 acres
Chicago’s total parkage area is 1,900 acres, and 300 acres
of boulevards.
Cleveland (1887 ) 91 acres
Cleveland (1897) 1,222 acres
Indianapolis 116 acres
Minneapolis (1887) 700 acres
Minneapolis (1897) 1,552 acres
Paterson (N.J.) 90 acres
Rochester (N.Y.) Genesee Valley Park
Wilmington, Del. (1877) 3 acres
Wilmington, Del. (1887) 136 acres
Wilmington, Del. (1897) 254 acres


Washington 405 acres
Toronto (Canada) 1,100 acres
Montreal (Canada) 660 acres
Quebec (Canada) 177 acres
Philadelphia has a park area of 3,000 acres. In Boston
there are 2,270 acres of municipal parks, besides nearly
8,000 acres held by the Metropolitan Park Commissioners
in the suburbs. St. Louis has over 2,000 acres of parks, San
Francisco, 1,200; Pittsburgh, Louisville, and St Paul, 1,000
acres each.
Further afield again, Manning says in Mexico City the
principal park is Chapultepee, the site of Montezuma’s
favourite park, containing several hundred acres and
covered with great cypress trees. The Paseo de la Reforma is
a fashionable drive two and a half miles in length, lined with
trees and statuary. Alameda Park in the central por-
tion of the city, covers 22 acres; there is also the
Zocala or Plaza Principal. Every city and town in the
Republic has its parks or plaza, which give pleasure to the
people and increase the value of adjacent properties. San-
tiago (Chili) contains three parks—Quinta Normal, 400 acres;
Cousino Park, 150 acres; and Santa Lucia Hill, about 20
acres. All are beautified with trees, lakes, and grass plots.
Santa Lucia, a high hill rising out of the centre of the city,
has been transformed by landscape artists into one of the
most beautiful hanging gardens in the world. Turning to
the Continent of Europe, we take Paris first —the city pre-
eminent of modernity—and we find that the gay Parisians
have set aside 279 acres of parks in the city, not including
the Tuileries, Luxembourg, and gardens of the Louvre,
which are the property of the State. In addition, the muni-
cipality owns the Bois de Boulogne pleasure-grounds of
2,250 acres and the Bois de Vincennes of 2,400 acres. Flori-
culture and horticulture are carried on extensively by the
administration, and huge nurseries and greenhouses are
established In the Bois de Boulogne, where youths from
all over Europe are sent to learn floriculture, &c., from the
botanical experts and gardeners employed by the munici-
pality. The trees planted in the streets are a special feature
of Paris, as everyone knows, and a recent visitor says al-
though the parks of Paris are entitled to some special men-
tion, for the purposes of the people the broad and well-cleaned
avenues and boulevards, with their rows of shade-trees,
are to be deemed the most important provision for out-of
door life and recreation. In all the streets having a width
of 20 metres or more there are rows of shade-trees, and
most of the broad thoroughfares have also a middle strip,
planted with trees, grass, and flowers. Benches are every-
where provided under the trees, and thus in some sense


the whole city may be considered a park. The rivet
and the quays form the most valuable of the breathing
spaces of Paris. There are nearly a hundred thousand trees
along the chief streets; this is a great number when account
is made of the compactness of the city, and the comparative
dearth of trees in the wide streets of the cities of Australia,
whose traffic is infinitely smaller than that of Paris, strikes
the traveler as a grievous neglect, and he yearns with a
great yearning for something umbrageous in place of the
heated verandahs, when thirst is chronic and the mercury
is breaking records with its fantastic summer tricks. In
Italy the park movement is growing with the expansion
of municipalism. Milan boasts its parks and Florence its
boulevards, while the ambition of the municipal governors
of Rome is to make it one of the finest and most attractive
of modern cities. Within a short space of time it is intended
to set aside a large archaeological reservation as a public
park, to contain within its bounds “the Forum, the Coliseum,
the baths of Titus, the remains of the palaces of the Caesars,
the baths of Caracalla, and the temples of Vesta and For-
tuna,” also to include “an extensive area of land made up
of parts of the Capitollne, Aventine, Palatine, and Coeliau
hills.” A much larger park is projected north of the Porta
Pinciana, and within the bend of the Tiber, to be laid out
on a magnificent scale, and the cost, which will be enormous,
is to spread over a series of years. Most of the parks and
open spaces in the German cities are small, but numerous,
and well distributed. Berlin has about 80, Hamburg 60,
Munich 44, Dresden 35, Cologne 32, Nuremberg 31, Breslau
28, Frankfort 25, Chemnitz 24, Stuttgart 19, and Leipsic 18
Great attention is paid to forestry and horticulture in Ger
many. Particularly is this the case in connection with the
parks of Stuttgart, where due regard is paid to the fact that
recreation is a necessity for dwellers in cities and “the sub-
ject is one not to be left wholly to personal choice or private
management.” Vienna has its tastefully planted beauty-
spots, and Budapest possesses in “The Stadtwalchen” i
magnificent pleasure-ground for its people of about 1,000
acres in extent; the Elizabeth park is worthy of mention,
also the Margareten Insel, or Margareta Island, in the
Danube, two miles long by one and a half wide, which is
maintained by the Archduke as a resort for the burgesses.
In Christiana (Sweden) there are three beautiful parks,
“St. Hanshagen,” “Botanish Have,” and “Slots Parken.”
All are covered with trees, and are well maintained with
fountains, seats, and walks.
The making of pleasure grounds, parks, and recreation
resorts is one of the best phases of the newer municipalism,
which is developing well in Great Britain, and a de


partment for the provision of public pleasure grounds is
part and parcel of every administration. Manchester, in
1846, contained two public parks, now it boasts of 30.
Liverpool is better favoured. Since 1864 the city has
spent no less than £700,000 in parks, and now owns
Sefton Park, 269 acres ; Wavertree Park and Botanic
Gardens, 43J acres; Stanley Park, 93 acres; Shiel Park, 15
acres; Wavertree Playground, 108 acres; Princes Park, 50
acres; Kensington Gardens, 18 acres; and 21 smaller areas.
Leeds and Nottingham are well provided, and Sheffield owns
a dozen or more beauty spots, including Weston Park, Firth
Park, Meersbrook, Hillsborough, and High Hazles Park.
Endcliffe Woods, and various other recreation spots. Until
1856 the City of Birmingham did not possess a square foot
of ground devoted to park purposes; now thanks to the
generosity of local donors and the push and progressiveness
of the Corporation, 15 parks and grounds with a total ex-
tent of 350 acres, are handsomely planted and maintained
for the use of its people. The famous Birkenhead Park
—one of the finest in Great Britain—belongs to the munici-
pality of that name. It was laid out from designs by Sir
Joseph Paxton at a cost of £115,000. Bolton, Bradford
(Bradford spends £lO,OOO a year in maintenance), Brighton,
Bristol, Burnley, Derby, and Halifax have all embraced
every opportunity of acquiring lungs for the people. In Glas-
gow the chief parks are Kelvin Grove, Queen’s, Kuchill,
Alexandra, Maxwell, Bellahouston, Toll Cross,. Springburn,
and the historic Glasgow Green. Over £50,000 was spent
last year in the upkeep of parks and gardens,' and £2,300 in
providing music in them. A great deal has been accom-
plished by the Lords Provost in the pursuit of fresh air, but
there is much yet to be done in providing playgrounds, when
it is remembered that Glasgow’s population is fast approach-
ing a million people. In Loudon, according to a competent
authority, “great attention has been given in recent years to
the acquisition of ground for parks. Formerly the principal
public gardens and open spaces were appurtenances of the
Crown, and were under control of H.M. Commissioners of
Works and Buildings. This remains time of Hyde Park,
with St. James’s and Green, of Richmond, Hampton Court,
and Kew Gardens, of Regent’s Park and of Greenwich—all
noble pleasure grounds, that are freely at the service of
the Londoners. But the County Council has fallen heir to
a number of parks that had either been created by the
Metropolitan Board, or transferred to it. Thus in 1887 the
Victoria, Battersea, and Kennington Parks had been trans-
ferred from the control of H.M. Commlssoiners to the Metro-
politan Board; and among the other well-known parks,
commons, and open spaces that came under the Council’s


■charge after the death of the Board of Works were South-
wark, Finsbury, Blackheath, Hackney, Clapham, Hamp-
stead Heath, Stoke Newington, Shepherd’s Bush, Tooting
Beck, Plumstead, Streatham, Wormwood Scrubs, Wands
worth, Yauxhall, and Brlxton. A large amount of legislation
enacted within the past quarter of a century has had for its
object the creation and preservation of open spaces, the
transformation of disused cemeteries into parks, and the
encouragement of all possible ways of park making in and
about the metropolis.” Even the unreformed City of London
Corporation has lately made good use of some of its wealth
in the purchase for public parks of several extensive tracts
of country beyond its bounds. The guilds and other bodies
are helping in the great work, and although metropolitan
London leaves something to be desired in park spaces, out-
side the city proper the preservation of several large wooded
tracts will ensure the health of Londoners in the years to
come. A measure of praise must be given to the London
County Council, who have Increased the area of parks under
their control from 1,500 to 3,000 acres. And the efforts of the
landscape gardener, aided in every possible way by the
County Council, have succeeded in transforming barren
wastes into “beauty spots of bloom.” Recreation spaces
are everywhere on the increase, and younger London points
with pride to its cricket and football grounds, its tennis
courts, and spaces for golf and hockey, which are set out
on every side ; and the life history of humanity proves
nothing more clearly than that crowded populations,
if they would live in health and happiness, must have
■space for air, for light, for exercise, for rest, and for
the enjoyment of that peaceful beauty of nature, which,
“because it is the opposite of the noisy ugliness of towns,
is so wonderfully refreshing to the tired souls of towns-
people.”


THE IMPORTANCE OF THE SANITARY INSPECTOR.
One of the earliest professors of hygiene in King’s College,,
London, defined sanitation as the science for preventing
disease, preserving health, and prolonging life, in order to
maintain the people of a nation in the highest efficiency for
the labours of peace or the struggles of war; and the
modern city, with its congestion of human beings in closely
packed areas, has called into existence the Public Health
Department of every urban local governing body, with a
qualified medical man at the head as health officer, who
controls a staff of sanitary Inspectors and aids them daily
with, professional advice and oversight in their endeavours
to mitigate and abolish as far as possible the multifarious
evils of city life, which Doctor Shaw has asserted are but
“temporary and remediable.” The abolition of the slums,
he affirms, and the destruction of their virus are as feasible
as the drainage of a swamp, and the total dissipation of its
miasmas. The conditions and circumstances that surround
the lives of the masses of people in modern cities can be
so adjusted to their needs as to result in the highest develop-
ment of the race in body, in mind, and in moral character.
And we moderns are now most earnest in our endeavours
to give concrete application to the axiom that “life is not
to live, but to be well,” uttered in the far-off time when
Rome was in the full enjoyment of its baths, public latrines,
scavenging systems, gymnasia, cloacae, and sanitary edicts.
The Sanitary Inspector is the active agent who, week in
and week out, makes his monotonous and ofttimes unsavory
round in order to enable the environment to be best adapted
to the welfare of the population by the detection and abate-
ment of nuisances, preventing overcrowding, noting cases
of infectious diseases, inspecting dairies and drains, super-
intending the cleaning and disinfection of premises, being
alert to the quality and sources of the food supply, meeting
abuse with courtesy, and being kind and considerate in all
his dealings with the unwashed, the vituperative, and the
dregs of the large army of the lower stratum, in hovels
where filth seems part and parcel of existence. The princi-
pal duties prescribed by the London Local Government
Board for sanitary inspectors are —
1. To perform, either under the special directions of the
sanitary authority or under the directions of the medical
officer of health, or in cases where no such directions are


required, without such directions, all the duties specially-
imposed upon sanitary Inspectors by statute, or order of
the Local Government Board.
2. To attend all meetings of the sanitary authority when
so required.
3. By Inspection of districts, both systematically at certain
periods and at intervals as occasion may require, to keep
themselves Informed of all nuisances existing therein that
need abatement.
4. On receiving notice of the existence of any nuisance,
or of the breach of any by-laws or regulations made by
the sanitary authority for the suppression of nuisances,
or of any by-laws made by the London County Council
which it is the duty of the sanitary authority to enforce,
they shall, as early as practicable, visit the locality and
enquire into such alleged nuisance or breach of the by-laws,
and take such action as may be necessary.
5. To report to the sanitary authority any noxious or
offensive businesses, trades, or manufactories established
within their district, and the breach or non-observance of
any by-laws or regulations made in respect to the same.
6. To report to the sanitary authority any damage done
to any works of water supply, &c.; also any case of wilful
or negligent waste of water supplied, or any fouling by
gas, filth, or otherwise of water used for domestic purposes.
7. To visit and inspect from time to time and forthwith
upon complaint all shops and places kept or used for the
preparation or sale of butchers’ meat, poultry, fish, fruit,
vegetables, corn, bread, flour, milk, or any other article to
which the provisions of the Public Health Act shall apply,
and examine all or any such as aforementioned, and in case
any such article appears to be Intended for the food of man
and to be unfit for such food snail cause the same to be
seized and dealt with as provided; in any case of doubt,
to report the matter to the medical officer of health.
8. To procure, when directed by the sanitary authority,
samples of food, drink, or drugs suspected to be adulterated,
to be analysed by the analyst duly appointed under statute,
and upon receiving certificate of adulteration to take the
necessary legal proceedings prescribed by the Food and
Drugs Act.
9. To give immediate notice to the medical officer of health
of the occurence within the district of any contagious, in-
fectious, or epidemic disease; and wherever it appears that
the intervention of such officer is necessary in consequence
of the existence of any nuisance injurious to health, or of
any overcrowding in dwellings, he shall inform the medical
officer of health without delay.
10. Subject to the directions of the sanitary authority to


attend to instructions of the medical officer of health re-
specting means for preventing the spread of any contagious,
infectious, or epidemic disease of a dangerous nature.
11 and 12. To keep all necessary books containing par-
ticulars of inspections and actions taken in execution of
duties, and a record of the sanitary condition of all premises
where action has been taken under the Public Health Act.
The late Dr. Campbell, in his published pamphlet on
“The People’s Health,” strongly insisted on the good work
to be done by the trained nurse among the poor. The law,
he wrote, may command, but men and women are free
agents however poor, and if cleanliness in all their sur-
roundings, as well as the early recognition of communicable
■diseases, is to become a part of the daily experience of the
poor, the intelligent, trained nurse is specially fitted by
virtue of sex to bring it home to them. The Public Health
Act of England now provides for the employment by cor-
porations and local bodies, of trained nurses on the same
footing as sanitary Inspectors, and it is pleasing to note that
Adelaide now boasts of a trained nurse who is doing good
work. The advantage of the trained nurse acting as an
inspector under the Health Board is obvious, for much
necessary work and much delicate attention in cases of
sickness can be expected by the dwellers in the back
streets from the very gentleness inherent in woman,
whose instincts would cause sympathy to rise superior
to red tape and the dry bones of unbending officialism.
In no city in Australia is the highly important duty
of disinfection properly performed by the health authori-
ties. Disinfecting stations and steam apparatus, com.
mon enough in Great Britain and the Continent, have yet
to be established here. Disinfection is another phase of
the Importance of the Sanitary Inspector’s work, and the
South Australian Institute of Hygiene and Bacteriology haa
conferred a benefit upon the community by issuing broadcast
its model directions for disinfection in cases of diphtheria,
enteric and scarlet fevers.
Various types of steam disinfecting apparatus are made,
the most favoured in Great Britain being Goddard, Massey,
and Warner’s, Washington Lyons, Geneste-Herscher, Dr.
Thresh’s, and Reek’s patent. The work is under the control
of the Sanitary Inspector, and all such officials are required
to have knowledge concerning the application of the dis-
infectants in common use, such as corrosive sublimate (1
per 1,000), chloride of lime, chlorine gas, permanganate of
potash, iodine, bromine, izal, alkalized gas creosote, terebene,
and carbolic acid. The hallmark of ability is set upon the
Sanitary Inspector in Great Britain by competitive exami-
nations held under the auspices of the Sanitary Institute


and the Local Government Board, successful candidates
being certificated for the purposes of the Public Health
Act (London), 1891, in hygiene and sanitation. And in
pursuance of the policy of properly trained inspectors acting
lu conjunction with their health officers it is satisfactory
to read in Mr. Sidney Webb’s pamphlet of a lecture de-
livered in October, 1898, at the Centennial Hall, Sydney,
that even in the mazy vastness of the City of London,
despite hygienic drawbacks, the County Council have
managed to lower the death-rate during the last 10 years
by no less than three per thousand, which means, when
pursued to its logical conclusion, that prior to the advent of
the leviathan example of autonomy, three people per
thousand swelled the death-roll who would not have died
if municipal government had been earlier pulsing with
enthusiastic reform, and its policy main-planked with the
motto “ Salus generis humani.” In the words of an eminent
hygienist, the late Dr. Parkes—“lt has been proved over
and over again that nothing is so costly in all ways as
disease, and that nothing is so remunerative as the outlay
that augments health, and in so doing augments the amount
and value of the work done.” Therefore let us have the Sani-
tary Inspector trained in the elements of hygiene, and let
him take his proper place alongside of, yet subordinate to, the
medical officer of health; those now in the honourable service
of the community to be trained by the community for the
community. Those yet to come forward, with the increased'
facilities for acquiring training which will assuredly arise,
may well be left to properly equip themselves at their own
expense, perhaps under the aegis of the Institute of Hygiene,
which might arrange the necessary curriculum and exami-
nations. The Sanitary Inspector, however, needs no apo-
theosis, nor is there any necessity for unduly magnifying
his importance; rather let us properly recognize him, and
agree with Dr. Keid (medical officer for Staffordshire), who.
defined him at a recent conference as nothing more nor less
than a common-sense man, who is honestly interested in
his work and who is prepared to accept any risk Incidental
to it, whose interests are those of the public at large, who
should receive a reasonable acknowledgment of his services
in the shape of salary, and who is entitled to expect that
the conscientious discharge of his duties shall in no way
imperil his livelihood. In this respect the Manchester and
Glasgow Corporations have set a worthy example by in-
forming their inspectors that they are to carry out their
work with absolute impartiality, and assuring them that
they will suffer in no way for fearlessly discharging their
duties.
The fact that so many channels for the spread of disease


and the creation of insanitary conditions are now guarded
by specialists has somewhat simplified the actual duties of
the urban Sanitary Inspector during recent years. While
his work will merit an added value if he has a sufficient
knowledge to detect faulty conditions in buildings, defects
in plumbing and sewerage works, the appearance of disease
in cattle, and other technical matters which are under the
control of the Health Department, yet it is necessary in
an age of specialization to have specialists for essentially
technical work. For example, sewage and drainage con-
nections are submitted to a severe test when first made, and
are subsequently inspected by departmental officials at
stated periods. All buildings are erected subject to con-
ditions, which are controlled by boards of health. Meat
supplies are certainly not sufficiently safeguarded at present,
but at the slaughterhouses in the cities a check is provided
against the distribution of diseased meat. If the provisions
of the Health Act of 1898 are properly enforced that check
will be made absolute in the case of all meat supplies in
South Australia, so that the Inspector’s duty will be nar-
rowed down to the detection of meat which has become
offensive by over-keeping, and of food stuffs where putre-
factive agencies are at work. It will be conceded, however,
that the Sanitary Inspector is called to fill a position of
importance, in which he must be constantly on the alert
to detect any appearance of insanitary conditions—being
■practically the eyes and nose of the Health Department
for this purpose—and his chief function will be the exercise
of constant and unfailing watchfulness, and his principal
qualification devotion to duty. He must, above all things,
be tactful and shrewd, and have such a supreme belief in
the value of his work as an active agent in securing health-
ful conditions in the community that he will be an en-
thusiastic apostle of the gospel of sanitary science; he must,
by precept and example, further the good work in which he
is engaged, and be prepared to patiently bear the abuse
which he will sometimes receive for what is sometimes
called his “prying interference.” Lastly, “he must educate
himself In common sense, that most valuable commodity,
without which book learning availeth not much.”


PUBLIC HEALTH IN NEW YORK.
(Summarized from the Report of the Chief Health Officer.)
The Health Department of New York City has charge
•of the welfare of a population of upwards of three and a
■quarter millions, and the Board of Health consists of five
members, whose duty it Is to supervise all matters con-
nected with the scientific investigation, diagnosis, and
supervision in every way of infectious diseases, and the
control of food supplies and sanitation in all its branches.
In 1892 the first municipal bacteriological laboratory was
established, and the scientific staff now employed in con-
nection with vaccine and bacteriological Institutions includes
twenty-five physicians, one chemist, and two veterinarians,
as well as clerical and laboratory assistants. In addition,
there is a Chief Inspector and a small army of subordln
ates, who are entrusted with the important work of disin-
fection. The general inspection work of the Health
Department is carried out by different corps of Inspectors
attached to the various div-sions; some are medical men;
all others are required to have special training in the work
set apart for them, such as plumbing and ventilation, offen-
sive trades, meat, fish, milk, food, and factories. Depart-
mental hospitals are maintained, and where practicable all
cases of infectious disease are removed to them for treat-
ment. Proper disfection of all tenements and infected
materials is rigidly insisted upon, the clothing and bedding
being scientifically treated at the disinfecting stations.
After treatment they are returned to the owners, no charges
being made for the services.
Arrangements have recently been perfected for the free
bacteriological examination of sputum for the diagnosis of
•cases of suspected tuberculosis. Diphtheria antitoxin is pro-
duced in the laboratories, and is supplied free to all the
public institutions in New York; it is also supplied gratis
to private physicians for use among the poor, on condition
that reports of the eases treated are furnished to the Health
Department. “In October, 1896, arrangements were com-
pleted for placing at the command of the physicians of
New York City Widal’s test for the diagnosis of typhoid
fever; also for the administration of Pasteur’s treatment
for the prevention of rabies.” Dr. Hermann Biggs, the Chief
Medical Officer, mentions that a method devised by Dr.
Hiss, of the New York Health Department, for the


bacteriological diagnosis of typhoid fever, through the ex-
amination of the intestinal discharges, has just been
introduced, which it is believed will supersede the Widal
test for enteric fever. From the published statistical
statement of the work of the laboratory for 1898, we
learn that 25,049 cultures were examined for diphtheria
bacilli, 1,850 specimens of sputum from cases of suspec-
ted pulmonary tuberculosis were examined for tubercle
bacilli ; 10,790 vials of diphtheria antitoxin were issued ;
918 cases of diphtheria were treated in their homes by
the medical attaches of the laboratory, and 1,214 persons
were Immunized. Every case of contagious disease reported
to the Health Department (notification being compulsory.)
is regularly inspected by the Medical Supervisor In charge
of the district in which it occurs. When consent can be
obtained such cases are removed to the department hospi-
tals. In tenement house districts an effort is always made
to Induce patients suffering with such diseases to enter the
hospitals, and if the conditions are such as to require it,,
removal to the hospitals is enforced.
Sectional maps, drawn to scale, showing every house in
the city, are used for recording all cases of Infectious
diseases. Diphtheria and tuberculosis (consumption) are
most carefully watched. Public institutions, hospitals,
asylums, homes, &c., are required to report the name, last
auvii'ess, sex, age, and occupation of every case of tuber-
culosis coming under observation within one week of such
time, and they are further required to notify the health
authorities of the discharge or transfer of such patients.
The purpose of this procedure is to keep under more or less
constant supervision those cases of pulmonary tuberculosis
which occur amongst the poorest classes of the population,
and which are likely to be most dangerous sources of in-
fection to others. It is is estimated that there are at leasr
20,000 recognized eases of pulmonary tuberculosis in New
York City at the present time, and an additional large
number of obscure and Incipient forms of the dread disease.
The need of careful watching and rigid treatment are
apparent when it is remembered that all the suffering and
death consequent upon the prevalence of this disease are,
in view of modem scientific knowledge, largely preventable
by the careful observation of simple, well-understood, and
easily applied measures of cleanliness, disinfection, and
isolation; and it is worthy of note that the best medical
opinion forbids that persons suffering from consumption
shall be treated in association with other classes of cases in
the general medical wards of general hospitals. In con-
nection with consumption the sanitary code prohibits
spitting on the floors of street cars, ferry boats, and other


public conveyances, and requires under penalty that all Com-
panies shall post notices in their cars, boats, &c., forbidding
the practice. Dr. Biggs says:—“This regulation is very
difficult of enforcement; but, while the results have been
by no means entirely satisfactory, there has yet been a
definite improvement in the existing conditions.” Methods
have been elaborated with great care for protecting the
public from infection through the meat and milk of tuber-
cular animals. In 1895 the Legislature forbade the sale of
milk within the city without a permit from the Health
Department, and requiring that all owners, drivers, and
•conveyances used for carrying and delivering milk should
be licensed. Full Information has to be furnished as to the
source from which the milk is obtained, the number of
animals, the character of the food supply, and the sanitary
conditions surrounding each dairy. All milch cows are
subject to the tuberculin test under the supervision of the
Health Department, and diseased animals are destroyed.
Similar tests and supervision are being applied to all cows
whose milk is sent into the city from the surrounding
districts. There also exists a careful inspection of animals
slaughtered for food, and of all food sent into the city, and
carcasses found to be badly tubercular are destroyed. Dr.
Biggs mentions that the death rate from tuberculosis is
decreasing, and the combined death rates from measles,
scarlet fever, diphtheria, croup, smallpox, and typhoid fever
have been reduced almost exactly one-half within ten years,
the rates for 1896 being 1.64 per 1,000 of the population as
contrasted with 3.26 for 1887 (the figures for 1896 being the
latest available at present for comparative purposes).


PUBLIC HEALTH MATTERS IN CONTINENTAL
EUROPE.
A Brief Review.
On the Continent of Europe the local health authorities
are entrusted with control over the administration of the
poor law, hospitals, asylums, workhouses, night refuges,
orphan children, abattoirs, markets, food supplies, school
hygiene, waterworks, drainage, sewage farms, and the
housing of the poor. In the German capital (Berlin) note-
worthy institutions are the “people’s kitchens, originated
in 1866. There are now IB of them within Berlin’s bounds,
where a wholesome meal may be obtained for threepence.
The 13 markets in the German capital are all under muni-
cipal control. Public health works form a very large item
in the balance-sheets, the expenditure under this head
averaging £450,000 a year. Vaccination and re-vaccination
are compulsory throughout Germany, and the authorities
boast that they always speedily check all threatened epi-
demics of variola by these means. A recent report of the
Berlin Health Officer shows that the death rate from typhoid
fever is steadily diminishing, owing to the improved purity
of the water supply and perfected drainage. In most
German towns the rate of infant mortality is very high,
varying from 18.46 to 52.37 per 1,000, and it is attributed
to the great distress which exists amongst the poor and
chronic overcrowding in the slums. Compulsory disinfection
is performed by the authorities in all cases of cholera, small-
pox, typhus and typhoid fevers, diphtheria, and phthisis.
Steam disinfecting ovens have been in operation since 1886.
The supervision of the hygienic affairs of Paris is divided
between the departments of the Prefecture of the Police and
the Prefecture of the Seine. The Prefecture of the Seine
manages waterworks, drainage, hospitals, the statistical
office, the cemeteries, the poor law, and the cleansing and
maintenance of main thoroughfares. The care of the
abattoirs, markets, Inspection of meat and food, the over-
sight of dangerous or unhealthy trades, boarded-out Infants,
factories, workshops, the regulation of prostitution, the
inspection of private roads and courts, and the suppression
of illegal practice in medicine and pharmacy all devolve
upon the Prefecture of Police. House sanitation is rigidly
Insisted upon in Paris, and all building plans have to be
submitted to the medical Inspector-in-Ohlef of the Sanitation


Department. The charge of the hospitals and medical at-
tendance on the sick poor in their own homes is in the hands
of the Assistance Publique. There are 30 establishments
in the administration, and to supply its needs the Assistance
Publique has its own bakehouse, slaughterhouse, provision
depot, wine cave, and pharmacy; and It distributes every
day with its own conveyances the various necessaries
required.
Brussels is under the supervision of a highly elaborated
Administration of Hygiene. The Burgomaster and aider-
men constitute the local authority with an executive official
of the Bureau d’Hyglene as Medical Inspector-ln-Chief.
The administration attends to the certification of births
and deaths, the medical examination of all persons seeking
employment in the Government service, and of those liable
to the ordeal under the O.D. Acts and certification of the
Insane, medical superintendence of the communal schools,
house sanitation, and the inspection of building plans, pro-
phylactic measures against infectious diseases, Including
vaccination, analysis of water and foods, supervision of
dangerous occupations and theatres, lodging houses, abat-
toirs, markets, epidemic and epizootic diseases, and the
preparation of demographic statistics.
It is worthy of note that medical men in Brussels take
places similar to those which the Sanitary Inspectors
who are attached to the Health Departments occupy
In Great Britain and the colonies. In his treatise on public
health Dr. Palmberg states that Stockholm (Sweden) dis-
putes with Brussels the honour of possessing the best
sanitary organization of any Continental capital. There are
certainly many points of resemblance between the two
cities. Both are occupied with very similar work. The
distribution of milk is very stringently controlled with
beneficial results in Copenhagen and Stockholm. Dairy
cattle are most carefully examined, and the sanitary officers
are all qualified veterinary surgeons. Copenhagen made the
first really systematic attempt to combat tuberculosis by
the use of tuberculin as a means of diagnosing the disease.
Great attention is paid in the Danish capital to the abattoirs
and the inspection of meat, while in Germany, France, and
Belgium legal enactments compel their proper control and
inspection.
Dr. Maltbie, in his “Municipal Functions,” states that
almost every considerable city in Central and Western
Europe now controls the slaughtering of all animals within
its limits by means of municipal cattle yards and abattoirs.
The necessity of strict regulation of this business for sani-
tary reasons has led to the erection of large establishments
where the entire work of inspection and killing is con


centrated. Municipal abattoirs were established in Paris
early in the century, but the present abattoir general in
La Villette was built after the extension of the municipal
boundaries, and the suppression of the private slaughter-
houses in the suburban arrondissements. The abattoirs
(2) in Berlin, opened in 1883, cost nearly £1,000,000, and
supplanted nearly a thousand private slaughterhouses, and
the municipal abattoirs of Munich, opened in 1887, did away
with about 800 small private establishments. Municipal
abattoirs are at work also in Switzerland, Holland, Belgium,
Austria, Hungary, and even in Turkey.
Brussels, Copenhagen, and Stockholm are the pioneers in
the system of compulsory notification of Infectious diseases,
and their example has been copied in Paris and Berlin.
Cholera, smallpox, diphtheria, typhoid and typhus fevers,
as well as scarlatina, and yellow and puerperal fevers, have
been placed in the list of notifiable cases. Efforts are now
being made in each of the cities mentioned to get other
maladies added, though there is a diversity of opinion
amongst experts regarding the necessity of any extension
in that direction. Obviously the matter is one requiring
the exercise of great prudence so that the laws may not
be too restrictive. The housing of the working classes in
specially erected block tenements, let at nominal rentals,
is undertaken by most of the Continental municipalities,
and the authorities in Paris and Berlin are largely extending
their operations with this purpose, while in Brussels,
societies receive subventions for the construction of work-
men’s dwellings. As a rule the proletarian Belgians dwell
in tenement flats of buildings of three or four stories, and
only rarely in their own cottages. In Great Britain lately
the housing of the working classes has become recognised
as a phase of municipal health work suggested by the
density of the population. In London the County Council,
various associations, and companies are responsible for it.
while in Liverpool, Salford, Barrow-in-Furness, Birming-
ham, and Glasgow the Corporations own their own blocks of
artisans’ dwellings, which are municipally managed. In his
“ Municipal Government” Pollard has a good word to say
for the scavengers in Berlin; —
“They are clad in overalls and wide leggings of coarse
hempen stuff, which give them an appearance of tidiness
and preserve their ordinary clothes from pollution. With an
official cap on his head and a belt round his waist the Berlin
scavenger feels that he is a public servant; and, though
his occupation may be menial, yet his health and comfort
are of some concern to his masters. The municipality takes
no credit for philanthropy in providing these overalls.
On economical grounds, which are the only grounds where


auy expenditure of the sort is justified, the Corporation
does -what it can to make its servants an example to the
community in respect of clean habits.”
This idea of uniforming the street-cleaners and rubbish-
men, whose work is not too enticing at the best of times,
is a good one, and their garbing in some recognized official
costume would be a protection to householders against
imposition by larcenous visitors who effect entrance to
their premises by false pretences. It is evident from this
very brief summary of public health matters In the old
world how earnestly the sanitation of the cities and towns
is regarded, and the lesson learnt across the seas should
be taken to heart here with due allowances for contrasting
circumstances. In all matters of jmblic health the wise
maxim should be recognized that panic ought not to be the
parent of wholesome remedial action in any well-ordered
community, and with the machinery provided by the Public
Health Act of 1898 great things should be accomplished


NOTES ON TUBERCULOSIS AND INSURANCE OF
CATTLE.
Every Intelligent layman knows that there is no douht
now amongst scientists and medical men concerning
the identity of the tubercle bacilli in man and beast, and
such unanimity should guide all who are in the vanguard
of public health matters regarding the treatment of con-
sumptive humans, and the Isolation and treatment and abso-
lute destruction (when needed) of tuberculous cattle. Dr.
Guerrard, Assistant Bacteriologist to the Municipality of New
auiAoq pun uunmq gnqx : sAbs ‘2,681 ni Surq.iAV ‘q.iox
tuberculosis are identical may be inferred from the fact
that the germ found in the two eases is absolutely indis-
tinguishable. Its morphology is the same; its peculiar
behaviour in regard to staining fluids is identical; it grows
in the same culture media at the same temperatures, and
has the same appearance and chemical products of its
growth; it has the same thermal death point; it produces
the same pathological lesions in both subjects. If inoculated
from man, ox, horse, or pigs into guinea pigs the same
pathological phenomena are produced in the various eases.
There are cases to be found in the literature of the subject
which give evidence of the disease having been communi-
cated from tuberculous animals to man, and vice versa,
when living in close and prolonged contact, as well as from
the ingestion of tuberculous flesh and milk, and by means
of infection through wounds. That which is distinguish-
able in all its relations and conditions, and which is inter-
changeable, cannot be otherwise than Identical.”
Dr. George Held in his “Practical sanitation” gives similar
testimony to Dr. Guerrard’s. Dr. Morrison Legge in “Public
Health in European Capitals” lays particular stress on the
prevalence of tuberculosis and man’s liability to tubercular
disease through the meat and milk of infected animals
Dr. Sykes in “Public Health Problems” devotes considerable
space to the subject, and quotes (p. 281) the following
resolution passed in 1891 at the second congress in Paris
for the study of tuberculosis in man and animals ; “It is
necessary that all Governments should decree the most
efficacious prophylactic measures for preventing the exten-
sion of bovine tuberculosis. It is urgently necessary to
establish a special inspection of meat in all towns, without
exception, provided with a public abattoir. It is equally
necessary to suppress all private slaughterhouses In towns
containing more than 5,000 inhabitants, and to replace them


as soon as possible by public abattoirs; effectual inspection
is impossible without this measure.” It is difficult to see
why towns of less than 5,000 inhabitants should be ex-
empted from the necessity of public abattoirs, and why
private slaughterhouses should be tolerated anywhere in
centres of population. Legislative enactment rigidly en-
forced must be looked to in order to abolish the private
slaughterhouse. The chairman of the recent Koyal Com-
mission (London) on Tuberculosis, Sir Herbert Maxwell,
Bart., says;—“ As long as the law favours the maintenance
of private killing-dens so long is there direct discouragement
to the enterprise of municipal authorities in the erection of
model abattoirs.”
The time is surely ripe to be up and doing. Money should
be found by the Government for a thoroughly equipped
Public Health Bureau with a bacteriological laboratory.
If the sentiment salts populi suprema lex is to be more than
a pretty euphony, said the late Hon. Dr. Campbell, ther
expenditure must be encouraged in the exposition of health
laws.
The “Campbell” clauses dealing with pulmonary consump-
tion in “The Public Health Act, 1898,” have given rise to
a deal of controversy. But it must be conceded that
pulmonary sufferers from consumption are under no re-
strictions; indeed, no less an authority than Dr. Borthwick
has written that “there is no ground for raising the cry of
harsh treatment of these sufferers.” The clauses in the
Act aim at obtaining a knowledge of the existence and
location of consumptive patients by means of compulsory
notification on the part of their medical attendant, and In
■order to facilitate early recognition of te dlshease, which
is of the utmost importance both in regard to disinfection
and to treatment.
In the Inaugural addres to the Institute of Hygiene last
year on Tuberculosis, the late Dr. Campbell stated that “No
pestilence which visits mankind makes anything like the
havoc that is wrought by tuberculosis. There Is no dis-
puting the fact that one-eleventh of the population of
England and Wales die of the disease, and that even in
our own community of 360,000 e lose 450 a year. That is
one death in every nine among us is due to tuberculosis,
and if I choose to Impress this fact more vigorously I would
say that of the 360,000 alive to-day 40,000 will, when this
generation disappears, have died of this scourge. If a
mortality like this were due to any other cause, such as
typhoid fever or diphtheria, there would be a reign of terror.
Typhoid gives rise to three deaths out of every 10,000 of
the population, but tuberculosis gives rise to 13. But the
mortality rate does not represent the actual extent of the


disease. Every one attacked does not die. Even when we
leave out of sight the acumulated pain, expense, misery,
prolonged suffering, grief, and final agony to Individual men
and women and families which these figures represent, the
manifest loss to every community in the enforced idleness
for a long period, and ultimate death of Its workers—some
the very cleverest and best—is surely an annual leakage
in a nation’s wealth demanding serious attention.”
In milch cows the principal danger of tuberculosis to con-
sumers of the milk is when the udder of the beast if
affected. In Stevenson & Murphy’s “Hygiene and Public
Health,” vol. 1., p. 432, article by Dr. Sidney Martin, it Is
affirmed that “tuberculosis in cows affects the milk and
may lead to the same disease in man.” A distinction must
be drawn between the milk from cows with tubercular
udders and that from animals with general tuberculosis
only, since, according to Professor Bang, tubercle bacilli
are rare in milk unless the udder is tuberculous.
Nocard also says that tubercle of the udder is rare, but
be it remembered that milk when healthy from the cow
may, before It reaches the consumer, contain numberless
pathogenic germs, including the bacilli of tuberculosis,
received from outside sources. Therefore, it is manifest
that before use It should be sterilized or boiled.
Is tuberculosis among our cattle Increasing ? Though
there are not sufficient data available to warrant a positive
conclusion, it is idle to shut our eyes to the fact of its
omnipresence. Judging by the apathy of the various Gov-
ernments and the supineness of many local health boards
In the matter of meat inspection, we may safely affirm that
it Is not decreasing, and no less an authority than Mr. Came-
ron, the head of the Veterinary College, Victoria, has stated
that tuberculosis Is as common in the colonies among cattle
and dairy stock as in any part of the world Touching local
authorities, a gleam of light appears in the city mayor’s
last annual message concerning meat inspection and the
condemnation of animals at the Adelaide Slaughterhouse:—
“Thirty-nine head of cattle were condemned, seized, and
destroyed during the 12 months as being unfit for human
food, 25 suffering from tuberculosis, 11 from pleuro-
pneumonia, and 3 from cancer, a very small percentage
of nearly 11,000, the total number slaughtered, and a per-
centage that must be gratifying alike to the council and the
citizens.
“ The superintendent, I understand, has had great ex-
perience amongst stock, and he has the assistance, at all
times cheerfully rendered, of Mr. John Hemsley (an equally
practical man), the clerk of the sheep and cattle markets.
Furthermore the Government Chief Inspector of Stock


keeps a watchful eye for diseased cattle, both at the abattoir
and the saleyards, but the council must not forget that
neither of their officers are veterinary surgeons, and in con-
nection with the abattoirs in large centres of population in
America and Europe the employment of highly trained and
experienced veterinary surgeons in addition to superinten-
dents and inspectors is considered absolutely necessary and
indispensable for the detection of diseases in stock Intended
for human food. Germane to the subject of a qualified,
expert is the fact that in the near future this city will have
forced upon it the duty, in the interests of public health, of a-
bolishing private slaughterhouses for small cattle, and forbid-
ding under heavy penalties the introduction of meat within-
the municipal bounds which has not been killed at the muni-
cipal abattoirs. The Continental capital cities mostly lead
the world in having established abattoirs upon a thoroughly
scientific basis, and ip bacteriological work generally in
regard to food supplies. The most approved style of
abattoirs comprise special slaughtering rooms for sheep and
cattle, necessary cattle stables and pens, accommodation
for the various processes connected with the killing and
dressing of pigs, pig pens, and various buildings for bone-
boiling, fat-melting, gut-scraping, the extraction of the
albumen from the blood, &c., &c., and of course electric-
light, and a plentiful supply of water. In addition there
are necessary laboratories fitted with microscopes, micro-
tomes, and bacteriological apparatus.
“So many diseases are transmissible from the flesh of
slaughtered animals to meat-eating man, that it is no alarm-
ist’s cry to point out the dangers which threaten If proper
and sufficient preventive means are not adopted. From a
recent return of the Berlin abattoirs I have excerpted the
following list of diseases which led to the seizure and de-
struction of beasts offered for sale as human food: —Tuber
culosis, pneumonia, jaundice, dropsy, haemorrhages
(various), swine erysipelas, swine fever, cysticercl (oxen and
pigs), trichina, psorosperms, blood poisoning, calcareous
deposits, and actinomycosis. It is perhaps fair to infer
that our cattle are liable to all these diseases, or most of
them, although so far distant from the great German capi-
tal, yet only those are Inspected which chance to go through
the city slaughterhouse, and then not by veterinary experts.
“The carcases of condemned cattle, after the hides, hoofs
and horns aire taken off, are sprinkled with kerosine, and
burled from six to eight feet below the surface of the earth in
a portion of the olive plantation near the gaol. This method
of disposal is cumbersome, inelegant, and from a sanitary
and health point of view is utterly ineffective. Barth burial
does not destroy disease germs ; the presence of bacteria in


the soil has been conclusively proved by Pasteur and others
who made exhaustive examinations of earth taken from
trenches where diseased animals have been burled (In some
instances the ground had not been disturbed for upwards
of 30 years), and they found both the earth on the surface
and also that which was taken from various depths to be
full of germs. Earth-worms are largely responsible for
bringing bacteria to the surface, and Pasteur conducted a
series of experiments with the excrement of earth-worms
showing that the stuff contained bacteria which had lost
none of their virulence. In view of these facts which are
fully realized by scientists and medical men, including the
city health officer, who has time and again urged upon the
council the necessity of cremation, I venture to assert that
a proper furnace be built in close proximity to the abat-
toirs, and the carcasses of germ-diseased meat effectually
•destroyed by fire.”
The total destruction of condemned carcasses is not
necessary in all cases. Localized tuberculosis is effectually
dealt with without total destruction in Germany, France,
and Denmark, under the supervision of the experts em-
ployed, and after sterilizing treatment the sound portions of
the carcasses are exposed for sale. Dr. Legge, in his re-
cently published book on cattle tuberculosis, devotes a
■chapter to the -schemes in vogue to Insure cattle-dealers
against loss from seizure. In Germany the subject is fully
worked out on an extensive scale, and the printed rules of
the Cattle Insurance Association, having its headquarters
in Berlin, are:—
1. The insurance of cattle destined for slaughter belong-
ing to the cattle-dealers of Berlin, founded to protect the
owners of cattle, by the payment of a premium, from the
great losses to which they are exposed, owing to the
rigorous measures of the veterinary inspectors at the
abattoir.
2. The association is not started for the purposes of gain.
The premium to be paid, therefore, is regulated every
month, according to the number of seizures, and published
on the first of each month in the abattoir.
3. No person is allowed to insure who does not promise in
writing to insure the whole of his cattle coming to the
slaughterhouse.
4. Animals cannot be insured which have been injured
during transit, or have been transferred as suspicious by
the veterinary Inspectors to the contagious disease isola-
tion slaughterhouse, or are markedly wasted or recognized
as diseased by the veterinary inspectors.
5. The compensation paid is the full market price of the
animal. If the carcass is not wholly condemned, then the


price of the portions which are allowed for sale must be
deducted.
6. The liability of the society ceases if the animal is not
.slaughtered within 20 days.
7. The director is justified in refusing the privileges of
insurance to those whom he is convinced will cause damage
to the office, or to those not acting in good faith.
In addition to Berlin insurance societies are in existence
at Baden, Dresden, Gottingen, Halle, and Leipzig, the
management being jointly in the hands of representatives
of the Butchers' Union and the cattle-dealers. Besides
these special insurance societies, many of the ordinary pub
lie offices cover against loss which may be sustained through
the seizure of cattle by the authorities. Dr. Legge says the
larger the number of parties w T ho can be Induced to join
the special societies the lower will be the premiums to be
charged, and on this account the plan is to strongly re-
commend farmers, butchers, and cattle-dealers to unite in
forming the insurance fund. Further, if the insurance Is
to be of real value, all animals (prior to being insured) must
be examined by a veterinary surgeon, and only those ac-
cepted which are without visible signs of disease; carcasses
which are presented for examination of animals that have
not been seen alive must be excluded; there should be a
Freibank, or similar institution, for the sale of second-class
meat; also arrangements for utilizing to the full for trade
purposes carcasses totally condemned and destroyed. The
expenses of management of the special Insurance funds are
small-, as with the exception of the veterinary surgeon and
a clerk all other appointments are honorary. Dr. Legge
mentions that funds on somewhat similar lines are in opera-
tion at present in Newcastle, Carlisle, and West Hartlepool,
in England; at Paisley and Aberdeen, in Scotland: and at
Belfast, in Ireland; but they are largely In the experimental
stage when compared with Germany, where “public
slaughterhouses are more the rule than in Great Britain,
and consequently the collection of premiums and means of
checking fraud are easier to effect.”
Abbatoirs for large and small cattle have been established
an Melbourne, Sydney, Brisbane, Hobart, and Dunedin.


THE BELIEF OF RATES.
MUNICIPAL ENDOWMENTS AND MUNICIPAL
PROPERTY.
Many and various are the schemes which prudent finan-
ciers and other thoughtful men have fathered as a means:
of relieving rates, and, if poslble, of ultimately abolishing
in toto the necessity of direct municipal taxation, and I
shall briefly treat of some of these. Probably the oldest
Industrial function undertaken by municipalities in the Old
World, according to Dr. Maltble, was that of managing and
letting out real estate to inviduals. In mediaeval Europe
the allotment of the common lands and their regulation
were the most important functions of the village com-
munity ; and, like the villages, the mediaeval cities also had
their open fields, which were often very large, and some-
times included several villages. The greater part of such
common land became the private property of individuals,
but in many instances large tracts were held as corporate
property by the municipal authorities. In fact, the de-
velopment of the legal conception of a municipal corpora-
tion, whose fundamental principle is its right to own
property, arose from the actual corporate or private
possession of real estate by communities in addition to their
common lands. The municipalities made use of these cor-
porate lands in the same way as an individual landlord.
They were rented, leased, and sold on ordinary business
principles—some as farms, some with dwellings or shops—
and the money was turned into the municipal treasury, the
sales and leasings proving a very important source of
revenue. Many municipalities, to secure money for other
purposes, have disposed of most or all of their patrimony.
As a result municipal land-ownership is now somewhat
less important than it has been; but there remain many
survivals. There are also Instances (fast increasing) of
recent municipal exploitation of urban property, which are
commanding a great deal of attention in the development
of the present-day municipal activity.
In South Australia, with no mediaeval history at its back,
we find in the records of the City of Adelaide that in 1872
a brochure was compiled by the then Town Clerk, Mr.
Thomas Worsnop, on endowments of Corporations—“A Pro-
posal to Endow Corporations for the Public Good"—written,
as he tells us, from the desire to see the principle of self


government fully perfected in tlie granting of the fee-simple
■of unallenated lands by the Government to the local gov-
erning bodies of the province in order that rents might
accrue for necessary works (with the growth of population
and closer settlement) and the necessity of increased taxa-
tion he obviated.
“In new countries,” the far-seeing author wrote, “where
the area of unalienated land is almost illimitable, and the
value thereof (now) to the State of but little account, the
endowment of corporate bodies as centres of population is
-easy of attainment without impoverishment of the resources
■of the State. This idea is not new in its enunciation, but
is merely an attempt at the revivification of that principle,
which was so fully exemplified in the early history of cor-
porate institutions in England by our forefathers. Turn-
ing to historical records we find that from the time of
William the Conqueror downwards the encouragement of
self-government was promoted and fostered by grants,
either of landed property, or in lieu thereof of rights and
privileges which should advance the good of the Inhabitants
of the city or town so favoured.” Mereweather and
Stephens’s “History of Boroughs and Corporations” is cited
by Mr. Worsnop in support of his contention that in
ancient times corporations were endowed with lands for
municipal purposes, amongst those favoured being London,
Canterbury, Winchester, Beading, Exeter, Oxford, Car-
lisle, Gloucester, Leicester, Chester, Stamford, Norwich.
Scarborough, Ludlow, Litchfield, Chippenham, Caine, Bir-
mingham, and Bury St. Edmunds.
After the lapse of nearly 30 years, with the continual
alienation of land, the endowment scheme as applied to
local governing bodies here has been forgotten. It is well,
however, to recall the fact that the University in Adelaide
possesses considerable endowment land, which is advancing
In value with each decade. Further search in the city’s
archives shows that a Parliamentary Bill was prepared to
endow corporations with lands, but it appears to have died
in embryo.
The Town Clerk of Dunedin, New Zealand, some time
ago Informed the writer that when the first organized set-
tlement of Otago was made the land was laid off in town
quarter-acre sections, suburban ten-acre, and country fifty-
acre blocks; and out of these substantial reserves were
made for Presbyterian Church, educational, and local gov-
ernment purposes. These latter were held in trust by the
Superintendent of the province, and on the abolition of
provinces were transferred to the city under the authority
■of Act of Parliament. From time to time other lands have
been purchased to carry out revenue-producing improve-
ments, and the Ton Clerk concludes—" We have thus en


joyed an easement in rates owing to our rent-roll, and I have
no doubt that this was the object sought in endowing the city
with these lands.” The present annual rent-roll of Dunedin’s
real estate is £9,800 from endowment reserves, with an
increasing value every year.
The Town Clerk of Wellington, New Zealand, also cour-
teously responded to my enquiry that their endowment lands-
are vested in the city for all time. The whole of the areas,
with the exception of those set apart for ornamental and
open spaces, are leased, and “were granted as endowments
with the idea of relieving in the matter of direct taxation.”
Most of this city’s endowment lands are let on long
building leases. The present rent-roll has a value of £9,000
per annum.
Dunedin owns waterworks, abattoirs, and electric-lighting
plant, but no account is taken of the profits earned by these.
The figures here given for New Zealand are for endowment
lands alone. The cities of Australia have no endowments
corresponding to those of the cities of New Zealand.
Adelaide.—Freehold estate is valued at £179,600; its leased
properties at £50,900 ; annual present rent-roll (Including
park lands, rents, and cattle-depasturing fees), £10,600. As
building leases fall in the rent-roll will be considerably
augmented. The City Market acres (4) were bought in
1871 fbr £4,000; to-day the value of land and buildings is
over £32,000.
Melbourne. —Rents, fees, and dues: —Abattoirs (fees, rents,
and sale of fertilizers), £7,570; markets and cold-storage
chambers (dues and rents), £48,561; sanitary conveniences
(fees for use), £261; Town Hall and sundry rents, £2,942;
total, £59,335. Melbourne is a wealthy city, and in con-
sequence of its large income from extraneous sources
its rates are low. Income from rates, £79,000; total
Income from rents and other sources, £106,000. Grand total,
£185,000 per annum.
Sydney.—Rents and dues from cooling-rooms, and Belmore,.
Queen Victoria, and Eastern Fish Markets, £12,610; rents
from premises, baths, wharfs, and Town Hall, £9,400; do.
cattle saleyards dues, &c., £13,644; total, £35,655.
Brisbane.—Ferry rents and dues, £2,842 ; market rents and
dues, £2,273; wharfs, £6,806; Town Hall and reserve, £1,353;
total, £l3, 274.
There is, of course, but poor comparison between endow-
ment property as in New Zealand and that acquired mostly
by purchase and the building up of bonded debts, as in
the Australian cities; but interest and Sinking Fund once
disposed of, the margin between revenue received and
working expenses and up-keep is undeniably healthy—e.g.,.
Adelaide’s slaughterhouse, one year’s fees and dues received,.


£1,342; deduct wages and up-keep, £767; margin, £575..
Adelaide’s sheep and cattle markets—fees and dues, £2,709;.
wages and up-keep, £1,073; margin, £1,636. Sydney’s cattle
saleyards—fees and dues received, £13,614; disbursements
(including interest on debentures), £4,196; margin, £9,448.
It must be conceded that the progressive policy of muni-
cipalism is certainly acquisitive, and that is an axiom that
“The bigger the rent-roll the better the easement of rates
directly the municipal ledger shows the Interest and Sinking
Fund account cosed.
The following facts and figures are taken from the
excellent publications of the New York Reform Club Com-
mittee on “Municipal Matters”:—
r Many of the cities of Continental Europe have retained
large parts of their patrimonial estates, which generally
include much of the vacant land in and about the town for-
merly used for village pasturage and timber land, and
occasionally Include large tracts beyond the city limits.
There are also instances of municipal ownership of land
and buildings in the heart of the city. In Germany the
City of Berlin owns nearly 40 square miles of landed pro-
perty, nearly all of it beyond the bounds of the municipality.
Frankfort-on-the-Main owns about 16 square miles, most of
it within the city limits, and including half the total area
of the city. In Oassel 55 per cent, of the total area Is
municipal property; and in Weisbaden, Augsburg, Hanover,.
Aachen, and Mannheim the municipality owns from 30 to-
-40 per cent. Of Munich and Madegburg each owns some
3,000 acres within the city limits, and the latter has as
much outside, Breslau has 9,000 acres, and Liegnitz 5,000
acres, beyond the city. Leipzig has 6,000 acres of agri-
cultural land and nearly 3,000 acres of forests. Twenty of
the 55 German cities of over 50,000 population possesses at
least 1,000 acres of real estate, and most of the others have
some property of this kind. In some German cities a con-
siderable amount of property in the business and residence
districts is owned by the municipality. Thus, Dresden, with
only 400 acres of municipal property, has a revenue from
this source of nearly £40,000. Cassel owns dwelling-house
property ocupied by 150 persons, the rental from which
amounts to £6OO a year; and municipal property of this
kind is owned by Essen, Augsburg, and many other German
towns. In Austria the landed estates of municipalities are
even more important, but complete statistics of acreage or
of the number of buildings are not available. Vienna has
an annual revenue of £300,000 a year from property, and
Prague £IOO,OOO. In the smaller towns of Leimberg, Graz,
and Linz, each receive over £50,000 a year from this source.
Olmutz has an income of £34,ooo—equal to 60 per cent, of


■the total revenue. Parts of these amounts are from the sale
of lands for building purposes, but the greater part in most
cases is from rentals and leases. The other Austrian muni-
cipalities and those in Hungary and the smaller Danubian
principalities have also large amounts of lauded property,
which, with the development of the towns, is an increasingly
valuable asset, and one that will mean ultimately the abo-
lition of direct taxation. *
The cities of Russia srifso own real estate to a large extent,
some of which is rented in small lots to the poorer classes
for potato or vegetable farms, but most is leased in larger
lots to the highest bidder for a term of years. St. Peters-
burg and Moscow receive about £120,000 each a year from
such property, Riga about £BO,OOO, Odessa £56,000, and other
cities smaller amounts. In many of the more backward
•cities, where taxation for public improvements has not been-
introduced, the receipts from municipal property constitute
30 or 40 per cent, of the total income. Practically
all of this income in Russian cities is from rents and
leases, as the central Government discountenances the
sale of city lands, although in many cases municipali-
ties wish to do so in order to secure funds for per-
manent statements for Italian
cities show the existence of large amounts of municipal
property. Milan has an annual revenue of £60,000, Rome
•of £30,000, and other cities receive smaller amounts. Mes-
sina owns the land of a neighbouring village, which is
allotted to 156 tenants. The Important municipalities in
Belgium and Holland all own some income-yielding pro-
perty. Ghent possesses several business blocks, which are
rented to 160 persons for a total revenue of £4,500 a year.
Antwerp has nearly 500 buildings, mostly dwellings, valued,
with the land, at £140,000, and renting for £B,OOO a year to
700 families. Rotterdam receives nearly £IO,OOO a year from
rents and leases, and Amsterdam also owns dwellings.
Malmo, in Sweden, possesses 2,000 acres of laud, leased to
260 persons for terms of from one to twenty years. The
French municipalities have now but a smal amount of pro-
ductive real estate. Paris receives a revenue of £20,000
from communal lands and houses, and nearly three times
that amount from rentals for stands in public places, under
the arches of the bridges, and in similar institutions. Rouen
receives some £2,400 a year from municipal property, mostly
acquired in rearranging street-lines ; and Nice netts about
£1,300.
The British cities, like those of Prance, have In many
cases disposed of much of their ancient landed estates.
There are, however, several instances where some part of
the old town property is still retained. In Glasgow and
■other Scottish cities there exists a “Common-good Fund,”


and Glasgow's is mainly derived from ancient endowment
lands, Church lands, and the surpluses of petty customs
received on all goods which entered the city prior to 1848.
Out of this “Common Good” the moneys borrowed In its
security were taken the funds required to construct the
city’s tramways, and also the money spent In purchasing
the markets. The rents alone from this fund amounted to
over £35,000 annually. According to Donald the City of
Edinburgh Is the proprietor of land and houses which
bring in an income In aid of rates of £12,000 a year.
The City of Dublin, Ireland, has an annual rental of
£25,000 a year from city estates. London is blessed
with an Income of nearly £IBO,OOO annually from ren-
tals, and Liverpool with about £107,000. Doncaster, a
Yorkshire town, of 30,000 population, has an annual
income of £20,000, which in 1898 enabled the corporation to
do away with the borough rate; and Berwiek-on-Tweed.
with 13,000 inhabitants, receives nearly £6,000 annually
from property. Newcastle-upon-Tyne owns extensive lands
within and without the city, many of which are let on
building leases, and from which it gets a revenue —which
will increase—of £30,000 a year. Manchester, Sheffield.
Bristol, and Nottingham hold property which yields about
the same as Newcastle. Blackpool has an income of about
£18,000; and Leeds, Plymouth, Kingston, and Bath of up-
wards of £12,000. other boroughs enjoy a revenue of
over £3,000, and/nearly all derive some Income from this
source. Most of the cities and towns in Great Britain, in
the execution of their public Improvement schemes, have
made large purchases of urban property, some of which
has been sold after the completion of the improvements.
A considerable part of the property thus obtained has, how-
ever, been retained by the municipalities, thus making them
landlords on a large scale. For example, Glasgow in 1870
erected two model lodging-houses upon land which had been
secured under its noted Improvement scheme. They proved
such a decided financial success that before the end of
that decade five others were constructed. At an early stage
also a few tenements were erected, chiefly with a view
to providing models for private builders, but nothing further
was done till 1888, and it has only been within the
last six years that the extensive construction of new
model tenement-houses has been undertaken. A large
amount of other property, real estate and buildings, acquired
under the Improvements Acts, is thus held by the municipa-
lity. from which large rentals are received. Consequently, in
addition to its ancient estates, Glasgow now owns, as a
permanent possession, over 1,000 dwelling-houses, accom-
modating nearly 7,000 persons, and yielding an annual
Income of £54,000, Among other British towns which have


acquired productive real estate in connection with schemes
of sanitary improvement and workmen’s tenements are
Birmingham, Liverpool, Manchester, London (both County
Council and City Corporation), Bradford and Huddersfield.
Birmingham has an income of close upon £60,000 from
rentals from property thus acquired. The example of Glas
gow in constructing and operating municipal lodging-houses
has been followed by Nottingham, Salford, Huddersfield,
Southampton, Paisley, and the London County Council.
In the United States municipal ownership of real estate,
except that for public purposes, has not yet received very
great attention. The City of New York, under the Dongan
Charter of 1686, was granted all the unappropriated land on
the Manhattan Island, and as late as 1844 the city still
owned about 1,500 acres, or more than one-seventh of the
whole island. But in the 12 years following 1844 the greater
part of the municipal estate was converted into current
funds and applied to reduce the current debt. What is
now left produces an annual income of something less than
£20,000, about equally divided between house and ground
rents. In 'Chicago the square mile of public lands granted
by the national Government for school purposes was located
in what is now the heart of the business portion of the city,
in 1834, during an early land speculation, nearly all of this
was sold for $38,000, while the few lots that are still owned
by the city produce an annual revenue of half a million
dollars. Boston began in 1824 the work of reclaiming, im-
proving, and selling the flats and lowlands surrounding the
city—an investment which continued to yield a revenue to
the city until 1892, the total net profit on the undertaking
being nearly $2,000,000. Later schemes of street improve-
ments in that city have also been paid for in part by the
sale of land acquired for such purposes. New Orleans and
Providence each hold real estate acquired by bequests for
charitable purposes, and rented for profit.
Notwithstanding the vastness of municipal undertakings
in late years, the following list shows that the thin end ol
the wedge has been driven in. The figures refer to the
reduction of rates in Great Britain:—Salford, 3Jd.; Stafford,
Is. IJd.; Huddersfield, 34d.; Lancaster, 9rd.; Leicester,
10d.; Leeds, 2|d.; Manchester, Northampton, 7d.;
Norwich, 5d.; Nottingham, Is. Id.; Plymouth, 3Jd.; Burnley,
6jd.; Bristol, 3id.; Brighton, 4Jd.; Bradford, 3Jd.; Blackpool,
9id.; Birkenhead, Is. 5d.; Bath, 6d. These municipalities
have been able to start reducing rates in consequence of
rents from property, and partly from profits transferred
from gas, water, and kindred undertakings.
Enough has been said to show the benefits derived from
the ownership of real estate. If the day of endowments for


us in South Australia, has gone by the opportunity of
acquiring revenue-producing real estate has certainly not
done so, and we shall be wise in our generation if we make
haste to buy up what we can, remembering in all seasons
that rents and rates work well together, particularly when
the former is slowly but surely applied to the extinction
of the latter. Devlin, writing on “Municipal Reform in the
United States,” says of rentals from municipal real estate—
“Of all sources of revenue this is the most easily acquired
and the most easily managed, for it enters into competition
with no established industries; it requires no large number
of employes; the necessary (up-keep) expenditures are light,
and it leaves the city free from the entanglements of labour
and wage problems. By a little thought and diligence it
may be found possible to increase the revenues of cities,
multiply their advantages, and at the same time reduc,*
the burden of taxation.”


JW, K. Tlioraas & Co., Printers. Adelaide.




