

PRICE ONE SHILLING
COPYRIGHT.
MURDER
WILL
OUT
OR
THE
MYSTERY OF
KAIWARRA
B ROWN, THOMSON & Co„
PRINTERS AND PUBLISHERS,
WELLINGTON, N.Z.






SCENE OF THE MURDER.


Murder Will Out!
OR,
THE MYSTERY OF KAIWARRA.
A Narrative of the Extraordinary and Mysterious
Events connected with the Murder of
THOMAS HAWKINGS, of KAIWARRA, and the Trial and
Conviction of LOUIS CHEMIS, for that Crime.
By J. EVISON.
PROFUSELY ILLUSTRATED




THE STILETTO.


KNIFE AND SHEATH FOUND IN CREEK NEAR SCENE OF MURDER.


PREFACE
jjSifN THE following pages will be found a narrative of the
murder of Thomas Hawkings, of Kaiwarra, and of the trial
of Louis Chemis, who was tried, convicted, and sentenced
to death (though not hanged) for that murder. Were
any excuse needed for the publication of this History op a Great
Crime it might be found in the facts that the Kaiwarra Tragedy
is one of the most extraordinary and mysterious in all the annals
of criminal jurisprudence; that it will be quoted hereafter in
civilised countries whenever circumstantial evidence is solely relied
on to secure a conviction; and that a succinct and trustworthy
narrative of all the circumstances connected with the Kaiwarra
murder will be of greatest value, not only to all who are directly
connected -with the administration of justice, but to the general
public of New Zealand and adjacent Colonies, who heretofore have
had no opportunity of perusing a connected account of this most
singular tragedy. Moreover, if at some future time it should be
proved —as is by no means improbable that Chemis is innocent
of the crime for which he has been convicted, this little work
will be of eminent assistance to the Executive who may have
forgotten the salient features of the case. My object herein is
to present a brief and dramatic collection of facts. As a general
rule nothing will here be set down unless it has been sworn to.
Where, however, prolixity of statement appears unnecessary, the
evidence of witnesses will be greatly summarised, or the purport
only stated.
J. EVISON.
Wellington, 2nd September, 1889.


Murder Will Out!”
OR,
THE KAIWARRA MYSTERY.
WELLINGTON, the “ Empire City ” of New Zealand, although
zlwl|/j£ a seaport, has never attained an unenviable reputation for
crimes of violence, or indeed for crime of any sort, and her
police have seldom or never previously been called upon to
(so) investigate a crime so complex, and in many ways so mysteri-
ous, as that which forms the subject of this work. There was, there-
fore, considerable excitement and some consternation in Wellington
during the course of Saturday forenoon, June Ist, 1889, when it was
rumored that Mr. Thomas Hawkings had been found dead at Kaiwarra
—a suburb of Wellington, and though quite close to the city a some-
what wild and lonely spot—about eight o’clock on the previous evening,
under circumstances which led to a suspicion of foul play. This excite-
ment was intensified when the evening papers appeared, containing
accounts of the death of Mr. Hawkings under such “ sensational ”
headings as “Violent Death of a Well-known Settler”—“Was it an
Accident?”—Rumored Foul Play.”
The Victim.
Mr. Thomas Hawkings, aged fifty years and some two or three weeks,
farmed 500 acres—loo freehold and 400 leasehold—at Kaiwarra, where
he resided from the date of his marriage—some eighteen years ago—to
the night of his death. It had been his regular custom for years to
come into Wellington every Friday, for the purpose of selling his butter
and transacting business. It was almost invariably his habit to return
not later than six in the evening. He was often home by five. He
went in on other days beside Fridays, and on those other occasions
sometimes rode a pony, but on Fridays his custom for eight years past
had been to drive a grey mare in his cart.
His Last Day on Earth.
On Friday morning, May 31st, Thomas Hawkings left home for
Wellington at 9.40. He drove the grey mare referred to, in a cart.
He had with him a butter-box. He carried on his person a large brown
leather pocket-book containing £7 15s. or £7 17s. in money—about
six notes, one or two half sovereigns, the rest silver; and in the same
pocket-book were some Native papers and odds and ends. His wife


put the money in the book on this particular morning. Hawkings duly
arrived in Wellington and transacted some business there. Among
other things he paid in £6 to his credit at the Bank of New Zealand,
and bought some articles dress material and hosiery —of Messrs.
Thompson <fc Co., paying for them by cheque obtained in shop, he
having then apparently only a few shillings in his pocket. “About
5.30”* in the evening the deceased was seen by William Dimock,
bacon-curer, who lived beyond Kaiwarra, at the junction of Hawkings’
road and the main road. The latter went up to Dimock’s house for
bread, and Dimock stated he did not see Hawkings’ horse and cart.
Hawkings did not stop more than a minute. This, so far as has yet
been ascertained, was the last time the murdered man was seen alive
save by his murderer or murderers. Dimock described the unfortunate
man as perfectly sober, apparently in good spirits, “indeed he seemed
very jolly.” This, as before said, was about 5.30 p.m. Between that
time and six o’clock—apparently at about 5.50 p.m.—John May, a fish-
curer, proceeding from Kaiwarra across the hills to Khandallah railway
station, heard two shots fired at short intervals, from the direction of
the road taken by Hawkings on his way home.
Wellington to Kaiwarra.
At this stage it becomes necessary to give some description of the
locality of the tragedy, more especially of the road by which the
murdered man went to his doom. The distance from the General Post
Office, Wellington, to the scene of the murder, may be roughly stated
as about three and a half miles. The foot passenger, walking at a fair
pace, may go from the Post Office to the spot where the Tinakori Road
merges into the Hutt Road, in about twenty minutes. When this
junction is reached, there is no other lower road by which the scene of
the murder can be reached. It could only be arrived at across the hills.
Here it is necessary to point out, with reference to the affidavit of H.
W. Oakley alluded to in a foot note, that Hawkings, when proceeding
home on the night of the murder, may have gained the main road, via.
the Tinakori Road, and Oakley may thus have missed him. From the
junction of the main or Hutt Road and the Tinakori Road, the writer
has paced the distances. They are as follows ;
PACES.
Prom Tinakori Road to Railway Bridge ... ... 484
„ Railway Bridge to Kaiwarra Toll Gate ... ... 510
„ Toll Gate to Last House in Kaiwarra ... ... 450
„ Last House in Kaiwarra to Chernis* entrance ... 700
„ Chemis’Gate to Dimock’s Gate ... 520
„ Dimock’s to spot where first shot was fired ... 500
Total ... 3164
4 Henry William Oakley, of Oxford Street, Adelaide Road, Wellington, tinsmith, made affidavit,
subsequently to the trial, that he on the night of the murder had walked from Kaiwarra to
W ellmgton and did not pass Thomas Hawkings, “ either walking, riding, or driving on the main
road, from the time I first reached it, at five minutes past five o’clock, until I left in the tram at
twenty-five minutes to six o’clock."


The above measurements represent the ordinary paces of a man of
medium height. They agree fairly with the official measurements
which will be found further on.
Arriving at the spot where the Tinakori Road and the Main Road
meet, the traveller has on his right two railway lines (Wairarapa and
Manawatu). To the right of these are the land-locked waters of Port
Nicholson. On the traveller’s left, until the railway bridge is reached,
is a level space made by cutting into the hill. This is walled by pre-
cipitous cliffs. About a quarter of a mile further on the Wellington-
Manawatu line sweeps away from the right to the left hand of the
passenger, crossing the road by means of a high level bridge, and
winding up the hills, glimpses of the line being occasionally caught
from the road. After passing beneath the railway bridge, the hills
close in on the road from which they rise more or less precipitously.
Until the township of Kaiwarra is passed, the road is fairly lively ;
after then, especially at night, the road—with the narrow railway line
and the sea on the right, and the dark hills walling it in on the
left—is lonely and gloomy. About 700 paces from the last house in
Kaiwarra on the left, is the entrance to Chemis’ holding—simply a
cut in the hill, barred with a rough gate—the whole so unpretentious,
that a stranger to the locality would hardly imagine that it was any-
thing but a mere cow path. From Chemis’ entrance to Dimock’s, or
rather to the entrance to Hawkings’ land, is as stated 520 paces. It
must be borne in mind, however, that this is the distance by road.
Anyone desiring to reach the scene of the murder from Chemis’ house,
across the hills, would have to travel about 1,000 yards of extremely
rough, and difficult hill country. At the entrance to Hawkings’ home
road, and on the far side of it, stands the bacon-curing establishment of
the Dimocks. It will be remembered that Hawkings was last seen
alive by William Dimock about 5.30 p.m.
The Road to Death.
Let us in imagination follow the murdered man from that moment.
Bidding William Dimock good-night, he goes back to his cart, and, lead-
ing the horse on its near side, commences the ascent. The road is
terribly rough and steep. For the first few yards he has on his right, but
below him, a slaughter-yard, then a sheer drop of many feet into a running
stream. As he leaves this part of the road behind him, the narrow and
rough path—for it is little better—winds among the hills and suddenly,
by a turn of the road, he is as much cut off from light and life and hope
and chance of speedy assistance in case of danger, as if he—instead of
being a few paces from neighbors and friends, and within sound of the
chimes of Wellington Post Office—were traversing the Kyber Pass. Very
slowly, owing to the steepness and roughness of the road, he ascends,
stopping often to rest his horse. On his right is the cart; to the right
of that again rough hills; to his left a gully; but, strange to say, though
he has now proceeded 400 yards from Dimock’s, and though a murderer


is, or murderers are, waiting to take his life, he has as yet passed no spot
from whence that could be done with any degree of certainty, or of
safety to the assassin. Some hundred yards or more ahead is, however,
the identical spot where, as the event proved, the unfortunate man, slowly
toiling up the hill, could be ruthlessly killed without fear of his death-
cries alarming either the Dimock’s below or the inhabitants of his
(Hawkings’) house above. Let us, still in fancy, take our stand
♦ With the Murderer.
Twenty and a-half chains, or 495 yards from the Dimock’s; 682 yards
by road, or 462 yards in a direct line, from the murdered man’s house, on
the left of the road, on a little bank some three feet higher than the road,
stands a tall gorse bush. From the back of this bush to the edge of the
bank which overhangs the road, is a distance of six feet. The road
proper here is barely ten feet wide. Anyone walking with a cart, on his
right side must necessarily almost brush this gorse bush with his clothes.
Across the road, directly opposite to the bush, is a rough boulder-covered
patch on which no cart could travel, measuring thirty-nine feet, from
which ascends a very steep boulder-covered hill with some scanty wind-
swept vegetation on it. Immediately at the back of the bush, behind
which it is almost certain
The Murderer Crouched,
Rises a little gorse-clad hill up which, as the bird flies, the spot—outside
an unoccupied house of Hawkings’, where the murdered man’s horse and
cart were afterwards found—might be reached by an active man in a very
few minutes. Suppose the murderer crouching behind the gorse bush
referred to. On his right runs the lower road up which his victim toils.
Down that road the watcher, unless the night was very dark, could see
his view only once obscured in the whole distance by a jutting boulder
some 220 paces. On his left the road lies uphill, in sight some twenty-
five paces only, there disappearing, winding round to his left rear. To
the murderer’s right rear runs an easily ascending track, which, eighty
yards from the gorse bush, suddenly dips into a gorge thickly covered by
bush,, affording an easy line of retreat should his attack fail. Even
illumined by the broad sunlight, the spot is uncanny and secluded.
Standing behind the gorse bush the spectator notices that he is com-
pletely shut in—enclosed in a devil’s punch-bowl. In front, at rear, to
the left are hills forming an almost unbroken wall and forbidding the eye
to travel more than a few yards. The road to the right, visible some 220
yards or more, is suddenly at that point cut off by two huge hills which
slope to meet one another. Beyond these the eye, even in daylight, finds
one relief only—the hills described cut a triangular vista out of the blue
waters of the harbor, at the base of which triangle can be discerned the
habitations on Clyde Quay, with their background of purple hills. Leav-
ing the man going to his doom, and the murderer waiting to inflict that
Refill doom, we now proceed to see what was happening at the house of


the man who was never again to behold it. At this stage, therefore, it
becomes necessary to continue the narrative by reproducing the sworn
statements of a most important witness at the trial—
Charles Bowles.
This witness—a quiet, rather nervous, fair-haired man, somewhat
below the middle height, and who, seen by the writer on Tuesday, June
4th, appeared to be suffering to a certain extent from the mental shock
consequent on the tragedy—was examined at the trial by Mr. Richmond,
and deposed among other things :
Am a laborer; reside with Mrs. Hawkings at Kaiwarra. Carterton is my
residence. On 31st May I resided at Hawkings’. Had been there since 27th March.
Am cousin to Mrs. Hawkings. I came down to get married; was so on 15th April
last. I had known deceased fourteen years last May. He lived fifteen chains on
the present house. Old one pulled down; now lives in new house. He used not
often to have business to do in town, only on Fridays. He used to go in on
Fridays. He delivered his butter regularly on Friday to Dickson. He used to go m
with horse and cart. On the 31st May we were cutting firewood, I and young lad
Norman—firewood for the house all afternoon till quarter to five. After that we
got the cows in, and were milking till a quarter to six, then went in and had. tea
about six o’clock. Hawkings left for town about ten o’clock in the morning,
driving the trap and mare. I never saw him after that alive. We were about half
to three-quarters of an hour at tea. Norman had tea with us. He (Hawkings)
had nine children, and Mrs. Hawkings. They were all at home that evening. Age
of the eldest bov, eight years. He (Hawkings) usually got back at six, hardly ever
later in winter.' After tea I said to Mrs. Hawkings, “It is strange he has not come
in.” She said she had expected him. We kept waiting. We waited till ten
minutes to eight. She said, “ You had better go down the hill and see if you can
see him.” I looked at the time. I got the lantern. I went about six or seven
chains from the house to where there is another house ; there I found the mare and
trap this side of where they are living. The near wheel was in the paling-fence.
I looked and called for Mr. Hawkings. I found the reins tied up at the front board
of the trap as he always did at the bottom of the hill. I got the mare out of the
fence. I took the horse and trap home and gave it to Harry Norman. It (where
the trap was found) is a dwelling-house, unoccupied. I then went down to look for
Hawkings.
He Finds Him—Dead.
I followed the road right round until I came to where I found Mr. Hawkings. I
found him laid straight across the road, feet towards the hank, head towards the
gully. I found him lower down than the lend, forty or fifty yards lower down
(i.e., forty or fifty yards lower than the gorse bush previously described). I took
hold of his wrist. I turned him over on his hack. I put my hand on his stomach.
I found he was quite dead. I left him lying on his hack, and I went down to Mr.
Dimock’s. Before I got there, I saw young James McCallum leading a horse up to
Mr. Cate’s stables. I asked him to go back and tell Mr. Dimock that I found Mr.
Hawkings dead up the hill. I waited with the horse until Mr. Dimock came up
where I was standing with the horse. It was William Dimock, and Victor Ihtnock.
Victor went up with one or two more to where I found the body, and William
Dimock and myself went to the telephone at Dimock’s. I informed him to tele-
phone to Dr. Martin. Dr. Martin was not home. Dr. Cahill came out. 1 should
say it was half-past eight. I cannot say what time it was Dr. Cahill came out. 1
went up the hill with him and five or six more. It was a very cold, windy night •
It was Stan-light; 'not dark; no moon. Wind blowing direct up the gully. We
call it South East wind. The doctor looked at him and we brought the body down
the hill.


There is no necessity to further follow this witnesses’ evidence at
present. So far we have arrived at these facts :—Hawkings was seen
alive by William Dimock at about 5.30 p.m., and found dead by Charles
Bowles—some 500 yards from the entrance to the murdered man’s road
and about the same distance from his own home—a little after 8 p.m.
The police appeared on the scene sometime after 9 p.m., and the body of
Hawkings was conveyed by them to the morgue.
Suspicions of Foul Play.
Dr. Cahill—perhaps the most important witness daring the whole trial
—appears to have had his suspicions immediately aroused, because he
observed, before the body was removed to Dimock’s, two incised wounds
on either side the neck from which blood was issuing. Having given the
body into charge of the police, he, accompanied by a constable, went to
view the spot where the body had been lying, proceeding thence to visit
Mrs Hawkings, whom he saw. He called at the Police Station, Welling-
ton, “ about eleven or soon after ” the same night, having communicated
his suspicions to no one but Dr. Robertson. At the Station he informed
Sergeant-Major Morice of his suspicions. Here occurred
The First Police Bungle.
It might naturally have been supposed that when the police were
informed by Dr. Cahill of his suspicions—which indeed must have been
certainties—that Hawkings had been murdered, a force would have been
at once despatched to make thorough search in the locality, before the
murderer—if really a resident of the locality—could have had time to
obliterate all traces of his crime. Instead of this, however, no active steps
appear to have been taken until the next morning (Saturday, June Ist)
when constables Carroll and Healey were despatched to Kaiwarra, arriving
at 6.45 a.m. In this connection the evidence of
Detective Benjamin
Throws strong light upon the remissness—to use no harsher term of
the police authorities. Benjamin deposed at the trial:—
Am chief detective of station at Wellington. I went to the morgue shortly
after 10 a.m. (June Ist). 1 was waiting there till nearly twelve o'clock. I had to go
away, and I then returned and found the morgue closed. I knocked at the gate.
Carroll came to the gate. I said I wanted to go in. Carroll said he would ask the
doctor. He said, “ The doctor says you are to wait for his report.” I waited ten
minutes, then Carroll came and said, “Doctor says it is a murder.” I said Go
back and ask him what instrument has been used. Carroll returned and said A
sharp instrument like a knife." I then left and came to the station and informed
the Inspector of Police. I went to Kaiwarra first. In the afternoon about two
o clock I went to town of Kaiwarra.
A little after nine on the previous night, it was known to Dr. Cahill
and at eleven to the police, that foul play had been committed, and yet
the Chief Detective was not on the scene of the crime before two o’clock




in the afternoon of the following day, or some fifteen hours after the
time he should have been sent, and the Inspector of Police did not go
out until three o’clock on the afternoon of June Ist.
The POST MORTEM.
The examination of the body was not completed by Dr. Cahill until
Sunday, but long before then, on Saturday forenoon, he knew that
Hawkings had met his death by Gunshot and Stabs. A strange reti-
cence, strongly complained of by the Wellington leading paper—the
Evening Post, was manifested both by the Doctor and the Police. By
Monday, June 3rd, however, every one knew that murder had been
committed.
The Coroner’s Inquest
Was held at the Morgue, at 9 a.m. on Monday; Mr. H. W. Robinson,
District Coroner, conducting the enquiry. The Police, so it was stated
at the time, had taken special care to select a picked jury, which con-
sisted of Messrs. James Lockie (foreman), W. M. Muir, M. Mackey, T.
B. Hewitt, E. Player, and C. A. Knigge. Inspector Thompson exam-
ined the witnesses; Chief Detective Benjamin was present, and Mr.
Chapman, solicitor, appeared for Mrs. Hawkings and her family.
When the jury proceeded to view the body, they were unable to suppress
their exclamations of horror at sight of the fearful wounds which had
been inflicted upon the unfortunate Mr. Hawkings. The body was
identified by the widow. Now, for the first time as far as the public
knew, suspicion was directed to the man who was subsequently con-
victed—although many persons still believe him innocent—of the crime.
The following account of what transpired is extracted from the Evening
Post, Monday, June 3rd:—Mrs. Hawkings was under examination :
The Deceased Threatened.
Inspector Thomson — As the post mortem examination will show that your
husband must have met his death by foul play, I may ask if you are aware whether
he was threatened by any of his neighbors or anyone else ?
Witness—Well, I think he was.
Inspector Thomson—What makes you think so ?
Witness—What he said one night when he came home a couple of months ago.
Inspector—What took place then ?
Witness—Perhaps I shouldn’t say.
Mr Chapman, when appealed to, suggested that it was a question of prudence for
the police to consider whether the question should be answered.
Inspector Thomson said that as there was no person now accused the question
was quite admissible, and he had already thought of the question of desirableness.
Witness continued—My husband came home one evening and would not have
his tea. He seemed depressed and put out, but when I pressed him he took some
tea and toast. In answer to my further persuasions he said that Louis Chemis,
who worked on the Hutt road, had sworn at him and said, “Ah ! I’ll have you yet.”
This took place between Kaiwarra township and Chemis’ gate. The conversation
seemed to have made a great impression on the deceased. There is a case now
pending in the Supreme Court between Chemis and the deceased in connection
with a lease of a fifty-acre section rented by Chemis from my husband. I had never
heard of any other person threatening him. He had no enemies in the neighbor-
hood that I am aware of.


Dr. Cahill at the Inquest.
“For Murder, though it have no tongue, will speak with most miraculous organ.”
The narrative will be more comprehensible and more trustworthy if
told, as far as possible, from the evidence adduced at the trial. It will
not be out of place, however, to give here the medical testimony at the
Inquest, relative to the barbarous manner in which the dead man had
been hacked by his murderer. Thomas Cahill, M.D., deposed :
On Friday night about twenty minutes to nine, I received a telephone message
from Mr Dimock—“ Come out at once and see to an accident which is believed to he
fatal.” I went out, and was conducted up the hill by Mr. Dimock and some men who
were at his butchery. We went up for about half a mile,* and found the deceased
lying on his back across the road. His hands and wrists were cold and rigor mortis
was beginning to set in. The face and the clothing on the front of the chest
were covered with blood. He was undoubtedly dead, and must have been so from
three to four hours. I made a casual examination with a lantern. Taking his watch
from the pocket of the vest, I opened it, and found that it was still going and indi-
cated a quarter past nine. The glass was not then broken, and I handed it to Mr.
Bowles. I then made an examination to see where the blood was issuing from, and
saw an incised wound on the right side of the neck, which severed the right exter-
nal jugular vein. This wound at once aroused my suspicion as to whether death
was caused by accident. The suspicion was confirmed when, on cutting the shirt in
front, for it was buttoned from behind, I saw another clean incised wound on the
left side of the neck, lower down than the one on the opposite side. I did not
communicate my suspicions to the by-standers, from some of whom dropped the
expressions, “ This is bad work,” and “ This is a bad business.” I had the body
conveyed down the hill on a stretcher to Mr. Dimock’s, where I awaited the arrival
of the police. Constables Carroll and Webb arrived shortly, and I handed the body
over to their charge, with instructions to remove it to the morgue. Leaving Con-
stable Webb in charge of the body, I took Constable Carroll and a boy up the
gully to whers the body was found. We made an examination of the ground by the
light of a bull’s-eye lantern, but did not discover anything to throw light upon the
affair. We also examined the trap and harness, but found nothing unusual.
Coming to Wellington I reported the matter to Sergeant Major Morice, to whom I
communicated my suspicions. On Saturday morning I made a post mortem exami-
nation of the body.
The Awful Wounds.
Its general appearance was as I have already described, but in addition I was able
to see several clean cuts through the clothing, the majority being about three-
quarters of an inch in length and some smaller. These cuts were principally upon
the collar, shoulders, and left breast. Many of them passed through the under-
clothing and corresponded in position and extent with the wounds found on the
body. There was a small, round, ragged hole on the right front of the coat, about
the centre, close to the buttons, and a portion of the left corner and pocket were
torn away. There was a long, ragged tear in the vest above the left corner, passing
through the pocket, and some ragged tears on the front of the upper part of the
trousers on the left side. There was a large, round, ragged tear on the back of the
right shoulder of the coat, and there were corresponding holes in the vest, shirt, and
singlet, leading down to a lacerated, contused wound, 1J inches by 1| inches, situated
above the upper angle of the scapula, or shoulder-blade, close to the spine on the
right side. I now had the clothing removed. The body was that of a well-
nourished man apparently between forty-five and fifty years of age. Rigor mortis
was well marked. Blood-clots were found on the face, chest, back, and arms.
There were contusions on the left cheek. An incised wound about three-quarters
* The distance given by the doctor was an evident mistake, the true distance being little over
a quarter of a mile.—[Editor],


of an inch in length on the left side of the face in front of the lobe of the left ear,
passing through the superficial structures, completely divided the lower jaw-bone,
making a clean, slightly-curved fracture. This wound opened into the cavity of the
mouth. There was a clean incised wound, about three-eighths of an inch in length
and three-eighths in depth, behind the right ear, ending in a similar wound on the
mastoid process. Its direction was from above, downwards and forwards. Two
incised wounds, three-quarters of an inch long and two and a-half inches deep, ran
downwards and inwards through the muscles of the neck and ended by striking
against the bones of the spine. Two incised wounds behind the right ear ran
downwards and forwards through the muscles, and ended by cutting clean through
the tranverse process of one of the vertebrae, and on the left side of the neck an
incised wound, three and a-half inches deep and three-quarters of an inchin length,
ran downwards, forwards, and inwards across the neck from beneath the angle of
the jaw, and ended by penetrating the pharynx. An incised wound, three-quarters
of an inch long and two and five-eighths inches deep, ran downwards and forwards
from beneath the angle of the jaw on the right side and was found, on dissection,
to have severed the right external jugular vein. It passed through the muscles
immediately outside the right carotid artery and internal jugular vein at the point
where the artery bifurcates into internal and external carotids, then passed behind
these vessels and the accompanying pneumo-gastric nerve, and ended by striking
against the spinal column. An incised wound on the left side of the neck, over the
region of the carotid artery, passed through the superficial structures and s.terno-
mastoid muscle, injuring the omohoroid muscle which passes beneath. Continuing
its course it severed the left internal jugular vein, and ended by striking against the
spine. On the body I found six clean incised wounds and one angular wound filled
with blood and clots, beneath and in front of the left arm-pit, and varying in size
from five-eighths to seven-eighths of an inch in length and from half-an-inch to four
and a-quarter inches deep. These measurements were made by passing a probe
into the wounds from the outside. The angular wound was evidently produced by
two thrusts of the same instrument, one wound opening into the other. When the
chest was opened six of these wounds were found to have passed between the ribs
and penetrated the upper lobe of the left lung. There was a .circular contused
wound on the left hypochondriac region seven-eighths of an inch in diameter.
Three incised wounds were found on the lower part of the chest, on the. left side,
three-quarters of an inch in length and one and a-quarter inches deep, which, when
the abdomen was opened, proved to have entered the spleen to the extent of from a
quarter to half-an-inch. Two incised wounds in the back passed through the
muscles and ended by striking against the spine. They were three-quarters of an
inch in length and one and three-quarter inches in depth. Several incised wounds
of a similar character were on the arms. The large and ragged wound on the back
of the left shoulder was next examined. It ran forward through the muscles for
three and a-quarter inches and was directed slightly upwards and outwards. It
contained clotted blood and torn and crushed particles of clothing, paper, and shot,
which were lodged in the lower part of the neck, immediately above the shoulder.
This was a Gunshot Wound.
There were smaller wounds, made by single pellets, around. On opening the
chest I found the left pleural cavity filled with blood and coagula. The left lung
was collapsed and wounded as previously described. The right pleural space also
contained blood and clot. A small circular wound was found in.theapexof the
right lung. It was probably made by a pellet of shot, for its position was in a line
with the gunshot wound on the shoulder. I now opened the pericardium, or sac,
in which the heart is enclosed. It was full of blood and coagula. In the upper
part of the pericardium, on the left side, a clean incised wound half-an-inch in
length, and a similar wound a quarter of an inch in length, opened into the left
auricle of the heart at a point where it is entered by the pulmonary veins. These
wounds were on the same line, and I was able to pass a probe through them, and
through the left lung, whence it passed through the wall of the chest by one of the


wounds previously described, beneath the axilla, or arm-pit, a distance measuring
exactly five inches. It is to he noted that the external wound ivas three-quarters to
seven-eighths of an inch in length , while the innermost wound in the heart was a
quarter of an inch.*
It will thus be seen that—exclusive of several incised wounds on the
arms—there were at least twenty-four wounds on the body, and this
fact demonstrates the savagery, even more than the determination of
the brutal assailant of the unfortunate Mr. Hawkings. Continuing his
evidence, Dr. Cahill stated his theory of the mode of attack which we
will epitomise. He considered that the wounds were mainly inflicted
from the back, the majority of them having a direction downwards and
forwards, towards the centre of the body. Those under the left arm
were directed slightly upwards and inwards towards the heart, and all
being “ clean cut at both extremities, the doctor inferred therefrom
that they were produced by a double-edged weapon. They were all
similar in character, except the gunshot wounds, the contusions on the
face, and left side of stomach. The fact that they diminished in size
from without inwards, was well shown by the wound which passed
from the left side through the lung, pericardium, and heart, where the
wound on the surface of the body measured three-quarters to seven-
eighths of an inch in length, while that on the heart measured only a
quarter of an inch. He considered, one wound being five inches in
depth, that the instrument must have measured at least five inches ;
that it was strong and driven with great force was shown, he deduced
by the clean cuts made through the bony processes of the vertebra, and
the fracture of the lower jaw. From the appearance of a small, ragged
round hole in the right front of the coat, and a long ragged tear in
the pocket, and left corner of the coat, he inferred that the tears were
caused by a rounded missile like a
Spherical Bullet Fired from Above,
This bullet, Dr. Cahill believed, entered the right side of the coat
tearing the circular hole close to the hem near the buttons, tearing the
cloth of the waistcoat, striking against a penknife, after which it emer-
ged from the coat. The bruise on the left side of the stomach showed
the mark of the penknife, as though the bullet struck the knife and
would have entered the body, but for being thus deflected outwards.
At the Inquest the
Clothing Worn by Deceased
Was produced. The artist who has so ably illustrated this story
sketched that clothing within the last few days only some three
months after they were shown at the Inquest. In the interval it is
known that the coat at least has been made the subject of experiments
—most reprehensibly so, we deem—and that the coat certainly was not,
* These lines have been italicized because they are of very special importance. The prosecution
subsequently relied on the foregoing measurements to prove that the instrument used was over fire
inches in length, and tapering,—[EditorJ. u a


when sketched by our artist, in the same condition as on June 3rd.
We produce a description of the garments as they appeared at the
Inquest:—
The waistcoat was at one side cut diagonally across, the corner of the row of
button-holes being almost severed, and there was also a nearly circular rent in the
back, two or three inches below the nape of the neck. The coat had several cuts
under the left arm-pit, and another close to the left side-pocket. In the back, quite
close to the collar, and corresponding with the rent in the back of the waistcoat, was
another big rent, evidently torn by a gunshot, and surrounding this came a number
of small punctures, such as would have been made by scattering shot. There was
a cut over the left-hand pocket of the trousers, and all the garments were sodden
with blood.
A Retrospective Glance.
We have now—recording events in their natural sequence, and ad-
hering to sworn testimony—followed the murdered man from his home
to Wellington, on Friday morning, May 31st; have noted some details
of his transactions in Wellington ; have seen him return to the entrance
to his road home; have described that road, and the spot whence the
first attack was delivered : have imagined the victim within a hundred
yards of that fatal spot; have described the finding of the body, its
examination by Dr. Cahill; have recorded that gentleman’s testimony
at the Inquest, the wounds inflicted, and the fearful appearance of the
blood-stained clothes of the murdered man. In all these matters we
have adhered, according to our promise, to a strict record of matters
sworn to by witnesses. If for a moment we depart from the region of
fact and stray into the domain of theory, we do so because it is abso-
lutely necessary—there being no certainty in the matter —to place
before the reader the most probable theory of the
Mode of Murder.
But even in doing this we shall he guided by evidence given on oath,
and shall only make the simplest and most natural deductions from that
evidence. In a previons page we conducted the reader to a certain gorse
bush some 500 yards on the road up from Dimock’s. There can te no
doubt that, crouched behind that bush, the murderer awaited the
murdered one. In the first place, that position was the only one on the
entire road at all suited for the assassin’s purpose—it was a strategetic
point of the greatest importance; in the next, the battered penknife,
proved to have been shot from Hawkings’ pocket, was found by Victor
Dimock (a witness) right opposite to that identical bush, on the right-
hand side of the road, looking up—the body was found forty-four feet
below where the portions of the penknife were picked up. Hawkings
always walked on the near or left side of his horse. His assailant—even
had there been cover, and there was none—would not have awaited him
on the right side of the road, because then the cart would have been
between him and Hawkings. The murderer was on the left side, behind
the gorse, and Hawkings, passing him, must have been within a few feet
of him. But here is a strange fact: The bullet first penetrated the coat


on the right side, not on the left. Dr. Cahill reasonably accounted for
this apparent anomaly by the supposition that Hawkings had just passed
the murderer, heard some noise, turned round, facing downhill, and was
shot in the right side, or rather through the right side of the coat. We
may, without outraging fact,
Picture the Awful Deed :
The murderer, crouching behind his scanty cover, looking down the
road to the right, hears, if he cannot see, the doomed man, happy with
pleasurable anticipations of home, toiling up the ascent. Ever and
he stops to breathe his tired horse, but after each rest he comes nearer
and yet nearer to the cruel watcher and to death. Now he is a few yards
away—and now the man, thirsting for his blood, sees plain his quarry.
Now the horse, now the cart have just passed him—Hawkings so close
that he can almost touch him. He might shoot, he might aim now with
certainty at his victim’s heart. But it may be that he wants to do
something more than mere murder-desires to taunt his foe, and torture
5“: , e , nses suddenly—maybe calls Hawkings by name. It is possible
the latter knows and dreads the voice he hears; possible also he calls the
skulking devil by name. So much the worse for him. Now there must
be no quarter indeed. The murderer fires ! A moment, and he sees
that he lias missed, and in that moment Hawkings knows that he stands
face to face with cruel death. A second’s pause, and Hawkings, rushing
round the cart, dashes down the hill. Too late ! The murderer close
pursuing, fires his second barrel at the flying man’s back, then, dJawing
his knife and following close, hacks at the neck of the unarmed unfor-
tunate, who falls. Then, mad with rage or terror, or both, the murderer
rams stabs at the prostrate, fainting Hawkings, and so—an end.
*****
Suspicion.
The key-note to subsequent events was struck at the Inquest
Inspector Thomson’s question, and the reply of Mrs. Hawkings thereto!
at once directed suspicion to Louis Chemis, the man who, so Mrs!
Hawkings said her murdered husband had told her, had threatened
Hawkings’ life. Moreover, towards the close of the Coroner’s Enquiry,
Inspector Thomson, producing a double-edged dagger, or stiletto, asked
of Dr. Cahill whether it was such a weapon that had made the wounds.
To this the doctor answered :
. } bellev e all the incised wounds and fractures could have been made with an
instrument of this description.
The stiletto referred to was the property of Louis Chemis, and had
been taken from his house by Dectective Benjamin—acting under orders
from and accompanied by Inspector Thomson, who was armed with a
search-warrant—on Saturday afternoon, June Ist. It is certain that the
police, rightly or wrongly, had on Saturday formed a theory that Chemis
was the guilty man, and that theory was wholly or partially founded on


information given to the police to the effect that Chemis had threatened
Hawkings. In this deplorable affair nothing is much more deplorable
than the neglect of the police to search every dwelling-place in the locality.
Excitement in Wellington.
When the full particulars of the Inquest—which was adjourned for a
week, the interment of the deceased being ordered by the Coroner—
became known, excitement ran very high. As is usual in such cases the
public demanded a victim and were indignant because the police had not
found one. Many condemned Chemis without further enquiry—he was,
so it was freely said, a man of bad character, well known to the police ;
he had already shot a man although never convicted of the deed, and above
all he was a foreigner. Hawkings had been stabbed, and it was a clearly
ascertained fact that foreigners and no one but foreigners ever used the
knife. It is almost needless to say that not one of these rumors had
foundation on fact, save that Chemis some years ago, at target practice,
had accidentally shot the marker. He was really known as a quiet,
inoffensive, and industrious man. Nevertheless, these absurd rumors
strengthened the hands of the police, who appear to have been quite
satisfied, without much if any further enquiry, that Chemis was really the
man wanted.
Theories.
As is usual, when there can be no certainty, all kinds of theories were
promulgated regarding the murder, both before and subsequently to the
trial, and the opinion that Chemis was the perpetrator was by no means
universal. With these theories we have nothing here to do. There
was, however, one incident which—although it probably has not the
slightest connection with the Kaiwarra tragedy—is in itself sufficiently
remarkable to place on record, the more especially as an extraordinary
theory was deduced by a local writer from it, and, so far as we can
ascertain, no official enquiries have been made regarding the incident in
question. On the evening of Saturday, June Ist, the night after the
murder, there appeared in the Evening Press the following
Astounding Advertisement:—
NOTICE.
Yet forty days, and Wellington shall be overthrown. The earthquakes have told
that God is not pleased at all with men in New Zealand. There is no faith and no
love for God in the lot, nothing but sin of all kinds. He will serve them all alike.
It is far better to be buried alive very deep than to go in sin more and more every
day, even in one they shall not be unpunished. Many infants born of harlots are
murdered, some buried alive, some given away and slaves made of them. Many live
in pleasures of sin as if mad, and do no mercy, but cruelty more than ever to men,
horses, beasts, etc., until they see they must die, then do they weep bitterly, and
howl and lament, and pray hard to God for mercy, but have to obtain none, seeing
that they have shown no mercy to the friends of God, but tormented them instead.
Churches, Chapels, Temples, etc., are got up by men most wicked of all. Their
hearts are full of deceit, the same as a thief and a robber, with too much learning
but good for nothing, too lazy for business and for work; they speak fair and good


words to serve their own belly and not God ; they pray and spout much about the
Word of God, and deal deceitfully with it like Korah and Comp, Numbers XYI.
Ye people of God be ye not deceived by those evil servants that know the will of
God and do it not, shall suffer very very much. Many fast and pray not in secret,
and give no alms in secret, are not converted by a saint, not repented, not sanctified,
not purified, not regenerated. These things are Commanded by the Lord Jesus
Christ to be done every year instead of burnt offerings and sacrifices. lam a Saint
from Germany to convert everybody free of charge. Any person who receives me
and does what I tell them shall be saved for eternal happiness, anyone doing it not
shall be soon m eternal hell and great torments.
Live days only, and I shall be gone.
Address J.M., Post Office.
The foregoing advertisement—which, on Monday, June 3rd, was
followed by a shorter one of very similar character—may of course be
susceptible of a very simple and innocent explanation. On the face of
it, however, are indications that it was inserted by a person suffering
from religious mania. This being so, it might naturally be supposed
that the police would at least have taken the trouble to trace the ad-
vertiser. They, however, seem to have scouted any theory adverse to
the guilt of Chemis. They may be tight; on the other hand they may
be wrong; in either case no harm could have resulted from judicious
enquiry. One strange fact in connection with the matter is this :
Although the writer to whom we have referred pointed unmistakably
to the suspicious nature of the advertisement, and more than insinuated
that the advertiser might be connected with the Waitahuna and Kai-
warra tragedies, together with the recent disappearance of the child at
Carterton, and though this theory was either copied or commented upon
by the press throughout the Colony, yet the advertiser has never come
forward to reveal his identity. The matter may be, and probably is, of
a most trivial nature ; at the same time, when a great and mysterious
crime has been committed, it behoves the police to neglect no clue, how-
ever trifling it may appear.
Waiting for a Hint.
Notwithstanding that the police apparently entertained no doubt of
the guilt of Louis Chemis, they permitted Monday and Tuesday (June
3rd and 4th) to pass without making any sign. On June 4th, the
Evening Press published a paragraph plainly indicating the opinion of
the writer that Chemis—although he was not named—should be
arrested. This expression of outside opinion really would seem to have
been the precise encouragement the police were waiting for. On the
following morning thej arrested Chemis.
The Search.
So far back as Saturday, June Ist, the police had been busy at
Chemis’ house. Immediately Mrs. Hawkings informed them of the
threats previously referred to, they hastened to search Chemis. Between
four and five p.m. on Saturday, Inspector Thomson and Detectives
Benjamin and Campbell, armed with a warrant, made an exhaustive


THOMAS HAWKINGS.


HAWKINGS’ HOUSE.


search of the suspect’s person, clothes, and premises. They found not
the slightest trace of blood either on Chemis, his garments, or his
premises. Both Chemis and his wife were present the whole time, but
did not exhibit then, and have never subsequently exhibited, the least
discomposure. The police assert they found in the house the following
weapons :
1 Double-barrelled gun.
1 Shot pouch containing a few grains of shot.
1 Revolver, loaded in three chambers.
1 Small knife, in case
1 Stiletto, in sheath.
4 Bullets.
The police further assert they found in certain drawers and elsewhere
several pieces of paper, to which, in the proper place, further reference
will be made. They did not take away the gun until Sunday, about 10
a.m.
Arrest op Chemis.
Chemis was arrested by Detectives Benjamin and Campbell, while he
was working upon the roads at Kaiwarra, about ten o’clock in the
forenoon of Wednesday, June sth. Chemis was perfectly cool. Ben-
jamin, calling Chemis on one side, told him he had a warrant for his
arrest, to which the suspect made no reply. Then, taking Chemis into
an adjacent shop, Benjamin read the warrant to him. The prisoner
said : “ All right.” Then, after a short pause, “It is all damned lies, I
won’t be there long ", I wish I had better clothes to go in.” That was
ill he said. He was then taken to the Wellington police station.
Before the Magistrates.
The news of the arrest—which was not unexpected—soon got about,
and a crowd of persons were present at the opening of the R.M. Court
on Wednesday forenoon of June sth. Messrs. J. R. George and J.
Nancarrow (both, remarkable to say, since dead) presided, and Mr.
E. W. Mills subsequently took his seat on the bench. Great and
natural curiosity was felt as to the appearance of the man charged with
so desperate a crime. We may as well here as elsewhere give
A Description op Louis Chemis.
Picture then a man of thirty-four or thirty-five years of age, of stout
and active build, under rather than over five feet seven inches in height,
with crisp, curly, and intensely black hair, whiskers, beard, and
moustache (we are speaking of him now as he appeared at the trial),
with dark and fine eyes, decently dressed, and of a decidedly nautical
appearance. Just such a man indeed as might have been found as A.B.
or boatswain’s mate on hundreds of English, deep-sea merchant-ships a
few years ago, and before the economy of owners had “ manned tlieii
vessels with half-licked ordinary seamen or boys. Some persons profess
to find in the physiognomy of Chemis indications of blood-thirstiness, and
savage cruelty. But some persons would detect a murderer in a
]3


confess *Tv “ do< *- We
former, of considerable good nature, of undoubted couLTanddete rmf
tear. laken all in all, he impressed the present writer—who has had
many opportunities of seeing him—as iust the sort nf LI? / .
of a sailing ship would choose to help man a boat when on
the cry went up, “man overboard ! ” Just the cut of seLnl tw 7
volunteer to swim ashore, at time of wreck, with a life-line Appear
ances cannot, of course, be implicitly relied on • b,,t fZ Ppear '
go, Chemis does not look like t iLt^T'' 068
criminality in every skin that is a shade darker than their own. “
First Hearing.
The proceedings were merely formal. The police insneetnr
bid reSed Ut aSked * re “ and &r eight d4je - This ™> granted and
The Adjourned Inquest
srais t swr onS d :^rc h d r B the
e“ Mr U Bl f ; r poi°nted oSt'tat
missible elsewhere might be adducVTftat“ “andthKu
tend to injure the deceased, he should ask that the iurv milht L -
““P™ T “ di »‘> especially as the whole matter would be gone”fnto
at the R.M. Court on the following Friday. Mr Bell on heh.tf „Vii.
Crown, expressed his satisfaction at the course proposed h, it » the
and the Coroner ultimately directed the jury that if tW « M
that on May 31st Hawkings was wilfully murdered bv 6 Sfied
unknown, he would accept that as their verdict. The Foreman reS
that the jury were so satisfied, and a verdict beino- drawn „n • P A
the jury were dismissed. ° drawn up and sl S ned >
The Adjourned Magisterial Enquiry.
7*h whom f ;r C^rdeSd of the e p2oTer'
densely crowded. On the application of Mr. Bunny all . ,
ordered out of Court. The prisoner showed symptoms ne teer Z
vousness nor bravado, but listened calmly to the evident
Mr. Bell Opens the Case.
wfproj^to e foSe*tege V nerridir ß eSion 0 b e ut i to ?* 7™°'
portion of the Prosecuting 1


paper evidence, on which subsequently the whole case hinged, and
which, believed by the jury, doubtless controlled their verdict.. _
Mr. Bell apprehended that he would be able to establish a prima facie
case against the accused. He entered upon a detailed description of the
road which leads from the Hutt Road to the property of deceased
whereon the murder was committed. He then described the track
across the hills from Chemis’ house to the scene of the murder. He
detailed the habits of Hawkings with relation to his visits to Wellington,
and his proceedings (already detailed) on the day of the murder. He
affirmed that Chemis must have seen the murdered man pass to Well-
ington in the morning; that Chemis left off work at 4.20 p.m., and
must have known that Hawkings had not returned home, and t at
deceased was seen at Pipitea Point (Wellington), by men wholiad been
working at Kaiwarra in the same locality as the prisoner. He traced
Hawkings to Dimock’s, and mentioned that the point where the road
turned on to the plateau was about half or three-quarters of a mile dis-
tant from Khandallah Railway Station, and that a man named O Shea,
while waiting at that station for the train that left town at 5.30 p.m.,
Heard Two Shots Fired
In the direction of Hawkings’ house. Mr Bell proceeded to relate the
proceedings (already detailed) at the murdered man s house on Friday
night; the search by Bowles, his finding of the body, the advent of Dr.
Cahill and the police, the search by constables. Mr Bell referred to the
broken fragments of deceased’s penknife, and stated that close to the
pieces of knife there were found
Pieces of Cloth and Paper.
It would be shown that Hawkings was killed by a charge of shot being
poured into his back, and that some twenty terrible stabs with a sharp
instrument were inflicted upon him at or about the same time. One o
the stabs passed through the heart and most of them were delivered from
the back. Some of them passed into the lung under his left arm upwards,
so that in all probability while the poor man was lying on his back the
murderer raised his left arm and drove the dagger upwards under the
arm. Uuquestionably, he said, the shot was fired from a muzzle-loading
gun, because there were taken out of the wound not only the shot but also
the paper that had been used for the wad. And at such close quarters was
the shot fired that the paper must have gone in in front of the shot,
because it was hardly destroyed. That paper was extracted by Dr.
Cahill, and it lad never been in the hands of the police. > It was taken
by the doctor to Mr. Tasker, a gentleman unconnected with the police
who had been employed to piece together the fragments.
* It must be borne in mind that this can hardly be described as a trothM Tasker
though not actually a constable, having been connected with the police department for years, ill?
selection as “expert” was, to say the least, unfortunate. [Editor].


How Mr. Bell Connected Chemis with the Crime.
Mr. Bell pointed out that the pocket-book, said by Mrs. Hawkings
to have been upon her husband, had not been found. On June Ist
certain pieces of paper had been picked up, and on that day the officers
went to Chemis’ house with a warrant. Referring to the weapons
found there (already detailed) Counsel continued : Various newspapers
and scraps of paper were found in the house. These were taken away
and carefully preserved, and they were handed on 6th June to Tasker.
They were in Tasker’s possession before he received the paper taken by
Hr. Cahill from the wound. Mr. Bell then proceeded to state what he
rightly designated
A Marvellous Thing.
So marvellous and so vitally important to the whole case was that
thing, that we propose to reproduce almost verbatim the Counsel’s
opening observations regarding
The Paper Evidence,
It was a fact when he said that the paper produced by Constable Carroll, and
[° und him on the ground, fitted exactly with the paper found by Dr. Cahill in
the body, and these pieces again fitted precisely into a paper found in the prisoner’s
house. There were two newspapers of importance—an Evening Post of the 17th
November, 1888, and another of the 23rd May, 1889. Of the former all that could
be said was this that some of the shreds of paper found on the scene of the murder
belonged to the same page of the paper as the scrap found in Chemis’ house. There
was no fitting in of the edges of the paper so far as the examination had gone yet
It was impossible to say with absolute certainty that some small scrap among the
numerous pieces might not be there. That might yet be the subject of further
examination, but at present the evidence that he would bring, so far as the number
of the 17th of November was concerned, was that a portion of that paper was found
m Chemis house, and a portion of the same paper, being also a portion of the same
page, and a higher part of that page, was found in the shreds at the scene of the
murder. It was suggested that the latter piece had been used for the wadding of
the shot, or that it was part of the paper which had been torn up, and shred down
for the purpose of the wad. But the Evening Post of the 23rd May, 1889, had
pieced together in the most marvellous manner. The portion which entered the
body of the deceased was part of the shipping column of that issue. There was no
possibility of mistake about that. As he had already stated, this portion entered the
body with the shot, and was teased out by Dr. Cahill, put into a small box, and
delivered to Mr. Tasker. (At Mr Bell’s request, Mr. Tasker stepped forward and
produced from his iron box a number of small cardboard boxes, containing cards on
which scraps of paper were pieced together). Handing the pieces of the shipping
column of the Post of the 23rd ult. to his Worship, Mr Bell called attention to the
fact that at the end of one of the pieces came the words “Rotorua,” and then came
half of the lettes “ f,” and below it half the word “ Picton.” This was the piece
which came out of the wound. He next handed up parts of the paper found in
Chemis house. s»This bore the continuation of the shipping column of the same date.
Then he passed up two connecting pieces, one of which bore the remainder of the
letter “f,” and was found in the body of the deceased. Mr. Bell concluded as
follows : I hope I shall be understood, sir, as making no comment upon the fact at
all. It may be, and possibly is, capable of a perfectly innocent explanation. It is in
the fact only that I am now concerned, and it is quite possible that my learned
friends may have a complete and full explanation of the fact. To go back to the


paper of the 17th of November, I think I have already informed your Worship that
we shall be unable to piece in the scraps of that paper. All that we are able to
show beyond question is that a paper of that date—a long time ago —was found in
Chemis’ house, and a portion which might be of the same paper was found on the
scene of the murder. That is the main evidence that is to be adduced against the
prisoner, and that it constitutes a prima facie case will, I presume, hardly be
questioned. To sum up the evidence which I intend to call so far as Chemis
is concerned there is first of all the fact that he had a quarrel with Hawkings over
some land; that there was an action pending in the Supreme Court; that he had
expressed his belief that if that action succeeded it would ruin him; that he was a
neighbor, and that there were special facilities for any person going from his house
to the scene of the murder. X should have said that there were men working at
Dimock’s that night, and there were dogs there, so that in all probability any person
who passed by there to lie in ambush up the road would have been heard at Dimock’s.
Probably, therefore, whoever it was, went across the hills to the spot. There were
found in the prisoner’s house a double-barrelled gun, which had been recently fired,
and a dagger, and one further thing which I should mention—a parcel of bullets.
The Resident Magistrate—What sort of bullets P
Mr. Bell—They were bullets cast in a round mould. They did not fit the bar-
rel of the gun, and it is suggested that they would require a considerable amount
of paper to make them fit into the barrel, supposing that they were used. What
accused said with regard V> the gun, was that he had recently fired it off at some
quail. What he said in regard to the dagger was, that it had not been out of its
sheath for some considerable time. At any rate he had in his possession weapons
with which it was possible to commit the crime. That is, perhaps, carrying it very
far. The peculiar nature of the dagger, however, coupled with the peculiar nature
of the wounds, is a piece of circumstantial evidence which perhaps is not entitled
to much weight, but still it has some weight. Of course the main evidence against
the prisoner is that which I have just opened with regard to the paper found in his
house. Ido not know, sir, that I have anything further that I ought to mention
at this stage of the case.
The Magisterial Enquiry
Lasted from 14th to 21st June, and occupied four days. On
June 21st Louis Chemis was committed for trial for murder. Having
given so far a connected narrative of events; and having, by a synopsis
of the opening speech, in the R.M. Court, of Counsel for the Crown,
indicated broadly the general nature of the case for the prosecution as
against Louis Chemis, we shall, to avoid needless reiteration, now take
up the story as it was told by witnesses at the trial itself.
THE TRIAL.
The trial of Louis Chemis for the murder of Thomas Hawkings com-
menced at the Criminal Sessions of the Supreme Court, Wellington,
on July Bth, and ended on July 15th, 1889, before His Honor Chief
Justice Prendergast. Mr. Bell, with him Mr. M. Richmond, appeared
for the Crown, while Mr. Bunny, with him Mr. Devine, defended the
Prisoner, who pleaded Not Guilty. The excitement and interest in the
case had by no means decreased, and though some thought the accused
guilty, a large number—possibly a large majority—held a contrary
opinion. It was recognised that nothing but purely circumstantial


evidence could be adduced against the prisoner, and that that was
narrowed down to what had become known as the paper evidence In
choosing
The Late Mr. Bunny
To defend him, there can be no doubt that the accused had retained an
excellent, conscientious, and painstaking lawyer—one who would do his
duty to his client to the utmost. Unfortunately, Mr. Bunny was seized
at the close the magisterial enquiry with what he and his friends considered
was merelly a trifling indisposition, but which, as the event proved, was
the commencement of an illness that terminated in his death An
impression prevails in some quarters that, had Mr. Bunny been during
the trial in better health, a different verdict would have resulted. We
offer no opinion on this subject, one way or another—contenting ourselves
vith pointing out that the legal gentleman who has since undertaken the
case, and who appears, by his own showing, to think he should have been
entrusted with it from the first, has certainly not succeeded, despite
advantages of time and the offer of a large reward, in placing Chemis in
any better position than that in which Mr. Bunny’s lamented decease left
him. Regarding the matter of who should or should not have been
chosen to defend the prisoner, however much we may deplore the
unseemly squabble raised over the scarce cold ashes of Charles Bunny
we do not feel called upon in this place to enlarge upon that wrangle.
With the expression of deep regret that one lawyer should have seen fit
endeavor to cast a slur upon the memory of another who died doing his
duty, we pass from a most distasteful subject.
Motive.
no occas i° n to reproduce Mr. Bell’s opening address, which
differed in no essential particular from that delivered by him in the
R.M. Court. The prosecution first addressed itself to the task of proving
motive. The first witness called was Arthur Cooper, Registrar of
Supreme Court, Wellington District, who simply proved that there was
a legal case pending between Hawkings and Chemis ; that the case had
been adjourned in the previous January for “ further consideration,” and
that “It has not been set down by either party.” Mr. William Sandilands,
Solicitor, deposed that he had attested a lease—Hawkings to Chemis
eighteen years, from Ist. August, 1883. The next witness called to’
prove motive—we are not following the sequence in which evidence was
actually given, but classifying, without regard to date, particular lines of
evidence—was Frederick Bolton, Clerk to Mr. Chapman, Solicitor. He
deposed that he had in December last, taken Chemis a draft-lease of
®°™ e property comprised in an agreement between him and Hawkings.
JLhis Chemis refused to sign. The witness saw prisoner again, later in
December,, and served him with a writ—Hawkings v. Chemis. The
latter declined to take the writ. The witness flung the writ down beside
Chemis, who picked it up and flung it back, on which witness picked the *
document up and flung it back again.


Mr. Devine elicited that probably prisoner did not understand the
nature of the document, and that Hawkings’ solicitors had not set down
the case for argument. In reply to Mr. Bell, witness said, “ After the
hearing we offered to settle for £5O. So far as I recollect, two offers
from the defendant were made; one before action, one before hearing.
Another witness called to prove animus was John Tucker. It should
be explained that subsequently to the trial, Mr. Jellicoe, a Wellington
lawyer, acting in the interests of Mrs. Chemis, obtained several affidavits,
which tend to contradict or weaken evidence given for the prosecution.
When any testimony given at the trial appears to be contradicted by
these later statements, we shall publish the two statements side by side.
The evidence of Tucker and the affidavit of John Holmes seem to us
cases in point. We publish evidence and affidavit, therefore, in parallel
columns:—
John Tucker (examined by Mr. Bell) —I
am a laborer at Newtown with Mr.
Harlen, milkman. ... I saw at
door of Harlen’s house prisoner on Sun-
day before Christmas last. . . . We
walked across road together. He told
me that he had come there for some
deed that would do him a great deal of
good he thought. He said he leased
some land off Hawkings ; it was forty or
fifty acres ; that he wanted to chuck it
up ; that it did not pay; that Hawkings
did not want him unless he chucked up
house and land he was living on to make
a slaughterhouse. He said, “The son
of a wanted to do him same as he
had done one or two more.” I asked
him, “ Ho you think Hawkings will get
away with you ? ” He said, “If he get
better of me I will fix b—— so that he
will get away with no other.”
William Durrell (examined)—l get
milk from Chemis ; have so for eighteen
months. I pay monthly. Once I was
not able to pay. It was in March last
year. I told Chemis I could not pay all.
I explained I had had a lawsuit, and
oase would very likely cost me £lO or
£l2. He said that was nothing ; if he
had lost his case it would cost him £5O
or ,£6O, and God knows if it did it would
ruin him. He said it was a case of
Hawkings’. I asked him if it was
settled' he said no; that was all.
John Holmes (affidavit) —I, John
Holmes, the younger, of Kaiwarra . . .
tanner, make oath and say as follows :
1. I was subpeened as a witness on
behalf of the prosecuton at the late trial
of Louis Chemis for murder.
2. I attended on the same trial, and
on the afternoon of Tuesday, the second
day of the trial, Mr. Bell, the Crown
Prosecutor, said to me, “ Didn’t Chemis
tell you that Hawkings wanted to get
him ‘ out of the gully,’ or off the pro-
perty ? ” I replied, “ No; I met Chemis
on the Saturday evening before the
murder at the Rainbow Hotel, and I
asked him how his Court case was get-
ting on. He said he thought it was all
settled, and that he didn’t think he
would hear anything more about it, as
he saw Hawkings had his cows on the
ground.” Mr. Bell said, “Is that all
Chemis told you ? ” I said, ‘ ‘ Yes *, ”
and then Mr. Bell said, “ You may take
it from me I will not call you as a wit-
ness, and you are discharged. You will
receive pay for two days, and if you
come again you will not receive anything
beyond that sum.”
Distances.
The next class of evidence to which we shall address ourselves, was
that adduced by the prosecution regarding distances, the object, of course,
being to prove that it was possible for Chemis to have reached the scene
of the murder on the night of the tragedy. Joseph Anderson, surveyor,


produced a plan of the result of his survey of the scene of the murder.
He satd, I went along the ground; I made a traverse along the Hutt
fmm T. ICrOSSGd t 0 Khandallah Station; then
om Hutt Road to Chemis house; then followed a track leading up to
folbwsfl ’ J ° mmg HaWldngS ’ r ° ad a^in ‘” He g a ™ distances as
From Kaiwarra Bridge to Chemis’ road ... ° S *
n Chemis’ road to Dimock’s * "** 04
„ Bridge to Dimock’s ... ***
~ Dimock’s to where body found . " oof
» Body to where knife found ... \\\ *** %
~ Knife to Hawkings’ (direct) ... £1
” ’’ ... »» (by road) ... .” 31
„ Chemis’house to knife ... ... 44
This witness spoke of a track from Chemis’ house, which was shown on
the plan In cross-examination he said: “ I speak of a track from
Ohemis house ; I mean a beaten track. It is pretty rough country. It
is not easy to travel over in parts on the ridge. It is pretty easy, if you go
(own a gnlly, over a stream, up a hill. I ascended a saddle near a cow-
shed at Chemis and came out higher up, at track leading to the butts.
There is no bush, but it is pretty steep.”
Time,
We have now to consider the evidence brought forward by the prosecu-
tion, with a view to showing that Chemis had plenty of time to commit
the murder after he had knocked off work for the day. As there appears
to have been some conflict of testimony in regard to this subject, we
shall proiluce the evidence (whether verbal or written), for and against
the theory of the prosecution, side by side:
Michael Green (examined Mr Bell)
lam a laborer. On 31st May we were
laying a gas-main. There were ten of
us. Capling was one. We were work-
ing at end of road at Kaiwarra, a little
way past bridge from here, one hundred
yards other side Eainbow Hotel. I just
know prisoner by seeing him spreading
metal. I saw him on 31st May spread-
ing metal, a little way past Taylor’s shop,
further from Wellington than Eainbow
Hotel. He was working on road. He
knocked off at half-past four o’clock. He
knocked off before us ; we knocked off
at twenty minutes to five. He went
towards Ngauranga (away from Welling-
ton) when I saw him. Gasmen all
knocked off together. We came to town
in a spring dray, the clock just striking
five as we passed Government buildings.
The horse walked part of the way and
trotted part.
Henry William Oakley (affidavit)—
1. I am in the employ of Edward
Barber, and work at his slaughter-yard
at Kaiwarra.
2. I remember Friday, the 31st May
last. Barber’s slaughter-yard is situate
about one-third of the distance along
the Hutt road between Kaiwarra and
Hawkings’ road, and nearer Kaiwarra.
To reach the yard from the Hutt road
there is a road leading from the Hutt
road with several bends in it. On leav-
ing work on the 31st May last I particu-
larly noticed that the time was three
minutes past five o'clock. I did so
because I was anxious to catch the
Newtown tram leaving Pipitea Point at
about 5.25. I walked quickly down the
road leading to the Hutt road, and while
rounding the last bend I heard the noise
of a vehicle on the main road, and it
occurred to me I might get a lift to


Cross-examined by Mr Bunny, this
witness said he had seen Chemis at
work later than half-past four. If he
had a load to spread he would stop and
do it. Chemis was spreading all the
afternoon. He had seen him particu-
larly leave work that afternoon Not
more particularly that day than any
other day. Did not see cart Chemis
was working with go away.
Charles Capling (examined) Was
laying gas-pipes at Kaiwarra 31st May.
Knocked off at 4.30. Did not see pris-
oner knock off. Came into town in
Miller’s cart with Green. Clock struck
five as they got to Government Printing
Office. Knew Hawkings. Met him that
afternoon, Wellington side of Pipitea
Point. Did not see Chemis leave work.
Pipitea Point. I hurried along to inter-
cept it if going my way and on reaching
the Hutt road I found the cart was
going towards the Hutt and was then
about 200 yards beyond the track lead-
ing from Chemis’ house to the main
road, and I am certain the time then
was not more than five minutes past
five o’clock. It did not take me more
than two minutes to walk down from
the slaughter-yard to the Hutt road.
3. I then commenced walking to
Wellington along the main road. I
reached Pipitea about 5.30 and found
I had missed the tram. I waited a few
minutes and caught the tram leaving
Pipitea at twenty-five minutes to six.
4. I knew the late Thomas Hawkings
by sight, and I swear I did not pass him,
either walking, riding, or driving, on
the main road, from the time I first
reached it at five minutes past five until
I left in the tram at twenty-five minutes
to six o’clock.
As the next witness, George Lee, was called by prosecution, we give
his evidence as if it favored the theory of the prosecution, To our
mind, however, it it does not exactly do so.
George Lee , carter (examined)
Drive cart on Hutt road. Live half
a mile up the Ngaurauga road (further
distant from Wellington than Kaiwarra).
Carting gravel on afternoon, 31st May.
Prisoner spreading it front of Rainbow.
Took Chemis home in cart. It was
something to five when I took him up.
He had his coat on. Chemis picked
witness up. Witness had to pick up
horse-feed in front Rainbow. “I just
had to load-up this after Chemis left off
Work. 1 did not see where Chemis
Went, and he picked me up after going
half a chain.” Dropped Chemis at his
gate. Saw him walk up the road.
(Mr Bunny)—Prisoner helped to pick
Up the pollard. It took five minutes to
load up. It was getting on towards five
when loading was finished.
(Mr Bell) —There were five sacks. It
would take ten minutes to load up five
sacks.
Robert Maelcie, a storekeeper at Kai-
warra, swore that Chemis came to his
shop for the Evening Post about half-
past four p.m. on 31st May, and that
Hawkings called for the Post and two
loaves about half an hour after the
prisoner.


The Milk Bills.
, n ?^ er P°* attempted to be made by the prosecution was that
Chemis, who supplied milk in his neighborhood, was in the invariable
habit of rendering his accounts to customers on the first of each month,
but that he did not render those bills for May until long after the usual
date—the inference presumably being that he was too agitated to do so.
Tins is one of those more minor details which it is advisable to clear off
bcfoie preceeding to more important evidence. We are not exceeding
out piovince when we say that the theory of the prosecution just indicated
completely broke down. William Durrell, when under examination,
testilied that he got his milk bills from Chemis on first of month, unless
it came on a Sunday, then they (the bills) came on the Mondav. This
always happened. “As to May month I got that on Monday, June 3rd.”
Cioss-examined, this witness deposed that the milk bills were invarialby
delivered on first of month. But Margaret Cook swore at the trial
and Ellen Collins, Minnie Flaws, and Sarah Eagle, subsequently made
affidavit that they always received their milk bills about 3rd or 4th of
the month, sometimes as late as the 6th. Having thus dealt with these
minor and preliminary details, we proceed to give some idea of the main
body of evidence.
Charles Bowles.
This important witness —the man who first discovered the body was
examined on the first day of the trial. His evidence in chief differed
little fiom that given by him in the R.M. Court. We propose, however,
to reproduce in detail his replies to cross-examination:
(To Mr Bunny)—l came down on the 27th March. I came down before that
last Christmas. I stayed a few days. I went back on New Year’s Day. I used
to come down at holiday-time. I had been working for Hawkings for five years
some year-ago. Ido not believe his habits have been broken. He never missed a
bn day. lie would go in other days if he had business. During the visit at 27th
March I had been into town several times. We used both to walk up the hill.
He was generally home not later than six if he had a horse and trap.
, "Mill J® 11 B "’ear that lie was not in the habit of coming home later than six
o clock r 1 —-Yes, and that is why I became anxious ; I expressed anxiety two or three
times and my wish to go out and look for Hawkings.
Did she not prevent youp No. Yes. She said to me not to go for two or
three minutes. She said “ not ” two or three times. Even when I went I said I was
going. She said all right. They all got uneasy. The widow was the least un-
easy> Ifc a vcr y “girt s P ri ng cart, The trap was all right, back-board was up.
Why did you think (when you saw Hawkings was not with the cart) that he
had lost a parcel ? Ido not know. The trap was not empty, there were one or
two pumpkins I saw the pumpkins. I saw no parcels. There was a bag con-
taining pumpkins. Ido not know how many. Half a bag full. I had a ship-lamp
with me, a circular one .. I could not tell why he was not in the trap. I
thought lie had dropped a parcel, because he was not in the trap . . . The trap
had just passed one of the steepest pinches. I took the trap up to the house. I
did not go in. I gave it to Norman (the lad).
• j f° anc i ihe g a * ;e open, did you not think he must be on the other
side . I did not know what to think. Yes, he mostly shut the gate. I thought
perhaps he had gone through with the trap, and gone down through the gate again.


It did strike me as peculiar that the gate was open. As I was going down I was
looking on the road and alongside the road. I was looking for Mr. Hawkings. I
then found Mr. Hawkings.
One of not the least extraordinary incidents in this most extra-
ordinary affair was that the horse drew the trap a distance of many
chains, and up one of the most terribly steep pinches on the whole
road, without apparently any guidance, passing through a gate (pre-
sumably left open), turning bends, and bringing up quietly against the
fence of an unoccupied house, where Bowles states he found it.
Why did you not go on to Dimock’s and report the matter ?—I guessed I could
trust to him (McCallum) ; I held the horse. I was very close to Dimock’s, it is
true, but I thought the young chap could tell them as well as I. I was not much
upset. I felt the stomach. I saw, at that time, congealed blood on the neck. I
did not see any blood, at that time, on the coat. ... I stayed (afterwards) till
half-past twelve with Nichols, in his tent. I stayed there two hours. Then home.
I did not go in. My wife was in there. I did not go into the house. I was not
asleep. Harry Norman usually slept there. There was a bunk there. Norman
was awake. I sat on his bunk all the night. I swear I had no sleep that night. I
tried to sleep. I could not sleep. I had nothing to wrap round me.
Why did you not go inside ?—I did not like to see the woman (Mrs. Hawkings)
that evening. I saw Mrs. Hawkings before I went down in the morning. I went
in and lit the fire. Six o’clock was the usual time we always sat down to tea,
whether he was at home or not. He sometimes came home early from town on
these Fridays, sometimes early in the afternoon.
Mr. Bunny further cross-examined this witness regarding a German
named Bidden, a friend of Mr. and Mrs. Hawkings, who had been at
the wedding of Bowles, eliciting that Lidden and Hawkings had had
no quarrel. The witness further said he had heard no shots that night.
Wind was S.E., blowing straight up the gully, and S.E. winds were
felt at the house. Examined regarding
George Bowles,
He said: I have a cousin, George Bowles —Mrs. Hawkings’ brother. He came
down a week ago last Saturday. Does not frequently come down. Not in the habit of
going to Hawkings’. He was not on very good terms with them. Do not know
cause of quarrel. Remember George Bowles becoming bankrupt and bringing down
200 sheep to Hawkings’. Do not know that he gave them into Hawkings custody.
Know sheep came down. Know creditors did not get the sheep. Know nothing
about his asking Hawkings tor the 200, and only getting 100 sheep. George
Bowles’ mother lives at Ngahauranga. I was never present when any disturbance
took place about the sheep. I was never present at a row. I never heard
Hawkings say he would shoot Bowles as a dog. 1 know they were not on
very friendly terms; that is all I know. ... I believe I have been twice into
the Rainbow Hotel since (the murder). Ido not remember once bursting into tears
before Jenkins, the landlord. Ido not know him ; I never did lam sure. . .
George Bowles lives at Carterton. Ido not know where lie was on 31st May. Ido
not know that Bowles’ debts have been paid. I have nothing to be afraid of.
Ido not know if my hands were marked with blood. I saw none on my clothes or
hands. ... I did not feel the pockets. I noticed no pocket-book.
James McCallum.
This witness was the u boy ” sent by Bowles to alarm Dimock s. He
corroborated Bowles as to that portion of the latter’s evidence. Cross-
examined by Mr. Bunny, he said:—


I knew Hawkings. Never had a row with him. He never hit me. He
threatened to. We had a few words—l and my brother up the hill at the same
time. He threatened to beat us. Hawkings was talking to Chemis at the gate by
the bridge. One of us called out “ Hulloa, Tom ! ” We were cutting ti-tree.
. . . He said if he caught us again he would lay the whip round us.
Mary Hawkings,
The widow of the murdered man, was not called until the third day of
the trial. She deposed that she had been married eighteen years on the
24th May last, and had lived at the farm ever since; that she had placed
the money £/ 15s. or £7 17s.—in her husband's pocket-book before he
had left home on morning of murder; that they were all in at tea at a
quarter to six, and remained in house to seven o’clock. Bowles had
wanted to go out and look for Hawkings; she said, “He will come home
all right, sober enough.” Did not notice the exact time he (Bowles)
went out. He went a quarter to eight or so. Saw him come back with
trap seven minutes after. Bowles gave Norman the horse; Norman put
horse away, and went to look after Bowles. Did not see Norman till
after she had seen Dr. Cahill (who went up, it will be remembered, to the
house after finding body). Her mother came up after Cahill was gone,
a,nd told her that her husband was killed. Knife produced was something
like her husband s. Lidden was a great friend of her husband, who had
known him five years. No quarrel between Lidden and Hawkings :—■
Mrs Mary Hawkings (examined)—
George Bowles is my brother. Ido not
remember him bringing sheep to our
farm. I know nothing of any quarrel
between my husband and George Bowles
about sheep. There were no words, no
quarrel. There was ill-feeling, but not
about sheep. ... I never heard of
my husband threatening George Bowles
in any way.
Mary Ann Bowles (affidavit) —
1. I am the mother of Mary Hawk-
ings, wife of Thomas Hawkings, late of
Kaiwarra, settlor, deceased.
2. About three years ago my husband
and I removed from Johnsonville, where
we had theretofore resided, to Ngahau-
ranga, and a short time prior to re-
moving I remember the late Thomas
Hawkings stating to me at my house,
and in the presence of my husband, that
if he “ ever came across my son, George
Bowles, he would shoot him down like
a dog.”
3. A short time afterwards I was at
the house of deceased, and while Mrs
Hawkings was in bed in the adjoining
room the deceased made use of the same
threat towards the said George Bowles.
4. On another occasion, after our re-
moval to Ngahauranga, the said Thomas
Hawkings again, in a conversation he
had with me at my house, made use of
the same threat towards George Bowles.
5. I was summoned as a witness on
behalf of Louis Chemis at the recent
trial of said Louis Chemis, at Wellington,
and I attended at the Supreme Court-
house throughout the trial, and was
prepared to give my evidence as herein
set forth.


Cross-examined Mrs. Hawkings stated she was not aware George
Bowles ever fetched sheep to her place. Sheep came down by truck. Her
husband bought them in the Wairarapa. Believed 200 sheep Not
P™T tO , bankru Ptcy of Bowles. Was sure Bowles did not get back
100 of the sheep. He was paid for them. She would swear it. EiHit
shillings per head. Not brought down to protect them for Bowfes.
Was sure it was not about sheep they had words . . . There were
lots of people came shooting on the land. Her husband’ objected, but
she could not say whether he expressed his feelings. There was never
any row. In reply to Mr. Bell, Mrs. Hawkings stated that she was
not on bad terms with her husband.
Bidden.
As Lidden’s name was freely mentioned in the cross-examination of
1, Bowies and Mary Hawkings, we may mention that he was called by
the prosecution, and swore that on 31st of May, he was fourteen miles
the other side of Westward’s flax-mill, Foxton district, and had been
there three days.
Three Extraordinary Statements made to Colonel Hume.
As theprosecution laid some stress on the alleged fact that the late
lhomas Hawkmgs had no quarrel with any one save Louis Chemis
and with reference to the concluding portion of the evidence of Mrs!
Hawkings, we may here reproduce, for what they may be worth, three
extraordinary statements made to Colonel Hume, Inspector of Prisons
subsequently to the trial.
Statement op Loxly Pickering.
o’clock n h m ee ? y o arS ° f S e ‘ 0n * he Q ueen ’ s last, between four and five
T ’ G T ge I Ho F’ and F< Sed g wick were on Mr. Hawkings’ ground
wffe we " B re n fir d ff T e ¥ d T Baw a man about 150
was in Uio i! ?• 6 ? tv J° barrels • We did not see what he fired at. Mr. Hawkings
after fir^ d r Ct T he ? red at,aud had his d °g with him. The man, immediately
When he Pam t 0 tow f rds ? s ‘ We were moving away, and he called out “ Cooey.”
and he said Sa fi° T he asked Ge o r ge Hogg to exchange with him his coat and hat,
once or twt« h w d Hfwkmgs’ do S- H . e asked Hogg to exchange hat and coat
or shoot him ’» i 1 Wl Jl g ° to bim (meaning Hawkings) and either fight
yards distant Li A thlUk lif S n-n ' S m,° ot ‘” Hawkings was at this time about 110
HawLmrs’ A U £ x llL The strange man furt her said he had been on
saidtha? hJ m' d t llß d \ Y be fe™ and had shot two hares > and that Hawkings had
stmnue L h n ti aW D . gS) Y^ not leaVe him ( the atwnge ma “) a l«ne yet The
account of th«“? ™ nt UP I could not see them together on
three minutes and?!. gro * nd > but 1 distinctly heard them quarrelling for two or
men came down+L tben , th ® strange u man returned to us. At this time two other
Sid to them ™V h tra °J t 0 X The strange man > wbo bad just left Hawkings,
The * Y -°? arS damned fools *0 let Hawkings clear you off the ground.’ l
quamTled wrth H d awl^ e S* not 'I ant &ny bother -” Tbe Grange man "Chad
He had admli awk , m S s then went away by himself in the direction of Kaiwarra.
him IT fl T™i!' b j r * e muzzle-loading gun, and he had a brown retriever-dog with
Z e a PP ea f ed . to be under the influence of drink, and was very angry. He
whiskeSs and monSS? 0 u 8 ®’ abo . ut bft ,’ 7m. high, rather stout build, brow/ beard,
wmskers and moustache, dressed in dark clothes and hard-felt hat. He was carrying


a dirty white-canvas bag. There did not appear to he anything in it. He was an
utter stranger to me, and I have not seen him since. I reported all this to Mr.
Davis, my employer, I think before Ghemis was arrested, and I told my brother
about it the very same day it happened. I know Chemis well; he saved me from
drowning . _ Loxly Pickering.
Taken before me, this 26th day of July, 1889—A. Hume.
Statement op George Hogg.
Am a boiler-maker, residing at Kaiwarra. On Easter Monday, not Queen’s
Birthday, I was on Hawkings’ land between three and four p.m., with Pickering
and Sedgwick. I had a gun, and we had five dogs. I shot a rabbit, and was in
the act of picking it up when Hawkings came to me and said, “ You cannot plead
ignorance, you know that you are not allowed here.” We immediately parted. He
went up the hill and we went down. Shortly afterwards I saw a strange man
running. He was about 400 yards from us. He had a brown retriever-dog. He
was running from the direction where Hawkings was. When he had proceeded
about twenty yards further he turned round and fired off both barrels. Ido not
know what at. After firing he ran straight towards us. My attention was drawn
to him by the two boys, Pickering and Sedgwick, who said, “ Look here at this
fellow.” He stood still. He appeared to be under the influence of liquor, and was
in a great rage and foaming from the mouth. He said, “ That old b (meaning
Hawkings) has chased me for half a mile.” He said to me, “ Will you lend me
your hat and coat ? ” I declined to do so. He then took off his hat and showed
the inside of it, and said, “ My hat and coat are as good as yours,” and again asked
me to lend them, adding, “ Then I will have revenge for you all.” I declined to
lend them. He then asked Pickering to hold his dog, which Pickering did. He
then left us, taking his gun with him, and went up to Hawkings, who was at this
time about 200 yards away. I heard them quarrelling for about five or six
minutes, and then the strange man returned to us, and went in the direction of
Kaiwarra, taking his dog and gun with him. lam certain he was a foreigner from
the way he spoke. He was about sft. 9in. high, stoutish build, about thirty-six
years of age, and had a heavy sandy moustache; dressed in dark coat, tweed
trousers, and hard black-felt hat. The gun was a double-breech-loader, top-action.
Could not say if he had a game-bag. The man was an utter stranger to me. I
have not seen him since. I told several people about this in Kaiwarra the same
night it happened, and I made a similar statement to Detective Benjamin after
Chemis was arrested. George Hogg.
Taken before me, this 26th day of July, 1889 —A. Hume.
Statement of Frederick Sedgwick.
Am sixteen years of age. Employed in the Government Printing Office. On
Easter Monday, about four or five o’clock, I was out shooting with Hogg and
Pickering. Hogg had a gun, and we had several dogs. I heard Hogg fire, and I
ran down, and he had a rabbit in his hand, which he had shot. Just after this
Pickering said, “Here’s Hawkings coming.” Hawkings had a dog with him.
We ran down, away from Hawkings. We saw a strange man about 300 yards
away. He fired off two shots. I don’t know what at; in the air I think. He
came up to us and asked for the loan of Hogg’s hat and coat two or three times,
saying he did not want Hawkings to know him. Hogg refused to lend them. He
then gave his dog and game-bag to Pickering to hold, and went up to where
Hawkings was, and they were quarrelling there for about five minutes. He then
came down for his dog and game-bag, and went away in the direction of Kaiwarra.
He looked as if he had been drinking, and looked a bit angry. I never saw the
man before or since.
_ . , „ ~ . Frederick Sedgwick.
Taken before me, this 26th day of July, 1889.—A. Hume.


Dr. Thomas Cahill and the Paper Evidence.
The substance of Dr. Cahill’s general evidence has already been given
but not his evidence on the particular subject of that paper that may be
truly said to have convicted Chemis. Considered in any light this
portion of the case is most marvellous where all is marvellous We
deem it necessary, to a proper understanding of the case for the prosecu-
tion to detach as far as possible the testimony relating to the paper from
all other evidence. This is not only a difficult but a delicate task for a
mere layman to attempt, especially when he is likely to number anion*
his readers most of the lawyers in the Australasian Colonies—for the
Kaiwarra tragedy has already become a cause celebre. We approach our
task, however, with the sincere desire to state facts without any colorin*
of our own, and if we fail to present this portion of the case as it should
be presented, our failure will at least be due to no prejudices or theories
ot our own After describing in his evidence in chief the awful incised
wounds inflicted upon the unfortunate Mr Hawkings, he came to the
shot wound in the back. He alleged that this was a ragged, round hole,
and there were a large number of shot-wounds outside it. He took out
of the wound the “ mass” (of flesh) that had been injured, put it in a piece
ol paper the name and date of which he did not know— that he had in his
bag and earned it home on Saturday, June Ist. He produced that mass
at the Inquest (June 3rd), took it home again (June 3rd) without
changing the wrapping, and dissected it on 6th June. When, on the
latter date, he opened the parcel, the whole of the newspaper wrapping
did not come away. This “mass,” when taken from the body, consisted
ol particles of clothing, flesh, blood-clots, paper, and shot—the whole
emg saturated with blood. When the “ mass ” was put into the news-
paper wrapping, the blood, Dr. Cahill stated, gravitated to and wetted the
newspaper wrapping on the part the mass was standing on.
or Sr : h ° le ° f th ® pa P er ca 7 me away clear ’ exce P l a P iece < ahout the s™ of a shilling
ZJITiZ 'ril lam(ld on , the mass - In order that the P a Per should not get con-
wat„7 „ a the piece that remained. I endeavored to remove by soaking in
aw/ d * belie Y ed had removed it all, but, on reconsideration, I think it possible
rema;Ln° r !n n °f the ™ ra PP er (unknown newspaper of unknown date) might have
remained adherent to the mass.
Here follows, on the Judge’s notes, a sentence we confess we are—
taking it with what had gone before—totally unable to make sense of
It is this
_ did remain, it would have been only a very small portion of the paper I had
the wound ” ( from the outside or inside of the wound?) ; ‘‘if it did
and taken from the wound!” 4 ** P ° rti ° n ° f the pap6r foUnd in the mass
In other words, we take it, it is not only possible, but highly probable,
• a a pie^ e wra pping paper, that was never inside the wound, was
innocently handed over by Dr. Cahill as a piece of paper found inside the
wound.


The doctor, having removed the wrapper—or as much of it as he could
—dissected the mass, separating from it hlood, paper, particles of cloth-
ing, and shot.
Dr. Cahill then deposed that he cleaned and dried the particles of paper
and clothing, put them in a box, and handed them to Tasker and another.
There were two boxes. In the first (given to Tasker) there was paper
teased from, the vwund —“ there may have been shot.” This first box
contained the whole of the paper found in the mass, “ and, possibly, part
of the wrapper .” The doctor first called with this box on Inspector
Thomson, but did not deliver the box to him, nor did Thomson, the
doctor swore, touch it. In the box, when handed to Tasker, was a
memorandum, in Dr. Cahill’s handwriting, of June 6th. The second box
contained particles of clothing and shot, which the doctor had teased from
the wound. He produced that box and contents at the examination
before the Resident Magistrate. The box was of precisely similar nature
to that handed by witness to Tasker. The witness identified this second
box at the trial from its general appearance. He left this second box
with Mr. James, Clerk of the Resident Magistrate’s Court, who, produc-
ing it at the trial, swore it was received by him at the magisterial
enquiry, and had been kept locked up ever since. Cross-examined, the
doctor said:—
I did examine pieces of paper that I teased out of the flesh, before I delivered
them to Tasker. One piece contained the words “ Nelson ” and “ Havelock,” and
the word “ Hudson,” and dates “ 22nd and 23rd May.” It was evidently part of a
shipping column of a newspaper —that piece was about half an inch to two inches
square or rectangular. That was not the largest piece ; there was a smaller piece
of a shipping column, and, as well as I recollect, the word “ Rotorua ” or part of
that word on it. The large portion of the paper taken from the wound was part of
an advertisement in large letters, but I do not know what it was about. There
were a large number of small particles of paper besides these three.
One or two other matters relative to the paper were brought out by
Mr. Bunny in his cross-examination of Dr. Cahill. The last wound the
latter examined at the morgue on Saturday, June Ist, was the shot-
wound in which the paper was found. He took the “mass” out, then want
of light prevented him continuing. He had, before leaving home, put
paper in his bag to wrap wadding in. It was perhaps half a newspaper.
Could not tell what newspaper it was, but he took with him to morgue
no other paper but that which was wrapped round wadding. He did not
examine the “mass” at all till Thursday, June 6th, though he knew
there was paper in the “mass ” when (June Ist) he removed it from the
wound, and he might have made a casual mention to Inspector Thomson
that he had found part of a paper of May 23rd :
I believed I had removed all the paper. It was very difficult to remove it. I
had to remove it in small pieces. I believed I had removed the whole until I saw,
in the paper, that part of paper of May 31st was found amoug the papers taken by
me from the wound. It is quite possible that pieces of that size (shown in photo-
graph) may have been left in the mass, though I had tried to remove the whole of
the paper completely in which it was wrapped. I never intended to convey that the


LOUIS CHEMIS.


CHEMIS’S HOUSE.


paper was not doubled or more than doubled. I did not remove adhering part in
layers, but in small pieces—some, pretty big pieces. Ido not swear that this piece
of paper was not in wound.
We have now, to the best of our judgment, presented all relevant
evidence given by Dr. Cahill on the subject of the paper. That evidence,
at the risk of re-travelling familiar ground, we will summarise as
follows : —On June Ist the witness extracted a “mass” of flesh, &c., from
the gunshot wound. He wrapped it in a piece of paper of unknown
date and name. He looked at but did not examine “mass” on June 3rd.
Examined “ mass ”on June 6th. Discovered dates on paper (presumed
to have been the paper found in the wound). Those dates were May
22nd and 23rd. Went with box to Inspector Thomson, on June 6th,
and may have mentioned to that officer that he had found part of paper
of May 23rd in the wound. We must now show the connection between
what we may term Dr. Cahill’s paper, and
The Police Paper.
On Saturday morning, June Ist. Constable Lawrence Carroll—who
was at Kaiwarra when the body was found on the previous night—
started at six with Constable Healey for the scene of the murder, arriving
at a quarter to seven. It was light then. They commenced searching
about where the pool of blood was, and found nothing there. Then
they went up to Hawkings’ house, examined the cart and horse, and
came down the hill again, returning to spot where pool of blood was.
There they found a handerchief, a stone with blood on it; two smaller
stones with blood. On the same side, about eight yards opposite where
pool of blood was, they picked up a coat button, near the blood—a
button corresponding with missing button on murdered man’s coat.
William Dimock, who with others had come up, picked up two smaller
buttons. Afterwards two stones were picked up. “ Before there were
some pieces of paper picked up." First things picked up were small
pieces of paper, on right-hand side of road, and cloth. A portion of a
pocket-knife was also found. Both Carroll and Healey picked up pieces
of paper. William Dimock picked up some, and what Healey and Di-
mock picked up, they gave to Constable Carroll. All the pieces of
paper were in Carroll’s possession by eight a.m. He described them as,
“ Small pieces of paper. They were about two inches square. They
had the appearance of being blackened and crumpled up.” Carroll
also swore that he put the pieces of paper in right-hand coat-pocket,
nothing else being in the pocket when he placed paper there. I think
there were ten or twelve pieces of paper :
There was cloth and pieces of paper lying about on the road together. 1 showed
them, when I got in, to Sergeant-Major Morice. I then took them to the Morgue
to see if tweed corresponded with Hawkings’ coat. I got to the Morgue between
eleven and twelve that morning. Before I went to Morgue I wrapped paper
(picked up) in brown paper and locked it in my house. I took it to Mr. Skey
(Government Analyst) on the sth June. I received same paper back from Mr.
Skey. I had shown it to Inspector Thomson on sth June. Hb told me to take it
c


to Skey. He never touched it. On 6th I received back what I supposed to be same
paper, and on 6th I took paper to Tasker. I gave Tasker paper wrapped in half-
sheet of foolscap.
To the Court—l did not unfold pieces of paper. I could not identify them.
Cross-examined by Mr. Bunny, Carroll swore that he had locked the
pieces of paper up till June sth, and had never looked at them again till
he received instructions on that date. At the Morgue* (June Ist) he
held them in his hand, but Dr. Cahill was not there when he went
between eleven and twelve. Constable Gleeson was there. Dr. Cahill
had been there a short time before, but had not then observed gunshot
wound. Afterwards Cahill sent out message that cause of death was
stabbing and gunshot wound. “I told Benjamin (Chief Detective) of
the signs that there had been shooting on the ground. I told Benjamin
I thought paper had been fired out of a gun.” Recalled on the last day
of the trial, Carroll said:—
I made a search at prisoner’s house on sth June, on afternoon after his arrest
I took a piece of paper from trousers of prisoner. I took the paper and put it in
my pocket. Trousers were hanging in bedroom. Gave paper to Beniamin at
Detective Office.
We may mention that Carroll’s statements, as to finding pieces of paper
at the scene of the murder, were corroborated by William Dimock, Victor
Dimock, Malcolm McCallum, Donald McCallum, and Constable Healey.
So far we have, from the evidence, established the facts that newspaper,
with certain words on it, was found in the wound, by Dr. Cahill, and that
Constable Carroll picked up pieces of newspaper at the scene of the murder
on June Ist, which pieces of paper were eventually handed to Tasker.
We now propose to give the substance of the evidence of
John Tasker,
The Clerk in the Police Department who was entrusted by the police
with the duty of receiving and arranging the pieces of paper, etc., used
as evidence. That portion of Tasker’s evidence which relates to the
pieces of paper brought to him by Dr. Collins and Constable Carroll, we
will italicize, in order that the reader who does not desire to wade
through all the details of Tasker’s evidence, may easily pick out the
pertinent facts for himself. Tasker, examined by Mr. Bell, said
I am a clerk in the Government service in the police department, in the General
Government Buildings, in the Commissioner’s office. I have nothing to do with
the detection of crime, no relations to police office here. I have received papers
from different individuals connected with this case. I have noted either on the
outer wrapping, or the envelope from whom received, and the date of receipt. T
produce a bundle of papers [AAJ. I received this bundle from Detective Benja-
min on the 6th June. It is the whole of that bundle. This is another bundle
brought by Benjamin to me on the same date [BB]. This is the whole of that
bundle. From bundle [AA], I took out a piece of paper, which I now produce
[CC]. I produce some pieces of paper in box marked [DD]. I received these
pieces of paper in an envelope on the sth of June, from Inspector Thomson. The
envelope marked containing pieces of paper taken from coat (this is all paper of the
• This appears to contradict the statement that before going to Morgue he (Carroll) had
locked the paper up.—[Editor].


28th May). [EE] is one piece of paper received from Detective Benjamin, on 6th
June. Envelope is a marked piece of paper from Chemis’ coat (28th May). [EE]
is evidently part of the same issue as [DD]. (Two pieces of 28th May handed to
jury for their inspection—this is only of importance so far as it tends to confirm the
statement of Inspector Thomson vide his evidence, that he did take the piece of the
28th May from the pocket of Chemis’ coat). [FFJ is paper brought to me in an
envelope, also produced by Inspector Thomson on sth June, about four in after-
noon. I examined the contents of envelope [FF]. The first piece on the left is piece
of Evening Post of 23rd May, portion of column one and two, page two, part of the
shipping column and adjoining advertisement. The second scrap is part of the
same date, column one and two, page four. Next is a small piece of Evening Post
of 12th November, 1888. To the right of that is a piece of printed paper, ap-
pearing to relate to the Langworthy case. The fifth piece, is a piece of paper I
cannot identify as belonging to any particular paper. [GIG-] is a large envelope
received from Mr. Thomson on sth June, and the contents consisting of pieces of
Post of 17th November, 1888, also pieces of 23rd May, 1889. Two pieces of 23rd
May. I have separated two pieces of 23rd May and these are they, [G. I].
Carroll’s Paper.
[//] is eight or nine small pieces of paper received by me from Constable Carroll on
the 6th June. [ HH ] This is all I received from Carroll. It is all paper of me date,
23 rd May, 1889. I pieced the scraps together as well as I could. The parts at the
left I piece in as forming part of page four, column one, of May 23rd; and the
three pieces at letters one, tivo, three: one and two are parts of shipping column of
Evening Post of same day, the 23rd May, and page two, column one, and little piece
ofi column two, and part of column one same page—two of Evening Post of 23rd
The Importance of it.
The reader, by turning to Dr. Cahill’s evidence, will perceive the im-
portance of the foregoing, because the doctor swore that one piece of the
paper teased by him out of the wound, and subsequently handed by him
to Tasker, contained the words “ Nelson,” “ Havelock,” “ Hudson,” and
dates.“ 22nd ” and “ 23rd May,” and that there was a smaller piece of a
shipping column and he thought the word “Rotorua also, that on the
urger portion of the paper taken from the wound was part of an
advertisement. The remainder of Tasker’s evidence throws further
light on the same subject. Continuing, Tasker said :
fH] [ s scraps of paper received from Detective Campbell on 6th June. These
scraps I identify as parts of paper to the left—as portions of 17th November, scraps
orignt, pieces of Evening Post of 23rd May, all from page 2—two of them from
co urun 3, one from column 4. Also, some small fragments in a pen-box that I
Campbell 60 ece ‘ ® ox mai- ked [l], I got no other paper from Detective
Dr. Cahill’s Paper.
W~\ is fragments of paper 1 received from Dr. Cahill. They were in a small
wooden box—ointment-box. He came to my office on 6th June, about two o'clock. I
landed that into Court. It contained a lot of small fragments of paper; nothing
e se, no cloth. These small fragments I have taken one by one to piece together.
, !e [f are sor P e st hl remaining in the box. I have taken out pieces and put them
get ler on sheet [J], Part of Post of May 23, page 2, columns 1 and 2 : and some
grnents °f Posi °f May 31, Friday, page 2; columns 7 and 8 being the pieces
•°° c, f [!]• At the time [J] was handed to me I had had no communication
‘ , 1( ? wn 2° .* or > 80 that a number had been gummed. Since then I have used
break pnaU then ? t ? gelher ' The P ieces forming [J] are very brittle; they
K easily. |KJ l received from Detective Benjamin on 7th. From Wilson [L] on


17th June, as received from Green. I made a chart showing where these same
exhibits would come in the Evening Post of 23rd May. I have this chart. This is
it. It is what was photo-lithographed. The large piece (6) on the chart is left-hand
side piece of [F], handed to me as coming from bedroom. No. lis piece given me by
Carroll in [Hj, that is connected by “ from ’’—the edges correspond, and the other
side correspond. No. 2is also from Carroll. 1 fits on to 2; 2 connects with 6; it
goes through [F]. It goes through “ south.” 4is piece from Thomson [G.l], 4 fits
on 1. and 2, and 3,1, and 2 fit on to 6, and 4onto 1. As to [J]—those from Cahill
—I have not charted out the whole of [J]. The lowest piece on left-hand corner of
[J]. It fits on. 7,8, 9 are all given to me by Campbell. Then, as to page 4 : This
is a photograph of another portion of same paper of same day, 23rd May, report of
proceedings of Petone Borough Council. 16 is section-piece on photograph [F]
10, 11, 12, 13, 14, brought by Carroll and shown in photograph [H]. 15 was given
Thomson. Piece given by Thomson brought from spot. I have not in any way
altered the condition of the papers as they reached me.
Mr. Bunny—l have not had any special experience in this class of work. lam
the junior clerk in the department. There are five, including the Commissioner.
On the 4th of June I received instructions that I should have to deal with the
newspaper. Major Gudgeon gave me the instructions. I have been there seven
years and three months in the office. I have always been a clerk. Once in Armed
Constabulary. I was once in the shipping line.
When these persons came with the paper, did you give receipts ? —No.
Did you take any note of their arrival ?—I marked on the envelope as I received
it. This bundle is a bundle with my sketches. Thomson was the first to bring me
an exhibit —about four o’clock on Wednesday. This was on the sth. None from
any one but Thomson on the sth; the next morning from Benjamin, Carroll, and
Campbell. I was told that certain papers had been picked up on the ground, and
in the house, and to see if they agreed. Nothing said as to what papers. Major
Gudgeon spoke to me on the 4th. I had no indications given me as to what part of
the papers I should find would fit. Thomson gave me portion 4. Gudgeon did
not say Thomson had communicated with him. The last exhibit I received on the
18th June. I commenced examination on morning of the 6th. I opened the
different envelopes, and put them on sheets of paper. I took all from Thomson,
and put that on a sheet of paper by itself. Then another one. The first I started
with I gummed them down. I took each out of its envelope, and put each on
separate paper. I generally pinned them. I never had them all opened out
together; only two or three opened out together. I had a set of pigeonholes. I
completed the examination about the 20th of last month. I remember you and the
Crown Solicitor going together, and you looked at the papers, and amongst them the
papers brought by Dr. Cahill. I said I had found all. I thought I could identify
them. As to piece with Kaitangata on it, I did search to see if it belonged to paper
of the 23rd May. I found that it belonged to paper of 31st. I had seen this before.
It did not seem same type as shipping-column. It was because I thought it did not
belong to shipping-column I did not commence to search to what it would corres-
pond. I think I would have found it out if you had not come. When you asked
for the pieces got from the wound I showed you that they were gummed, and said
then that they were pieces I could not make anything of. I probably had the boxes
opened two at a time. I marked them as they came in. I made a list on the
second day. Each was kept on a separate sheet of paper. I had nothing to
identify the papers except the memos, on the parcels. I was very careful to put
them back to the parcels I took them from. The first clue to the 23rd May was
Friday night after the Wednesday I got them. I think I told them on the 18th. I
am certain I made no mistake as to the dates I received the exhibits. I received
from Cahill on 6th at 2. I received Thomson on sth. It was not the same day I
received from Cahill, but the preceding day.
Thus far we have seen the evidence goes to prove that parts of the
same paper found in the wound were also found on the scene of the
murder. We express here no opinion whatever as to whether that was


or was not conclusively proved, but certainly that is what the prosecution
intended to prove. But, as yet, the evidence here reproduced has not
connected Louis Chemis in any way with the paper. Two-thirds of the
link are constructed, the remainder has now to be completed. To do
this we must first turn to the evidence of
Inspector Thomson.
He deposed that on Saturday, June Ist, he, at about 3 p.m., and
accompanied by Detectives Benjamin and Campbell, proceeded to Haw-
kings road at Kaiwarra. There he saw a pool of blood and, at a bend of
the road, a number of very small pieces of paper, too small to be from tearing.
I hey appeared as if from an explosion of gunpowder. He further saw
some fragments of woollen cloth, also what appeared to be pieces of paper in
the yorse-bushes on left-hand side , which were larger than those that were on
the road. He picked from gorse-bushes no very small pieces. He left
Campbell there. He placed the paper he had picked up, on the right and
off gorse-bushes, into a sheet of note paper, put the small pieces into an
envelope, and wrote “Corse” on back of paper. The same evening, on
his return to his office, he wrote, “ Found on gorse bushes,” and put the
envelope with the paper in it in the back pocket of his coat, having first
satisfied himself that the pocket was empty. After finding the paper the
three officers, accompanied by Norman, who showed them the track, went
through the scrub to Chemis’ house. When they reached, Chemis was out-
side, and they read to him their search warrant; Chemis simply saying,
“ All right.” They searched him particularly for blood spots, but found
none. Benjamin and Campbell, accompanied by Chemis, went into a room
leading into a bedroom to search, and Thomson remained in kitchen
with Mrs. Chemis
After a short time Benjamin brought out a double-barrelled, muzzle-loading gun.
He put his finger into one of the barrels and said, “It looks as if recently dis-
charged.” His finger was blackened. After searching some time Benjamin brought
out to kitchen a white handkerchief tied up in a bundle. I opened bundle. 1
found it contained a considerable number of documents, and a few fragments of
torn newspaper. I placed the fragments of paper on one side, and looked through
the memoranda. After that examination the ivory-handled dagger and shot-pouch
brought out at same time ; also a revolver, rusty. It had the appearance of not
having been used for some time. After examining documents, I took the fragments
of paper and put them into an envelope. That envelope I placed in left-hand
breast-pocket, with fragments of paper in it. I had no fragments of paper in my
pockets. The same night, when I got to the office, I made a memo, on the envelope,
on the fly. [Ex. N.] After they had searched inner room I searched a pocket of
a coat hanging in kitchen, and in one pocket of one of the coats I found several
fragments of torn newspaper. These I put into a third envelope, and one placed
that in my right-hand breast-pocket. [Ex. o.] I also marked that envelope the
same night, and made memo, on that envelope. lam certain that paper I first put
away was paper brought to me by Benjamin ; and I am certain that I put that into
the left breast-pocket. I put into the right breast-pocket the paper got from the
coat. I marked the envelopes as they are now in the evening. I did not interfere
with envelopes for some time. I then, after an hour, took the envelopes out of the
tail-pocket, and marked on the flap what there is now ; and marked second as now;
and did the same with the third ; I marked flaps. lam certain contents did not


get mixed. I found the key of my press mislaid. I placed them back in the
pockets I had taken them from. They remained there some time. I went to the
private residence of Major Gudgeon. I returned, made a search for the key ; I
found it. I put them in the press, and locked it up. On either the Sunday ’or
Monday evening I put them in my pocket to examine them at home. I took out
the one marked “gorse.” I took some of the contents out. My first intention
was to examine them. I abandoned the idea of examining them, and handed them
to Mr. Tasker on the sth. I took no papers out of the other two envelopes, only
the “gorse” one. I took the papers on the sth to Mr. Tasker, each in its turn, into
a clean envelope. I marked each of the fresh envelopes as former ones had been
marked. • This is the envelope in which the paper found at the gorse and on the
road was in when I handed it to Mr. Tasker. [GG]. This is the envelope to
which I transferred the papers brought in by Benjamin and Campbell in Chemis’
house to me, and which I handed to Mr. Tasker. [FF.] This is the envelope in
which I transferred the paper found in the coat-pocket, and which I handed to Mr
Tasker with paper in. [DO.] When I got to the office I found some of the paper
had got out of the envelope in the coat-tail pocket, and I replaced them in the
envelope. The pocket had been empty when I put it in. I replaced the paper in
the envelope at the office. At the inquest I saw the flesh in the hands of Dr.
Cahill, with shot,, paper, &c., mixed up in it. Dr. Cahill brought on the 6th a
round wooden ointraent-box. He took the lid off and showed me the contents.
They were small fragments of paper. I did not touch it. I did not take possession
of it. He went with me to Mr. Tasker, and in my presence he handed the box and
contents to him. I had delivered my paper to Mr. Tasker on the sth. I had not
examined the papers I found. I only once looked, as I have said. I only once
saw the mass of flesh—there at the inquest, in Dr. Cahill’s hand. Before the 6th
June I had not received any communication from Dr. Cahill as to what he had
teased out of the flesh. I saw him once before. He told me he was about to make
a careful examination of the mass. I was at his house once—two nights before the
6th—between the date of the inquest and the 6th. I was not at his house at all
on the 6th. When the mass of flesh was at the inquest the outer wrapping was
brown paper ; the inner wrapping was newspaper.
Mr. Bunny.—l believed Benjamin remained at the morgue till about ten o’clock.
He told me after one o’clock he had just come back from the morgue. I had
directed Benjamin to wait at the morgue till he could get the result of the post
mortem; this was about ten a.m. Some time after one he came back to me, and
told me that Dr. Cahill had sent out a message to him that the deceased had been
murdered with some sharp instrument. Then I directed him to go out at once. I
marked the envelope “Gorse ’’ in pencil before I put the paper in. I did not look
to see what paper they belonged to. I did not notice to what paper they
belonged.
Why did you not go into the bedroom yourself ?—I thought it better to send
the detectives in, I told them to secure any fragments of paper, to look for blood-
stained paper, and to look for the pocketbook. Ido not remember telling them to
bring out all pieces of paper. My theory was that there had been a gunshot, but
at that time there was nothing to support it. It was in consequence of seeing the
pieces of paper and cloth. All that Benjamin mentioned was, that it was by some
sharp instrument, nothing about a gunshot. I am not sure that I had been in-
formed before I went out that paper had been found by Carroll in the morning. I
think the first I heard of the paper was when Campbell pointed out on the spot
where paper had been picked up and the knife. The stiletto was in the same bun-
dle as the papers. There were spots of rust on it. I immediately examined the
stiletto. I have no remembrance of saying, “This thing is rusty, but we can see
better in daylight.” There was |in., or less, of verdigris down the hilt from the
cross-piece. I saw Benjamin put his finger in the gun once. I cannot say
whether he did in both barrels. I did not take the gun away that night. I did
not because I had no positive knowledge at that time that he had been shot. I
think it was Campbell brought away the shot-pouch.


Was it not because you were then under the impression that the gun had not
been recently fired ?—Certainly not. I did not give instructions that the gun should
be left behind. Ido not think so. I have no remembrance of saying so. I did not
look upon the gun as an important feature at that time. I saw Dr. Cahill on the
Saturday night. I showed him the stiletto. I expect I told him what I had seen
at the house. He may have asked why I had not brought the gun. I do not
recollect that he did or did not. I do not remember his saying I ought to have
brought the gun. Benjamin or Campbell, I do not recollect which, was present.
This was at nine or ten p.m. There was a third person present. I marked the
first “ Gorse,” so that I should remember it. I put the second in left-breast pocket
of my coat. I did not mark either of the last two with pencil. I think it was
about six, or past, when I returned to the police-station from Chemis’. I was, I
dare say, an hour and a half reading the evening paper. I marked them before I
went to the Commissioner of Police. After reading the paper I marked the
envelope. I marked the envelopes when the whole matter was fresh in my
recollection. lam sure that paper that was brought out by Benjamin in bundle
was put into the left-breast pocket, and the other into the right-breast pocket. At
the Commissioner’s I did not produce the envelope. I told him what had taken
place. I told him there that I had taken papers off gorse-bushes. I did not show
him the contents of either of the envelopes. I did not offer to show them to him.
I left this place after nine, I should think ; not so late as half-past ten ; not ten.
On bunday or the Monday. I only opened one of them, the one marked “ Gorse.”
I did not take notice of what pieces of paper they were. I thought it would take
more time than I could give to it. The pieces I found were nearly torn, lacerated.
Those I took from the gorse were impaled. I had to tear them from the gorse.
They are not like the paper taken from the house.
.Th o C' our t-—Some of the paper brought out by Benjamin was as small as a
shilling ; most larger ; but the smaller not distinguishable from what was found on
the roadway. What was picked off gorse was torn by getting it off the thorns.
The first intimation from Dr. Cahill was on the 6th, when he said that he found
the word “ Hudson ” and the date. Mr. Tasker furnished me with no report.
Information was laid on the night of the 4th June. It was not determined to lay
the information because of what appeared in the Evening Press of the 4th. It had
been arranged to lay the information before that. I believe O’Dowd’s house was
searched. I believe at that time only two search-warrants were out. I and the
detectives never had the papers and comparing.
Mr. Bell.—No information has been withheld from the defence. Since the
papers have been in Tasker’s possession I have seen the paper, but not examined it.
Ihe police searched O’Dowd’s house. The matter as to O’Dowd was carefully
investigated.
The Last Link.
ith Inspector Thomson’s evidence, the prosecution may be said to
have completed the last link in their chain of testimony connecting Louis
Chemis with the murder. At a later stage we purpose making some
comments explanatory of the dissatisfaction manifested by a large section
of the public with this paper evidence—leaving the reader to form his
own conclusions thereon. Inspector Thomson’s statements were cor-
roborated by Detectives Benjamin and Campbell and by others of the
police, and we should not, therefore, perhaps, be called upon to take any
but the most superficial glance at the evidence of the Detectives, had not
that evidence been the cause of another development in this astounding
case. After the trial and conviction of Louis Chemis, Mrs Chemis laid
informations against Inspector Thomson and Detectives Benjamin and
Campbell for alleged perjury committed by them at the trial with regard
to their statements thereat concerning certain articles (quail, wads,


a wad-cutter, &c.,) which they swore they had not seen when searching
Chemis house. As we shall, towards the conclusion of this story, have
to refer briefly to the prosecution of the police and what came of it, we
must here deal at some length with the evidence of
Detective Benjamin at the Trial.
As, however, there is—as regards a somewhat important point to
which we will again refer, viz., the search of the police for paper lefore
they knew of any gunshot wound—a seeming discrepancy between the
evidence of Benjamin and Dr. Cahill, and which appears in the early
poition of the Detective’s evidence, we shall, pursuing our usual course,
record the contradictory statements in parallel columns :
Defective Benjamin said: I went to
the morgue shortly after 10 a.m. (June
Ist.) Waited there till nearly noon. I
had to go away. I returned and found
the morgue closed. I knocked at gate.
Carroll came. I said I wanted to go in.
Carroll said he would ask doctor. He
said, “ The doctor says you are to wait
for his report.” I waited ten minutes.
Carroll came and said, “ Doctor says it
is a murder.” I said, “Go back and ask
him what instrument has been used.”
Carroll returned and said, “A sharp
instrument like a knife.” I then went
to station and informed the Inspector of
Police.
Dr. Cahill said : When Detective
Benjamin, during the forenoon, wanted
to know what instrument, I said, “ Gun
and stabbed.” This would be about
eleven.
I asked—either Benjamin or Thom-
son—for gun on Saturday evening, June
Ist. I asked for gun because they had
shown me dagger and shot-pouch. They
said they had not brought it (gun) from
Chemis’ house, because it had not been
recently discharged.
During his cross-examination Benjamin swore he, on forenoon of June
Ist, had heard nothing about a gunshot wound, and P.C. Carroll states
that Benjamin had left the morgue when Dr. Cahill sent out word that
there was a gunshot wound. Carroll adds, however, “ I told Benjamin
of the signs that there had been shooting on the ground. ... I
told Benjamin I thought paper had been fired out of a gun.” In our
general comments on the case we shall refer to this matter again. We
have recorded the incidents here because they naturally belong here. To
proceed with Benjamin’s evidence: He recounted how he, Inspector
Ihomson, and Detective Campbell had, on Saturday afternoon, June
Ist, searched Chemis’ house; how he (Benjamin) and Campbell had
searched Chemis in kitchen and outside and found no signs of blood ; and
how he and Campbell had then proceeded to accused’s bedroom, where
they saw a double-barrelled gun hanging on the wall. Witness took it
down and accused said he had fired it some three days before at some
quail. Benjamin took the gun to Thomson, and, in his presence, put his
finger in one of the barrels. “It was black and wet when I took it out.”
Left gun in kitchen and returned to accused’s bedroom.
Ho (Thomson) and Campbell were there. I tried top drawer of a chest of
drawers. Right-hand drawer was locked. Did not try the other. Accused pro-
duced key and unlocked and opened it. He also opened left drawer. I cannot say
he opened it. Campbell was searching the drawer that had been locked; I the
other. Before doing so I went behind Campbell and placed a pocket-handkerchief


on bed. I found two or three pieces of paper in the drawer I searched ; small pieces
of newspaper about the size of palm of hand. Two or three pieces, I placed these
in the pocket-handkerchief on the bed. Campbell found a number of pieces ttf paper
and a number of documents in bis drawer. He put them oa top of the drawers. I
took them up and placed them in the handkerchief on the bed. He also found: —
1 Shot pouch containing a few grains of shot.
1 Revolver, loaded in three barrels.
4 Bullets.
1 Small knife, in case
1 Stiletto, in sheath.
I took stiletto off the drawers and drew it out of the sheath. . . . We found
on the shelf in the corner two or three pieces of paper. . . . All the pieces of
paper we found in the drawers and on the shelf were put into the handkerchief—
no other paper. I saw the Inspector putting some pieces of newspaper into an envelope
and put it into the breast-pocket of his coat. I saw the Inspector take papers out of
prisoner's coat—this was after I saw him put the pieces of papers in the envelope.
The coat was hanging on the wall. We then searched the children’s room at the
back. We picked up more paper there ; then in the kitchen, and picked up more
paper. I have heard since that a whole newspaper was amongst it. We got a
good-sized bundle of paper, three inches in diameter. What we found in the
kitchen and children’s room Campbell took to police-station, and gave it to me at
station, and I locked it up at station. I delivered the whole to Tasker on 6th June.
I found no gunpowder, no powder-flask, no caps. I did not take away the gun.
In cross-examination Benjamin said :
I heard nothing about there being a gunshot wound. When the doctor sent out
word that it was a sharp instrument, I considered that conclusive, although I had
heard that Carroll had picked up paper. I was anxious to get hold of paper because
I was instructed to do so by the Inspector.
Why did the Police look for Paper 1 ?
We shall not be considered to travel beyond the record if we again
ask—Why ? Benjamin knew nothing about a gunshot wound. It is
supposed Inspector Thomson had “ a theory ” —a theory in which paper
was involved. But that theory could hardly relate to gunshot wounds,
because the Inspector left the gun behind him at Chemis’ when he left
on Saturday afternoon. We are not impugning the police evidence.
What was that Theory?
We simply ask what Inspector Thomson’s “theory” was, and for the
answer to that question we look through the Inspector’s evidence—in
vain. Mr. Thomson said, it is true, “My theory was that there had
been a gunshot,” but he adds with truth, “ at that time there was nothing
to support it.” There was not; indeed Thomson admitted that he was
not sure that he had been informed before he went out that Carroll had
found paper in the morning.
Detective Campbell.
Detective Campbell’s evidence differs in no important particular from
that of Benjamin. He deposed to finding in the drawer, “ a revolver,
stiletto, shot-pouch, number of bullets, and a quantity of newspaper and
some documents,” but said nothing about seeing in the drawers wads, wad-
cutter, or gunpowder, or finding the quail alleged to have been on the


• premises This witness had not heard that Carroll had picked no naner
w en e (Campbell) first went out. He first discussed with Beniamin
Camnb g e7, g 9 and 10 a - m - Nothing then said about a gun.
Mows •- QCe U PieC6S ° f Pape1 ’ f ° Und by him wa3 as
On June Ist, in afternoon, I went up to Hawkings’ road. At bend in road I
picked up paper on right. I did not count them. They were very small piece* I
Th s waTnot tiU afte° C it’ 1 to , the station 1 P ut ‘hem in an envelope
and some of L ! H P rlBoner 3 house - About the size of a shilling
amidst nL/, f b aok cfi! led ,h l^ln P le . pieces and pieces of cloth scattered about
amidst pieces of paper. Should say I picked up ten pieces of paper.
Cross-examined by Mr. Bunny, this witness said :
w.Jthet'T t 0 SC ! n i 0f fn rder , 0n Safcurda y> June Ist. I went out alone. Dimock
7M - n i? 01 T. ed ° Ut th ® P aCe> 1 then picked up small P ieces of paper,
as the W SI. lh 7 e '7l°’% P 1 ‘ eCe / 0f paper thafc 1 P ick ed up which was as large
hl ho!% P l P ? r ed Tasker ( B,ze of two hands). It was crumpled up and
had through it I picked up some paper on the left-hand side of the road.
-By Mr. Bunny—l think I found the large piece on the left-hand side opposite
P f ed UP ° n 4 T he ri g ht - 1 d i d not pick it up off the gorse-’bZ It
through g °rs e 'buBhe - 1 rec oHect undoing it. It was crumpled up with holes
The Gun.
If we have not in this story given any prominence to the two weapons
(gun and stiletto) which were found in Chemis’ house, it is because the
prosecution placed little or no emphasis on the fact of their having been
ound. The prosecution, however, adduced some evidence, such as it
was, regarding the gun. The « expert ” evidence touching this weapon
was contradictory. Henry Bradford, Government Armorer, had re-
ceived the gun from Benjamin and examined it. As, presumably, the
prosecution did not consider Bradford’s evidence proved much, another
expert, Thomas James Tolly, was called. Carefully perusing the
evidence of both experts, we fail to see that they proved anything except
that experts always disagree, and that one of the barrels had been
recently discharged—the defence accounted for this by saying that the
gun had been fired off at some quail. Certainly all the probabilities
are against Chemis having used that particular gun, even if he com-
mitted the murder. It was proved beyond a doubt that two shots
the first charge, presumably, containing a bullet, the next shot only
—-were fired, and it is little short of idiotcy to suppose that the mur-
derer had time to re-load. If the gun produced were the weapon, two
barrels must have been discharged on the night of the murder, and it
cannot be said that either Bradford or Tolly proved that more than one
barrel had been lately discharged when they saw the gun.
The Stiletto.
We are unable to perceive that the evidence, connecting the stiletto
found in Chemis’ house with the wounds on the unfortunate Hawkings
was one whit stronger than that adduced regarding the gun. Dr.’
Cahill’s opinion amounted to nothing more than this : “ I believe all


the incised wounds and the fracture in the jaw could be made by this
instrument.” At a later stage the doctor, under cross-examination, de-
posed, “ I still say wound was five inches long ” (the stiletto was five
and a half inches), “ and this instrument may have been used. Ihe
Government Analyst,
Mr. Skey,
Deposed at the trial: —
I have had things for examination—a stiletto and sheath, and knife. This is the
stiletto and sheath. I examined it for blood and found none. I removed no
verdigris or rust. I removed some rust and examined that. , . .
By Mr Bunny—l examined the sheath; it was handed to me cut open. 1 think
the weapon might have been used for stabbing, and signs of blood removed by
washing in warm water, or bv rag. You mu«t rub a long time to get o s ains o
blood, and it would brighten the blade. If warm water were used it would have to
be rubbed and wiped. I think in that case the blade would be blight. ft suci a
process rust would be rubbed off.
It should be mentioned that Dr. Cahill had made experiments before
the trial with the stiletto, by fitting it into the wounds, and consequently
any evidence regarding blood stains upon it, or the absence of blood stains,
appears to be worthless, for the weapon examined by Mr. Skey was not
in the same condition as when found in Chemis’ house. In a letter
addressed by His Honor the Chief Justice to the Minister of Justice,
after the trial, the following extraordinary passage occurs :
The stiletto found in the prisoner’s house, on being examined by Mr. Skey, bore
no traces of blood. It appeared, however, that before being examined by him. it
had, in the course of the post mortem examination, been inserted into some o le
wounds and made bloody, and afterwards washed in cold water. The fact t a no
blood stains were discoverable by Mr. Skey was therefore quite consistent wi 1 e
supposition that it had been used at the murder.
With all due respect to an authority so eminent as the Chief Justice,
we think he should have added —“ and was equally consistent with the
supposition that it had not been used at the murder, for, in common
decency to Dr. Cahill, it is only right to suppose that he, after using the
stiletto at the post mortem , and knowing that it would be tested foi the
presence of blood, took the most elaborate and minute precautions pie-
cautions which the murderer could not have taken to remove the
slightest particle of blood. Blood quickly removed from steel does not
permanently stain. It is reasonable to suppose that if Chemis used the
stiletto he made no attempt to remove the blood until after he returned
home on the night of the murder. Some time must then have elapsed,
and it would be almost impossible to obliterate all traces of blood on the
steel. Dr. Cahill, presumably, cleaned the weapon immediately after he
had fitted it into the wounds. Had Mr. Skey found traces of blood upon
the weapon, his evidence to that effect would have been utterly valueless
as against Chemis. In dismissing the subject of the gun and the stiletto,
we may express the opinion held, we have reason to believe, by most
Wellington lawyers, viz., that these weapons proved nothing, one way or
another. If Chemi* had the hardihood, the savagery, and the cunning


The Case against Chemis.
winnow the pertinent facte from those not pertinent It 40
“1“ “ d A “
We done so, s? **» ** f •
2otttf e w h r’ a ;“«r the d f7 - i—
there is any „rT deration, but when
the evidence of witnesses, we have deZeTt TesV to iTtT 68 7 tween
speak for themselves, even at the risk of tedious WItDeSSeS
Conclusion op the Teial.
proceeded 6 * V^ectn^'' ’ '**. the trial had
the public * **»
merely record that it undoubtedly exTsted andrtil/existe bt
evLn“Z^re°lydrourstantW° n it bUt ‘° “ Va ™ ty o£
deuce, and moreover, purely police e vi-
Mes. Ciiemis.
The spectators argued that if Chemis were indeed the miilfv „
knowingTer “husband to Z PP °‘V h “ t a 7“ an of good reputation*
of writing, exhibited nothing but what we .ouH pII, , ■ me
brave and devoted woman, thoroughly conSsThl h"*!, V
innocence, and determined to prove it " i .
undue stress upon the value f f +u„ j ' thout wishing to lay any
wife, we yet fed compelstofavLtTph “ and *
wife have exhibited the most astounding oomjXe coS«Ue. aUd


Extraordinary Assertion by Government Armorer.
The opening proceedings on Saturday morning were marked by one
rather extraordinary incident. Edwin Henry Bradford, Government
Armorer, was recalled at the request of His Honor, and stated that
when he examined the left barrel of the gun on June 4th it was very
foul, and looked as if it had not been fired for some time. He did not
think it was possible that the barrel would be in that state, even
though it was left in an habitually dirty condition, and was fired four
days before he saw it. Here the gun was handed to the witness, who
said the nipple was full of white powder, which was not there when he
examined it before. Mr. Bell declared that the gun had remained in
the possession of the Registrar of the Court, and it was ridiculous to
suggest that it had been tampered with.
Hr. Cahill, Recalled
By desire of His Honor, stated that the police evidence—to which
we have previously made reference—as to there being two messages
sent out from the morgue was correct. Regarding the stiletto, the
doctor said he used it (at the morgue), and, looking after, Mr. Skey
found no blood. It had been washed (at the morgue) by one of the
constables in cold water, who had afterwards wiped it with a rag. He
had placed the dagger several times in the wounds up to the hilt. If
the stiletto had been cleaned by being dug into the ground it would
have been scratched, but if taken home and washed the verdigris would
probably have been removed, though it would have been possible to
clean dagger without removing verdigris.
Mr. Bell’s Address to the Jury.
Mr. Bell then arose to address the jury. He asserted that nearly all
murder cases depended upon circumstantial evidence, and that unless
juries could act upon such evidence punishment for murder could no
longer be imposed. He admitted the only direct evidence was the
paper evidence. He reviewed that evidence. The murderer had
loaded his gun with the three pieces of the shipping column of Evening
Post of 23rd May, pieced together by Tasker. If the prosecution could
place their hands on the balance of that paper they could place their
hands on the murderer. The balance of the paper had been found in
Chemis’ house. He contended it was impossible the evidence could be
concocted, as it did not rely solely upon police evidence. Constable
Carroll, who had found the important pieces of paper (Post of 23rd
May), was never on the ground with Thomson, and in order to make
Thomson’s piece of paper lit with Carroll’s and Campbell’s they must
arrive at the conclusion that the three of them were engaged in a vile
conspiracy to convict the prisoner. The place of the murder was
familiar and easily accessible to the prisoner, and it was apparent that
the murder had been committed by some one who had great bad-feeling
to Hawkings, while the nature of the wounds demonstrated that the


crime had not been committed by an Englishman— a foolish, insular
and incorrect statement, which called forth a just objection from Mr’
..11,' 1 ,; 7 ’ 7 ‘°, Pr ° tested a S amst the Cr own Prosecutor making any
allusion to the prisoners nationality. Mr. Bell proceeded to allude to
owne P d T eS f 10n the P ris oner of a stiletto, a description of weapon
owned by few only, arguing that when they found the wounds had been
made with such a weapon, they reduced the class from which they had
th l | ln ri the - inUrderer ‘ , Wlth regard t 0 auimus > Mr - Bell contended
that Chemis was apprehensive of the result of his lawsuit with
Hawkings. Referring to the points in favour of accused, the learned
Counsel thought the absence of blood-marks, and the fact that the
missing pocketbook was not found in the possession of the prisoner
were matters of small importance considering the time he had had in
WllC . h obliterate traces. There was evidence that the shot in the
pouch did not correspond with the shot found in the wound, but where
ie demanded, were the prisoner’s powder-flask and caps ?f Alluding
to the evidence as to whether both barrels of the gun had been fired
off on the same day, Mr. Bell said that would make no difference—nor
would the fact that the gun had never been fired—in face of the
•damning and overwhelming” paper evidence. He characterized the
Government Armorer, who had given testimony antagonistic to the
Grown theory, as “ honest, but an enthusiast and a partizan—one
who had set up a theory of his own.” Referring to the evidence of
Joseph -Gee,| he characterized it as not worthy of serious consideration
He commented on the fact that the prisoner’s children (aged nine and '
six years). had not been placed in the box in their father’s behalf and
in conclusion asked the jury to discard the suggestions that the Crown
had scratched verdigris from the nipple and the dagger. If the jury
believed that the paper evidence carried them from the man’s body to
the prisoner’s house, they must do their duty. Mr. Bell spoke for
upwards of two hours.
Mr. Bell’s Conduct of the Case.
As Mr. Bell’s name has recently been brought into prominence in con-
nection with his conduct of this case as Crown Prosecutor, a few words
on the subject may not he here out of place—premising that the writer
has not the pleasure of Mr. Bell’s acquaintance. No unprejudiced person
who closely watched the proceedings at the R.M. Court, or at the trial
would accuse Mr. Bell of having shown any indecent eagerness to prove
his case, or any want of courtesy or any unfairness to counsel on the other
side—the late Mr. Bunny himself assured the writer that he had experi-
enced great fairplay and all reasonable assistance from Mr. Bell. At the
be.n'comZS“&SS""" 1 “ th " : “ h * d no ‘ b “” P rev « d th « «»
' om ” i< ‘ ““ SUbie °‘ °'"" ° h " st< ” ■‘""W"** brought
, We J iave ofc , ours f l \ es alluded to this yet, preferring: to group the points in favour of
by themselves at close of the narrative proper, where Lee's evidence will duly appear.— [EditorJ 3


same time, to represent Mr. Bell as one acting with quite unbiassed and ju-
dicial mind, as one as anxious to prove the prisoner’s innocence as his guilt,
would be to be guilty of fulsome adulation. Mr. Bell acted as Crown
Prosecutor, as one who, having no doubt about the guilt of the accused,
was determined to neglect no proper means to prove him guilty. Mr.
Bell made the very utmost he honorably could of his case against the
prisoner, and gave no undue prominence to any evidence that told in his
favor. Throughout he was the Advocate for the Crown, and we appre-
hend that he would—believing in the guilt of Chemis—have been failing
in his duty had he not fought the Crown’s case to the best of his ability.
We do not for one moment mean to insinuate that Mr. Bell held back
from the defence anything that he thought would tell in the favor of the
accused, but it is possible that he may, having formed a strong theory,
have neglected to investigate clues which appeared to him trivial, but
which may have been of more importance than he thought. After all,
he is but human, and as such shares the common liability of humanity to
errors of judgment. Some days ago we should have imagined the pre-
ceding sentences applied with more force to the police (who are suppr sed
to have prepared the case) than to the Crown Prosecutor, who is, or
rather was, popularly supposed to act on information supplied to him by
the police. As, however, Mr. Bell has, since his action (Bell versus
Jellicoe), publicly assumed the onus of the action of the police in the
case of Regina v. Chemis, he must, of course, take any blame for any
errors of judgment that may have been committed by the police, includ-
ing their dilatory action on Friday night, May 31st—a delay which, if
Chemis be innocent, has probably been the means of relegating him to
life-long imprisonment.
The Defence.
After Mr. Bell’s address the Court adjourned until 3 p.m.—Mr. Bunny
having expressed a wish to address the jury that afternoon. On resum-
ing, Mr. Bunny called the following witnesses as to character; first,
William Alfred Fitzherbert,
Who deposed:—
Am Engineer of Hutt County Council. As such employed prisoner. I formed
a very high opinion of him. Was a very good workman. His moral character was
good* Was first employed as an ordinary laborer. I promoted him to be foreman.
By Mr. Bell—As far as I know, I heard a good character of him. I never heard
of his being a violent man or using threats. He was married between nine and ten
years ago.
William Burgin.
Reside at Kaiwarra. Have so thirty-five years. Know the prisoner eleven or
twelve years. Am member of Local School Board, Formed a very good opinion
of him. Has a very good reputation in Kaiwarra as honest, industrious, and sober.
By Mr. Bell —Never heard of his showing temper or using threats. I believe
his children attend the school.


Mr. Bunny’s Address.
The learned Counsel, addressing the jury, said his was the duty to
point out to them the weak spots in the evidence against his client. The
crime he was charged with was, indeed, a terrible one. Let them bear
in mind that it was the duty of the Crown to prove Chemis guilty, not his
(Mr. Bunny s) duty to prove him innocent. A foul murder had been
committed on 31st May, and as usual, statements highly prejudicial to
the person accused had gone forth. The jury must dismiss these from
their minds and be guided by the evidence adduced only. They would,
he trusted, forget the prisoner was a foreigner, or remember the fact only
as a reason for being most particular in sifting the evidence. It would
be a question for them to consider whether the murder had been com-
mitted by one man alone. It was supposed deceased was fired at from a
double-barrelled gun, the charge entering the right shoulder, and that
afterwards innumerable stabs were inflicted. Was one man only concerned
m this crime? If they were satisfied, as he believed they would be, in
the prisoner’s innocence, they need not consider who committed the
murder, their sole duty being to consider the case as against prisoner.
Referring to motive, Mr. Bunny asked what was there in the lawsuit to
make Chemis feel malice towards Hawkings ? The prisoner was served
with a writ in December, the case was heard and ordered to stand over
for argument in January, since which Hawkings had taken no further
action. Theie was no proof of any quarrel between the two men since •
indeed, Hawkings had written offering to settle, and the prisoner was not
suffering from the lawsuit in the slightest degree. As to the feeling
shown to Bolton when serving prisoner with the writ, it was no pleasure
to receive such documents, and court officials frequently received insults
when serving writs. He warned them to receive Tuckers’ evidence
with caution, as he had admitted that he paid no attention at the time to
the statement made by the prisoner, and yet several months after was
able to come into Court and repeat the statement. The prisoner could
gain absolutely nothing by killing Hawkings, but as regards the lawsuit
would be in the same position as before. After a reference to the date
on which the milk bills were delivered, Counsel referred to the suggestion
that the prisoner had an object in desiring to gain possession of the
missing pocket-book. The matters in that book could not be of the
slightest interest to the prisoner. Allegations of motive had entirely
failed. On the other hand, Counsel asserted, Mr. Hawkings had frequent
quarrels with other people. He had lawsuits with one and quarrels with
another, and might be said to be surrounded with people with whom he
was at variance. Having disposed of motive, he would ask what other
evidence had been brought forward. Stress had been laid on Chemis
having left off work on 31st May earlier than usual. The truth was he
left off later. There was no clear evidence that Hawkings had any
regular hours for his journeys to and from Wellington. If the prisoner
was the murderer, why did he not use the revolver—easy to be carried
across the hills—rather than the gun? Regarding the stiletto, they had


THE CROWN PROSECUTOR.


Mr. C. E. BUNNY


Mr. JELLICOE


proofs that it had verdigris on the hilt to extent of half-an-inch. If that
dagger had been used in making the larger wound the force of the blow
would have sent it so far in that there would have been blood over the
verdigris, or the verdigris would have been rubbed off. Neither of the
police officers present when the dagger was taken out of the prisoner’s
drawer were able to swear that there was not dust upon the sheath. Mr.
Bunny proceeded to refer to the evidence of Mrs. Hawkings and Bowles
—the latter of whom had, said Counsel, found the gate open, and was
unable to account for it. He contended that Mrs. Hawkings showed no
anxiety regarding her husband’s absence, and when Bowles wanted to go
out and look for him, prevented him. He would ask them to consider
the whole of the evidence about the cart; the finding of it by Bowles,
and his subsequent conduct in going to Dimock’s, remaining there until
12.30; afterwards, instead of going into the house to his wife, sitting on
a bed in the lean-to and trying to sleep.* Mr. Bunny, referring to the
conduct of Mrs. Hawkings and Bowles on the night of the murder, asked,
“ Was there not some strange mystery relating to the Hawkings’ house-
hold that night? ” As to the gun, there was clear proof, he urged, from
the condition of the barrels, that they had not both been fired off at the
same time. The Crown, however, could, had they pleased, have made
chemical tests, which would have conclusively shown whether both had
been fired off, and thus have set the matter at rest. They had not done
so. Commenting on the conduct of the police on the night of
the murder, he pointed out that at 11 p.m. Dr. Cahill had reported to the
senior officer at the station that a murder had been committed. This
was no idle tale conveyed by anyone about town, but the report of the
medical officer who visited the scene of the murder. The detectives
should have, been on the spot that night, should have made enquiries,
should have disturbed houses if necessary. But they had it that
Sergeant-Major Morice sent out detectives next morning. The action
of the police afterwards was very dilatory. The post mortem was held
in the morning and then two houses were searched. There was no
search of the murdered man's house, and he submitted that it must
sometimes be necessary to make enquiries at the abode of the deceased
person. Whatever Benjamin asserted to the contrary, he must, Mr.
Bunny asserted, have known there was a gunshot wound as well as stabs,
for Carroll had given out the second message at the morgue before noon,
and Benjamin had not left until 1 p.m. As to Inspector Thomson
requesting the detectives to pick up pieces of paper to establish a little
theory of his own, it was the Inspector’s duty to personally conduct the
enquiry in the prisoner’s house, but they found him remaining in the
kitchen while the detectives were searching the other rooms, and then
Inspector Thomson wanted to give evidence about what the other
officers found, about which he could have known nothing whatever. He
* We, jof course, merely reproduce, without in any way adopting, the arguments of Counsel.
Under the distressing circumstances the behavior of Bowles appears to us natural. It would have
been much more peculiar had he calmly gone to bed and to sleep after finding the dead body of his
friend.—[Editor],
D


had actually written on an envelope that certain things came from certain
rooms when he could not of his own knowledge state that they really
had come from those rooms. Nor did he allow the officers, who could
swear to what they had found, to keep these articles, but took charge of
them himself, making no mark of any kind by which he could identify
tnem again. It was noticeable that every person, except the police, who
had found paper had the good sense to note some mark upon it. It was
very peculiar Thomson should have marked the paper found in the <mrse
bush but none other. All the police officers had most positively sworn
that they had no knowledge of the contents of the envelopes, and he
asked the jury to say that from the beginning of the case the police had
controlled Tasker’s actions. Quoting “ Taylor on Evidence,” the learned
Counsel insisted that the testimony of police should be watched with
care not because they intentionally perverted the truth, but because then-
professional zeal, fed as it was by an habitual intercourse with the vicious
and by the frequent contemplation of human nature in its worst form’
must almost necessarily induce them to ascribe actions to the worst
motives, and to give coloring to facts and conversations which were
perhaps, in themselves, consistent with perfect rectitude.
Mr. Bell here remarked that this could not apply to Tasker.*
Proceeding, Mr. Bunny would ask the jury to say, with regard to
the piece of paper of 31st May, sent by Dr Cahill to Tasker, that its
presence in the mass of flesh was not satisfactorily explained by the
Crown. They were bound to give the prisoner the benefit of the doubt
about it. When Tasker found that piece of paper he did not trouble
about it because it was not a piece of 23rd May. It was Tasker’s duty
to have removed every piece of paper. It was not the jury’s place to
say that one piece of the paper came out of the wound and the other
did not. The doctor should have clearly established the fact that he
had removed the whole of the foreign substance, but he had not done
so, and the jury must remember that a paper intact, of 31st May had
been found at prisoner’s house. Referring to a piece of paper found
near the scene of the murder with the name of Bowden on it, he con-
tended that Bowden’s evidence showed how easily a piece of paper
connecting a man with a crime, might be found without that man being
aole to account for it. Supposing the name on that paper had been
Chemis, the police would have said that it was an absolute certainty
that he was the murderer. It was easy, he said, for the paper to have
been blown where it was found. There was an evident desire on the
part of the police to keep that paper back; for, why had not Detective
Campbell mentioned it in the lower Court? He then referred to the
evidence that men had been seen about the place on the night of the
*We would respectfully ask, Why not? We think if any nart of Mr Rpll’c „„„„ .
tenuous his trick of representing Tasker as a .civil servant quite unconnected
may be fairly so described. What does Tasked himself say?_“l am a clerk in the n ! dutle *
service in Tni PoLiCF. Department, in the Commissioner’s Office,” and adds <'l have nothm
H« h in)!, il r , 01 ! °[ crl . rne - T° thi * we answer that the Commissioner is the held of the neb 1°
His duty is to detect crime, mid Tasker was the iunior clerk in thp rmnmiaoi 1 , ® police,
orderly room clerk of a regiment might as well say he is not a soldier.— [Editor], 10UOr 8 ° 1Ue ' The


murder. There was the evidence of Joseph and George Lee, and the
evidence of the former showed that there were people with guns about
the neighborhood It was clearly the haunt of poachers, persons who
had given Hawkings considerable trouble. When the murder was
committed they found the city horrified, and the police knew that they
had to secure somebody or else there would have been such an outcry
that even Major Gudgeon would not have been safe in his position.
The murder was committed on Friday and nothing was done by
Tuesday, and then they find the Evening Press publishing an article to
the effect that if any failure of justice occurred it would use every effort
to promote a strict enquiry. He (Mr. Bunny) said that when Inspector
Thomson saw that he said—“ I must arrest Chemis at all hazards, and
I must prove him guilty.” The police had added this fragment of
evidence about the newspaper to the case, and they had taken the
pieces to what lie (Mr. Bunny) called a hireling of the department. It
was the Crown’s duty to have secured a person of very high standing,
who could have had the assistance of a practical printer—to ascertain
the particulars of these pieces of paper. The jury must remember that
Tasker had not given any receipt for these pieces of paper, and he con-
tended that they could not be satisfied that the police had no connection
with these exhibits. It was a most extraordinary thing that they all
said they never looked at them. There was, he submitted, no particular
instance connecting the prisoner with any of these pieces of paper. As
to the suggestion of the Crown Prosecutor that the accused’s children
should have been called, he would say, and he was sure everybody else
would say, that it was unfair. How could they expect young children
to come there and state whether their father was at home on a certain
night two months ago. He pointed out to the jury that the prisoner
had appeared at his work as usual on Saturday morning, and continued
at his work until the Wednesday, when he was arrested, and there was
no change in him—his demeanor was the same in every respect. This
was not the first case in the Australian colonies of a man being tried
on similar evidence, and he read a paragraph from a newspaper, stating
that an entirely innocent man had been hanged in Adelaide on similar
evidence about fifty years ago; the real murderer, who subsequently
died in a lunatic asylum, confessing to the deed, and admitting that he
had prepared the plant of the newspaper, gun, etc. The prisoner’s life
rested on their verdict. They must give him the benefit of any reason-
able doubt. He should ask them to say that the evidence for the
Crown had been unsatisfactorily placed before them and bungled by
the police, and so—commending the prisoner to their hands—concluded.
His Honor deferred his summing up until Monday morning.
Mr. Bunny’s Death.
That summing up the Counsel for the defence was destined never to
hear. He never knew even the verdict of the jury. From the Court on
Saturday afternoon Charles Bunny was borne to the bed he never again


left alive. The following, written a day or two before his death,
appeared in the Catholic Times, in the same issue that announced his
decease:—
In this city of Wellington a lawyer has recently displayed a courage, mental and
physical, which would put to shame many a great military commander, and has
shewn this bravery and endurance hour by hour, and day by day, for many long
and weary days—how weary and how long are only known to himself and to his
Maker. Mr. Charles Bunny, who so ably and so faithfully defended Chemis, was
stricken with severe illness several days before the trial came on. Despite the
utmost pain and weakness, which for a time incapacitated him from attending his
office, he still worked doggedly on at the preparation of his case, nursing himself
only that he might be the better enabled to do his duty to his client. When the
case came on in the Supreme Court, Mr. Bunny was far, very far from well, but his
force of mind triumphed over his body, and while in Court his suffering was far
more patent to the spectators than himself. When out of Court those who knew
him perceived only too clearly the terrible battle he was fighting, the fearful strain
he was enduring. Immediately that strain was relaxed he seemed to utterly collapse,
but once more back in Court he bent resolutely, stoutly, and gallantly as ever to his
task. His Honor the Chief Justice, not given to lightly praise, paid a well-deserved
compliment to the most able defence. No one, not even Mr. Bunny himself,
believed it possible that he could make his speech for the defence. But still, mind
conquered matter, until the last item of his fearful labor—for fearful it was, under
the circumstances—was achieved; then nature asserted itself, and the staunch and
unwearied advocate took to his bed, from which only his British pluck and Spartan
sense of duty has enabled him to rise. May all those who are placed in the awful
position in which Chemis found himself have the good fortune to find a lawyer as
brave, as unselfish, and enduring as Charles Bunny!
The writer may perhaps be pardoned for giving that further publicity
which this little work affords to an imperfect tribute which he penned
at the time of Mr. Bunny’s decease :
* IN ME MO It I AM.
Charles E. Bunny, the advocate of Chemis, is dead! It is but a statement of
simple fact to say that he gave his life for the man he defended. When we penned
the words which will be found in another column, words written only a few hours
before his death, we had not the slightest suspicion that Charles Bunny was in any
danger. We can only with difficulty realiae that he is gone now. The shock of
his death is too sudden and too recent to permit us to utter what we would. But
the facts are patent to all. He died doing his duty. We can write no set panegy-
ric on our friend. He was a good man, a Christian, a Gentle Man in the truest
acceptation of these words—unselfish, equable, kind, always ready to lend a help-
ing hand, always eager to raise a brother who had fallen through fault or misfor-
tune. He was, for some months immediately prior to his decease, intimately con-
nected with the Catholic Times. By his business-like qualities, by his tact, by his
fairness, his amiability, his consideration for the feelings of others, he endeared
himself to all. We feel that we have indeed lost a wise counsellor—a true, brave
friend. Of his professional abilities it is hardly necessary to speak. They were
well-known. His splendid defence of the man now lying under doom of death,
will be his enduring monument as a lawyer, and when we think of the mental and
physical martyrdom he endured during that defence, we know that he died a Hero’s
death. To those very near to him who now mourn so deeply for him it were pre-
sumptuous for us to attempt here to proffer consolation. But when time, the great
consoler, has brought nepenthe to the first bitterness of their sorrow, the nobility,
the modest grandeur of the manner of their dear one’s death will be the matter of


not altogether unhappy recollection. His final heroic effort in the cause of duty
will hereafter prove a legacy to his children. Charles Bunny was a good Catholic;
he died receiving the _ last Rites and Sacraments of that Church of which he was a
faithful son. May his Soul rest in peace !
Mr. Bunny s speech for the defence was delivered on Saturday, July
13th. On Wednesday, July 17th, he died, at the age of thirty-three
years.
The Summing up.
His Honor the Chief Justice commenced his summing up on Monday
morning. He requested the jury to consider the facts, unbiassed by the
atrocity of the crime and the suggestions regarding prisoner’s nationality.
Much of the evidence was of a nature calculated to produce in one’s mind
a feeling of smallness and technicality. When it was put forward as a
main ground of accusation that one small piece of paper, found in the
wound, fitted another piece found in prisoner’s house, the fact appeared
at first sight to be of too small and technical a nature. Their utmost
reasoning faculties were therefore needed in considering the question.
That question was, were they satisfied beyond doubt that the prisoner
committed the crime ? They had to consider whether the witnesses were
prejudiced in any way, and whether, admitting their truthfulness, their
description of the facts were correct. The main evidence was* that of a
police constable, but he (His Honor) looked upon the extract from
“ Taylor on Evidence,” read by Mr. Bunny, as applying .to police giving
their opinion, which they did not do in this case. The jury must say
whether there was any reason for believing the police had in any way
misled them as to the prisoner. The principal evidence against the
prisoner was this : —ln the wound is found by Dr. Cahill several pieces
of paper—admittedly portions of the Evening Post of 23rd May. It
was inferred that the man who shot Hawkings must have used a piece of
the Evening Post of that issue. These pieces were identified with pieces
found on the ground. There was nothing extraordinary in that. But it
was said that pieces of paper were found in the prisoner’s house which
fitted with those found on the ground. It may be said there was a
possibility of some error. This, of course, was possible, but they must
say whether there was any reasonable ground for the possibility of a
mistake. The Chief Justice here went through the police evidence as to
the finding of the paper, and said the jury must bear in mind that some
of the paper found in the house was found in the drawer,' and some on a
shelf, but it was not clearly established from which place any particular
piece came. I here did not seem to be any reason for being certain about
that. It was, therefore, whether they were satisfied that Inspector
Thomson Icept the papers so distinct that the papers he said he marked
“ gorse could not be mistaken for those found in the house* They
would have to consider whether they could rely on his evidence where he
said he kept those separate. The question for them to consider l’eally was
whether they, upon consideration, were convinced that the pieces must
* The whole pith of the case is contained, we take it, in this sentence.—[Editor],


be parts of the same paper, and if they came to that conclusion, that the
pieces were the same, then they must consider the matter further was
that paper in the prisoner’s possession ? If they had found it in a locked
drawer of which only the prisoner had the key, there would be no cause
for hesitation, but they would have to consider whether they could say
the same with regard to paper found in the parlor or an open drawer
Other persons no doubt had access to it, and that would also have to be
weighed. He referred to the state of the gun and the evidence of the
gunsmiths and the finding of the stiletto, which the doctor said had
fitted in size and length with the wounds. There was the fact that the
shot in the pouch was mixed while those in the wound were No. 4. It
would be for them to say whether this circumstance, and that circum-
stance of there being no powder nor caps found, was in the prisoner’s
favor or otherwise, or whether it was one of those circumstances that was
consistent with either guilt or innocence. They would have to consider
whether these were circumstances which, in the absence of explanation,
lend strength to such case as was made out by the Crown, if with
regard to any point a strong prima facie proof was made out which was
incapable all human explanation—incapable of explanation by the prisoner
■ the matter was then for them to say what inference they would draw from
it. What inference would they draw from the fact that there was no pow-
der in ,the house ? There was a difficulty in the fact that the second barrel
was different to the first, and it would be for them to say what conclusion
they could draw by that, or whether it was also one of those circumstances
from which no inference could be drawn. The theory as to the two shots
being fired by the same barrel was improbable. They had to decide
whether, if one barrel was fired off, the other was also fired off, both on
the same day. Then there was the question as to more than one man
being concerned in the affair, and they would have to consider whether
the condition of the barrels of this gun in any way pointed to the inference
that any one else was ready with another barrel loaded with shot as soon
as the first shot was fired. The actual fact of the possession of the <nm
and dagger could not be looked upon as any preparation for the crime.
With regard to the possession of the bullets they would have to consider
if that was a question which needed explanation. Although it was not
evidence of preparation for the committing of the crime it was proof of
possession, as stated by the Crown, of some of the articles which assisted
to commit the crime. The question of motive would have to be considered
in this way. Was the theory of alleged motive more than balanced by
the bulk of evidence ? With regard to Tucker and Durril’s evidence
if that were not looked upon as proof of threats there was no proof of ill-
feeling on the part of the prisoner against the murdered man. His Honor
here impressed upon the jury that they must not allow any such rumors
that they had heard to affect their minds. If there were really any
ill-feeling existing between the two men there would certainly have been
some evidence of it called. It had not been proved in Court. With
regard to the pocket-book, His Honor did not think that in this any
circumstance was made out against the prisoner. Robbery could not be


file motive for the crime, for neither the watch nor money was taken.
His Honor referred to the not calling of the child of nine years of age
who, it was suggested, would have been able to say that the prisoner was
at home at a quarter to six o’clock. This murder must have been com-
mitted within a quarter or ten minutes to six, and His Honor pointed
out that if the child had been called and she had said, perhaps, that he
went out to milk and was out say for half an hour or an hour, that would
be taken as evidence against the prisoner. Therefore, why should the
prisoner call evidence from his own family to show what was the truth and
which might lend support to the prosecution ? He referred to the pre-
sence of the little piece of paper of the 31st May. It was a question
whether that piece of paper was or was not connected with the pieces found
in the house. He could not quite understand the object of the questions
put to Mrs. Hawkings and Leddin, but it was evidently with regard to
motive, but the jury would have to fully consider that question " They
ought also to bear in mind the circumstance of the persons seen upon the
track that night. With regard to the piece of paper having on it the name
of Bowden, His Honor pointed out that that was not the case for'the pro-
secution. The case was the question whether the pieces on the road, in
the wound, and in the prisoner’s house, formed at one time one piece.
With regard to the suggestion put forward by the defence, touching the
revolver, His Honor said the jury would draw any inference from the
fact of the possession, and they may assume that that weapon was in,
sufficient order to have been used. Then they had the evidence of Mr.
Tasker with reference to the piecing of the paper; that he was very
careful not to mix any one of the lots of paper with any other. With
regard to the witnesses as to character, he pointed out that where the
evidence for the prosecution was in doubt, and if, after weighing all the
evidence, the jury were in doubt, this evidence would, even in a case of
murder, be thrown into the balance in favor of the prisoner, but, of course,
in that they would use their own common sense. Of course, as to the
evidence that the prisoner was not of a violent nature, there would be a
question as to whether the crime could not be committed from very
malignant feelings.
Mr. Devine pointed out that His Honor had omitted to call attention
to the fact that Inspector Thomson took the papers to his private house;
that there was no search made for the caps and powder; and the failur e
of the prisoner to compromise in the lawsuit.
His Honor ran through the evidence given by Inspector Thomson,
that he took the paper he found home for the purpose of making an ex-
amination, but recognising the task, he put them up again and took them
to the Commissioner, who in turn had them forwarded to Mr. Tasker.
With regard to the caps and powder he pointed out that no question had
been put to the prisoner as to the whereabouts of these articles; the
police did not say, when they said they could not find any caps and
powder, that they had made search for them. He referred the jury to
the evidence of Mr. Bolton, with reference to the attempts to com pro-


mise. In leaving the matter in the hands of the jury, he said he need
hardly warn them that they were to consider what facts are sufficient to
prove. _ Next to consider whether these facts led them to an inference of
the prisoner s guilt, and in doing so, they could not draw an inference
of the prisoner’s guilt, unless it was the only inference they could draw.
In order to convict the prisoner—the inference must be not only a
rational. conclusion, but it must also be the only rational conclusion;
bearing in mind that no human tribunal could expect to have absolute
certainty, except that it is brought to the conclusion without any reason-
able doubt. His Honor further said that if they found there was
still a doubt—if they should come to the conclusion that the evidence
was not sufficient—they would give the prisoner the full benefit of
the doubt.
The jury retired to consider their verdict at one o’clock.
The Verdict.
When the jury retired to consider their verdict, probably not half a
dozen people m court suspected that they would agree. Few perhaps
anticipated a verdict of Not Guilty, but it was confidently thought that
the jury would disagree, and that there would be a new trial, at which
new facts might come to light which would possibly establish the inno-
cence of Chemis. When, after a retirement of four hours, the jury re-
turned with a verdict of Guilty, a thrill of astonishment went through
the court, which was shared in by the country when the' verdict became
known. .Petitions praying for the commutation of the sentence were at
once prepared. These petitions were largely signed by men of every
degree. It was felt a doubt existed, and the prisoner should have the
benefit of it. The Premier appears to have interested himself consider-
ably in the case, and Ministers were so concerned that they are said to
have made experiments on their own account with the dagger. His Ex-
cellency the Governor appointed a day for the presentation of the petitions
and anxiously and carefully enquired into the whole of the matter*
interviewing Mrs. Chemis and her little girl, and visiting the scene of
the murder Under date July 22nd, His Honor the Chief Justice
addressed the following letter to the Minister of Justice for the infor-
mation of His Excellency the Governor:—
The Chief Justice’s Letter.
BEGINA V. LOUIS CHEMIS.
Judge’s Chambers, Supreme Court, Wellington, 22nd July i«so
Sir, On Monday last, the 15th instant, at the criminal sittings held here Louis
Chemis was convicted of murder before me, and I thereupon passed upon him
sentence of death.
I have to report, for the information of His Excellency the Governor that tL
conviction was obtained in due course of law, and, except as may hereafter nrme-ir
execution aWar6 ° f * ny reason w^y tiie sentence of death should not be carried into
. , T he verdict was, in my opinion, justified by the evidence. This statement is not
guilt** t 0 convey any conc lusion of my own on the evidence as to the prisoner’s


I enclose herewith a copy of the notes of the evidence taken by me at the trial.
At the trial an application was made to me by Mr. Bell to admit evidence of
statements made by Mr. Hawkings, the person alleged to have been murdered, of
grounds for fearing Louis Chemis, so much so as to cause him to procure a revolver
for his protection. I did not admit that evidence, as I was of opinion that it was
not legally admissible. I mention this application, as His Excellency may be of
opinion that the alleged facts, though not legally admissible as evidence at the trial,
ought now to be investigated.
It will be seen from the notes of evidence that there can be no doubt that Mr.
Hawkings was murdered on the evening of the 31st May, at probably about a quarter
to six in the evening, on the road leading from the Hutt road, near Kaiwarra, to
his house, and at a spot on the road about forty-five or fifty yards from a bend in
the road nearer to the Hutt road. The evidence appears conclusive that very near
this bend Mr. Hawkings was struck by a bullet from a firearm fired from the left
side of the road going up, probably from amongst the gorse bushes there, Mr.
Hawkings being on the right-hand side of the road; that in loading this firearm,
portions of newspaper were used in remarkable quantity ; and the bullet striking
against a knife in Mr. Hawkings’ pocket glanced off and did not wound, though it
bruised him ; that be probably fled down the hill pursued by his assailant; that in
the course of his flight he was stabbed at by a sharp-pointed instrument, and
eventually stabbed to death by a sharp and double-edged instrument; that, either
in the course of his flight or afterwards, he was shot in the back with a firearm
loaded with No. 4 shot, and newspaper being used as a wad or otherwise in loading ;
that the portions of newspaper used in loading the firearm from which the bullet
was fired, as well as the firearm from which the shot was fired, were of the first,
second, and third colums of the second page, and first and second and third columns
of the fourth page of the Evening Post of the 23rd May, 1889; that, the assailant
was actuated by motives of revenge; that, suspicion having been directed to the
prisoner, his house (situated about a quarter of a mile, or a little more, from the
spot of the murder), in his presence, was searched on the following day, about 4
o’clock in the afternoon, and he was found to be in possession of a dagger, which,
from the post mortem examination, corresponds in every particular as to dimensions
and strength with the instrument which must have been used ; that he was in
possession of a muzzle-loading gun, of which one barrel had certainly been recently
fired off; that as to the other barrel, whether that had not also been recently fired
off was open to doubt, inasmuch as, though the inside of the left barrel was found
four days after the 31st, rough and rusty, while the right was sooty and greasy, this
difference might be accounted for by the inside of the left barrel, near its muzzle,
having been wiped or otherwise interfered with, while the right barrel had not been
wiped or interfered with ; that the prisoner was also found in possession of several
cast bullets, which, being too small for the barrel of the gun, would, if fired from
that gun, have required some material to be wrapped round it, and that paper
would have been a suitable material; that a shot-pouch was also found in his
possession containing No. 4 shot, mixed, however, with No. .6 shot, the latter largely
prevailing in numbers; that this shot was greased ; that this is a device for causing
shot not to scatter ; that portions of the same columns of the same newspaper used
in both loadings were found in the prisoner’s house, either in the locked drawer (of
which the prisoner had the key) in which the stiletto, bullets, and shot were found,
or on a shelf in the parlor. , .
The prisoner accounted to the police officers who searched his premises for the
appearance in the gun of having been recently fired off, by saying he had fired at
some quail. The police, though they made a search of the premises for evidence,
and the search therefore may be believed to have been minute, found no powder-
flask or powder, no percussion-caps, no wads or wad-cutter. <*• _
The jury, no doubt, credited the evidence, and concluded that the possession of
the paper by the prisoner was proved, and that it connected him with the crime.
It was proved that the prisoner had returned home that evening shortly before five
o’clock ; that his residence was about a quarter of a mile from the spot where the
murder was committed; that lie had the means of knowing that Mr. Hawkings had


gone into, town that day, and had not returned at five o’clock, and that Mr.
Jlawkmgs usual hour for returning was before six o’clock.
feeli„gto™d a 8 Mr e HartiDg»° f moti ™’ °« SI-
At the trial, in the cross-examination of witnesses for the prosecution, there was
much suggestion on behalf of the prisoner that other persons bore ill-feeling
cZ"eLmLSon e "' “ “ ° ot ” t 0 m 6 that “*“”8 «*■“ out to this
nf l n J he co f u ™ of ease ifc a PP ear ed that at about five o’clock in the afternoon
SI. mn^ 1 ' a “ an ' viLh a B un was proceeding along a public track
K p if 1 *? h , l8 ’ f u ' 8t ln a direction away from Hawkings’ land, and afterwarda
o ards, Barber s slaughter-yard; this slaughter-yard is on the Kaiwarra side of the
Fr?aT ne p 8 hOUSe ’ an A, nofc far fr ° m ifc< Who this man was was not shown at the
A; * °J the witnesses called by the Crown it was proved that early in
siAAAA af(jer the murder a person living on the Ngahauranga road saw a man, a
stranger to him, running up that road towards Johnsonville.
The prisoner was not arrested till the sth June; it was not till the 6th that the
shot-wound was found to contain portions of the newspaper of 23rd May. At the
trial the police officers were closely questioned by counsel for the prisoner, for the
purpose of showing that the paper, said to have been found in the housk might
have been in truth found on the spot; the jury, however, were, in my opinion,
justified in concluding there had been no mistake in the matter. The stiletto found
Ihe P™oner s house, on being examined by Mr. Skey, bore no traces of blood. It
appeared however, that before being examined by him, it had, in the course of the
post mortem examination, been inserted into some of the wounds and made bloodv
f" d afte ™' ds was A d “ cold water. The fact that no blood-stains were discovered
-5. ~k e? was therefore quite consistent with the supposition that it had been
used in the murder.
Accompanying this statement are the plans produced at the trial, the photo-
fTlf Co P l . ea of portion of the newspaper relied upon as connecting the convict
ltb the crime. The originals are in a box with the Registrar, who of course will
oenver them to any person you appoint to receive them from him. The stiletto
shot-pouch, bullets, etc., are also in the possession of the Registrar.
I have, &c.,
The Hon. the Mini,ter of Jnrtice. <Sig “ d) Ji “ B
Louis Chemis Explains.
On July 22nd Louis Chemis, lying under sentence of death for the
murder of Thomas Hawkings, made the following statement in writing
for the information of His Excellency the Governor :
STATEMENT OF LOUIS CHEMIS.
[Tbanslation.]
His Excellency the Gfovernor of New Zealand. 22nd July, 1889.
I have pleasure in making an explanation to your Excellency with regard
to my misfortune. I begin from the last day of May. On that day I was working
opposite the Rainbow Hotel before twelve o’clock. After twelve o’clock I was
working at the Government school; the work consisted in helping a young man of
the name of Lee to put some gravel in a cart, and afterwards going with it opposite
the hotel. I was five minutes arranging it, and then went again near the school to
help Lee. I stopped work at half-past four, after haying assisted Lee to put four
bags of oats on the cart. I went into Cook’s shop, and I took the newspaper I


came out and went on the cart, and I went towards my house. I came down from
the cart opposite my gates ; it was then ten minutes to five. A few minutes after I
arrived at home. My wife was milking the cows. I gave them some hay, and after
I went to take my horse on to the hill, and, after having fed him, I washed and cut
to pieces a barrelful of mangold, and sent the cows out of the stable. I went into
the house to make tea. It was then past six o’clock. This work I have done always,
I get up every morning, together with my wife, at four o’clock to milk the cows,
and afterwards go to Kaiwarra to distribute the milk. It was half past six a.m.
when a man to whom I was giving some milk, named John Mack, told me that
Thomas Hawkings was dead on the road near his house. This was the first news I
received. This Saturday, during the day, I received several pieces of news concerning
the crime. This day, Ist June, being Saturday, I went home at half-past three. I
was outside the house chopping firewood when three detectives came near me, and
said they wauted to search the house for a pocketbook that had been robbed from
the dead man. I said, “ All right, look for it as much as you like.”
In the beginning they looked at me and looked at my clothes very carefully. I
went with them into my room, and as soon as we entered Detective Benjamin took
my gun and brought it into the kitchen. He came backhand then started to look m
my chest of drawers, together with Campbell, and from it they took a knife, several
lead-bullets, and the pouch in which I kept my ammunition.
Having searched this room, together with the others, and not finding the
pocketbook, they asked me to go with them “ to the stable of the pig,” and other
places ; and, not having found the pocketbook, the three went away. On the sth
June I was at my work as usual, when Benjamin and Campbell arrested me. This
same day, at three o’clock, I was in gaol. When the doctor came to visit me he
made me take off my clothes till I was naked, examined me carefully, and, after an
examination of my clothes, not finding any stain of blood, I dressed myself again.
He asked me if I was wearing the same clothes on the last day of May. I said
Yes.
It is true that there is a question between me and the dead man, but this
question is in the hands of the Judge, and his death does me neither good or bad.
I have many times seen this man going home before I left work, and so how could
I know if he was past when I was working near the schools? This Thomas
Hawkings had quarrels with many others, especially “hunters.” As soon as he
saw one with a gun he called him all the bad names he knew.
Detective Benjamin swore in the Court that he had not seen powder in the
chest of drawers, when there was half a flask of it. He said also that he had not
seen caps, and there were two boxes—one full, the other half full. He had not
seen the wad-cutter, although it was near the knife and other things. He also saw
four quail which were in the kitchen, and this also he denied. As for the wad-
cutter and the quail, there is the blacksmith in Kaiwarra, William Daebl, who
bought the wad-cutter for me on Ist April; and the same morning I killed the quail
I was in his shop and told him I had shot these quail. As for the bullets, a young
man named James Gibson gave me a dozen twelve months ago, because there
were wild pigs on my land. ,
If I was a thief and a murderer—as such I have been condemned—-the bounty
Council would not have kept me twelve years in their employment. Thank Heaven
I am innocent of this murder : and, if your Excellency does not give me grace, I
die contented. The only thing lam sorry for is my family.
Louis Chemis.
Penal Servitude for Life.
On August 6th, 1889, His Excellency the Governor, in the exercise of
his prerogative, commuted the death sentence passed upon Louis Chemis
to penal servitude for life. The following is a copy of the Memoranda
issued:—


MEMORANDA.
I recommend that the sentence be commuted to penal servitude for
life.
(Signed) H. A. Atkinson.
I concur. (Signed) T. Fergus.
I concur. (Signed) E. C. J. Stevens.
I concur. (Signed) E. Mitchelson.
I concur. (Signed) G. F. Richardson.
I concur. (Signed) T. W. Hislop.
I concur. (Signed) Fred. Whitaker.
Commuted.
„ r (Signed) ONSLOW,
6th August, 1889.
In Council, 6th August, 1889.
(Signed) Alex. Willis,
Clerk of the Executive Council.
The Libel Case.
Mr. Charles Bunny, the Counsel who had so ably defended Louis
Chemis, died on the 17th July. On the 16th, while Mr. Bunny lay
dying, Mr. Jellicoe, a Wellington solicitor, interviewed the convict at the
prison, obtaining from him a statement to the effect that he had been
influenced in the prison to retain Mr. Bunny’s services in preference to
those of Mr. Jellicoe. In forwarding this statement to the Minister of
Justice, Mr. Jellicoe wrote :
I find upon enquiry that the prisoner lias a mass of evidence which ought to be
investigated, and, as I am anxious to place the whole of that evidence before you, I
must ask that you will be good enough to give directions enabling me to interview
Chemis in private.
Writing under date, 17th July, 1889, the Minister of Justice, through
his Private Secretary, said, “No reason is seen for any departure from
the practice as regards interviews with prisoners under sentence of death.
No objection will, however, be offered to you seeing the prisoner under
proper restrictions.” Hereupon ensued a heated correspondence between
the solicitor and the Department of Justice which would be neither
interesting nor useful to reproduce. Eventually, Mr. Jellicoe interviewed
the prisoner in presence of Messrs Glascodine (his clerkj, Garvey
(governor of the gaol), and Gore (shorthand writer, who reported the
interview verbatim). Extracts from these notes were subsequently
published, and the following words contained in them formed the subject
of the recent libel action—Bell v. Jellicoe : J
. I have a mass of evidence all telling in your favor. A large portion of that
evidence was kept back by those who conducted the prosecution—your prosecution


We may as well finish this part of the subject at once. Mr. Bell, the
Crown Prosecutor, claimed £SOOO, and the case was heard before Mr.
Justice Richmond and a special jury, on Thursday, September sth. The
substance of the statement of claim was that the plaintiff had, as Crown
Prosecutor, conducted the prosecution of Louis Chemis, and that the
defendant had, on 22nd July, falsely and maliciously published—in the
form of a narrative —the above statement, meaning thereby that he (the
defendant) had a mass of evidence, all telling in favor of the said Louis
Chemis, and that a large portion of such evidence was concealed by the
plaintiff, acting in his capacity as Crown Solicitor, and in consequence of
the premises the plaintiff had been, and is, greatly injured in his credit
and reputation. There were two other “ causes of action.
The defendant filed a statement admitting the allegations in the
first three paragraphs of the statement of claim ; denying that he pub-
lished maliciously or otherwise the words alleged in the statement of
claim ; denying also that the words have the meaning placed on them
by plaintiff. As an alternative defence, defendant repeats the allega-
tions in the first paragraph of his statement of defence, and asserts
that when the words were uttered he was acting as Solicitor for Louis
Chemis, and the words were privileged. There was also an amended
statement of defence. Mr. Jellicoe’s defence, divested of legal techni-
calities, seems to have been a denial of publication, maliciously. or
otherwise, a denial that the words complained of had the meaning
placed upon them by the plaintiff; an assertion that the words were
privileged, and finally a plea of justification. Mr. Jellicoe had managed
to attract so much public attention to himself and the case, that some
thought that he would at this trial justify the libel by proving its truth,
and showing that evidence favorable to the convict had been kept back
by the prosecution. On the second day, however, the case came to
abrupt and tame conclusion. Mr. Jellicoe agreed to withdraw the
plea of justification and to pay the costs of the action, and those who
had expected there would be “ startling revelations ” concerning the sup-
pression of evidence by the prosecution and the innocence of Chemis,
were doubtless considerably disappointed.
Affidavits made Subsequently to the Trial.
We nave, however, though unavoidably, got a little ahead of our
narrative. After a long epistolary conflict with the Government, and
after the Premier had ascertained the procedure in adjacent colonies
regarding interviews with prisoners under sentence of death, Mr.
Jellicoe was permitted a private interview with the condemned man.
Mr. Jellicoe also procured and forwarded to the Government a number
of affidavits on behalf of Louis Chemis. The first of these, published
in an earlier portion of this story, was that of John H. Holmes, which
certainly goes to contradict the theory of the prosecution touching
motive on the part of Chemis. There were also several affidavits
showing that Chemis did not, as a rule, render his bills foi mil
supplied before the 3rd, 4th, sth, or 6th of month.. There was an


affidavit (published elsewhere) by Mrs. Bowles, mother-in-law of
Hawkings, another by Hugh Nicol, to the effect that Louis Chemis
wore, on Friday morning, 31st May, a brown-colored faded coat and
brownish colored trousers, “ moleskins, I believe ” ; and an affidavit by
John Lambert, stating that Chemis, when seen by him at 4 p m. on
the same day, was wearing a brownish-colored coat, faded, and torn
under the arms, and trousers “with stains about the knees, the
result of work, I think, and a grey tweed hat ” —these being similar to
the clothes worn by Chemis when arrested. Robert Dybell made
affidavit that he had, on 13th of April last, bought a wad-cutter for
Chemis and given it to him ; that Chemis afterwards told him his
gun “ killed a lot better with the wads ”; that on 29th May last
Chemis had told him (Dybell) that he had shot two quail at his back
door, and on 30th May Chemis had said he had again shot two quail
from the back of his house. John Daly made oath that he went with
Dybell when the latter bought two wad-cutters on 13tli April. Fred-
erick Graves swore he had frequently, on Sundays, gone on Chemis’
property shooting; had frequently taken Chemis’ gun from the bed-
room, “and the powder-flask, which is now in Mr. Jellicoe’s possession,
from the top right-hand corner drawer of the chest of drawers, and on
my return I have placed powder-flask in same place ”; that he was at
Chemis’ house on Sunday, 19th May. Went shooting with his gun.
look powder-flask from the same drawer, and returned it afterwards;
that he loaded with wads which he took from small tin box in same
drawer ; “ a number of wads were left in the box, and I swear that
some of the remaining wads and box are the articles now in Mr.
Jellicoe’s possession ” ; that he remembered Chemis, about last Easter,
producing a wad-cutter, which he said he had purchased. “On Sunday,
the 2nd June last, at about 11 a.m., I was at Chemis’ house. I went
into kitchen. I saw three or four quail being prepared for dinner.
On the evening of sth June I was again at prisoner’s house, and went
round the house with Mrs. Chemis. I then examined the contents of
the drawer, now in possession of Mr. Jellicoe. It then contained a
powder-flask, a box of caps, a wad-cutter, a box of wads, some dynamite
fuse and dynamite caps, a cocoa-tin containing powder, and an empty
cocoa-tin and revolver cartridges. A day or two afterwards I was
talking to Mrs. Chemis, and told her she had better let Mr. Bunny
have the wad-cutter and wads.”
The affidavit of John Dowd corroborated that of Greaves in many
particulars. He said that he, on stli June, saw in the drawer the
articles mentioned by Greaves. He also swore that when he and
Louis Chemis went to work together they always took their lunch
wrapped in paper; the paper was sometimes thrown away - and in
winter they went on the top of the hillside for their luncheon in order
to get the sun.
Timothy Dowd swore that he, on 26th May, went to Chemis’ house
thence shooting, with John Dowd; the latter bringing out from


Chemis’ bedroom a gun, powder-flask, shot-pouch, and some wads and
caps, which John Dowd subsequently returned.
Affidavit of Mrs. Chemis.
I, Annie Chemis, of Kaiwarra, wife of Louis Chemis, of the same place, dairyman,
make oath and says as follows :
1. I remember my husband coming home on the evening of Friday, the 31st of
May last. He brought meat home in his kit. It was a little after five o’clock
when he came home. I was in the cowshed; he spoke to me when he passed.
When he had put his kit in the house he came back to the cowshed. He fed the
cows first, and then went into the garden and pulled up some mangolds, and washed
them and cut them up. My children were about. He then came into tea. He
had tea with me and the children. After tea he read the Evening Post. The
children went to bed about seven o’clock, including my eldest child Lizzie. From
the time he came home I swear he did not leave the premises. I say that my
husband’s gun was in the bedroom all day on Friday, the 31st May last.
2. On the following evening Inspector Thomson and Detectives Benjamin and
Campbell came to my house. They searched the bedroom, Thomson staying in the
kitchen. I remained in the kitchen with Thomson. Benjamin first brought the
gun out of the bedroom. He put his finger in one barrel of the gun and then
showed his finger to Thomson, and said nothing. He placed the gun by the table
and went back to the bedroom. He afterwards came back with a handkerchief.
He opened it on the kitchen table before myself and Thomson. It contained a
stiletto, a shot-pouch, some bills, Italian letters and documents. I swear positively
there was no newspaper amongst the contents of that handkerchief. Detective
Benjamin went back into the bedroom and brought out the revolver and handed it
to Thomson, and asked him to look at it. They both agreed that it had not been
fired for a considerable time and was rusty. They put it on a shelf in the kitchen.
As they were leaving, my husband asked them if they had taken the revolver, and
Detective Benjamin said “No,” and pointed to the shelf where he had put it.
They took the stiletto, shot-pouch, and bullets away, leaving the letters and papers
on the table, and Thomson examined the documents, and said to me, “ There is
nothing there, Mrs. Chemis, I can take ; you can put them back in their place
again.” I did so.
3. I was at the drawer which had contained the stiletto and shot-pouoh that
morniug and the day previously. We used to keep money there. I always went to
the drawer when I wanted change or money. The money was kept in an empty
cocoa-tin. There was also in the drawer a revolver, powder-flask, box of caps,
bullets, cake of dynamite, a box of dynamite-caps, a wad-cutter and box of wads,
and a tin containing powder which my husband had himself ground, and the empty
cocoa-tin hereinbefore mentioned. After the police had left I went into the bedroom
to see what they had done.
4. After the police had left, my husband brought the revolver from the shelf and
put it back in the drawer in the chest of drawers in the bedroom, where it was
always kept. I took the paper and documents and put them in the left-hand
top-drawer of the chest of drawers. The right-hand drawer, when I went into the
room, was open. I saw my husband put the revolver into it. It then contained
the wad-cutter, the box of wads, the powder-flask, the box of caps, dynamite, and
dynamite-caps, the tin of ground powder, and the cocoa-tin.
5. On the sth June my husband was arrested. Detective Benjamin went to the
drawer, took possession of the revolver, and handed it to Constable Healing, and
then Benjamin took away the Italian letters, lease, and documents. The articles
mentioned in the last-preceding paragraph were at that time in the drawer, and
remained in it until the drawer was taken away by Mr. Jellicoe last Wednesday,
with the exception of the wad-cutter and box of wads, which I took out and gave to
Mr. Bunny after the arrest, to produce in Court.


6. On the Ist June last when Thomson, Benjamin, and Campbell were at my
house there was a biscuit-tin on a shelf there over the cupboard in the kitchen
containing four quail. We had the quail for dinner on Sunday, the 2nd June.
Benjamin opened the tin, looked in, but did not take anything out. My husband
shot the quail contained in the tin on the previous Wednesday and Thursday
mornings from the back premises.
7. On Friday, the 31st May last, my husband wore an old coat which was black
when new, but had become brown by fading ; the coat was torn. He was wearing
brownish moleskin trousers and a grey-tweed hat. He wore the same clothes the
following day, and was wearing them the day he was arrested ; and he was also
wearing a grey-flannel shirt on the 31st May, and was wearing the same when
arrested.
8. My husband never carried a sheath-knife.
9. On the road up to our house from the Hutt road there is a box for the baker
to leave his bread.
10. I remember about Easter-time my husband telling me the blacksmith at
Kaiwarra had brought him a wad-cutter. Shortly after I saw him cut a piece of
cardboard from a cardboard box, and cut with the wad-cutter the wads I have
hereinbefore mentioned. The remainder of the cardboard box was left on the shelf
in the sitting-room, and was used by me for keeping odds and ends in it until it was
taken away by Mr. Jellicoe on Sunday last. It was there on the occasion when the
police visited and searched the house. Detective Benjamin took some lollies out of
it on one occasion, and gave them to one of the children. After Mr. Bunny was
dead I went to his office and obtained from his clerk the wad-cutter and wads I had
previously given him, and I handed them to Mr. Jellicoe..
Annie Chemis.
Sworn at the City of Wellington, this 23rd day of July, 1889, before me—A.
Gray, a solicitor of the Supreme Court of New Zealand.
Janies Gibson swore he had last winter left with Chemis nine or ten
bullets and that he (Gibson) had five of his original stock of bullets
left, which wore identical with those taken by the police from Chemis’
house.
The affidavit of ff. W. Oakley, has already been published.
Walter Edward Rawson, clerk to Mr. Bunny states that a wad-cut-
ter and tin box were in the possession of Mr. Bunny, and that he
(Rawson) delivered them to Mrs. Chemis on July 18th.
There were a number of other affidavits among them, one by Mr.
Jellicoe relating to a drawer and contents he had sealed up and brought
from Chemis’ house. We have not space to review all these affidavits
in detail, nor does there seem any real necessity so to do, because they
formed the basis of the
Perjury Charges
Made by Mrs. Chemis against Inspector Thomson and Detectives Ben-
jamin and Campbell, who, it was alleged, had falsely sworn at the trial
concerning the contents of the drawer when they searched Chemis’
house on June Ist; those charges—after long and patient hearing by the
Assistant R.M., at which a large quantity of utterly irrelevant evidence
was adduced—were dismissed. As, however, the matter is understood
to be still siib-judice we forbear treating it here at any length. We
desire to give Mr. Jellicoe every credit for the wish to benefit his client.
Whether, by the methods he has pursued, he has placed that client in
any better position than he was in previously to Mr. Jellicoe’s appear-


INSPECTOR THOMSON.


DETECTIVE BENJAMIN.


ance in the case, seems to us very problematical. Of course the gentleman
in question may yet have some very strong cards to play on behalf of
Louis Chemis, but so far he has not played them. He has raised public
expectation to the utmost, and in the present disappointment of that
anticipation, public feeling is likely to undergo a re-action. The inno-
cence or guilt of Louis Chemis does not, however, depend on public
sentiment, but on hard facts, and if Mr. Jellicoe can prove the innocence
of his client no one will be more pleased than ourselves. At the same
time, the charges of perjury against the police have most emphatically,
so far, not been sustained. There is one matter with relation to these
perjury charges we desire to mention without comment; that is, the
evidence given before the magistrate by
George Ernest Lowe,
Relative to the finding by him of a knife and shot pouch in the neigh-
borhood of the scene of the murder. He deposed :
That he resided in Molesworth-street and was in the employ of Bannatyne & Co.
Was born in Wellington, and knew Hawkings’ property well. Had recently been
on the property. Recollected calling upon Mr. Jellicoe last Monday week, the
19tli August. Was asked to search the gully between Dimock’s house to the target;
to search all waterholes and creeks, and take away anything he could find there.
Mr. Jellicoe told him that any trouble and expense he was put to, he (Mr. Jellicoe)
would pay for. In consequence of this he went out on Sunday last. He entered
Hawkings property from a point near Ngahauranga, and came along the track in
the direction of Hawkings’ house. He got to the top of the hill where the road
turns off to Hawkings’ house. When he reached that point he met Collins, who
was in Mrs. Hawkings’ employ. He then told Collins that he was there in search
of evidence in Hawkings’ murder. He told Collins where he had been, and Collins
told him that he did not think anything would be gained in that direction ; that he
(witness) was more likely to find things in the gully on the other side.
Mr. Bell—That would be on Chemis’ side.
Witness—Yes.
Witness, continuing his evidence, said that he went to the creek which runs
from the rifle butts to Dimock’s house.
Continuing, Lowe said that he discovered a creek running from the direction of
Hawkings’ house into the main creek on the same property. That would be on the
going up from Dimock’s. He went up the small creek from the main creek. Met
two falls in the small creek. In the second fall, which was about eight or ten feet,
he found something. As he was climbing up he saw something. There were
several boulders there. Saw something lying on a boulder. He first saw a shot-
pouch, . Had no difficulty in seeing the pouch. He saw the end sticking out. Had
not to disturb anything to see the pouch. The end he saw was the filling part.
Before that he had not seen anything else. Also saw the blade of a knife. Did not
have to disturb anything to see it. Found it with blade uppermost. Took posses-
sion of the knife. Could not see the handle until he took the knife out of the water.
There were leaves round about the handle. Also rummaged about in the leaves
and found a sheath-knife. Could not see the leather of the shot-pouch as there
were a lot of leaves about it.
A knife was now produced by Mr. Jellicoe, and witness said that he thought it
was the one which he picked up. When he found the articles, he took them home,
and afterwards to Mr. Jellicoe’s house, where he gave them to Mr. Glascodine.
Did not see Mr. Jellicoe in the house when he took the articles. Went out to the
property this morning in company with Mr. Jellicoe, Mr. Glascodine, a prison
warder, and another person he did not know, and pointed out to Mr. Jellicoe the
spot where he found the articles.
£


His Dream.
Ke-examiued by Mr. Jellicoe—Had been bothered with a dream about the
Chemis case, and this had upset him. He dreamt that he went f but to the scene of
the murder. Dreamt about the case from the very first. His dream indicated that
if he went to an old house he would find the articles with which the murder had
been committed. Nothing much was said when he was going out in the cab with
Mr. Jellicoe and the others this morning. When they got out of the cab he walked
before the others. [The knife shown to the witness was a common looking instru-
ment with a black wooden handle, such as are used by butchers, and was enclosed
in a rough leather sheath. The shot pouch produced by Mr. Jellicoe, and said to
have been found by Mr. Lowe, was of the pistol pattern, and had an iron top. The
leather, which was brown, was somewhat discoloured,]
Before proceeding to hazard a few remarks on the whole case, we
desire to place on record some sworn statements and other matters which
—until they are disproved—appear to us to tell in favor of Louis Chemis.
The first is the
Remarkable Statement of George Lee
Made at the trial. At the conclusion of his examination by Mr. Bell,
he said:—
Next morning (June Ist) I saw a man going up the Ngahauranga road coming
from the Hutt road. Walter Wilmerson saw him before me. He spoke to me.
Walter said something. I came out at once. I saw him running up the road. He
had no gun. I was going out to feed my horse. I went out to see who he was.
Mr. Bunny. —lt was strange to see a man at that time. I watched him past
the house. I could see he had no gun. I could see if he had a gun. I told this to
my father, and then communicated to the constable at Johnsonville. I have not
said he had a gun after I had heard of Hawkings’ murder.
Mr. Bell.— My father told the constable. I told my father the same morning at
the quarry. It was Monday morning. My father told me he had told the constable.
I never spoke a word about the death of Hawkings, or any one to me. I did not see
Mrs. Chemis since.
Although Mr. Bell made light of the statement, we cannot perceive
it has ever been disproved.
Extraordinary Affidavit of Blanford.
Among the affidavits forwarded by Mr. Jellicoe to the Government
was the following :
I, Henry Crofton Blanford, of Ngahauranga, in the Provincial District of
Wellington, polisher, make oath and say as follows: —•
1. I was in Wellington on the 31st May last. I think I walked home that
evening.
2. When I was taking the last bend in the road to Ngahauranga at about nine
o’clock I heard a rustling in the scrub. I stopped and listened. It was a calm
night. The noise was some way up in the scrub, and it was a sound of something
or some one moving about.
3. I heard of the murder of Thomas Hawkings next day. A few days after I
went up to the scene of the murder. I remembered the noise I had heard in the
scrub, and I knew there was a track near there, but I did not know where it led to,
so I proceeded to examine it and see where it led to. I followed it up and found
that by so doing I could get to the scene of the murder. I mentioned the noise I
had heard to my brother-in-law directly I heard of the murder, and said I wonder if
there was anything in it.


4. I noticed very distinct heel-marks on the track; they led about half-way
down to the Hutt road.
5. On the Friday preceding the late trial of Louis Chemis in the Supreme Court
I went up to this track again. In the gully on the top of the hill I found in the
scrub a pair of boots. They were old boots, but clean, and they evidently had not
been there long. The nails were just beginning to rust. The insides were clean.
I also found what appeared to me to be part of some false whiskers. I took the
whiskers in to Detective Benjamin on the Monday. He took my name and put the
whiskers on a shelf.
6. I took the boots in on the following Wednesday. I spoke to Detective Kirby,
and told him I wanted to see Benjamin about these boots, and he asked me if I
were a witness in the case. I said, “ No,” and he said, “ You had better see Ben-
jamin.” I looked for Benjamin but could not find him. I spoke to the Court
Orderly, and he told me to put the boots in the room opposite.
7. On the Sunday week after the murder I was on the scene of the murder, and
picked up pieces of pearl of the handle of a pocket-knife, and a portion of the little
blade.
Henry C. Blandford.
Sworn at Wellington, this 24th day of July, 1889, before me—Robert J. Staveley,
a solicitor of the Supreme Court of New Zealand.
CONCLUDING REMARKS.
Our task is done. From the sworn evidence we have told the story of
the Kaiwarra murder, which, standing by itself, is almost unique in the
annals of crime. If we consider all the surrounding circumstances, and
the events that have followed in the train of the murder of Thomas
Hawkings, and reflect that even now no finality has been attained—further
proceedings against the police and further libel actions being still
threatened—no compiler of mere fiction could hope to produce a more
startling and bizarre chapter than this collection of simple facts, which
fully justifies the stale apothegm that “ Truth is stranger than Fiction.”
The murder, an almost purposeless one—for the Crown has not succeeded
in proving adequate motive—was one of the most savage and brutal
conceivable; executed too, seemingly, with a forethought and chnning
which tend to show that the murderer, whoever he was, is no novice in
crime. The skill with which the murderer chose his point of attack
justifies the belief that he was intimately acquainted with the nature of
the ground, and with the movements of the murdered man. But there
can be no certainty even of this. The spot selected may have been chosen
by accident, or simply because it afforded cover for the assassin and was
lonely. Granting, however, that the selection of the place was the result
of design rather than chance, it must not be supposed that Louis Chemis
was the only person acquainted with the locality.
Immediately following the murder occurred a remarkable incident
—the failure of the police to make search immediately they received
information from Dr. Cahill that a murder had been committed. Of
course it is very easy to be “wise after the event,” and we will not go the
length of saying that the police may not have satisfactory explanation to


offi-r regarding the delay, and it is only fair to point out that Sergeant-
Major Morice’s mouth is closed. It was not possible to call him during
the trial as a witness, as he could give no direct evidence concerning the
murder. No matter, however, who is justly to blame, the fact remains
that the time lost on the night of the murder has been the means of
introducing a remarkable element of uncertainty into the whole matter.
Next, we have the extraordinary fact that the two Justices of the
Peace—Messrs Nancarrow and George—who presided at the opening
magisterial enquiry, both died before the verdict against Louis Chemis
was recorded.
From his seat in Court, on Saturday, July 13th, Mr. Charles Bunny,
who defended Louis Chemis, was carried to that bed in which the brave
young advocate died on the following Wednesday.
Arising out of the murder of Hawkings we have already seen the
initiation and termination of one libel action, and the commencement,
though pu,sibly not the conclusion, of the charges of perjury against the
police.
another libel action is to be brought by Charles Bowles against
the Evening Post newspaper, published in this city, for having repro-
duced a certain affidavit originally published in a parliamentary paper
an incisive commentary on the rottenness of our libel laws.
However we may regard the finding of the knife and shot-pouch by
Mr. Lowe, it is impossible to deny that the dream, which apparently led
him to search for traces of the murder, is one of a long list of astounding
coincidences.
We express no opinion, nor is it within our province to do so
regarding the innocence or guilt of Louis Chemis. Our sole desire is
that the truth may yet be made plain. It is impossible, however, to
painfully examine and compare the evidence, as we have been forced to
do, without recognizing that the case as against the accused is even
excluding the paper evidence—very strong. We exclude that branch
of the case for the Crown, because it is not sufficiently conclusive to
justify the infliction of the death penalty; nor should, in our humble
opinion, circumstantial evidence alone, no matter how apparently
conclusive, be permitted to lead any accused man to the gallows.
Great is the difference, however, between regarding the paper evidence
as non-proven and holding that the police committed wilful and corrupt
perjury. *
The Police.
Let us here say that there is no proof nor even reasonable around
for supposing that the Wellington police have been guilty of perjury.
That they should have been on the ground on the night of the murder :


HAWKINGS’ COAT.
A.— Stabs.
B— Bullet Holes
S-— Shot Charge.


HAWKINGS’ VEST, SHOWING WHERE THE KNIFE WAS BLOWN OUT OF LEFT-HAND POCKET.


cc
<
_J
O
o
o
z
<
I—
LU
_l
o
z
CO
\—
oc
I
CO
CO
o
z
k
£
<
I


that they should have brought away the gun from Chernis’ house on
their first visit thereto, and that they should have followed up some
other clues, no matter how trivial these clues may have appeared to
them, we consider to be indisputable. To suspect them of conspiring to
hang Chernis is to attribute to our local police a depth of depravity of
which they have never yet, so far as we can ascertain, given the faintest
symptoms. No one will accuse us of being biassed in favor of the
police generally. Elsewhere we have written in unsparing condemna-
tion of the British and British-Colonial system of selection and training
of these forces—more especially as regards the training and selection
of detectives. Nevertheless, we here place on record our opinion, not
lightly formed, that though there may be, and doubtless are, black
sheep among the police of this Colony, the force, taken as a whole, is
equal in character and intelligence, if not in experience, to any similar
force in the British Colonies, and superior to many. To conclude, in the
absence of overwhelming proof, that an inspector, two detectives, and a
constable have conspired, by means of manufactured evidence, to take the
life of a fellow man, is to rush to a conclusion as grossly illogical as it is
cruel and unjust.*
But strong as the evidence against Chernis appears to be, it must
steadily be kept in mind that men who have been executed on testimony
seemingly far clearer and more conclusive, have subsequently been proved
guiltless. The strength of any chain of evidence is no greater than that
of its weakest link—and there are weak links in the testimony against
Chernis. The absence of proof of adequate motive is one of these. The
failure of the prosecution to show that the testimony of Lee and the
affidavit of Blandford were untrustworthy, are others. Lee, it will be
remembered, deposed to seeing a stranger going up the Ngahauranga road
early in the morning after the murder, while Blandford made affidavit that
he had heard a rustling in the scrub, “ as of something or some one moving
about ”on the Ngahauranga road, on the night of the murder. Blandford
recounted the incident two or three days after to Robert Dybell. The
inability of the prosecution to show conclusively that the murder could
have been committed by means of the stiletto and gun are weak links;
nor did the Crown bring forward any satisfactory evidence to show that
Hawkings had not been threatened by any one in his neighbourhood or
was not on bad terms with anyone. Unless we are to conclude that the
statements made to Colonel Hume of Loxly Pickering, George Hogg, and
Frederick Sedgwick were deliberate lies, we have conclusive proof that a
man under the influence of liquor, foaming with rage, in possession of a
gun and acquainted with the locality, had a quarrel with Hawkings
shortly before the murder. This man is described as having “ a heavy,
* A recent article by the present writer in the “ Catholic Times ’’—and which article appeared
wlnle the Cliemis trial was occupying the public attention—was, we regret to learn, construed by
some into an attack on the police of New Zealand in general and the local Police in particular.
Nothing is further from the truth. The substance of the article was originally contributed by the
writer to “ Sydney Bulletin ” with reference to the Whitechapel murders, and he had the London
police m his mind at the time. Nevertheless, some-of the faults visible in the London police are
also present in this colony.— \Ed\ tor].


sandy moustache,” and in this connection we may mention that after the
trial a portion of the sleeve of Hawkings’ coat, which was stuck together
with congealed blood, was opened and examined with a microscope. In
the part opened, stuck to the coat by the congealed blood, wore found
Three Hairs which had Evidently Belonged to a Heavy, 111-kept
Sandy Moustache.
Our task is ended. “ Murder will out ” has passed into a proverb;
all true men will join with us in the earnest hope that the truth
of that proverb may be demonstrated in this case, and that Louis Chemis,
if innocent, may be returned to his home and guiltless little children; or*
if guilty, that his guilt may be made apparent, and the police and other
innocent persons at present, in the estimation of some, resting under a
stigma, may be relieved from all imputations.
The writer bids his readers farewell, trusting he may meet them, in
print, many times again, but that he may never again be historian of a
tragedy so foul and cruel as the Mystery of Kaiwarra,
[the end].




