

MURDER
MOST
FOUL !


Murder Most Foul !
By
DR. NEWELL DWIGHT HILLIS,
AN AMERICAN OBSERVER ON THE WESTERN FRONT.
DR. NEWELL DWIGHT HILLIS, one of America’s foremost
ministers, of Plymouth Church, Brooklyn (of which the first
pastor was Henry Ward Beecher), spent July and Aug'ust in a
personal investigation of the battlefields of Prance and Belgium from
which the Germans had been expelled. He desired to learn for himself
the exact conditions and to find out whether all the reports of German
atrocities would be confirmed by a personal study.
Since he returned to America Dr. Hillis has delivered a number of
public addresses. The discourse printed in the following pages was
delivered from the pulpit at Baltimore to a church packed to the doors.
It attracted enormous interest, enabling Americans to grasp the
meaning of Prussia’s war against civilisation, Christianity and
democracy.
To many in Great Britain the facts set out by Dr. Hillis are known.
But they are not known to all. They should be known to all. Once the
truth of this indictment sinks into the heart and mind of every citizen,
and the date when the war will end is determined. The war can only
end when the Prussian Government, responsible for these fearful outrages,
is shorn of its power for evil. “We are accepting this challenge of
hostile purpose/’ declared President Wilson, “because we know that in
such a Government following such methods we can never have a friend,
and that in the presence of its organised power, always lying in wait
to accomplish we know not what purpose, there can be no assured
security for the democratic Governments of the world.”


Printed in Great Britain by The Field & Queen (Hobacb Cox) Ltd.»
Bream’s Buildings, London, E.C, 4.


Murder Most Foul i
17l’ VERY American who has passed through France and the
(j edge of Belgium this year has returned home a permanently
saddened man. German cruelty and French agony have
cut a bloody gash in the heart, and there is no Dakin
solution that can heal the wound. Here upon this pulpit
rests a reproduction of an iron coin given as a token to each
German soldier. At the top is a German portrait of Deity, and under
neath are these words: “The good old German God.” To encourage?
the German soldier to cruelty and atrocity against Belgians and French
the Deity holds a weapon in his right hand, and to dull his conscience
and steel his heart to murder the token holds these words: “Smite
your enemy dead. The Day of Judgment will not ask you for your
reasons.” To this native characteristic Goethe was referring when he
said : “ The Prussian is naturally cruel; civilisation will intensify that
cruelty and make him a savage.” The German atrocities of the last
three years simply illustrate Goethe’s words, for we must confess that
German efficiency reached its highest point in the discovery of new
and horrible devices for torturing old men, helpless women, and little
children.
For three years German-Americans have protested that the stories
of German atrocities were to be disbelieved as English inventions,
Belgian lies, and French hypocrisies, but that day has gone by for ever.
When the representatives of the nations assemble for thei imai settle-
ment there will be laid before the representatives of Germany
affidavits, photographs, with other legal proofs that make the German
atrocities to be far better established than the scadpings of the Sioux
Indians on the Western frontiers, the murders in the Black Hole of
Calcutta, or the crimes of the Spanish Inquisition. On a battle-line
300 miles in length in whatsoever village the retreating Germans
passed, the following morning accredited men hurried to the scene to
make the record against the Day of Judgment. The photographs of
dead and mutilated girls, children, and old men tell no lies. Jurists
rank high two forms of testimony —the testimony of what mature
men have seen and heard and the testimony of children too innocent
to invent their statements but old enough to tell what they saw.
For the first time in history' the German has reduced savagery to
a science; therefore this great war for peace must go on until the
German cancer is cut clean out of the body.
The cold catalogue of German atrocities now documented and in
the government archives of the different nations makes up the most
sickening page in history. Days spent upon the records preserved in
Southern Belgium, Northern France, or in and about Paris, days spent


in the ruined villages of Alsace and Lorraine, leave one nauseated,
physically and mentally. It is one long, black series of legally-
documented atrocities. Every solemn pledge that Germany signed a
year and a half before at the Hague Convention as to safeguarding
the Red Cross, hospitals, cathedrals, libraries, women and children
and unarmed citizens are scoffed at as a “ scrap of paper/' These
atrocities also were committed, not in a mood of drunkenness nor an
Lour of anger, but were organised by a so-called German efficiency
and perpetrated on a deliberate, cold, precise, scientific policy of
German frightfulness. It is not simply that they looted factories,
carried away machinery, robbed houses, bombed every farmhouse and
granary, left no plough nor reaper, chopped down every pear tree and
plum tree, with every grape vine, and poisoned all wells! The Germans
slaughtered old men and matrons, mutilated captives in ways that can
only be spoken of by men in whispers; violated little girls until they
were dead; finding a calfskin nailed upon a barn door to be dried, they
nailed a babe beside it and wrote beneath the word “ Zwei " ; they
thrust women and children between themselves and soldiers coming
up to defend their native land; bombed and looted hospitals, Red
Cross buildings; violated the white flag—while the worst atrocities
cannot even be named in a mixed audience.
THE KAISER BRANDED HIS PEOPLE AS “HUNS.”
No one understands the German people as well as the Kaiser.
President Wilson, in a spirit of magnanimity, patience, and goodwill,
distinguished between the Kaiser and the Prussian Government, and
over against them put the German people. But Germany's Chambers
of Commerce, Hamburg's Board of Trade, and certain popular
assemblies would have none of this, and in the fury of their anger
passed resolutions, saying: “ What our Government is we are. Their
acts are our acts. Their deeds and military plans are our plans."
Knowing his people through and through, the Kaiser called his soldiers
before him and gave them this charge:* “Make yourselves more
frightful than the Huns under Attila. See that for a thousand years no
enemy mentions the very name of ‘ Germany ' without shuddering."
Why do the German people say they feel so terribly because the authors
of the world call them “Huns" and “barbarians"? Who named
them “LI tins " ? Their Kaiser. Who christened them “barbarians"?
Their Kaiser. Who likened the German soldiers to bloodhounds
held upon the leash by the Kaiser's thong as they strained upon the
leash with bloody jaws, longing to tear their French and Belgian prey ?
With bloody fingers the Kaiser said: “ I baptise thee ‘ Hun ' and
‘barbarian/” Let the Kaiser’s words stand —“ For a thousand years
no man shall speak the word ‘ Hun ' without shuddering."
All wise men trace deeds, wicked or good, back.to the philosophic
thinking of the doer, just as they trace bitter water back to a poisoned
spring. What the individual or the nation thinks in his heart, that
he does in the life. Judas thinks in terms of avarice and greed, and
his philosophy results in treason and murder. The Kaiser, Nietzsche,
* At Wilhelm shaven on July 3, 1900, when German troops were embarking tor
China.


Bethmann-Hollweg, Von Bissing, and Plauss think and teach the
theory of iron force, the right of big Germany to loot little Belgium
or Northern France, and drill them in the belief that Germany’s right
is the right of the lion over the lamb, and that no questions will be
asked by a just God on the Day of Judgment.
The originator of this world war was the Kaiser; Treitschke was its
historian; Nietzsche its philosopher; Yon Bissing and Yon Hindenburg
its executives. The murder of Edith Cavell and of hundreds of women
and children on the Lusitania, the rape of Belgium, the assassination
of Northern France, were the outer exhibition in deeds of the inner
philosophy of force. Their great master, whom they celebrate and
never tire of praising, Nietzsche, judges Germany aright. On page 38,
in his “ Ecce Homo,” Nietzsche says : “ Wherever Germany extends her
sway she ruins culture.” On page 124 of the same volume he says:
“ I feel it my duty to tell the Germans that every crime against culture
lies on their conscience.” By “ culture ” Nietzsche means painting,
sculpture, cathedrals, international laws, the Athenian sweetness,
reasonableness, and light. “ Germany's goal should be a super-
Hercules or Goliath, with the club. Germany has no gift for culture
of the intellect. As to that there is no other culture beside France. 7 '
THE IN! ERNATIONAL BURGLAR S EXCUSE.
Consider the reflex influence of Germany’s philosophy of militarism
upon her statesmen and diplomats. In one of his greatest speeches
Edmund Burke speaks of “ the peculiar sanctity attaching to the word
of a foreign minister.” From Phocion to John Hay prime ministers
have been jealous of their pledges. Lincoln speaks of the failure of
a government to make good its word as “ a crime against civilisation.”
Business men scofi at the trickster, who does not count his written
pledge more precious than life itself.
With the standards of civilised States in mip^-recall the intellectual
and moral atrocities of the Kaiser and Bethmann-Hollweg. In-1911
the German Foreign Office reaffirmed the Treaty with England and
France to observe the neutrality of Belgium in the event of war with
France. The French and English Governments now have full
knowledge of the conference between the Austrian Emperor and the
Kaiser at the Potsdam Palace on July 5, with the agreement to launch
the war on August 1. When the war proclamation was delayed until
August 3, the Kaiser’s representative used this sentence in his speech
in the Reichstag: “We must not postpone the agreement entered into
with Austria at the conference of July 5.” For more than three weeks,
therefore, before war was declared, Germany and Austria were pre-
paring cannon, guns, equipment, and as soon as the last buckle was
on the harness and the last rifle in the hands of the soldiers, on August 3,
war was declared. Then Bethmann-Hollweg sent out this statement
to the world as to why the Kaiser and himself counted an international
treaty a “ scrap of paper.”
He said: “As to Belgium —we are now in a state of necessity, and
necessity knows no law. The wrong-—I speak openly—that we are
committing we will endeavour to make good ai soon as our military
goal has been reached. We have now only one thought —how to hack


our way through.- So the international burglars excuse is that he
must hack his way through his neighbour’s Louse and kill his family
because that house stands between himself and the Frenchman’s vault
whose gold he wants to steal !
GERMAN PHILOSOPHY DEGRADES GERMAN OFFICERS
> AND SOLDIERS.
That is why President Wilson, answering the Pope, said that no
treaty signed by the Kaiser and his Government means anything. And
here is Bernstorff, German Ambassador in Washington, who forgets that
cannibals and savages even consider that eating salt in another Indian’s
tent or white man’s house is a pledge of truth; while this Judas
Ambassador dines at the White House at night and goes on plotting
seditions in Mexico, the blowing up of our munition factories and
the killing of our people. Bernstorff smiled as he kept one hand
above the table and in the other hand under the table whetted a dagger
on his boots with which to stab his host in the back.
Witness the discovery of treachery to Norway. After several
Norwegian steamers had been mysteriously sunk at sea the German
Consul was found travelling back and forth from the Foreign Office in
Berlin, filling his trunk with bombs and glass tubes containing the
cultures of glanders to spread one of the most deadly diseases, to anni-
hilate men, horses, and cattle, and protecting these instruments of
death by the seals of the Berlin Foreign Office. The substance of
Germany’s answer to Norway’s protest was the sneering answer:
“What are you going to do about it?” Germany’s Ambassador
to the Argentine Republic advising the sinking of Argentine ships so
as to leave no trace behind is a part of the same cunning, devilish
Germany diplomacy that exhibits these German Ambassadors as a
composite Judasi, Machiavelli, and Mephistopheles, united and carried
up to the nth power of diabolism. No wonder the Kaiser baptised
them “ Huns ” and “ barbarians ” !
The German philosophy has dehumanised Germany's officers and
men. Later on I shall give a detailed account of the devastated regions
of Northern France, but here and now let us confine observations
to the ruined villages and towns of Eastern France. Pulling his iron
token out of his pocket—that exhibited Deity as a destroying soldier—
the German officer and private reads the words beneath: “ Smite your
enemy dead. The Day of Judgment will not ask you for your reasons.”
Having, therefore, full liberty to loot, these Germans became wild
beasts. The plan had been “ Brussels in one week, Paris in two weeks,
London in two months,” and then two pockets filled with rings, bracelets',
and watches from Paris or Nancy for the sweethearts at home.
When the German army in Lorraine was defeated by oneJialf its
number it fell northward, passing through French towns and villages
where there were no Frenchmen, no guns, and where no shots were
fired. During July and August we went slowly from one ruined town
to another, talking with the women and the children, comparing the
photographs and the full official records made at the time with tho
statements of the poor, wretched survivors, who lived in cellars where


once there had been beautiful houses, orchards, vineyards—but where
new was only desolation.
In Gerbevillier, standing beside their graves, I studied the photo-
graph of the bodies of fifteen old men whom the Germans lined up and
shot because, there were no young soldiers to kill; heard the detailed
story of a woman whose son was first hung to a pear tree in the garden,
and when the officer and soldier had left him and were busy setting fire
to the next house, she cut the rope, revived the strangled youth, only
to find the soldiers had returned, and while the officer held her hands
behind her back, his assistant poured petrol on the son’s head and
clothes, set fire to him, and, while he staggered about, a flaming torch,
they shrieked with laughter. When they had burned all the houses and
retreated the next morning, the Prefect of Lorraine reached that
Gethsemane and photographed the bodies of thirty aged men lying as
they fell, the bodies of women stripped and at last slain.
A THOUSAND INDIVIDUAL ATROCITIES.
In the next village stood the ruined square belfry into which the
Germans had lifted machine-guns, then forced every woman and child—•
275 in number—into the little church, and notified the French soldiers
that if they fired upon the machine-guns they would kill their own
women and children. After several days’ hunger and thirst, at mid-
night these brave women slipped a little boy through the church
window and bade their husbands fire upon the Germans in the belfry,
saying they preferred death to the indignities they were suffering. And
so these Frenchmen turned their guns, and in blowing that machine-
gun out of the belfry killed twenty of their own wives and children.
In a hundred years of history where shall you find a recotd of any other
race who call themselves civilised who are such sneaking cowards that
they could not fight like men or play the game fairly, but in their
chattering terror put women and little children before them as a Field?
Proof overwhelming. Her© are in brief the records of more than a
thousand individual atrocities that go with the original photographs,
affidavits, and documents resting in the archives of France against the
day of reckoning.


Hera is German efficiency for you—and organised by the devil
himself. Take these pages found in the diaries of German soldiers,
August 22. Notebook of Private Max Thomas: “Our soldiers are so
excited we are like wild beasts. To-day destroyed eight houses, with
their inmates. Bayoneted two men with their wives and a girl of
eighteen. The little one almost unnerved me, so innocent was her
expression.' 7 Diary of Eitel Anders: “In Yendre all the inhabitants,
without exception, were brought out and shot. This shooting was heart-
breaking as they all knelt down and prayed. It is real sport, yet it
was really terrible to watch/ 7
“ At Haecht I saw the dead body of a young girl nailed to the cut-
side door of a cottage by her hands. She was about fourteen or sixteen
years old/ 7 Page 21. Affidavits PI-67.
In returning from Malines eight drunken soldiers were marching
through the street. A little child of two years came cut, and a soldier
skewered the child on his bayonet and carried it away, while his
comrades sang. D. 10-45.
Withdrawing from Plofstade, in addition to other atrocities, the
Germans cut off both hands of a boy of sixteen. At the inquest affidavits
were taken from twenty-five witnesses, who saw the boy before he died
or just afterwards.
Passing through Haecht/ in addition to the young women whom, the
Germans violated and killed, affidavits were taken and the photographs
of a child three years old nailed to, a door by its hands and feet.
Affidavits D. 100-8.
CAREFULLY PLANNED IN ADVANCE.
That all these atrocities were carefully planned in advance for
terrorising the people is proved by the fact that on the morning of
August 25 the officers, who had received great kindness from Madame
Roomans, a notary’s wife, warned her to make her escape immediately,
as the looting and killing of all the citizens, men, women, and children,
was about to begin.
These records could be multiplied by thousands. Upon the retreat
from one city alone inquests w T ere held upon the bodies of over 600
victims, including very aged men and women and babes unborn,
removed by the bayonet from their mothers. It is the logical result of
the charge of the Kaiser to his army: “ Give no quarter and take mo
prisoners. Let all who fall into your hands be at your mercy. 77 The
General Staff of the German army published a manual Several years
before they began this war. They explicitly charged their soldiers to
break the will of the people by cruelty. Witness this from the
“ War Manual 77 on page 52: “A war is conducted with energy merely
against the combatants of the enemy States and the positions they
occupy, but it will and must in like manner seek to destroy the
total intellectual and material resources of the latter. 77
And witness this injunction to atrocity, page 35 : “ By steeping him-
self in military history an officer will be able to guard himself against
excessive humanitarianism. It will teach him that certain severities are
indispensable to war. Humanitarian claims, such as the protection of
men and their goods, can only be taken into consideration in so far as


the nature and object of the war permit/ 7 Therefore the War General
gave each German soldier his token, large as a silver dollar, bidding the
soldier “ Strike him dead. The Day of Judgment will ask you no ques-
tions/ 7 Jesus said: “ Take heed that ye offend not one of My little
ones/ 7 The Kaiser says: “I have done away with Jesus’s teachings/ 7
The Master, who loved the little children, said: “ I was an hungered and
ye gave Me no meat. I was athirst and ye gave Me no drink. Therefore,
depart from Me into everlasting fire, prepared for the devil and his
fellows. 77 The War Staff answers: “ Don't be afraid. Look at your
token. The Kaiser will take care of you in the Day of Judgment. Kill
old men and little children, loot merchants 7 houses, violate women;
the Kaiser will see that the God of Justice asks you no questions/ 7 The
result was logical and inevitable.
TERRORISM A NECESSARY PRINCIPLE.
On August 27 General Yon Lieber gave out this proclamation : “ The
town of Waevre will be set on fire and destroyed without distinction of
persons. The innocent will suffer with the guilty. 77 After this town
was destroyed and all the inhabitants killed, from the diary of a
soldier slain on the retreat we find this page: “We lived gorgeously;
two or three bottles of champagne at each meal; all the girls we want.
It is line sport. 77 Are we surprised that many of the letters and journals
taken from the bodies of Germans quotq General Yon Hartman’s
sentence: “ Terrorism is a principle made necessary by military con-
siderations. 77 German-American objections that these towns were
destroyed because the inhabitants had fired upon the invading arm}
from the windows of their houses are conclusively met and answered by
another letter, written by a German officer to his wife : “ On approaching
a village a soldier is sent on in advance to insert a Belgian rifle in the
cellar window or stable, and,.of course, when this weapon is found We
take it to the Burgomaster, and then the sport begins.’ 7
On a little board in one ruined village I read these words: v< Marie,
aged sixteen; dead August 24, 1915. ‘ Vengeance is mine; I will repay,
saith the Lord. 7 ” The hundreds of atrocities personally investigated
only serve to interpret Ambassador Moi-genthau’s statement as to
Armenia —-that the Turkish soldiers and German officers massacred in
Armenia half a million people, that they might move into their farm-
houses and little shops and stores.
The glory of every great city and country is its scholars, with their
love of truth and their stainless lives. We have had our civilisation at
the hands of men who loved the truth supremely, pursued the truth
eternally, and cherished the truth above their fear of hell or hope of
heaven. The world has its liberty, its science, and its law at the hands
of the heroes who preferred the truth above life. Concerning the
patriots, the reformers, and the statesmen, we can only say they were
stoned, they were sawn asunder,- they were crucified in Jerusalem,
poisoned in Athens, tortured in Ephesus, exiled in Florence, burned at
the stake in Oxford, assassinated in Washington. But the iron autocracy
and militarism of Germany debauched her university men. Here in
my hand is an address to the civilised world, signed by ninety-three


German- professors. They all receive their salaries from State
endowments. Any hour the Kaiser can cut off their income.
When the indignation of the civilised world flamed out against
Germany in the winter of 1915, the German Government asked these
professors to sign a document, and these men had been so degraded by
the German philosophy of militarism and autocracy that they obeyed —-
losing their souls to save their salary. And consider what they signed !
In the previous August Bethmann-Hollweg issued a statement to the
world, saying that, as to the violation of Belgium’s neutrality, “ the
wrong—l speak openly—that we are committing,” &c.
GERMAN PHILOSOPHY OF MILITARISM HAS DEBAUCHED
GERMANY’S UNIVERSITY PROFESSORS.
These ninety-three professors signed a statement, saying: “It is not
true that we wtonged Belgium.” In the Kaiser’s address* that has
been published, he says :•“ Give no quarter, take no prisoners. Let all
who fall into your hands be at your mercy. Make yourself as terrible
as the Huns.” Now this address was circulated in postal cards all over
Germany. Realising the mistake, these professors sign a statement,
saying: “It is not true that our soldiers ever injured the life of a single
Belgian.’ 7 Socrates or Dante, or even Galileo, Savonarola, Milton,
Victor Hugo, or Lincoln would have died a thousand deaths by faggots
or upon the rack rather than have signed their names to such a, state-
ment—to lies. The Kaiser and Bethmann-Hollweg must have been
desperate and bewildered when they had to endeavour to counteract
their own documents at the beginning of the war by asking their pro-
fessors to contradict these documents during the middle of the war. It
makes every university professor almost ashamed of his calling. Thfnk
of Harnack and Eucken, with their moral cowardice and their intel-
lectual impotency! Plainly that is what Nietzsche meant when he
said (page 134, “ Ecce Homo ”): “ Every crime against culture that has
been committed for 100 years rests upon Germany.”
All men love their native land, but the Frenchman’s love has a
unique quality. The patriotism of the Englishman is undemonstrative.
The Britisher surrounds his home and his garden with a high brick wall,
conceals his finer feelings from his closest friends, and when he enters his
club in Pall Mall and disappears behind the threshold the door is closed
upon a tomb. The American’s patriotism is largely academic ; national
safety through isolation breeds contempt for danger. The time was
when his love of country was vociferous on the Fourth of July, but the
enthusiasm has died down, until he is now ready to extinguish even a
fire-cracker. The occasional speaker deals in historical statements about
the four wars fought by our country. But the Frenchman’s love of
country has a tender, gentle, wooing note. He speaks of La Belle France
as Dante spoke of Beatrice, as Petrarch spoke of Laura, and the name
of France lingers upon his lips as music trembles in the air after the
song is sung. The reason, doubtless, is found in the fact that the French
people have carved the hillsides and smoothed the valleys and adorned
* At Wilhelmshaven on July 3, 1900, when the German troops were embarking
for China to suppress the Boxer Rebellion.


the ridges and mountains with vineyards, until the whole land is a
thing of radiant beauty. It is love that has mad© France beautiful,
just as the lark, after completing the nest, makes it soft and warm by
pulling the down out of her own bosom. The French people love France
as an artist loves his own canvas, as Bellini loved the missal he had
illuminated, and as that young architect loved the little Roslyn chapel
upon whose delicate capitals he had lavished his very soul.
THE FRENCHMAN’S LOVE OF FRANCE.
Would you have an emblem of France in the month of June, with
her wide, fat valleys, her green pasturesi, and the hillsides up which
the pines climbed in serried regiments? If so, take a great robe of green
velvet lying loosely on the floor, the creases and velvet ridges answering
to the rivers and the valleys and the hills, and then fling a handful of
rubies, pearls, and sapphires down, so that these gems will lie within the
creases as the lovely French cities at the foot of the hills and beside
the rivers, and you have France, the beautiful; France, the mother of
the modern arts and sciences; France, full of sweetness and light—-that
France concerning which Heinrich Heine exclaimed: “ Oh, France, thou
daughter of beauty ! Thy name is culture ! ”
The three great enemies of farms and towns and cities have been fire,
flood, and earthquake. Witness the city of St. Pierre. An interior
explosion blew oft the cap of the mountain and a flood of gas poured
down upon the lovely city, asphyxiated the citizens, and left not one
house standing. Witness that mighty convulsion in San Francisco,
which brought thousands of bricks crashing down in ruins. Witness the
fir© in Chicago, that turned the great city into twisted iron and ashes.
In New Zealand there is a lake called Avernus, the birdless lake.
Poisonous gases rise from the black flood of water, and soon the lark,
with its song, and the eagle, with its flight, fall into* the poisonous flood.
But all these images are quit© inadequate to explain the desolation,
the devastation of France upon the retreat of the Germans. About forty
miles north of Paris one strikes the ruined region. Then hour after hour
passes, wliii© with slow movement and breaking heart one journeys 100
miles to the north and zigzags 125 miles south again through that black
region. The time was when it was a wild land, rough, with forests filled
with wolves. Then the Frenchman entered the scene. He subdued all
the wild grasses to which Julius Caesar referred in his story of the war
in France; h© drained the valleys and widened the streams into canals.
He enriched the fields, and made them wave with gold. He surrounded
the meadows with odorous hedges, and banked where there had been a
swamp with perfumed shrubs. Slowly he threw arches of stone across
the streams and carved the bridges until they were rich in art, while
everything made for use was carried up to outbreaking beauty. The
roof of the barn had lovely lines; the approach to the house was upon a
curved road; the highways were shaded by two rows of noble tree®.
The stony hillside was terraced, and there the vines grew purple in the
sun. How simple was his life! What a sanctuary his little home! With
what rich embroidery of wheat and corn he covered all the hills! He
was prudent without being stingy, thrifty without being mean. He


saved against old age with one hand and distributed to his children with
the other.
And; having lavished all his love upon the little farmhouse, the
granary, and the barn; having pruned these grape vines with their
clusters of white and purple until each seemed like a friend, dear as
that miraculous picture was to Baucis and Philemon, having at last
made every tree to be shapely, his little world was invested with
affection and beauty.
Do you remember how that Florentine artist, after his day’s stint
was done, toiled upon his studio, slowly carving the capitals, collecting
a little terrarootta from Cyprus, an old manuscript from Athens, a lovely
head of Apollo from Ephesus, and iridescent glass from Persia., with a
bit of old Tyrian purple lending a spot of flame in one corner and a little
mosaic from Thebes colouring another? When he saw the end was
approaching, w T hile on a visit to Egypt, he asked that he might be
carried home to die in the studio, which he made rich with his soul.
WHAT THE HIDEOUS HUN HAS DONE.
In some such way as that the French peasants loved their land, and
then lost it. One morning the enemy stood at the gate. The farmer
with his pruning knife was no match for a German with a machine-gun,
and down he went under the plum tree he was pruning. The devastated
regions of France are like unto a devil world. All the pear and plum
trees have fallen over under the stroke of a German axe, and are dead
and dry. Here and there one sees an occasional tree where a half-inch
of bark remains, and, sympathising with the peasant's sorrow, the roots
have sent a flood of sympathetic tears and sap out into one little
branch, amidst the death of a hundred other boughs, that flamed in
May its rose and pink of bloom, then in August gave its red glow of
clustered food. But as for the rest, it is desolation. Gone all the beau-
tiful bridges—they have been dynamited. Gone all the lovely and
majestic thirteenth-century churches. Gone all the galleries, for every
city of 5000 people in France had its quarterly exhibition of paintings
sent out from Paris, and some of the finest art treasures in the world
have perished. The land has been put back to where it was when Julius
Caesar described it 2000 years ago —a wild land, and waste, growing up
with thorns and thistles. That proclamation on the wall tells the whole
story: “ Let no building stand, no vine or tree. Before retreating let
each well be plentifully polluted with corpses and with creosote.” The
spirit was this: “ Since w© Germans cannot have this land, no one else
shall.”
Your eyes never saw a more exquisite bit of carving for the corner
of a roof than this (a spray of myrtle leaves, carved in stone, after the
Germans had destroyed the cathedral of Arras). Look at this firebrand.
Every German company of soldiers carried one automobile lorry filled
with these firebrands, with a tank of gasoline hanging beneath the axles.
One of the historic chateaux is that of Avricourt, rich in noble associar
tions of history. It was one of the buildings specially covered by a
clause in the international agreement between England, Germany,
France, the United States, and all the civilised nations, safeguarding


historic buildings. For many months it was the home of Prince Eitel,
the Kaiser's second son.
Forced to retreat, the aged French servants, who understood the
electric lighting and gas plant and served Eitel during his occupancy,
when the judge and jury held the trial at the ruins of the chateau,
stated that they heard the German officers telling Eitel that he would
disgrace the German name if he destroyed a building that had no
relation to war and could be of practically no aid or comfort to the
French army, and he would make his own name a name of shame and
contempt, of obloquy and scorn. But the man would not yield. He
brought in great wagons and moved to the freight cars at the station
absolutely every object that was in the splendid chateau. And, having
promised to leave the building uninjured, he stopped his car at the
entrance and exit gates of the ground, ran back to the historic building
with a can of oil that he had secreted, filled the asbestos in this ball
of perforated iron, ran through the halls, and waited until the flames
were well in progress, and then ordered his men to light the fuse of a
dynamite bomb.
All the testimony was taken immediately afterward from aged
servants and from the little children, and the degeneracy revealed has
not been surpassed since the first chapter of Romans was written on
the unnatural crimes of the ancient world. There are the copies of
the affidavits. In the ruins, hard beside the black marble steps, I
picked up this firebrand with which Prince Eitel assassinated a
building that belonged to the civilised world.
A MIND THAT CAN MULTIPLY AND EXPLOIT.
One of the things that has horrified the civilised vrorld has been
the ruin of Rheims Cathedral. Germany, of course, was denied the
gift of imagination. It belongs to France, to Italy, and to Athens.
Heinrich Heine, her own poet, says that Germany appreciates architec-
ture so little that it is only a question of time when, “ with his giant
hammer, Thor will at last spring up again and shatter to bits all Gothic
cathedrals.” This gifted Hebrew had the vision that literally saw
the Germans pounding to pieces the Cathedrals at Louvain and Ypres,
at Arras, Bapaume, St. Quentin, and Rheims.
The German mind is a hearty, mediocre mind, that can multiply
and exploit the inventions and discoveries of the other races. The
Germans contributed practically nothing to the invention of the
locomotive, the steamboat, the Marconigram, the automobile, the
aeroplane, the phonograph, the sewing machine, the reaper, the electric
light. Americans invented for Germany her revolver, her machine
gun, her turreted ship, and her torpedo submarine. In retrospect, it
seems absolutely incredible that Germany could have been so helplessly
and hopelessly unequal to the invention of the tools that have made
her rich. But that is not her gift. If Sheffield can give her a model
ktiife, Germany can reproduce that knife in quantities and undersell
Sheffield. The German people keep step in a regiment, in a factory,
and on a ship, and therefore are wdiolesalers. The French mind is
creative; stands for individual excellence, and is at the other extreme


from the German temperament. It is this lack of imagination
that explains Nietzsche’s statement that for 200 years Germany
has been the enemy of culture, while Heinrich Heine declared the name
of culture was France.
WHY GERMANY DESTROYS CATHEDRALS.
It is this total lack of mental capacity to appreciate architecture
that explains Germany’s destruction of some of the noblest buildings of
the world. She cannot by any chance conceive how the other races look
upon her vandalism. Her own foreign government expressed it publicly
in one of her State papers: “Let the neutrals cease chattering about
cathedrals. Germany does not care one straw if all the galleries and
churches in the world were destroyed, providing we gain our ends.”
Guizot, in his history of civilisation, presents three tests of a civilised
people : First, they revere their pledges and honour; second, they
reverence and pursue the beautiful in painting, architecture, and
literature; third, they exhibit sympathy toward the poor, the weak,
and the unfortunate.
Now apply those tests to the Kaiser and his War Staff, and you
understand why Rheims Cathedral is a ruin. No building since the
Parthenon was more precious to the world’s culture. What majesty
and dignity in the lines! What a wealth of statuary! How
wonderful the twelfth century glass! With what lightness did these
arches leap into the air! Now the great bombs have torn holes
through the roof; only little bits of glass remain. Broken are the
arches, ruined some of the flying buttresses; the altar where Jeanne
d’Arc stood at the crowning of Charles is quite gone. The great
library, the bishop’s palace, all the art treasures are in ruins.
Ancient and noble buildings do not belong to a race; they belong
to the world. Sacred for ever the threshold of the Parthenon, once
pressed by the feet of Socrates and Plato; thrice sacred that aisle of
Santa Croce in Florence, dear to Dante and Savonarola.; to be
treasured for ever the solemn beauty of Westminster Abbey, holding
the dust of the men of supreme genius. In front of the wreck of the
Cathedral of Rheims, all blackened with German fire, broken with the
German hammer, is the statue of Jeanne d’Arc. There she stands,
immortal for ever, guiding the steed of the sun with the left hand,
lifting the banners of peace and liberty with the right. By some
strange chance no bomb injured that bronze. Oh, beautiful emblem
of the day when the spirit of liberty, riding in a chariot of the sun,
shall guide a greater host made up of all the peoples who revere the
treasures of art and architecture and law and liberty and Christ’s
poor, and will ride on to a victory that will be the sublimes! conquest
in the annals of time!
Over against the greatest military machine that was ever forged
and controlled by merciless and cruel men, who have given up all
faith in God, who practise the Ten Commandments with the “Not”
left out, who Have stamped out of the souls of their soldiers every
instinct of pity and sympathy, are our Allies. Here is Belgium, after
all her agony, ready to die to the last man rather than submit to a


cruel master, the Kaiser. And here is England, and all her colonies.
How glorious this land! “This land of such dear souls, this dear,
dear land/' as Shakespeare said. She has already sacrificed one-third
of her total wealth, a million of her sons; and here is France, not bled
white, but tired after three years of grievous toil. Her bankers are
tired, her business men are tired, the women and the little children
are tired, for they have struggled unto blood striving against a cruel
militarism for which they were unprepared.
“EITHER GOD IS DEAD, OR GERMANY IS DOOMED.”
The French boy is like unto one who carries food and drink a long
way unto perishing men until the heavy burden forces his fingers to
relax—but give the youth a little time, and he will take up his task
afresh and bring water to* the thirsty soldier. The coming of the .Ameri-
can troops has been a tonic to' France and has rested her weariness.
Said the French wife as she sent away her young husband with smiles
and words of pride: “I give him gladly; I am only his wife—France
is his mother/' And here is Great Britain, whose fleet to-day holds
the German battleships behind the Kiel Canal and safeguards our
republic, New York and Boston, On one side of the silver dollar write
these words: “In God wo trust/' and on the other side of the dollar
write the words, “ And in England's navy." Every force that makes
toward justice, humanity, and liberty is on our side. Soon or late, an
unseen Providence will take off the wheels from the chariot of the
enemies of Truth and Justice. That dying German officer in Roye
packed the genius of a moral universe into a few words. Wounded
last winter through the spinal cord, unable to move the lower part of
his body, for weeks he waited for death. Two aged Frenchwomen
cared for the dying man. Little by little the wings of the Angel of
Death fanned away the mist before his eyes. One day the German
officer sent for the village priest and told him that the Yon Hindenburg
line was nearly complete; that the order to retreat had been given;
that the home of these aged women who had cared for him so tenderly
would be burned; that not one church, house, barn, vineyard, or
orchard would be left. The news crushed the old priest. In his dying
hour a righteous wrath filled the heart of the German prisoner. These
are his last words, as I transcribed them from the lips of that man
of God, standing one day in Noyon :Curses upon this army! Curses
upon our Kaiser and his War Staff! Ten thousand curses upon my
country! Either God is dead, or Germany is doomed! " The officer
had come to understand that soon or late the wheels of God will grind
to nothingness those who wrong God's children. “ Woe unto the man
who offends one of My little ones. It were better for him that a.
millstone were hanged about his neck, and that he were drowned
in the depths of the seas."
Better days are coming. We may have to enter the wilderness,
but soon or late the pilgrim host will enter the Promised Land and
hang out signals of victory. Truth is stronger than error; liberty
is stronger than despotism, God is stronger than Satan; right makes
might, and must prevail. In this faith we must strive on for a peace


that will safeguard democracy, defend the frontier lines, vindicate
the rights of little lands, destroy militarism and autocracy. During
the January snows a dear friend and noble surgeon at the head of
a hospital at the front wrote me a letter which stays my heart as
the anchor the ship in time of storm. The ground was deep with
snow, many wounded men had been carried in from the field, but at
midnight, when his work was done, the physician wrote me this letter:
“ This war is of God. Sometimes it is peace that is hell. The
soldier's life is a life of poverty, obedience, self-sacrifice; we know what
the civilian's life is. But for the chastisement of this war, Berlin
and Vienna, London and Paris, wnuld have descended into hell within
three generations. I once spoke in your Plymouth on the blessings of
peace; if ever again I have the privilege, I shall speak on the blessings
of war. I never dreamed that men could be so noble. For three
months I have slept on the stone; for three months before that in a
tent; for six months I have not been in a bed; but I have never been
so happy. I have acquired the fine freedom of a dog, and, like a
dog, I wear a metal tag around my neck, so that they may know to
whom I belong when it happens that I can no longer speak. And never
was a man engaged in a cause so noble. I have seen Belgium; I l ave
seen a lamb torn by the wolf; lam on the side of the lamb. I know
the explanations the wolf has to offer —they do me at this battle for
your own good, for right here at this Western front this war will be
decided, just where all the great wars of history have always been
decided. It is decided already, but will take the enemy some time
yet to find it out."
What does this noble scholar mean ? History makes that meaning
plain! No wine until the purple clusters are crushed. No linen
until the flax is bleeding and broken. No redemption without
shedding of blood. No rich soil for men's bread until the rocks are
ploughed with ice glaciers and subdued with fire billows. This war
was not brought by God, but, having come, let us believe that His
providence can overrule it for the destruction of all war. When
Germany is beaten to her knees, becomes repentant, offers to make
restitution for her crimes, then, and not till then, can this war stop.


MURDER
MOST
FOUL!
