

MURRAY’S GUIDE TO THE GOLD DIGGINGS.
THE AUSTRALIAN
GOLD DIGGINGS:
WHERE THEY ARE,
<0
HOW TO GET AT THEM;
' WITH LETTERS FROM SETTLERS AND DIGGERS
TELLING
HOW TO WORK THEM.
LONDON:
STEWART AND MURRAY, 15, OLD BAILEY,
" AUSTRALIANNEW ZEALAND GAZETTE" OFFICE.
PRICE ONE SHILLING.


Patent detached Lever Watch, in Engraved or Engine-
•turned
Double Backed Gold Cases, Compensation Balance
. £12
18
0
Ditto, size for Gentlemen .
. 16
15
0
Ditto, with Enamelled Dial ....
11
18
0
Ditto, size for Gentlemen .
. 15
15
0
Ditto ditto, in Hunting Case ....
. 18
0
0
Ditto ditto, with Gold Dial.....
. 19
10
0
53, CHEAPSIDE, LONDON
BENSON AND SO N'S
M : 15 : 0
(g@Lle)
THE SAME MOVEMENTS IN SILVER CASES,
£2*: 15 : 0.
THEY are of the Horizontal construction, with highly-finished
Movements, Four Holes Jewelled, Maintaining Power to continue
going whilst winding up, Double Backed Cases, and every other
Improvement.
A Written Warranty given wUh every "Watch, and Two
Years' Trial allowed.
WATCHES MADE EXPRESSLY FOR INDIA.
The following are the Prices:
Messrs. Benson & Son have upwards of Six Hundred and
Fifty Watches always to toe selected from.
Persons about Emigrating, and being desirous to take with
them an excellent WATCH, will do well to call and inspect
Messrs. Benson & Son’s extensive Assortment of Watches,
suited to all Climates.
*** OBSERVE THE ADDRESS—S 3, CHEAPSIDE,
Three doors from Bow Church.
V. B.—This is the only Original House of the above name.


EMI^RATIOI.
BENJAMIN EDGINGTON,
2, DUKE STREET, LONDON BRIDGE,
INVITES all who are embarking for the Colonies or the Gold Regions,
to inspect his
EMIGRATION TENTS.
A lofty and extensive Warehouse has been added to the premises,
where a variety of Tents are erected, so that Settlers and others may
select at once the Tent best adapted for their purpose.
THE MILITARY & EMIGRATION TENTS
Exhibited in Class 8, and for which a PRIZE MEDAL was awarded
by the Jurors, may also be seen at the above Warehouse.
Jflanjurrs an& Qkn ts for sale or Sire.
RICK CLOTHS, WITH POLES, &c., COMPLETE.
Be particular to address at full length,
Benjamin Edgington, 2, Duke Street, Southwark.


You are going far away, where no tailors can be met,
And clothes, and boots, and hosiery you’ll wish that you may get,
So I reckon you had better just procure them ere you go,
At Samuels’ Outfit Warehouse, where the prices are all low,
At Samuels’ Outfit, &c.
Sure, if you start without a stock, howe’er you pick up gold,
In wealth you’ll but be comfortless, exposed to wet and cold;
And midst the lonely wilderness you’ll sadly rue the day
On which you passed by Samuels’ house, not heeding what I say.
On which you passed, &c.
IMPORTANT TO EMIGRANTS.
HAMUEL, BROTHERS, TAILORS and OUTFITTERS, 29,
IO LUDGATE HILL, invite attention to the following, from all persons
about to Emigrate to AUSTRALIA, CALIFORNIA, or any other Colony
throughout the World.
SAMUEL, BROTHERS, impressed with a deep anxiety for the comfort
of those who are about to quit their native land, respectfully beg to intimate
that they have added an important feature to their extensive and well-known
Establishment, 29, Ludgate-hill, namely:—An Outfitting Department;
where government officers, clergymen, surgeons, surveyors, factors, clerks,
i • _ j itri+l-i omirrrafirm ma.v vplv nnnn on
mechanics, and gentlemen connected with emigration.
Outfit of the best Materials and Workmanship. Tc
consideration of the utmost importance.
OUTFIT for £4. OUTFIT for £7 10s
2 strong jackets 1 overcoat
1 do. trousers 1 superior cloth frock coat
1 flushing do. 2 fancy vests
3 vests 1 do. with sleeves
1 duck frock 1 black cloth trousers
1 Scotch cap 1 beaverteen jacket
1 hat 1 do. do. lined warm
12 striped cotton shirts 1 do. trousers do.
2 pair shoes 1 fancy do.
6 handkerchiefs 1 duck frock
13 cotton hose 1 Scotch cap
1 pair braces 1 hat
6 towels 12 striped cotton shirts
Razors, shaving box,and 2 pair shoes
glass 6 handkerchiefs
1 knife and fork 12 cotton hose
1 tin plate 1 pair braces
1 pint tin mug 6 towels
1 table and tea spoon Razors, shaving box, & glass
4 lbs. marine soap 1 knife and fork
1 hair brush and comb 1 tin plate, 1 pint tin mug
Red and 1 blanket 1 table spoon and 1 tea spoon
1 counterpane 4 lbs. marine soap
1 pair sheets 1 hair brush and comb
And Bed and 1 blanket
1 chest with lock 1 counterpane & pair sheets
And
1 chest with lock
Extracts from the Government abstracts:— 1 "
on, may rely upon an
To emigrants this is a
OUTFIT for £l2.
1 superior cloth dress coat
1 do. frock do.
1 do. trousers
2 fancy or white vests
1 strong do.
1 overcoat
1 shooting jacket
2 pair strong trousers
Hat and cloth cap
12 shirts and three night do.
1 pair boots and pair shoes
8 handkerchiefs
6 pair cotton hose
6 pair worsted do.
2 pair braces
3 nightcaps and 6 towels
Razor, shaving box, strop, &
Knife, fork, and plate [glass
1 pint tin mug
1 table spoon and 1 tea spoon
6 lbs. marine soap
1 comb and hair brush
1 clothes brush
Shoe brushes and blacking
Bed and 1 pair blankets
1 counterpane
2 pr. sheets end 3 pillowcases
1 strong chest with lock
It cannot be too strongly im-
dressed, as a general rule, that the more abundant the stock of clothing each
person can afford to take, the better for his health, comfort, and prosperity.”
Observe the address —SAMUEL, BROTHERS, 29, Ludgate
Hill, one door from the Old Bailey.


INDESTRUCTIBLE
AUSTKALIAN
LIATOiK m©KETS 9
WAISTCOATS, MATS,
Sffi®MS‘S’ ®@3LS®.
BUSH JACKET, I'M. XEW ./EAI.A.Nn.
rjIHESE new and indestructible Articles Oof Clothing will be found
invaluable to Persons proceeding to the Colonies. They are
light and cool, and well calculated to repel damp and chilling winds.
mroO a Jas-rsLuGC
IV.NIC HO I;EH;
v u-: -as.***
4, BIRCHII AHTE , -
... ; . . . : - - c- o-Vu ««dki:
gaijiix'isvs gjxibixijci ,aXocT 'ansaiHH lo ioa A
.aaaiiJaia aioC sau ai ’isiaocTAtl a i*i ijtaaassM
♦** £2O l\roels Jbr Exportation -at the JFfapesale Price.


TO EMIGRANTS.
PERSONS intending to EMIGRATE should furnish themselves with
one of
DEANE; DRAY, AND GO’S EMIGRATION
CIRCULARS.
To he had at the Counting-house of their General Furnishing Iron-
mongery, Cutlery, Deanean-plate, Lamp, Stove, Fender, Iron and Brass
Bedstead, and Turnery Warehouse,
Wo. 46, King "William-street, London Bridge,
where every article required for domestic use is supplied at the lowest
wholesale prices, together with Horticultural Implements, Smiths’,
Carpenters’, Coopers’, Bricklayers’, and Masons’ Tools; Pewter, Bri-
tannia Metal, and Tin Goods; Dairy Utensils, and a large variety of
everything needful to the well-being of an Emigrant’s Family.
The very best and cheapest Saddlery
may be procured at Deane’s Manufactory, No. 2, Arthur-street East.
AND
One-horse Carts,
Iron Houses, Ploughs, Scarifiers, Horse Hoes, Harrows, Winnowing
Machines, Indian Cultivators, together with their lately perfected
Emigrant’s Corn Mill,
may be had, along with an Illustrated Catalogue, at the Agricultural
Implement Depot,
Swan-lane, Upper Thames-street.
» r M I 1.1 v 771 U I rl tIT
These several Establishments are within a Minute’s walk of each other, and in-
sure to the emigrant that distinct and especial attention which can only be had at
separate warehouses. But with this Is also combined tlje advantage of having all
purchases brought to a centre, and shipped at one time from
THEIR EXPORT WAREHOUSE,
No. 3, ARTIIUR-STEBET WEST, LONDON BRIDGE.
A complete set of Miners’ Tools, including everything
necessary for a Labourer in the Gold Districts,
May be had for the small cost of 20#.


TO Em€}RAITH.
THE following GUTTA PERCHA Articles will be found of great
value to Emigrants, especially such as are proceeding to the
H© Q i(g| B
CRutta Dotols for SiKasijmg €Hofo.
BUCKETS, GUTTA PERCHA TUBING,
DRINKING MUGS, SYPHONS,
LIFE BUOYS, SUCTIONS FOR PUMPS,
FLASKS, CARBOYS FOR GUNPOWDER, ETC.,
LINING FOR BOXES, MINERS’ CAPS,
SOLES FOR BOOTS AND SHOES.
Is of the utmost importance to the Emigrant. This may he secured
by the use of Gutta Percha Soles, which are perfectly Waterproof, also
cheaper and more durable than Leather. They can he put on with ease
by any one. This cannot be too extensively known amongst Australian
Emigrants, as it is now difficult to find a Shoemaker in that country.
©©M ° WAiHIM©
Of every variety of shape, may be had to order.
Directions to Emigrants
For Lining Boxes with Gutta Percha Sheet (so as to. preserve the con-
tents from injury by sea water), also for putting on Soles of Boots and
Shoes, &c., may be had
(Gratis of ang of tf)t Compang’s Dealers in ®obm
or ©ountrg.
THE GUTTA PERCHA COMPANY,
■ ■ ;on.n
m.r , ra ™ s -
is. Wharf Road, City Road, liondon.


T. F. EDGINGTON,
79, BISHOPSGATE STREET, WITHIN,
FACING MARINE SOCIETY,
BEGS to inform all PERSONS proceeding to the COLONIES or
GOLD REGIONS he has prepared a large Assortment of WATER-
PROOF TENTS of the most approved make, which are ready for imme-
diate Shipment, and may be seen erected on the Premises, fitted with
every requisite; also, Emigrant’s Portable Cooking Kettles, Swing Camp
Cots, Iron Bedsteads, and Bedding, Rugs, Waterproof Floor, Cocoa-Nut
Matting, Horse-Cloths, Tarpaulings, Ropes, Cordage, &c.
Miners’ Tools of the best quality, and least possible cost.
79, BISHOPSGATE STREET WITHIN, LONDON,
TO EMIGRANTS AND VOYAGERS.
ly/TOORE & BUCKLEY’S PATENT CONCENTRATED MILK,
JLtJL supplies Fresh Milk at all times. It is preserved in hermetically-sealed tins,
which will keep sweet many days after being opened; each tin producing seven times the
quantity of pure Milk.
“It was almost (if not quite) equal in flavour and quality to Milk fresh from the cow.”
—Capt.lL. T. Austin, Commander of the Arctic Expedition. H.M.S.Resolute, Oct. 1,1851.
“ The Milk is most admirable; none should go to sea without it.”— Capt. Ommaney,
H.M.S. Assistance, Arctic Expedition, Oct. 25,1851.
“ The greatest comfort and blessing we had on board our ships In the Arctic Expedi-
tion.”—Medical Officer’s Report to the Lords of the Admiralty, Nov. 1851.
CONNOISSEURS OF COCOA AND CHOCOLATE
AEE INVITED TO TEY
MOORE & BUCKLEY'S COCOA AND MILK AND CHOCOLATE AND MILK,
which are combinations of the finest Trinidad Cocoas and the choicest English and French
Chocolates, with the Patent Concentrated Milk, in hermetically sealed tins. These de-
licious preparations are wholly free from the admixtures so common in the packet Cocoas,
and, considering their quality, are equally inexpensive; for example, a Breakfast Cup of
Puee Cocoa, combined with Milk and Sugar, can be had at the cost of a Penny, by
merely adding boiling water.
THE PRIZE MEDAL AT THE GREAT EXHIBITION
was awarded to these preparations, for their novelty, utility, and economy; and they
were constantly used in the refreshment rooms of the Exhibition, giving universal satis-
faction.
MOORE & BUCKLEY'S INFANT'S FOOD
is a combination of the Concentrated Milk with pure Farina, and will be found a light
and nourishing diet for Invalids as well as Infants, requiring only boiling water for
its instant preparation.
*,* The whole of the above are prepared under the immediate inspection of Me. Moore
who was for many years the ordinary medical attendant of the Royal Family, in Louflbi).
The finest FRENCH CHOCOLATES in every variety, made expressly for the Sub-
scribers by one of the first Paris manufacturers. These Chocolates, it may be observed,
are really Feenoh, and are greatly superior to those commonly sold as French, but which
are, in fact, generally speaking, of English manufacture.
MOORE & BUCKLEY, w 0 *HT
RANTOM ABBEY FARM AND WORKS, STAFFORDSHIRE;
Wholesale Depot, 4, Upper East Smithfield, London ;
And to be had from all the Provision Merchants &o> See.


MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS for AUSTRALIA.
EMIGRANTS will find pleasure during their Voyage, and Profit
upon their arrival, by taking out a
CORNOPEAN at 355. or 40s.
Or a FLUTE at 255. or 30s.
N,B. —Everything connected, with Music cheap and durable.
HAITE & LEACH, Musical Instrument Makers to H. M.’s
Army and Navy, 13, Clifford-street, Bond-street, London.
THE GOLD DISTRICTS.
ALL the requisite APPARATUS and INSTRUCTION for
JX WEIGHING and ESTIMATING the VALUE of GOLD DUST and
MIXTURES of GOLD and QUARTZ, are supplied by
Horne* Thornthwaite, & Wood,
OPERATIVE CHYMISTS, 121 and 123, NEWGATE-STREET.
TO E
DURING the Voyage to, and residence in, AUSTRALIA, and other
warm climates,
S. SAINSBURY’S SUMMER FRUIT
BEVERAGES would he found most grateful to the palate, as well as
je found most grateful to the palate, as well as
conducive to the health.
jprmt lEssenccs,
Raspberry Essence. Lemonaded G inger Beer Essence.
Apple
Pine Apple
Strawberry „
Gooseberry „
Red Currant „
Lemonade „
Orangeade „
Foreign Pine Apple „
Mulberry „
Black Currant „
A table-spoonful of either
of the above.
s, mixed with a tumbler full of
water, will form a delicious beverage,
ImprobriJ IBfferbesring
Seidlitz Powders, containing siz doses .... Is. o d. per box.
Lemonade Powders, making six glasses .... Is. Od. „
Ginger Beer Powders, „ .... Is. Od. „
Soda Powders, making twelve powders .... Is. Od. „
Potass Powders, „ .... Is. 6d, „
The above are packed in tinfoil, to prevent their being damaged by
the action of the sea air.
Sainsbury’s Concentrated Essence of Jamaica Ginger.
MANUFACTORY—I77, STRAND, LONDON, 3 doors West of Norfolk-st.


TO EMIGRANTS, MERCHANTS, & CAPTAINS.
ROWLANDS' UNIQUE PREPARATIONS
ARE universally held in high estimation, and the fact of the distin-
guished patronage they enjoy, their general use in all countries, and
the numerous testimonials constantly received of their efficacy, sufficiently
prove their value, and render them well worthy the attention of
Merchants and Shippers.
UNDER THE ESPECIAL PATRONAGE OF
Her MAJESTY the QUEEN, HR.H. PRINCE ALBERT,
The Court and Royal Family of Great Britain,
And the several Sovereigns and Courts of Europe;
AND UNIVERSALLY PREFERRED AND ESTEEMED. x
ROWLANDS’ MACASSAR OIL.
The unprecedented success of this discovery in restoring, improving,
and beautifying the Human Hair, is too well known and appreciated to
need comment. Price 3s. 6d., 75., Family Bottles (equal to four small),
10s. 6d., and double that size, 21s. per bottle.
ROWLANDS’ EUPLYSIA j or, Improved Hair-Wash.
A Preparation from the choicest Oriental Herbs, of peculiarly
mild and detersive properties. It pleasingly and effectually cleanses the
Hair and Skin of the Head from Scurf and every species of impurity,
and imparts a delicate fragrance. It is particularly recommended to
be used after Bathing, as it will prevent the probability of catching cold
in the head, and will render the hair dry in a few minutes. Price 3s. 6d.
per bottle.
ROWLANDS’ KALYDOR.
An Oriental Botanical Preparation of unfailing efficacy in thoroughly puri-
fying the Skin from all Pimples, Spots, Blotches, Redness, Freckles,
Tan, and Discolorations, producing a healthy freshness and trans-
parency of Complexion ; and a softness and delicacy of the Hands
and Arms. Price 4s. 6d. and Bs. 6d. per bottle.
ROWLANDS’ ODONTO; or. Pearl Dentifrice.
A White Powder, compounded of the choicest and most rechercM
ingredients of the Oriental Herbal, of inestimable value in preserving and
beautifying the Teeth, strengthening the Gums, and in rendering the
breath sweet and pure. Price 2s. 9d. per box.
ROWLANDS’ ALSANA EXTRACT.
For relieving the most violent Tooth-ache, Gum-boils, and Swelled
Face, and which by constantly using prevents those maladies. In the
anguish of excruciating pain, it affords instantaneous relief. Price 2s. 9d.
4s. 6d., and 10s. 6d. per bottle.
CAUTION.
Whereas spurious compounds are universally offered for sale under
the titles of “ Macassar Oil,” “ Kalydor,” &c. &c. it is essentially
necessary to purchase either of the Proprietors, or of “respectable”
Wholesale Perfumers and Medicine Vendors, who make a liberal allowance
to Shippers, &c., and particularly to see that the word “ROWLANDS ”
is on the Wrapper of each article, with their name and address in red, thus —
A. ROWLAND & SONS, 20, HATTON GARDEN,LONDON.
All others are Fraudulent Counterfeits.


MURRAY’S GUIDE TO THE GOLD DIGGINGS.
THE AUSTRALIAN
GOLD DIGGINGS:
WHERE THEY ARE,
HOW TO GET AT THEM;
WITH LETTERS FROM SETTLERS AND DIGGERS
TELLING
HOW TO WORK THEM.
LONDON:
STEWART AND MURRAY, 15, OLD BAILEY,
“AUSTRALIAN NEW ZEALAND GAZETTE” OFFICE.
1862.


NEWS FROM THE “GOLD DIGGINGS.”
Price SIXPENCE ( Stamped ), or 135. per annum , payable in advance ,
AUSTRALIAN AND NEW ZEALAND GAZETTE;
A FORTNIGHTLY SUMMARY OF NEWS FROM THE COLONIES.
This Paper is a record of all events of interest passing in these Colonies; in
addition to which it contains the latest news received in this Country from the
GOLD DISTRICTS; Official Returns of Gold collected and shipped; Gold
Circulars ; Private Letters Descriptive of Trade, Mining, Gold Digging, Wages,
Prices of Provisions, &c.
LONDON: STEWART AND MUERAY, 15, OLD BAILEY,
AND ALL BOOKSELLERS AND NEWSMEN.
Forwarded on receipt of Six postage Stamps.


TABLE OF CONTENTS.
Founding of the Australian Colonies. — New South Wales; Victoria;
South Australia; Western Australia—Statistics page I—61 —6
Gold. —Sought for by the Dutch —Secretly sold by shepherds—Murchison’s
opinion in 1848—Humours by Rev. W. B. Clarke—Discovery by Har-
greaves page 6—B
NEW SOUTH WALES GOLD FIELDS.
First Gold District. —Bathurst—The Blue Mountains—The Gold Fields
—Clarke’s discoveries—A hundredweight of gold found by a black—
The Tort Phillip districts —Mount Alexander page B—l 3
Accounts of Eye-witnesses —Ophir—Summerhill Creek —First earnings of
the diggers—A letter in May—Variations of luck—A doctor’s letter—
The Turon and Havilah—Wentworth Diggings—Frederick’s Valley—
Louisa Creek The Meioo —Fortunate parties —Quartz ridges—Two
thousand pounds earned—Goulburn —Flight to the Aralueu —Thirty
ounces before breakfast page 13 —81
Prices of Provisions. —Extravagant rise at first Settled down—The
Turon—Port Phillip page 31
The Nuggets. —Dr. Kerr’s hundredweight—Present to the black—Lucky
“ find”—All’s well that ends well page 31—34
Public Worship at the Mines— Founding the first church—The Bishop
at work—Ail lend a band—Built in a week—Roman Catholics and
Wesleyans page 34—36
Art of Gold Digging and Seeking. —Prospecting-How to start—Diary
of a prospecting party—Secret diggings page 36—40
Claims and Licenses.— ln digging, plenty of water essential—lour ways
of working—A miner’s tools page 41
Cradling. —Partnerships indispensable—Less luggage the better—Letter
on the construction of gold cradles, by Rudder, a Californian miner,
now in Australia page 41—46
PORT PHILLIP GOLD FIELDS.
The Discovery.— Port Phillipians set to work in earnest—Melbourne—
Geelong—Buninyong—Ballarat—Clunes page 52—46
Noes from the Diggings. —First escort, 2,3001. in four weeks —Where to
look for the richest yield—Successful doings—Gold seven miles from
Geelong page 52—56


Description of Golden Point— Good luck at Ballarat—lmperfect mining
—Servants earn 17. a day—New appointments—Opening for young
men—A printer’s letter—Melbourne in “pie”—Compositors wanted
page 56—63
Mount Alexander. —ls.ooo men at work—Great excitement—Prices of
provisions and labour—Demand for gold watches—Plenty of gold but
no money I page 63 —66
Letter from a Gold Purchaser. Bide to Ballarat—Description of the
“ diggings”—Curious scene—Strata of Golden Point-Gold gravel—
Variable success—Start for Mount Alexander—Description—Departure
of the escort —Picturesque tableaux—Service on Sunday page 66- 74
Effects on Melbourne. —Returned diggers—Finery in great demand—A
rush for ironmongery—Damper and salt beef in Melbourue—What shall
we do?—Be off to the diggings page 74—75
A Scotchman’s Letter.— No mistake about the matter—All doing well—
Boots 3 1, a pair—Demand for really good clerks—No time to teach
blockheads page 75-78
Shipments of Wool.— The merchants sadly put about —No labour to be
had—lCts. a day for loading vessels—Sailors ask 801. for the run home—
The result of three mouths digging page 78—79
Hard Work at the Mines. —Excessive heat—Want of rain—Digging
season begins in May—Accident through undermining page 79—80
First Return from Mount Alexander. —Success of four diggers—34o oz.
in four days—Direct route to Mount Alexander—One hundred miles
in gold—Grog shops and gambling page 80 85
Melbourne Trade. —Banking accounts opened daily—Formerly poor men
with cheque books Van-Diemonian expirees Price of water
Instances of individual success—Migration of sailors, butchers, &c
Return of miners to spend Christmas page 85—86
PRACTICAL HINTS TO EMIGRANTS.
Who should (jo?— Shepherds more needed and better paid—Any one can
make a shepherd—Capital time to buy or lease flocks —Stout country
girls could shear sheep—Openings for small farmers—Fine field for
labour—lncreasing markets—Miners like the best of everything—Any
one strong in mind and body will succeed-Tradesmen of all kinds
make as good a living as the diggers without the hard work—An un-
limited supply of respectable girls wanted page 87 —90
What to take.— Nothing cumbersome, and pack all flat—A tent, tools, &c.
—Clothes for very warm or very cold weather—Minimum list—Divisions
of luggage for the voyage page 91—93
Howto go.— Choice of ship—Precaution with shipowner Extra stores—
Medicine—Cleanliness—Good humour page 93—94
The Passage.— Three modes of going—Private passage—Philanthropic so-
cieties- Mrs. Chisholm—Government free passage—The ship—Provi-
sions—Accommodation —Arrangements of Family Colonization Society
—Government terms page 95


MURRAY’S
GUIDE TO THE GOLD DIGGINGS.
Twenty-two Tons of Gold have been gathered
in Australia, and shipped for England within
ten months between May 1851 and the end
of February 1862. Twenty-two tons of gold!
worth, at a moderate computation, Two Millions
Sterling. Such facts outweigh the most eloquent
periods, and the finest flowers of rhetoric. Bishops
and peers, members of Parliament, and dignified
clergymen, in vain warn against the perils, material
and spiritual, of the golden sands, and cover acres
of print in praise of lands where the “ curse of gold ”
has not yet been encountered : the breeches pocket
argument prevails everywhere, and in a rapidly
swelling tide, all orders of men, who have any emi-
grating stuff in them, are hastening to Australia.
Under these circumstances, it cannot but be
acceptable to the crowds of intending colonists
and gold-seekers, to present them with a picture of
the “Progress of the Diggins,” drawn by the
diggers, shewing the first faint rumours down to


the present time, when gold is shipped from Aus-
tralia as much as a matter of course as wool and
tallow, or any other of its regular exports.
Commencing with a very brief account of the
Australian colonies, and their condition previous to
the gold discoveries, we propose to trace the work-
ings from month to month, in the letters and re-
ports of diggers and eyewitnesses, adding such notes
and comments as may be needful for the full infor-
mation of the numerous class whose attention has
only been turned to these important colonies by the
discovery of the El Dorado.
The first colony founded in Australia, New South
Wales, was commenced sixty-four years ago, in
1788, as a receptacle for the criminals of this
country, whom it was not fit to hang, and not safe
to turn loose.
Until somewhere about 1815, New South Wales,
better known as Botany Bay, excited no sort of
attention, except in courts of justice, bridewells,
and jails; but in that year we received from the
convict colony some 70,000 lbs. weight of fine
merino wool, an article of great value to our
manufacturers, for which they had previously been
dependent upon Spain and Saxony. A few enter-
prising colonists, at the head of whom stood John
MacArthur, introduced and cultivated the merino,
and in 1824, New South Wales became known in
this country as a colony where fortunes were to be
made.


In 1829, a party of gentlemen, with several ship-
loads of labourers, and every kind of useful and
useless implement, endeavoured to found a colony,
without the aid of convict labour, in Western Aus-
tralia, on the hanks of Swan River. All manner
of blunders were committed in this undertaking;
but no amount of good management could have
made a colony succeed, which was deficient, and is
still deficient, in the first elements of success.
Western Australia has very little available agri-
cultural land, and what is still more fatal, its pas-
tures are so limited, that they have never yet been
able to support a million sheep. Minerals have
not yet been found in any quantity; and thus,
for want of a staple of exports, Western Aus-
tralia vegetates under a very fine climate, without
thriving, in spite of various plans adopted from time
to time. Its distance from the other colonies has
been a great disadvantage, limiting its intercourse
both by sea and land. Between the other colonies
a brisk constant communication exists, by steamers,
coasters, and overland. The steam post will do
something for Australia, but without pas-
tures, or gold mines, or copper mines, it cannot
go ahead. These opinions will be found corrobo-
rated by a long memoir of grievances from Western
Australia, signed by almost every colonist, and laid
before the House of Commons in 1850 Blue Book.
Victoria, lately and better known as Port
Phillip, was discovered by Bass and Flinders, and


settled in 1835 by flock-owners crossing- the Straits
from Van Diemen’s Land with their sheep and
cattle, at the same time that others from New
South Wales were gradually creeping toward it
overland, and colonial whalers had established hoil-
ing-down parties at Portland Bay and Western Port.
Port Phillip has a better climate, and more avail-
able land for both agriculture and sheep-farming,
than any of the other colonies. It was declared an
independent province under the name of Victoria,
with a separate Legislature, in the session of 1850.
In the same year that the flock-owners of Van
Diemen’s Land founded Port Phillip, South Aus-
tralia was planned by a party of amateur colonists
in England on a new and model system, which was
intended to have substituted concentration and agri-
cultural pursuits, including the growth of the vege-
table productions of France, Italy, and Spain, for
the dispersion and pastoral pursuits of the older
colonies.
The new system proved a total failure; and after
two years of land gambling, general insolvency at
the expense of the Home Government to the ex-
tent of 280,000 Z., and of English merchants and
manufacturers to an unknown extent, swept over
Jie colony. But the land being fertile, and, con-
trary to the wishes and calculations of the original
colonizers, within reach of overland parties, with
sheep, cattle, and horses from New South Wales
and Port Phillip, and the colonists themselves being,


Population by last Census
Imports
Exports
Sheep
7,026,000
Cattle
Horses
when put to the pinch, energetic and industrious,
and beyond the average of other colonists in edu-
cation and character, they managed to maintain an
existence until sheep-breeding gave them in wool
the indispensable staple export, which had first
directed the attention of British emigrants to New
South Wales, when all their fine schemes had
failed ; and in 1844-5 copper mines of great value
were discovered, —one, the Burra Burra, being the
richest in the world. These afforded a valuable
export, a demand for labour, for agricultural pro-
duce, and for oxen and horses in carrying ore and
stores to and fro. Colonization recommenced, and
South Australia became at once a flourishing colony.
Gold has not yet been found in any quantity in
South Australia or Western Australia, but there is
every reason to believe that it will eventually be
found in both.
The following statistics afford at one glance an
idea of the condition of the Australian colonies just
previous to the startling events we are about to
record chronologically: —
NEW SOUTH WALES.
Capital City and principal Ports — Sydney & Moreton Bay.


VICTORIA (rate PORT PHILLIP).
Capital City— Melbourne.
Ports— Melbourne, Geelong, & Portland Bay.
Populatioa* 78,000
Imports £744,225
Exports £1,041,796
Sheep 6,033,000
Cattle 346,662
Horses 16,743
SOUTH AUSTRALIA.
City— Adelaide.
Ports — Port Adelaide & Port Lincoln,
Population 67,000
Imports .£887,423
Exports £571,348
Copper Metal 44,594 cwt.
Copper Ore 8,784 tons.
Sheep 1,200,000
Horned Cattle 100,000
Horses 6,000
Gold.
The Dutch, in the seventeenth century, visited
and explored the coast of Australia in search of
gold without success. None was worn by the
natives as in South America.
Rumours of its existence have been floated from
time to time ever since its settlement, but until


very recently no confidence was placed in them.
On more than one occasion prisoner shepherds
brought in and sold secretly, to jewellers and others,
pieces of gold; but when the subject was discussed,
it was generally settled these pieces of gold were
coins stolen by bushrangers, and melted up in order
to avoid all chance of identification.
The discovery of the Californian gold fields drew
from Australia a considerable number of adventu-
rous spirits, good, bad, and worse. Between the
Australian and American character there is a strong
resemblance; both act up to the go-a-head motto.
In 1848, Sir Roderick Murchison, the eminent
geologist, who had previously, on geological princi-
ples, come to the conclusion that a chain of moun-
tains which runs, at various distances, parallel to
the coast, with a few breaks, around the Island of
Australia, would contain gold, received such a
confirmation of his views in correspondence with
specimens from colonists, that he wrote to the
Colonial Secretary, Earl Grey, and suggested that
a scale of royalties should be adopted for the
guidance and encouragement of gold seekers. No
attention was paid to this communication. At
the same time the Rev. W. B. Clarke, a clergyman
and enthusiastic geologist, resident in New South
Wales, without any communication with Sir Ro-
derick Murchison, published a letter in one of the
Sydney papers, in which he declared his strong-
conviction that in the line of the Australian “ Cor-
dilleras,” known as the Blue Mountains in New


South Wales, gold existed in considerable quantities.
But these vague rumours and scientific speculations
produced very little effect on a people so eminently
practical and so busy as the people of New South
Wales, who, in the way of profit, believed in very
little beyond wool and tallow.
But among* the Californian adventurers from Syd-
ney was one Edward Hargreaves. He was struck
with the similarity between the richest gold district
of California, and a certain district in New South
Wales beyond the Blue Mountains, about thirty
miles from the town of Bathurst. Accordingly, he
proceeded there with a small party, and, after some
weeks of exploration, found enough gold to justify
his foresight in Summerhill Creek. He reported
this discovery to the Government, and, through the
press, to the public, and very soon the whole coun-
try was “prospected ” with more or less success.
Mr. Hargreaves received a Government appoint-
ment, and is about to receive a gold dust testi-
monial from his fellow-colonists, which he richly
deserved, and has since made many important dis-
coveries. The Colonial Government also engaged
the geological services of the Rev. W. B. Clarke,
and of Mr. Stutchbury.
New South Wales Gold Fields
The first gold district was Bathurst.
This district was discovered in 1813 in conse-
quence of a drought, which induced three young gen-
tlemen, Messrs. Wentworth, Lawson, and Blaxland,


to attempt, what had often been attempted before
and failed, to find a pass across the Blue Mountains.
They succeeded, and came upon the five series of
plains now known as the Bathurst and Wellington
districts. Governor Macquarie had a road con-
structed by convict labour, afterwards improved
by Sir Thomas Mitchell; he founded the town of
Bathurst, and gave grants of 2,000 acres to the
chief colonists, and especially to these discoverers.
Mr. Wentworth became an eminent barrister and
member of legislature, and in one of his grants, at
Frederick’s Valley, a rich field of gold has been
discovered.
The Bathurst district consists of plains, watered
by a river, on which the town stands, with many
nebularies or creeks, and divided by a series of
sharp precipitous rocky hills or u ranges.”
The pastures when discovered were the finest in
the colony, but have since suffered from droughts
and overstocking, but it is interspersed with larg’e
patches of arable land such as Emu Swamp, Black-
man’s Swamp, King’s Plains, Frederick’s Valley,
and the Cornish Town, where the soil produces the
finest crops, which have scarcely ever suffered from
want of moisture. In the immediate neighbour-
hood of the two last, gold was first discovered.
The town of Bathurst is on a post road 150
miles from Sydney, surrounded by plains on which
thousands of sheep and cattle feed, and by farms
occupied by small settlers, able to grow any quan-
tity of grain.


Thus the first Australian gold field, unlike those
of the fields of California, was discovered in the
midst of meat and corn, and within easy reach of
the great city of Sydney.
The following’ were the first g’old fields dis-
covered in New South Wales :
Summerhill. —The first g’old discovered by Mr.
Hargreaves was in Summerhill Creek, a tributary
of the River MacQuarie. Summerhill is about
144 miles from Sydney, about thirty miles from
Bathurst, and about four from the Cornish settle-
ment, where large fortunes were made during* a
great drought twenty years ago, by growing and
selling wheat at 20 s. a bushel. The whole of this
district is auriferous.
The Turon, on which Ophir has been planted,
is a river rising in the county of Roxburgh near
Cullen Cullen, which divides the county from Well-
ington, and also flows into the MacQuarie.
Lewis Ponds is a tributary of the River Mac-
Quarie.
Fredericks Valley is near to Summerhill, 163
miles from Sydney: here gold was first found in
clay on the estate of W. C. Wentworth, Esq.
Meroo. —A creek in the County of Wellington
which flows into the Cudgegong.
2he town of Goulburn forms the centre of the
district, second in importance to that of which the
town of Bathurst is the centre.
Araluen is a deep creek in the county of St.
Vincent, near Shoal Haven River. This neighbour-


hood should not, in strict propriety-, be called the
Araluen Digging's, as they are situated some six
miles from Araluen, extending, indeed, very nearly
to the range at the foot of which that beautiful
valley is buried. It is also called the Braidwood
Diggings. The first indications of gold were at
Araluen, but the Major’s Creek and Bell’s Creek
having proved so much more productive, the first
named locality is almost deserted.
The Abercrombie River flows from Mount
Mering, and after flowing through the county of
Georgiana falls into the Lachlan. Gold found
below the junction with the Isabella.
While these pages are passing- through the press,
the following additional report, dated 7th Peb.,
has been received from New South Wales:—
“The Government at Sydney had received de-
spatches from the Rev. W. B. Clarke, the geologist
announcing the discovery of gold in the Snowy
Mountains. Mr. Clarke states that he has found gold
in granites in the counties of St. Vincent, Argyle,
Murray, Dampier, Wallace, Wellesley, and beyond
the boundary on the Victoria (Port Phillip) side;
also on the basins of the Shoalhaven, the Murrum-
bidgee, the Hume, and the Snowy Mountains.”
A vast number of other gold fields have not yet
received recognised geographical names.
The greater part of the country on w r hich the
gold-seekers are now encamped was, until recently,


only known as the feeding-ground of wild cattle.
When the gold-seekers first began to swarm toward
the Turon, the children of a stockman who had
scarcely ever seen any one hut their father and one
or two of his mates, wondered where they all came
from. They “ had not thought that there were so
many people in all the world.”
The greatest discovery in the Bathurst district
was a hundredweight of gold, found by a tame
black in the middle of a plain, of which we shall
presently quote the description from an eyewitness.
The black gave information to his master, Dr. Kerr,
the brother-in-law of Mr. Salter, the introducer of
oranges into New South Wales.
This hundredweight of gold, which had lain on
the surface of a plain ever since the first settlement
of the district without notice, still remains the
largest prize; but lumps of from one to ten pounds
weight are of ordinary occurrence, especially in the
Port Phillip gold fields, which an active search
soon laid bare when the Port Phillipians on
the point of setting out for the new Ophir of New-
South Wales.
The centres of the Port Phillip gold field are at
Ballarat, four miles from the township of Buninyong,
which is thirty-six miles from Geelong, and Mount
Alexander, ninety miles from Melbourne.
Geelong is one of the ports of Port Phillip, with
a bar harbour admitting vessels drawing ten feet
and a half water, to enter and load alongside the


wharfs. Geelong- is about fifty miles from Melbourne.
From Melbourne to Ballarat the journey may be
and is performed with ease in two days, resting- a
nig-ht, on horseback, with a dray, or a tandem dog-
cart.
There too, as in Bathurst and Goulburn districts,
excellent arable land is to be found in unlimited
quantities close adjoining, and great flocks of sheep
and herds of cattle, while a port is even more ac-
cessible.
But the richest district as yet tapped is that of
Mount Alexander, where, while water was plentiful
for washing, the diggers realized easily 1/. a day,
with bonuses in the shape of “nuggets” of pure
gold, once or twice a week. At this place hun
dreds, and even thousands of pounds were realized
by many parties in three or four weeks.
Under the circumstances of gold fields so wide
and so rapidly discovered, the accounts of eye-
witnesses will be most satisfactory, as they make
up in graphic truth, for what may he wanting in
literary ability.
We commence our extracts from
Ophir.
On the 23rd May 1851, a correspondent of one
of the Sydney papers writes: —That his journey
was impeded by the rising of the river Nepean,
and although he started on Saturday 17th May,
he did not reach Bathurst until Wednesday evening.


At that time, the gold digging had not become
an established trade, and the farther he proceeded
the less excitement he found. At Bathurst, most
of the shopkeepers had more or less of the precious
metal. On the 18th, having with some difficulty
hired horses, he proceeded with his party on to
Ophir, via Roch forest, and was speedily followed
by troops of horsemen, footmen, and drays; some
well provided with digging* tools, others armed
with substitutes which have since quite gone out
of use, such as tin tea-trays, pots, riddles, and
cullenders. The parties he met returning reported
that they had done well, and were returning for
better tools. He halted the first night at a shep-
herd’s hut twelve miles from the diggings, where
he arrived on the 19th (Friday).
u The road is exceedingly good; it then assumes
a very rugged, mountainous character, with some
difficulty passable by vehicles. The creek which
the miners are working is approached by a steep
descent, and is bounded on the one side by rocks of
quartz and schist, in some places almost perpendi-
cular, rendering many parts of the gully nearly
obscured from the rays of the sun, and giving to it
a sombre and romantic character.
“ Arrived at last at the debateable land, we
proceeded up the ravine, through which flows
usually the Summerhill Creek sometimes a
mountain torrent, but which now consists of a
chain of deep water-holes, with here and there a


trifling rivulet. A few hundred yards brought us
to the mines, and here a scene presented itself
which almost defies description. Within a small
compass of about a mile, were nearly six hundred
men at work, digging and washing with an untiring
industry, at once indicative of success, whilst the
steep hanks were lined with every species of gunya,*
tent, &c., as a protection against the inclemency of
the climate; the frosty nights of which we can
abundantly vouch for.
“ Many parties we found were earning 2/. to 4/.
and upwards; some I/, to 2/.; and a few 11. down-
wards to utter disappointment; whilst nearly 20/.
per day was the reported result of one or two of
the most fortunate. The greatest success appeared
to be at and in the vicinity of the holes of two or
three parties formed of settlers and their sons. One
man, a labourer, had, near this spot, procured about
300/. value the day previous to our arrival, the
largest piece in which weighed nearly four pounds
troy. This result must be considered of impor-
tance when we bear in mind the primitive im-
plements employed. In our observations down the
creek, we did not see a single cradle washed out
(generally the result of about thirty buckets of
earth and stones) without some gold in it, though
in many cases the quantity was certainly very
small. Many parties washing with tin dishes only,
* A bark lean-over hut.


on the margin of the water, obtained a fair result in
small gold.
“ The greatest quietness and cordiality appeared
to prevail amongst all the adventurers; and our
inquiries were readily and good-naturedly responded
to, although it might occasion a temporary stoppage
to their gold hunting.”
“ For many years past, small pieces of gold, im-
bedded in quartz, have been picked up occasionally
by shepherds and others to the westward of the
mountain range, and one of these masses of gold in
the matrix, of rather a large size, was exhibited in
the shop of a Sydney jeweller about six years ago.
Sir Roderick Murchison, the eminent geologist, has
also repeatedly predicted that gold deposits would
be found on the western side of the Blue Mountain
range, from the perfect resemblance of the geolo-
gical character to that of the western side of the
Ural chain, where the large Russian gofd diggings
exist. The settlers in the interior, however, have
always been averse to researches for gold deposits,
for all or nearly all being sheep-farmers, or having
their capital invested in live stock, they naturally
avoided giving prominence to a topic which might
lead their shepherds to neglect the flocks.”
Our next extracts are from private letters :
Diggings, 23 rd May 1851,
“ Dear , —I have little time to spare, so
you needn’t expect a long letter. Myself and three


mates have now been at work three days, and have
got six ounces or thereabouts, of gold, making, I
am told, nearly 6 1, a man. This seems a respectable
lump, but I can assure you it is well earned. Some
of my neighbours are apparently doing better than
we are, and others much worse. The gold we have
found is all fine, or what they call dust, I believe.
An adjoining company have been lucky enough to
pick up a little nest, about the size of pigeon eggs,
which has enhanced their earnings very materially.
I should say that on that day they must have
earned from 5 1, to 61. a man, but there are plenty
not doing more than at the rate of 10s. per day,
and when out of this they have paid for their
rations at the high prices that are charged here,
they won’t have much to shout about.
“ There is one thing which surprises me not a
little, that in many cases stout willing men come
here with a capital rig, and slave from “ morn to
noon, from noon to dewy eve,” and do perhaps only
moderately well. Others will come with their
tin pots and pan lids, aided, perhaps, by a two-
pronged pitchfork or a superannuated fire-shovel,
and do a raking business. A little shi’imp of a
fellow, about the size of an Esquimaux Indian,
with no earthly implement but a two-forked stick
and the ghost of a dilapidated frying-pan ; and,
would you believe it, the insignificant little varmint
did a stroke to the tune of about 6 1. in half a day;
whilst at the same time our company, all strapping


fellows, with strong limbs, and a way of using
them, were then doing very little. I felt intensely
disgusted with myself, and was half inclined to
look upon my fraction of a friend with respect.
But he was what is termed a lucky man, and I
would not have you imagine that on account of his
extraordinary success intending miners are to come
provided with forked sticks and frying-pans.
“ If you come, bring plenty of bedding, woollen
clothing, a month’s rations, a good pick or two, and
a heavy crowbar, light ones being of no use. A
little spirits to revive your own, after leaving the
cradle, would not be amiss. You cannot keep
yourself dry.—Yours, truly.”
From a Surgeon's Assistant.
Bathurst, 27 th May.
“ Dear Sir, —I received yours of the 22nd inst.
duly, but, being at the diggings, I could not answer
it before. There is abundance of gold in this
creek; they are now at work—it has been found
twelve miles apart in it, and not only in the creek,
but on the sides of the hills. There is about fif-
teen hundred men at work; all are getting some,
many are doing very well indeed. A party of four
men obtained 280/. worth at one haul, another com-
pany of four got upwards of one pound of gold on
Saturday last. I suppose it is worth 50/. A great
many are earning 20/. to 40/. a week. It is very


hard work, and they have to put up with great
inconveniences. You would enjoy a trip to the
diggings if you have any taste for scenery and
romance, &c., and I have no doubt but that you
would more than clear your expenses up, if you
are willing .to use the pick and the tin dish. Dr.
Machattie has been up. He borrowed a tin dish
for one hour, and got 13 s. worth. I worked four
hours, and got 30.5. worth, with nothing but a pick
md tin dish. It took me six hours to walk my
horse in from the diggings, and in that short time
I met 244 people on the road to Ophir.—Yours, &c.
“John Hutchinson.”
At the same date, scarcely four weeks from the
first discovery, a newspaper correspondent re-
ports :
“ The arrivals are still very numerous, notwith-
standing the numbers who are returning. On
Thursday no fewer than 800 people were counted
on the road from Bathurst to Ophir. A few cases
of extraordinary luck are still occurring. One
individual trespassed upon the digging ground of
Messrs. Howard and Clapham, during their ab-
sence, and in the course of a few hours got about
350 Z. worth from amongst the roots of a tree. A
company of six, consisting principally of Mr. Syer’s
men, returned, after an absence of nine days, and
sold the produce of their toil for 140 Z., besides
paying 9/. for licenses. A stranger passed through


the town on Thursday, on his way downwards, with
2g lb. of gold, which himself and two others had
found in eight days. Three men passed our office
yesterday, who had worked assiduously for nine
days, and shewed 14 dwts. as the result of their
labours. In the course of the last two days we
have conversed with about thirty individuals who
have fared still worse; and a few hours since we
were called upon by a stranger, who informed us
that he kept a small country store before the mania
broke out, and was doing a good business, but
becoming infected with the disorder, he sold off at
a sacrifice, broke up house, and started for the
diggings. Not having done any good there, he
considered himself a ruined man, and begged that
we would mention his case as a warning, but
without using his name. He concluded by ex-
pressing his contrition that he had not taken the
advice given by us at the commencement of the
fever.”
From May, through June and July, the accounts
became more and more satisfactory; but it is not
worth while to repeat them. The Summerhill
Creek was almost deserted, Turon well explored,
the Araluen diggings discovered, and quickly fol-
lowed by Port Phillip news.
O' Connell Plains, Avgust B.—The second rush
to the Turon has swept away the diggers from the
Havilah, and no wonder, when gold by the hun-
dredweight can be picked up in a day. This is


moving Sydney, and according to your own ac-
count, it will move the gold-loving world. How,
then, can we be satisfied with half an ounce of the
precious metal a day per party of three! At the
Turon they are despising two or three ounces per
day. Then, we have such a strong case at our own
door. Three neighbours, residents of O’Connell,
started for the Turon a month ago, and have re-
turned just to see their friends a day or two. Two
of them, sons of a poor man, almost blind, named
Hall, who, by the practical assistance of his family,
cultivates a few acres of rented land. The other,
a struggling settler, of the name of Stapley, who
occupies a small farm under the same landlord, the
Rev. W. Walker. They have paid all their ex-
penses, taken out licenses for August, clothed them-
selves well, supplied their families, have each of
them kept a nice little pocket-nugget, which they
display to their friends by way of Turon specimens,
and have a nett overplus of something more than
one thousand six hundred and fifty pounds, all
obtained in the month of July. In consequence,
not the Havilah diggings alone, but almost every
house for miles around, including the Plains as
well, has been left to the u weemen and chilthur.”
I say almost, for all are not gone exactly. There
is the Rev. Mr. Walker (in one sense) at home,
though he is indefatigably scouring the mountains,
scrambling along the creeks, diving into the gul-
lies, raising, overturning, smashing’, &c. &c, } the


stones, and all else that lie in his way. The rev
gentleman is not prospecting in the usual sense of
that term, he it understood, hut exploring in a true
scientific yet practical sense. The result is, that
for five miles along Stoney Creek, in particular,
commencing where the Havilah diggings were first
opened, he has discovered gold; and generally
along Campbell’s river up to its source. The next
discovery to the Turon, in the same district, was that
on Mr. Wentworth’s property, a fitting reward to
the discoverer of the Bathurst district. A com-
pany has been formed in Sydney for working this
property.
Wentworth Diggings, Sept. —At Frederick’s
Valley about fifty of Mr. Wentworth’s tenantry
are employed at these diggings, who pay him a
monthly license of 30s. Mr. Wentworth owns
about 6,000 acres of land in this locality, all of
which is supposed to he auriferous. The adjoining
country is exceedingly fertile, being one of our best
wheat-growing districts, and as it is well watered,
is capable of supporting a dense population. Ex-
cept on the Ophir side, and when approaching the
Canoblas, it is generally flat, slightly undulating
in places, and where not black alluvial bottoms,
consists principally of red clay intermixed with
quartz. Basaltic rock is also abundant in the
neighbourhood. The present number of fifty rea
lize a yearly income of 900 Z. to the proprietor,
which, from present appearances, by throwing the


land open to the public, could be augmented to
untold thousands. Amongst the miners now at
work is a party of Israelites* who netted sixty
ounces last week, which they sold at 3 1. 4s. 9 d. per
ounce. William Acland and his mate realized
150 Z. worth of gold in two days, and a man, whose
name did not transpire, procured gold to the
amount of 100 Z. in a day.
Discovery of the Louisa , Oct. —Much excite-
ment has been created here for some days past
by a report that very valuable diggings have been
found on the Meroo Creek and one of its tributa-
ries called the Loiusa Creek. The Meroo lies thirty
miles to the north of this, and twenty miles south
of Mudgee. You cross the line of ranges between
the Turon and Pyramil, and then the ranges be-
tween the Pyramil and the Meroo. Upon reach-
ing the Louisa Creek, Mr. Hardy looked for the
miners in the bed of the creek as usual, but could
see nothing of them until he left his horses and
climbed up the rocks to the table-land at the head of
the creek, and there he found them hard at work.
Instead of digging deep into the bank, and finding
gold only in the stratum of clay next the rock, the
gold was found in an alluvial deposit from four to
six inches thick lying upon a bed of yellow greasy
clay. From that and what he could learn from the
miners, he considers that 30s. per man per day is a
* An Australian sect of Christians, who wear beards, and
adhere to the laws of the Old Testament.


low average. The gold of the table-land and the
Louisa, instead of being in scales like the Turon
gold, or in water-worn nuggets like that of Ophir,
is in nuggets of all sizes from four ounces to a
pin’s head, with exactly the appearance of gold
broken carefully out of the quartz. This table-
land is about twenty miles long and two to four
wide, with gold so universally disseminated that a
man cannot fix on a spot without finding it pro-
ductive. The Meroo is exactly the same as the
Turon, only that the hills are about one thousand
feet high instead of six or seven hundred, and has
room for a much greater number of miners, still
more profitably employed. The gold is of the
same description, but the scales a little coarser.
The people here have been trying the table-lands
to-day, and a man has been to the Commissioner’s
quarters to shew a considerable quantity in nuggets
which he had found to-day, so that there is reason
to believe that the Wyagden table-land will prove
equally productive. The people who commenced
upon the Sheep Station Point below this have been
digging down to the rock without success, and y es-
terday the whole point was abandoned, but to-day
they again took possession of their claims, and
have been working the surface, the green sods, and
making an ounce out of eig’hteen or twenty buckets.
There were about a hundred licenses paid at the
Meroo, and about fifty have left this to-day : there
will of course be an immediate rush to it. Mr.


Hardy shewed me some beautiful nuggets which he
had bought as specimens, one nearly three ounces.”
Ophir , Dec. 7. —North wood’s party have taken
their departure to spend the Christmas in the me-
tropolis. From calculations which I have been
enabled to make, I may safely set down the earn-
ings of the party at 1 1, per diem, Sundays excluded.
But this calculation is made by reckoning that
twenty men worked at gold digging, whereas for
the first month of their labours only twelve were at
work (when the weather permitted), and on the two
following months, up to the period of the party
breaking up on the 30th ultimo, there were sixteen
licensed diggers —the others of the party being' en-
gaged in carpentering and other necessary works to
keep the tools in order, and prepare the food. The
party who has purchased the tools and claims from
Northwood and company, has arrived, and has
taken out several licenses, with the intention of
setting to work instanter.
The sailors, who were so very successful the early
part of our golden era, have been very fortunate
again at the junction here. It is enough to state
that they are sending to Sydney 114 ounces this
week, the principal part of which are in nuggets
varying in size from a pea to a walnut.
Wallace and party of three have been also reap-
ing well for their labour. In the space of ten
minutes, last Thursday, they “ pickit a pocket” of
nuggets weighing upwards of twenty ounces; and


on the following clay turned out nearly the same
quantity. Others, having- claims at gold bars, where
they have been enabled to work, have done a first-
rate stroke; and considering the few diggers we
have just now at Ophir,' the gold brought to light is
truly astonishing. To work successfully you must
have large and steady companies.
Louisa Creek, Dec. s.—Many have been leaving
for other places, not far distant, where the produce
is more equal and certain. Still several have been
doing well, especially near the junction of the two
creeks, and also near the great quartz ridge, where
many fine specimens have been dug out, one of
which I saw, that has just been sold for 39/., the
greater portion of it consisting of quartz. A few
days ago a considerable commotion was caused by the
arrival of the “ Great Nugget Quartz Ridge Crush-
ing Company,” who, accompanied by the Commis-
sioner, proceeded to have their allotment mea-
sured off. This consists of half a mile square, or
160 acres, the quartz ridge lying nearly in the
middle.
Two days ago, having had occasion to ride down
to Meroo, after my horse that had strayed, I came
upon the place where the Scotchmen, as they are
called, were at work, and of whose success, where-
ever they go, I had heard so much. I found that
they, as well as some other parties who were work-
ing close by, had turned off the stream to one side?
and were sinking in the bed of the creek. They


confessed quite freely that they had obtained 68 ozs.
of gold from a pocket one day after dinner; and one
of them (pointing to a person in the next party)
said that he had seen that man washing out 2| lb.
weight of gold from one tin dish! The common
belief is, that these parties have often been making
4 and 5 lb. weight in one day. I was told they
had made 2,000 1, worth of gold from one bar; and,
as a person remarked, they think no more of an
ounce a day than a pinch of snuff. At the
Devil’s Hole Creek, a tributary of the Meroo, which I
visited also a few days ago, I found five or six hundred
persons at work, generally with good success. They
are digging deep into the banks, and are getting-
well repaid. On Long Creek, which is within a
mile, I hear that many are doing a fine stroke. A
party of six I yesterday met with, returning home
from the Mud Hole Creek, where they had been at
work ten weeks. They gave most favourable ac-
counts of it, stating that man} r parties had been
making twenty and thirty ounces a day; that these
were the richest and most extensive diggings they
had met with; and that though the banks consist of
wide flats, yet the gold seems abundant throughout,
resting chiefly on beds of pipe-clay.
Turning from the Bathurst district, we proceed to
Goulhurn. —The town of Goulburn, in the County
of Argyle, 125 miles from Sydney, is the centre of
one of the most important squatting districts, and
was proposed as the terminus of the Sydney rail-


way, now in course of construction. It was in this
district that the second gold field was found and
worked with considerable success, partly on Crown
land and partly on the property of Mr. Badgery
and Dr. Bell.
In November we find faint accounts of isolated
success on creeks of the Shoalhaven River, which
appeared early in September, grown into great
prosperity. On Mr. Badgery’s property, eight hun-
dred licenses had been taken out. A small party
obtained gold in four days to the amount of 400/.
While the first diggings are worked out, farther
exploration discover others new and more rich; in
the words of an eyewitness ;
“ Cradles are to be seen at work in all quarters;
creeks before and creeks behind; creeks at all
points of the compass. Gold is sought, and gold is
found. One ounce a day is the average result
of a party of three where they have to cart the
earth down to the water and wash it there. A
nugget was dug out a short time since in the
shape of a skeleton of a horse, which had been
bogged there in former days.
“ At Major’s Creek four got 9 lb. of gold the first
week. Martyn’s party are earning 5 1, per man per
day. Plumb’s party turned out 30 oz. per day.
A woman and boy got 16 oz.
“ The Rev. Mr. Allen preaches once a fortnight,
alternately, at Bell’s Creek and Major’s Creek.”
The discovery in the Goulburn district, which


includes, for gold mining, the Araluen, the Aber-
crombie, as well as Braidwood, was the result of a
reward offered by a committee. The Abercrombie
is forty-five miles from Goulburn town, and seventy-
five miles were in the first instance prospected.
Gold was found 900 feet above the water mark.
In November the accounts are not less satis-
factory. In two days we hear of 1 lb. I oz. An-
other party, 23 oz. in one day; others from 7 to
13 oz. from Bell’s Creek.
Bell’s Gully, on the Araluen, gives Moore’s
party 85£ oz. in four and a half days; Greenwood’s
15 oz. in five days; Major’s Creek, on the 4th Nov.
18 oz. in a day.
In December a correspondent writes : — u What
the end of the present excitement will be, it would
be hard to imagine. On account of the principal
part of the choir belonging to the church having
“ gone off,” there was no singing for several Sab-
baths ; the hell at the Scots Kirk ceased to toll, for
he who used to pull the rope went off. Sabbath
and day school teachers are off, and schools are
being closed; one reporter is off, and premonitory
symptoms are appearing in the other; one under-
taker is off, and the other feels the excitement; we
had occasion to inquire for some one accustomed to
put up mementos for the dead, but all those accus-
tomed to do this work were off, and for a time no
“ storied urn or animated bust” will mark the place
where dear departed friends are laid ; five constables


gave in their resignations yesterday, and will he oft'
immediately; two others are ready to follow their
example; crowds of people are flocking through the
town to the diggings at Braid wood, a great number
of them are from the Turon and Abercrombie; the
intelligence from the diggings at Major Creek is
still favourable.”
On the new year there is no falling off; but a
fortunate fellow finds thirty ounces before breakfast
on New Year’s Day, and from that time, although
eclipsed in brilliancy by Ballarat and Mount Alexan-
der, the Goulburn fields may still be found in the
returns of the Sydney gold circulars.
No doubt, after mere hand labour has ceased to
he rewarded, scientific machinery will for many
years obtain a satisfactory return from abandoned
claims, considering that in Brazil four ounces was
found a profitable return from a ton of earth raised
from a deep mine on a mountain far from a port.
It is well observed : “ Poor maligned New South
Wales has been trusted with that which older
countries could not safely be trusted with, even
with gold in almost inexhaustible profusion, and
there has been no mischievous consequence result-
ing. All is peaceful and quiet. Occasional little
outbreaks may, in almost every instance, be traced
to the temporary influence of intoxication, which,
though bad enough, is a very different thing from
that innate propensity to vice which does not wait
for temptation or stimulus, but seeks for opportuni-


ties to develop itself. The police force may have
done something-, but moral force has done much
more to bring about this result.”
The New South Wales gold fields were made
known in May, and in August the Port Phillipians
halted on their way to the sister colony, and turned
their faces and their picks first towards Ballarat,
and then towards Mount Alexander.
The first discovery of gold was marked by an
extravagant rise in the price of provisions, hut they
soon settled down to a reasonable rate.
On the 10th December, at the Turon, mutton was
3 \d. per lb., by the joint; 2\d. ; bread, 4 ±d.;
and great and increasing competition in shop goods.
At Port Phillip the prices were, and continue, quite
as reasonable for all provisions.
The Nuggets.
Very soon after the first successful workings on
Summerhill Creek, a reaction took place ; the first
fields were limited and exhausted, and the diggers
very inexperienced. The correspondent of the
Sydney Morning Herald, on his second journey,
found more returning than going toward Bathurst,
but an extraordinary piece of good fortune gave a
new impetus to the search for gold, which has since
been amply rewarded, so that it became certain
that the gold at Summerhill was not a mere


accident, but that Australia was really an auri-
ferous country.
An aboriginal black, who bad been educated
at the since abandoned mission establishment at
Wellington Valley—as much as it is possible to
educate an Australian black—and afterwards for
seven years in the service of Dr. Kerr, the brother-
in-law of Mr. Sutton, one of the oldest and most
respectable and most respected of the colonists of
New South Wales, hearing so much talk of gold,
began to examine the stones on the run where
he was tending sheep, and found, among a cone of
rocks projecting from the backbone of a hill, some-
thing glittering. He broke off a portion with his
tomahawk, took it to his employer, who hastened
to the spot, and very soon raised up a mass which
is supposed to have weighed between two and three
hundredweight. Unfortunately, not being able to
move it conveniently, Dr. Kerr broke it into several
fragments. From these upwards of 106 pounds of
pure gold was obtained: the largest of the blocks
was about one foot in diameter; out of this piece
sixty pounds of pure gold were extracted, beauti-
fully encased in quartz; u the heaviest of the two
large pieces presented an appearance not unlike a
honeycomb, or sponge, and consisted of particles of
a crystalline form, as did nearly the whole of the
gold. The second larger piece was smoother, the
particles more condensed, and seemed as if it had
been acted upon by water. It was found at the


commencement of an undulating- table land, very
fertile, contiguous to a never-failing supply of water
in the Meroo Creek, about thirty-five miles from
the town of Bathurst, eighteen from Mudgee, thirty
from Wellington, and eighteen to the nearest point
of the MacQuarie river, and within eight miles of
Dr, Kerr’s head station.
The neighbouring country was immediately ex-
plored, but with exception of dust, nothing was
found on the same range until December, when a
lump, nine inches in diameter, and twenty-one
inches in circumference, weighing 336 oz. was
picked up. It consisted of nearly half quartz,
beautiful white, interspersed to fully one-half with
gold of the brightest quality, and in size, shape,
and appearance resembled a cheese of nine or ten
pounds weight which had been squeezed until the
gold protruded throughout. At the time of the
second nugget being found, lumps of from half a
pound to four pounds were becoming ordinary oc-
currences.
To return to Dr. Kerr’s hundredweight, which has
neither yet been exceeded either in theTuron or any
other diggings. A party, consisting of Dr. Kerr,
N. H. Suttor, Esq., and two attendants, well
armed, in a dog-cart drawn by a pair of greys
tandem, drove up to the Union Bank of Australia,
Bathurst, one day early in August, and there and
then weighed out as much gold in lumps aa
amounted to 106 lb.


Dr. Kerr presented the black and his brother, as
reward for his “find,” two saddle horses equipped,
suits of clothing-, with blankets, and two flocks of
sheep. They at once commenced feeding- their
black brothers, killing-, feasting, and dancing-, until
the flocks were much reduced in number, and then
sold the remainder—ewes about to lamb, with good
fleeces—at a trifling rate per head.
The second nug-get was found, at some con-
siderable depth in the earth, by Brennan’s party,
a company of labouring men from Maitland. They
were just about to leave off work, when one of them
struck his pick on a hard substance. “ I have got
something- here,” said he. “It’s only a boulder,”
said his brother. But on prizing it up, they found
“ the real cheese.”
Port Phillip digging’s have not produced a hun-
dredweight, but lumps seem more numerous than in
New South Wales, and the last accounts (Jan.
]852) speak of a piece the size and shape of a
man’s foot of solid gold.
Founding the First Church.
As soon as a population was fairly established
at the Turon, the Bishop of Sydney came up
for the purpose of building a church. His Lord-
ship preached in the open air at the Commis-
sioner’s camp, and gave notice that he -would
attend at six o’clock in the morning at the site


fixed for the intended church. At the appointed
hour a large concourse had assembled. The Bishop
addressed them, observing that;—his “ object was
to induce them to contribute, by the labour of the
bodv, that which would shew their earnestness for
the welfare of the soul—to obtain their help toward
providing the expenses of that church which he
had been engaged in preparing materials for. The
ground beneath their feet had lain undisturbed
since the day of its creation, and was now about
to be broken up in order to receive the foundation
of a building dedicated to Him by whom the
worlds were made.” “He desired that the funds
required for this most holy purpose should be pro-
vided by the faith and free-will of the community ;
and if, as in the days of Nehomiah, 1 the people
had a mind to work/ the labour would easily be
accomplished.” After more to the same purport
and prayer, the Bishop took a pick in hand, saying
that he would set them an example, “ that they
should all dig together for the honour and glory of
God and the extension of his Church,” and himself
began to make the first post-hole where the north-
east support of the building was to stand. The
example was contagious. All who could get hold
of an implement set to work. By half-past eight
more than half the holes were dug to the required
depth of three feet. The carpenters then took up
the work. At mid-day a waggon arrived from
Bathurst with a canvas covering for the roof and


sides, the communion-table and cover, the rails,
the reading-desk, front doors, and all other neces-
saries for the due celebration of public worship.
On the following- Sunday the church was opened,
capable of accommodating- upwards of two hundred.
The Roman Catholics and the Wesleyan Metho-
dists also established public worship.”
The Art of Gold Digging and Seeking.
In prospecting, the miners take a prospecting
dish—in common language, a tin milk-dish—a
pick, a spade, a blanket, and some days provisions,
and traverse the likely country digging holes, and
washing panfuls of earth until they find encouraging
symptoms. Here, for instance, is the diary of a
party in the Turon district, reported the 10th
August:—
“ Ophir, August 10.
“ They struck across the ranges, and made the
MacQuarie below the junction of the Summerhill
Creek; next day, on their way down the river, they
met a man prospecting upwards, who told them
that there were no huts below, and, as they could
get no provisions, they returned upwards, prospect-
ing at various places as they went, at all of which
they found gold; they also tried the bars in the
bed of the river, which they have no doubt will pay
well at some time, but have such a depth of sand
and shingle on the top of the workable earth, that


they considered they could get diggings as rich
elsewhere, attended with infinitely less labour.
Next day they walked straight a-head to a
1 diggin’ ’ on the Turon three miles up from the
junction, where they heard that there were a
butcher’s shop and a store, but on reaching it they
found that many of the miners had left, and as
usual the commissariat with them, so that they
could get nothing. They went upon short allow-
ance forthwith, and returned down prospecting
every bar to the MacQuarie, but nothing they con-
sidered good enough; only one party out of about
sixteen were doing well (or acknowledged that they
were), and they were making about an ounce and a
half to two ounces a day among four; they also
intended to move. Next day they went right up
the'Turon thirty-five miles (following the creek)
to the first store, where they got a supply of pro-
visions. A great many of the claims there had
been deserted upon reports coming down of the
extraordinary success of the diggers on Oakey
Creek, one of the upper branches of the Turon :
forty tents had been struck in one night, the store-
keeper said ; numbers, however, were now return-
ing to their old diggings disappointed, all the good
places being already overcrowded; they therefore
thought there was little to be gained by going
there, and returned down the creek, passing the
upper bars without examination, as numbers of
parties were at work, by the result of whose cradles


they saw that no good was to he done, until they
came to the bars recommended by Mr. Stutchbury,
about nine miles from the junction of the Mac-
Quarie. They sunk a hole seven feet upon the
bank at a bar where they camped for the night,
and found fair appearances at the top, as described
by Mr. Stutchbury, but very little indeed when
they went more than two feet from the surface;
the rock was too deep for them to reach, or to pay
well even if there was gold when they did. They
then went down three miles to some deserted dig-
gings, where they took possession of a hut, and
examined the holes seriatim; one they found very
good indeed, but unfortunately there was no quan-
tity of soil, and the rock dipped so suddenly that on
trying' between it and the river they could not
reach it, and found no gold to pay as far as they
went. Next day they went down three miles and
tried a bar at the junction of a second Oakey Creek,
about three miles from the junction of the Mac-
Quarie, where they found another party also
prospecting. They sank a hole and came to the
water at five feet, with very small appearances of
gold. Being out of meat, they went to the place
where they stayed on coming on to the Turon, but
got none. Still they determined to examine tho-
roughly, and while two tried another bar above
the junction of the Oakey Creek, where they sank
six feet without success, the Messrs. Windeyer
went up to see the diggers they heard of being


there. In about half a mile they came to the first
cradle, the man at which told them that though
there were one or two more cradles up the creek,
between that and the main falls, above which the
principal digging’s were, it was impossible to reach
them by way of the channel, as it was narrow and
precipitous, with great numbers of little falls. They
did succeed, however, and found it an almost
perpendicular rock, eighty feet in height, with a
very small stream trickling over, and reached the
top by climbing round high up on the side of the
mountain. Above this point lay a table-land about
two thousand feet above the bed of the Turon;
and the creek, which had by this time dwindled
into a small gully, wended for three hundred yards
between low stringy-bark ranges, and beyond that
through an open valley, with small water-holes at
intervals. In the three hundred yards were
crowded fifty cradles, and about one hundred and
fifty men, who had been washing in that secluded
spot for nearly a month, unknown to the generality
of mankind, including the Commissioners. They
had only worked the bed of the gully, but
appeared, as they said, to have done a 1 great
stroke’ at it; they saw one cradle panned out,
which contained rather better than an ounce, but
the man said that though he had passed through
only fourteen buckets of sand and gravel, he had
been all the forenoon obtaining that, which they
believed the more readily, as it was only in the


crevices of the rock that they obtained 1 good
tack.’ Upon prospecting the valley above, they
found the appearances of gold very small in the
soil near the surface; and as there were no holes
dug, and they had no tools, they had to leave it
without going' deeper; none of the miners had
gone further than they did, hut they consider it
very probable that on the rock there it is as rich
as between the ridges below where the creek has
washed it bare. They went across a range in an
easterly direction, and dropped into another gully
of exactly the same appearance and geological
character, rising out of the same table-land. They
followed it down to the junction, which they found
was about three miles above where the first creek
comes in; in prospecting they found gold in every
pan, of exactly the same description in colour and
shape of scales as that in Oakey Creek, but only
in small quantities, the trials being made only on
the surface. This Oakey Creek must not be con-
founded with the Oakey Creek at the head of the
Turon ; on an average there is at least one Oakey
Creek on every run. They rejoined the other two
during the night, and it was determined to return
and acquaint their companions with the result of
their expedition, which they did accordingly, and
reached our camp in the course of the next night.
They all join in declaring that prospecting is
the most harassing work they ever undertook, and
their poor condition strongly confirms their opinion.”


Claims and Licenses.
After having 1 discovered gold, the next process
is to obtain a license ; these are granted as of course
on application to the Commissioner.
Except in the rare case of lumps of gold picked
out of clay or quartz, plenty of water to wash the
dust out of the earth is essential, and the want of
this water renders many diggings temporarily
valueless, or compels the miners to carry the pre-
cious dirt long distances on their backs.
This is the case at Ballarat.
Gold diggers either collect the surface soil, or
sink a pit from twelve to eighteen feet deep, or
drive a tunnel in the bank of a river, or drain
a water-hole. In any case, they have to use what
are called navigators’ spades in digging stiff clay—
draining spades would be better, being strong,
sharp, and narrow—picks and mattocks, heavy
crowbars, and iron wedges. They require wheel-
barrows, sledges, baskets or bags, for carrying
the golden dirt to the cradle. Except in very
rich “ pockets,” all golden dirt must be washed ;
this is done in a cradle in the following manner :
Cradling.
The cradle is placed lengthwise with the river or
creek. The cradleman } holding the handle, which


gives a sort of barrel-churn motion, in his left
hand, with a stick to break the lumps of earth,
keeps the cradle, when it has been charged with
“ dirt,” constantly going. The waterman , standing
at the head of the cradle either with a supply of
water or, if the creek will allow, with a long-
handled scoop keeping pouring water continually
into it. A third man brings the stuif which he or
some other of the party has dug; while a fourth
takes the deposit, which has fallen through the
wire-sieves of the cradle on to boards beneath;
washes it into a large tin dish, which he carries
into the stream, where he stands knee-deep; tilts
the dish up under the water, and, shaking its con-
tents, the metal falls to the bottom, while the earth
and sand washes away. After long washing, the
glittering dust is seen along the bottom edges of
the dish; this residuum is carefully washed into a
pannikin, dried over the fire, and packed for expor-
tation.
While this washing for dust is going on, the
cradleman and the waterman examine the quartz
stones for pieces and lumps of gold.
From this description, it will be clear that a part-
nership is indispensable, and that it is advisable to
secure the aid of one experienced digger.
The following hints on the proper construction of
a cradle are by an experienced Californian miner.
It can only be advisable to take the wire netting.
A party should not take more than they can


themselves carry in four packages, or load on one
horse, except provisions. Drays, carts, &c., are
better purchased in the colony.
On the Construction of Gold Cradles , from a
Californian Miner now settled in Australia.
Since my residence in the land of “Ophir,”
I have witnessed much waste of the “ precious
metal,” —an evil to be regretted on many accounts,
but felt seriously by the inexperienced miner. It
is my desire, on the present occasion, to point out
the origin of the evil alluded to, and illustrate the
remedies. The first evil, and most serious, is that
of ill-constructed “rockers” badly worked. The
machines generally used are defective in one very
essential requisite, viz., a sufficient space for the
washed soil to pass over, so as to allow the water to
mix freely with it, and separate the fine from the
coarse parts. The menstruum should be suffi-
ciently fluid to allow the gold to obtain that
position in the machine which, from its superior
gravity, it will attain. If the space is contracted,
the materials thrown into the hopper (or riddle)
are so crowded together, or, in plain terms, the
mud is so thick that it carries the gold (if fine)
along with it; or so much water must be thrown
into the hopper as to drive everything but heavy
gold before it. It is in this way an immense
quantity of fine gold is lost. Since I have been


here I have met with very many who entirely
disregarded the small particles, and never at-
tempted to secure any but what they termed
“ nuggets,” and I have seen about three shillings
worth of gold obtained from a single pan of refuse,
on the Turon.
The next loss originates from gold combined
with its natural matrix quartz. When found in
combination with quartz, it is usual to hammer the
gold, to free it from the stone, and throw or blow
the latter away. It will be found that the quartz
immediately in contact with the gold is rich in
that metal. In some instances it may be detected
by the eye, in very minute specs, but in the greater
part it is not discernible at all. I have reduced
quartz of this kind, and heated it with mercury,
that is, adopted the process of amalgamation, and
from my experiments on Ophir specimens, I find
the loss of gold is not less than 16 dwts. per
100 lb. of quartz, every 100 lb. of which so
thrown away is worth at least 48/. Having briefly
pointed out the causes of loss, I will endeavour, as
distinctly as I can, to suggest the remedies, which
some little experience enables me to recommend
with confidence.
First, as to the “ rocker,” It should not be less
than four feet in length, and from eighteen to
twenty inches in width, with a slide of two feet in
length under the hopper, so that the soil be made
to pass over an inclined plane of at least six feet.


Thus, two feet for the slide, and four feet for
the bottom of the rocker. No bars are requisite on
a machine so constructed, except one. at the ex-
tremity. The inclination of the rocker, when set to
work, should not exceed half an inch in a foot, and
the water, instead of being dashed into the riddle
in large quantities and with great violence, should
be well distributed over the soil, and poured in with
force enough only to cause it to flow freely but
gently through the machine. By adopting this
plan, the gold will traverse gradually over the first
inclined plane (the slide) and drop on to the second
(the rocker bottom), down which it will pass till
impeded by the small stones and sand retained by
the bar. The rocking motion, by the aid of the
water, throws the gold to the centre of the ma-
chine. When ten buckets have been washed
through in this way (if the work is properly per-
formed), on pouring water gently through the
machine, keeping up an easy rocking motion for a
very short time, and then discontinuing the ope-
ration, a cone will be found to be formed on the
bottom, and the materials ranked in the following
order, commencing at the lowest part of the in-
clination, which will form the base of the cone :
First, small stones and sand; second, emery; third,
gold; the apex of the cone being fine gold. The
order observed by bodies when influenced by the
attraction of gravitation being exactly reversed.
The water first carrying the lightest particle before


it to the extremity of the machine, and the heaviest
being left the last and highest. It is also essential,
before rejecting the washed material left on the
inclined plane, that it be brought up to the top
of the rocker, and water poured gently down the
first inclined board (slide), and re-rocked, so as
to obtain any portions of gold which, from their
size or shape, have opposed a sufficient surface to
the water to enable that element to carry it too
much below the apex of the cone. When the
order described prevails, the machine and rocking-
may be said to be —the one accurately made and
the other performed. In this way the finest gold
may be procured with very little, if any loss.
J. W. Rudder.
The Victoria or Port Phillip Gold Fields.
In the midst of the successful returns from
prospecting, digging, tunnelling, washing, cradling,
and the other operations of the new trade opened
up by Californian example in New South Wales,
the inhabitants of the new province of Victoria
were not idle. In the preceding three years, several
specimen lumps had been sold to Mr. Brentano, a
ieweller at Melbourne. The Port Phillipians now
set to work in good earnest, and were soon favoured
with that good fortune which has always attended
the district not ill-named by Sir Thomas Mitchell,


Australia Felix. It may be as well to mention
here that Australia Felix, Phillipsland of Dr.
Lang-, Port Phillip of the masses and common
parlance, and Victoria, as named by the Act which
divided it leg-ally from New South Wales, and
erected it into a separate province, are all the same
country. Port Phillip, from which it takes its
popular name, is a great harbour entered by a
channel barely two miles wide, of which one mile
only is navig-able, and then spreading out to a
breadth of from twenty to sixty miles, and a leng-th
from the “ Heads” to the inmost anchorage of forty
miles.
Melbourne , the capital city of Victoria, stands
on the river Yarra. Yarra is a narrow stream
navigable up to the town by steamers of 200 tons,
and discharging into Hobson’s Bay in Port Phillip,
where ships of burthen lie at anchor and discharge
their passengers into steamers. Melbourne is 587
miles from Sydney. There is a constant communi-
cation by steam between the two cities, and also
with Launceston on the opposite shore of Van
Diemen’s Land, and with all the other "ports of any
importance, as well as with Port Adelaide in South
Australia, by a vast number of sailing vessels.
There is a constant overland communication with
Sydney—a mail coach, and the Journey is made
from all parts of the old colony on foot and on
horseback. Cattle are driven from the north of
Victoria for sale in South Australia.


Geelong , the second port of Victoria, is 641
miles from Sydney, and fifty-four miles from Mel-
bourne, on the western arm of Port Phillip Bay.
A steamer plies between them daily. The harbour
is good, and admits vessels drawing eleven feet,
loading or unloading alongside the wharfs; but
a bar at the mouth of the harbour excludes vessels
drawing more than ten feet of water.
After a number of rumours and some trifling*
successes, in August, at Climes Diggings, a number
of miners went to work with great success at
Ballarat, in the township of Buninyong, 40 miles
from Geelong, and the returns from there exceeded
everything previously obtained in New South
Wales, until a still richer field was found at Mount
Alexander, ninety-eight miles from Melbourne.
“ Buninyong lies on the edge of an open forest,
and in the midst of a magnificent agricultural and
pastoral country, two days drive from Melbourne.
The attempt to condense into a small space a de-
scription of the momentous events of the last
few months must needs be a failure. Six months
ago we were looking forward to the consequences of
the discovery of gold at Bathurst. Some feared a
drain of our population; others, ourselves among
the number, were hopeful of the effect of the
discovery on our agricultural interests, while the
recollection of former rumours of the finding of
gold at the Pyrenees, led us to anticipate the dis-
covery of a gold field of our own. A few short


weeks brought about the verification of our hopes.
Several hardy adventurers had gone forth in various
directions, and after many mistakes and disappoint-
ments, at last hit upon the gold bearing quartz
veins of Clunes, near Burnbank, seventy-five miles
north-west from Geelong. Here the work was
severe, and the yield small, although remunerative.
“ The next discovery was at Buninyong, twenty-
five miles nearer town. At first the gains were
promising, but did not exceed those at Clunes, and
the diggers prosecuted further researches in the
neighbourhood. One of the prospecting parties
settled down on a creek about five miles distant,
and turned up gold in much greater abundance.
Other parties joined them, and the work of excava-
tion proceeded merrily. Some had extraordinary
luck, and the news of their findings spread rapidly
over the land, producing the first access of the gold
fever. All the other diggings were deserted, and
the miners settled down on the Golden Point of
Ballarat, where individual gains were soon reckoned
by tens and twenties of ounces in the day. The
townspeople went mad. Every available vehicle
was loaded with the paraphernalia of gold wash-
ing, and the necessary supplies. It was the depth
of winter, and the roads were fearfully bad; but
Saxon and Celtic energies were at work, and in a
few weeks there were concentrated, on a small area
of land not exceeding 300 acres, at least 6,000 peo-
ple, digging, smashing, shovelling, wheeling, pud-


tiling- the earth, and rocking at least a thousand
cradles! In one week 7,000 ounces of gold were
handed to the Government escort for conveyance to
town, and this was estimated to be only a fifth of
the yield.
“ And yet it was no holiday work to pick up
the gold. Each party worked in a space of ground
eight feet square, and many of the holes were sunk
to three times eight feet deep! In the motley
crowd that gathered there, hundreds were physically
unfit for the work; hundreds more were morally
incapable to enter on a task requiring so much per-
severance. Hundreds, again, of those who were in
every way fitted for the work, obtained but mode-
rate gains; for here, as in every other gold field,
there were blanks as well as prizes. The neigh-
bouring hills and river banks were tried; but,
although gold was everywhere found, there was no
place so rich as the Golden Point, and small gains
were now despised. Numbers returned to the
towns; others penetrated into the interior. Hu-
mours of parties at work near Mount Alexander,
fifty miles to the northward, reached Ballarat;
many went thither, and, before reaching the Mount,
pitched upon a field more wonderfully auriferous
than Ballarat itself.”
Discouraging Accounts.
Buninyong, Aug. 19.
“ I have been on the field, and have spoken to


nearly every one there without finding’ a single
party that is doing good. One party of two had
procured about a quarter of an ounce since 1 rid ay
last, inclusive, and this was the largest quantity
which I saw. At present but little ground has
been turned up, and although persons have been
marching in various directions, gold has hitherto
only been found in the one limited spot. Flour is
selling at Buninyong for Qd. per pound, and tobacco
for 10s. o>d. Stores generally are at present scarce.
I shall endeavour to visit the place again next week
if the creeks permit.”
dunes Gold Diggings.
Aug. 23.
Since last week, little work has been done here,
owing to the inclemency of the weather, and the
creeks flooded by the excessive and general rain.
The Clunes people have hardly been at work at
all, and although to-day was favourable, few seemed
inclined to make a beginning on what is generally
a broken day. Some new parties have arrived on
the ground, but the population is numerically
scarcely altered, as several persons have abandoned
the pursuit. While talking with some persons who
had just arrived from Melbourne, I was greeted by
a blue-shirted, moleskinned individual, whose good-
humoured phiz, I felt sure, I had seen before.
“ How d’ye do; who the deuce are you?” said I.


I found that it was Mr. Cheetham, of Collins-street,
who has come up as one of a part}' with a quicksilver
machine. I explained that, as the state of his health
rendered a country excursion advisable, he had de-
termined on combining 1 pleasure with business. To-
day was our market-day, and I was at the “ bank.”
The principal transaction was the sale, by Sprigg’s
party of two, of nine and a half ounces, the pro-
duce of about three weeks work, though of that
time some days were wasted. This is, perhaps, the
greatest success which has been met with by any
on the ground; they have been singularly happy in
their choice of place, but they say that good
places, and rich soil, are now getting scarce and
difficult to find. It ought to be mentioned that
these men have been able to give their undivided
attention to the work, as the wife of one of them
has looked after their domestic comforts, and
washed nearly an ounce on private account into the
bargain.
News from the Diggings. —The first escort from
the digging's arrived in Geelong on Sept. 28th. It
consisted of an officer of the mounted police, two
troopers, and two of the native police, and was
accompanied by the gold commissioner. It left the
diggings on Saturday morning ; and although inti-
mation was given, none of the diggers availed
themselves personally of the advantage of the
escort. They were, we presume, too well occupied,


and few of them have yet made arrangements for
sending their gold to a town agent. The officer of
the police brought a few parcels, but the great bulk
of the gold brought down is the property of Govern-
ment, the produce of the license fees.
On Saturday night, two brothers, named Cave-
nagh, arrived in Geelong with sixty pounds weight
of gold (value the produce of four weeks
working. The party actually averaged 100£. per
day ! There are many extraordinary accounts of suc-
cess—such as the finding of sixteen pounds weight
in one morning. The most successful party is Gal-
loway’s, who have got into a very rich hole. As
to diggers, the Commissioner supposes the average
earnings to be from a quarter of an ounce to two
ounces, or from 15s. to 60s- for each man per day.
The richest yield of gold is obtained from a
stratum of blue clay, which is found at a depth
of from two to nine feet. The deeper it is found,
the thicker is the bed. This is the case about half-
way up the side of the sloping banks, the whole of
the strata being there thickest, and the whole
thinning and dying out on the top and towards the
creek; so there is no probability of finding gold in
the creek when the waters subside, except what
may have been washed down in the course of ages
from the higher strata —that, in fact, the river gold
bed, should any exist, will be of a totally different
character from that which is now being worked.


Gold has been found in quantities at Mount Alex-
ander, Clunes, and Buninyong, throughout an extent
of country thirty miles in length. It has been found
in smaller portions at the Anakie Hills and Bates-
ford, in a line of country forty miles south-east from
Ballarat. Anderson’s Creek probably belongs to
a separate auriferous rang’e, which has yet to be
explored. The Wardiyallock Ranges, the upper
branches of Mount Emu Creek, Fiery Creek, and
the Hopldns, are everywhere intersected and strewn
with quartz, evidently a continuation of the same
system of rocks as those round Buninyong. The
whole of these watercourses, with the Marahool
and Leigh, if not also the Avoca and other rivers
on the northern slope of the dividing ranges, will,
there is every likelihood, prove auriferous.
Successful Doings. —At “ our own diggings,” I
have to report the discovery of three nuggets, which
I have just seen weighed. The first piece weighed
271 grains, the second 106 £ grains, the third 136
grains 5 and I have seen others on the ground fully
equalling’ them. These specimens are purchased
and forwarded to Messrs. Jackson, Rae, and Co., in
Melbourne. There is of course a great difference
in the success of the parties working, hut none are
unsuccessful. Messrs. Day and Garlick s party are
netting’ two and a quarter ounces per day 5 Connor’s
party, five ounces per day 5 another party, an ounce
and a half per man; a party of three, an ounce per
man per day. The “ mutual association” of seven,


an ounce and an ounce and a half per man per
day; Shipman’s party, a quarter of an ounce each ;
Richard and Wilson’s party, three quarters of an
ounce each per diem; a party of three, two ounces
per day; a party of five, one ounce per day; ditto,
one ounce per day; Furby and Richard’s, one ounce
and a half per day; Tom Toddleton and his uncle,
half an ounce per day; Dunlop and Regan, half
an ounce per day; one party of three has netted
twenty-eight ounces in fifteen days; another party
of four, in eight days, in conjunction with an extra
two for the last two days, have realised the enor-
mous quantity of sixty-three ounces; Jones, eight
ounces in, I believe, a week; amongst them a
nugget weighing 151 grains, and another ninety-
two grains. Dunlop and Reg’an, six ounces forty
grains in five and a half days. Two tin dishes
average one ounce each per day, and the new
machine mentioned in my last has turned five and
a half ounces in three days. I have heard of, but
not seen, two very large nuggets found on Satur-
day; and I speak advisedly when I state that up.
wards of 100 ounces have passed through one hand
during the past week. I forward six ounces per
this mail.
A gentleman (Mr. Montefiore) who has returned
from the Ballarat diggings informed us that there
were about 400 people there hard at work, and about
600 en route for the same place for Geelong. Mr.
Montefiore in about ten minutes procured a quarter


of an ounce of gold from a spadeful of earth.
About 3,000 Z. worth of the precious metal was in
one day received in Melbourne from these mines.
It appears that gold has been found on the Cobban.
We learn from a credible source, that one hundred
ounces of gold were brought into Geelong on Wed-
nesday last, by a man who stated that it had been
gathered by him and two others in three weeks.
All parties, it appears, are getting abundance of
gold. Between four and five hundred men of the
labouring class have left Geelong within the last
week for the diggings, and the emigration still con-
tinues to such an extent as to threaten the depo-
pulation of the town. Drays are seen on all sides
ready laden, all surmounted with the significant
cradle. The diggings are represented to be about
forty-four miles from Geelong, in ranges that are
spurs from Mount Alexander. Gold has also been
found dn small quantities within seven miles of
Geelong. Mr. Commissioner Armstrong started
for the diggings in the beginning of the present
week.
Description , by an Eye-witness.
Buninyong, Oct. 29, 1851.
«I have just returned from the Ballarat ‘ dig-
gins.’ This particular spot, called Golden Point,
exceeds in richness of yield any other yet dis-
covered. The sight is one well worth going to
see. Picture to yourself a pretty valley clothed


with, timber on either side, with a verdant meadow
spread out at the bottom, through which ripples a
stream, limpid, perhaps, till now, but at present of
the colour and consistency of pea-soup. On one
side a little round hill projects into the basin. This
is the spot. It is now absolutely honey-combed
with holes eight feet square, varying in depth from
six to forty feet, according* to the depth of the pipe-
clay, below which no gold is ever found. The pipe-
clay is most irregular in its lay —in fact, it is like
the waves of the sea, and the gold is found in the
greatest quantities immediately above it, in a sort
of hard, purple clay mixed with quartz and sand.
The quantity which has been taken out of this hill
is almost incredible. Out of one hole 1,800/. worth ;
out of another 1,400/. worth of gold. A friend of
my own, from whose station I am now writing,
saw a working* man receive 1,400/. for a week s
work. Lumps of 5 lb. weight have been found,
many of several ounces, but most of the g*old is
got in grains, sometimes oval and flattened, some-
times round, like shot Nos. 1 or 2. It presents
precisely the appearance of liquid lead dropped into
water, being sometimes indented, with sharp points
projecting. It was evidently fluid before it assumed
its present form, and has never been worn by rolling
in water. Many specimens may be seen of the gold
adhering to quartz, some of which are very pretty.
At present it is only got by the common cradle pro-
cess, but it would pay a company well to work over


again all the earth with a quicksilver machine.
Golden Point will soon be exhausted, hut numerous
new diggings will undoubtedly he found. In fact,
gold is found to exist in all the ranges about here,
but it will not pay for the working in every case,
or rather in very few places. It is utterly impos-
sible to g-ive any adequate idea of the excitement
which this discovery has occasioned. Thousands
instantly left their occupations and rushed to the
gold. It is now about a month since the beginning
of it. I believe the sight at Ballarat is not nearly
so singular as it was a week ago, still it is well
worth seeing. It is like the encampment of an
army. In a confined space of a few hundred yards
are to he seen thousands at work, busy as bees, with
the same sort of hum —the rumbling of the cradles.
The sides of the little creek are so thickly lined
with human being’s, that it is impossible to cross
without disturbing’ them in their occupations. The
cradling is light work, excavating is ordinary home
work. The holes near the water are dangerous, as
the earth falls in ; one or two men have been killed
in this way, one or two have been murdered, and
some robberies have taken place, hut on the whole
they are wonderfully well conducted. A great pro-
portion are respectable tradesmen and mechanics.
Many are gentlemen who have property, and have
brought parties of four or five, giving them either
wages or a share of the profits. Consequently, the
first effects of the mania have been very prejudicial


to the interests of the country. Fears, too well
founded, were entertained that the wool would not
he got off the sheep’s hacks, and that the crops
would rot on the ground. I am glad to say
that a reaction seems to he taking place, which
will most likely prevent these results. There is
no want of shearers at present, and the exten-
sive immigration already setting in from the
neighbouring colonies is rather likely to cause a
superabundance of labour. The cause of this is
that gold finding is neither more nor less than
a grand lottery, in which there are a few splen-
did prizes, with innumerable blanks. Numerous
friends of mine have brought up parties, and not
made enough to pay their expenses. But, again,
I saw two servants who had left me a week ago,
and they were clearing 11. sterling* per day. Num-
bers are making more than this, still greater numbers
less. Were I at home without employment I should
immediately come here. Just now it is actually
pic-nicking, for the weather is charming; of course,
in winter very disagreeable. All the world of Vic-
toria and his wife have been there, —from Mr. La
Trobe, the Governor, downwards. Lawyers, doctors,
clergymen—on Sunday there is no working—and nu-
merous congregations may he seen in groups round
the different clergymen. I was much pleased with
the order and good feeling which generally pre-
vailed, —in fact, I saw nothing else; every one
most civil and obliging, as to giving information


and assistance. Our national character seems quite
changed,—l suppose from the good humour pro-
duced by finding such quantities of the “ root of all
evil.” I saw no drunkenness, —perhaps because
the day before a large seizure had been made of
spirits by the magistrates. There are plenty of
them and of members of council here. Immense
numbers of people are returning to their legitimate
employments.
The staid, middle-aged man, who likes his com-
forts in peace and quiet, with a certainty, will
prefer staying at home. I have hitherto been very
cautious in advising people to come out here, now I
have no hesitation in doing so most strongly.
When I mention that man} r new appointments
have been caused by these discoveries, of from
300/. to 500/. per annum, that every common
constable gets 100/. per annum, and that they are
discontented, you will perceive that there must be
an opening for young men independent of digging
gold. I have been obliged to give my groom 50/.
per annum, and then he only stayed as a sort of
favour, because he liked the place.
From a Printer.
24#/t Nov. 1851.
“Of printers now, there is not only not one
out of work, but they cannot be got for love
or money. There are nine wanted for the go-
vernment office, six for the Argus office, three for


the Herald , and six for our place the Daily
News. If you refer to the accompanying- papers,
you will see it is all owing- to the 1 diggings.’ We
have most extensive gold fields within sixty miles
of us—a three days journey, and it is to this field
that most people are wending their way. In fact,
such is now the excitement in town, that no one is
satisfied to remain behind; but off* they must go,
and try their fortune. A fortnight ago our land-
lord went away; and last night we heard he had
got upwards of 2 lb. in the course of the week.
Last Saturday the armed escort came down from
Mount Alexander, and so heavy was the quantity
of gold sent down, that two horses could not carry
it, and they were obliged to employ a dray to con-
vey it to town. The amount was the enormous sum
of 200,000/., all collected (so it is said) in the course
of one week. Such an amount was staggering, and
it has given even me a touch of the gold fever ; and
I have made up my mind to join a party of three
steady men who are about to go up —three who can
be depended on. To this end I have written out
my notice to leave, and in a fortnight from this, I
shall be on my way, if all is well, to the gold field.
From this you will see how changeable things are
here—one day here, another there—no certainty.
I know not how long we may remain at the dig-
gings, but we take provisions for at least three
months, so it is most likely you will not receive any
letters from me for that time. When I return, if


very successful , I would not mind taking a trip
home again, and then returning to Australia. Do
not on any account make yourselves the least un-
easy, as, if I am not successful, there is plenty of
work in the town for the next two or three years;
and by giving my regular notice, I would be almost
certain of regaining my position in the Daily News
office when I returned. One powerful reason for
my leaving is this : I cannot stand so much night-
work as there is here. Why, the other day, on the
opening of the Legislative Council, I went to the
office at nine in the morning, was there till six in
the evening (except the hour to dinner), back again
at seven, and did not stir out again till quarter-past
nine next morning, thus being actually twenty-four
hours in the office; and this is frequently the case
now we have so few hands and so much to do.
The wages are good, but the work is killing. At
present there is no prospect of getting any com-
positors now for at least six months to come. At
the present period there is abundance of work for
thousands, with good wages and cheap provisions.
House rent is very high; but all will not do ; the
gold fields are too close; and off every person
goes.”
In December the ground had grown more rich,
and people began to migrate from New South
Wales and South Australia.


Geelong, Victoria, sth December 1851.
My Dear Mr. , —A ship sails this day.
In the way of our gold information, a new place
lately discovered, Mount Alexander, about forty
miles from the old one at Ballarat, about N. W.
direction. On it 15,000 men are working’; many
have made fortunes in three weeks; four Germans
sold 1,440/. of gold; a baker, in Melbourne, is said
to have sold 8,000/. worth of gold at 3/. Is. 6f/. the
ounce. All our servants are gone; our harvest,
standing’, as fine crops as ever seen, will, I fear, be
left minus of reapers; in fact, nothing thought of
excepting gold, selling about the streets daily. I
have no idea to what end all this will arrive at,
but, though great wealth will be produced, I greatly
fear evil will follow; we must only do the best, and
trust in God.
“ Oh, this gold ! I wonder where this mania will
stop. People used to be satisfied to find it by the
ounce, but now nothing but lumps will satisfy.
Things are in a dreadful state: water, 6s. per load;
wood, 1/. per load; bread, Is. 6d. per loaf; eggs,
2s. a dozen; butter, 2s. per lb.; and everything
else as high.* Housekeeping is really dreadful. If
goes to the 1 digging,’ I hope he will close
the house, and I can visit my friends
The escort came in yesterday from the ‘diggings’
• Provisions have since fallen to their usual prices, but
wood and water and rent continue high.


with 70,000/. worth of gold, more than ever came
before. I could fill sheets of paper with accounts
of the poorest men, who in a few hours have become
rich, and then of the absurd manner in which they
spend their money. For instance, there was one of
the poorest men in the town went up, and although
his wife had not the necessaries of life, yet when he
came down with 300/. or 400/., he bought his wife
and two or three of his children the most costly gold
watches and chains.
“ You will see by the papers far more than I can
tell you, but you cannot conceive the revolution it
has caused here. There are not less than 20,000
men gold-digging, besides women and children—all
of whom two months ago were in Melbourne or
Geelong, at work in their proper trades; and now,
save and except drapers, grocers, and ironmongers,
we are at a dead stop. Two hands are worth five
heads, and men, who for a life have been.slaving
for 255. or 20s. per week, are now earning 20/.,
30/., 40/. or 50/., and as much as 60/. per week,
digging up gold by pounds, picking it out in
lumps with the point of a pocket-knife, and walk-
ing into a draper’s shop, and clothing their wives
and children in silks and satins, or fooling and
drinking away their money in a style that would
startle you Sheffielders out of your senses. We
are paying 3s. for water where we paid Is. j Is. 4 d,
for bread where we paid Bd.; 6s. for carriage
where we paid Is.; and so on, all the way through;


while, on the other hand, we have a 1 government
escort’ or conveyance, bringing' every week into
town from the gold-field, a ton of gold. We turn
up our noses at California, and treat with contempt
all the other gold mines in the world. Ours lies on
the surface, and after a shower of rain, you may
see it with the naked eye, and a child can put in a
spade, and dig that with his little hands in one
minute, which many of you in England wear out
eyes and heart in getting. The gold is found all
over the country nearly, and there is enough to
satisfy, reasonably, all the people that may come
either in a direct or indirect way; and from the
surface down to twenty feet in the ground, you
may get more or less. It is a common thing to see
in dozens of shop windows, and there is nothing
else thought or talked of. It is worth 3£. 17s. KM.
in England, and has been selling here at 3/. Is. up
to 31. 2s. 3d. It has now fallen to 21. 14s. 6d. per
oz., because, listen — roe have not sufficient money
in the colony to huy it! There is so much of it
brought, and likely to he brought, into the market.
And now, you ask what am I doing’ ? Why, lam
gold-digging, as soon as I can find a suitable party;
for in this way we all go, in companies of three ,
four, five, or six, or more together, for mutual pro-
tection as rvell as for increased labour . The gold
is found in the hush, so all have to sleep in tents,
and put up with great inconveniences, of course
but then, gold pays for all.


Letter from.' a Gold Purchaser.
Description of Ballarat. “To forward our
views, we rode that afternoon into Geelong 1 , to
procure various little necessaries for our journey;
and thus provided, set out the following- morn-
ing*, mounted on good horses, and carrying our
baggage with us. The day was hot, for you
must remember that our November ranks with
May in Europe, though more like April in its
very changeable character; there was, however, a
pleasant sea-breeze, which prevented the heat being
oppressive, and I enjoyed the ride through a pretty
park-like country, just now verdant with the young
grass, but for the most part rather flat; so that, on
starting, we could see the point of our destination
in Mount Buninyong. We met with no particular
adventure, the chief objects of interest being the
various parties going to and coming from the Bal-
larat diggings, whither we were hound; great
numbers being encamped in an open forest about
mid-way, and forming, with their temporary gipsy-
like tents, baggage-drags, and bush-fires, some pic-
turesque scenes.
“After an early breakfast at the little inn where
we spent the night, we rode seven miles through a
rugged forest road to Ballarat, —till within these
last few months a part almost unknown, and simply
forming a portion of a sheep run, occupied by


Mr. Y . The hills, of very moderate height,
rise from the valley with little hollows (or gullies,
as they are called) .between them. Here the dis-
covery of gold caused an accumulation of 8,000 oi
10,000 people in a few weeks; and although by
the time I arrived the greater part of these had
gone away again, there were still enough left to
form a very curious scene; many hundreds of tents,
of all sorts and sizes, being scattered about the
valley in the most irregular manner, —while others,
including several stores, were clustered together on
one particular hill, called Golden Point, the lower
part of which has been upturned and ransacked for
the precious metal it contains. At a little distance
this hill looks like a vast gravel-pit, consisting of
fine red gravel, such as you would choose, when
sifted, for your garden walks. On examining the
ground more closely, the excavations are found
to consist of square holes, of all sizes and depths,
from three or four feet to twenty or thirty feet.
The strata are very variable and uncertain, but
generally this bed of gravel lies upon a bed of
whitish sandy clay, and the gold is, for the most
part, found in the lower part of this gravel, which
is generally so firmly bound together, that it has
become a hard conglomerate, which can only be
broken up by hammers. The gold is usually found
in small rounded, and evidently water-worn pieces,
from the size of a pin’s head to that of peas, but
now and then of much larger size. The great


bulk, however, is small and scarcely perceptible
to the eye among’ the gravel, which is taken down
to the bed of the stream, and washed in tin dishes
and cradles.
u Among the rough, unshaven, dirty-looking
men who were at work, I every now and then
discovered some friend, who could hardly be re-
cognised in his bush attire, consisting generally of
a blue or scarlet woollen shirt, worn outside a la
blouse, with a leather belt round the waist, a straw
or “ wide-awake ” hat, and trousers and thick
boots of coarse materials, and all of one colour, viz.,
that of the clay and mud with which they are
covered. Mr. W. was one of those who thus mas-
queraded, and addressed me without my knowing
him. Among’ others of my acquaintance with
whom I met were lawyers, doctors, tradesmen, —in
fact, people of all sorts; but I noticed that gene-
rally the parties of labouring men were doing
best.
The success is very variable indeed; in proof of
which, one gentleman told me that he and his party
had been working hard for six weeks, and had sunk
thirteen deep holes, but got nothing. On leaving
one of their holes, as a failure, another party took
possession of it, and in two or three days took out
720/. worth of gold.
For some time past a new district, called Mount
Alexander, had been attracting a good deal of
attention, and a great many had proceeded thither


from Ballarat. From all I had heard, I concluded
that this would be the best place for our object of
purchasing gold, and therefore we proceeded there,
after spending three days at Ballarat. One of
these days was Sunday. It was a very wet
morning, and, probably owing to this, no clergy-
man visited us; otherwise, there is generally ser-
vice. The place was very quiet and orderly, no
work being done, and most men being very glad of
a day of rest after their week of toil, for gold
digging is no easy occupation.
u It was on the afternoon of the 11th of Novem-
ber that we strapped our baggage on to our horses,
wound the tether-ropes round their necks, and
started for Mount Alexander, having the greater
part of our money still with us. The direct distance
is fifty miles, but we were too late to make a single
ride of it, and slept at the house of Captain S .
Leaving Captain S —’s after breakfast, we rode at
a moderate pace, thinking that we had plenty of
time; but in consequence of our horses being low
in condition, and losing our way, we were in our
saddles till some time after dark. Our first busi-
ness on arriving at Mount Alexander, was to in-
quire for the tent of the government commissioner,
where we deposited our money, as we had pre-
viously done at Ballarat, for the sake of safety.
We continued our ride for about three miles, to
where the main diggings and the largest collection
of tents were, in hopes of finding some place oi


rest and some grass for our horses.
A friend with whom I happened to fall in allowed
me to creep into his tent, and, having- obtained the
loan of a blanket, I rolled myself up in it, munched
a biscuit which I had in my pocket, and then lay
down on the floor, and soon fell asleep, thinking
how many with feather beds and pillows would
sleep less soundly. After an early breakfast I rode
slowly up the valley, visiting several gold-washers
on my way, and buying a little gold.
“ These diggings are of a very different character
to those at Ballarat, being much more widely dis-
tributed ; consequently the tents of the diggers are
scattered up and down the various valleys over a
considerable distance, more or less thickly according
to the richness of the locality. After looking about
us, and making some inquiry, we decided upon
pitching a tent (if we could get one) close to that
of the commissioner’s, where I could carry on the
business of gold buying. Meanwhile we made a
few purchases, and at night got accommodation in
the tent of an acquaintance. No tent was to be
bought or borrowed, and therefore, as there was no
time to lose, we set about making one. We got
the loan of a tarpauling, and then set to work, dug
holes, cut down trees, stripped some bark off others,
in which, by-the-by, a black fellow helped us, and
by night had our tent pretty well secured. You
would have laughed, or, perhaps, stared with as-
tonishment if you had seen me, one minute chop-


ping- away at a tree, or carrying- it on my shoulder,
and the next sitting on a log, weighing gold, and
counting out the bank-notes, for we did not lose
any opportunity of buying when it occurred.
u The next day was Saturday the 15th December.
—We were again early at work. Did more to our
tent, and bought more gold. . . . My furniture
consists of a piece of bark stripped from a gum
tree, and nailed to four bits of rough wood in the
form of a table (on which, moreover, I am now
writing), on which I weigh my gold. My ward-
robe—what I brought on horseback, and a pair of
blankets. On Sunday, when I was as glad of a day
of rest as any of the diggers, I read the church
service to myself, and only went out a little in the
afternoon when the weather cleared up.
« Monday the 17th.— I was busy all day buying
gold, writing letters for the post, and in the evening
making up my bags of gold for the Government
escort, which was to leave Melbourne the following
morning. I found I had purchased altogether just
600 oz., for which I paid on an average about 5 75.
per ounce. The following morning presented a
bustling and picturesque scene when the escort was
preparing to start. Previously to this week, only
two lots had been sent down from here by Govern-
ment, and each time on horseback; but the success
of the diggers had so increased that there was now
gold to the amount of 25,000/., and a chaise cart
was necessary. The cavalcade consisted of two


mounted troopers ahead, then the chaise cart,
driven by an officer with an armed guard beside
him, and six more troopers on horseback behind,
four of them, I think, of the native black police. The
pretty scene alluded to was when all this was pre-
paring. The hilly, open forest land is in itself park-
like, and on a rising ground the commissioner’s
establishment is placed, consisting of several tents
and two or three gunyas, or bark huts, made by
the native police after their own fashion. The
troopers’ horses were standing about ready saddled,
and the men themselves, both black and white, and
in various costumes, gave life to the picture, while
of course some interest was added by the know-
ledge of the valuable load contained in the cart,
and the rugged forest country through which it
had to travel. I lost sig’ht of the train as it wound
among the trees, and in due time heard that it had
safely reached its destination My
occupation during the remainder of the week was
very uniform • hut I occasionally took a ride or
walk among the gold finders, hut did not like to
leave my tent for long at a time, as my companion
had now left me. About this part there are chiefly
two kinds of diggings, —surface digging, which is
simply skimming off a thin layer of gravel from the
surface of some of the hills, to the depth of a few
inches, when a bed of gravel is reached; and hole
digging, which is dig’ging down in hollow places in
the streams, and between hills, and searching the


fissures which exist between the slate-rock there
found. Both kinds have proved very profitable to
many. As an extreme case, three men, last week,
got above 30 lb. weight of gold in less than two
days, out of a little patch of gravel of a few feet
square, and not more than six inches deep. And,
as an extreme case of hole digging, I heard to-day
of four men who took seven pint pots of gold out of
a hole, or fissure, on Tuesday last. What a pint
pannikin of gold weighs Ido not know; hut, at a
rough guess, I should think this prize would he
worth not less than 3,000/. Of course these are
hut two extraordinary cases among some thousands
of diggers; hut, nevertheless, the great number of
persons who are getting rich in this district is
almost incredible. It is really most absurd to see
rough, illiterate labourers come with their ounces
and pounds of gold tied up in a bit of dirty rag,
and sometimes to see them turn out of their dirty
pockets, among bits of tobacco, bread, Ac. 20s.
or 30s. worth of the loose grain that have escaped
the fragile package. Most of them bring it in the
little round wooden match-boxes
The main valley of the diggers, which extends to
where I am located for about four miles, has an ex-
traordinary aspect by day, from the number of
tents and diggers scattered throughout it j and still
more so by night, when the multitude of fires
would lead a person to suppose that he was looking
down upon a large town, till, on near approach, he


perceives that each fire has its own little group of
men clustered round it in front of their tent, —some
of them cooking- their supper, some smoking- their
pipes, and not a few singing- songs; each group
presenting him, as he rides along, with a series of
tableaux worthy of the pencil of a Teniers. The
following Sunday was a finer day than the last.
In the morning I took my nag, which had fared
but badly on his tether lately, about a mile away,
where there was some good feed; and while he
enjoyed a couple of hours of sweet grass, I sat upon
a tree, and united with those who, at a distance,
were engaged in the services of our Church. In
the afternoon a clergyman read prayers, and
preached a sermon in the open ground, near the
commissioner’s tent, where a congregation of about
one hundred and fifty mustered together in a circle
round him, joining in the responses, and singing the
Hundredth Psalm very well. Our service had just
closed when the escort arrived from Melbourne. I
was sorry to see it thus travelling on Sunday, hut
was told that it was unavoidable this time, and that
henceforward it would always leave on Tuesday and
return on Saturday.”
Letter from Melbourne.
The extraordinary yields of gold which are
springing up on every side are strongly indicated in
the haberdashers’ and ironmongers’ shops, where


the wives and female friends of fortunate diggers
are lavishing the precious metal on every article of
finery that can adorn the human figure. The most
expensive articles of dress are in the greatest pos-
sible demand, and the shops are crammed. The iron-
mongery trade is equally startling; the demand
for spades, picks, shovels, tin dishes, pots, cradles,
&c., is immense, and can scarcely be supplied, even
at the extravagant figure demanded for them. And
this is but the beginning’ of the end. Our baker,
who is doing a roaring trade, has already given us
notice that he and his whole establishment are off
for. Mount Alexander to-morrow, and many of the
same calling are doubtless similarly affected with
the gold mania. We expect our butcher to give
us the same polite hint in a day or two. We must,
like hundreds of others, then have to fly to damper
and salt beef, to hold out during the panic, unless
we can induce the softer sex to slaughter the cattle,
and knead the dough; the latter work may be
accomplished certainly, but the butchering process,
we fear, is altogether hopeless. Joking apart,
matters are really looking very serious. Every-
body, non-alarmists and all, are beginning to cry
out, “ What will become of us ? ” The only answer
in our power to give is, “ Be off to the diggings.”
A Scotchman s Letter.
“ There is no mistake about the matter. Mount


Alexander is, without doubt, the richest gold field
in the world. There are at present upwards of
17,000 men digging on this same Mount Alexander,
all of whom are doing well. Many have realized a
fortune in a few days. A report is current to-day
of a young man having* got B,OOOZ. worth of gold
in one day ! * * * We have copper ore within
four miles of Melbourne; hut, of course, nobody
will look at copper as long as they can get gold.
The gold discoveries have unhinged so-
ciety here altogether. Many have given up busi-
ness, shut their shops, and gone to the diggings.
Shoemakers, tailors, wrights, blacksmiths, and all
other trades, are at a great loss for men to carry
on their business. The consequence is, that wages
are up, and everything rising* in price. A pair of
boots, which I could have bought three weeks ago
for 18$., would now cost 21., and almost everything
else in like proportion. A friend of mine last week
offered a blacksmith 4/. per week of wages, and
was refused ! The man has gone to the diggings.
There are only two men in the shop of the indi-
vidual referred to, and he could employ twenty.
One firm could employ just now upwards of fifty
men, such as blacksmiths, millers, Cartwrights,
founders, finishers, and labourers. Many other esta-
blishments in town are equally destitute. Another
firm has stopped this week for want of hands. The
foreman of their millers had 31. per week, with a
free house, fire, and water; but he has resigned


and gone to the diggings. * * * Come.
We have plenty of room, plenty of food, plenty
of money; if you do not choose to dig for gold
in the bush, you can work for it in the town.
We require men of all trades —the only qualifica-
tion is, that they be able and willing to woi’k.
* * * I have often been told before I left home
that I would find Melbourne swarming with half-
starved clerks. The statement is not true. If a
good clerk wants employment, it is his own fault.
It is true that many have come here pretending to
be clerks, thinking that anything would do for
Australia. Such, however, have found their mis-
take. The men in business here, are really busi-
ness men, and must have their work done in a
business-like manner; they are able and willing to
pay for a man, and therefore will not put up with
“ big laddies/' and they have not time to teach
blockheads. Really good clerks will soon find em-
ployment, and be well paid. * * * You will
say, why do you not go to the diggings your-
self? It is my intention, if all is well, to have a
hit at the gold during the months of September,
October, and November next. * * * We get
first-rate tea at Is. 4 d. per lb.; and the mutton
that we get at 2d. the lb. would astonish the poor
bodies o’ Banff. I believe the butchers of Mel-
bourne give more good meat to their customers
for nothing —for the purpose of feeding dogs
in three months, than the good folks of Banff


consume in six months. * * * We are all
happy, and enjoy life in a far higher degree here
than ever we did in Scotland. * * * As to
emigration, I would, from personal experience, re-
commend those who cannot get a u free passage,”
to take a third cabin, the cost of which is 15/.
The second cabin is only paying 10/. additional for
an empty name, which nobody on board ship cares
a button about. If you get a good ship, you
will be as comfortable in the former as in the
latter.”
Melbourne, Jan. 15, 1852.
The merchants are very much put about in the
shipments of wool, owing to the almost absolute
want of labour. At the wharfs, so high as 10s.
per day are given to common labourers, for
loading and discharging vessels, and even at these
wages it is very difficult to get men. In my
last I ridiculed the idea of sailors asking 80/.
for the run home, but in many instances 60/.
and 70/. have been paid, A great number of
vessels will have to remain here for a long time,
but those for London will get away; for having a
good freight for gold, the captains will be enabled
to pay high wages. The Melbourne took 60,585
oz.; the Brilliant has already on board 50,498 oz.j
the Sarah Ann, about 12,000 oz.; and the States-
man, to sail about the 20th, it is expected, will
have more than any vessel yet. The shipments to


31st December consisted of 144,825 oz., which, at
3 1. 10s., gives an amount of 506,887?., the result of
about three months digging. But the above forms
only a portion of our export. There is no outward
entry required. All that is necessary is, that the
captain make a declaration as to the quantity on
board on freight; of course, he knows nothing of
what his passengers may have, and it is a well-
known fact that passengers to London, Adelaide,
Sydney, and Hobart Town, take very large quan-
tities.
Hard Work at the Mines.
Forest Creek Diggings, Dec. 27, 1851.
“ Since my return from Melbourne, people have
left by thousands; many parts of the creek, which
were formerly crowded with tents, are now almost
tentless; and unless rain comes soon will be entirely
deserted. There are many complaints of poor suc-
cess, some not making sufficient to clear their daily
expenses, while there are few who can say they are
doing well. There are more reasons than one for
these complaints ; the heat is so excessive that few
can work in the sun; the ground has become so hard
for want of rain, that nothing but a pickaxe can
break it, and for the same reason you cannot wash
without puddling; and lastly, the water has become
so thick, that nothing but heavy gold can be ob-
tained. As I stated in a former letter, it is madness


for men to give up good situations to come here.
There is plenty of gold, but it cannot he got for the
next four months in any quantity. Several parties
have arrived lately, who intend returning imme-
diately, and one of them told me he was sorry he
did not take the advice of the Argus, for he had
lost a good situation, and sunk three months’ hard
earnings; and I can assure you this is not the only
case. Another accident occurred this morning
through earth falling in. The individual had his
collar-bone broken, and is otherwise wounded. The
greatest carelessness is manifested in undermining,
and I am only surprised more accidents do not
occur. The holes are cut square, and the centre
weight is so great, that it must fall in, unless
shored up, which is seldom done. Four prisoners
were conveyed to town yesterday for felony.
Discovery of Mount Alexander.
The following statement of success is given by a
Mr. Leete, just returned from Mount Alexander.
He and three others had been engaged in gold
hunting for a fortnight, without success, and it was
not till Monday last that they happened to open a
hole which encouraged them to proceed in their
labours. The first spadeful of earth they dug out
was found to contain gold, and they excavated
twelve by eight feet, carefully washing the earth.


0 z.
Wednesday
Thursday
771
Friday
Saturday
They further deepened the hole next day ; and the
precious deposit was found more abundantly as they
descended. On Tuesday night they had obtained
about fifteen and a half ounces, and they entered
into a hook the produce of the subsequent days of
the week, from which we were permitted to make
the following- extract:—
In all 234| oz., which, with the quantity formerly
obtained, make 250 oz.
The direct Route to Mount Alexander.
We give, on the authority of a correspondent, the
road which parties proceeding- from Geelong- to Mount
Alexander diggings should take, the total distance
being- eighty-seven miles, as nearly as can be esti-
mated. From Geelong the first stage should be to
the bridge crossing- the Werribee, on the Melbourne
road, a distance of twenty-four miles; from thence
to Fyke’s station, twelve miles; after which make
for Collyer’s station, three miles; and so on to the
Bush inn, Mount Macedon, a distance of eight
miles further. The road from the Bush inn to the
diggings is then forty miles.


On Friday afternoon, at four o’clock, I left the
wharf, Melbourne, between heavy showers of rain,
and arrived at the Forest Creek on the following
evening- at eight, on my little cob, a distance of
seventy-five miles; and left again on Thursday to
walk down, thus leaving me near five days to look
about, and arrived at M elbourne at noon on Satur-
day. I mention these simple facts to shew to the
world our proximity to the gold region—that it is
accessible to all.
u A person came towards me smiling, and asked
me if I remembered him. I told him I remem-
bered his face, but not his name. He said his
name was Miller, and that he had sailed two
voyages for me in the brig SJterne to the Mauri-
tius. I then asked him how he was doing. His
reply was, “ Pretty well, sir.” “ What do you call
pretty well ?” said I. u Well,” said he, “we took
out of that hole (pointing to one about twenty yards
from his tent) 10 lb. 4 oz. weight in four days, this
week; and this (putting the gold into my hand,
tied up in a handkerchief) is the stuff.” And sure
enough, it was beautiful stuff, too; for one of the
nuggets weighed over 7 oz.
“ Another person I immediately recognised was
young Huddlestone, the next tent but one to the
one I went to ; and this young man and his party
were coming down, having saved near 30 11).
weight of gold, a great part of which I saw and
handled, as they brought it from their work.


“ Now, these are not one-hundredth part of what
I could enumerate, hut are sufficient for my present
purpose; and I affirm it as a positive fact —and I
know there are not many who will dispute my
affirmation—that thousands are doing equal to these
mentioned, and that not a person on the ground
need go without his half-ounce to an ounce a day,
who will work and pursue it with assiduity.
“ There was, when I left Mount Alexander
diggings, supposed to be, at least, from 12,000
to 15,000 persons, over twenty miles of country;
and in my way down to Melbourne I met no less
than 401 drays and carts; which, reckoning eight
persons to each, would give 3,208 persons, besides
horsemen in great numbers. It is believed, from
the Commissioner’s tent downward, that what has
been done is only the beginning of what will be
done, and that the dust and small nuggets already
found are only the pledges or indications of the
wedges or blocks of gold that are yet undiscovered.
The gold is now known to extend over a country of
at least one hundred miles in length, and includes
hundreds of thousands of acres, and only some few
hundreds are yet tried, not worked.”
Mount Alexander.
The reports of large quantities of gold being
found, have become so frequent, that it is now
looked upon as quite common; but I think the


present will throw all former ones into the shade.
A lump of pure, clean gold, free from quartz, was
obtained from the surface, near Messrs. Fen turn and
Edmiston’s new tent, weighing sixty ounces. A
party of four obtained, on Monday, 1,200/. worth
before night; and numerous instances occur of one,
two, three, and four pounds weight being obtained.
I feel satisfied that many will have doubts as to the
truth of such reports ; but,‘as I will not give such
accounts without. seeing them, they may be de-
pended on. A gentlemen who had his doubts as
to these facts, would not be satisfied until I in-
troduced him to the parties, and, on shewing him
the precious metal, he could only find words to
exclaim, “ ’ Tis wonderful! ” The generality of the
diggers are doing well, although I hear complaints
from parties that they have not paid their ex-
panses, and intend returning. This is not unlikely;
out, of a multitude (some 12,000 or 14,000) it cannot
be expected that all will be lucky, but I will not
hesitate in saying, that four out of five, when asked
“ What success?” will answer, “Why, I can’t
complain!”
The escort left here yesterday, with 32,000/.
worth of gold, and the same day Mr. Powlett had
10,000/. worth more deposited for the next con-
veyance. The police force has been increased at
last. A file of ten men made their appearance
on Monday, dressed in drab California hats, blue
monkey jackets and trousers, and armed with short


carbines. On inquiry, I find that fifty-two able-
bodied men are to be stationed here, independent
of the mounted police. They were much wanted.
Several persons have returned to Melbourne from
these gold fields, nearly all of whom give very
satisfactory accounts of success. One party of four
in one week obtained 280 Z. each. A party just
returned informed one of our reporters that he saw
several actually dig up small nuggets with a pocket-
knife from within two or three inches of the sur-
face. A small dealer in Little Lonsdale-street has
ten pounds weight of gold as his share of three
weeks work. — Geelong Intelligencer, Dec. 2.
Effects on Melbourne Trade.
Two men returned from Mount Alexander to
Colling wood with 10 lb. of gold, the produce of
one fortnight’s gold-hunting. One of the great-
est wonders of the present day is the number
of formerly poor men who are now daily draw-
ing large sums of money from the local banks, in
exchange for gold and cheques, the price of gold.
A person of some experience, who has come down
from the gold fields, declares it as his opinion that,
generally speaking, the Van-Diemonian expirees are
the most fortunate of the diggers, a very large pro-
protion of them having managed to secure a fair share
of “ nuggets.” Water is now selling in town at prices
ranging from 25. Gd. to 45. per load, and in many


cases the water-carriers are far saucier than their
customers. Within the past week, from twenty to
thirty sailors have bolted from their respective em-
ployments, and many more have notified their inten-
tion of leaving’ in the course of the week. Upwards
of a dozen butchers’ establishments have closed up
owing’ to the want of hands; and for the same
reason it is now a complaint to get commodities
sent to private houses from many places, too glad
before to oblige a customer to send things home.
A man named Lynford returned yesterday from
Mount Alexander 300 1, richer than he left, after a
month’s absence. He states that there are many
who do not clear their expenses. The men who
left the brewery of the Messrs. Murphy are doing-
well, and have amassed upwards of 500 Z. each. The
miners are coming down in large quantities to spend
Christmas.
Practical Hints to Emigrants.*
And now having presented a pen-and-ink pano-
rama of the progress of Australian gold diggings,
taken by diggers themselves, —having shewn how
* The intending emigrant will require all the information
he can obtain from the gold mines. Let him therefore get
the Australian Gazette, a paper published fortnightly, at 15,
Old Bailey, London, and to be procured of any newsman,
which will furnish him with the most recent and trustworthy
intelligence from all the Australian Colonies.


ounces have grown into tons, —how a chance dis-
covery has become a staple of export, —how, instead
of one waterhole of treasure, great parts of the
finest districts of Australia have been proved to he
golden,—the question is—Who should go ? and
how?
Formerly, eligible emigrants to Australia con-
sisted only of—lst, capitalists; 2nd, men willing
to become shepherds; 3rd, able to do agricultural
work; 4th, a limited number of town mechanics;
and, sthly, an unlimited number of respectable
girls, of all classes, willing to make themselves
useful in domestic service, and affcious to avail
themselves of the large stock of good husbands to
be found then and now in Australia.
At the present time, Port Phillip is short of its
proper proportion of women by ten thousand. In
New South Wales the deficiency is still greater.
The opening up of the gold fields has enlarged
this demand in an extraordinary degree. Shep-
herds are more needed and better paid than ever.
Any man or boy, between thirteen and threescore,
—any one-armed pensioner, can make a shepherd;
it is the easiest, laziest life in the world, —rather
lonely and monotonous, but a man who has a wife
and a lot of children need not be lonely. But the
gold revolution has opened a new trade for emi-
grant farmers of small capital, if prepared to under-
take sheep, and not desirous to plunge into the
perpetual “ fair ” life of gold washing.


Flocks of moderate extent may be purchased or
leased on very moderate terms, and managed ad-
vantageously by a Highland, a Cheviot, a South
Down sheep farmer or shepherd bailiff, with a
little capital, that is to say, enough to support
him for one year after getting his sheep, whose
family is sufficiently large and useful to do all
the work, and that is not much, without hiring
any labour. In an open country, from three to
four youths can take charge of as many thou-
sand sheep. While some of the family cultivate
the garden, and plant out wheat and maize, the
iWomen and children will see to the cows, pigs, and
poultry. The only difficulty will be shearing the
sheep, and that must be got over by co-operation.
The German women as well as the men shear sheep,
and there is no reason why English country girls
should not learn to do the same.
At the present time sheep are positively valueless
to the capitalist. The great dockowner cannot
afford to pay the price of labour ; and the fourteen
million sheep which exist in Australia must either
be destroyed or pass into the hands of working
sheep-farmers, by lease or purchase, on the plan
above described. If leased, the farmer would pay
either a money or a produce rent in wool. H 6
would grow enough corn, vegetables, tobacco,
mutton, pork, poultry, pigeons, and honey, for his
own use, and only have to buy tea, sugar, and
clothes. Many respectable men, who cannot live


under free-trade prices in England would prefer
this mode of life to the mines.
Then, again, in the neighbourhood of flourish-
ing- towns like Goulbourn, Bathurst, Geelong, Mel-
bourne, the concentration and activity of trade,
produced by recent events, affords another fine
field for family labour; hired labour will not suc-
ceed. Cora bears a good price, and vegetables,
fruit, butter, cheese, a capital price, with an in-
creasing market.
What may be done in trade it is impossible to say,
no doubt a great deal; but it would not be wise
to attempt advice. We know that the miners will
have the best of everything, that they buy good
clothes and good furniture; those who can buy, sell,
chop, and change, cannot fail to do well. In like
manner, there is a certain demand for musical
talent, portrait-painting, and other luxuries.
As for digging, that is a pursuit open to all
who are strong enough; gentility seems to be no
bar to the exercise of their strength by members of
the learned profession side by side Avith the refuse
of the earth —Yan-Diemonian expirees. Carpenters,
and blacksmiths, cooks and washermen and women,
make nearly as good a living as the diggers, without
the hard work. They are paid in “ dust,” and that
is “ dirt cheap.”
Honest colonizers, until the gold discoveries oc-
curred, were very cautious in recommending many
of the educated, the clerk, the shopman, the skilled


mechanic class, to emigrate to Australia • but now
there is no longer any cause or room for hesitation
among those who are fit for a life of barter, or
strong enough in mind and body to bear the hard-
ships inevitable in a rude, transitory state of society,
hardships for which they will be well paid. Pro-
visions are cheap, and those who do not save a
fortune, have only themselves to blame.
We are only astonished that more farmers with
large families, and a hundred pounds or two, do not
move off, instead of staying here to thump the table
at dinners, to roar at hustings, to subscribe to pro-
tection societies, and be thoroughly humbugged in
the end.
But too many farmers, like Maw worm, who de-
lighted to be despised, delight in being sold again
and again • and while their pockets are being
emptied, they stand watching* the shifting of the
thimbles, never finding the Derby pea, although
they are comforted with an occasional sight of it.
To clerks, shopmen, mechanics, weavers, la-
bourers, and fathers of large families of girls and
boys, the prospect is also soundly tempting.
For those who have made up their mind to
emigrate, the first point to be considered is the
outfit.


Outfit.
Begin by mustering what you have got, and
see how much will do. No household furniture
of a cumbrous nature should be taken unless
the party is going to settle at a town adjoining
the port; and even then it should be packed all
flat. A flat chair or two may sometimes be useful,
so may a metal bedstead. Knives and forks, pewter
plates and teapots, will be found serviceable, and
many other little things that take "up little room in
packing, and sell for nothing at a sale by auction.
But if the party are going into the interior, the
less they take the better, for carriage is very ex-
pensive.
Every party of not less than four should take a
small three-pole tent —Edgington knows the sort —
a cheap, strong article. Tools are useful for those
who can use them; they are made expressly for the
country. The miners’ tools are mentioned at p. 41
in a letter from the diggings.
Clothes should be for warm and for very cold
weather. The mining districts are subject to hard
frost, snow, sleet, and torrents of rain. A water-
proof rug is useful to sleep on damp ground, and a
hammock net may be handy. A large loose coat
of the best pilot pea cloth —made after the fashion
of a soldier’s coat, down to the heels, with a large
cape, loose sleeves, and pockets well lined with
Mackintosh —is a capital travelling companion.


A good blanket is indispensable.
Shoes are of no use, except a pair or two of
canvass slippers for wear on board ship. Boots
should be large, of good leather and workman-
ship.
At present they are dear and bad in the colony.
Shirts, blue sailor stripe, with a white one or two
for Sundays. Blue or red woollen Jerseys are the
daily wear among diggers and bushmen. Fustian
or cord trousers. A suit or two of light washing
clothing.
Stockings, woollen and cotton. Caps, and a
Norwester with a string for the voyage.
The following is the minimum list of outfit re-
quired from emigrants to whom the Government
gives a free passage:—
FOR FEMALES.
Six shifts
FOR MALES.
Six shirts
Six pairs stockings
Two ditto shoes
Two flannel petticoats
Six pairs stockings
Two ditto shoes
Two complete suits of
exterior clothing
Two gowns
With sheets, towels, and soap. Two or three
serge shirts for men, and flannel for women and
children, are strongly recommended.
As this outfit is the lowest that could consistently
be allowed, emigrants should, if practicable, provide
themselves with a greater number of each of the
articles mentioned, including a good supply of flan-
nel under-clothing.


On board the Family Colonization Society’s ships,
conveniences are provided for washing’ clothes with-
out being’ overseen, which renders it less necessary
to take a large stock of linen for the voyage. This
should be universally adopted; an extra s s. a head
would defray the cost, and be cheap to the emi-
grants.
Luggage should be divided into three divisions :
Ist, for use in the cabin ; 2nd, for use on the
voyage; 3rd, at the end of the voyag’e. For the
cabin, a bag, or a box 18 inches long-, 22 wide, and
22 deep, will be convenient for each person, a bag
of leather, carpet, or canvas, being preferable.
The things wanted on the voyage should be
packed in sound boxes, not too large, with handles
or bands for lifting, and marked in large, distinct
characters, with the initials or mark of the owner,
and “Wanted on voyage j” the rest, “ Not wanted,”
should be packed with even more care, to exclude
damp. Moderate-sized, well made barrels and
kegs make good packing-cases.
Choice of Ship.
Good ships leave the ports of London, Liverpool,
Plymouth, Bristol, and Glasgow. The fare varies
considerably, but may be stated at from 15/. for a
single man in the steerage, to 26/. intermediate,
and from 40/. to 60/. in the cabin.
There are also the more expeditious steamers,
from 20 to 80 guineas, as advertised.


In making' arrangements with shipowners, it is
better to have a written agreement as to cabin
accommodation, provisions, and weight and dimen-
sions of luggage allowed, and to see to the arrange-
ment for ventilation and the water-closets—the
latter arrangement being essential to the comfort
and health of passengers.
On the Voyage. —ln most ships a few extra
stores will be found convenient, especially for those
who have children., A few tin boxes of Sains-
-1 jury’s effervescing draughts, a pot or two of pickles,
anchovies, potted herrings, or other savoury food, a
little tea and sugar to go to when the ships’ stores
are not to be got at, and a keg holding a gallon of
water, will be found grateful in the tropics.
Medicine is found by the ship surgeon, but still
some, both aperient and as a remedy for diarrhoea,
will be a proper precaution. Also smelling salts,
sal volatile, camphor, a bottle of disinfecting fluid,
and perfumes to burn, will at times be needed.
Dirty emigrants sometimes bring unpleasant
strangers on board, which children may catch.
White precipitate or Scotch snuff will be your
remedy.
Tobacco for your own smoking, any musical in-
strument you play on, good humour, a close tongue
about your own affairs, and a go-a-head spirit —
these will carry you comfortably to Australia with-
out much grumbling or quarrelling, and enable you
to get on when you are there.


These hints are the result of the experience of
many voyages.
Every emigrant feels downhearted and disap-
pointed when he first lands in a colony, but every
sober, hearty, married man can succeed now. Sin-
gle men often spend their money as fast as they
get it. Wives should not allow their husbands to go
without them if they have passage money for both.
The Passage.
There are three modes of obtaining a passage.
Ist. By taking a cabin, intermediate, or steerage
passage, from a private shipowner, for a single
person or part}'.
2nd. By applying to a philanthropic society—
“ The Family Colonization ” —which provides ships,
or by forming an association for the purpose of
filling or chartering a ship for a party sufficient
to fill it; as a Leeds ship, a Birmingham ship, a
Kidderminster ship.
The Rules of this Society may be obtained at 3 Charl-
ton-crescent, Islington, or 29 Bucklersbury, Mansion
House, London, enclosing- two postage stamps.
3rd. By obtaining a free passage from the
Government Emigration Commissioners.
Arrangements with shipowners are matters of
private bargain; some ship-brokers are like horse-
dealers, they sell every quality, and they some of
them sell “ bargains” to those who are not on
their guard.


The best plan is to go to a respectable broker,
but as it is not always possible to ascertain who
is respectable, the following hints will be found
useful:—
See that the ship is registered at Lloyds either
A 1 or not lower than the OE in red ink, or, as itjs
called, the red-diphthong.
Not less than 500 tons register, —tons burthen
advertised are a deception. A moderate-sized ship
is generally better than a large one, if the ’tween-
decks* are lofty. A good height ’tween-decks is
very important—the higher the better. See that
proper waterclosets are erected, and one 'tween-
decks for women only, and enough for the number
of passengers. Ascertain that there is no patent
fuel or other foul cargo on board—the exact cabin
or berth you are to occupy—the quantity of pro-
visions and water per week, and how much for each
child. A father, after bargaining to have several
children taken at half or quarter price, has found, to
his horror, only half or quarter rations for them.
Go on board the ship a few days before sailing;
and before you send anything on board, see that
everything- is as promised. Have a distinct agree-
ment, in writing, as to all these points, including
the day the ship is to leave London and Plymouth,
or whatever port she sails from. Families have
often been put to great expense and inconvenience
by ships being delayed for many days after the
date announced to sail.


As to provisions, there is the greatest possible
difference. The writer has himself known an in-
stance in which provision merchants offered to
supply the stock, which Government require to be
put on board of every emigrant ship, at what
appeared a moderate figure, and to allow a per-
son supposed to have influence enough to obtain
them the contract, a commission of thirty-five
per cent.; of course this cannot be a solitary trans-
action, and in such cases some one must suffer.
Our warnings are founded on facts within our
knowledge, but we are glad to be able to assert
that the voyage to Australia is one of the safest
known, —that a shipwreck is a very rare occur-
rence,-—that the Government regulations, which
are applied to all ships, have secured much more
safe and healthy passages than to America, —and
that many respectable men are engaged in the
trade.
Next to private ships, we place the operations of
the Family Colonization Society, founded by Mrs.
Chisholm.
The plan and operations of this society deserve
the attention of all interested in emigration, on
several grounds. In the first place, it offers a
self-supporting system for assisting the indigent,
and enabling working men to help each other. By
adopting the plan of this society, our mechanics
might improve the condition of their trades, without
permanently interfering with trades’ funds.


If the Amalgamated Engineers had lent the
thirty thousand pounds they spent the other day in
a strike, to emigrate their members to the gold
fields, it would have been sufficient, at the present
wages of the colony, to remove four thousand souls
a year, and return the whole thirty thousand pounds
to the fund every year.
In the next place, it endeavours to establish a
model system of shipping, as to cabin accommo-
dation, as to provisions, as to ventilation, and to
make each ship an improvement on the preceding
one.
These attempts to make the voyage to Australia
comfortable, safe, and suitable to the decent, mo-
dest habits of respectable people with wives and
daughters, have excited a good deal of jealousy
among shipowners; many, however, have now
raised the standard of accommodation up to the
level of Mrs. Chisholm’s ships. Shipowners should
remember that every ship of emigrants, landed in
comfort and content in Australia, prepares the
way, and invites ten more ship loads to follow
their example.
Parties proceeding by private ships, we recom-
mend to procure and examine carefully the cir-
culars issued by the Family Colonization Society,
and see that their diet and accommodation is as
good for 20Z. as the Society supplies.
The following are the principal arrangements; —
Weekly meetings for affording information and


forming- family groups —payment for passages at a
rate of about fifteen pounds per head, by weekly
or other instalments enclosed cabins to each
family, of a size according to the number of indi-
viduals enclosed cabins to each seven single
females, and the same to each seven young men
—all passengers on an equality; no cabin passen-
gers —and the poop open to all—ships ventilated
by a contrivance for bringing fresh air at one end,
and taking out the foul air at the other —ships
all A 1, that is the best class—orphan girls, and
friendless females, are placed under the protection
of families, who enter into a solemn pledge for their
protection during the voyage.
Those who cannot make up the sum required
by this Society may apply to Government, although
it is very wrong of the friends of any working
man to allow him to go out at Government expense,
if they know him to be honest, and can lend him
the money. In the colony a Government emigrant
is always rather looked down upon, in comparison
with those who pay their own passage.
The Government Emigration Office is 8, Park-
street, Westminster. The Commissioners grant
passages to approved emigrants on the following
terms: —
Agricultural labourers, shepherds, herdsmen, fe-
male domestic and farm servants under 45 years
of age, on payment of 11. a head.
Mechanics, countrymen being preferred, 21.


Children under 14 years of age, 10s. each.
Single women under 18 years are not eligible,
unless under the care of their parents.
Certificates of good conduct are required to ob-
tain these free passages.
For the sura paid, the emigrant gets a mattress,
bolster, blankets, counterpanes, canvass bags, knife,
fork, drinking mug, which will be useful in the
colony.
Further particulars may be obtained, by applica-
tion to S. Walcott, Esq., Secretary, Emigration
Commission, 8, Park-street, Westminster.
And now, having given an honest picture of
the colony, we have only to advise the emigrating
classes not to look to patronage or poor law guar-
dians, or Government, for help, but to form them-
selves into local committees, and do the work for
themselves. Inquire, discuss, read, learn, sub-
scribe, associate, and if ready and willing, march
away to the land where a clear, sober head, and a
pair of strong arms, are better than any capital. To
such we say, God speed you all, on the deep and in
Australia!
London: Printed by Stewaet and Mueeay, Old Bailey.


WATERPROOFS FOR AUSTRALIA.
EMIGRANTS proceeding to the “ GOLD DIGGINS ” will find
great comfort in having a good
Waterproof Coat and Long Boots; also a Waterproof Rug
to protect them from damp when resting from labour in the heat of the
day, and for sleeping at night; our Goods are particularly recommended,
being the only Waterproofs prepared expressly to stand the Heat of
the Tropics ; they have now been tested above two years by
Messrs. FENTUM & EDMISTON, of MOUNT MACEDON, AUSTRALIA,
AND THEY NOW
sbell t&em to tlje Diggers at ifflount gUexanber.
Air Beds and Pillows are recommended for use on Ship board,
being more convenient after landing, on account of the facility for
carrying up the country.
*** WHEN FOLDED, THEY GO INTO A VERY SMALL COMPASS.
Improved Life Belts, 9s. to 12s. 6d.
None should go to sea without them; they not only save the wearer from
drowning, but enable him to swim quickly.
PORTABLE FOLDING BATHS,
Useful for many purposes at the “ Diggins,” such as Tanks for Water, Ac.
Water Bottles, Drinking Cups, Goloshes, Knapsacks, and
Clothing Bags.
m- SOLE MANUFACTURERS OF THE
CELEBRATED POCKET SIPHONIA,
oHngi)t—@Ten Ounces,
EASILY FOLDED TO CARRY IN THE POCKET OR ON THE
SADDLE.
London: EDMISTON & SON, 416, and 69, Strand,
THE ADELPHI THEATRE.


MARSHALL & EDRIDGE’S LINE OF AUSTRALASIAN PACKET SHIPS.
Js. rpHE undersigned despatch a regular succession of First-
class, Fast-sailing British vessels, for
SYDNEY, PORT PHILLIP, ADELAIDE, VAN DIEMEN’S LAND, &c.
42 These Ships have most superior accommodations for
Passengers, and sail punctually on their appointed days.
Load at the Jetty, London Dock.
The terms of Passage-money are most moderate, and arrangements
are made to secure to Passengers every attention and comfort during
the Voyage.
Goods and parcels consigned to the care of Marshall and Edridge
for Shipment are forwarded hy the earliest eligible conveyance.
For particulars of the Ships now Loading, Dietary Scales, Rates of
Freight, and Passage-money, &c., apply to
MARSHALL & EDRIDGE, 34, Fenchurch-street.
“WHITE HORSE” LINE OF AUSTRALIAN PACKETS.
FDHE VESSELS of this favourite Line are despatched
&|m|\ L FORTNIGHTLY FROM LONDON FOR PORT PHILLIP
jPi|\ (MELBOURNE) DIRECT,
CALLING AT PLYMOUTH.
The Fittings, Ventilation, Provisions, and general arrange-
ments, are of a very superior description, and every attention is paid to
the comfort, respectability, and well-being of the Passengers.
These Packets carry (with the exception of Chief Cabin Passengers
in the Poop)
One Class of Intermediate Passengers only.
AT THE UNIFORM RATE OF TWENTY-TWO GUINEAS EACH ADULT,
Or Half-price for Children under 14 years of age ;
The object being to charge the lowest rate of passage-money consistent
with real comfort.
They are under the inspection of her Majesty’s Emigration Agent,
and carry experienced and trustworthy Surgeons.
For lists of Ships, Dietary Scales, and further particulars, apply to
FRY & DAVISON, 113, Fenchurch-street.


EMIGRATION TO AUSTRALIA AND THE GOLD REGIONS.
BELL, BUDDEN & Co.,
2, JEFFREYS SQUARE, ST. MARY AXE, LONDON,
Render every Information to Intending Passengers to the
Australian Colonies.
PERSONS negotiating their Passages through B. B. & Co. will
have the advantage of their experience and personal attendance in the
inspection of First-class Ships only. Great care is taken in the selection
and engagement of suitable Cabins for Families, and every arrangement is
made to ensure a comfortable voyage.
No charge is made for the advice and assistance rendered in securing berths.
Full particulars of First-class Vessels, specifying their Tonnage, Dates of
Sailing, Rates of Passage Money, &c., will be furnished on application at
their Offices. They are in possession of numerous testimonials from their
friends, who have arrived safely in the Colonies, stating the advantages they
have derived by their passages having been negotiated through B. B. & Co.
B. B. & Co. have made arrangements for the supply of Outfits and Cabin
Furniture, at shipping prices, every expense being reduced as much as possible.
Lists of the Articles required by Cabin, Intermediate, and Steerage Passen-
gers, forwarded on application.
Baggage shipped, Insurances effected, Goods and Parcels forwarded by the
earliest eligible Vessels, or by the Steamers. Letters of Credit obtained, and
General Mercantile Agency business undertaken, at equitable rates.
INFORMATION GRATIS.
AU§T]EAILIAo
GOLD DIGGINGS AT THE TURON, BALLARAT, MOUNT ALEXANDER, ETC.
THOMAS WOOLLEY,
2, Cullum Street, Fenclmrch Street, London
( Long Resident in Australia, in the vicinity of the Gold Diggings ),
IS prepared to afford useful and practical information to intending
Settlers, gratuitously. He can tell them what Implements are
requisite for the Diggings ; furnish them with a proper List of Outfit
indispensable for the Voyage and Colony; and afford them
Every Information as to taking Ship, How to proceed on
Arrival, How to get to the “Diggings,” and What to do
when they get there.
Insurances effected, Goods cleared, and every description of
Colonial business transacted on moderate terms.


SW. SILVER & Co., having rebuilt and enlarged their Premises in
• BISHOPSGATE-STREET, are now enabled to supply
INTERMEDIATE AND STEERAGE PASSENGERS WITH THEIR FIT-OUT
(or any part of it) at their Shipping Prices, which will be a great saving.
The Cabin Passengers’ Branch for Ladies and Gentlemen is, as heretofore,
at 66 and 67, CORNHILL, where a similar economical principle is adopted.
LIFE-PRESERVING FLOATABLE BEDS, BELTS, SEATS, &.C.,
IN CASE OF FIRE OR SHIPWRECK.
Ship-sailing information given, Ship passages bargained for, and no com-
mission charged or paid, that Passengers may embrace every advantage.
S.W. SILVER &. Co., 10, 66, & 67, CORNHILL, and 3 & 4, BISHOPSGATE-ST.,
Opposite the London Tavern; and at LIVERPOOL;
HAVING AGENTS AT THE AUSTRALIAN AND NEW ZEALAND POETS.
GOLD DIGGINGS.
GOLD QUARTZ CRUSHING & STAMPING MACHINERY, WITH CRADLES,
WASHING MACHINES, GOLD SCALES and WEIGHTS, and
MINERS’ TOOLS of every description. Also, TENTS, all sizes,
CARTS, WHEELBARROWS, COOKING APPARATUS, and all
kinds of Articles for AGRICULTURAL and DOMESTIC purposes
suitable for Emigrants, at the Warehouses of
RICHARDS AND CO.,
117 and 118, BISHOPSGATE WITHIN.
Gold Washing Cradles, 305., and upwards, and Boring
Apparatus, to bore any depth, kept ready to ship.
Priced Lists forwarded on application, enclosing a postage stamp.
MOST RECENT WORK ON NEW ZEALAND.
With a Map, Price 6 d., or free per Post on receipt of Ten postage stamps,
THE SEVENTH EDITION OF THE
EMIGRANT’S GUIDE TO NEW ZEALAND;
Comprising every requisite information for Intending Emigrants.
By a Late Resident in the Colony.
LONDON: STEWART & MURRAY, 15, OLD BAILEY.


“GOLD DIGGINS” IN AUSTRALIA AND CALIFORNIA.
APPARATUS for the Examination of GOLD and other
valuable Mineral substances to be met with in
AUSTRALIA, California, &c.
GEORGE KNIGHT & SONS,
METALLURGISTS AND MANUFACTURERS OF CHEMICAL APPARATUS,
INVITE PARTIES proceeding to the GOLD REGIONS to inspect
their Stock of Apparatus and Instruments for the Assay and examination
of Gold and other Minerals, which comprises every requisite for the partial
testing or perfect assay of the precious metals, and without which many
valuable substances, as precious stones and even diamonds, may be passed
over or thrown away.
Mineralogical and Mining Hammers, Picks, Steel Chisels, <fec.
Scales and Weights of every description.
Small Portable Furnaces.
Crucibles of every description.
Assay Apparatus, consisting of Furnaces, Muffles, Cupels, Tongs, Ingot
Moulds, Anvil Hammers, &c.
Blowpipes, and Blowpipe Apparatus, either separate or in small pocket
cases of various sizes and prices.
Touch Stones, and Acid Bottle, in case for the pocket.
Instruments for taking the specific gravity of Minerals. This is one of
the most important, at the same time ready tests an unknown mineral can
be subjected to.
Pocket Compasses, and Clinometers, for ascertaining the altitude, inclina-
tion, and direction of Strata.
Pocket Gonometer, for measuring the angles of Crystals.
Machines for washing Gold, and various other useful tools and implements
required, together with the best works on the subject, may be seen at the
Establishment of
GEORGE KNIGHT & SONS,
2, 40, and 41, Foster Lane, Cheapside.


TO MERCHANTS, SHIPPERS, COLONISTS, EMIGRANTS, AND OTHERS.
Price SIXPENCE ( Stamped ), or 13j. per annum, payable in advance,
THE
Australian anti #clu Zealand
#ajettr;
A FORTNIGHTLY SUMMARY OF NEWS FROM OUR AUSTRALIAN COLONIES.
This Paper embraces the whole of our Southern Colonies, those of South
Africa alone excepted; and contains full notice of all matters passing in them
.respectively ; recording their progress, and faithfully displaying their capabilities
as suited to the Merchant, the Shipper, or the intending Emigrant.
Being the only paper devoted to these Colonies, it affords the best medium
for Shippers, Outfitters, Implement Makers, Public Companies, and all Adver-
tisers desirous of addressing the Colonial and Emigrating Public.
The Australian and New Zealand Gazette is of deep interest to those
having Friends in the Colonies, as it provides a record of events passing in
AUSTRALIA: NEW ZEALAND:
New South Wales, Wellington,
Victoria (Port Phillip), Auckland,
South Australia, Nelson,
Western Australia: New Plymouth,
Van Diemen’s Land : Otago,
Auckland Isles : Canterbury,
THE GOLD DISTRICTS THROUGHOUT AUSTRALIA,
And those numerous islands of the Pacific Ocean which passing events are
rapidly bringing into political and commercial importance.
Its contents may he arranged as follows: —
1. General Summary of Intelligence, and Original Articles on the Colonial
Topics of the day,
2. Extracts from the various papers published in Australia, New Zealand, <fec.,
giving the continuous News in detail.
3. The most recent and copious information, correspondence, &0., from all the
Gold Districts : —per steam and sailing packet; via India; and via Valparaiso.—
Official Returns of Gold received at the Colonial Treasuries; and of that Shipped
to England; Gold Circulars, &c.
4. Proceedings of the Local Governments, and Debates in the Legislative
Councils, when of great public interest.
8. Private Letters from Settlers, descriptive of the various Provinces, Trade
Mining, Gold Digging, Farming, Wages, Prices of Provisions, &c.
6. Reviews of New Publications having reference to the Colonies,
7. Practical Replies to inquiries of Intending Colonists, &c.
8. Home Intelligence of Societies to promote or improve Emigration.
9. Commercial News, Wool Sales, Prices Current, Births, Marriages, and
Deaths, Home and Colonial Shipping Intelligence, Lists of Passengers, Colonial
Shipping in Eastern Ports, Lists of Vessels Laid on for the Southern Colonies, &c.
10. Emigration Advertisements of all classes.
LONDON: STEWART AND MURRAY, 15, OLD BAILEY,
To whom all communications for the Editor, and Advertisements are to he forwarded.
To be had also of Smith, Elder & Co., 65, Cornhill; W. H. Smith & Son, 136, Strand, and
Eden-Quay, Dublin; T. Saunders, 6, Charing-Cross; Wilson, 11, Royal Exchange
Orger & Meryon, 17t, Fenchurch-Street; and all Booksellers and Newsmen.


PUBLISHED ON THE MORNING AFTER THE ARRIVAL IN LONDON
OF EVERY OVERLAND MAIL.
Price SIXPENCE; or 12 s.for 24 Nos. payable in advance.
INDIAN NEWS,
A FORTNIGHTLY JOURNAL OF INTELLIGENCE OP PUBLIC AND PERSONAL INTEREST
INDIA, CHINA, & THE EASTERN ARCHIPELAGO.
This Journal was established in June 1840, by a numerous body of the Principal
Merchants, Company’s Officers, and others connected with India, and has ever since
maintained its influence and circulation among Anglo-Indians, and parties in this
country having friends or relatives in the Civil and Military Services of the Company;
also among Merchants, Shippers, and others interested in our Eastern Empire.
SUMMARY OF PUBLIC NEWS:—A continuous sketch, bringing down the Political,
Military, and miscellaneous Transactions in an historical form from Mail to Mail.
DETAILS FROM THE PAPERS: —Giving the more interesting Materials of the fore-
going History, in Extracts from the various Indian and Chinese papers.
NEWS FROM THE PRESIDENCIES, CEYLON, &c.: —This department contains the
Anecdotes and on dits of the English in India, and generally all Articles of News
not included under the foregoing head.
GOVERNMENT NOTIFICATIONS:—CiviI, Military, Naval, Medical, Ecclesiastical,
and Miscellaneous; Births, Marriages, and Deaths; Shipping Intelligence, Arrivals,
Departures, and Lists of Passengers.
COMMERClAL:—Comprehensive Views of the Movement of Trade and Commerce in
India, China, and the Archipelago, from the best authorities on the spot, with Prices
Current.
LEADING ARTICLES:—On the Indian topics of the day; Sketches of Manners in
India; Proceedings of Public Societies; Resources and Improvement of the
Country, &c.
LITERATURE AND ART: Embracing a Critical Review, not confined to Work*
on India.
HER MAJESTY’S FORCES IN INDIA.
DISTRIBUTION OF THE ARMY IN INDIA:—And general list of Casualties from
time to time.
PARLIAMENT AND THE INDIA HOUSE:—Examinations at the Colleges, Reports
of Arrivals, Permissions to Return or Remain, Applications to Retire, &c. &c.
HOME INTELLIGENCE:—Containing everything interesting to the Indian body ia
England up to the day of publication; Births, Marriages, and Deaths, Shipping Intelli-
gence, Arrivals, Departures, Lists of Passengers, &c.
LONDON: STEWART AND MURRAY, 15, OLD BAILEY.
To whom all communications for the Editor, or orders for Subscriptions may be addressed.
To be had also of Smith, Elder fc Co., 65, Cornhill; W. H. Smith & Sow, Strand,
and all Booksellers and Newsmen.
* # * Forwarded on receipt of Six Postage Stamps.


TO MERCHANTS, DRUGGISTS, STOREKEEPERS, ETC.
THE following Old Established and Highly-Esteemed Pee-
parations can be recommended as suitable and valuable in all climates; —
BUTLER’S COMPOUND CONCENTRATED DECOCTION ;
or, FLUID EXTRACT of SARSAPARILLA. Containing all the
properties of the Sarsaparilla in a very condensed state, in pints, half, and
quarter pint bottles. A pint bottle is equal to three gaUons of the ordinary
preparation.
BUTLER’S TASTELESS SEIDLITZ POWDERS, combined in
one Compound Powder, in hottle and case (accompanied with measure
and spoon), at 2s. 6 d., suitable for all climates, efficacious and most agreeable.
BUTLER’S EFFERVESCENT CITRATE of MAGNESIA; or,
MAGNESIAN APERIENT, for Dyspeptic and Bilious Affections.
When taken after too free indulgence in the luxuries of the table, particu-
larly after too much wine, the usual disagreeable effects are altogether
avoided. In warm climates it will be found extremely beneficial, by correct-
ing the disordered biliary secretion, without debilitating the stomach.
BUTLER’S PURE PONDEROUS CALCINED MAGNESIA.
Prepared after a peculiar process, whereby it is perfectly deprived of
Carbonic Acid, freed from taste and smell, and every unpleasant property,
and the bulk required for a dose reduced to one-half of that prepared in the
usual way. In bottles at 2s. 9 d.
BUTLER’S MARKING INK, without preparation, Is. cases.
Db. JAMES’S FEVER POWDERS.
ESSENCE OF PEPPERMINT.
LAVENDER WATER (BUTLER’S).
DALBY’S CARMINATIVE.
MOTHES’ COPAIBA CAPSULES.
PRESTON SALTS (BUTLER’S).
STEER’S OPODELDOC (BUTLER’S).
BUTLER’S ESSENCE OF GINGER.
BUTLER’S COMPOUND TINCTURE OF QUININE.
{HIT All Medicinal Preparations of repute, established Patent Medi-
cines, Perfumes, &c., &c., with allowance to Merchants and others, for
exportation, of
BUTLER & HARDING,
Chemists, 4, CHEAPSIDE (Corner of St. Paul’s), LONDON.
Medicine Chests fitted up for all Climates.
Agents for the above are already established, and they may be readily
obtained at Sydney and Poet Phillip (Melbourne), &c.


OUTFITS FOR ALL CLASSES.
THE ADVANTAGES OF EMIGRATION being materially increased
by the comforts of a Suitable Outfit,
E. J. MONNERY & CO., 165,
having had many years’ experience in that line,
FENCHURCH STREET, CITY,
feel confidence in calling
the attention of all classes to their Outfitting Warehouse, where a large
assortment of Shirts, Clothing, Hosiery, &c. &c., suitable for any of the
Colonies, is kept ready for immediate use, at unusually low prices. Sea
Mattresses, Bedding, Cabin and Camp Furniture of every description.
Lists, with prices affixed, forwarded by post.
A CAPITAL OUTFIT FOR £5 IS*.
£ s. d.
Pilot Coat 0 10 0
Beaverdeen Jacket 0 4 6
Do. Trousers 0 4 6
Do. Waistcoat 0 3 3
3 Pair Duck Trousers 3*. Od. 0 6 0
13 Striped Shirts ls.6d. 0 18 0
3 Worsted Undershirts ... 3*. Od. 0 4 0
3 Pair ditto Drawers 3*. 3d. 0 4 6
4 Pair ditto Hose I*. Id. 0 4 4
4 Pair Cotton ditto lOd. 0 3 4
4 Pair ditto Half-Hose 6d. 0 3 0
4 Pocket Handkerchiefs 6d. 0 3 0
6 lbs. Soap 6d. 0 3 0
3 Pair Sheets 3*. 6d. 0 5 0
1 Pair Blankets 0 5 6
Quilt 0 3 0
Bed and Pillow 0 5 9
3 Pair Braces 6d. 0 1 0
3 Pair Shoes s*. 6d. 011 0
6 Towels 6d. 0 3 0
Knife and Fork, Hook Pot 0 1 8
Water Can 0 16
Wetter V>cllJ KJ JL o
Plate, Mug, and Spoon 0 1 0
XidtC) IVIUg, dliU OJJUUJLI U I vd
Chest 0 10 0
£5 15 0
A VERY SUPERIOR OUTFIT FOR
£lO 10*.
£ s. d.
Shooting Coat 0 14 0
Pilot Coat 0 14 0
1 Cachmeret Waistcoat 0 5 0
1 Double-breasted ditto 0 5 0
4 Pair Duck Trousers 4*. Od. 0 18 0
1 Pair good Cloth ditto 6 14 6
18 Striped Shirts 3 5 0
3 5 0
6 Long-cloth ditto, line Linen
fronts, &c 4*. Od. 14 0
4 Nightcaps 6d. 0 3 0
3 Lamb’s-wool Undershirts 3*. Od. 0 6 0
3 Pair ditto Drawers 3*. 6d. 0 7 0
4 Pair Cotton ditto 3*. Od. 6 8 0
4 Pair Lamb’s-wool Half-Hose,
I*. Od. 0 4 0
13 Pair Cotton ditto 6d. 0 6 0
6 Pocket Handkerchiefs 6d. 0 3 0
u .tuciAcu v o u
Black Silk Neckerchief 0 3 6
3 Pair Braces 9d. 0 1 6
3 Pair Shoes s*. 6d. 0 11 0
8 Towels 6d. 0 4 0
6d. 0 4
4 lbs. Marine Soap 9d. 0 3 0
Chest 0 13 0
£lO 10 0
The above articles are warranted both for quality and workmanship.
Every description of Cabin Furniture.
Intending Emigrants. —Those of our readers about departing to the Canadas,
Australia, New Zealand, &c., would save much money, time, and trouble, by con-
sulting Messrs. Monnbry and Co., 165, Fenchurch-street, whose long experience as
Colonial Outfitters enable them to furnish the most suitable equipments for all
climates. —The Emigrant’s Newspaper.
Suggestion to Emigrants.— A great many of those troubles and impositions to
which intending emigrants are subject may be obviated by a judicious selection from
whom to obtain the requisite outfits; and of all parties we are acquainted with we
do not know any better qualified to give satisfaction than Messrs. Monnery, of
Fenchurch-street, whose known respectability, and long experience in Colonial out-
fits, entitle them to every praise. —The Emigrant's Ouide,
Continual annoyance and disappointment are experienced by emigrants in re-
ference to outfits ; some dread the trash of slop-shops, others again feel uncomfortable
in visiting an establishment quite new to them. Emigrants who require outfits
for any of the colonies, and who wish to place themselves in the hands of a
respectable house, may save themselves much money and unnecessary anxiety
and trouble by applying to Messrs. Monnery and Co., 165, Fenchurch-street,
whose great experience, high character, and respectability, is the best guarantee
that every article which they supply will give satisfaction,— Weekly Times, in
reply to the inquiries of “An Emigrant.”


S. S. & J. W. BENSON,
WATCH MANUFACTURERS,
16, CORNHILL (opposite the Royal Exchange), and
63, CORNHILL (three doors from Bishopsgate-Street), London.
BENSON’S “EXACT” WATCH.
THE PROPRIETORS have just finished a large Stock of these
WATCHES, which, after considerable attention, they have succeeded
in producing expressly for the GOLD DIGGINGS : the peculiarity of which
consists in the adaptation of the case, which is so constructed, that it is
impossible for dust and dirt to find its way into the movements. The move-
ments are highly finished, of the Horizontal and Lever construction, many
of them with the improved regulator, which is the invention of Messrs. S. S.
and J. W. BENSON, affording a greater control over the performance of the
Watch. The price is reduced to the lowest possible scale, varying from Eour
Guineas to Eight Guineas for the Lever, in Silver Cases, and 3Z. 10s. to 61. 6s.
for the Horizontal.
BENSON’S HIGHLY-EINISHED
2 1. 15s. SILVER HORIZONTAL WATCHES,
Jewelled in Four, Six, and Eight Holes, with all the latest Improvements.
These Watches are made in four different sizes, being suitable for Ladies
and Gentlemen. They have beautifully-engraved silver dials; the movement is
constructed with the balance-wheel lowered even with the other wheels, for the
purpose of rendering the Watch flat, and are, in every respect, such as can be
recommended.
Benson’s Patent Detached Silver Lever Watch, made flat for the waistcoat
pocket, with the skeleton movement, jewelled in Ten holes. Silver or
Enamelled dials £3 10 0
BENSON’S PATENT
DETACHED LEVER WATCHES,
Adapted expressly for the Gold Diggings,
LONDON MADE, IN SILVER CASES.
Doubled-backed, plain, or engine-turned case; the movement with the latest
improvements, i. e., the detached escapement; jewelled in two holes; hard
enamelled dial; hand to mark the seconds, and maintaining power £3 18 0
Ditto, jewelled in Pour holes, and capped 414 6
Ditto, jewelled in Six holes, with the improved regulator 5 15 0
Ditto, jewelled in Eight holes, ditto 6 18 6
Ditto, three-quarter plate, with compensation balance 7 18 0
Benson’s Patent Detached Silver Lever Watch, made flat for the waistcoat
pocket, with the skeleton movement, jewelled in Ten holes 3 15 0
Fine Vertical Watches, in double-backed, engine-turned, or plain silver cases,
with highly-finished jewelled movements, hard enamelled dials 2 18 0
Messrs. BENSON would call particular attention to the fact, that equally
the same attention is paid to the finish and style of these Watches as those
in gold cases, being determined that nothing shall be wanting on their part
to maintain the reputation they have so long enjoyed with the mechanic, the
artisan, and the tradesman, in giving to them a Silver Watch without fault
in its accurate performance, and combining every improvement, at the above
very low prices.
CAUTION.
S. S. and J. W. BENSON have no connection with any other Estab-
lishment of the same or similar name, and the above Watches can only be
obtained at Nos. 16 and 63, CORNHILL.
The above Watches can be had in Gold Cases at 6 & 8 Guineas extra.
