

AUTHOR'S COPY. 3s
MUSIC and MUSICIANS:
PERSONAL REMINISCENCES,
BY
JOSEPH SUMMERS,
MUS DOC
PERTH:
THE GALWAY PRINTING COMPANY, 14-16 LANE STREET


MUSIC and MUSICIANS;
PERSONAL REMINISCENCES,
1865-1910
BY
JOSEPH SUMMERS.
MUS, Doc. (CANTUAR.)


SUBSCRIBERS’ AUTOGRAPHS.




PREFACE.
“Unless a writer gives us something new,
Something to cause the mind to think;
’Twere better far, he threw his paper on the fire,
And his ink, down the sink,”
so said the Venerable and Reverend Dean Swift.
I learn, furthermore, in Sacred Writ it is recorded, that in
1620 b.c., there lived a man in the land of Uz, whose name was
Job. Instead of building a Dreadnought to blow them up, he
prayed God that his enemies might write a book. Having, there-
fore, been taught to be cautious, 1 keep within bounds of a
simple narration of facts.
J. S.


REMINISCENCES
OF
MUSIC AND MUSICIANS IN AUSTRALIA
From 1865 to 1910.
By Dr. J. SUMMERS.
{y ATLIXG from Liverpool in the good steamship “Koval
Standard," of the White Star Line, for Mel bourne, with
VI J Commander Whinerv, in 1865, 1 landed at Williamstown,
~ the shipping port of Melbourne, after experiencing a
pleasant, though perilously exciting voyage of 65 days, ri/i the
Cape of Good Hope. Had dear old father Haydn been my com-
panion, and seen the mighty ocean waves, swooping, swelling,
rising, and falling, in awful grandeur when off the Cape, his
representation of “rolling in foaming billows’’ would have received
a different treatment in his Oratorio “The Creation."
Little was known of Australia, or of the “noble colony," as
the late Poet Laureate, Lord Alfred Tennyson, called Victoria,
in those days in England, beyond the fact that it was a land of
sunshine and of gold, and to a large extent peopled by convicts.
In 1852, some of my family in Warwick-street, Pimlico,
London, laid down their chisels and hammers, and deserted their
sculptors' art studio to seek their luck at gold finding at Tnriia-
gulla, Victoria, which according to the eminent mining geologist,
Mr. Brough Smyth, was the richest gold-bearing line of reef ever
known to the world. It was cabled Poverty lteef, and so named
after Mr. David Hatt. The famous Posiedon and Jim Crow
leads now at work take their rise from Taruagulla Range. Mr.
David Hatt, and his two mates, met with a black fellow at Friar's
Creek, who for a plug of tobacco, showed them the line of reef at
Tarnagulla, studded with glittering gold all along the surface,
and from which they banked a wheelbarrow full every week.
Mr. Hatt was uncle to Mr. David Hatt, the famous reefer at
Southern Cross, who purchased the sand at Fraser's Company,
which had been crushed by the notorious murderer, Deeming,
and which yielded Mr. Hatt an enormous fortune.


In Melbourne I found many Musicians who had occupied
high positions in the world of Music in Europe—Cutoli, Schott,
Buddee, Marsh, Siede, Pringle, Russell, David Lee, Bindley Nor-
man, Martin Simonson, Berg, Brown Hoare, Rich tv, Hart, J. A.
Thompson, Creed Royal, Hornidge, Kohlman, Montague, Her-
man, Hardman, Kohler, Verso, Charles E. Horsley, and others.
A complete grand orchestra of first class musicians could be ob-
tained superior to most of our present orchestras in any of the
States.
On my arrival I was welcomed by a soiree given by the
profession at my brother s studio. 105 Collins Street, known as
the Exhibition of Fine Arts, where, for the information of the
rising generation, the colossal statue of Burke and Wills was
designed, modelled, and cast in bronze, the copper being obtained
from South Australian mines and the tin from Beech worth. The
mouth of the pit into which the molten metal flowed can even
now be seen in the back yard of the late l>r. Fisher, Collins
Street East. Tt is said that the Burke and Wills monument is
the only one in Europe or Australia cast without a join in
one piece of bronze.
Having been announced in the press on my arrival as the
well known composer in the Bristol Tune Book, it was no little
surprise to read in the “Age” that the writer of the paragraph
said he knew for a fact that the composer of the above named
work had died and was buried in Loudon many vears previously.
Having proved my identity to Mr. David Symes satisfaction,
some of my friends are, it may he kind enough to think, pleased
that I am still very much alive in W.A.
At the soiree many notable guests were present. The poets
Lindsay Gordon, R. H Horne, Henry Kendall, Chevalier, Mar-
garet Thomas, and the well known painters Gill, Richardson, and
Brennan Mr. Horne was not a little proud of his musical
attainments, and, attired in Spanish costume, with his long-
curly golden hair flowing over his shoulders, he sang Spanish
songs to his guitar accompaniment. There was present an ex-
cellent male quartette —Messrs. Williams, Donaldson, Ameiy,
and Angus—who sang a Threnodia which was written by Mr.
Horne in memory of the great tragedian, G. t . Brooke, and set
to music bv me, this being my first composition in Australia.
It was also sung on the occasion of the unveiling of a marble
heroic bust of Brooke at the Newmarket Theatre. The line bust
was engraved in the “ Illustrated .London News, ' and exhibited
for three' vears at the Royal Academy, London. It is now placed
in the Melbourne Library in the Summers Gallery of Original
Sculptures.


THRENODIA.
Words by R. H. H. Horne (Orion), 18Gti.
(President of the Melbourne Garrick Clulc .
Quartette.
0 cruel sea, whose wild embrace
Majestic ships unnumbered hath destroyed ;
Whose nether realms are rich in each rare Trace
And glory which thy surface hath enjoyed ;
Why art thou still insatiate,
Unfathomed in thy love or hate ?
0 cruel sea.
Becitative —The Sea.
Listen, mortals, unto me.
Calm as a mirror do I lie
Beneath the sun-inspired or starlit sky.
Divine, reflecting God’s divinity.
Aria.
But when the wind in thunder sings,
Beating his broad and homeless wings,
Then with myself and all the world at war,
I must obey great Xature’s lawn
Quartette.
We mourn alas beyond redress.
O reason not with our distress.
Our hearts, lost friend, are wrecked with thee,
O faithless wind ; 0 cruel sea
The great actor who was idolized bv the people, was drowned
while on his way to Melbourne in the s.s. London in the Bay of
Biscay. It is said by the prim old street aristocratic organ
grinder of Ballarat (known as Ballarat -Joe), that when the ship
was contending with wind and wave, and all who could do so
had deserted her, Brooke, who would not leave the ship, was
last seen stripped to his waist, working at the pumps, for in
those days machinery for the purpose was not used. In his
grand sonorous voice, heard above the raging elements, he sent
the following message : —“ Give my kind remembrances to all
my friends in Melbourne.’’
Several musical societies flourished in Melbourne about 186 b.
The Melbourne Philharmonic, founded by John Russell, the
Musical Union, the Orpheus Union, a genuine German Lieder-
tafel (all the songs were sung in German), conducted by Sprink-
horn, which met at the '‘Adam and Eve’’ Hotel, Little Collins
St., the Metropolitan Liedertafel (the first attempt in English),
by J ulius Herz, the Musical Association, the Orchestral Union,
ail of which were ably conducted with enthusiasm, and we!)
supported by the public.


Mr. St. John Caws, who was well known in musical circles,
was a native of the Isle of Wight, and was the first Secretary of
the Musical Society of Victoria. As music master in the Church
of England Grammar School he had many pupils in his charge,
who became known professionally in the musical world. He
was a Grand Lodge officer in the Masonic Body.
St. Peters Church, Eastern Hill, now the centre of our
great Australian metropolis, Melbourne, was then called St.
Peter’s in the bush. There was an excellent surplieed Choir,
12 mni and lb boys, and no liner rendering of our English
services and glorious anthems of Purcell, IJacli, Gibbons, Spohr,
and Mendelssohn could be desired Commodore Goodenough
whose father was Dean of Wells, and the composer of well-known
chants, always attended this church when in Melbourne. It was
choral praise worship, dignified, and of the highest artistic stan-
dard. Nothing less was permitted by the incumbent the Rev.
H. H. P. Handheld. 011 one St. Peter's Festival at Evensong,
we gave a complete performance with orchestra, aided by the
Philharmonic Society, of Mendelssohn's “ Lobgesang," which 1
regard as the most perfect and beautiful of all his works.
Canon Handheld was an athlete, about 11 .7 stone in weight,
a lover of cricket, a scholar and a gentlemen. After Church
Sunday nights, with his choir-men lie enjoyed a quiet smoke
from his long clay church-warden pipe, and with a glass of ale
he usually terminated his gospel labours.
Canon Handheld was named Camaliel, from his classic,
eloquent, and original expositions of Holy Writ, from the parable
of ‘‘Adam and Ere' 1 to Daniel in the Lion's Den," lie brought
the representative brains of the legal and the artistic professions
to his feet, at his Gothic pulpit steps, and taught them to under-
stand the meaning of St. Paul's words “ Know ye not that your
bodies are the Temples of the Holy Ghost," and that profanity
of speech in art, or conduct of life is in our own power of will to
do. right or wrong, with inevitable consequences. He held that
musicians especially are gifted with power of spiritual influence,
therefore the choice of music, either for teaching or performance,
should be their careful consideration.
At St. .John's Church, Latrobe St.. Mr. Sam Greenwood,
the organist and choir master, conducted a surplieed choir,
which hid fair to rival that of St. Peters Church. He was a
painstaking teacher, and of a retiring nature. At St. Stephen's
Church, Richmond, Mr. Phil. Plaisted presided at a grand
organ, a three decker, and his playing was the means of attract-
ing large congregations on Sunday Nights.


At St. Frances Roman Catholic Cathedral, Lonsdale St.,
there was a powerful choir, and a grand organ, in charge of Mr.
Compton. The masses were nmgnillcantly rendered with
orchestra, and the Italian Opera Artists.
At St. Patrick's Cathedral. Mr. Plumpton with Madame
Tasea had charge of the music Mr. Plumpton composed a
grand Mass, which met with hearty approval.
Mr. and Mrs. Plumpton ( Madame Tasca) came to Melbourne
under concert engagement to Mr. Trank Heston, Tire Cliristry
Minstrel, and Wizard Oil Prince, of world-wide fame and
fortune. Madame Tasea was a gifted musician, and a successful
teacher. Manv clever pianoforte players were educated by her.
chief among whom was Miss Ada M illetts, known and esteemed
most highly bv us in Perth, as Mrs. Curthovs. Madame Tasea
possessed exceptional and refined taste, and having had the
advantage of a liberal education, the charm of a visit and a
social chat with her, was exceedingly pleasant. Both great
artists returned to London, and Mr. Plumpton was appointed
musical conductor to the Empire Musical Hall. Both have
passed away.
A SONG OF WONDERMENT.
By J.S.. into.
The heat of the pulse of a living soul,
To the melody of ecstatic joy.
Doubting, lingering, fearing, hoping,
Is it love f
A wondrous spell of magic power.
Enthrals the sense in Elysian bliss.
Waiting, requiting, believing, longing.
Is it love ?
'The golden flame of passion by desire kindled.
Consuming all but one pure thought.
Ever increasing, never satisfying.
1 s it love r
His Koval Highness the Buko of Edinburgh paid a visit to
Melbourne about ISO”. Mr. Horne wrote a reception cantata
"Galatea Secunda," which 1 set to music. It was performed in
the presence of H.li.H. (by command at the Government House),
also at the Exhibition Hall, Lonsdale St,, with a choir of -)00
voices, an orchestra of 50. and grand organ built by the Aus-
tralian organ builder, Mr. George Fincham, of 'Melbourne.
Charles Edward Hoiysley, the father of music in Australia, was
a composer, organist, conductor, and scholar, and a gentlemen
well-bred. His father was William Horsley, Mus. ISae. Oxon,
composer of that exquisite glee, “By Celia s Arbour, and Dr.
Calcott. and Webb, were all English musicians of note, of the


Horsley family. Horsley was a great favourite of Mendelssohn's,
ami it is thought that liavid his oratorio has caught much of
Mendelssohns spirit. With a career before him of the highest
eminence in Europe', his presence in Australia was somewhat a
mystery. He was one of the five musicians appointed to confer
at Paris, and advise the European music world as to the much
vexed question of Pitch. An agreement was ultimately arrived
at, after exhaustive inquiry, from the Handelian pitch to date,
and Horsley of course had his .joke as to there being more pitch
than tar. It is said the jurors unanimously agreed to differ. So
long as any two human beings are not exactly alike in taste or
physique, and vocalists may choose high or low pitch as suits
them best, it is improbable there will be insisted on, absolute
and universally defined \ibratorv pitch. The composers are as
a rule, thoughtful, when giving to the world the product of
their brains, and the compdexion and relationship of sounds are
almost their first determination.
Horsley was brimful of subtiltv and wit, and, when in
a merry mood, pints Hew fast on everybody and everything.
Horsley conducted the Philharmonic Society, but he was not
it good conductor. lie gave many String Quartette Concerts in
Hell lourne, the music of which was chiefly select!‘<l from his own
String Quartette compositions. .After residing in Melbourne for
two years he went to Sydney, X.S.W., but, not finding it a con-
genial and financial place from bis point of view, lie returned to
Afelbourne, and was commissioned by .Mr. Samuel A mess, the
.Mayor of Melbourne, to compose a cantata, “ Euterpe,” for the
opening of the new Town Hall. The words were by Kendall.
It was a line work and it was splendidly performed. .At a
disastrous fire in the Lyceum Theatre, Londsdale St., all Horsley s
works were burned. " Euterpe, ’ “ South Sea Sisters’’ were lost
to the world. Ife left Melbourne for London, thence to New
York, where he died, and his body was taken back to London
and buried with his ancestors in Kensal Green Cemetery.
Horsley, Hines, Russell and myself were jurors for music
and musical instruments at the first Intercolonial Exhibition,
and we played a Haydn String Quartette on instruments made
by Revereaux. a resident of .Melbourne. His violins now com-
mand great prices, and are no longer obtainable. Curtis and
George Weston play on the violins made by Detereaux Ivilner
exhibited his manufactured pianos, made principally of Aus-
tralian timber. Wilkie. Webster w C'o tried the experiment, as
did also Blaze, and all found it impossible to compete in quality
or price with English, German, or even American pianofortes.
Tli<“ Beale Company, of Sydney and Perth, with their newest
inventions and a factory up-to-date, with experienced hands.


and suiticient capital, cam place their instruments wdthin the
reach of the public w’ith assured success.
i)a\icl Lee will be favourably known as a conductor and
organist. As city organist lie gave bi-weekly organ recitals in
the Town Hall with unvarying success. At one of these I went
to hear him play an offertoire of mine, and the usher gave mo a
seat near where Die Naylor, the organist of ork Minister, was
sitting. On the conclusion of the recital I gave my card to Dr.
Naylor, and asked him if lie could remember the 3rd of June,
15(53. when he was the organist at Scarborough. Oh, said he
you are Summers: .1 remember we were the only two candidates
for the Degree of Pachelor of Music at Oxford at that time.
Degrees in music were, as a rule, sought for only by musicians
and composers already known, and recognised as suck, in the
musical world. Dr. Naylor was accompanied by bis daughter,
and by two daughters of His Grace the Archbishop of \ork,
who were on a pleasure trip to New' Zealand. On his return to
England Dr. Naylor succumbed to the ailment from wdiicli he
suffered. He was a fine organist and musician.
For five years I laid the honor of conducting the Melbourne
Philharmonic Society, and, among other works, produced the
greatest of all oratorios, “St. Matthew's Passion, by J. S.
Bach, and for which II was specially donated an honorarium of
£d() by the Society. Madame Arabella Goddard, Jenny Claus,
lima JDeMurska, Palmieri. Amelia Bailey. .Mrs. Cutter. Lucy
Chambers. .M adame Christian. Mrs. Pal hut. Madame Miranda,
Signor and Signora Cov, Kebottaro, .Miss Pitts, and numeious
other ladies played or sang for the society ; whilst among the
gentlemen Amies I’eaumont. .1 Kmatdson, C liarles Cole (of Loheit-
son A: Moffat's), Williams. Palladini, Dondi, Lanible, dumper,
and Staker frequently appeared at tie 1 concerts.
Mr. Jackman, out 1 of our leading Perth land agents, gave
Monday Populars at the Town Hall with marked success. It
was al these concerts that Madame .Melba (then known as Miss
Nellie Mitchell) was first recognised by her marvellous gift of
voice. She sang "Sing Sweet Bird" (Ganz), and an operatic aria.
Vadame .Melba is proudly acknowledged as the Australian
“Queen of Song." and the people of London and Paris simply go
mail with delight when slit' appears in Grand Opera. She is the
singer of the doth century, and was born in .Melbourne.
R. S. Smvtlie. the “niuvli travelled' convert agent and
manager, introdnded star artists, snjgvrs. players, lecturers, and
kept mi the </«/ »7/v the pleasure loving public of Australia.. He
toured the Arabella Goddard Concert Co. : the Rev. Gluts. C lark, in
his celebrated "Tower of London," witli financial success every-


where. l)e Vivo, manager for the Hungarian Nightingale, lima De
Muiska, was a smart and stylish agent, eminently successful.
Vollugi was manager for our dear old T)e Koutski, the last living-
pupil of Beethoven, and who gave pianoforte recitals at the Town
Hall. He recently died at Berlin.
Madame Anna Bishop, wife of the composer. Sir H. Bishop,
paid two visits to Melbourne, and gave concerts at the Town
Hall. Giamoni and Julius Siede assisted her as flautists. The
renowned singers rendering of “With Verdure Clad,” "On
Mighty Pens, has never been equalled on our concert platform.
Madame Testar an accomplished local amateur vocalist, assisted
at these concerts. Tt was interesting to hear Madame Testar
relate her experiences of Melbourne in its earliest days, when
Sir James Palmer hawked cabbages and oranges for sale in the
so called streets of Melbourne, eventually became Mavor, and
was knighted. How, also, at a Messiah " concert, she had to
wade through sand and mud. in drenching rain, from South
Yarra to Collins street to appear on the conceit stage without
being afforded an opportunity of making her toilet.
The Poet Laureate, Lord Alfred Tennyson, in 1882. gave to
us our real aspirations of an Australian Commonwealth when
lie sent us by the hand of the Lord Chamberlain a noble hymn,
'■ Hands All Hound," with a request that it should be sung on the
Queen s birthday following, throughout the British Dominions.
Being the Government Inspeetor of Music our Chief Secretary,
the Hon, James Grant (of unlock the lands fame) desired me to
mass bOOO voices at the exhibition to sing the ltvmn, under
Government auspices. The immortal poet sent me the following
letter :
“Dear Sir.—Pray accept my thanks for your illustrated
paper and kind letter. lam sorry that T was not present to hear
your bOOO voices.
“A\ ith all good wishes to yourself and your noble colony,
believe me.
Very faithfully yours,
A. Tennyson.
.Madame Miranda sang with the Philharmonic in Schumann's
“ Paradise and the Peri," and Beethoven’s “ Engedi.”
Madame Lucy Chambers' last appearance was in “Have
mercy upon me, O God," in Bach's “Passion" (S. Matthew), with
violin obligato by Jenny Chius.
Perhaps not the least interesting and eccentric resident of
Melbourne was Mr. .James Gatehouse, the Mavor. Full of prac-
tical jokes, occasionally he went near the verge of criminality.
He was full of passion for music, and prevailed on Madame lima


de Murska to sing the Oratorio ‘‘Creation in conjunction with
the Philharmonic Society on a Sunday afternoon, this being the
first Sunday concert in Australia, and to the credit of Mr. Gate-
house this advanced step in civilised musical education shall
remain to his honor.
Conductors occasionally have to exercise quick thought when
a symphony, opera, or oratorio is being performed. One notable
circumstance happened to me on the conclusion of the “ Messiah '’
on a Christmas Xight. It was a perfect performance up to the
‘•Amen'’ chorus, when one of the first violins made a false
start, and others following I saw ahead an inevitable breakdown.
Just then the audience began to leave their seats to catch their
trains. 1 immediately stopped the performance and faced about
watching until all who wished to do so left the hall. Applause
greeted my action, and the chorus started again, finishing in
perfection before any attempt by the audience to move was made.
Ed. King, our veteran principal violin, safe and firm as a rock
at all performances, understood my action, and we heartily
laughed. He was not the culprit who lead off before the time,
but the one near him who played on a violin made by Devereaux
was the guilty party.'
On mv appointment as the Government Inspector and Ex-
aminer in Music, I resigned the conductorship of the Philhar-
monic Society. Mr. George Peake, my talented pupil, succeeded
me, and he has maintained his position with credit and ability
for a number of years. Curtis continues to be the principal
violin, and the Society is in a flourishing and strong financial
position. The members are loyal and jealous for the dignity of
the Society. When the death of Charles E. Horsley was an-
nounced to the Society I was asked to compose a Dead March,
which was performed at the concert with success, and it received
an encore prior to the commencement of Mendelssohn s Oratorio,
“S. Paul,” an unusual and honored compliment. The full orches-
tral score and parts are being published by Breit-koff and Haertel,
London.
]t nmv be of interest to record a journalistic court case in
which the Evening Ifemhl was sued for prejudging the public
production of a comic opera, “The Princess of Trebizonde, " some
weeks previous to its performance under the management of the
Theatre Royal lessees Mr. Marcus Clarke was known to have
written the alleged defamatory article, as music and dramatic
critic to the Herald. Damages for .£SOOO were sued for. There
was a trial which lasted three days at the Supreme Court before
the Chief Justice, Sir Redmond Barry. Henry Hughes and mv-
self were subpcened bv the Herald , and the plaintiff's witnesses
were numerous. Mr. .Marcus Clarke, on oath, swore he did not


write the article, and claimed the right as a journalist to deny it
even though he might have written it. Mr. G. P Smith, a brow-
beating barrister, conducted the case for the plaintiff', and with
Hughes in the box the following tilt amused the court :
Barrister Smith to Hughes : What’s your name!
Henry Hughes.
What are you !
A musician.
Smith : A fiddler, aren t you ?
No.
What then !
A violinist.
Smith : Well, what's the difference !
Well, a violin would remain a violin in my hands, but would
be a fiddle in yours.
1 was in the box for six hours, and having a critical know-
ledge of the opera, I was able to show" the innumerable cuts
made at the performance, gag by Harwood and the inimitable
Dick Stewart, introduced by way of songs, they being non-singers.
Not one half of the opera was attempted, so the mutilation was
clearly pro fed. and the case for plaintiff lost, the damages one
farthing with costs.
Many will remember with delight the visit of Henri Ixetten,
the pianist. lie was the most fascinating concert player that
ever appeared in Melbourne. Night after night the Opera House
was idled to its capacity, and for two hours, unaided and from
memory he kept his audience spell-bound. Prom .Beethoven s
grand Sonata in P> Plat to Gotschalk s “Banjo lie captivated
his listeners, especially the gods, who yelled with delight at the
latter piece. Like the majority of exceptionally talented pianists
he was eccentric. His diet being vegetarian, he was a terror to
his landladies and waitresses He ate cabbage ('very day of his
life, and on one occasion after having repeatedly requested that
the vegetables should be well cooked, he was wroth and chased
the waitress with the hot underdone cabbage as she went down
the stairs, throwing dish and cabbage upon her head, saying—
‘■you shall remember when you next bring me cabbage.
For some years, however, before he died, he became abso-
lutely a raw eating vegetarian.
Tn I SSO a -Juvenile Exhibition of Art and Industry was
held in Paddy's Market, which was newly built, and prior to its
market use we plaved o_ orchestral conceits, on a train!
scale, with a professional list of ■)- first class instrumental
musicians, and a choir of 2nd voices. In about II weeks the


company netted over .£6,000. At one of the concerts an amus-
ing incident took place. The orchestra hieing of a temporary
nature, and on four raised step divisions, I made use of gin cases
for seats for the orchestra, placing my bass and instruments of
percussion on the highest elevation. There was a clever trom-
bone player Wormall—set down for a solo with orchestra,
“The Heath of Nelson,’’ and he had to come down from his place
to the front of the platform. When his number came on
J beckoned to him to come, and, lifting his slide trombone
above his head, he made a start, and stepping on a gin
case which gav e way, he rolled from the top of the orchestra to
the bottom. It was impossible to play the solo owing to the
ludicrous accident.
William Saurin Lvster. the world-renowned impressario,
produced grand opera on a lavish scale. With indomitable
pluck, vast theatrical experience, refined artistic taste, he pro-
duced all the grand operas from “Alaritana" to ‘•Lohengrin.”
As an instance of his honest conduct, he took his whole grand
opera company to the V arrnamhool district, and gave a complete
and exacting performance of "William Tell." It was a tempestu-
ous night, and the attendance was small. Lvster announced to
the artists that he expected a critical performance of the opera,
which was then performed. Within a few hours after the opera
was over, it is said sent Lvster a chepue to cover the cost
of the vacant seats in the full house.
Our Australian Sims lleeves—Amies ISeaumont. whenever
available, sustained the solo parts of the operas successfully. To
render all the tenor music of “ William Tell. ’ ” Bach s Passion,
Ac., from memory speaks the highest points in favour of his vocal
powers and extraordinary musical attainments. He mill he re-
membered as an artist and v ocalist of the most exalted type.
Miuiv excellent and highly gifted conductors and composer-
were imported hv G. Lester to conduct grand opera, notahlv
among whom wore Ciorza. Zelman, Mazoratti. Von Gliele. Leon
Caron, Signor Hazon. Siede conducted a militarv hand of tin
musicians, and played a fine programme of music on three morn-
ings weekly in the Treasury Gardens. Mr. T. H. Guenett,
pupil of Chas. Halle, gave a series of classical subscriptions com
certs, at which the famous Zerliini String Quartet played. Wes-
ton, Curtis, Lleimers, Zerliini. •lager. Hart, Herman, and
Montague taking part.
Mi'. G. AY. Marshall Hall has laboured in (lie cause of music
among us for over -0 vein's. He mas recommended l>v Sir
Cliarles Halle to the Vniversify Chair of Music. His talent as
an orchestral conductor is greatly appreciated, and his musical
compositions are of a classical and high order. It is pleasing to


learn that he is about to revive String Quartet Concerts, which,
I*s years ago, were so successfully held by Zerbini and Air. I. H.
Guennett.
Of Professor Peterson and his prolific staff of teachers at
the Ormond School of Alusic at the Melbourne University, we read
the Calendar Report, and learn of colossal proceedings and suc-
cesses, which prove that he too is '‘very much alive in his
happy sphere of duty in Alelbourne.
As a gifted composin' of the highest culture, a teacher,
conductor, linguist, scholar, a gentleman of character, respected
by all and loved by his brother musicians, stands emblazoned the
name of Maestro Alberto Zelman. He rose with the sun,
and could be seen any morning near the “Argus’ Office perusing
some new volume of choice literature.
Mr. Otto Linden is a veteran musician and a teacher of
pianoforte 1 . Genial and gentlemanly, lit 1 has the respect of all
with whom he comes in contact.
Mr. Ernest Wood, the organist and choirmaster of St. Pauls
Cathedral, Melbourne, is greatly respected as a musician and in-
structor.
Mr. William Steel is a talented young organist, who presides
at the finest organ in the city, at Scott's Church, where to years
ago Pastor Hetherington showed great antipathy to the use of
“the kest o' whistles." by leaving the church in front of the
people when T commenced to play on the Alexander harmonium.
That the congregation may now be credited by having one of our
best musical sendees is largely due to the Rev. Dr. Strong,
Pastor and Founder of the Australian Church.
Air. In go, the organist and choirmaster of All Saints
Church, St, Kilda: Mr. Shanks, the organist and choirmaster
Christ Church, South Yarra, are both gentlemen of high profes-
sional distinction.
The once renowned St. Peter's Church, Melbourne, where at
one time the music was compatible with “the worship of God in
the beauty of holiness" appears to have changed its intellectual
character for a more ritualistic form of service, and is neither
fish, tlesh nor fowl, as Archdeacon Dennison would say. L’lie
Right Reverend the Lord Bishop of Newcastle, John F. Stretch,
LL.B., was for some time in charge of St. Peter’s and All Saints,
St. Kilda. He was an enthusiast in church music, as well as
an eloquent, popular and forcible preacher.
I think the power of music could never have been more
deeply felt than when in ‘‘a Alasonic Lodge of .Sorrow, held on
a Sunday afternoon at the Town Hall, in memory of Brother


Croker, an energetic choir conductor. Bro. Clias. Truelovc
brought the surplieed choirs of the churches of All taunts, St.
John’s. St. Peter's, Christ Church. St. Kilda and South Yari'a,
350 voices in all. and directed an impressive service, according'
to the American Masonic Bitual, copies of which were supplied
bv Tiro. Padlev. recently a stock and sharebroker in Perth. Pro.
Sleight erected and richly furnished a catafalque in orthodox
stvie. Pro. Canon Tucker delivered an oration. One thousand
brethren were present in full regalia. The procession started
from the Masonic Hall. Collins Street East, ftrar Masons abreast,
extending To the Town Hall entrance. Such a brilliant be-
spangled arniv of jewelled men can well he pictured under a
shining sun. Tim PAY. Grand Master. Bro. Geo. C'oppin, was
present, and the event signalled the nativity of the Australian
.Masonic Constitution. Etiquette and dignity, worthy of the
solemn occasion, were memorable, and the Wardens discharged
the duties of their oliice, controlling the assembly in perfect
harmony. The union of such a colossal choir of male voices, the
grand organ, military hands, trumpets, drum, harps and bells,
combined, made music more than mortals ling lit ever expect to
hear, without being translated. Pro. J ruelove, conductor: Pro.
Staker, solo tenor: Bro. Gladstone Wright, solo bass: Lundborg.
McCoy, Richardson. Howard. ,J. Thompson, Killian. Jordan.
'Weinberg. Lurtieh. Warneckic, Canna. Signor Alberto Zelnian,
Peon Caron. Palladini. Dondi, Lyster s Opera Company with
orchestra also assisted. 1 presided at the oigan.
Bro. Truelovc was a chorister boy at >St. George s. Windsor,
and. like Sir A. Sullivan, had a sound musical education. Queen
Victoria specially favoured him on account of his voice, and
••Charley” was envied hv his brother choristers. In connection
with ecclesiastical endowments, on leaving St Georoe s Choir he
was apprenticed to an art furniture business, and eventually
ship]ied to Australia in charge of a cargo of art furniture. The
ship was wrecked, and Truelovc was stranded, clotldess on the
coast of Africa. He was next heard of as a costumier to M es-
crows Opera Company, and had the renovation of Lyster s
music library. .ISro. Truelovc was largely responsible for the
fascinatin'’ 1 stage costume of the Soldene Comic Opera Company.
The regulation of tunics for the ladies was disregarded, and a
delicate and more primitive mode of pink and Oxford blue,
closely lifting the figure, was chosen. A storm of sentiment
contra to this most elegant and coincident style, invoked the at-
tention of the authorities, and the theatre treasury was consider-
ably increased by curiosity audiences. Comic opera commenced
and grand opera made its exit with William Saurin Lystebs
decease.


Air. J. C. Williamson and the evergreen Maggie Aloore were
imported from America, and “ .Struck Oil’’ was and is a
favourite play with the public.
Truelove was appointed to the management of St. Ivilda
Cemetery, and speedily transformed it into an Oriental pleasure
resort, in fact an Elysium. Trnelove's penchant for music was
amply satisfied at lhe " Lodge.’"' Glees and madrigals morn
noon and night, with a grateful crust, and a flagon of wine, the
gravedigging duties of master and men were greatly relieved.
.Mr. George Porter, of St. Kilda, was kindly disposed to True-
love. -Mr. Palph Fletcher, of Perth Technical School Mr. C. P>.
liusliton, of tin' W.A. Railways: Mr. Bertie UofF, of the Con-
gregational Church : Mr. J. D. Dobson. Mr. H. Goss, Lev. Mr.
Price, of Midland .1 unction, and many other gentlemen now
resident in W. A.. owe much of their musical attainments to Pro.
Truelove. Applications for land for graves sent up boom prices,
as much as IhiO being paid cash down, for blocks specially se-
lected. A panic set in. the boom burst, when ominous rumours
circulated that the management, owing to irregular registration,
sold Alary -lanes buried body and allotment to half a dozen
diilerent buyers, who were unable to get their title deeds. The
worry of numerous eases and proseeutions hilled Truelove : but
the trustees, in mv opinion, were culpable.
It was in .Australia, that Wallace was inspired to compose
Maritana, when lie lived at Launceston in a hut in tin' rugged
mountain gorge, through which a time bodv of crvstal water
flows from th<‘ interior mountains to the ocean, and the linin'
tribes in mvriads, in companv with •• King (Salmon, sport like
electric sparks as thev jump and fall out of the water, and the
umbrageous branches of the trees are reflected like lovely fan-
tastic water spiites. The wonderful fertility of the Tasmanian
soil, its climate, its forests, its (lowers, its harlot' and hops, its
magnificent multiplicity of fruits, are said by .Mrs. .Meredith, the
author of that exceedingly interesting nmd. “ Lrezwon. who
lived near Hobart, to resemble an ideal Paradise. Trnelove’s
choristers, when singing concerts in the gorge, drew thousands
of people to hen' them, the audience, seated on rocks, grass, or
or maiden hair fern, had an abundance of all kinds of refresh-
ments. The adult members of the choir, under charge of Air.
•I. P. Daniel, indulged in hdf a yard or more of the lovely
Tasmanian Cascade iteer, and swore there was nothing like it
after a big sing at a concert.
AI ust 1 1 il: 1 1 1 v itsiKH-tn 1 among popular \ocal artists socially
and publicly will bo remembered the Countess Carandini and hm'
linanlit'ul and handsome daughters, Posina and Irannv. A\ ith
M alter Slierwin and Gordon Gooch, combined in concert pro-


gramme, it would he difficult to conceive anything more pleasant.
Attention to light and shade, enunciation, and pronunciation,
the Countess was most particular, and scorned the attempt of
the Italian teachers to train singers to sing English songs or
English students.
Mrs. Palmer has rendered inestimable service to the music
world in Australia as soloist at the Philharmonic Society, and
in Choral Societies. Her purl' sweet toned soprano, always most
charming, her classic physique of face, and grate of figure,
stamped her an artist lady every inch.
Bendigo has given us many star musicians. Miss Amy
Castles carries the golden hag of success as a swe ‘t voiced concert
soprano, she lias the world before her, and Bendigonians rejoice
in her triumphs in Europe.
Mr. and Airs. Henry Bracev from London appeared ill
Operetta at the Theatre Royal, also in concert and Oratorio, in
eon junction with the Philharmonic Society. Botli art' accom-
plished musicians and singers, and in social life, genial and gentle.
At Wesley Church, Melbourne, the Cathedral of Common-
wealth Methodism. lias been lately celebratin'; the jubilee of its
foundation. A curious fact about the organ that has been used
in the Church w ill be interesting. It was originally const meted
in .Europe for a R.C. Cathedral in South America. The ship
that was conveying it to Rio Janeiro was blown out of her course
and wrecked on the Australian coast. The organ was saved, and
purchased bv the Trustees of Wesley Chinch, and as regards
beauty and purity of tone, is one of the finest in the Common-
wealth.
In Sydney N.S Mb. an ornan has been erected, which is said
to he at any rate, one of the largest in the world, and Mr. A . T.
Rest of Liverpool was engaged to open it. With his universally
acknowledged alhlitv as a supreme executant on the King of all
musical instruments his visit to Australia, and tin' "Sister"
Queen city of the Commonwealth, whs of great interest, Judging
bv i 1 is remarks made to me in Melbourne, he did not care so
much for monster organs. As a student. Mr. Alfred Willis told
me that Mr. Rest practised the art of pedalling four hours daily,
and devoted eight hours close study to the works of the great
composers. He had no time to listen to quasi organists who
essayed pianoforte arrangements, and fairy pieces on the organ.
Contrapuntal, Fugal. and melodic themes of the old master com-
posers. was Mr. Rests home. He did not aspire to he classed
among composers, hut our organ catalogues show the enormous
amount of time he must have spent in arranging and editing
their works.


Ilte Honourable George Coppin, actor, banker, politician,
and vocalist, the first and last of the Lords of low comedy, in
Australia, at the time of his final exit. He was the the first
W.G.M. of the United Lodges of Masons in Australia. He at-
tempted to hold an Australian Musical Festival on the lilies of
.Birmingham, Liverpool, and Gloucester, but eve were scarcely
ready for such a large undertaking, which, of course, resulted in
financial toss He was a most benevolent man. always in his
seat at Church on Sundays, ready with a new clean £1 hank
note. (Commercial .Hank).
Lambert and Greville were artists of the first water, one
high, the other low comedians. Richard -Stewart, the head of a
celebrated family of dramatic artists and musicians, played his
part in life, well respected. Harwood was a low comedian, and
skilled in the art of make-believes of a genial and versatile actor.
His singing and vocal eH'orts were not unlike Artimus Ward’s.
The founding of a Melbourne Chair of Music for Degrees,
on the lint's of Oxford and Cambridge Universities, was an im-
portant experiment in musical advancement, and the sum of
£l*o.ooo vas donated tor the pairpose by Mr. George Ormond.
It was understood to he the wish of Mr. Ormond that the Uni-
versity chair should he an examining institution only (as at
Oxford), and that it should not compete with the practice of
teachers of music It would appear that this wish has not: been
complied with.
When the appointment of a Professor was under considera-
tion. I advocated that it should be a pan mm, that he should
compose at least one new work every year, and that it should be
publicly performed at the University on Commemoration Day.
and a score of the work deposited in the Library of the Univer-
sity to be tin 1 property of the University. Over Ttlb.OOO have
been paid to the University Professors of Melbourne and Ade-
laide. forthe lb yeaiv of their service, and it would seem as
though their “lights ' in the world of composition have not been
burning to any great extent, beyond scholastic work. Professor
Savior considers the time approaching for a radical change in
their duties and the work of the Professors of music should be
more amp!ifieri and popularized.
Music being largely an imitative as well as a scientific ait.
the Professor of music should not onlv lecture, but show example
of compositions, and encourage the students to do likewise. Our
music shops would then have less to expose in the wav of rubbish,
with which their windows are now filled.
Prominent among composers to produce original works was
Packer, of Sydney, who wrote an oratorio “the Crown of Thorns


at a time when he was on a visit to the gailor of the debtors
prison in Parramatta. Bolts, locks, and bars were rent in sunder,
it is said, when the master of the jail heard the song of the peni-
tent crucified thief, “O Christ saw me’ following in sequence of
chromatic fourths, about 100 times consecutively. Tolhurst's
oratorio Ruth,’"’ Marsh's grand opera “ The two gentlemen in
black, ’ Dr. .Meßurney's cantata “ Victoria, " Giorza s " Mass,”
and the Rev. Dr. Torrance's oratorio •« The Last .Judgment,”
were all composed and performed in Melbourne.
The visits to Australia of Wilhelmi, Santlv, Fob, Sir
Charles Halle, Szezepanowski, and l)r. Fred Oowen’s engage-
ment to conduct concerts for six months at a salary of £5,000,
marked the public spirit of enterprise, and went far to make
Australia known. Sims Beeves, the great tenor of the century,
contracted to sing fifty concerts in ustmlia for ,£2.3.000, and
his intended departure from England was signalled by inagnifii-
cent farewells in London. However, at the hour of 12 o'clock
when he was to leave London by the mail-boat, he did not ap-
pear, and I received a telegram from his solicitor saying that
the contract was off. He agreed to sing at all our capital cities of
Australia and New Zealand. But when he was informed by
Barry Sullivan, Jefferson. Arabella Godard, and others, that
Perth was the capital of W.A., which was a community of
convicts and cut throats, who would enveigle him up the bush
and he would be made to sing in wool-sheds and drinking dens,
nolens miens, or be strung up to a gum-tree. lie was a bad
sailor and afraid of the voyage, after the drowning of Brooke in
the s.s. London. Had he lived till now. Ido not think he would
have offered an objection to sing in H.M. Theatre, which is
recognised as the handsomest and best appointed Theatre in the
Southern Hemisphere. Owned, originated, and built by Mr.
T. G. A. Molloy, whose' name will live as a monument to his
foresight and confidence in the city of his adoption. Mr. Molloy
has been honoured bv being twice Mayor.
To mass a colossal choir of 1 1.648 registered voices at a
months notice, to sing a programme of music without a full re-
hearsal, reflects credit on the system of teaching programme sing-
ing in the Victorian State Schools, thanks to Wilson Brown.
Our adopted Australian anthem “ Maker of Earth and Sea,”
was the chief item on the programme, and its rendition
obtained the honour of a triple encore. The noble sentiment ex-
pressed bv the Queensland poet Brunton Stephens, was mated
to a melody described as dignified and worthy of acceptance,
and surpassing any of the legion of attempts to produce an
Australian National Anthem up-to-date.


THE AUSTRALIAN NATIONAL ANTHEM.
Words by J Brunton Stephens. Music by Hr. Summers.
Maker of earth and sea,
What shall we render '.l’liee r 1
All tilings are Thine :
Ours but from day to day,
Still with one heart to pray.
God bless our land alway,
Tins of Thine.
p Here let Thy peace abide :
Never may strife divide
(./•(’.s' This land of Thine.
ft Let us united stand,
One great Australian band.
Heart to heart, hand to hand,
Jim Heart and hand Thine.
/ Strong to defend our right.
Proud in all nations’ sight.
pp Lowly in Thine. —
f One in all noble fame,
ars Still be our path the same,
Onward in EroodonTs name,
O' Upward in Thine.
A communication from the organ to inv rostrum under the
dome, a distance of iXO yards, was effected bv means of a tele-
phone, and was most successful. Instantaneous message's from
me to the organist were observed, and these greatly aided the
precision of tin' grand choir. His Excellency Lord Ilopetotm.
was much interested in tin.' concert. Their Excellencies the
Gocenors of W. A. and X.SAY. were also present. The audience
numbered 4-0,000. Mr. Joshua Lake was business manager, and
Mr. St. John Caws, Secretary. The adjutant conductors were
the Government- singing masters. Messrs. Ford, A lien, Eeraton.
Lang, Kvan, Matthews. Hill, Bright well, Johnstone. Mr. John
ITasler presided at- the organ. It was a magniiicent success, and
will be ever memorable as a State Festival Concert.
At St. Stephens Church, Richmond, there was a line organ,
and .Phillip Plaistead's organ recitals on Sundays, attracted
numerous lovers of organ music. The Incumbent, the Hew T. C.
Perks, revelled in listening to a well-developed Bach's fugue, as
did also his church warden John Thomas Smith. Both went to
London and successfully protested against convicts being sent to
Victoria. Mr. J. T. Smith brought back with him to Victoria
the first four-legged donkey. Smith became thrice "Mayor of
Melbourne, and was honoured by a knighthood.
Sir AV. .1. Clarke, Baronet, of Bupertswood, and father of
Rupert Clarke, of Mcvnel, Clarke >V Co., theatrical impressarios.
was one of our most liberal patrons of music and fine arts. He


founded a scholarship, tenable for five years, at the Roval Col-
lege of Music, London, for Victorian native born musicians, and
presented four heroic marble statues of H.li.IL the late Prince
Consort, H.M. Gracious .Majesty Queen Victoria, our present
King, and Her Gracious Majesty the Queen, all of which were
of the purest Carrara marble, sculptured by my brother Charles,
who lies buried next his friend Gilbert, the great English sculp-
tor, in the cemetery at Rome, where a visitor may observe a
marble slab with two words only on it as an epitaph, Charles
Summers.
"Walter Horatio Wilson, the well-known solictor of Brisbane,
and President of the Musical Union, was a liberal friend in the
cause of music, a violinist and a composer of music. He read an
interesting paper on the “ .Scientific basis of music from a phvsis-
logical aspect,’*’ when on a visit to Melbourne at a monthly meeting
of the Musical Association.
His Honour the Chief Justice of Victoria, Sir .John
Madden, is an ardent lover of music, and a keen musical critic.
His daughter is gifted with tin exceptionally fine musical voice,
and it is said that Madame .Melba stands as her musical god-
mother during her education in Europe. .Miss Madden is said to
be a reincarnation of the once illustrious and renowned .Madame
Mallabran.
Mr. Harry Rickards, the impressario, commands success the
whole world over in everything to w hich his name appears. Solo
and great as a vaudeville artist and musician, he is honoured and
supported by a galaxy of beau tv and form, in fact, the pink of
the aristocracy of Mu rope. Asia. Africa, and especially America.
Careful and critical in his selection of artists, male and female,
he is held bv them in respect for the observance of a rigid mosaic
code of commandments, and for upholding the morality and
dignity of the profession. Should a vacancy occur. Mr. Rickards
might safely he nominated for the prurient olllce of Lord High
Chamberlain of England himself. It is said Mr. Rickards sleeps
like a Bristol cockney in his observatory with one eye open, and
has been known to forestall our learned Government Astronomer
Mr. Cooke, bv first proclaiming to the world in the lUst.-les-
trnliun, the appearance of a rare comet-artist. Tip I top I toe.
Mark Handwurg, a magnificent pianist, lias toured Austra-
lia and New Zealand in concerts. welcomed by enthusiastic
audiences. His stvle of playing is not unlike Boulanger. Tlml-
berg's, full of fire. expression and unerring accuracy. Socially
be is most interesting, and having been a great traveller can re-
late, add infinitum, incidents of thrilling experience. With a
choice menagerie of birds, beetles, butterflies, snakes, monkeys,


cats, dogs, and mice, presents from Kings and Queens, white,
red, and black, from all parts of the globe, his retinue forms a
splendid ad. wherever he goes.
Madame Ada CTossley became famous when she sang with
the Philharmonic Society in the ■' Elijah." Seated among the
audience she was asked by the Committee to sing the contralto
music in lieu of a celebrated singer, who had boon suddenly taken
ill, and was unable to be present. Ada went on the platform
without any preparation, and made a remarkable success by her
rendition of the deelamtory part of the tragic Queen, and the
solos ‘AYoe unto them, ' and " O liest in the Lord." With a
glorious gift of voice, and pathos, controlled by intelligence,
grace, simplicity, and modesty in her deportment, she won the
approval of her audience, and was crowned with golden applause.
She didn t win the Sir William Clarke’s scholarship in competi-
tion, but she captured the good opinions of the critical and
exacting musical audiences of the Albert Hall, Crystal Palace
and all the great- festival cities of Europe. Her musical educa-
tion was obtained in .Melbourne.
Ilinumevable instances may be given where precocious young
Australian children have displayed extraordinary musical instinct
which, in after life, has proved arbortive. Ernest Hutchinson
and John Kruse may be mentioned among hosts of others as
examples of Australians whose education was provided by public
subscription. The ear and brain powers, voice or other faculties
if not perfect, change, and go to prove that we are but frail and
human For myself. 1 abhor prodigies, and though I advocate
the best education for young people who may be considered to
possess exceptional talent, like my Argiix critic friend Henry
Keilv, I am averse to the too early public (exhibition of that
talent. Perhaps among all the faculties with which we are often
times unknowingly possessed, we value the singing voice especi-
ally, and not being able to hear our own voices when attempting
to sing, we are often egregiously unaware of the dire afflict ion
with which we try to please our friends. The phonograph will
do much perhaps to assist in checking the vanity of pnasi voca-
lists, if they will only try to hear its production of their own
voices. They will save a lot of time and money.
The wonderful’ Phonograph and Picture Shows are a means
of education, and of the greatest interest and value as a scientific
and artistic discovery. The Phonograph will find a home in all
public schools where the best English, the art of elocution, and
the master works of the composers, vocal and instrumental, can be
heard technically to absolute perfection. To the great discoverv of
the power of electricity, and popularizing its use in music, for


pleasure and profit, Edison commands the pride of place among
all inventors to which the world has given birth.
Mile, Olmrbonet, an accomplished musician and pianiste,
assisted me at the Intercolonial Juvenile industrial Exhibition,
and made her home for a time in Melbourne, but after her ap-
pearance in concert at Sydney, she gave her heart and her hand
to teaching in that city, and at present she enjoys a lucrative
practice.
Kowalski was a popular and talented pianist, well-known
as an excellent teacher, and a composer of a march universally
played by dashing and demonstrative performers on the piano-
forte.
To recount the valuable assistance in the cause of music of
.Mrs. Xorquat, Mrs, Perruton, Maggie Liddle, Madame Elmblad,
Miss Menzies. the composer of “God be with you," Mr. G. .John,
son (the “Elijah ' buss), Sam Lambic (Phil. bass). .Juniper and
L. L. Lewis, 1 regret would exceed the limits of rnv booklet.
Our most highly esteemed, much loved, and energetic popu-
lar Pishop of Perth. C. O. L. iiilcy. visited Melbourne in ld!)7.
at the outbreak of excitement of the discovery of the Golden
West, and I>v the force of Ids eloquent appeal for good men,
desirous at anv rate to spy out the land of V. A., I felt constrained
to do so, and make room at All Saints Church, and .Melbourne,
for another man. I took my passage in the s.s. Rnekton for
Perth, and gave notice of leaving St. Kilda to Canon Potter, who
said 1 was a fool or a lunatic. Sometimes in W.A., I
think lie was not a bad judge. AVhen I arrived in Perth,
the boom of mining speculations and land shark invest-
ments had burst, capital ceased to How, and business went back-
wards. People seemed staggered bv tlu: darkness following on
the shower of meteoric wealth, which so suddenly came, and
more quicklv disappeared. Life was a, sort of catch who can and
the devil take tin' hindmost, as our Governor Hopetoun said of
the smash in Victoria, when the banks closed down, and Premier
Patterson went mad, threatening to throw open the gates and doors
of our jails, and hang all the civil servants. The cloud of de-
pression in W.A. soon lifted, and during the past 12 years the
success of Perth and kindred cities commercially and artistically
has been plienomnal.


PART II.
Oil the eve of mv departure from Melbourne the following
Farewell was presented to me at iSeott's Hotel, together with a
purse of sovereigns, all brand new and shining.
THE TEACHERS’ TESTIMONIAL.
Melbourne. Feb. 26th, 1867.
To Joseph Summers, Esq., Mus. Doe., Cantuar.
Dear Sir, —On your departure from the Colony of Victoria after a
long connection with our schools, and with tiie cause of music generally
we desire to hear testimony to the loss which the Musical Profession
will sustain by your departure, and also to express our sincere wishes
for the future success of yourself and family.
We trust that you will accept the accompanying souvenir as a small
token of our esteem and regard, and of our high estimation of your
talents as composer, conductor, and teacher of the Divine Art, and 'hope
that it may serve' to perpetuate pleasant recollections of the Colony
and of the people amongst whom you have laboured for so many years.
We remain, dear Sir. yours very sincerely,
Hugh Young, Chairman.
George F. Carter, Hon. Sec.
Tlios. Ford. John Raw.
John Hill. E. J. M. Hamilton.
IV. H. Nichols.
The old tub in which T sailed from Melbourne was rightly
named Kockton. With a full and merry lot of passengers, sing
mg, ( laiicing, and variety shows, we made a fair spurt to Ade-
laide. Our mates, the prize pigs, sheep, horses, and cows also
enjoyed the trip. To cross the Great Australian Fight, however,
was not so easily negotiated. It was like a mighty prolonged
Plagal cadence jammed into a. cradle upside down, and it ap-
peared to me as though the crew were very bilious also. The
captain kept her head to the wind, and. as lie knew how to lav
out a. full orchestral score, we wen' saved a death bath and
being devoured by mermaids when rounding Cape Leeuwin. The
passengers declared they would henceforth vote for the Trans-
continental railway, knowing that it was a matter of comfort
and convenience for future unborn generations, who would
gratefully pay any reasonable claim, even though they had to
borrow the wherewithal from the unfathomable London IBank of
31 oses, Aaron it Co.


It will interest friends at a distance to learn that the State
of W.A. comprises an area of about one million square miles,
and that it is being rapidly peopled by intelligent and civilised
beings of all nations, who are not slow to learn that the cry of
White Australia, does not unduly effect them so far as complex-
ion is concerned, and that St. Peter's vision directing him to call
nothing that Clod sends unclean,” is the political creed, though
difficult to carry out, of our wise legislators.
As pioneers in labour, art and industry, with the advan-
tages of a superior system of public instruction, and the valuable
records of unsuccessful experiments of the other States in even-
phase of life, from the cradle to the crypt, we have every reason
to he proud and thankful. With a soil and climate probably
unsurpassed in any part of the world, we shall produce butter
and honey, corn and wine, sufficient to export and satisfy the
starving millions of people elsewhere on the face of tile globe.
Let us have the best of music, taught bv the best of musicians,
and public schools for fine arts and music, and thus quicken the
joy of emotional life and make it more worth living. Fifty years
ago there might have been found one pianoforte in a town in
England of 5,000 inhabitants. To-day in Australia on every
goldfield and hut in the hush, and on every squat ter’s homestead,
though 100 miles distant from each other, the wonderful Edison
Phonograph, mandolin, violin, and pianoforte are become a
part of the necessary articles of furniture'. On some stations, brass
bands are formed bv station hands instructed by professional
bandmasters.
To illustrate the universal desire and love for music among
our rising population, even the cadets on the stations and
boundary riders on the hack blocks of the Xorlh-West would
just <is soon make their rounds without their whips, as without
their mouth organs, ilutes, or some other pockctablc musical
instrument which they have been taught to play at school.
So far as 1 know, the hoys of the Christian Brothers College.
St. George's Terrace, and the C E. Grammar School, Guildford,
are deserving of special mention in the subject of singing and
music, and in after lift' the school songs now sung will he heard
again in the lonely hush, where the homesteads tire few and far
between.
Sociot v in W. A. was almost indescrilwble when T first ar-
rived in Perth. Jt was a hush cifv. traversed bv sand streets,
and here and there a sturdv giant jarrah tree. Jones and Law-
renee struck a jmteli of concert business, and transformed into
oriental magnificence a paddock in Hav St., on which TT.Jl. Theatre
now stands, and built a canvas ttl ti'emi concert and varietv stage.


Heralds in formidable blazing array were located on turrets, and
nightly the paddock was packed l>v men and women of all sorts
and conditions, eager to enjoy the fun and frolic provided by the
management on a lavish and liberal scale. Jones and Txiwrence
were subtle champions of hilarity, in fact the Harwood and
Greville duplicated in Perth. Notwithstanding the rush of money
into the Treasury, it is said there was a leakage somewhere, and
when tin' rain set in and wind began to blow, in the shape' of
hum-bailiffs, the merry old show was wrecked, hut Join's and
Lawrence were mercifully saved, though not insured, and they
continue to adorn the court of Conuis, E. T W., as the inimitable
champions of their line, A wink from Jones, and a smile from
Lawrence satisfied the audiences.
Professor Marseluier, a ravishing musician and violinist, was
a peculiar artist, and when not playing in the paddock-orchestra
for Jones and Lawrence, he used to pace the two streets of Perth
from morn till night, and night till morn, smoking cigaiettes,
and posing at Weslev Church corner, of course in a penniless
condition So far as I could, 1 advised him to clear out, as we
were a pair badlv in want, hut he was a kind-hearted man. and
swore he would take care not to desert me. The thought of that
purse of sovereigns which the teachers of Victoria gave me
haunted me. It, was Tlarschner's pleasure to extol the fascinat-
ing and picturesque eitv of Perth, and its Swan River, always
saving how he adorably admired our fresh-looking, modest, chaste,
intelligent, lovelv girls, ‘‘Con doleezza," when strumming on
a rattle-trap pianoforte two thousand miles away, and he
in his "Home, Sweet Hume," near Peach worth. Brandy Hot. and
Dead Dog Gully, where Charlie Summers is carving the Omeo-
Carrara marble, and building the sanctuary of our Federal City,
ala Jerusalem. He, the Count, thinks lie would like to know
what the title of Prime Minister means, and what would he his
responsibility were he to throw up fiddling, as Verdi the com-
poser of ”11 Trovatore” did, and captured .Rome with the help
of Garribaidi, and Chicea my brother-in-law. Would he be able
to smoke alluring intoxicating cigarettes, take snuff, erect a bell-
topper like Bernard King, the “chic" tailor of Hay St., or the
Central Arcade beadleman, if he ousted Donkin and look his
office as a sinecure. I put him in a way to gain the desired
information of the Secretary of External Affairs, if he thought
he could hold out for two or three years longer. In music,
Marseluier was a painful, severe critic. As for Pagantiini, no words
could be found to express his abhorence of his eccentric and
trick}’ style of playing. It was, he said, all a “show off .and a
vain-glorious exhibition. He thought the violin should he taught
more in preference to the piano, and favoured the harp and even


the flute for education in schools. I ventured to suggest the
mandolin and guitar, and that closed our conversation. As a
souvenir of our Perth friendship, I gave him to read “Viola."
*• Charles Aucliester,” '‘Coming Man.” “Kronstadt," and
“Signa,” knowing that lie had been taught to avoid Milton.
Shakespeare, Ossian, and Tennyson, as out of date.
The sacred quotation “Now then' arose a new King over
Egypt, who knew not Joseph," appeared to apply to mi' in this
virgin country with sorrowful feeling, yet. it appears to be the
inevitable consequence as time advances, to most artists, men
and women.
In everv Australian city and town that Melba has visited
some little incident has occurred which has founded the staple of
a newspaper paragraph, and which one daw mav result in a
volume of Melba anecdotes, 1 was particularly favoured bv
Madame during her stay hi W.A. Her exclamation on seeing
me. "(dood gracious, what on earth are you doing over here :"
will inner Ik; forgotten by me. After a long talk of old times,
and mentioning mv West Australian compositions, she expressed
a wish to hear them, and a time was arranged—ll.-10 p.m. at her
hotel —after her first concert. A goodly company was allowed
on the balcony, whilst about 4,000 people assembled outside in
front of the hotel on the lawn. A first rate quartette, comprising
Miss Hilda Harman, and .Messrs. .Tones, Peter bioxbv. Young,
and Hicks sang a cycle of 111 quartettes, known as the " Philos-
ophy of Ages," and after hearing them Mai lame said—“ They are
all right: they are good enough,'' accompanied bv what is known
as the “Melba nod.’ Mr. (4. Hosting and Dr P. Pickelis. Miss
Yiotti Pearce, and Miss Hilliard, violinist, also assisted. When
I called to sav “good bye" to tin 1 “Queen of Song" sin' gave mi' a
handsome photo of herself, on which was written -"To Dr.
Summers, from Ins old friend and pupil, Nellie Melba, and in an-
other little packet I found one of the daintiest of mouchoirs,
witii “Melba" embroidered in the corner. One of Madame
Melba's favourite pastimes during her stay in Perth was “crab
fishing." The idea of this amusement seemed always to tickle
her fancy, and she never mentioned it without laughing heartily,
remarking that “the crabs might grab her fingers but they
couldn't grab her voice." She also made use of it as a convenient
excuse for not replying to a sackful of begging letters and for
escaping from pressing visitors and interviewers, alleging that
she was engaged to go “crab fishing’' and had no time to spare.
Alter 25 years incessant labour in tlu* cause of music, retire-
ment and rest in the peaceful Subiaco gum-tree shades were ex-
ceedingly agreeable. However, Mrs. Smith the energetic en-


thusiast, Mrs. Kadclifte, Mrs. Bessie Barlow, and His Worship
the Mayor (all musicians), prevailed on me to take charge of a
musical Society, the Philharmonic with about 50 members, Air.
Flintoff being the Secretary. This was the making of the now
prosperous and fashionable Subiaco.
A Liedertafel Society was started in Perth under my con-
duetorship, with Mr. \V. E. Dixon as Hon. Secretary. Mr.
Hill, an amateur, now' conducts the Society, without salary.
Mr F. L. Parsons has conducted an Orchestral Society for
three years, and given many successful concerts.
The West Perth Glee and Madtrigal Society conducted by
Mr. J. Mb Huntington has given several most enjoyable concerts,
and is doing good work.
The brass bands of W.A. are said to rival those of the
Eastern States, and to emulate the " Besses of the Barn. \\ ith
steady and regular drill, under qualified conductors, there is no
reason to doubt that they may surpass these renowned players
just as our Australian bovs rival or outshine their brothers in
the north, of the globe, in deeds of heroism, cricket or literature.
An attempt to form a Philharmonic Society in Perth, with
Mr. Goff as conductor. Mr. Greenwood as Secretary, and an in-
fluential Committee, bids fair to be successful.
Our Church Choirs at any rate, keep pace with some of the
Church choirs of the Eastern States. 'flu' musical education of
our clergv being now considered bv the most liev. the Lord
Bishop Kiiey as indispensible. we may hope that the Puritanical
ideas of " Art in \\ orsliip will not be so constrained, and that
a non-musical priest may become a rarity in the established
Xational Church.
Alr. Alexander Leckie the* organist and choirmaster of St.
Georges' Cathedral occupies a proud position, and has control of
a line choir of men and boys. A ith a magnificent library of
ser\ ices and ant hems, unheard as yet in W. A. he has a. field of
labour of love before him, in which he appears to be most dili-
gent and successful.
At the Congregational C'huivh. St. George’s Terrace. Air.
Goff has the direction of a. powerful and well-trained choir, and
presides ai a tine organ. Mr. Watkin. the organist and choir-
master of Wesley Church, an accomplished amateur musician, has
a grand new organ, up-to-date, built bv Dodd and Son of Ade-
laide. It was presented bv Sir Geo. Klionton to tin* Church, in
memoriam of Ladv Shenton, ami it. is to be regretted that the


wish of tilt; donor, that fortnightly organ recitals should be giv en,
cannot be complied with. Space will not permit me to refer to
other prominent choirs who are no less enthusiastic and success-
ful with their devotion of praise in Worship.
A great movement in the cause of education hi W. A. has at
last been taken in to consideration, the Univer.sit y Graduates Union
having obtained from His Excellency the Governor, a Royal Com-
mission with Dr. -J. W. Hackett as Chairman, to report ways and
means on the feasibility of establishing a University without delay.
With the Doctor s capacity and assiduity for work of this nature,
we may be sure the report will reach His Excellency promptly.
Mr. J. S. Battve is the Secretary to the Commission.
In Perth and other cities of this State our music-warehouses
by Nicholson Ltd. and Dobbie and Co. are well up-to-date, hand-
somely and conveniently furnished, all novelties hi music can be
heart I here a fortnight before the Pastern States.
Idpham, of Perth, most creditably and expeditiously type-
prints music for composers or church choirs.
During the lit'e of ;ui artist it may he that he never experi-
enee the pleasure of being in a position to help his brother in
time of need pecuniarly hevond rendering gratuitous sendees.
'ldle artist labours to cultivate and demonst rate his talent to
excel in his own sphere of art for the lo\e of it. to win his daily
bread bv it, or to afford pleasure to his fellow beings when
listening to it. The composer of music, transcendent, with head,
heart, knowledge, and soul, nigh well a being not of this world,
in a mundane sense, vet not incapable of appreciating the good
things of life, should lliev happen to fall to his lot. .He lives to
express in language by sound, the emotional or spiritual passions
which in a measure, are not uttered hy speech.
A song without words for pianoforte inscribed to a friend—
-0 loveliest of spirits divine,
\ itrato my heart, with chords from thine,
Whisper tin' soul-notes deep and sweet,
To make my gratitude complete.
With regard to composers of music their early compositions
arc to me the most interesting and pronounced of character,
when the heart's blood is warm, and the pulse beats strong, and
melody Hows t’reelv. easily, and naturally. Tlmlberg says "it is
bv the force of melody and not of harmony, that ‘that one touch
of nature makes the whole world akin and endures. ’
It is the one simple melodic idea, like the “grain of mustard
seed," that generates the magnificent symphony, by heart, head,
and hand.


Emulating the Sister States, by way of composers, and as-
pirants to that distinction, Air. Had wen-Chandler and Mr.
Sampson have an acknowledged claim for special mention. Their
compositions are melodic, musicianly, and popular. Mr. Sampson s
new anthem stamps him as of the right brand of a composer.
Composers are frequently asked by quasi poets to set
their words to music. Among many of various kinds of poets in
Perth, who try to sing of love and that sort of thing, butchers
do not fear to tread, and from one at least, lines were suggested
for musical setting, which 1 declined. They are here given for
the benefit of my friend.
My name it is Beaumont.
I’m a butcher by my trade,
I sell the sweetest tripe.
And the plainest mutton made.
I advised him to send the lines to Henry Kussell, the
greatest popular song composer of the world, the man who
made the American nation bv his songs “To the A est. " A life
on the Ocean 'Wave,” ‘’Cheer Bovs, Cheer, and the " Ship on
Fire, and address them to c o IMr Bust, the Master of the Old
Men s Home, or Air. Bold our enthusiastic musical Town Clerk
of Perth, or perhaps better still consign them to the gravediggers
custody at Karrukatta till Air. liussell himself presented his
ticket.
A street vendor of penny awfnls would be preferable as a
means of making a living. It is painful to rellect that a di\u of
opera or concert is often applauded to the echo, and banking a
thousand pounds per night, whilst tin 1 composer of the glorious
music which she has been singing may he perishing and staining
in the gutter or garret. One day perhaps the worlds Uoral
tribute may grace the composers grave, and a parallel he found
to the touching lint's :
“ Seven cites did contend fur Homer dead,
Throng-h which the living Homer begged iiis bund."
1 Vvblowor's musical genius, shadowed bv bis ‘'Big Brother
in America.'' by which he made, it is said, a fortune in a few'
days, is of course, phenominal and a rarity, like the heavenly
Halley's comet, though not quite so certain of repetition.
.Til tlic* Commonwealth Government a small provision has
been math' for charitable purposes, under *• Men of Letters
Grant,” to assist those whose lot has been east in adverse circum-
stances. A Committee representing the States, with the Secre-
tary of External Afiaiis, draft a statement after due enquiry,
and report to the Treasurer. Tt appears an extraordinary thing


for a journalist or commonplaced rhymer like the Fremantle poet
to be eligible to receive State or Government aid, and an artist,
painter, sculptor, or musician, ineligible, notwithrtanding how
eminently useful or ornamental his past services may have been,
or how long they may be likely to continue of benefit to the
nation. This state of things is not desirable in an intelligent
community.
There are few people in the Commonwealth to whom the
hospitality of the “ Bungalow is unknown, and who have not
been honored, delighted, and entertained by the accomplished
Ltidv Forrest herself. For her unostentatious acts of kindness
and assistance to ihe weather-beaten, weather-bound literati, and
struggling musicians, wrecked on the sands of W.A., she will
ever be remembered with gratitude.
We have now bad 00 years of comic opera, and it is still
going strong, taking the “ Merry Widow” as a criterion. To
M e.ssrs. 'Williamson, Gainer, (Stewart, and Musgrove, we are in-
debted for this form of entertainment, and if money-making be
the object of Theatrical Managers, it is said the enterprising firms
have been eminetlv successful. Winter in the Supreme Court
case (herein reported), denounced comic opera as gilded sensuous
idiotev, insinuating irregularity of conduct, pandering to vulgar
taste, and propagating the lah-da-dah element, but Winter was
a purist. Many worthy attempts have been made to revive
Grand Opera, but the cost of its production in a great measure 1
is a barrier, outside the wealthy capital cities of Europe. The
only wav' if you are a musician, and you wish to know what grand
opera is, study the full scores, and learn in detail by heart, and
carry them in vour head, 30 of them at a time, as Melba is
said to do, whereever she goes, sleeping or waking, feasting or
fasting. That is, should you be living in W.A. For myself
your room would be more agreeable than your company.
Shortly after inv arrival in Perth, the Rev. James Duff'
commissioned me 1 to compose music to his dramatized version of
Miltons “Paradise Lost' and “Paradise l Regainedentitled
“ The Two Worlds." The work engaged my close attention day
and night for fifteen months, and when finished T gave a private
hearing of the work at the Bishop's Palace. Bishop Salvado,
Monsignor Burke, and a numerous audience of clergy being
present. It met with their hearty approval, and was ready for
acceptance bv Fr. Duff, conditionally to its being paid for by
him. Trouble commenced, evasion and repudiation, and other
causes of delay, necessitated recourse to law, which lasted about
18 months trial of Supreme Court hearing, at a cost to Fr. Duff
of .£IOOO. Tt was a splendid time for the lawyers, Messrs. Hens-


man, Pilkington, V. Smith, -James, Pennvfather, Lavai 1, Durston,
Penny, and an army of legal scouts. Th(' Judgos associates im-
mensely enjoyed the relaxation, and so I think did their Honors
Judge Hensman, Stone, and Parker. Tt ended in a farthing
damages to me and the establishment of mv copyright.
After ail the costly litigation, it was consoling when Fr.
J )uff approached me, and said Doctor let us shake hands, I have
been misled by Fitzmaurice. Good-bve. Xot long after this lie
died. The entire work was played bv command of H.E. Governor
Lawlev at Government House, bv the full company of "William-
son's 1 loyal Opera Co., -Judge Hensman exclaiming, •• it is glorious
music.’’
For the last seven years T have devoted mv life chiefly to
composition, and the following works, among others have
been produced in concert, “ Song of mv Soul,’’ words bv Dr. J. "W.
Smith, "The wind in the chimney," “A evcle of Kh vines," “The
Philosophy of ages," an Australian ‘•Christmas Carol," “The
Bush Skeleton," “An Faster Carol," “ In Orient Splendour."
“An Ode to the Karl of Dudley," and “The Two "Worlds."
Mdlle. Dolores, the adorable and gifted artist, with angelic
voice, and graceful concert appearance, has gla<letted our hearts
with two seasons of concerts at the Queen’s Hall, unaided, she
entranced her audiences with every number on her recherche
programme.
The great Albani appeared in concert in Perth, and brought
to memory her artistic triumphs achieved on the Continent, and
at the great music festivals of England and America. Admired
alike for Iter elegant and pleasing manners, as for her rich and
lovely voice, she is the same bright star, as of ISGb London.
Sir George Shenton was an ardent and enthusiastic sup-
porter of the cause of music, and conductor of the choir of
Wesley Church for many years.
His Honor Sir Edward Stone. Lieut. Gmrnior of W.A.,
was a prominent patron of music in early dates, and a good all
round musician, pianist, vocalist, and an excellent cornel’ man, it
is said, at the minstrel and variety business, when in cause of
chai-it y.
His Honoi- Judge Parker can read and plav from a full
orchestral score, and all students in music know w hat that means.
Hi s was the ultimatum verdict in the case of Summers v. Dull',
one farthing damages. A 1 y attorney got the farthing.
His Honor Mr. -Justice Booth, is an enthusiastic musician,
pianist and celloist, and is always ready with kindly assistance,
at concerts or charitable entertainments.


His Honour Mr. Justice Hensman was a first-class violinist
and a musician of taste and experience. He was also an able
conductor of oratorio, arid well qualified to act as such, from his
knowledge of instruments and instrumentation.
In the Cathedral of the Immaculate Conception. Perth, a
grand organ has been erected by Dodd it Son of Adelaide, at a
cost of £l,OOO. Our good Bishop Gibney will he remembered as
being present tit Gienrowan, Victoria, at the Kelly episode, when
Fie ventured to cross tin* paddock of Ann Jones' Hotel, amidst a
shower of bullets and burning faggots. He had a less severe
opinion of the misconduct of the three wild lads, than had the
stern officers of the law, and he (hired to risk his life to save
theirs. Ned was captured, and notwithstanding the splendid
defence and effort hv that astute, impetuous able lawyer, David
Gaunson, in favour of Ned's release, he was hanged in the
court yard of the Melbourne jail, there being outside the prison
walls, waiting the fatal hour of ten o’clock, a gathering of 20,000
persons, including Ned’s singing master at the State School.
Beechworth. Mr. TVesthoven is the conductor of the choir at
the Cathedral, and has a select choir of solo voices.
The Right Flew F. Torres 0.J.8., the Lord Abbott of New
Norcia, W.A., is a musician of (exquisite taste and and an (‘Xpert
in musical education. Having the charge of about 100 monks,
some of whom arc octogenarians, he must of necessity have force
of character, charitable, and loved bv all with whom he comes in
contact, a rigid disciplinarian, a matured and experienced scholar
brave.and self-sacrificing, lie knows not fear, and like the great
St. Paul travels his vast diocese with scant clothing, perhaps a
comb, brush and a rug, and has no objection to sleep on a door-
mat. To capture the hearts of the blacks, and turn them into
white Christians, is his pleasing and sacred duty. TTc swims
the rapids, and single-handed in Ids dinghev, crosses the Indian
Ocean currents, risking his life (‘very moment, to carry the Cross
of Christ to the wild black man. Surely his reward will he the
Crown of Glory and life everlasting. His comfortable companion
is bis simfF box of aromatic snuff, and perhaps a bottle of lollies.
'Flie learned monks of the Monastery are all more or less
musicians and play the piano, organ, or some string instrument.
The choir and singing is said to he unique, and surpasses far any
other choir in Australia. After matins and during the (lav the
Monks are found at work in orchards, vineyards, piggeries, cow-
sheds, blacksmith s shops, shoemaking, wood and stone caning,
and last, hut not vet least, carefully attending the duties of the
enormous wine cellar where there are stacks of wine made bv
the good old Bishop Nalvado, a rare violinist and musician, who
founded the Monastery March Ist, Id-17. There is a fine library


well looked after. In fact the place is most highly interesting
and worthy of a visit, second to none in Australia.
The Right Honourable Sir John Forrest, P.C., G.C. M.G.,
late Treasurer, and Minister of Defence of the Commonwealth of
Australia, is well-known as one of the greatest of Australian ex-
plorers. He is a pinnacle of the State 1 of W.A., a corner stone
of the Australian Commonwealth, a giant of enterprise, a tower
of strength as a politician and ruler. His name will be honoured
as a true man, and an Australian gentleman.
THE DEMON OF GOLD.
The Demon of Gold! Heboid! Heboid!
Millions of wealth are mine untold ;
Ravish the earth, all passions subdue —
W.A., I come to claim you.
(Chorus of Sprites below stage.)
Gold ! Gold! The Demon of Gold !
Hip-Hoorav !
From grave to gay my sceptre I wield,
The philosopher’s stone emblazons my shield ;
La Carita,” the angel of Xmas fame,
To ‘‘ Santa Claus ” the Good, united in name.
Chorus—Gold ! Gold ! etc.
The forests and rivers owned by Sir John
Are trivial assets to those coming along;
The Dynamite Prince, with thundering force;
Auriferous veins’ hail, mighty source !
Chorus —Gold ! Gold ! etc.
THE BESH SKELETON.
(Scene : —A skeleton in repose on sands of gold, surrounded by scrub and
salt-bush, with miner’s implements erected at its head and feet.)
(i-)
Singer invisible. (Mortality.)
Bleached upon the parched soil,
I rest till morn’s sunrise :
Thoughts of deeds, and life’s past toil,
Bright lustre to my closed eves.
(ii.)
Labour for gold, my ■work is done,
Hole after hole I delved ;
Tons of bright metal proudly I won,
Which passed me on. “ Excelsior.”
(in.)
(Immortality.)
Hope eternal, forward it leads,
The soul triumphant above ;
Sphere unto sphere in boundless pace,
Seeking the abode of Love.
(IV.)
Fathomless science commands,
Star's destiny mine to obey;
Life! Love ! Home ! Glory !
“ Pour prendre conge.


Signor Lardelli, F.R.C.0., a gifted composer, resided in Perth
for about four years, but he has recently returned to N.S.AA’., and
enjoys a lucrative practice in Sydney. Mr. Gordon Gooch, of
Sydney, was a valuable bass in Melbourne concerts for many years.
Madame Clara Butt and Mr. Ivenneiiy Rumford’s concerts
in W.A., have been attended by enthusiastic and crowded audi-
ences, and the great artist is always made to feel “at home "
when she comes to this hind of sunshine.
Mr. James Hay a promising tenor, now a member of Ma-
dame Crossley’s London Concert Party deserves metiou, as hailing
from AY. A. and being identified as tenor in the Melba Quartets.
He is in good business hands.
The popular success of an artist, no matter how eminent he
may be, can only lie assured when he is introduced to the public
by a good business manager, anil this fact should be well re-
membered by artists intending to visit this pleasure loving city,
this bonanza of the Commonwealth.
Miss Minnie Waugh is the solo soprano of AY. A., with an
exquisite voice and queenly appearance, she never fails to please
her audiences.
Miss Sadie Harris lias been an acquisition to the profession,
and was a favourite at Government House during Lady Lawlev s
regime. She was trained as a musician by the Maestro Sig.
Alberto Zehnan, and that's enough to know.
M iss Ada Baker of Sydney, was an active artist, benevolent,
in cause of charity. Her repute as a capable teacher of sin‘••ini;,
as well as lx dug a singer herself, gained for her an extensive con-
nection in AY. A. On the stage or concert she compared favorably
with our versatile Australian star “Nellieof Sweet Nell of
.Drury Lane (Miss (Nellie Stewart.)
Foremost amongst the talented Australian musicians of
Madame Ada Crosslev's Concert Party, was Mr. Percy Grainger,
as solo pianist. "With a warm heart, and magic touch, lie capti-
vated and moved in sympathy his critical hearers con aniore.
AN AUSTRALIAN EASTER CAROL.
1909, J. Sioi.unßS.
In Orient splendour our Easter banner waving;
Rcsurrexit Doniinus.
Baptized in Fathomless Oceans,
Australia reads the Book of Light;
On Avings of labour, science, mystery,
Touched by the breath of the Fountain of Life.
Resurrexit Doniinus.
No midnight lantern groping,
Or tomb ere longer sealed ;
Behold the Christ, the Christ that is to be:
Upward’. OiiAvard'. Liberty’.
Wisdom! Power! Fraternity!
Resurrexit Doniinus.


AN AUSTRALIAN CHRISTMAS CAROL.
1908 J. Suvi.vikks.
Church Bells o’er the Darling Ranges. . . . Flora gloriously rejoicing,
resigning triumphant, and welcoming Santa Claus to Australia. . . .
The feathered tribes—black swans, lady companions, kangaroos, and
Aborigines negotiating a Christinas Corroboree.
Faithful and true till death, the wattle and the rose,
Reared in music’s cradle, shall dwell in sweet repose,
Magi costly treasures, emblems of joy and love ;
In adoration bringing, from God's great throne above.
Christmas bells are ringing,
Carols sweetly singing,
'This joyous Holiday,
Christus liatus hoe die,
Ex Maria Virgine, " Hallelujah.”
Leo’s paw and Southern Cross, o’er land and sea. fraternal.
Heaven’s gifts of power and light, held out from left to right.
Herald in trumpet notes. Australia newly born ;
Christ-like striving e’er to be, through all Eternity.
Christmas Bells, etc
At our annual Byte Memo Koncert for Xmas at the Town
Hall, a novelty programme was presented, at which for the first
time in the world, Afghans and Christians, united, appeared to-
gether on the stage. A report of the event will he read with
interest.
The following address was delivered bv Hasan Alusa Khan,
a cultured Afghan, resident in l!ulvver-street, Perth : -
Ladies and Gentlemen, I had just now the pleasure of
introducing to you a number of Oriental gentlemen who are known
in this eountrv as ” vfgbans. They hail from the hills and
plains of that stretch of territory which lies between India, on the
one side, and Persia and liussian Turkistan on the other side.
The political importance of that eountrv and its people is very
great to British India, and therefore to the whole of the British
Empire, hut for to-night’s subject: f shall omit any reference to
that matt' r, and will treat the subject in a way more appropriate
for this occasion.
These Afghan gentleman who are here to-night have cmne,
not to engage \ our attention on a question of political or social
wrangle, hut to entertain you with a musical performance of a
description which must seem very novel to you, and therefore, 1
•believe, v ery interesting. It might surprise you when I say that
in the history of the Afghan nation, so far as [ am aware, this
would be the first occasion that a company of respectable Afghans
would hav e appeared in a music-hall before a European audience.
The performance that you will witness in a few moments was ad-


vertised in the daily press as the "Afghans’ Jov Dance, which
in the Afghan language is called " Attanh.''’ The English word
“dance ” does not exactly express the meaning of the Afghan
term “Attanh.” as the word “dance’’ is a general term, applied
to every kind of that performance, whether amateur or profes-
sional. whether for recreation or otherwise. But the Afghan
performance which you will have the pleasure or displeasure to
witness to-night, is looked upon and used only by the Afghans
as their national recreation (exercise of a healthy character, both
for mind and body. It is enjoyed by them email occasions of re-
joicings by persons of all rallies and all ages, and of both sexes
with a childish simplicity. 'Whether it be the occasion of mar-
riage or a national festival, whether it he a social picnic party or
a battlefield, all such occasions have no interest for them unless
the old and tin 1 voting amongst them, and the rich and the poor,
and the layman and the priest enjoy themselves in this style of
dance or “Attanh’ as they call it in their own language.
The Afghan nation is div ided into several clans or tribes,
and each tribe adopts its own distinctive style of the said dance,
bv using a different step or a different style of the swinging of
the hands and the body, hut in the main all tribes use the com-
mon style of dancing in a ring with certain measured steps, going
backward and forward, and swinging their hands and bodies in
various wavs, a detailed description of which will not interest
von. specially on this occasion when you are anxious rather to see
the performance than to listen to a lecture about it.
Ever since the Afghan race has been known to exist, its
popular recreation for both sexes lias been this style of dance,
accompanied with love songs or other songs as the occasion would
rei|uire.
In connection with this entertainment, it might not he out
of place if I mention the pleasing fact that, bv a happy coincidence
this week is fraught with national and religious jov for both the
East and the West. You will understand me better when 1 tel]
you that the Great Festival of Pilgrimage of the Mohammedans
commences from to-morrow morning, and it lasts for the whole
week following. To morrow ami the following two days are oc-
casions of a great religious importance, being the “Feast of the
Sacrifice," annually observed by the whole of the Mohammedan
world in memory of that great event which took place some four
thousand years ago. I refer to the seripitural story of Abraham,
tin 1 Father Prophet of the -lews, the Christians and the Moham-
medans, who built the first chapel for the worship of God and
attempted to sacrifice his son in obedience to the command and
word of liis Creator. When the three great religious bodies, viz.,


Judaism, Christianity, and Islam, trace their religious history
back to Abraham (the Patriarch) they all meet there on a com-
mon ground of peace, goodwill, and fraternity. Ihe present dif-
ferences between them mav be looked upon from a broad point of
view in the light of healthy rivalry necessary for the progiess of
the different branches of human family. The present signs of
the modern times everywhere show that all nations of the earth
are gradually being inllueneed by broad views of goodwill towards
each other.
Whatever diHerences have existed or may exist between
various peoples and races of mankind, it is a pleasing fact to know'
that their racial, religious, and other differences sink down to a
disappearing point as soon as tliev come under the intluence of
music. Their hearts are drawn towards each other with a power
over which human prejudices have no control. Music is un-
doubtedly a beautiful divine intluence which relieves the mind
for th(‘ time being from all the pressure of the physical and other
worries, and prepares and stimulates the Mini for a higher and
purer atmosphere, where the language, the relationship, and the
conditions of all the creatures of God is only one. There the
language is music, the relationship is fraternity, and the condition
is peace and happiness, an illustration of which we witness here
to-night in the fact that notwithstanding their numerous differ-
ences. the people of the Hast and the \\ est have met here to-
night. to greet each other with joy and peace in this music
atmosphere.
Ladies and gentlemen. I am afraid T have taxed your patience
of listening to mv address rather too much, for which I humbly
apologise, but 1 hope that the item of the Afghan dance in to-
night s prgraiume of l)r. Summers annual Christmas Ryle Merrie
Koncert wall give you joy and pleasure sufficient to’keep you in
high cheerful spirits for the w hole of the coming year.
It is pleasant to record among the most liberal patrons of
music with whom wo have been honoured, as past Governors,
Sir Charles Darling. Sir 11. Locke. Lord Tennyson, Sir William
Robinson (composer of music Gnfurl the Flag, ) Lord llope-
toun. Sir A. Lawlev, Admiral Sir Fred. Bedford, all took an active
interest in the cause of music.
Sir Redmond Many, founder of the University of Melbourne,
a good flautist, Sir W. J. Clarke! Honourable Sir George Verdon,
lion. Henry Miller, anil Ambrose lvyte, were all connected with
music, fine arts, and literature.


Mr. Andrew Black of X.S.W. and his Concert Co. favoured
us with a series yf popular and high class concerts at the Queen's
Hall. Oratorio, opera, and songs by the great classical composers
attracted enthusiastic audiences.
The Corrick family are always welcomed in Vi. A. Mr.
Corrick is a native of Somersetshire, a county of England, famous
for its poets, painters, sculptors, musicians, soldiers, and politicians.
Our theatres in Berth are the Royal and His Majesty s,
owned by Mr. T. G. A. Molloy, the Cremorne Theatre by Mrs.
Oliver, the Queen's Hall, by the Wesley Church Trust, The
Kings Pictures, al //yoyo, and Vi est s Pictures, ‘’the best of all,
at the Queen's Hall arc all well patronised, and Messrs. J. C.
W illiamson, William Anderson, Meynell M Clarke, Harry
Rickards, and .J. Ah Tait A Co., do their best to send us then-
star artists, and keep all our musicians on the string of regular
employment To lament over the instance of our geographical
birth (W. A.) in being so isolated on the one hand, and often
deprived of the visit of exceptional talent may be pardoned. At
any rate Westralians will be grateful for the treat of hearing and
seeing the best of music and drama that the aforementioned
managers can send us, as it appears these gentlemen are willing
to risk large sums of money and lose them oftentimes, for the
love and enthusiasm they possess in trying to instruct and amuse
us. and to elucidate the New Spirit of the Age, in song, dance,
and drama.
Owing to family bereavements, and losses, to which as
honest Ixaaek Walton says, every man is liable, I have felt con-
strained to rest from work, and to avail myself of excursions to
distant parts of this glorious state, as thus noticed in the Daily
.Ycm-n by Encle Tom (Mr. Rust).
Extraordinary Vitality. — Dr. Bummers is (>7 years old
to-day. To “pace the sun’ for 07 annual rotations, take a jour-
ney of ikOOO mill's by rail and cart, and a walk of 10 miles within
ten days appears to be a fair record of extraordinary vitality
vouchsafed to few mortals on earth, but this is I he doctor's achieve-
ment. The doctor gave a bush concert en route at Boddington’s
Station homestead, Twin Peaks.
As I am writing, news has hashed from London, that our
Most Gracious Majesty, King Edward VII died at midnight,
The following lines with music occurred to me :


AX AUSTRALIAN ELEGY.
Dr J. SUMMERS, May 7tli. ll’lO.
Sing softly, sorrow’s lay,
A man of love, power, might.
His mystic call obeyed this day.
Beckoned to a loftier height.
The portals of joy wide opened,
His record of deeds proclaimed;
“ Well done faithful soul”—passport acknowledged ;
Thy Father’s guerdon, “ Crown and Sceptre,” attained.
Sing softly, sorrow’s lay.
First publicly sung at H.M. Theatre May 9th 1910. Pub-
lished and printed by Upham.
In 1907 1 was advised to pay a visit to the East to ascer-
tain the conduct of the Universities of Adelaide and Melbourne
Chairs of Music, and that in view of the early establishment of
our AY.A. University, I might be able to say what we should do.
My boat ticket was superscribed pri-sto anil subscribed
aji'etuoso. The purser said No. 13 or 44 cabin please. A friend
had a sort of Dictionary of Music on board, and like Daniel he
told me what the words meant :
Fremantle Port is a noted place for debt policemen, who in
league with a gang of pretended debt collectors, w ith a P.M. as
captain, stop everybody who is leaving AY. A. with any money,
and evidently the man who stopped me thought I had the purse
of golden sovereigns the teachers gave me, and tried on a black-
mailing.
A CORONA TICK ANTHEM.
For His Most Gracious Ala.jesty Kino George Y.
To be sung on (D.AL) the clay of his coronation at Perth, AY.A.
A Kingly Crown shall grace thy head this clay.
Jewelled by love, truth, wisdom, might;
Now Britannia chants her Alleluia.
Dei gratia, thy paternal right.
Destined, great King George A’,
Jure divine, voce populi,
By compass, follow thy father’s pilgrim course;
Move light will bo thy ceaseless cry.
Sing ; sun, wand, moon, wave, star ;
God's messengers, life, labor, science, art ;
A brotherhood of Nations acclaims afar
Huzza! Huzza 1 Huzza!
Written and set- to music hv Dr, ,T. Summers. Mus. Doc. Cantuar.


Having filled the space of my booklet, I am compelled to
close it, with a hope that my readers will pardon me for sins of
egotism, omission, and commission. Perhaps another writer may
be disposed some day to add much to what I have endeavoured
simply and briefly to record. I would therefore wish in con-
clusion, to venture to hope, that these my reminiscences may be
read with pleasure, by my numerous kind friends and musical
acquaintances in the Commonwealth of Australia, and that the
booklet may be honoured by finding a nice place on the shelves
of their libraries, and the nicest place in their kind hearts’ remem-
brance. Vale.


Mosman Park. W.A.
July 15. 1966
/ j 1
|j
Pear jir. since, . ||
. 4
T h ank you for your letter. I ope your illness/ i
and are behind you'. ||
I’ve made further inquiries t v, roug T ' + v e W.A. State
library touching Joseph Summers. Jl e died in Pert* 1 ; ,
on October 10, 1917. On following day t v ere was‘.f
a funeral notice in West Australian" t v e
usual undertakers’ advertisement as to time and place
«
* y
of interment.
I V 'ave looked in vain t v roug v t v e "West" files
of t v e four issues following ’"is deat v , for an «!
V.
obituary. But t v at does’nt in t v e least surprise me. A
■k
I was in Pert v (arrived from England as a young ' j
I
man in 1912) during t v e last years of v is life, and I 1
recall t v at not only v ad v e quite dropped out of
public musical life; so far as music-lovers were aware
of v is existence v e was regareded as a sort of eccen-J'
w
-trie, part pitiable (for I fear v e must ’"ave lived in
. «:•


2
penury, v is days of glory far in t v e past in
Melbourne), part tragi-comical. T v at, at anyrate, Is
my own recollection of t v e prevailing view of v im• j|
v is last days; wherefore it does'nt at all surprise!?!
if 3
me t v at t v e Press (never muc v interested in run-of
t v e-mill musicians’.) ignored ''is end.
T e ’’West” was, as now, t u e only morning daily,'
ml, . fcfl
T ere was an evening daily, t v e "Daily News", but ZM
m
feel sure it’s less likely t v an its contemporary tfC'
V ave bothered about t v e deat v of an obscure—foiifl!
■ fill!
t v at was Summers's position by t v IfJ|
v owever, you are keen on a c v eck of its columns if I
being made, let me know and I’ll do it for you. ll•
. 11
Keep t e booklet as long as you need it. Ml
U:;
Wit*’ regards, } jpfj
Yours sincerely, IS
M


