

New Australia
Co-Operative Settlement
Association.
HEAD OFFICE: til, ELIZABETH STREET, SYDNEY, N.S.W.
BOARD OF TRUSTEES:
WILLIAM LANE, Chairman. W. W. HEAD, Secretary.
T. H. HALL (Bourke) Treasurer.
FRED KIDD, Albury, N.S.W.
MAX LEWIN, Adelaide, S.A.
WM. SAUNDERS, Hughenden, Q. JAMES MOONEY, Wagga, N.S.W..
CHARLES HOLYER, Bundaberg, Q.
Deputy-Chairman, PETER McNAUGHT, Sydney.
land:
430,000 acres secured in Paraguay, S.A.
pioneers:
200 sailed from Sydney on July 16, 1893, and will be followed by further
shipments as notified in the Journal
“NEW AUSTRALIA,"
Published in Sydney, N.S.W.
2s 6d per annum.
gtxjhnetj :
“worker” office,
1893.
ALFRED WALKER, Asuncion, Paraguay,
GEORGE HURN, Broken Hill, N.S.W.




MUTUAL AGREEMENT
SIGNED BY ALL MEMBERS OF THE
NEW AUSTRALIA CO-OPERATIVE SETTLEMENT
ASSOCIATION.
PREAMBLE
Whereas —
So long as one depends upon another for leave to work, and
so long as the selfishness induced by the uncertainty of living pre-
vents mankind from seeing that it is best for all to insure one another
against all possibility of social degradation, true Liberty and
Happiness are impossible ;
And Whereas —
The weakness, ignorance, and doubts of society at large is
the great barrier in the way of the establishment of such true Social
Order as will insure to every citizen security against want and
opportunity to develop to the fullest the faculties evolving in
Humanity;
Therefore —
It is desirable and imperative that by a community wherein
all labor in common for the common good, actual proof shall be
given that under conditions which render it impossible for one to
tyrannize over another, and which declare the first duty of each to
be the well-being of all and the sole duty of all to be the well-being
of each, men and women can live in comfort, happiness, intelligence
and orderliness unknown in a society where none can be sure to-day
that they or their children will not starve to-morrow.
With this end in view an Association of Workers is hereby instituted,
and the accompanying basis for co-operative organization and articles of
association agreed upon, the signatories intending and expecting to migrate
to another country, there to devote to the movement their possessions and
their best endeavors.
BASIS FOR CO-OPERATIVE ORGANIZATION-
Production— . , „ , , ,
Ownership by the community of all the means of production-
in-exchange and distribution.
Conduct by the community of all production-in-exchange and
distribution.
Superintendence by the community of all labor-saving co-
operations.
Allotment— . , • , , ~
Maintenance by the community of children under guardian-
ship of parents.
Maintenance by the community of all sanitary and educational
establishments.
Saving by the community of all capital needed by the com-
munity.
Division of remaining wealth production among all adult mem-
bers of the community equally, without regard to sex, age, office,
or physical or mental capacity.


Authority—
lliT Subject to the supremacy of the laws of the State settled
in, which all members pledge themselves to observe loyally, the
following authority and regulations shall be observed between the
members of the community :
Ballot vote of all adult members to be supreme authority.
Director, elected by two-thirds majority of general ballot, to
be sole executive authority, advised by Board of Superintendents.
Superintendents, elected by two-thirds majority of depart-
mental ballot, to be sole departmental authorities, subject to
director.
Regulations—
Regulations affecting the community at large to be confirmed
by a two-thirds majority of all adult members.
Departmental regulations to be confirmed by a majority of
all adult members interested.
All regulations to be submitted annually for continuation or
rejection.
Disputes arising between the community and any member or
members to be decided in equity by an arbitrator mutually agreed
upon between the communal authority and the member or members
interested.
Disputes arising between members to be decided in equity by
an arbitrator mutually agreed upon by them.
Dismissal from the community, for persistent or unpardonable
offence against the well-being of the community, to be decreed only
by a five-sixth majority of all adult members.
Elections—
All offices to be vacated annually and whenever occupants
cease to retain the confidence of their constituents.
Individuality—
The individuality of every member in thought, religion,
speech, and leisure, and in all matters whatsoever whereby the in-
dividuality of others is not affected, to be held inviolable.
Sex Equality—
The sexes to be recognized as equally entitled to full member-
ship.
Religion—
Religion not to be officially recognized by the community.
Amendment—
Amendment of this basis for co-operative organization to be
made only by a two-thirds majority of all adult members.
Articles Revised—March, 1893.
Sec-: W. W- Head-
Office: 111 Elizabeth-street, Sydney-


ARTICLES OF ASSOCIATION-
Name—
New Australia Co -operative Settlement Association.
Object —
To found a co-operative colony in the spirit of the preamble and
upon the lines laid down in the basis fir co-operative organization.
Conduct —
The conduct of the association shall be by means of a Board of
Trustees and a Chairman.
Membership—
QUALIFICATION.
Members of the association shall be those who have (a) satisfied
the Board of Trustees as to their desirability, (h) signed the preamble,
basis for co-operative organization, and articles of association, and foj
are financial to the satisfaction of the Board of Trustees.
DISQUALIFICATIONS.
The following shall not be admitted to membership : —Any not
knowing English so as to understand and be understood ; any person
of color, including any married to persons of color ; any living to-
gether otherwise than in lawful marriage ; any of questionable reputa-
tion ; any objectionable by reason of past disloyalty to the Labor
movement or of such other actions as are clearly opposed to the
common good.
INVESTIGATION.
The names of those applying for membership directly to the
Central Office from any district where organization is established
shall be submitted before final approval to an officer of the Association
in that district; and it shall be the duty of the Central Office and of
every officer to see that no disqualified persons are organized. Should
any such be inadvertently admitted they shall be removed from the roll.
Groms —
To facilitate organization, groups shall be formed wherever con-
venient, which shall be recognized as the centres of the association in
their respective districts.
Payments—
AGREEMENT.
Every member of the Association, by act of joining the Associa-
tion, agrees to subscribe to the funds of the Association all he may
possess when he is finally enrolled for actual migration, such sub-
scription to be not less than £6O.
PRELIMINARY EXPENSES.
The necessary funds for all preliminary expenses, including
prospecting, organization, and colonization arrangements, shall be
provided by a preliminary payment of £lO ; £5 of which must be
paid within one month of provisional enrolment, the other £5 within
three months of provisional enrolment ; this £lO to be counted as
part of the £6O which is fixed as the minimum final subscription.
RETURN OF PAYMENTS.
The payment of £lO for preliminary expenses and the final sub-
scription or not less than an additional £5O shall both be, when
made, free and voluntary donations to the Board of Trustees for the
purposes.of the Association which no member shall reclaim if he de-
cides, after haying made either, to withdraw from membership. But
any member shall be entitled to reclaim any amount over £lO which
he may have paid to the Board of Trustees in advance for and on ac-
count of his final subscription should he decide, before final enrolment
for migration, to withdraw from membership. The Board of
Trustees, if for any reason whatever it decides to strike from the roll
any member who has fulfilled to the time of such striking off all the
conditions of membership, shall return him his previous payments in
full.


Special
■WIDOWED MOTHEES.
That a subscription of £3O be required for widowed mothers ac-
companying sons to the Settlement. Exceptions at discretion of
Trustees.
MEN OYEE FIFTY.
That at the discretion of the Trustees a minimum subscription of
£lOO may be required of men over 50 years of age applying for
membership.
ESTIMATED FINAL CONTEIBUTION.
That every member on joining shall state the estimated amount
of his intended final contribution, and the delegate enrolling shall
certify that such is a fair estimate to the best of his knowledge and
belief.
PEEMIUM FOE CIIILDEEN.
Every family enrolled after June 12, 1893, to be charged a pre-
mium of £lO for every child over one year of age, this premium to be
added to the final payment of not less than £5O. Exceptions at dis-
cretion of Trustees.
Board of Trustees.
COMPOSITION.
The Board of Trustees shall be composed of ; The Chairman,
the Secretary, the Treasurer, and seven (7) general Trustees elected
by plebiscite.
EE-AEEANQEMENT OF COMPOSITION.
Re-arrangement of representation upon the Board of Trustees
may bo made at any time by a two-thirds majority of a plebiscite of
the Association.
FUNCTIONS.
The Board of Trustees shall nominate officers for submission to a
plebiscite as is provided in these articles. It shall have power to ac-
cept or reject subscribers, authorize groups, and generally direct
propaganda work. It shall have full authority to expend the ftmds
in its hands as may seem to it best for the good of the Association.
It shall be empowered to make such terms with the government of the
state to be settled in as may conduce to the maintenance of cordial
and loyal relationship with such government. It shall interpret
clauses of these articles and recommend new clauses. And it shall
have all other powers necessary for the carrying on of the purposes of
the Association.
BXEECISE OF AUTHOEITY.
The Chairman shall exercise the authority and discharge the
functions of the Board of Trustees, excepting only the expenditure of
the general funds of the Association.
TEEASUEEE.
The Board of Trustees shall elect a Treasurer half-yearly by a
two-thirds majority. He shall be subject to suspension by the Chair-
man pending notification to the Board of Trustees, which may by a
two-thirds majority declare the office vacant and elect another
Treasurer at any time. He shall have charge of the bank-book of
the Association, and shall pay no money except by order of the Board
of Trustees. He shall produce the bank-book, vouchers for all cash
and any other securities he may hold in hand, at every audit of ac-
counts. He shall pay to the Secretary such amounts as may be voted
by the Board of Trustees. He shall, on receipt of a written notice
signed by the Chairman and three Financial Trustees, deliver up to
the said Einaucial Trustees within seven days of the time when the
said notice has been served on him all books, moneys, cheques, and
other property of the Association which he may hold in his possession.


SECRETARY.
The Board of Trustees shall appoint a Secretary half-yearly by a
two-thirds majority. He shall be subject to suspension by the
Chairman pending notification to the Board of Trustees, which may
by a two-thirds majority declare the office vacant and elect another
Secretary at any time. He shall sign all official letters and an-
nouncements of the Board of Trustees. He shall receive all moneys
for the Board of Trustees, and pav them at once into the bank named
by the Board of Trustees, forwarding the deposit-slip to the Treasurer
within three days after making any deposit. He shall be under the
instructions of the Chairman, and shall perform such duties as may
be assigned him in accordance with the articles.
ORGANIZERS, AGENTS, DELEGATES, ETC.
The Board of Trustees shall appoint organizers, agents, dele-
gates, and such other officers as will enable organization to be
effectively conducted, and shall see that such officers are acceptable to
and have the confidence of all members in their respective localities.
SUSPENSION.
The chairman may temporarily suspend any trustee at his
discretion, notifying such temporary suspension immediately to the
group which the suspended trustee represents, or to the members at
large if a general trustee. An election for trustee shall at once take
place, the suspension being made final by the election of another
trustee ; at such election the suspended trustee shall be eligible for
candidature.
CONSULTATION.
In place of consultation meetings, the Chairman shall make a con-
fidential report, at least monthly, to the members of the Board of
Trustees, and each trustee shall promptly advise the Chairman upon the
matters contained in the report and upon any other matters which may
in the trustee’s opinion affect the association, and shall give his vote
upon any question submitted to him therein. Each trustee shall
also report fully upon the progress of his own group and upon any
association work in which he has been engaged,
STATEMENTS.
The Board of Trustees shall furnish monthly to each member a
printed statement containing an official report of the progress of the
Association and such general information and answers to enquiries as
will tend to solidify the movement and bring scattered groups and
members into full accord with each other. It shall also issue a
balance-sheet perodically.
ASSOCIATION RECORDS.
All reports and correspondence received by the Board of Trustees
and copies of all reports and correspondence emanating from the
Board of Trustees shall be kept for reference. Any trustee may
examine the records of the Association at any time, or may request a
copy of any specified record at any time ; excepting only that the
Chairman may withhold from inspection papers which in the interest
of the Association should be temporarily considered as absolutely
confidential, such papers to be recorded in the books of the Associa-
tion and handed over to any incoming Chairman.
LAPSE.
Upon the migration of 500 members to the Settlement the Board
of Trustees shall lapse and have no further authority.
Financial Trustees—
SELECTION.
The members of the Board of Trustees shall as early as possible
nominate five financial trustees, which nominations shall be individu-


ally submitted for confirmation by two-thirds majorities of a plebis-
cite of the Association.
FUNCTIONS.
The financial trustees shall hold the general funds of the
Association in trust to the order of the Board of Trustees or, after the
lapse of that body, to the order of the Provisional Director. It shall
be their duty to watch over the general funds of the Association and
to report to the members at large when necessary. No cheque shall
be valid which is not signed by three financial trustees.
SAVINGS TRUST.
The financial trustees shall, in addition to the Association’s
Trust Account, open a special trust account, to be called the
“ Savings Trust Account ,” into which shall be paid all moneys
deposited with the Board of Trustees in anticipation of the final call.
The “ Savings Trust Account ” shall not be drawn upon except for
the return of any deposit at the demand of depositor, until the final
call is made; it shall then be closed and the amount handed over to
the Board of Trustees, who shall hold it to the order of the respective
depositors. Any “ Savings Trust Account ” money for the disposal
of which instructions are not received from the depositor within six
months after the issue of the final call shall be considered as a donation
to the general funds of the Association, and there shall be no future
claim upon it by the depositor.
REMOVAL AND SUSPENSION.
The Chairman may remove any financial trustee at any time
after giving one month’s notice of his intention to the Board of
Trustees, and may suspend any financial trustee for one month
pending the expiration of such notice.
VACANCIES.
Vacancies arising among the financial trustees shall be filled by
two-thirds majority of the Board of Trustees.
Chairman—
ELECTION.
Candidates for the Chairmanship of the Association shall be
nominated by a majority of the Board of Trustees. A two-thirds
majority of a plebiscite of the Association shall be necessary for
election. A Chairman shall not be chosen until there are 50 members,
but an acting-Chairman may be elected by a two-thirds majority of
the original group, subject to confirmation by a two-thirds majority
of groups subsequently formed.
FUNCTIONS.
The Chairman shall be entrusted by the Board of Trustees and
by the members of the Association generally with the executive
management of the Association. He shall see that all notices and
announcements to members and others are made in the name of the
Association and signed by the secretary to the Board of Trustees.
CONFIRMATION.
The question “ Are you satisfied with the present Chairman-
ship ” shall be submitted half-yearly to a plebiscite of the Association
for a “ yes ”or“ no ” vote. If not answered in the affirmative by a
two-thirds majority the Board of Trustees shall suspend the Chairman
and nominate a candidate or candidates as before provided.
SUSPENSION.
A two-thirds majority of the Board of Trustees may temporarily
suspend the Chairman at any time pending an immediate appeal to a
plebiscite of the Association upon the question, “ Are you satisfied
with the recent Chairmanship ?” If not answered in the affirmative
by a two-thirds majority the suspension shall be made final, and a
candidate or candidates be nominated for the office as before provided.


Permanent Chairman—
ELECTION.
Upon the vacation of all offices prior to the final call, a
Permanent Chairman shall be elected by a two-thirds majority of a
plebiscite of the Association, in which election the nominee of any
ten members shall be eligible for candidature.
FUNCTIONS.
The Permanent Chairman shall upon his election assume full
control of the Association. He shall direct migration, superintend
the collection of calls, organize departments, appoint or remove
managers and generally discharge the duties of director, subject to
suspension by a two-thirds majority of the Board of Trustees,
pending an appeal to a plebiscite of the Association. He shall act
in the name and by the authority of the Board of Trustees.
DEPUTY.
The Chairman may appoint a deputy to act in his stead for any
specified purpose, such appointment to be at once notified to the
Board of Trustees.
Provisional Director—
Upon the lapse of the Board of Trustees, the Permanent Chair-
man shall become provisional director for two years, with sole
executive authority, subject only to removal by a two-thirds vote
of the Settlement upon a plebiscite, which may be demanded by
fifty members.
Permanent Authority—
At the conclusion of the two years’ provisional directorate, or
earlier if the provisional director deems it advisable, the provisional
authority shall be replaced by the permanent authority provided
for in the basis for co-operative organization agreed upon.
Women and Children—
STATUS OF WOMEN.
The wives of members and single women accepted as members
by the Board of Trustees shall rank as members equally with men,
and shall vote and be consulted equally upon all questions submitted
to other members of the Association. No payment shall be
required of any woman unless by special arrangement of the Board
of Trustees.
CHILDREN.
The children of any member shall upon the completion of the
subscription conditions be enrolled as wards of the Association.
WIDOWS AND ORPHANS.
The widow or orphans of any deceased member shall be entitled
to membership either upon the original conditions or as may be
offered after full consideration of the circumstances at the discretion
of the Board of Trustees ; if any widows or orphans are disinclined
to claim membership, all contributions made by the deceased mem-
ber shall be returned to them in full.
SINGLE WOMEN.
The Board of Trustees may nominate single women to mem-
bership at its discretion. Daughters of members, if over 17 years
of age, and any other relatives or friends desirous of joining the
Association, must tie notified of to the Board of Trustees for
nomination.
Migration—
PROSPECTING.
As soon as funds are available, the Board of Trustees may send
out a prospecting party of bushmen, and shall take other steps to
make such scientific investigation as will insure desirable land.


LIMITATION OF LIABILITY.
The Board of Trustees shall not bond the Association to the
carrying out of any contract by a greater bond than the deposit of
such sums as may be at the time in its hands, but it may at its
discretion agree by such deposit to increase the bond at a future date.
LAND ACQUIREMENT.
Not until the Board of Trustees* through its agents, has
thoroughly investigated the soil, climate and other conditions of
lands offered shall the location of the Settlement be finally decided
upon and the land acquired.
VACATION OF ALL OFFICES.
Upon the acquisition of the land and prior to the issue of the
final call, all Trustees shall vacate office and elections shall take
place, as before provided for half-yearly elections. The Chairman
shall vacate office also.
PIONEEEING.
When the land is acquired the Board of Trustees shall select a
pioneer corps from such members as may be suitable. This corps
shall contain the departments neeessary for making ready for general
settlement, and shall be despatched as speedily as possible for this
purpose.
SUPERVISION.
The Board of Trustees shall supervise migration so as to lighten
as far as possible the attendant hardship, shall see that every
member is provided witli all personal necessaries, and that carriage
is available as far as possible for distinctly personal effects, shall
advise wherever necessary, and shall make regulations as may seem
advisable for the well-being of migrating members.
FINANCIAL ARRANGEMENTS.
With the notice of final call each member shall be requested to
send in at once such a statement of the prospects of realising on his
property and of his financial position generally as may form a basis
for the arrangement to be made between each individual member and
the Board of Trustees.
REALIZATION.
Upon the final call being issued and upon the Settlement of the ar-
rangement to be made between each member and the Board of
Trustees, each member may, as is to be set down in such arrangement,
either realize himself on his property or transfer his realizable pro-
perty to the Board of Trustees.
VOLUNTAEYNESS.
No person over 15 years of age shall embark unwillingly, and
all persons over 18 shall be at full liberty to leave the Settlement at
any time.
Provided: There shall be no claim by any individual against the
common property of the Assc ciation but only against his or her share
of any undivided dividend.
Temperance—
Without prejudice to the liquor question, members shall pledge
themselves to teetotalism until the initial difficulties of settlement
have passed and the constitution has been established.
New Clauses—
New clauses of these articles or amendment or rescinding of ex-
isting clauses shall be made only by a two-thirds majority of a
plebiscite of the Association upon the recommendation of the Board
of Trustees.
Printed at Worker Co-operative Printing Works, 215 & 127 Palmer-st., Sydney.


jApp
ft I J I ft/
mm*.
k r . _


