

The Simplest Papers for
Amateur Photographers
A great many amateurs like to print by sunlight rather
than by artificial light, as they can then watch the
progress of the printing. For such we strongly
recommend the two papers described here, which will
be found eminently satisfactory.
“EUTONA”
COLLODION
Self-Toning Paper with a delightful matt surface.
SELF-TONING
“SOLIO”
Owing to difficulty in procuring supplies of paper base suitable
for coating Self-Toning Solio, we have, rather than in any way
sacrifice the fine quality for which the paper is famous, been
compelled for the present to withdraw it from sale.
In place of Glossy Self-Toning Solio, we offer exactly the same
quality you are accustomed to, but with a Velvet surface There
is ve-y little loss of detail and the new paper will be found in
every may dependable.
We hope you will, until further shipments of a suitable base
paper for Glossy Self-Toning Solio arrive, use that with the
Velvet Surface.
No dark room is required, and with either paper uniform
results may be obtained in cold or warm tones. The
gold is in the paper.
Get a packet of each, and try these fine papers for
yourself. Also available in postcards.
Of all dealers.


Premo Film Packs
Quality and convenience—plus the greatest
simplicity and rapidity in daylight loading and
film changing, are the exceptional advantages
of the Premo Film Pack.
Just insert the Pack in a Premo Film Pack
camera, pull out a paper tab —and you are
ready. To change film after exposure, pull
out the next numbered paper tab. When the
twelfth tab is drawn the Pack is sealed and
may be drawn in daylight.
If you have a plate camera convert it into a
film camera with the Premo Film Pack
Adapter. The Adapter is used in the camera
just like a plate holder, but it carries 12 ex-
posures with one loading instead of only two.
Of all dealers.


Keep a Kodak Story of the Children
And, along with it, written on the film at the time, keep the dates and the titles.
How old was baby when this was taken ? Where were we the year that that was
taken ? Such records mean a great deal when baby has begun outgrowing baby ways
and time has begun playing tricks with memory. And to make an authentic, per-
manent record, on the negative, is a simple and almost instantaneous process with an
Autographic Kodak


If there’s any doubt, use
Eastman
Dental X-Ray
Film
1
b '^A:
41
f
■
In every branch of dentistry
—in fact in practically
every individual case
there is need for a careful
X-Ray examination, to de-
termine the correct course
to pursue.
Radiographs like these on
No. 1 Eastman Dental
X-Ray Films, showing the
relation of the permanent
and deciduous teeth, dis-
close any irregularities that
otherwise would be im-
possible to detect.
Courtesy of
Dr. Albert Kinley,
Boston, Mass.
For further infortnatioti ask the nearest
Kodak Branch.


A New Plate
the Austral-Seed
For many years American photographers, no mailer
what part of the world they might be in, have enthused
over the special qualities of Seed Plates, particularly
mentioning, as a rule, the “Seed Gilt Edge 30.” We
are pleased to announce that these are now being made
in Kodak’s Australian works, and we commend them to
those workers who desire the best on the market, and
are prepared to pay a little higher price to get it.
Austral-Seed Plates are guaranteed to be coated on new
glass; are very thickly coated, containing an unusually
high percentage of silver, and though the emulsion is
probably the most sensitive made, yet it gives great
latitude in exposure with ample density and freedom from
fog. The “Seed” Plates are now available in all regular
sizes, and we urge users to give them a fair trial. The
results are sure to delight them.
Superiority of Seed results established the Seed standard
of plate quality.
Of all dealers.
CONTENTS
“Sunlight Mellow and Bright” ... 629
The Uses of a Camera to Me as a Teacher ... 627
Photography for School Teachers ... ... 629
London News and Doings ... , . 630
"In Spring Array” ... ••• 631
Straight Prints from Straight Negatives ... 634
Our Illustrations ••• •• ••• 637
Photographing Interiors ... ... ... 638
“Interested” ... ••• ••• 639
Photographs in Sunshine ■ 642
“The White Ship” 643
South Head Fatality
Young Photographer Drowned 645
Interstate News 646
Editor’s Locker ... • ••• 648
Answers to Correspondents ... • ■ 652
A.P-R. Competitions 654
Sale and Exchange ... ••• 655


Shornton
ICKARD
& -
British Cameras
g >j .
are known in all
parts of the world
as examples of
the highest skill
and workmanship.
They are suitable
for all classes of
photography in all
climates.
Orders should be
be placed now to
secure priority.
Stand
Cameras
ROYAL RUBY
IMPERIAL
COLLEGE
Reflex Cameras
DUPLEX
BIJOU
SPECIAL RUBY
Hand Cameras
Enlarg
m
IMPERIAL POCKETS
FILMA
KLIPPA
ers
ARTIST
M.C.C. No. 3
M.C.C. No. 6
SPECIAL RUBY REFLEX.
T.P. SHUTTERS
Time and Instantaneous
Stereoscopic Studio
Focal Plane, &c.
Thornton-Pickard Cameras and Outfits are
stocked and sold by Kodak (Australasia) Ltd.
all branches.
Lists Post Free from
THORNTON-PICKARD Ltd.
Altrincham, England.


o
o
For Negatives made during the
* light t© i®
Before leaving to participate in the Commonwealth
£lO,OOO Flight, each competitor will be allowed to
choose any camera of Kodak manufacture that he pre-
fers, and will be given a generous supply of Kodak Film,
by the London Branch of Messrs. Kodak, to make
photographs during the flight.
t?
This is the outcome of a cable sent to the Prime Minister
by Messrs Kodak (Australasia) Ltd., who are supple-
menting the already momentous prize by offering £BOO
for the best, £l5O for the second, and £5O for the third
best series of at least 50 printable negatives made en
route by the airmen.
These pictures will have an intimacy of detail that will
give them the greatest possible interest, not only to
Australians but to all civilised peoples.
This is a particularly timely offer. Even as interesting
as will be the photographs of subsequent flights, they
can never have the same appeal as those of the historic
first flight.
Readers of the A.P-R. can rest assured that they will be
given an early opportunity of seeing reproductions of
these pictures and may well look forward to the occasion.


“SUNLIGHT MELLOW AND BRIGHT.”
C. J. Merfield.
Melbourne Camera Club.


The australasian
PHOTO-REVIEW
EDITOR :
WALTER BURKE, F.R.P.S.
ASSOCIATE EDITOR S
ERIC KEAST BURKE.
Published by KODAK (Australasia) LTD.
“the Salon,” 379 George St., Sydney.
250-252 QUEEN ST., BRISBANE.
“the BLOCK,” 284 COLLINS ST., MELBOURNE.
37 BUNDLE ST., ADELAIDE.
Registered at the General Post Office, Sydney , for transmission by post as a Newspaper.
Single Copy, 4d. Annual Subscription, Post Free 5/-
Vol. XXVI. No. ii
November 15. 1919.
THE USES OF A CAMERA TO ME
AS A TEACHER
By “WHITELY KING.”
(Special to “The Australasian Photo-Review.”)
[Since you have been inviting con-
tributions from teachers, as to the uses
of a camera in teaching, I have
scribbled a few of these on the accom-
panying sheets.
I enclose a print of nest and eggs
of The White-eared Honeyeater. It
is all I have besides those framed, and
I do not like to disturb them. It was
discarded as below par., but it will
serve to show what I mean. These
are mounted on a piece of grey Cecil
board, and below is written —
“Nest and Eggs of White-eared
Honeyeater.”
Built in Briar and Bracken.
Local name: “The Green Whistler.”
Leach Bird Book No. 358.
The whole is then put behind glass
in a frame and hung on the wall.
I did not feel like making another
print to-day, as we had snow last
night; it is bitterly cold now, and my
dark room feels below zero.
As a teacher, how do I use my
camera? How should I do without
it ? I first became interested through
a friend presenting me with a cheap
box-form film camera and outfit won
in a raffle for 3d.! I studied the
accompanying manual almost relig-
iously and made nearly two hundred
negatives on Kodak film without
making one that was unprintable.
I was always a rather keen nature
student —what teacher is not, nowa-
days?—and I found a new use for
photography in this connection. My
box camera was useless here, so a
focussing instrument became neces-
sary, and I can particularly recom-
mend the Film-Plate Premo for this
work. The quarter-plate and post-
card sizes are generally the most
popular, but I prefer a half-plate with
sin. x qin. adapters.
I then have a fairly long extension
camera, which is useful for low-power
photo-micrography on quarter-plates
—that is for objects such as beetles,
butterflies, moths, etc., which do not
require a magnification of more than,
say, 8 diameters, and this is most
easily obtained by using a short focus
lens, of two or three inches.
Nearly all schools have their Gould
League of Bird Lovers, and teachers
find that one bird has, perhaps, several


names, and these again vary in dif-
ferent districts.
Birds are usually most easily
approachable in the nesting season—
take a photograph of the nest and
eggs (include the bird if possible)
mount it, write local name, and also
its name and number found in some
simple book of reference, like Leach’s
Bird Book.
The woodwork class make frames
for these, old plates supply the glass,
and we have valuable wall decorations
as well as interesting notes of the
birds.
For this work a stout tripod is
necessary, and a “Kodapod” is nearly
as useful.
Teachers in the back country often
have a school in which not one child
has seen the sea, or a ship—here is
another use for your camera. Record
your holidays, and give your pupils
a better idea of these things than any
amount of verbal description can.
Photographs taken by the teacher
have a greater interest to the child
than any other picture, for he can
describe the exact locality and manv
other little incidents connected with
the scene.
I publish a quarterly manuscript
paper and invite contributions from
pupils, such as a description of an
industry, or a local creek or river, and
I can generally find amongst my col-
lection of V.P.K. negatives some that
will supply suitable illustrations.
Those pupils who obtain the best
percentages in their quarterly exam-
inations are photographed, these are
included, and this makes the magazine
of more interest than if it comprised
names only.
1 use a V.P.K. for this work, but I
think a No. 2 Brownie would be more
suitable.
As regards printing, I have tried
nearly all of “Kodak” printing papers,
and find Velox Gaslight and Star
Bromide the most useful, but would
recommend “Eutona” as a suitable
paper for the beginner.
There were over twenty teachers
and old boys who enlisted from this
school. There was no Honour Roll
when I came, but with a little trouble
it was possible to collect the names
and borrow the photograph of most
of them—these were copied, and we
now have an Honour Roll, framed,
which was made by the pupils and
myself at small cost, and is more
interesting than a list of names only.
I would specially appeal to bird
lovers to take up this fascinating
hobby, read a good photographic
paper—Kodak will supply The
Australasian Photo-Review free of
charge to any school library. Use
Australian-made materials as far as
possible; experience has shown me
there are none better and many not
so good.
In conclusion, get rid of the idea
that photography is expensive. There
is only one grade of material for any
camera, and remember it is the man
behind the outfit that counts.
Your whole equipment will cost less
than a poor quality gun; it will be less
difficult to keep in “ammunition,” and
you will have something to show
always, besides the present pleasure
and fascination the work provides.


PHOTOGRAPHY FOR SCHOOL TEACHERS
Sandy Bank, being cut away by action of the waves
“By “MAGISTEK ”
(Special to “The Australasian Photo-Review.”)
I note with pleasure and interest
your short articles dealing with the
camera in school, and would like to
add my testimony.
At a concert in aid of school funds,
mounted photographs taken in the
district with a No. 2 Folding Brownie
sold readily at twopence each. The net
profits helped to swell the funds con-
siderably, and many orders were taken
to be fulfilled later. I enclose one
print which was a general favourite.
Please return this, Mr. Editor, as I
value it, and I have not the negative.
It was of great interest to the local
residents.
After the concert I “snapped”
different pupils in fancy dress, and
the net profits helped considerably to
augment the net returns.
Being soon after this transferred to
a school where the daily attendance
was poor, it was a good deal improved
by giving to each regular scholar every
month a photograph of the group of
the children who had not missed a
day, or of some other photograph
when they already had one. It soon
became a point of honour to be in the
group. My scheme proved so success-
ful that a sister, also a teacher, bought
a Brownie, and found the scheme
helped her too.
I can also testify to the value of
photographs of local industries and
of distant parts in the teaching of
geography, but can add a further use,
not, I believe, hitherto mentioned in
this connection. I enclose a print
from a negative showing the action of
waves on a sandy coast. This was
very eagerly and attentively scanned
by children distant from the sea.
Again, the planting of marram grass
in rows to check the movement of
sand greatly interested pupils who had
never seen a sand dune, or had never
heard of marram grass. This photo-
graph was used for illustrating the
sand dunes round Nieuport on the
Belgian coast, the original home of the
marram grass.
I am now engaged in gathering a
series showing wave action, wind
action and the action of running water
in altering the configuration of the
country, and I am sure that they
will prove invaluable in the treat-
ment and teaching of the subject
“Physiography.” The trifling expense
incurred in producing these records is


in no degree commensurate with their
practical value, and I heartily recom-
mend this latter scheme to any teacher
who may chance to read these notes.
I would like to mention that I started
my camera work with a No. 2
Brownie, then later exchanged for a
plate camera, quarter-plate size, but
soon got back to the Kodak family
with a3a Folding Brownie. When my
money box holds enough pennies I
intend purchasing a Graflex. It is my
fancy. Can you o filer any better
advice, Mr. Editor?
Graflex . i a w ? n , derf . u I lly ? ood camera, suitable for every class of work, except wide antrle
We find one of the models with a long extension the most useful. With this, even photo-microeraohic
rTmune^ate^-The l Editor. US m ° re teacherS ‘ The Writer ° f ever >' £
LONDON NEWS AND DOINGS.
By Rev F. C. LAMBERT. M.A., F.R.P.S.
(Special London Correspondent to “The Australasian Photo-Review.”)
G. A. Storey, R.A.,
whose death I regret to have to announce, at
the ripe old age of 85 years. The reason
why his name finds a place on this page, is
that he was the first artist-painter of front
rank who recognised the pictorial possibili-
ties of the camera. In those early days
of pictorial efforts with the camera, Royal
Academicians were “sniffy” in our direc-
tion. But Storey was an instance of a
large mind in a small body, and was always
mentally big enough to avoid all extremes.
His lectures, or “little talks”—as he called
them—at the Camera Club were always
attention compelling, being a happy blend
of trenchant criticism and helpful advice,
flavoured with a sprinkling of ever good
tempered humour. As a fellow judge at
photographic exhibitions, he was painstak-
ing to an exemplary degree. Any reader
having access to a photographic library
may turn to No. 5 of the Practical Photo-
grapher (Library Series), on P.0.P., and
there may find, as frontispiece, an excellent
portrait of the subject of these remarks by
F. H. Evans, who, in turn, is perhaps better
known as a past master in architectural
photography. Storey was professor of per-
spective at the Royal Academy.
Tank Development.
I am frequently asked what is the best
course in the matter of development for
one who has only occasional opportunity for
photography, e.g., week-ends now and again.
While no one system has all the advantages,
yet perhaps the balance, in such case, goes
to the tank method, and experience seems
to show, that for a mixed bag of exposures
this plan gives the best average results—al-
ways remembering that no known method
will give good negatives from grave errors
of exposure in either direction. Experi-
ence of many workers seems to point to the
curious fact that round about 20 minutes
seems to be the most favoured time. Also
as to the very important factor of tempera-
ture, we find ourselves practically limited
to 60-70 degrees Fahr., and the nearer we
keep to 65 the better. As to developer,
numerous formulae have been put forth as
the “best,” but who is to decide this? All
solutions should be prepared just before
use. It is a curious fact, that developing
solutions keep better in strong than in weak
solutions. But, in any case, freshly made
solutions work best of all. Doubtless,
neglect of this point accounts for some of
the tank failures.
Tripod Screw Tip.
The tripod screw and tripod head should
never part company, as each is useless with-
out the other. I tried various hints until I
hit upon the following: To the under side
of the head is attached a short, small-link
chain, 2-3 inches long. On the free end of
this comes an old-fashioned, large-size
watch-chain swivel, which in turn holds
the butt end of the screw. By means of a
hole drilled near its edge I can turn the
tripod screw in or out, without detaching it
from the chain, as the swivel provides for
this. It has been suggested to carry the
screw on one’s key-ring, but this might
easily be left behind when changing clothes,
etc,
W D. Welford.
I regret to record the death of Mr. Wel-
ford. Of late years his name has not been
very prominent in amateur circles, but some
years ago he was an ardent exponent of the
hand camera, both by precept and example.
His handbook on the subject enjoyed con-
siderable popularity. He was for a while
co-editor of Photography. He also founded
and edited the Photographic Review, a pub-
lication which well deserved more recog-
nition than it obtained.
Retouching.
May I add my testimony as regards Mr.


“EVENING CALM.”
Chas. Seymour.
Melbourne Camera Club.
Gamble’s excellent article on retouching in
the May number. My experience goes back
to the days when there was no retouching,
and, like many others, we had to find out
things for ourselves. As I have often said
to younger workers: “There is no difficulty
or mystery about retouching. It is just a
matter of patience and practice; not a scrap
of good trying to rush things—and never
forget that the best worker is he who gets
his effects with the least work. Over-
retouching, like over-dressing, is bad taste —
vulgar!”
Tilted Horizon.
Such familiar sayings as “water finds its
own level,” “tke surface of still water is
level,” “where sky and sea meet there is
the true horizon,” etc., all go to show the
main facts of the matter. Therefore, it is a
continual surprise to me to be shown —as 1
frequently am—excellent prints where the
sea and sky horizon line is not horizontal or
parallel with the top and bottom of the
print. As a rule, when this was pointed
out, the author of the print acknowledged,
but excused it as a negligible trifle —a mere
matter of trimming. But the trimming of a
print is in its way as important a step as
any other in the making of the final result.
The tilted horizon very often is imme-
diately due on the negative to a side tilt
of the camera. People who have a “good
eye” often have a fine sense of feeling as
well, and so do not need a camera level.
But those not thus endowed are well ad-


“THE FISHERMAN.”
H. Bedggood.
Melbourne Camera Club.
vised to get into the way of correcting or
verifying the camera position by a glance at
the camera level. One need hardly add, that
the side tilt of the camera giving a tilted
horizon also tilts other things as well—
which, in the case of buildings, may suggest
the occurrence of an earthquake. Tilting
the camera “fore and aft,” raises the hori-
zon or lowers it only; but it gives buildings,
trees, etc., the appearance of falling towards
or away from the spectator. Tilting “fore
and aft” at times is inevitable in hand
camera work, and can. to some extent, be
compensated for in enlarging; but it is not
easy to imagine any case where the side tilt
offers any advantage whatever.
A Coincidence.
Within a few hours I received two film
negatives from opposite ends of England
which showed remarkable similarity as re-
gards their characters, so that the same
description applies to both: open landscape,
trees in mid-foreground, a wide valley be-
yond, and distant mountains and sky. Both
had been over-exposed and under-developed,
slight general fog—probably due to bright
sky light falling on an imperfectly shaded
(hooded) lens. As both authors valued
these negatives as personal records that
could not be repeated, the first advice was
that a contact positive should be made on a
slow plate of the process, or slow landscape
kind, and that this be fairly fully developed.
Then from this positive, or “transparency.”
a new negative be made in the same way,
i.e., by contact. A candle, at 2to 3 feet, be-
ing the suggested illuminant. The exposure
to be found by a strip trial. The chief fea-
ture sought being the bringing out of the
mountains against the sky. In the original
negative there was very little difference
between mountain (snow clad) and sky.
It was now suggested to try and clear
away some of the general fog by hypo,
and ferricyanide. This, if not overdone,
ought to help the mountain and sky
feeble contrast. Then the next step
would be to intensify, by the acid-bichro-
mate bleacher, and re-develop, and to
repeat this if required. I mention this case
fully, because it seems to be a state of
affairs that frequently occurs with the
tourist photographer. But, as the Irishman
says, the best way to treat failures is to
avoid them by giving correct exposure and
correct development.
Jottings.
I hear that we may soon be having on
the market an English-made lens, working
at something f/2. Comparing this with —
let us say—f/6, we get the relative rapidity
of 9 to i ; or compared with f/8, the work-
ing speed would be 16 to i. This new lens
thus bids fair to make possible specialised
work, that at present is out of the question.
Scum marks, that remind one of the
track of a slug or snail, sometimes make
their appearance on the surface of bromide
and gaslight prints—chiefly of the glossy
kind. As they can be removed by acid,
probably they point to lime, etc., in the
water. When the prints have been well
washed, after fixing, pass them into water,
20 ozs. hydrochloric acid, drain, and give
them sto io minutes. Then a couple of
final rinses in plain water. Before putting
them out to dry, give them a rub over with
a plug of wet cotton wool.
The Photographic Convention has come
to life again, and just held a successful
meeting at Oxford, after being in a state of
suspended animation during the war. The
first convention meeting was at Derby, in
1886. Its previous meeting at Oxford was
in 1901.


“IN SPRING ARRAY.”
S. W. Eutrope.
Melbourne Camera Club.


STRAIGHT PRINTS FROM STRAIGHT
NEGATIVES
The Secret of Beautiful Photography
“SUNSHINE AND SHADOWS.”
H. Bedggood.
Melbourne Camera Club.
By WARD MUIR.
A fine article by a skilled worker and a particularly experienced photographic journalist. It is
commended to our readers, whose work should benefit by careful study of the ideas offered.
My contention is that photography deals
with facts. A beautiful photograph is pro-
duced by pointing the camera at a beautiful
fact. There are such a lot of beautiful
facts in the world that it is unnecessary to
photograph facts which are not beautiful,
and then bestow vast pains on altering the
resulting picture. This, indeed, is more
than a waste of time. It nearly always re-
sults in the production of a work which,
compared with a pure photograph, is
vitiated by manifest imperfections. Even
when those imperfections are skilfully
minimised, the actual texture of the
print can seldom, if ever, come up to that
of a print devoid of handwork from an un-
retouched negative.
There is a great deal of amusement to be
obtained from the practice of the craft of
combining handwork and photography—as.
for instance, in the oil process. But if the
sole object be the evocation of a thing of
beauty, then the necessity to introduce hand-
work for the purpose of modifying either
the tone-values or the drawing, is only
proof that the would-be picture-maker does
not know his business. Everything in
photography lies in the choice of subject,
Exposure, development, and printing pre-
sent no difficulties; to be sure, these pro-
cesses can almost be reduced to the
mechanical. Choice of subject, however,
can never be mechanical; it is always indi-
vidual; and it is in the choice of subject
that photographers have their only real
chance of seriously exercising personal taste
—therefore, their only real chance of being
what is called artistic.
The old dispute as to whether photo-
graphy is or is not an art, need hardly con-
cern us. The label does not matter. We
are interested only in whether the results


“AT FRANKSTON."
H. Bedggood.
Melbourne Camera Club.
produced are beautiful or are not beautiful.
Well, this utterly depends on whether the
subjects are beautiful or are not beautiful.
Personally, I am more addicted to land-
scapes than to figures, and I maintain that
if a photographer, having secured a land-
scape negative, finds it essential to revise
the subject in printing, then he has selected
a subject unsuited to photography. Why
should he do so, when there is an endless
supply of landscape subjects which are
suited to photography I suspect him of
thinking and seeing in terms of some other
medium —the medium, probably, whose tools
are the pencil and the brush. If he posi-
tively cannot find landscapes which make
beautiful photographs, if he positively only
sees the world as a place which requires its
natural compositions recast —a tree deleted
here, a shadow lightened there, a cloud in-
troduced in another place—then he should
“chuck” photography, which plainly is not
suited to his temperament, and attend a
painting class.
But if the formula for producing beauti-
ful landscape photographs is thus simple,
surely it is even simpler when applied to
those works generally classified as “figure
studies.” I hold that a “figure study” prac-
titioner who, having taken a picture,
solemnly makes an oil print in order to
modify the lighting effect, straighten the
curve of an ugly hand, or what not, is
openly confessing that he posed and
lit his model wrongly in the first instance.
With studio figure-study work, the photo-
grapher creates his picture first and then
exposes a plate on his creation. Why should
he ever evolve an imperfection, and then
photograph it, and by handwork devices
“put it right,” when he might have evolved
a perfection which did not need any “put-
ting right” whatever?
Of course, we all know that it is difficult
to get these figure studies flawlessly perfect
in every detail. It is. maybe, even more
difficult to find flawlessly perfect landscapes.
That cannot be helped. We have to do our
best, always remembering that photography
deals with facts. As soon as we start alter-
ing facts, we start altering photography.
Why should we not alter photography,
someone says? My answer is two-fold.
First, its possibilities are sufficiently delight-
ful without any alteration. Secondly, altera-
tion invariably results in a product which is
cruder than it would have been if no altera-
tion had been attempted. That is. if a
“straight” photograph is unbeautiful it can-
not be made beautiful without loss of photo-
graphic quality; its unbeautifulness is the
photographer’s fault, either (a) because he
chose his subject wrongly, or (b) because
he exposed and developed it wrongly, or
{c) because he did both.
Photography’s limitations must be recog-


nised. There are limitations in every me-
dium of expression. In literature we are
limited to the use of words. In painting
we are limited to subjects which can be
delineated on the flat, e.g., we cannot show
the back of a figure as well as the front,
though sculpture can. On the stage we are
limited by considerations of space. And
so on. The limitations of each art are
what give that art its peculiar interest, not
merely technically, but aesthetically.
The limitations of photography are con-
siderable but not excessive; and if we be-
lieve (as I believe) that no one has yet
approached the end of photography’s possi-
bilities within those limitations, this is all
the more reason why we should not strain
to go outside them. No other pictorial
process gives results in the least resembling
the results of photography. Those results
are so wonderful, of their kind, that it
seems a pity to struggle to get at results
which are textually less wonderful, and
exhibit peculiarities, associated with other
mediums. To aim at a photograph like a
painting is as ill-advised as to aim at a
painting like a photograph.
Suppose, then, I have got a print, and
someone tells me that by using the oil
process, or by spreading matt varnish on
sections of the surface of the negative, or by
retouching, I might improve it, my reply
would be that I decline. If he persuaded me
that the defects alluded to are serious ones.
I should throw awav the negative and turn
to the few million other subjects left to me:
this picture, one failure amongst so many
possible successes, is not worth bothering
with. Should I have exposed and developed
correctly, and the result displeases the eye,
then my selection of subject was at fault.
Considering any finished print, the pro-
duct of pure photography, we must either
accept or reject: it is idle to put forward
suggestions for tinkering at it. Tinkering
will only spoil the photography. To trim
the print a little more or little less is reason-
able enough, for trimming does not alter its
photographic essence. To print (or en-
large) it with a little more or a little less
diffusion of the image is also legitimate,
for this, too, is photographic.
The softening of the image obtained by
throwing the picture out of focus, either
locally or throughout its whole area, in the
negative, and that other softening which is
brought about by printing through ground-
glass, enlarging through bolting silk, etc.,
are photographic: they are effects produced
delicately by optics and light, not by clumsy
hand interference in the image texture on
the emulsion. Moreover, these softnesses
are highly typical of photography, and of no
other pictorial medium. Painting, for in-
stance, cannot imitate them. The “im-
pressionism” of the painter does not look
like the photographic diffusion.
The critic, then, in examining a pictorial
print produced by pure photography, may.
with usefulness, suggest trimming, or a
greater or less degree of diffusion in the
print. After which it is a case of take
it or leave it. Its author is justified in say-
ing ; “This is the best I can do, because it
is all that photography can do. The fact
that minor factors in the composition, or
the shadow detail, or this, or that, or the
other, are hardly what a painter would
have wished them to be, is no more a valid
objection to this photograph than the fact
that it is not in colours. The scope of the
painter’s medium is different from the
scope of my medium; and, just as there
are some things which he cannot do, so there
are some things which I cannot do; and
there is no reason why I should ‘fash’ my-
self to try.”
Photography deals with facts. Point the
camera at a beautiful fact and you get a
beautiful photograph.
The formula is simple. Putting it into
practice is less so. We must merely get
as near its achievement as is individually
possible, and, for myself, I have concluded
that the only treatment which should be
administered to a photograph with which
we are dissatisfied is—destruction. The
author of any given photograph is its sole
final judge. Every photographer should
take his pictures to please himself, not to
please anyone else. (Fortunately, pictorial
photography does not pay, so we need not
bear hypothetical sales in mind.) He,
therefore, can decree the destruction of a
photograph or its preservation, and it is
nobody’s business but his own that he
tolerates a high light which might have been
made less bright, or a shadow which should
have been less black. These were what photo-
graphy gave him; the best photography
which he could compass.
As he improves in photography he will
perpetrate fewer and fewer artistic
solecisms. But if he always takes refuge
in handwork remedies he will not only
sacrifice photography’s subtlety, but will
cease to improve as a practitioner; all his
pictures will end by being hybrids—neither
photographs nor drawings. •*
And one of the curious, and apparently
inevitable outcomes of giving way to the
habit of hand-work tinkering, is that he
will endlessly be altering, altering, altering;
taking other people’s advice; never making
a final print which conclusively meets the
views either of himself or of anyone else.
He becomes less and less able to perform
that superb gesture of the good photo-
grapher—the throwing away of the im-
perfect negative into the dustbin. For he
is always in a state of incertitude, eternally
thinking that “something might be made
of it.”
If something was not made of it when the
shutter opened and closed, then nothing can
be made of it at any stage thereafter.
The Amateur Photographer.


OUR ILLUSTRATIONS.
“HOMEWARD BOUND.”
C. Stevens.
Melbourne Camera Club.
In this number we have great pleasure
in presenting to our readers fifteen repro-
ductions from selected photographs sub-
mitted to us by the Melbourne Camera Club
(late Working Men’s College Camera
Club).
Some of these are of a very high order
of merit, as can be readily understood
when the names of the photographers are
noted.
The Melbourne Camera Club, which for
many years past has worked under con-
siderable difficulties, under its old name,,
has now taken on new life, and will doubt-
less sustain its reputation as a “live”
society.
We hope to have representative selecticns
from other camera clubs from time to time,
as these are a good indication of the pro-
gress made by the particular society.
There is, of course, one difficulty, which
is the satisfactory reproduction of prints
made on rough-surfaced and toned papers,
and in the case of those under review this
is particularly evident, but cannot possibly
be avoided. There are no means to-day of
making a perfect half-tone block from the
papers so largely used for exhibition work.
Yet, if a smooth-surfaced paper is sub-
stituted for that used in the exhibition print,
there is a loss of quality in other ways.
Therefore, we have to do the best we can
with the reproduction of such prints, and
desire to convey our special thanks to the
authors for their kindness in letting our
readers have an opportunity of seeing the
work.


PHOTOGRAPHING INTERIORS
“AT WARRANDYTE."
B. Buggee.
Melbourne Camera Club.
By CHARLES EDWIN ARNOLD.
It is acknowledged that interiors—the
interiors of rooms, offices and the like—are
extremely difficult subjects to handle suc-
cessfully, and this is perhaps the reason
why the demand for work of this kind is
not greater. Interiors, rightly handled,
make very interesting pictures, and, pro-
perly made, they are greatly appreciated.
In my interior work I depend practically
entirely upon daylight as an illuminant,
using flashlight only when life must be de-
picted. Flashlight has its advantages, but
it is, to my mind, unsuited to the portrayal
of an interior, for the simple reason that
the lighting effect secured is not that natural
to the room, and it does not give the win-
dows and the open doors into other rooms
their natural and logical appearances. True,
using a flash does much to simplify matters;
but, while the result may not seem par-
ticularly unsatisfactory to the photographer
who has seen the room only once, the cus-
tomer, more familiar therewith, perhaps
hardly recognises the scene when the light
is from a point practically opposite that
from which it normally comes, and the parts
of the room generally in shadow are shown
as the best-lighted and most noticeable. We
can by only a moment’s thought recall how
strange some room, with which we are
quite familiar, looks when seen for the first
time illuminated by perhaps a large chan-
delier near the centre, instead of the natural
light coming in through the windows.
Using daylight and a long exposure, one
is in a position to do almost anything he
may wish in the matter of evening up the
exposure, particularly if there are a number
of doors and windows through which the
light enters. A window back or well to one
side of the camera may be allowed to remain
unobscured during the entire exposure. One
coming within the view may be best covered
during one-half the exposure, perhaps for a
greater or lesser period. It is obvious that
if it be covered for too great a part of the
total exposure, a false effect, somewhat
akin to that resulting from a flash from be-
hind the camera would result. If the prin-
cipal light of a room enter through a large
window in front of the camera, that light
should be allowed to dominate the lesser
lights that other windows afford. The ob-
scuring of a window in front of the camera
can be carried to such a point that the view
outside shows plainly in the picture; and,
when this can be done without falsifying the
lighting, it adds much to the interest of the
picture, adds much to its charm. Frequently
the sash of such windows become obscured
in halation (or would so become were not
control exercised in developing) when the
necessary amount of light is allowed to
enter through them. The proper procedure


“INTERESTED.”
H. Bedggood.
Melbourne Camera Club


“THE SILVER LINING.”
E. H. Jones.
Melbourne Camera Club.
is to so regulate the time they are allowed
to remain uncovered that the proper light-
ing effect is secured, and then, if over-
exposure of the window itself results, use
such control as may be possible in develop-
ment.
The above indicates clearly two forms
of control —that of covering or darkening
windows or doors for a portion of the
exposure time, and that of holding back de-
velopment of brilliantly lighted areas in
making the negative. The first I generally
achieve by using some large sheets of stiff
binder’s board that have been either painted
black or covered on one side with black
cloth. Each sheet is provided with a slot,
about one-fourth inch wide, extending from
the centre to within a few inches of one
side. By overlapping the slotted sides of
two of these sheets and passing a winged
nut-bolt through the slot, one is provided
with an adjustable “blind” that can be
arranged to fit any window or door, much
as do the adjustable window screens in the
market. Of course, two or more sets of
these slotted screens are required to fill a
window, depending upon its height. A door
is made blind in the same way. By slightly
springing the cardboards before finally
tightening up the screw in the slot, enough
pressure can be secured against the sides of
the window or door casing to hold them in
place. As light will enter through the slots
where they come opposite each other, it is
best to glue a strip of cloth along each side
of these openings to cover them, without
impeding the action of the bolt that holds
each pair of “blinds” in the proper posi-
tion to fill the space being darkened. Where
the window is easily accessible from the
outside, large sheets made out of a good
close-texture, but thin, black cloth can easily
be pinned around the outer casing, in such
a way that a slight, quick pull at one corner
will bring them down when the light is to
be admitted.
Control in development is, I find, mainly
a matter of denying the over-exposed por-
tions sufficient reducer to allow of their be-
coming blocked up before the detail in the
poorly lighted portions are brought out.
It is obvious that tray development, with the
constant bringing (by the rocking of the
tray) of a new portion of the developer into
action over every part of the plate, defeats
this end. The portrait films, I find, have
wonderful semi-orthochromatic qualities,
combined with the power of overcoming
halation of windows and the like as per-
fectly as do non-halation plates.
The matter of uniform lighting that still
maintains the natural light effects of the
room having consideration, the next point
is that of good colour values. I always use
an orthochromatic plate, and, in addition,
I sometimes use a colour filter, either a light
or medium one as the case seems to demand.
The ortho emulsion will take care of ordin-
ary colour contrasts, particularly where
warm tones prevail, but occasionally one
will meet with a case in which blues form
an important part of the colour scheme, and
to prevent these last from being lost, a ray
screen is required. With the lighting pro-
perly controlled, with full exposure assured,
and with tone values preserved, good work
only requires a little judgment in the matter
of selecting the right viewpoint and avoid-


“QUIESCENT.”
C. J. Merfield.
Melbourne Camera Club.
ing the inclusion of unnecessary furniture,
or the like, so close to the camera that it
appears distorted or, what is equally objec-
tionable, cut off abruptly, so that no support
is shown.
Correct exposure is not near so difficult
as one might imagine, it being mainly a
matter of giving enough time. If one will
go over his past experience in this line, and
try to recall an instance in which too much
exposure was given, he will realise that
there is little danger in that respect. About
all that is necessary is to be sure and give
plenty of time; of course, using judgment
in the matter. I do not wish to imply that
any exposure will be right, just so it is not
too short, but I would call attention to the
fact that the latitude is much greater in this
class of work than in the usual run of com-
mercial photography.
Point of view is all important. A well-
handled interior gives the beholder a feeling
akin to that of standing within the room
pictured; a poorly handled one appears as
would the scene were it examined from
without through an opening in the wall. In
one case, the beholder is satisfied with what
is included ; in the other, the feeling is one of
being denied, of being offended by portions
of heavy articles of furniture that his eyes in-
stinctively try to furnish with a support. So
important is this matter that I would hesi-
tate to photograph any interior without be-
ing supplied with a battery of lenses that
would permit me to select the point of view
that I desired, and then use a lens of such
focal length as would give me what I
w r anted from that particular point.
Of course, it is not always possible to get
exactly where one would wish in the mat-
ter of either distance or the direction in
which the camera is pointed; but it must
be remembered that one can at least place
the camera on the exact spot from which
the room is most frequently viewed by those
visiting it, is at least always available, and
of course a selection of lenses will permit
the worker to include all that the beholder
could see from that point without turning
his head, if that is desirable. On the other
hand, truth to subject makes it advisable to
use as long a focal length as is allowable
consistent with a satisfactory portrayal of
the main or characteristic features of the
room. I might add, that while the position
from which the room is generally entered
may give the most familiar aspect, one per-
mitting a vista into another room, on to a
balcony, or through a window, sometimes is
more advisable. True, such a viewpoint may
not be the one the visitor encounters; but it
may be the one with which he is more im-
pressed than with the other, it may perhaps
tell a more complete story concerning the
room being pictured.
Photographic Journal of America.


PHOTOGRAPHS IN SUNSHINE
“THE SUNLIT PATH.”
W. Green.
Melbourne Camera Club
By J. KNIGHT MOWBRAY.
With the passing of the winter months
come again the days of powerful sunlight,
and a few hints may be offered on making
photographs of various subjects under
these brighter conditions. Many photo-
graphers use cameras that are unsuitable
for hand exposures except in bright light,
and they are especially liable to overlook
or misunderstand several points that have
an important bearing on the success or
otherwise of their results.
We may consider first the common in-
stance of an outdoor subject, in which the
play of sunlight and shadow is an important
factor. Properly rendered, such subjects
are very effective; but it is none too easy
to give a truthful impression of a sun-
shine effect in a photograph. The common
failing is a lack of luminosity. The sunlit
portions are apt to come out chalky or
snowy in tone, while the shadows are dark
and unrelieved. The usual reason for this
is that the photographer has been misled by
the apparent brightness of the sunshine, and
has calculated his exposure for the highest
illumination. Then, in his efforts to bring
out detail in the shadows he has prolonged
development until the high lights have be-
come far too dense, so that detail and
gradation of the delicate tones are alike
lost.
The correct procedure is to give such an
exposure that all the necessary shadow detail
is easily developable. Then this shadow de-
tail will develop out to the required density
before the brightly lighted portions have be-
come a dense, solid mass. There will be
tone and detail in both the sunshine and
the shadow, and that is as it should be.
The resulting print will give a true sun-
shine effect, with detail and light every-
where, bright and clear in some parts, dif-
fused and soft in others. The golden rule
of exposing for the shadows is never more
applicable than in the case of strong con-
trasts of light and shade. Of course, it
must not be overdone. If the exposure is
much too long, and development much too
short, the print will be flat and gloomy,
robbed of all its sparkle and contrast. That
is the reason why some intended sunlight
effects give the impression of feeble moon-
light, or an impending storm.
Sunlight is often an advantage in certain
kinds of figure subjects—mowers and
reapers at work, for example—iiut it is
generally a handicap in outdoor portraiture.
Strong light falling on the eyes, and strong
cast shadows on the face, make it difficult
to secure an easy and natural expression
and likeness, such as more diffused lighting
will yield. As in the case of sunlit views,
under-exposure accentuates the difficulty of
getting a pleasing result.
In exterior architectural subjects a strong
side lighting is frequently a great boon.
It aids in securing relief, and makes the
most of carved detail, and the cast shadows
are often very helpful in producing masses
of rich half-tone. In interiors the breaking
in of sun-rays through the windows gives
interesting play of light and shade, and
the rays themselves may form a valuable
addition to the pictorial effect. When i f is


“THE WHITE SHIP.”
H. Bedggood.
Melbourne Camera Club.


desired to emphasise the sunbeams them-
selves, it can be accomplished by shaking a
mat just before the exposure, so that the
dust in the air reflects the passing light
still more strongly. In certain woodland
subjects the sun rays as they are seen to
filter through the foliage, are frequently
turned to good advantage.
With all such pronounced effects there
are two valuable aids to success. One is
the use of a backed plate, or film; the
other is a lens hood that will prevent sun-
light from falling on the glass of the lens,
and also shut out as much as possible of
the light that is not necessary for the for-
mation of the actual image.
Another point which is very important in
sunshine photography is the use of an
orthochromatic plate, or film, with a yellow
light filter; but to secure the fullest ad-
vantages from this combination the photo-
grapher must be careful to make an ade-
quate allowance for the increase in exposure
rendered necessary by the colour screen;
always, in doing so, keeping in view the
shadows rather than the high lights.
The professional photographer in his
studio gets many of his best results by a
skilful manipulation of the sky shades and
blinds. He can enormously vary and
modify the lighting of the sitter, and get
just the right illumination he wants, and
place it just where it is required. On a
sunny day, when there are passing clouds in
the sky, very similar results can be obtained.
The clouds are not under control, as in the
case of the photographer’s blinds, but it is
generally only a case of a little patient wait-
ing and observation. At one time the fore-
ground will be in shadow, while the dis-
tance is in sunshine; at another time, the
conditions will be reversed. A particular
object or portion of the scene may stand
out bright and strong in contrast with its
surroundings, or it may sink into the
darkest note in the composition. The near
portion of a road may be usefully veiled in
cloud shadow, or be chequered with light
and shade. Such a day provides the oppor-
tunities never otherwise available.
Strong cloud effects may also be secured
at such times as these; but some of them
have a tendency to be over dramatic, and to
provoke irreverent remarks about fireworks
or bursting shells.
In some subjects sunshine leads to cer-
tain unfortunate defects. If very bright
points or small patches of light are out of
focus, they are apt to resolve themselves
into more or less round blobs or moons.
The eye does not see them in the form they
assume in the print, and they are there-
fore resented as unnatural and meaningless.
Such things as rushes and grass, when
brightly lighted, are apt to become un-
naturally hard and wiry in appearance,
while leaves and pebbles under the same
conditions give a number of pronounced
spots that make the result “spotty” or
“fidgety.” This necessitates a good deal of
careful hand work on the print to lower
the tone of the many bright spots, and make
the effect more quiet and harmonious.
If the photographer can avoid the pit-
falls indicated, he will find that sunshine is
a powerful ally in his efforts to secure
beautiful and striking pictures. He must
carefully study the effects themselves as
they appear in nature, and then persevere
until he succeeds in producing faithful
transcripts of them.— Photography.
HOME PORTRAITURE.
I have, on several occasions, noticed the
very pleasing effects secured in some of the
scenes in the moving picture shows, those
showing close-up views of the leading
characters. Inquiring as to how they were
produced, 1 found that they were made on
the stage of an out-door studio, with the
light well from above and well under
control, in the matter of subduing sunlight,
with large muslin screens that could be
raised, lowered, or swung on their centres.
However, finding much in the lighting that
pleased me, 1 attempted to secure like effects
in my home portrait work. Taking the lar-
gest available window in my home —one
only five by eight feet —I arranged a curtain
roller on the floor below, so that an opaque
grey curtain could be drawn up from below
to a height somewhat above the head of the
sitter placed directly in front of it. At
each side of the top of the window I ar-
ranged two arms extending into the room
about three and one-half feet long. These
arms were supported by brackets, and on
their upper edge carried six sets of the
ordinary metal supports for curtain rollers.
In one of these pairs of holders a curtain
roller is placed, and the curtain is drawn
downward and forward into the room, to
a point about half-way between the sitter
and the lens, and low enough so that, with
the eye at the lens, the top of the opaque
screen drawn up over the lower part of the
window is hidden. The camera, of course,
is placed in the centre of the room, with the
lens pointing directly towards the window.
The light coining from the top of the win-
dow is mainly reflected downward on to
the face of the sitter, seated with her back
to the opaque curtain covering that part of
the window within the field of the picture.
One can work in about the same way by
attaching the reflecting curtain directly to
the top of the window, but I find it better
to bring it forward somewhat by means of
the two arms mentioned. — Camera Craft.


SOUTH HEAD
FATALITY.
Young photographer
drowned.
Extreme regret was aroused among
all classes in general and photo-
graphers in particular by the tragedy
at South Head, Sydney, on Eieffit-
Hour Day, when one youth lost his
life, and another had a very narrow
escape. Three youths, Victor Dutch
(18). Eric Merton (18), and Geoffrey
Henningham (18), all employees of
Kodak (Australasia) Ltd., and ardent,
amateur photographers, were armed
with Kodaks, and made their way to
the foot of the cliffs at South Head
for the purpose of securing pictures of
the spray thrown up by the big rollers.
An unexpectedly large wave suddenly
broke over them, sweeping Dutch and
Merton off their feet into the surf,
while Henningham fortunately man-
aged to cling to a rock.
Merton was carried out to sea im-
mediately, but Vleuningham thought
that Dutch was dashed against a rock,
and the body sank, not to be recovered
for eight days. Merton was picked
up by the pilot steamer, “Captain
Cook,” after he had struggled for two
hours, and when rescued was quite
exhausted after his terrible fight. Dr.
Cohen, the Government Medical
Officer, worked on him for several
hours before he regained conscious-
ness.
We feel the deepest regret for the
relatives of Victor Dutch, a boy of
exemplary character, with an excel-
lent future with Kodak (Australasia)
Ltd., cut off at the outset by his un-
timely death.
The above illustration is of Eric
Merton and Victor Dutch (at left)
as they appeared only a few minutes
prior to the tragedv. the photograph
being made by Geoffrey Henningham.


INTERSTATE NEWS.
“JONQUILS.”
H. Bedggood.
Melbourne Camera Club.
Adelaide Camera Club.
My Committee would be very grateful if
you would be good enough to announce
through the medium of the A.P.-R., that we
are holding our Annual Exhibition on Dec.
16 to 20, 1919, inclusive, in the Society of
Arts Rooms, Institute Building, North
Terrace. Adelaide.
We are desirous of creating greater in-
terest in Pictorial Photographv in South
Australia, and of bringing the Club more
prominently before the amateur photo-
graphers of the State. In a city such as
Adelaide, the Club should be able to boast
of a much larger membership, and we
especially invite those interested to attend
our meetings, which are held in the Insti-
tute Buildings, North Terrace, on the
second Monday in each month. With the
object of creating a greater interest in the


Art, we are inviting amateurs to exhibit
their work in the open section, which has
been especially created for their benefit.
The exhibits may be either Technical or
Pictorial. Intending exhibitors should for-
ward their work to the Secretary, Adelaide
Camera Club, Institute Buildings, North
Terrace, not later than December 12.
Any amateur desirous of joining our
ranks may obtain full particulars from me
at the above address.
Thanking you in anticipation,—Yours
faithfully,
C. TOFTS,
Asst. Hon. Sec. and Treasurer.
Adelaide Camera Club.
Malvern and Caulfield Camera Club.
Just a year ago, a small notice appeared
in the A.P.-R., stating that a new camera
club had been formed in Malvern, under the
above name. Since then it has made splen-
did progress. The aim has been to foster
an intelligent interest in all classes of photo-
graphy, and to inspire a genuine liking for
photographic art, above that of the ordin-
ary amateur snapshot. To this end, a sys-
tem of monthly outings was installed, with
a meeting the following fortnight in each
month. At the beginning of this year it
was arranged to hold a competition for
prints from each outing, and a certificate
is given for the best picture made. The
competition runs in three grades—Senior,
Intermediate, and Junior —the two former
being judged by Mr. Woolocott, and the lat-
ter by the Committee. Two prizes, which
were very kindly donated by Mr. D. L.
Muntz, will be presented at the end of the
year to the holders of the two largest num-
bers of certificates. At the meetings, lec-
tures and demonstrations are given on
photographic subjects. The aim of these, so
far, has been largely for the Juniors; but
this year a course has been arranged for
advanced workers as well, so that there
will probably be two lots of demonstrations
the same night, one for Seniors and the
other for Juniors. Some of these include a
lantern lecture, demonstration on combina-
tion printing, and lecturette on bromide
papers as compared to gaslight, colour cor-
rect photography, reduction and intensifica-
tion, matte varnishing, and reducing nega-
tive, etc.
The Committee are desirous of promoting
an interest in lantern-slide making, and to
this end a competition has been arranged
for June, 1920. Members have thus prac-
tically nine months to prepare slides, and
the latter will be the subject for some lec-
turettes during the coming year.
Recently, Mr. Magnus, of Kodak (Aus-
tralasia) Ltd., demonstrated lantern-slide
making, and gave some useful hints.
With the number of enthusiastic camera
workers in and around Melbourne it is
astonishing how few belong to a club, and
this one wishes to enrol those not already
members of a society who are interested in
photography, irrespective of whether they
are beginners or advanced workers. The
Secretary, Mr. R. H. White, 26 Kooyong-
road, Malvern, Vic., will be pleased to
answer any questions.
Timaru (N.Z.) Photographic Society.
The first meeting of the Timaru Photo-
graphic Society was held on the 26th Sep-
tember. The result was most gratifying
to the promoters of the scheme, Mr. E. H.
Ombler and Mr. G. T. Palmer, M.A., and
the success of the venture seems quite
assured.
Mr. G. T. Palmer, who was elected to the
chair, explained the objects and aims of the
Society, which he said was entirely for the
benefit of amateur photographers, both old
and young. Besides mutual help among
the members themselves, lectures and
demonstrations would be given by experts
upon subjects of general interest to
amateurs, and outings in the summer
months would be indulged in under capable
leadership, when practical instruction will
be given in the actual operations of taking
a picture, and competitions would be ar-
ranged periodically, and prizes given, which
should stimulate the members into doing
their best.
An interesting discussion followed, in
which the question of the admission of lady
members was brought forward. It was
originally thought that the Society should
be formed of male members only, as with
the inclusion of ladies it might make the
Club too large, and tend towards over-
crowding the Society’s rooms.
Dr. Loughnan, however, pointed out that
this could easily be avoided, if the tendency
to overcrowding took place, by instituting
a ladies’ night, as distinct from the ordin-
ary Club night. On being put to the vote
it was unanimously decided that ladies be
admitted to full membership.
The subject of junior members was also
discussed, and it was decided that a junior
member be a person between the ages of
14 and 18, the subscription to be decided at
the general meeting.
A Provisional Committee was set up,
comprising Messrs.. G. T. Palmer, Dr.
Loughnan, A. T. H. Williams, H. D. Oddie,
and the Secretary, Mr. E. H. Ombler, who
will formulate the various details and ar-
rangements necessary to the commencement
of operations and will place these before a
general meeting, to be held later.
Votes of thanks were passed to the chair-
man and to all those who had promised
support; and the meeting, which was most
enthusiastic, promised well for the Society’s
future prosperity.


EDITOR’S LOCKER.
Our Sixth All-Australasian Number.
We will very shortly be making up the
contents of this special issue, every part
being contributed by local writers and
photographers. The number is recognised
as the finest publication of its kind issued
south of the line, and for it we will gladly
consider the best of which you are capable.
Following our regular rule, we will re-
munerate every contributor, either of suit-
able articles or photographs for publica-
tion. Let us have of your best as early
as is possible. Of the issue we each year
have printed a considerably increased num-
ber, and each year the issue has been fully
sold out. This suggests that if you want
copies—and the mere fact that it is wholly
Australasian in character should urge you
to support the venture —you should order
them early. If you leave ordering to the
last minute it is highly probable you may
miss the issue, and—it’s too good to miss!
Order from any Kodak dealer or branch.
Solemn Thoughts.
The Thomasville Times , U.S.A., says: —
“If you see an editor who pleases every-
body, there will be a glass plate over his
face, and he will not be standing up.”
“The Elements of Photography.”
No. 8 of the Practical Photography
Series: Though it contains little that is new,
the general history and methods of photo-
graphy are briefly touched upon, and
doubtless the information offered here will
be found of value to the novice. Price, i/6,
of all Kodak Branches.
Mr. R. A. Reid, Bethshan Mission, Wyee,
writes : —“I am getting along fine with the
Nepera Glossy Paper and Post Cards, used
with Kodak Special Developer. A photo-
graphic friend here and I agree that these
papers cannot be beaten. My friend also
recommends me to try Austral S.R.
Plates.”
“The British Journal of Photography” re-
ports that Mr. A. Dordan-Pyke (late
R.A.F.) gave an instructive lecture on “The
Importance of Photography in the War” at
the Croydon Camera Club on June 13. Re-
ferring to photographic materials used, the
lecturer said : “Fully seventy-five per cent,
of the negatives taken were on Wratten
Panchromatics.”


“EVENING SHADOWS. AUTUMN.”
S. W. Eutrope.
Melbourne Camera Club.
The New Kodak Catalogue
is available now
It is quite a long time since a Kodak
Catalogue was issued, the delay being due
to the constant fluctuation of prices, lack
of regular supplies in many lines, etc.
However, it is ready now —132 pages,
closely packed with details of apparatus and
other items useful to photographers. There
is a copy for you procurable through your
local dealer, or post free from any of the
Kodak Branches. Better make early appli-
cation, as the first edition is limited in
number.
“Stereoscopic Photography.”
When the few simple rules underlying
this branch of photographic work are
mastered, stereoscopic photography will be
found quite the most fascinating of all the
many and most varied sections. No. 175 of
“The Photo Miniature” furnishes an in-
teresting explanation of this specialty. It
fully explains how to make stereoscopic
pictures with ordinary apparatus, the
methods, transposing and viewing. It is a
book we are sure will interest our readers.
Procurable from all Kodak Branches.
Pn'cp t/6
Hcw the A.P.-R. Helps Societies.
Mr. G. Dehn, Hon. Sec., Melbourne
Camera Club, writes :
“Our Club wishes me to thank you for
the fine report of our Society in the Sep-
tember issue. We have captured several
new members through it.”
Mr. Edward H. Ombler. Hon. Sec.,
Timaru (N.Z.) Photographic Society,
writes —
“The help you so kindly gave me, first in
your letter, and secondly through the
columns of the A.P-R., has proved of valu-
able assistance, and I thank you on behalf
of the new Society for that help.”
Mr. J. E, E. Plumridge, “Heathercot,”
Sandgate, Brisbane writes : —r
“I have been asked to send you the en-
closed snapshot, which was taken with a
3A Special Kodak, exposure 1-25 sec., stop
f! 16, with a Kodak Self-Timer attachment.
I have been using the Kodak for the last
year, and am very pleased with the results.
“The Self-Timer attachment makes the
snapshots much more interesting, as I am
able to be in them myself; and this one
was taken at Bribie Island, a seaside resort.


A picnic group made with a Kodak Self Timer.
just before setting out for a picnic on the
main beach.
“The whole party are in the snap., in-
cluding myself on the running board of
the car, so it is a good record of a happy
day spent. ’
Kosciusko Revisited.
As we go to press, there is in the window
of the Tourist Department, Challis House,
Sydney, an exhibition of some 60 enlarge-
ments of scenes at Mount Kosciusko, from
Kodak Film negatives, by the Editor. Most
of the exposures were made with a No. 3
(quarter-plate) Kodak, and the enlarge-
ments are on Austral-Kodak Bromide
Papers of various surfaces, toned and un-
toned. Many of the snow scenes are very
high-keyed, and will probably specially in-
terest those cameraists who have experi-
mented with work in this style, which is
extremely difficult to make effective. After
the exhibition is finished in Sydney, the
pictures will go on to Melbourne, Adelaide,
Brisbane and Hobart. Most of our sub-
scribers will therefore have an opportunity
of viewing the prints, though at the moment
dates cannot be fixed for the different
cities.
South Australian Peace Exhibition
Kodak (Australasia) Ltd. has received
the following letter from the S.A. Chamber
of Manufactures, Incorporated, who are
controlling the above Exhibition: —
“Your letter of the 25th ulto., in which
you offer £250 in prizes in the photographic
section of the All-Australian Peace Exhi-
bition, to be held in Adelaide from March
26 to May 22 next year, was duly placed
before the Exhibition Committee, when I
was instructed to accept the offer and to
express to you the thanks of the Com-
mittee for the generosity of your Company.
“The Committee will make every en-
deavour to give the fullest publicity to the
prizes offered, and they hope that the
Photographic Section will be one of the
features of the Exhibition.
“At the request of my Committee, I have
written direct to Mr. Baker, expressing the
Chamber’s thanks.
“Yours faithfully,
“(Signed) H. E. WINTERBOTTOM,
“Secretary.”
Henry A. Strong passes away.
Henry A. Strong, for more than a quarter
of a century the President of the Eastman
Kodak Co., of New York, died on July 26
last, aged 81 years.
He was not merely generous in a big
way, a liberal giver to the charities of his
home city, but he was thoughtful in the
little things. He had the happy faculty of
carrying with him an atmosphere of good
cheer; a hard worker until his later years,
there was always time for a pleasant word
of greeting, a winning smile, a merry quip
or jest. And these he passed along, with-
out favoritism, to the office boy as freely
as to a fellow Director. It was all spon-
taneous, the simple, unaffected evidence of
his goodness of heart.
Photography owes much to Henry A.
Strong, for he it was who first had faith to
put money into the business that Mr. East-
man was developing. Rochester owes much
to him, not alone for his backing what is
now its greatest industry, but for his
charities and for his good citizenship.


WANTED,
THOROUGHLY EXPERT PRINTER,
skilled at enlarging and in the use of
Artura Paper. A good opportunity
offers in first-class New Zealand studio.
Address from KODAK (Australasia)
LTD., 379 George-street, Sydney.
WANTED. —“N. & G.” Sybil Camera, for
Roll Film or Plates. Size, V.P.K., 2*4
x 3%, or quarter plate. Send details to
N. & G., Box 864, G.P.0., Sydney.
The Latest “Fish Story.”
Mr. C. S. Harnett, a well-known amateur
of Sydney, sends the following, and re-
marks: “We won't want Kodak Film if we
keep a few of these fish handy!”
About a week ago, when fishing in the
Severn River, Mr. Jack Saunders captured
a Murray cod about 10 lb. in weight. This
was sent to Mr. Alec. Martin, of the Cos-
mopolitan Hotel, Warwick, and when
opened there was discovered on the lining
membrane of the gut a wonderfully clear
picture of an overhanging tree. The foliage
was most faithfully limned, the leaf edgings
being sharply marked out. No one could
mistake this representation of a tree, .with
its large trunk, boughs spreading in different
directions, and the usual Australian green-
ery above. Old fishermen, we are in-
formed, also state that they have seen on
the lining membrane of the gut pictures of
logs, with short branches spreading out.
It is probable that the Murray cod at some
period of its life has, by what means we
know not, been a subject of Nature’s
camera, and has registered the negative of
either the place where it had been spawned
or has later made its home. If there is to
be any explanation of this curiosity, it means
an explanation of one of Nature’s most
closely held secrets. —Warwick Daily News.
Ozobrome
Mr. W. H. Moffitt, who contributed an
instructive and interesting article, entitled
“A Plea for the Ozobrome Process,” to our
June number, writes; —
“I read with much interest the article in
the July A.P.-R. (reprinted from the A.P.
and P.), entitled ‘Carbro.’ The formula
given in that article is a great improvement
on that given by me in ‘A Plea for the
Ozobrome Process,’ and has given me most
satisfactory results. I find that the formula
is quite suitable for use with bromides
fixed and hardened in the bath, recom-
mended in the footnote to my article, the
author’s statement that prints fixed in an
acid bath are unsuitable notwithstanding.
The formula therefore can be used for the
non-transfer method, and with equal success.
“One criticism —I think the method sug-
gested by Mr. Farmer for bringing plaster
and bromide into contact is almost, certain
to result in a crop of air bells. At any rate,
that has been my experience. Moreover,
the bleaching action commences so quickly
that the slightest adjustment may result in
a double or blurred image. It is far better
for these reasons to lift the plaster from
the pigmenting bath, and slide it into posi-
tion over the bromide under water. Only
the bulk of the surface solution is removed
in this way. and the bleaching action is in
no way weakened.
“I am more enthusiastic than ever.”
The Associate Editor
is Still in Bagdad,
In spite of numerous promises by the
Defence Department to release the unfortu-
nate “53” of the Anzac Wireless Corps, left
in Mesopotamia, there does not seem much
probability of early fulfilment. The ex-
planation recently given is that the Indian
Government cannot spare these men—a
compliment, it is true, but not much satis-
faction to the remaining members of the
Corps and their relatives and friends. It
is almost a year since Armistice Day, and
these men are now considered part of the
Army of Occupation ! The delay in return,
however, has given the Associate Editor an
opportunity of visiting many of the old
historic sites, such as Mosul, Nineveh,
Asshur, Agar Guf, Babylon, etc., and adding
to his already valuable series of negatives
made in Mesopotamia and Persia. The re-
production on page 648, from a Kodak Film
negative, by Sapper Fordham, shows Sapper
Burke standing alongside the Great Bull,
or Lion (it is variously described) of
Babylon. This was exposed during the
winter, but on a recent visit the shade tem-
perature at 9.30 a.m. was 115 deg., while in
Baghdad temperatures up to 118 deg. have
been fairly regular!
In Layard’s Nineveh and Babylon, pub-
lished in 1883, is the following:—“The huge
lion stands over a man with outstretched
arms, which has led some imaginative
travellers to see in this group a representa-
tion of Daniel in the lions’ den. The figures
are in black basalt, either so barbarously
executed as to show very little progress in
art, or left unfinished by the sculptor. It
would scarcely be worth removal.”
In his letters, Sapper Burke desires to
be kindly remembered to the many readers
of the A.P-R.
FALLACIES.
Hubby: “Why does a woman say she’s
been shopping when she hasn’t bought any-
thing?”
Wifey: “Why does a man say he’s been
fishing when he hasn’t caught anything?”
Or, why does a camarist say that he’s
been out photographing when he returns
with results that are failures?
— Photo-Era.


ANSWERS TO CORRESPONDENTS.
W.F.P., WEST MELBOURNE.—“lnterested”
is a pleasing portrait of the small boy, though
the pose is very stiff. Of nice texture, and taste-
fully mounted.
C.R., EAST PRAHRAN. —Figure and rocking-
horse in “An Afternoon Ride” hopelessly out of
focus. Print rather carelessly turned out, and
should have been trimmed before being mounted.
B. CAMPERDOWN. —Your work is very
ambitious with a low-priced camera. The three
best prints are “Belladonna” (highly commended),
and “Sweet Peas”—the latter a good attempt, ex-
cept for the background, which should have been
larger—and “Christmas Lilies.” “Barbara” could,
with advantage, have been a little further away
from the lens Ducks, a very good attempt.
Others do not call for special mention, except that
you must pay very much greater attention to your
trimming and mounting, and also the tidiness of
your mounts generally.
C. TOOWOOMBA. —Baby with dogs, of
excellent technical quality, and would make a
splendid enlargement. Thanks for kindly
messages.
H. GOULBURN.—Had “John” been a
better enlargement, the print would have got a
higher award. Very flat and grey; otherwise,
excellent.
C.E.A , BUNYIP. —Group is from a very good
negative; one that would make a fine enlarge-
ment. In enlarging from such a negative, which
apparently is fairly hard, a full exposure would
be necessary, and development with a weak de-
veloper. This would probably give you better
values than you show in the small print, “Witches,”
a good example of record photography.
G.J.S., RAETIHI.—Prints apparently insuffi-
ciently fixed, with the result that they have faded.
Complete fixing of prints or negatives is actually
more important than prolonged washing. “A Por-
trait,” apparently from a first-class negative. The
portion marked on print returned would make a
pleasing enlargement for your home. This should
preferably be on rough or smooth cream crayon
paper, sepia toned. “Cliff Road,” a good record
photograph, only of interest to local residents.
L F.W., WILLIAMSTOWN.—The best is “Bon
Voyage”; a good print, from a fair negative.
“An Old-Timer” —from this negative you could
probably get a better print, as in that sent there
is no detail in the high lights. “Home Again,”
very much distorted; otherwise, fair technically.
G.H.0., DUNEDIN.—Two little girls technically
first-class. Pose not at all pleasing, and back-
ground too close and strongly marked.
J.M., CLAYTON. —Though technically good, the
background was badly selected for portrait of little
girl. This, however, would make a pleasing en-
largement for home decoration. V.P.K. prints are
almost too small for the open competition, and
good negatives should be enlarged, and the bigger
prints submitted.
E. PIONEER.—The tank is interesting
only as a record; good, technically. In “Little
Russel Falls,” the figure is too central, and should
have been placed more to either side, and prefer-
ably looking up at the Falls, rather than standing
to be photographed.
F. CAULFIELD.—“Chums All,” from a
splendid negative; except for the very strong pat-
tern of trellis background.
L.RA.U, SURREY HILLS.—“Joe,” a good
attempt; apparently from a very hard negative,
or the enlargement was insufficiently exposed and
developed.
L.A., CLIFTON HlLL.—“Weeding” has pleas-
ing lighting, and figure well placed. Background
poorly selected, and bright trunk of tree could
have been dodged. Technical work fair.
I. UNLEY.—“Pastoral,” technically first-
class; otherwise, uninteresting, owing to ineffective
grouping of cattle.
E.E.L., EAST MELBOURNE.—“A Happy
Pair” is from a good negative. Placing of figures
in relation to background not pleasing.
J. MELBOURNE.—“Care Free,” with a
better background, would certainly have been
amongst the prize-winners. “The Guardian,” fair
only; and required clouds to complete the scene.
W.J.P.8., PADDINGTON.—“Native Com-
panion” from a splendid negative of this graceful
bird.
R.F., GRANGE—“FIam ingoes,” including that
portion marked on print returned, would make a
pleasing panel, enlarged to whole plate.
T.C.M., CAULFIELD.—“Tim,” a first-class por-
trait of a dog; spoiled by poorly-selected sur-
roundings.
A.S.M., WELLINGTON.—Your work is un-
even—some of it first-class, other prints quite
carelessly turned out. “Sand Castles,” except for
prominent flaw in top left-hand corner, would
make a fine enlargement. “Beach Maiden” ex-
cellent; prominent flaw on left, possibly in nega-
tive, “Joan,” a very pleasing portrait of the
little girl, and would have been a decided suc-
cess with a less strongly-patterned background.
R.W., SHEPPARTON.—The gun is a good ex-
ample of record photography.
L.H.F., BURRA.—“Happy Chappy,” from a
splendid negative, technically; not altogether suit-
able for our competitions. Thanks for kindly
remarks.
F.J., SOUTH YARRA.—Your technical work is
poor; prints carefully mounted for a boy of your
age. It would be well for you to get together a
batch of your average quality prints, and take
them into Kodak. One of their experts would
gladly advise you as to the correction of prominent
faults.
E.T.P. and J.P., TORONTO.—Your prints have
a flared-out look, as if you were using an unsafe
light for development, resulting in surface fog.
Ihe negatives seem of good technical quality,
though not strong enough for competition.
D. KAITI.—“In a Summer Garden,” ap-
parently from a defective and fogged negative.
Centre portion only of good quality. Both the
single figure and group are hopelessly out of
focus.
J.S.D., SOL T TH YARRA.—“Shadows” shows
considerable taste in selection of subject, printing,
and mounting. Point of view not good, as all
lines lead out of picture to the right.
E. CAMPERDOWN.—The best is “The
Cathedral,” of unusually fine technical quality,
though point of view is not pleasing. “A Peace-
ful Morning” is from a splendid negative, tech-
nically. Cattle pictures are simply record photo-
graphs, and unsuitable for competition; technically
good.
E. J. McN., KENTUCKY.—“A Wartime Stock-
man” is a fine and typical Australian girl. Print
has apparently been under-exposed and developed,
there being no detail in the high-lights. The little
girl’s portrait is better, though even this required
more exposure to ensure a softer result.
R.H.H., ALBURY.—“The Air Scout” is a suc-
cessful aeroplane photograph, and a good print,
except for some stain blobs on the right.
MAGISTER, PORT FAIRY.—“The Run
Home” is from a first-class negative of the record
type. Centre portion would make a very good
enlargement. “Along the Coast,” not so good,
technically; and cloud seems over-printed.
W.G.M., NORTH SYDNEY.—“The Little
Gardener,” a very pleasing portrait of a child.
Background not well selected, as the strongly
marked lines attract attention from the figure.
C.P.W., SOUTH MELBOURNE.—” Sister” is
an exceptionally good portrait, made with a V.P.K.
and Portrait Attachment. Blocking out is skilled
work, seldom successful otherwise.
V. KYOGLE. —Figure slightly tilted back-
ward; otherwise, child with rose is a very pleas-
ing portrait: a good print, well mounted.
W. CLAYTON.—“The Old Bridge” is from
a negative of good ■ quality, and a useful record.
Things of this kind pass away as the years
progress, and should be recorded. Centre por-
tion of group of three would make a pleasing
enlargement.
H.0.F., DUNEDIN.—“The Skipper’s Daugh-
ters” technically good; expressions strained, and
mass of sail, or whatever it is in background,
should have been avoided.
R.N.K., NAPIER. —“Sunset,” fair technically;


not very effective, owing to the heavy mass of
silhouetted trees on cither side. The simplest
way is to make your own mounts. Procure tome
mounting boards and tint papers from Kodak,
and build up mounts to suit your particular
requirement.
W.E.A., ROSE BAY.—Floral subjects show
careful technical work. Pictorially, the best is
“Hibiscus,” and this would probably have been
better without the ferns; arrangement of each
very stiff and formal. In floral photography the
best effect is generally got with two or three
blooms only, rather than a bunch.
A.0.H., MARULAN. —“The Courthouse,” from
an excellent negative. This is a class of subject
which should be photographed from inside the
fence, so as to avoid the big telegraph pole and
mass of wires.
W.R.D., CHRISTCHURCH.—Portrait of Maori
boy nearly a big success, the outstanding fault be-
ing the out-of-focus hat.
C.H., WOODSTOCK. —“Jack,” a nice portrait
of a boy. Lighting very effective, and treatment
good.
J.J., MENTONE.—Sunlight portraits pleasing;
in studio style, and do not suggest “at home”
photographs. The larger one required more ex-
posure, in order to get better flesh tones and
rendering of detail. “Tack” not so effective.
C.P., KILLARA. —Child’s portrait from a very
much under-exposed negative, the clothing and
back of head merging into the background. It is
possible that you could get a better print on a
paper giving less contrast.
MRS. C.. CARLTON. —All are very good, tech-
nically, “The Weary Gleaner” being the best, ex-
cept for the proximity and sharpness of the back-
ground. Swans too central, and scene would have
been more effective with the camera turned to the
left. Background in “Transplanting” is badly
selected.
C.K.M., SINGLETON.—“Sunny,” except for
the out-of-focus hair, a very pleasing portrait in
sunlight. You would probably have got a better
result by making the figure in your original
smaller, to ensure sharpness, then enlarging and
introducing what diffusion you desired.
EL, HALIFAX.—“A Quiet Backwater” is an
unusual style of subject from your part of the
world. Except for the leaning trees taking the
eye out of the scene, composition is pleasing, and
good taste displayed in mounting.
T.A.W., COOGEE.- —“Portrait” not at all suc-
cessful. Apparently from a much under-exposed
negative, with very glaring patches of light
attracting attention from the figure. Also, note
out-of-focus mass in bottom left-hand corner.
C.H.L., Wintry Corner,” a good
example of record work; not suitable for com-
petition.
F. YOKOHAMA.—“The Sunshine Smile”
included too much bedding and too little baby!
Subject rather hackneyed, and we would suggest
that you let us have something new. Technical
work excellent.
L.W., TAMWORTH.—“Winter Scene” appar-
ently required more exposure in the enlarging, re-
sulting in the flared-out look. Foreground badly
selected, and the wiry, out-of-focus grass should
have been avoided.
L.J., DAPTO. —“Ploughing”—a good enlarge-
ment from a V.P.K. negative. Team too central.
J.E., DAPTO.—“At Playtime” has two outstand-
ing faults, the leaning clothes prop and the heap of
firewood immediately behind the boy’s head. When
making a portrait, you should invariably take into
consideration the background, and avoid anything
strongly marked.
G. TIMARU. —Point of view in “A Spring
Fall” not well selected, and the ugly fence in fore-
ground could probably have been avoided. It was
worth while making an effort to get a better re-
sult. Technical work excellent.
F.W.C., HOBART.—Portrait of child very pleas-
ing, though from a harsh negative. It is seldom,
except in studio work, that a black background can
be successfully used.
H. BRIGHTON.—The idea in “A Winter
Landscape” is good; patchiness of treatment in-
effective.
F.L., MALVERN.—“The Sunshine Girl”—very
flat and grey, and does not suggest the brightness
of out-of-doors.
VV.D.P , DUNEDIN. —We congratulate you on
your night photographs. In that of the “Railway
Station” the lights have badly solarised, owing to
long exposure. It is probable that the subject was
unsuitable owing to the heavy black shadow in
upper part. Landscapes not particularly inter-
esting, the best being “The Turn of the Road.”
J.W.C., RAWLINNA. —“Alone” certainly sug-
gests its title, and the catching of the bird alight-
ing was really a very happy note.
B. ST. KILDA. —Portrait of little girl
splendidly turned out. Strong front lighting has
resulted in flattening of the features. A good
print, very tastefully mounted.
P.P.L., HAWTHORN.—“Two Old Warriors”—
a striking example of distortion, due to the near-
ness of their heads to the camera. Apart from
this, it was technically well treated.
J.8.E., TOORAK.—Figure in “A Path Thru
the Ti Tree” not well placed, and would have been
better at the point marked on print returned.
G.T.H.8., EAST MALVERN. —“Under the
Trees” —technically first class. “Departing Day”
heavy and under exposed, but does not much
suggest evening.
M.J., MIDDLE BRIGHTON—We cannot ac-
cept entries from competitors using initials only,
though we will be glad at all times to have your
pictures if you comply with the competition rules.
V. EAST MALVERN.—“The Ferny Glade”
is a class of subject that mostly depends for its
charm on colour—very difficult to do justice to
by means of photography. A small part would be
more effective than the whole; say, two or three
of the more prominent tree ferns.
G.J.. LEWISHAM.—“A Young Aussie,” from
a very hard negative, without detail in the high-
lights. Background has a strongly defined pattern.
G. SANS SOUCl.—“Windy Shore” is the
best. “The Cave,” apparently from an out-of-
focus negative. “The Last Rays,” a somewhat
hackneyed subject; fair, technically.
C. GORE.—“Keep Still” is a good attempt
and very tastefully mounted. All the lines in this
lean to the right, and something is required to
hold up the left-hand side.
L.W., MEADOW BANK.—We have a mount
from you, titled “A Sunbath,” but the print is
missing, apparently not having been properly
mounted.
W. BRISBANE. —“Periwinkle,” a very
dainty print, tastefully mounted. The prominent
faults are the strongly out-of-focus mass in bot-
tom left-hand corner, and the distracting back-
ground behind and above the child’s head.
R L.W., CORIO.—“A Happy Picnic,” only of
interest to those included; unsuitable for a general
competition.
F.J.8., MOUNT GAMBIER. —“Where the Road
Winds Down the Hill” does not illustrate the title.
Point of view good; , clouds badly needed. “Sun-
beams Aglittering” is from a very much under-
exposed negative. As a rule, titles, unless very
well done, are better kept to the back of the
mounts.
L. QUEENSCLIFF.—“Father.” of fair
technical quality; oval mount unsuitable, and not
very well mounted. “Our Dining-room Fireplace”
required a great deal more exposure to give full
detail in the shadows.
F.L.C., SOUTH MELBOURNE.—“The Chapel”
is of unusually good technical quality; a really
first-class print. We congratulate you on the
progress you have made in so short a time.
H. McD., LISMORE.—Except for a rather
awkward pose, the girl with bath is a delightful
portrait. The upper part of this, as marked on
print returned, could very successfully be en-
larged up to whole plate size. “Crossing the
Creek,” good, technically. In “A Bush Party”
the camera should have been much lower down,
and included the whole of the figures. Prints, be-
fore being sent for competition, should be care-
fully trimmed and mounted, with all details on
the back of the mounts, instead of in a separate
letter.
M. ESSENDON.—“A Sunny Track” is a
class of subject only suitable for stereoscopic
work; good technically. In “A Quiet Hour” the
camera should have been turned more to the left.
As shown, the figure is too central. This could
be partly remedied by trimming about three-
quarters of an inch off the right-hand side.


The A.P-R. Prize Competitions.
Seven Prizes are offered for prints sent
in each month to The A.P.-R.
Monthly Competitions.
OPEN—SENIOR.
FIRST PRIZE.
Photographic material to the value of
SECOND PRIZE.
Photographic material to the value of
THIRD PRIZE.
Photographic material to the value of
OPEN—JUNIOR.
lor Competitors under 16 years of age.
FIRST PRIZE.
Photographic material to the value of . 10/C
SECOND PRIZE.
Photographic material to the value of . . 5/-
TIIIRD PRIZE.
Photographic material to the value of . . 2/0
Competitions for Set Subjects.
Monthly Prize.
There are no restrictions as to size, but we
prefer prints of good technical quality. Where a
toned print or a print on rough surfaced paper
(or a combination of these) is submitted, it must
bo accompanied by a print of the same subject
on a smooth surfaced paper, in black and white,
and of same size and quality.
No photograph previously published will be
eligible for competition, and every photograph
sent must be wholly the work of the competitor.
One prize only will be awarded to a competitor in
any month in any one competition.
All prints must be made on ’one of the varieties
of Austral or Kodak printing papers.
Each print must be mounted, but not framed,
and must bear on the back the title of the picture,
the class—Senior, Junior or special set subject
for which it is entered, and the name and address
of the sender. For the junior classes the age of
the competitor must be stated.
The prize-winning prints will be the property
of Kodak (Australasia) Limited.
We reserve the right to reproduce any of the
prints in the A.P.-R.
The prizes may be withheld if, in the opinion of
the Editor, none of the entries are of sufficiently
high quality.
The decision of the Editor will be final.
Prints will only be returned when stamps are
sent for the purpose. These must be mailed in a
separate envelope, with a slip of paper quoting
the titles of the prints and the name and address
of the sender.
Entries close on the fifteenth of the month
preceding month of publication.
Each packet must be addressed—
The Competition Editor,
The Australasian Photo Review,
Box 1486 G.P 0 379 George St., Sybney
•• £l/1/-
7 0
5/-
The following prizes have been awarded
for November:—
SENIOR.
First.—‘“Entrance, Y.M.C.A., by Night,” W.
D. Pool, Dunedin, N.Z.
Second.—'“Waiting for the Breeze,” Berke-
ley Clarke, Wellington, N.Z.
Third.—‘“Well, I’m !’’ J. Peat Millar,
Bulimba, Q.
Fourth.—“ The Little Messenger,” C. Webb,
South Yarra, Vic.
Fifth. —“ihe Hillside,” B. Schleicher, Hazel-
brook, N.S.W.
Sixth.—“A City Byway,” John B. Eaton,
Toorak, Vic.
Seventh.—“My Hobby,” W. H. Beanham,
Footscray, Vic.
Eighth.—'“Jacko,” D. R. Gibbs, Glen Morri-
son, N.S.W.
Highly Commended.—“ The Viaduct,” F.
Lewis; “A Vista,” J. T. Eaton; “Be-
calmed,” Berkeley Clarke; “The Air
Scout,” R. H. Heath; “A Little Smiler,”
B. H. Reid; “A Youthful Love Story”
and “Sand Castles,” A. S. Mitchell;
“The Cathedral, Adelaide,” Miss E. M.
Barton; “Jack,” C. Hughes; “Alone,”
J. W. Cochrane.
JUNIOR.
First.—“A Lovely Rose,” V. Webb, Kyogle,
N.S.W.
Second.—“ Chums All,” F. H. Manghan,
Caulfield, Vic.
Third.—“At Playtime,” Jack Evans, Dapto,
N.S.W.
Highly Commended—“ Windy Shore.” G.
Hubble; “Sweet Peas” and “Bella-
donna,” B. P. Gumming; “Bon Voyage,”
Leonard F. Wilby; “Flamingoes,” Rex
Forder.
SPECIAL.
Portrait or Group made in Full Sunlight.
SENIOR.
First.—“My Daughter,” G. Potter, Mosman,
N.S.W.
Second.—“ln Pensive Mood,” Helen Mc-
Lelland, Tarnook, Vic.
Third.—“Honi.” W. R. Davidson, Christ-
church, N.Z.
Highly Commended. “The Sunshine
Smile,” F. J. Anderson; “A Study,”
Mrs. I. Janssen: “The Skipper’s
Daughters,” Rev. H. O. Fenton; “Peri-
winkle,” W. G. Hamilton; “Carefree,”
J. M. Buchanan; “John,” H. A. S.
Shellabear.
JUNIOR.
No Award.
We want articles for publication in “Tht
A.P.-R.,” and for accepted contributions will pay
by orders for photographic material according to
the value of the article, or by cash in some special
cases.


SALE AND EXCHANGE LIST.
CAMERAS.
2166 — I A~P 1. Shew “Zit” Camera, Ross Lens in
Accurate Shutter, Film Pack Adapter, 6
Slides, Finder, Colour Screen, and
Leather Case £n ios.
2x65 —No. 3A Folding Pocket Kodak, R.R. Lens
and Automatic Shutter £4 ss.
2160 —P.C. Ross “Panros” Focal Plane Camera,
Ross Lens, 3 Plate Holders, Film Pack
Adapter, and Leather Case £l2
2158 — %-Fl. Folding Filma Camera, Single Lens.
New condition £1 17s. 6d-
-2 x 56 — V2- PI. Thornton-Pickard Imperial Camera,
R.R. Lens, 2 Slides, Tripod, Cloth and
Case £6
2155 —No. 3A Graflex Camera, for films only, no
Lens. In good order £l5
2153 —No. 3 Autographic Kodak, R.R. Lens, 8.8.
Shutter. As new £4 ss.
2152 —No. 1 a Autographic Kodak Junior, Single
Lens. As new £3
2148 —No. 3 Folding Brownie Camera, Single
Lens, 8.8. Shutter £1
2147 —Vest Pocket Kodak. In good order.
£ 1 Bs. 6d.
2146 —No. 8,3 A Premo Camera, 2 Plate Holders,
Film Pack Adapter, and Leatherette Case.
As new £3 *S S -
-214s—No.5 —No. 1 Autographic Kodak Special, Anastig-
mat Lens, and Leather Case £9
2144 —x/i-Pl. Perfect Camera, Teak Model, 1/1 PI.,
Ross Symmetrical Lens, 3 D.D. Slides.
In splendid condition ; £lO
2138 —P.C. Ensign Reflex Camera, Model 8., 3
Slides, Film Pack Adapter and Case. No
Lens £8
2137 —No. 3A Folding Brownie Camera, single
lens £ 1 2S. 6d.
2134 —Vest Pocket Ansco No. 1, 3% x 2%.
New £1 15s-
-213 Pocket Autographic Kodak Special.
In good order £3 15 s -
-213I—No.1 —No. 1 Autographic Kodak Special, Anastig-
mat Lens f/6.3. As new . . £9 7s. 6d.
2130 — V\ -PI. Folding Klito Camera, f/7.7, Ana-
stigmat Lens, and 1 Slide. In good
order £2 ss.
2129 —Vest Pocket Autographic Kodak Special, and
Leather Case. As new £4
2121 —No. 3A Autographic Kodak, R.R. Lens. 8.8.
Shutter £4 15 s -
-2119 —}4-Pl. Thornton-Pickard Unita Hand
Camera, Focal Plane Shutter, Cooke lens
in focussing mount, 1 plate holder, and
Film Pack Adapter £6
2118—-PI- T.P. Reflex Attachments, no slides
or lens £3
2118—P/C T.P. Reflex Attachments, two slides,
no lens £4
2117 — 3 1 /t x T.P. Ruby Reflex, no Lens,
Graflex Roll Holder, and 1 Slide . . £lO
2116—-J4-P1- Express Folding Camera, and 1
Single Slide 10s.
2114- —No. 75x4 Pony Premo, long extension,
R.R. Lens, Auto Shutter, Plate Holder,
and Velvet-lined £6
2113 —No. 3 s'x 4 Pony Premo, R.R. Lens, 1
Plate Holder and Case £2 ss.
2ii I—No.1 —No. 3 J /2-Pl. Pony Premo, Beck Lens, f/5.8
in Automatic Shutter, 3 Plate Holders
and Case £6 5s
2110 —No. 7 H-Pl. Pony Premo, R.R. Lens in
Unicorn Shutter, 3 Plate Holders, and
Leather Case £lO
2108—Vest Pocket Tenax Camera, Dagor Lens,
5 Single Slides and 2 purses £8
2105 — 3V2 x Mentor Reflex Camera, 5 in.
Zeiss Tessar Lens, and 2 Slides .. £l5
2103 —54-PI. Sanderson Hand Camera, Tropical
Model, f/7.7 Anastigmat Lens in Sector
Shutter, 3 D.D. Slides, and Leather
Case £lO
2007 —P/C T.P. Imperial Triple Extension Camera,
Aldis f/7.7 Lens, Beck 1/1 PI., and J4-Pl.
Lenses, 4 Slides, Tripod, and Canvas
Case £ lO
209I — T.P. Imperial Triple Extension
Camera, f/8 Cooke Lens, 3 Slides, Tripod,
Cloth and Canvas Case £ll
1397 — Film Plate Special Premo, fitted
Kodak-Zeiss Lens, f/6.3, in Compound
Shutter, 1 Plate Holder and Film Pack
Adapter, in Leather Case. In good order.
LENSES.
862—12 in. Ross-Zeiss Protar Lens f/7, Single
Anastigmats of in. an( i in. focus
at f/12.5. In splendid order .. £l7 10s.
861 —Ross No. 7 Combinable Set for J4-Pl., con-
sisting of four single components, com-
bining to give focal lengths of 6% in- t 0
in., at f/s-7 to f/6.4. Perfect order
£22
859 — 9/4 in. Wollensak Anastigmat Lens, f/6.8.
New condition £6 10s.
858 — s% in. French Wide Angle Lens .... £2
856 —Dallmeyer Adon Telephoto Lens and
Leather Case. New £3 2s. 6d.
851 —15 x 12 R.R. Lens, by Perkin, Son &
Rayment. As new £4
847 —Ross No. 3 Cabinet Portrait Lens and
Stops £l3
844 —Cooke Portrait Lens, Series VI., 16 in.
focus, complete. As new. Cap, flange
and panel £25
SUNDRIES.
1946 —No. 4 Brownie Enlarger. Good order .. 19s.
1945 —Brownie Film Developing Tank, 2 reels
and 2 aprons 15 s *
1944 —3 54-PI. Thornton-Pickard Bookform
Slides. each, 14s.
1939 —No. 2 Brownie, to 7 x 5 Enlarger .... 10s.
1938 —5 x 4 Graflex Magazine Plate Holder
£2 10s.
1937 —6 x 5 Velveta Background 12s. 6d.
1937 —Vest Pocket Enlarger 10s.
1933 —Klimax P/C Plate Developing Tank, 12s. 6d.
1931 —No. 1 Crown Tripod. Good as new, £1 ss.
1930 —Adhero Dry Mounting Machine, and 2
and Velvet-lined Case £6
WANTED.
Telephoto Attachment, for 6 in. Goerz
Celor Lens; special the model for use
on a Goerz 5x4 Folding Reflex.
G. Rowley, 34 Queen Street, Brisbane, Q.
WANTED.—Second-hand No. 4 Panoram
Kodak—must be good. Particulars to
Box 2572, G.P.0., Sydney.
FOR SALE.— 5 x 4 Shew Reflex Camera,
Revolving Back, Ross Homocentric Lens,
f/5.6, 3 D.D. Slides, Canvas Case. Just
overhauled. £l3 10s. Sale & Exchange
Department, Kodak (Australasia), Ltd.,
Sydney.
FOR SALE.—J4-Plate Special Ruby Reflex
(old model), long extension, Rising front.
Beck Isostigmar Lens, f/6.8, 3 D.D.
slides and leather case. In good order.
For a quick sale. £6 10s. Sale & Exchange
Dept., Kodak (Australasia), Ltd., Sydney.
KODAK (Australasia) LTD., 379 GEORGE ST., SYDNEY.


With a
Kodak
Self-Timer
everybody is in the print —even the
man who made the picture.
It presses the button for you.
Price , 6 -
Of all dealers.
SYDNEY, v
PHOTO'PROCESS
engravers!
HALN9ML ami
" POK ALL
i Arrisfic
Line
&
%
an
r Odi
Phone
ritt
Thi Organ oi Professional and Amateur Photographer*
* ’HE weekly photogra-
phic paper of reliable
information and instruc-
tion. The oldest in the
world. Noted for its
sound, practical help in
all branches of photo-
graphic work. The
journal which readers
keep and refer to again
and again.
Specimen Copy FREE from the Publishers
HENRY GREENWOOD & CO. LTD.
24 Wellington Street, Strand, London, England.
Obtainable from
KODAK (Australasia) LIMITED,
Sydney, Melbourne, Adelaide. Brisbane, ate.
And all Photographic Dealers.


-
mm
H
I*
K
v
n
mt
Give a KODAK
for Christmas
A Kodak is pre-eminently suited for presentation as it adds to all the
pleasures of life and is so wonderfully simple that anyone can make
splendid pictures after half-an-hour’s use.
You need a Kodak at Christmas to take on your holidays.
Get a 3a Autographic Kodak for the popular post-card pictures—x inches.
Price £6/2/6. Others from 40/- to £1417/6 and Brownies from 10/6 —for the children.
Of all dealers.


Goods Arriving
The Flexo Print Roller.
Inexpensive but very satisfactory for amateur use. It has black
enamel frame and a 4in. rubber roller. Just the size for those
using cameras up to quarter plate. Price, 2/-.
The Kodak Print Roller.
Quite the best roller constructed for general amateur use. Has
two 6 inch rubber rollers and finely nickelled frame. Price, 5/-.
Kodak Lamp Oil.
Specially made for darkroom lamps, gives a flame unequalled for freedom from smoke.
Gives great brilliancy, yet with low temperature of flame. Does not smoke or smell.
Per bottle, Bd.
Eastman Printing Frame, No. 00.
Specially made for printing No. 00 Premo Films in the
continuous strip, making it unnecessary to cut up these
small size rolls, as the film slides through the frame
from exposure to exposure. Model A for printing on
Soho or with other long exposures, price 1/6. Model
B. for use with developing-out papers only, contact being maintained by pressure of
the fingers as the frame is held up to the light. Price, 2/-.
J
Kodak
Serial Printing Frame, No. 2.
For Vest Pocket Kodak negatives, The film is
not cut up and easily slides through from
exposure to exposure. Price, 3/3.
Eastman Focussing Cap for Enlarging Cameras.
This is designed to aid the operator in composing the image properly on the bromide
paper for enlarging work. Has two openings, one clear, the other covered with ruby
glass, the panel sliding past the lens as required. No. I, for lens barrels fiom 1% to
I'/ins., 3/6 ; No. 2, ditto, 2% to 3in., 5/-; No. 3, ditto, 3 to 7/-.
■
No. 2 Brownie Developing Box.
A simplified and modified form of the Kodak Film Tank, offering the same assurance
of perfectly developed film. At the same time it is so simple that any boy or girl can
readily understand or operate it. Just long enough to accommodate a roll of No. I or
No. 2 Brownie film in one loop. Price, 9/-. Developing powders for this tank, 6 for
lOd ; Kodak Acid Fixing Powder, per tin, 1/3.
Particulars of New Zealand prices for photographic cameras or materials
advertised in the A.P.-R. may be obtained from any of the Kodak Branches
in the Dominion. There is sometimes a difference owing to variation in tariff
charges.
Of all dealers-.


Goods Arriving
The Eastman Measuring Jug
is made of strong, clear glass, with moulded gradations
from 4to 32 ounces. The removable top, when inverted,
may be used as a funnel. Price, 4/6.
The
Eastman
Vignetter
can be attached in
an instant to any
form of portrait or
view camera by
means of a screw
clamp. Is specially
well adapted for
home portraiture. Price, 7/
*
T.
The Simplex Album.
This Album is made with thin flexible
leaves, with centre pasted on, suitable for a
slip in picture on each page. The cover is
made of a heavier grade cardboard, stamped
with a lover’s knot design on the bottom
corner. Laced with a cord and tassel.
PRICES:
Vest Pocket Kodak
Vest Pocket Kodak
No. 2 Brownie
No. 2 Brownie
No. IA Kodak
No. 1A Kodak
No. 3 Kodak
No. 3 Kodak
No. 3A Kodak
No. 3A Kodak
The Unex Album.
This Album is made with thin flexible leaves,
with a printed centre, suitable for a slip-in
picture on each page. Ihe cover is made of a
heavier grade cardboard, stamped, with a
lovers’ knot seal on the bottom corner. Laced
with a cord and tassel.
PRICES:
I 6
3 0
I 9
3 0
1 9
3 3
3 0
3 0


Fhe Reasons for a
Graflex Camera
The subject is shown in full picture size, right side up.
Focus and Composition are under absolute control up to
the very instant of exposure.
The shutter speeds range from “time exposures to 1-1,000
of a second.
The shutter permits the lens to work at its full efficiency
throughout the period of exposure.
Well timed negatives obtainable with high shutter speeds,
or poor lighting conditions.
Simplicity and precision of operation.
Adaptability to speed work,
general views, or interiors.
These are the features that in-
sure certainty in the photo-
graphic result.
Ask your dealer or nearest Kodak Branch to demonstrate
a Graflex to yon.


The war put military discipline into photography. Fixed
temperature of solutions and fixed time of development
were required in war photography to insure uniform
results.
The
Eastman
Thermometer
Indispensible in tank development where
time and temperature are the governing
factors. Accurate, convenient made
with curved back to fit the tank.
Eastman Thermometer, - - 4/6
The
Eastman
Timer
A split-second timer, with
large dial, plainly marked
and easily read. Prints may
be timed with the accuracy
and uniformity necessary for
good results. Runs thirty
hours without re-winding.
The Eastman Timer,
22/6
Of all dealers.


When Was It Made?
That picture of that Battalion en-
training en route for overseas. This
is one of the prize prints in your col-
lection, but its story is incomplete
without the date. When was it made?
That picture of Billjim just back
from overseas —when was it madef
That picture of the crowds at the
peace celebration —when zvas it made f
That picture of Harry’s first ap-
pearance in long trousers, of Mabel’s
proud entrance with her hair done up,
of George’s first toddling steps, of
Esther’s first trip to school —such pic-
tures demand dates. When were
they made?
Practically every picture is incom-
plete without the date. Very fre-
quently the title is essential—but the
date, always.
The Autographic Kodak, by means
of which each negative is dated and
titled at the time of exposure, offers a
service that you will appreciate more
and more as time goes on. Its value
may be properly gauged by looking
over pictures made f\ve, ten years
ago. The ever-recurrent “When?”
and the frequent “Who?” or
“Where?” are answered sometimes
not at all —and other times with ex-
asperating vagueness.
Thanks to the Autographic Kodak,
the pictures you are making now are
permanently identified. There will be
no more interrogation points between
the pages of your album.
Remember—the title’s often vital,
but the date at any rate.
There are other services that the
users of the Autographic Kodak or
Brownie learn to value highly. One is
the ability to note on the film margin
the conditions under which each nega-
tive is made—“Cdy 1-25 8,” for ex-
ample, would mean an exposure made
on a cloudy day, at 1-25 of a second,
with the shutter opening at stop 8.
Such information, in conjunction with
the negative itself, is helpfully in-
structive. You know at a glance why
the picture is good or why it is not
better; and your next pictures, under
similar conditions, will profit from
such knowledge.
Another service is the avoidance of
double exposures. Open the little
door at the back of the Kodak, and if
the autographic record has been writ-
ten, the film has been exposed.
The substitution
of an Autographic
back for the plain
back, brings your
old Kodak up-to-
date and makes it
Autographic.
Autographic backs
may be obtained at
your dealer’s.


Sale & Exchange
Kodak (Australasia) Ltd.,
“The Kodak Corner,”
Corner
Lambton Quay and Willis St.,
Wellington, N.Z.
CAMERAS.
19--14-plate Uno Selfix Cameo, with 3
Slides and Carrying Case. In ex-
cellent condition £3
23- —4 x 5 Goerz Anschutz Camera, 4 D.D.
Slides, f/6.8 Dagor Lens, Leather
Case. In good condition .. fll xos.
24 — 3 a F.P.K., with Automatic Shutter,
R.R. Lens, Carrying Case, Combina-
tion Plate Back and 3 D.D. Slides
£6 ss.
x s Century, Model 42, R.R. Lens,
with D.D. Slides, 3-Fold Ash Tripod,
Leather Carrying Case .... £3 15s.
29 —V.P.K., with f/6.5 Cooke Focussing
Lens. Practically new .... £5 10s.
34 — No. o Midg, Canvas Case.
New condition £1 10s.
35 — No. 12 Premo, R.R. Lens, Film Pack
Adapter, 3 Single Dark Slides, Im-
perial Exposure Meter, 2 12-exposure
Film Packs £3 3s.
36 — No. 3A F.P.K., Ball Bearing Shutter.
R.R. Lens. In new condition . . £6
37 — 54 -plate Ensign Roll Film Camera, with
Goerz Dagor Lens, f/6.8, Koilos
Shutter £7 10s.
39 —P.C. Ensign Roll Film Camera, with
Rectimate Symmetrical Lens. Con-
dition as new £3
41 — 54 -plate Klito Magazine. In good con-
dition £ 1 2s. 6d.
54 — Busch Roll Film or Plate
Camera, with f/5.5 Anastigmat Lens
in Automatic Shutter, 6 Single Plate
Holders and Focussing Screen
£4 17s. 6d.
55 — No 1 Junior Seneca, 354 x 254, Roll
Film, with f/7-S Anastigmat Lens.
In good condition £3 7s. 6d.
LENSES.
2 12 x 10 Fallowfield Rapid Doublet
£4 10s.
3 Dallmeyer 3D, with Iris Diaphragm,
12*4 in., f/6, 1/1-plate £lO
5 6 in. No. 6 f/7.7 Aldis Anastigmat, £2
6 6.4 in. No. 2A f/6.3 Aldis Anastigmat
£2 ns.
9 —T.T. & H. 4.12 in. f/16 Wide Angle
£3
11—Goerz Dagor 4.9 in. f/6.8 354 X 4%
£6 ss.
19 —Busch Portrait Aplanat f/6 No. 3,
11 in £3 10s.
20 —Ditto No. s, 17 in £l2 10s.
2 5 15 x 12 R.R. Lens, Perken, Son & Pay-
ment £5
26 15 x 12 Dallmeyer Lens £6
30 — 1/1-plate Beck Symmetrical Lens, f/8
£1 ios.
31 — 5-in. f/5.6 Ross Homocentric Lens, £5
32 — 7-S-in. f/7.7 Aldis Uno Lens .... £2
33 — 5-22-in. T.T. and H. 454 x 354 f/8, £2
34 — Cooke Extension Lens, Series 111 , 14.8
in 10s.
35 — Cooke Extension Lens, Series V., 17
in 10s.
36 — 6-in. f/5.6 Ross Homocentric Lens. £5
37 — 11 r 4-in. Portland Soft Focus Lens,
f/5.6. Condition as new . . £7 10s.
Ross
Xpres Lens
for Reflex and
Focal Plane Work.
You must have an
exceptionally fast
lens to do the best
Reflex and Focal
Plane work.
The Ross Xpres Lens
works at F/4.5. It
gives you splendid
results with all sub-
jects that require
extremely short
exposures.
The great speed of
the Ross Xpres Lens
has been achieved
without the slightest
loss of general
quality. Definition
and covering power
are perfect at full
aperture.
KODAK (Australasia) LTD.,
Sole Consignees for Australasia:
ROSS LENSES AND CAMERAS.
Sydney, Melbourne, Adelaide, Brisbane,
The Valley, Hobart, Toowoomba, Townsville,
East St. —Rockhampton, Wellington, Christ-
church, Dunedin and Auckland, N.Z.. West
Australia: Optical & Photo. Supplies Co.,
Perth.


Eastman
Permanent Crystal Pyro
We make it —we know it's right
That’s all we need say for its quality. As for results, we
might say that Pyro-developed negatives have never been
excelled. Possibly you can improve your negatives by
using Pyro.
1 ounce bottles, 1/9
ELON
Proud of its war-time accomplishment—worthy of its
pre-war reputation.
We recommend Elon for the richness and brilliancy of
the prints it produces.
We make it —we know it's right
I ounce bottles, 5/-
Of all dealers.
p
Price 1/6
and cheap at
any price.
Of all dealers.
How lo make
Good Pictures
A Bock for
tKc Amhleur
r
t ('.Hist, C^rapjhjj
For Your Vacation
Pictures
THE KODAK ALBUM
There is added plea-
sure in showing your
photographic collec-
ion when it is
contained within the
covers of a Kodak
Album. The pride
that you may have
in the pictures is
matched by your
pride in the appear-
ance of the album
itself.
Ask any Kodak Branch to show you
a selection.


MOHAMMED
AND THE KODAK
Once upon a lime the mountain refused to come
to Mohammed, and so Mohammed went to the
mountain.
Very, very frequently the picture refuses to come
to the amateur, and so the
amateur goes to the picture.
It is the kind of picture that you
have to go to get that emphasizes a
characteristic of the entire Kodak
line —the extreme compactness con-
sistent with the size of the picture
the instrument makes. Kodaks are
as big as they ought to be for results
—they are as small as they ought to
be for convenience. If the mountain
won’t come to your Kodak, you and
your Kodak can go to the mountain.
But there are times when the larger
Kodaks take up just a little more space
than there is to go ’round. This
fact might constitute a problem were
it not for the Vest Pocket Kodak.
There is always room for the V.P.K.
It is so small that you can wear it; so
good that it will do just what its big
brothers will do, only on a smaller
scale ever to the autographic
record containing the date and
abbreviated title beneath the nega-
tive they describe.
A photographic equipment without a Vest
Pocket Autographic Kodak is incomplete.
And the price too, is small, only 40/-.
i
• €
Vest Pocket Kodak
Actual Size
Of all dealers.


Eastman
Film Negative
Album
Keeps your negatives
well protected from dirt
and scratches as every
negative has its indivi-
dual envelope leaf.
A convenience always
—but a real necessity
for autographic nega-
tives with their all-
important date and title,
not only to guard them
against loss but to keep
them in an orderly,
systematic fashion.
The index of the album
furnishes a means of
ready reference.
THE PRICE
For 100 negatives, 1H x2X - - -51-
For 100 negatives, 2 % x 4/i. or smaller 51-
For 100 negatives, 5% x 4%, or 4x 5 - 6/-
For 100 negatives, 5M x 5Vt, or smaller 61-
For 100 negatives, 5x7 or smaller - 9 -
Of all dealers.
A Range of Lenses
to Meet —Exactly—
Any Possible Need.
(poke Tenses
The Crux of the whole matter
in buying a lens is that you
can always turn to the Cooke
Lens List and find one that
will suit you, feeling confident
in your own mind that the
lens you buy will embody all
the features that are claimed
for'it.
Cooke Lenses
Are unsurpassed for high-
speed subjects, Cinemato-
graphy, Press and Commercial
Photography, Architectural,
Landscape, and Colour Photo-
graphs, Enlarging and
Copying.
Cooke
Primoplane Lenses
Are designed exclusively for
wide angle work, such as
Interiors and Photographing
Machinery, etc., in confined
spaces. They give an angle
of view up to 90 degrees.
Cooke
Portrait Lenses
Represent the highest devel-
opmentof the anastigmat lens
for Portraiture, Groups, and
all kinds of General Artistic
Studio work.
Sole Distributors for Australasia :
KODAK (Australasia) LIMITED.


2c Autographic Kodak Jr.
A size that fits the pocket
and a shape that fits the view.
A
New
Kodak
The 2c Kodaks and Brownies give
pictures of the popular 3a and V.P.K.
shape, but in an entirely new size—
-4% x 2%. A little smaller than the 3a
and considerably larger than the V.P.K.
—just the shape for horizontal land-
scapes and vertical full-length portraits.
All the folding models are Autographic.
Ask your photographic dealer to show
you the 2c Kodaks and Brownies.
PRICES.
2c Autographic Kodak Junior: With
meniscus achromatic Lens
2c Folding Autographic Brownie: With
meniscus achromatic Lens
300
I 3 6
2c Box Brownie
Get One for Christmas!


There is lots of room in your
vacation lu££a£e for the
KODAK
FILM TANK
Take it with you
“The experience is in the Tank.”
Priced from
16/6 up.
Of all dealers.


30
AUSTRAL SEED
PLATES
Latitude is a quality not always fully appreciated, but
it is responsible for a higher percentage of good
results than any other one quality of a plate.
If the scale of tones the plate will reproduce is no
greater than the scale of tones in the average subject,
then exposure must be absolutely correct or the sub-
ject will not be correctly reproduced in the negative.
If, however, the plate will render a scale of tones twice as
great as that in the subject, fifty per cent, over or under-
exposure will not alter the gradation or quality of a negative.
Austral Seed Plates have exceptional speed, fineness of grain
and the greatest latitude of any Austral plate made.
Backed
2/5
2/10
4/8
5/6
6/6
11/9
Made in Australia by the
famous American Seed Plate Formula.
Of all dealers.


The World’s
Largest Plate
Sales!
IMPERIAL
PLATES
Foremost in the whole
world’s dryplate proces-
sion march ever and al-
ways the IMPERIAL
PLATES. Their Quality
is unequalled. No fog;
absolute uniformity; long
range of gradation and
ample density; easy in
all workings; fine prin-
ters. 20,000 dealers sell
Imperials!
The Plates that
Raised, Refined
and Elevated all
Dryplate Qualities
IMPERIALS
—the Plates of
QUALITY!
Imperial & notes
A LONDON LETTER.
All Rights Reserved.
AN
IMPERIAL ROMAN
Dryplate Headquarters was being per-
sonally represented over among the Dutch-
men and the Belgians and the Frenchmen,
a few weeks ago. It was wonderful to see
how quickly all these people are recovering
from the war. The lands were under busy
cultivation; reassuring signs of agricultural
activity, visible from almost every train
we journeyed in.
There is something fine and free about
this agricultural work; though, maybe, it is
because we are so much in London that we
think so.
Yet in the early times of noble Rome, the
work of the farm was the only manual
labour deemed worthy of a free and
honourable citizen. And this feeling long
survived, as we may see from the praise
bestowed on agriculture by Cicero, whose
enthusiasm was caught from one of his
favourite books, old Cato. In many ways,
it has been made manifest in literature
that the subject of agriculture possessed a
strong and enduring charm for the Roman
mind.
There is a story, somewhere, of Cato,
to the effect that when some curious person
asked him what was the most profitable
kind of farming, Cato replied: “Good
grazing.” “And what is the next most pro-
fitable kind?” he was asked; and Cato said:
“Tolerable grazing.”
What next? he was asked; and he re-
plied: “Bad grazing!” What next? “Corn
growing.”
And so might those interesting Alices in
Wonderland, the Beginners, ask an old
hand: “What really is the best fun in all
photography ” And Cato-like, the old-
hand would reply: “Making a good nega-
tive.”
And the next? “Making a tolerable nega-
live.” And the next? “Even making a bad
negative.” What next? “Printing.”
But, you cannot make a bad negative with
Imperial Plates, if you are careful. All
your negatives on Imperials will be
tolerably good; and most of them should
be GOOD ones.
There is a reason, and a secret. You
can find it in the wonderfully made
EMULSION. Make for that emulsion.
To your dealer’s, friend!
THE IMPERIAL DRY PLATE CO., LTD.,
CRICKLEWOOD, LONDON, N.W. 2.
