

I THIRD THOUSAND .]
FANS
BO* II
MY CREED:
A LECTURE
GEORGE THOMAS WALTERS,
Minister of the Aberdeen Unitarian Church.
Published by W. & W. Lindsay, Market Street, Aberdeen I
Also to be obtained at the Office of the British and Foreign Unitarian
Association, 37 Norfolk Street, Strand, London ;
At the Unitarian Depository, Queen’s Arcade, Belfast ;
And from the Scottish Unitarian Christian Association, Glasgow.
1883,


This Lecture is published almost word for word as it was delivered
to a mixed audience in the Aberdeen Unitarian Church, and in response
to a request from some new members who thought it might be useful in
a printed form.
G. T. W.


MY GREED;
I believe in God the Father, . . . and in Jesus Christ, . . .
the Holy Catholic Church, . . . and the life everlasting.”
and the life everlasting.”
2 Cor. iv. 13. —“We having the same spirit of faith, according as jt is
written, I believe, and therefore have I spoken j—we also believe,
and therefore speak.”
In speaking to-night of My Creed, I wish you to under-
stand that I speak simply for myself; binding no one else
to my opinions, and without the shadow of a desire to
formulate anything by which to test the faith and belief of
another.
I am not about to define the “ Unitarian Creed,” for I
do not know of any such creed in existence.
Among Unitarians there is some difference of opinion
upon certain points, just because there is liberty of opinion;
and where liberty exists, there must be diversity. But we
are agreed upon this freedom of thought and speculation;
and we naturally turn our energies in one general direction.
We have unity of faith and aim, along with individual dif-
ferences upon those minor points which are, to some extent,
unessential.
Of course every man must have a creed, if he believes
anything. I have my creed ; and you have yours,
The mischief begins when a few powerful minds draw
up a document which they make the ground-plan for mutual
labour, and which gradually becomes a test of the orthodoxy
of their disciples, or their companions.
The Popular Creed, involving such doctrines as “ the
fall,” “ total depravity,” “ imputed righteousness,” “ atone-
ment through the blood of Christ,” the salvation of believers,
and the damnation of unbelievers, —that creed has lain like
a burden upon many minds, —it has been a hindrance to
free and honest thought,—it has led many a brave soul to
the torture chamber, and it lighted up the martyr-fires in
many countries and at various times.
It teaches of a lost and ruined world.


Its main strength lies in its terror, in its power of
repression, in the slavery under which its votaries must
live.
And when, into their minds, there come doubts of the
dogmas —doubts of the scheme of redemption—then the ruin
of the world seems complete, and only chaos remains, with-
out a ray of divine light, or hope, to penetrate, or dissipate,
the gloom.
Little wonder that so many, in their departure from
Calvinism, or any kindred system, take the clear leap into
Atheism.
They had never been impressed with the love of God,
and the beauty of the world, and the nobility of man.
The terrors of the Lord had been held threateningly
over them ! The green earth was said to be under a curse ;
and mankind was held to be under eternal displeasure and
condemnation—separate from the favour and the love of
God!
The reaction from this belief has carried many a bold
and fearless thinker beyond all sympathy with religious
faith, beyond the bounds of feeling and emotion, and has
compelled him to wander in the cool shades of materialism
and infidelity.
It is, therefore, our solemn duty to proclaim our free and
liberal faith ; to make known to men that though we have
left, for ever, the dungeon of Calvinism, we have not seen
fit to take refuge in the Cave of Atheism; though we have
given up the terror and vengeance of an angry God, we
have not been compelled to deny the existence of the Deity;
but we have gone forth, in freedom, into the bright and
happy world of reality and truth, and we have found that
the radiant loveliness of the Eternal Spirit was bathing the
whole Universe with light, and joy, and love, and beauty!
It is our mission to show that, even for the freest
thinker, the most honest sceptic or inquirer, the most deter-
mined opponent of the ancient creed, there is yet a realm of
religious feeling, hope and desire, where reason may reign
supreme, and yet every true emotion of the heart may rise
in worship, and find a real and living communion between
the soul and God.
And although I am not about to define, strictly and
closely, “ Unitarian Christianity,” still I shall speak as one


who, having left the orthodox ranks, has adopted the Uni-
tarian view, and has come to regard Christianity rather as a
spirit and a life than a rigid system of theological belief.
What I mean by Liberal Christianity, and what I mean by
Unitarianism, will be made tolerably clear, I hope, when I
speak of My Creed, and give you my own personal beliefs
about God, about Christ, about the Church, and about the
Life Everlasting.
And let me give one other word of caution. Ido not
bind myself, for all future days, to the words that I may
utter to-day.
This, of course, does not imply instability, but simply
the desire and capacity for growth in religious matters.
Here is the beauty of free and unfettered thought.
Time was when I was afraid to read this, or to study that,
lest it should disturb my mind and overthrow my religious
belief!
Now, I can welcome the light from wheresoever it may
come; and I am afraid of nothing that is true and good,
for religion must be in harmony with all truth and good-
ness ; and hypocrisy and falsehood are the only things of
which the student should be afraid.
Let us each have our Creed, or our belief ; but let us
always keep our minds and hearts open for the reception of
the truth ; and then our Religious Faith will be founded,
not on the shifting sand, but on the Eternal Rock, that
cannot be moved.
(I.) As the first point in My Creed, I say that I believe
in God, the Father,
Men have not always meant exactly the same by that
word, God. In past ages it has been representative of their
crude ideas about nature and the unseen forces there at
work. In this way we can see how men personified the
forces of nature, and worshipped the Sun-God, or the Ocean
Deity, or the spirit of the wind, the fire, or the storm.
The human mind was impressed with mystery and
wonder at a very early stage of its career ; and we must not
be surprised if, in ages of comparative darkness and super-
stition, the thought of God was much lower than that
which is entertained to-day. Here, as elsewhere, there has
been development.
As knowledge grew, as a more stable foundation was


secured for human speculation and enquiry, and for theories,
of nature and of life, as Science extended her dominion
and the glorious light of day superseded the night of
ignorance and fear, the thought of God grew in majesty and
beauty ; and, just as the form of some towering hill bursts
upon our gaze in the sunlight, so this thought has been pre-
sented to the minds and hearts of men, more clear and
more perfect, as age after age has rolled away.
In place of the world of chance that the savage and
uncultured saw and felt around them, we have now the
world of unchanging law, where chance is never known,
but all things move forward, in accordance with a wise
design, to some divine appointed goal.
We recognise, now, not disjointed and unconnected
events in the material or the moral world ; but we recognise
a sequence of events, a grand and mighty unfolding of some
Purpose, nothing meeting us that has no cause, and nothing
existing but must produce its effect in the future.
Thus, there is not only law, but there is unity also ; a
co-operation of events, without any disruption of the natural
order, without any supernatural interference, without a break
in the eternal harmony.
There are no cross purposes, no frustrated schemes ;
but the whole universe is bound in the chains of law and
harmony.
Beyond this, again, there is life and progress. Nature
is not inanimate, not dead, not a machine worked from
without. Nature is a living thing, subject to gi-owth
and development. The many spirits that, in the imagina-
tion of the savage, possessed nature and showed themselves
in the wind, the fire, the ocean, and the sky, they have
gone; they have taken their departure along with the
witches, and ghosts, and pixies of the twilight of civilization.
But we find that one Life is manifested in all nature j
one Spirit exists, though in many varied forms.
“ Every clod feels a stir of might,
An instinct within it that reaches and towers ;
And, groping blindly above it for light,
Climbs to a soul in grass and flowers.”
This theory of development has been feared by many
theologians and teachers of religion; but I think it is
becoming more clear, every day, that this theory is the


stronghold of theistic faith, and by it alone will science and
philosophy be reconciled to the belief in God,
What can we think of this wonderful story of the
growth and development of the world and man 1 What
can we think of the reign of law, and the revelation of a
complete unity of purpose and harmony of design? What
can we think of all this, save that it is the expression of
one Divine Will, one intelligent force or power working
through all towards one great and grand event ?
This gives us the faint impression of a Deity, not
changeful, not capricious, not angry to-day and repentant
to-morrow, but of a God in whom is, indeed, no variable-
ness, and not even the least shadow of a turning.
For myself it is impossible to conceive of nature and its
varied aspects, its history in the past and its promise for the
future, except as a mighty organism, throbbing, at all times,
with life, or as a body of which, as Alexander Pope said—
“ God is the soul!”
It is thus that we feel our kinship to all nature; we
feel that we are but parts of the stupendous whole; parts,
or notes, in the Divine harmony which only the ages can
complete and fulfil!
Thus, when we think calmly and deeply, and with
some small measure of the poet’s insight and rapturous faith
we feel
“ A sense sublime
Of something far more deeply interfused,
Whose dwelling is the light of setting suns,
And the round ocean, and the living air.
And the blue sky, and in the mind of man ;
A motion and a spirit that impels
All thinking things, all objects of all thought,
And rolls through all things.”
So far good. It is no slight thing to know that the
universe is throbbing with life, that there is a God—a Being
of wisdom and stupendous power, ruling over the destinies
of the world.
But we fain would know, or feel, more than this. It
is not enough that we recognise this power ; we long to
know whether it is beneficent or cruel, a tyrant or a friend.
And so, while the mind of man, flushed with its triumph of
knowledge and discovery, asserts an intelligent power in the
universe,. the heart, silently and reverently winging its


flight upward, comes home to us again with the message
that this God is a loving Father.
And when this thought takes possession of us, we seem
to hear the response from everything and every creature
around us ; or, in the old poetic phrase, the morning stars
sing together, and the trees of the field all clap their hands.
“ The voices of the rose-bud in the hedge, of the stream
that gurgles down the shadowy vale, of the mountain peak
that throws back from its snowy crest the roseate light of
the declining sun, of the clouds themselves that canopy the
great orb’s bed, of the stars that converse together in the
night, of the little birds that make air tremulous with song,
of the mighty music that sobs and swells and crashes down
the Cathedral aisle, —the voices of all these carry knowledge
to the awakened heart of man that Love is the law by which
all things move, the pulse of the over-ruling will, the
method of the purpose which holds space and time together,
the texture of the righteousness towards which the Eternal
Purpose shapes the sum of force.” *
It is thus that we can, with Tennyson, pluck the little
flower, and learn from it a deeper and truer lesson of God’s
love than is contained in any creed or catechism which
churches and priesthoods have imposed upon their adherents.
We can, to some extent, understand the charming little
verse, which is better than the Westminster Confession,
or either of the Catechisms ; that verse of Tennyson :
“Flower in the crannied wall,
I pluck you out of the crannies,
Hold you here, root and all, in my hand.
Little flower ; but if I could understand
What you are, root and all, and all in all,
I should know what God and man is.”
It is the prophet who loved the flowers and loved the
children, who gathered the lilies and made them subjects for
his choicest lessons, and who took the children to his arms
and made them examples of humility and tenderness, it is
the Prophet of Nazareth who has most impressed upon our
minds and hearts the idea that God is our Eternal Father.
Let theologians waste their time in arguments about His
purpose in creation, His condemnation of man, and His re-
* Rev. R. A. Armstrong, 8.A., in “ Positive aspects of Unitarian
Thought and Doctrine.”


quiring a sacrifice to appease His wrath ; let them talk of
the burning hell, and the wrath of God, and the endless
misery of the lost; but we go back, again, to the simple
words of Christ, and we say that God is our Father, and
His love watches over us in this world, and in all worlds ;
from Him we have nothing like vengeance to fear ; chastise-
ment we may, we must, receive for all our sins, but the love
of God must triumph at the last, and all His children be
brought to acknowledge Him,and come, repentant and weary,
yet trustingly and lovingly, to His home, and rest with
Him for ever and ever !
(IT.) And so I come, naturally, to the second item in
My Creed, I believe in Jesus Christ.
And here let me say, at once, that it is a great pity that
liberal thinkers are obliged to take a position that, in any
sense or any degree, seems to put them into an attitude of
denial of Christ, of opposition to his teaching, and of depre-
ciating the influence of his life and death.
And, again, by these last words of mine, I know that
I have made myself liable to misconception.
The name of Christ has, unfortunately, been inscribed
upon the banner of theological warfare, instead of being a
symbol of peace amid the discords of human controversy
and discussion. Deny the deity of Jesus, on the one hand,
and you are accused of slighting or denying him. Say that
you believe in Jesus Christ, on the other hand, and you are
suspected of giving countenance to the dogma of his God-
head ! This is unfortunate.
God can be best known through man, through the
feelings, and hopes, and aspirations of the human heart;
and, of course, He is most fully revealed in the noblest and
holiest men whom our earth has received, and whose bene-
diction descends upon all ages.
In prophets and poets he has been revealed to us, as
well as in our own souls.
These men were not exceptions, as to their nature;
they were simply men; but they were exceptions as to their
power and influence, they were the bright examples of our
race, fore-types of what humanity shall be.
Among these we recognise the person of Christ. To
some of us he may seem to reveal more of the love and
tenderness of God than to others. That is a matter for


each individual heart and conscience, and there is no sin on
one side or the other. It would be well for us, as liberal
thinkers, if we could discriminate better between acknow-
ledging Christ as God, and rejecting him as a teacher of
moral and religious truth.
I believe in Jesus Christ. Yes, but not in the theories
of the Church regarding him ; not in the dogmas concerning
his miraculous conception, his superhuman nature, or his
sacrifice to avert the wrath of God.
I believe in Jesus Christ. Yes, but not after the
manner of those who glorify his name, without ever exhibit-
ing his spirit ; who worship him as a God, but deny him in
the passions of their evil lives.
I believe in Jesus Christ simply as a point of
rational faith—believe in him as a teacher of righteousness,
as a prophet of eternal truth. I can fancy him, as a child,
thoughtful and reverent, but sometimes free and joyous.
In his youth he would spend his leisure hours upon the hill-
side, or away by the waters of the lake. He would ponder
upon the ancient religion of his people, upon the national
decay, upon their political slavery, upon the dark cloud
that seemed to hang over the Temple of the Hebrew faith.
As he grew to be a young man, these things would rouse,
within his heart, the fire of patriotic enthusiasm and of re-
ligious devotion. Beyond the narrow limits of his creed, he
looked forward to a time of national uprising, when the
throne of David would again be occupied by one of the tribe
of Israel.
And he also looked forward, we may well suppose, to
the wider and holier religion, which, apart from ritual and
ceremony, would recognise and teach the Fatherhood of God
and the Brotherhood of Man.
But not until he was nearly 30 years of age did he
venture out upon his public ministry, with his heart all
aflame with hopes and longings, thinking that he had only
to speak and men would listen, he had only to reveal the
divine spark of love in his own heart and the fire would
spread from soul to soul, until the world was regenerated
and heaven brought down to earth ! Alas! Alas! The world
will not welcome its best friends. The hearts of mankind are
not prepared for the gospel of truth and liberty, and love.
Christ was not the only Saviour, or Prophet, or Teacher,
who came to his own, but his own received him not. This


has been the story of every brave and honest thinker; the
cross has been the answer, returned by men, to those who
have tried to inaugurate the golden ago of peace.
It has been truly said that “ more than one Saviour
has already died for the earth and man ; and Chiist will one
day take many pious human beings by the hand, and say to
them :—‘Ye, too, have suffered under Pilates !’ ” And so,
I think how that thoughtful boy, that eager youth, that en-
thusiastic man, was carried away by his glorious mission, and
(refusing to betray his trust, refusing to be a coward and
renounce his work) was led, not to the throne of David, but
to a throne made grander and holier far—to the cross—
which, for all future ages, became the accepted symbol of
faithful adherence to truth and duty, and of sacrifice to the
brute forces of the world rather than stain the soul with
cowardice or a lie !
Christ on the cross, and Caesar on the throne ! Is this
world’s history a tragedy, or a comedy? No ! Think of the
world’s estimate of Caesar to-day; and then think of the in-
fluence of the life and example of the poor peasant of Galilee ;
who died upon the cross.
The poet sings of
“ Truth for ever on the scaffold,
Wrong for ever on the throne ; ”
but it is not for ever; there is an Eternal Power behind these
transitory affairs of men \ and so the poet exclaims again—
“ Yet that scaffold sways the future,
And behind the dim unknown,
Standeth God within the shadow,
Keeping watch above His own.”
When the creeds of the churches have perished, and the
dogma of the godhead of Christ has passed away, then,
perhaps, every heart will cherish its own creed,and one item, in
that creed, will be—the belief in the manhood of Christ of
Galilee, —the belief in his simple and beautiful and honest life,
—the belief in his tender teaching and his gospel of humanity,
—and the belief in his death, not as a sacrifice, but as a cruel
ending of a grand career, the bitter answer of a vulgar mob to
the high and sacred tones of a manhood, through which, (as
through every true human life,) there flashed, ever and anon,
gleams of divine beauty—the radiance of ideal excellence—
and the promise of what each of us shall be in the ages that
are to come !


(III.) And now, I take as the third point in My Creed
—I believe in the Life Everlasting.
This question of Immortality is one in which there
must be considerable difficulty, if we approach it merely in
an argumentative spirit, and if we require a clear demonstra-
tion of the doctrine.
The question has been made more difficult and perplex-
ing by the popular creed, which says that we have no proof
of the Life Everlasting, save in the story of the resurrection
and ascension of Christ.
The popular creed has, also, brought in the further
difficulty of dividing the future world, arbitrarily, into
heaven and hell, between which a great gulf is placed.
But men believed in Immortality, and preached the
doctrine, before the time of Christ ; and many of us feel that
our hope does rest upon a much surer foundation than that
of any reported event whatever.
And again, we do not divide the future world into two
divisions, to one of which the converted are to go, and to
the other the unconverted.
We do not believe that this life is one thing, which
death brings to a close, and that we begin a new life in the
unseen realm. But we believe in life, and in the continuance
of that life ; death being only a stage in our growth and pro-
gress, s stage that brings to an end our physical existence,
our bodily arrangements, but simply sets the spirit free to
move onward in its appointed course.
One of our ministers, expressing the same view, puts it
in these few words “ What I believe in is our life, and
that that life is continued, from age to age it may be, and
from world to world, but continued somewhere and in some
manner, after its removal from the present earthly stage.”*
I am not about to enter into any arguments upon this
point of my creed ; my object being to give a presentation
of my affirmative faith, and to indicate the grounds upon
which that faith is cherished, without going into detail,which
would be impossible in the limits of this Lecture.
Whenever we take up this subject of the Future Life,
we naturally inquire what is likely to be the condition of
that life. It is much the same problem that presented it-
self to the mind of young Hamlet; —
*Kev Charles Wicksteed, B.A.


“ To die —to sleep—
To sleep ! perchance to dream : ay ! there’s the rub j
For in that sleep of death what dreams may come,
When we have shuffled off this mortal coil,
Must give us pause I ”
We must not suppose that we can ever, while in this
world, gain a clear and definite knowledge of the details of
that future life. It is enough for us to cherish the bright
and invincible hope, without undue anxiety as to the
minute conditions into which we shall enter. At the same
time, from our faith in the character of God, His wisdom
and His love, we feel perfectly assured that all must be for
the very best. Indeed, for myself, the belief in God is
quite sufficient, for it seems to carry with it a full assurance
of future blessedness, of a stage in our career when sin and
sorrow shall be exchanged for perfect and everlasting joy!
We look upon the majesty and order of the universe;
we consider the laws that bind the whole in unity and har-
mony ; we trace the history and. progress of man in know-
ledge and in love j we cannot be blind to the evident pur-
pose in all this mighty song of creation, the one far off
divine event to which the whole creation moves ; and so we
feel our hearts comforted and assured, and we say :
“Thine are these orbs of light and shade j
Thou madest life in man and brute ;
Thou madest death ; and lo ! thy foot
Is on the skull which thou hast made.
“ Thou wilt not leave us in the dust:
Thou madest man, he knows not why;
He thinks he was not made to die;
And Thou hast made him; Thou art just ! ”
(IY.) I have spoken, now, of three pointsjin My Creed,
“God, the Father,” “Jesus Christ,” and “the Life Ever-
lasting.”
I have only one other point upon which to speak
briefly; and it comes as a summing up and a conclusion to
the whole subject—l believe in the Holy Catholic Church.
Man is a social being, and it is not enough for him to
hold, privately, certain articles of religious faith ; he feels
the necessity for some kind of social public worship.
I am not one of those who think the world would be
better, or would be quite as well, if religious worship became
a thing of the past, and men only united for secular purposes,
for material concerns. We all need to be lifted, occasionally,


out of the narrow limits of our daily life; we require
broader and grander views of nature, humanity, and God.
“ For, what are men better than sheep and goats,
That nourish a blind life within the brain,
If, having hands they lift them not in prayer,
Both for themselves and those that call them friend ?
For so the whole round earth is every way
Bound by gold chains about the feet of God.”
The various religions of the world testify to this general
truth. Despite the differences that exist between them,
they all testify to the religious sentiment in Man.
Christianity —one of the great religions of the world—
is itself broken up into a great number of sections.
One of these claims to be The Church, pure, perfect, in-
fallible, possessed of the authority of God Himself. This
is the Roman Catholic Church, within which freedom of
thought is sternly repressed, and the worshippers must wor-
ship and believe according to order !
The Catholic Church means the Universal Church—the
Church of all people; but the Roman Catholic Church
means those who submit to the tyranny of the Pope of
Rome.
The Holy Catholic Church must embrace all people,
in all lands and ages; it must be free and open to every
hi'man soul; it must be as high as heaven, as broad as the
universe, and as endless as eternity.
For practical purposes we labour in the world as under
the Christian faith; but only when we see that this is a
limitation, only when we feel that other people, and other
religions, have their share of truth and wisdom, do we gain
an insight into the Church Universal.
The thought is dawning upon many minds at the pre-
sent day, that, as the one light of the sun may be broken up by
a prism into various colours, so the one religious sentiment
may be, and has been, broken up into the different faiths of
the world ; and that harmony can result only by the blend-
ing of all that is true and sacred and holy in each—the
blending of all into the Catholic Church of Man.
A vigorous writer has said : “ Beneath all the various,
wide-spread, and disconnected labours, discoveries, and ex-
periments of the great body of scientific workers, there is
the common belief that all scientific truth is one ; that the
universe is all of one piece; that distant truths are only


different parts of one divine pattern that runs all through
the whole visible garment of God. This scientific faith is
grander than any that the religious world has yet attained.
But we must come to this. Religious truth is one, as God is
one. Go forth, then, ye religious explorers, and seek only
for truth; knowing that all truth-seekers are brothers, and
must come to hand-clasping and looks of recognition by and
by J ”
Yes, beyond all bounds and limits of sect or denomina-
tion, I believe in the Holy Catholic Church, in which all
human souls must be included, and wherein all discord
shall finally close, and there shall be heard, instead, the
harmonies of peace and joy and love.
The City of God is not a narrow village—a small para-
dise—shut away from the great world and the multitude of
toiling men and women; it is gi’ander than ever priest
could think, than prophet in his inspired moments could
dream, or than poet, with his heart aflame, could sing for
waiting souls to hear !
Meanwhile, our little sects niay wrangle, churches may
dispute, and priesthoods may curse j but God is over all
victorious ; Christ is the prophet of the brotherhood of men ;
the heart looks forward to the glories of the Life Everlasting ;
and so the Catholic Church is growing and expanding every
day—thank God, we cannot keep it back !
City of God ! how broad and far
Out-spread thy walls sublime !
The true thy chartered freemen are,
Of every age and clime.
One holy church, one army strong,
One steadfast high intent,
One working hand, one harvest song,
One King Omnipotent!
How purely hath thy speech come down
From man’s primeval youth !
How grandly hath thine empire grown
Of Freedom, Love, and Truth!
How_ gleam thy watch-fires through the night,
With never-fainting ray!
How rise thy towers, serene and bright,
To meet the dawning day !
In vain the surges’ angry shock !
In vain the drifting sands !
Unharmed, upon the Eternal Rock,
The Eternal City stands!


LECTURES, Sea..
GEORGE THOMAS WALTERS,
ABERDEEN.
Pioneers of Humanity.
The Higher Life (a Memorial Discourse).
My Creed.
Devil-Worship.
